!177I
1.

/ I~'

7V' J4
s'/2
________4 ) /,,

1923
UNIVERSITY LIBKRARY CAMBRIDGE

FROM TIIE LIIIRARY OF
FRANCIS JENKINSON

LIBRARIAN

THE
H I

STORY

O F THE
R

E I G

N

OF T HE
EMPEROR CHARLES

V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and His-

TORIOGRAPHER to his MAJ ESTY for SCOTLAND.

V O L. II.

D U B L IN
Printed for W. SMITH, A. LEATHL.vY, G. FAULKNER,

S. POWELL, P. WILSON, J, EXSHAW, H. SAUN-
DERS, W. WHITESTUNF, W. .LtATs.R, L. FLIN,
E. LNCH, D. CHAMBERLAI.E, J. POTIS, J.
HOEY, jun.J. WILLIAMS, J. MIl CHEL,, W.
COLLES, J. MILIKEN, C. INGHAM, and J. PRiti,
Booksellers.

M DCC LXXI.

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.
THE account of the cruel manner in which the Pope Boor V.

had been treated, filled all Europe with aflonidf- --

ment or horror. To fee a Chrifian Emperor, who, by^(; l in
poicfring that dignity, ought to have been the prc(tecordgnirion
and advocate of the holy fee, lay violent hands on hinc iici a-

llho represented Christ on earth, and detair his sacred it, t.'he

person in a rigorous captivity, as confildrecd as an im-
piety that merited the severest engeanc, and which
called for the immediate intcrpofition of ever) dutiful on
of the churh. Francis and Henry, alarmed at the pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms in Italy, had, vcn beflore the
taking of Rome, entered into a cloler allianLe; and, in
order to give onme check to the Ekmeror's ambition, had
agreed to make a vigorous diverlicn in the l.ow-Couin-
tries. The force of every motive w hiill had influenced
thein at that time, was now increaicd; and to tlhce \ crc
added, the desire of rfcuing the Pope out ot the E.npe-
r'r's liands, a ineafuec no less political, tihan it app)earcd
to be pous. This, however, rcndered it rnecff.i to
abandon their dcfigns on the Low-Countries, and to
make Italy the leat ct war, as it ias by iguruLs opelati-

A 2 ons

Bo00 v. ons in that country, they might promie most certainly

17. upon delivering Rome, and etting Clement at liberty.

57'Francis being now sensible, that in his fyltem with re-

gard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an excess of remissness,
he had allowed Charles to attain advantages which he
might easily have prevented, was eager to make repara-
tion for an error for which he was not often guilty, by an
adivity more suitable to his temper. Henry thought his
interposition necessary, in order to hinder the Emperor
from becoming malter of all Italy, and acquiring by that
means such superiority of power, as would enable him,
for the future, to dictate without conroul to the other
princes of Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had taken
care to secure by flattery and presents, the certain methods
of gaining his favour, neglected nothing that could in-
cense his rmaler against the Emperor. 3efides all these
public considerations, Henry was influenced-by one of a
more private nature; having begun about this time to
form his great scheme of divorcing Catharine of Aragon,
towards the execution of which he knew that the fantion
of Papal authority would be neceflary, he was dcfirous to
acquire as much merit as poflible with Clement, by ap-
pearing to be the chief infirument of his deliverance.

onfedercy THE negotiation, between princes thus dilpofed, was
inflhim. not tedious. Wolfey himself conduced it, on the part

of his sovereign, with unbounded powers. Francis treat-
c. with him in person at Amiens, where the Cardinal
appeared, and was received with royal magnificence. A
marriage between the duke of Orleans and the princess
Mary was agreed to as the balis of the confederacy ; it
was resolved that Italy should be the theatre of war; the
itrength of the army which should take the field, and the
contingent of troops or of money which each prince (hould
furnish, were fettlcd; and if the Emperor did not accept
of the proposals they were jointly to make him, they
bound themselves immediately to declare war, and to be-
:.' ,s. gin hostilities. Henry, who to': every resolution with

impetuosity, entered so eagerly into this new alliance,
that in order to give Francis the strongest proof of his
friendlhip and rcfpect, he formerly renounced the ancient
claim of the Englilh Monarchs to the crown of France,
w hich had long been the pride and ruin of the nation
as a full compcnation for which, he accepted a jpenfion o'

fifty

fifty thousand crowns, to be paid annually to himself and ooK V.
his successors .

MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfil the con- TIhe Flrel-

ditions of his capitulation, remained a prisoner under the tines rco-
severe custody of Alarcon. The Florentines no sooner verthei
heard of what had happened at Rome, than they ran to ee
arms in a tumultuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di
Cortona, who governed their city in the Pope's name;
defaced the arms of the Med ci; broke in pieces the fta-
tues of Leo and Clement; and declaring themselves a free
state, re-established their ancient popular government.
The Venetians, taking advantage of the calamity of their
ally the Pope, seized Ravenna, and other places belong-
ing to the church, under pretext of keeping them in de-
pofite. The dukes of Urbino and Ferrara, laid hold
likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff,
whom they confidered as irretrievably ruined t.

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to derive rome T'e Impc-

solid benefit from that unforeseen event, which gave such r'aliteloo
splendour and superiority to his maiter's arms. For this i
purpose he marched to Rome, together with Moncada,
and the marquis del Guafto, at the head of all the troops
they could assemble in the kingdom of Naples. The ar-
rival of this reinforcement brought new calamities on the
unhappy citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their license, and
with the utmost rapacity gathered the gleanings, which
had escaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans.
There was not now any army in Italy capable of making
head against the Imperialists; and nothing more was re-
quifite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns in the
ecclesiastical slate, than to have appeared before them.
But the soldiers having been so long accuflomed, under
Bourbon, to an entire relaxation of difcpline, and having
tafled the sweets of living at discretion in a great city,
almoll without the controul of a uperior, were become lo
impatient of military subordination, and so averse to ser-
vice, that they refused to leave Rome, unless all their ar-
rears were paid a condition which they knew to be im-
polible i and declared that they would not obey any other
erfon than the prince of Orange, whom the army had

Herbert, 3, &c. Rym. rPedcr. 4 103.
' Ouic. I. 8. 43.

clhofen

5
A3

Boo V. chosen general. Lannoy, finding that it was no longer
'"v'"'fafe for him to remain among licentious troops who de-
1527. spifed his dignity, and hated his person, returned to Na-

ples; oon atter the marquis del Guaflo and Moncada
thought it prudent to quit ome for the fame reason.
The prince of Orange, a general only in name, and by
the mofi prccarious of all tenures, the good will of soldiers
whom fuccels and license had rendered capricious, was
obliged to pay more attention to their humours, than
they did to his commands. Thus the Emperor, inflead
of reaping any of the advantages he might have expeced
from the reduction of Rome, had the mortification to fee
the most formidable body of troops he had ever brought
into the field, continue in a state of inacivity from which
it was impossible to rouze them .

The French Tl is gave the King of France and the Venetians lei-
marchesintofure to form new schemes, and to enter into new engage-
Italy. ments for the delivering the Pope, and preserving the li-

berties of Italy. The newly restored republic of Florence
very imprudently joined with them, and Lautrec, of
whose abilities the Italians entertained a much more fa-
vourable opinion than his own master, was, in order to
gratify them, appointed generaliflimo of the league. It
was with the utmofl rcludance he undertook that office,
being unwilling to expose himself a second time to the
difficulties and disgraces which the negligence of the
King, or the malice of his favourites might bring upon
him. The best troops in France marched under his
command, and the King of England, though he had not
yet declared war against the Emperor, advanced a confi-
derable fum towards carrying on the expedition. Lau-
trec's first operations were prudent, vigorous, and fuc-

iT orera- cefsful. By the assistance of Andrew l)oria, the ablest
t,'"n. fca officer of that age, he rendered himself maser of Ge-

noa, and re-eftablilhed in that republic the fa&ion of the
Fregofi, together with the dominion of France. He
obliged Alexandria to surrender after a hon siege, and
reduced all the country on that fide of the Tefino. He took
Pavia, which had so long refitled the arms of his fove-
reign, by aflault, and plundered it with that cruelty which
the memory of the fatal difafler that had befallen the
4'rench nation before its walls naturally inspired. All the

(f;tliZ. l. 8 4s 4.

Milanece,

Milanese, which Antonia de Leyva defended with a small BooK V.
body of troops kept together and supported by his own ~
address and industry, must have soon submitted to his '
power, if he had continued to bend the force of his arms
againfl that country. But Lautrec durst not compleat a
conquest which would have been so honourable to him-
self, and of such advantage to the league. Francis knew
his confederates to be more desirous of circumscribing the
Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new territories
for him, and was afraid that if Sforza was once re-efta-
blifhed in Milan, he would second but coldly the attack
which he intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this reason he inftruaed Lautrec not to push his ope-
rations with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily
the importunities of the Pope, and the solicitations of the
Florentines, the one for relief, and the other for protec-
tion, were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext to
march forward without yielding to the entreaties of the
Venetians and Sforza, who insisted on his laying liege to
Milan *.

WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome, theThe Empe-

Emperor had time to deliberate concerning the disposal of opet tli-
the Pope's person, who fill remained a prisoner in theberty.
castle of St. Angelo. Notwithstanding the specious veil
of religion with which he usually endeavoured to cover his
aions, Charles, in many inflances, appears to have been
but little under the influence of religious considerations,
and had frequently on this occasion expressed an inclina-
tion to transport the Pope into Spain, that he might in-
dulge his ambition with he fpe&acle of the two mot il-
lufirious personages in Europe fuccefively prisoners in
his court. But the fear of giving new offence to all
Christendom, and of filling his own subje&s with horror,
obliged him to forego that fatisfadion t. The progress
of the confederates made it now neccffary either to set the
Pope at liberty, or to remove him to rome place of con-
finement more secure than the cafle of St. Angelo. Ma-
ny considerations induced him to prefer the former, par-
ticularly his want of the money requisite as well for re-
cruiting his army, as for paying off the vafR arrears due to
it. In order to obtain this he had assembled the CortesFcb. t

Guic. I. xviii. p. 461. de Bcllay, 170, &c. Mauroc. His. Vcnct. lib, iii.

3 uic.
t Guic. 1. l8, 457.

A 4

of

Boo- V. of CaRile at Valladolid about the beginning of the year,
---and having laid before them the state of his affairs, and

'57. represented the necessity of making great preparations to

resist the enemies, whom envy at the success which had
crowned his arms would unite against him, he demanded
a large supply in the moif prefling terms. But the Cortes,
as the nation was already exhausted by extraordinary do-
natives, refused to load it with any new burden, and in
spite of all his endeavours to gain or to intimidate the
members, perfilted in this resolution *. No resource,
therefore, remained but the extorting from Clement, by
way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging what was
due to his troops, without which it was vain to mention
to them their leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inaftiveon his part, or his intrigues

unsuccessful towards hastening such a treaty. By flattery,
and the appearance of unbounded confidence, he disarmed
the resentment of the cardinal olonna, and wrought up-
on his vanity, which made him desirous of mhewing the
world that as his power had at first depressed the Pope, it
would now raise him to his former dignity. By favours
and promises he gained Moronc, who, by one of those
whimsical revolutions which occur so often in his life, and
which so strongly display his charater, had now recovered
his credit and authority with the Imperialists. The ad-
dress and influence of two such men easily removed all the
difficulties of the Emperor's ambassadors, and brought to
a conclusion the treaty for Clement's liberty, upon con-
ditions hard indeed, but not more intolerable than a
prince in his situation had reason to expe&. He was
obliged to advance in ready money an hundred thousand
crowns for the us¢ of the army; to pay the fame um at
the distance of a fortnight; and at the end of three months,
an hundred and fifty thousand more. He engaged not to
take part in the war against Charles, either in Lombardy
or in Naples; he granted him a cruzado, and the tenth
of ecclefafical revenues in Spain ; and he not only gave
hostages, but put the Emperor in pofceflion of several
towns, as a ecurity for the performance of there articles t.
Having railed the first moiety by a ale ofecclefiaflical dig-
nities and benefices, and other expedients equally uncan-
ponical, a day was fixed for delivering him from impri-
P Sandov. . p. 814. + Cuic. I. 18. 4 , &c.

fonment.

fonment. But Clement, impatient to be free, after a te- BooK V.
dious confinement of fix months, as well as full of the '
suspicion and distrust natural to the unfortunate, was foDecb. 6
much afraid that the Imperialists might frill throw in ob-
tacles to put off his deliverance, that he difguiled himself
the preceding night in the habit of a merchant, and Alar-
con having remitted somewhat of his vigilance upon the
conclusion of the treaty, he made his escape undiscovered.
He arrived before next morning without an attendants
but a single officer, at Orvieto; and from thence wrote a
letter of thanks to Lautrec, as the chief instrument of pro-
curing him liberty *.

DURING these tranfa&ions, the ambassadors of FranceOveture of

and England repaired to Spain, in consequence of theP'E'P'
treaty which Wolfey had concluded with the FrenchdH.1n.
King. The Emperor, unwilling to draw on himself the
united forces of the two Monarchs, discovered an incli-
nation to relax somewhat the rigour of the treaty of Ma-
drid, to which, hitherto, he had adhered inflexibly. He
offered to accept of the two millions of crowns which
Francis had proposed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy
of Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty on conditi-
-n that he would recall his army out of Italy, and retore
Genoa, together with the other conquests he had made in
that country, With regard to Sforza, he insisted that his
fate hould be determined by the judges appointed to en-
quire into his crimes. Tbele propositions being made to
Henry, he transmitted them to his ally the rench King,
whom it more nearly concerned to examine. and to an-
fwer them; and if Francis had been sincerely solicitous
either to conclude peace, or preserve confifiency in his
own condu&, he ought instantly to have cloied with over-
tures which differed but little from the propositions he
hitnfelf had formerly made t. But his views were now
much changed; his alliance with Henry; Lautrec's pro-
grefs in Italy, and the superiority of his army there
above that ot the Emperor, scarce left him room to doubt
of the success of his enterprize againit Naples. Full of
these sanguine hopes, he was at no loss to find pretexts
for rejeting or evading what the Emperor had proposed.
Under the appearance of sympathy with Sforza, for whoe
interests he had not hitherto discovered much solicitude,

* Guic. 1.. 46 .

o18.4 . C

Jov. Vi lo. 169. Mauroc. Hift.Venet.

lib. iii 51
t Recucil des Traitet, i. 149.

ie

BOOK V. he again demanded the full and unconditional re-eltablilh-

ment of that unfortunate prince in his dominions. Un-
517' der colour of its being imprudent to rely on the Emperor's

sincerity, he infiied that his sons should be set at liberty
before the French troops left Italy, or surrendered Genoa.
The unreasonableness of there demands, as well as the re-
proachful insinuation with wh!ch they were accompanied,
irritated Charles to such a degree that he could scarce lif-
ten to them with patience; and repenting of his moderation
which had made so little impreflion on his enemies, de-
clared that he would not depart in the smallest article from
the conditions he had now offered. Upon this the French
and English ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn un-
accountably to concur with Francis in there strange propo-
fitions, demanded and obtained their audience of leave *.

1$2. N.x r day two heralds who had accompanied the am-
January 2"baffadors on purpose, though they had hitherto concealed

their chara&er, having assumed the ensigns of their office,
appeared in the Emperor's court, and being admitted into

They de- his presence, they in the.name of their refpetive maRters,
clar war and with all the solemnity curfomary on such occasions,
sgtinn the denounced war againfi him. Charles received both with
Empcrur. a dignity suitable to his own rank, but spoke to each in a

tone adapted to the sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the Englilh
Monarch with a filmnefs tempered by some degree of de-
cency and refpett. His reply to the French King abound-
ed with that acrimony of expreflion, which personal ri-
valihip, exasperated by the memory of many injuries in-
flicded as well as suffered, naturally fuggefis. He desired
the French herald to acquaint his sovereign, that he would
henceforth confider him as a base violator of public faith,
and a stranger to the honour and integrity becoming a gen-

Francis tleman. rancis, too high pirited to bear such an impu-
ril.nprts tation, had recourse to an uncommon expedient in order
th iLmp-le to vindicate his chara&er. He instantly ent back the he-
rur to inic .
combat. raid with a artel of defiance, in which he gave the Em-

peror the lie in form, challenged him to ingle combat,
requiring him to name the time and place of the encoun-
ter, and the weapons with which he chore to fight.
Charles, as hc was not inferior to his rival in spirit or bra-
very, readily accepted the challenge; but after several

* Rym. 4. co. Hrlhcrt 8 . 8.
1. 8471.

messages

mefiages concerning the arrangement of all the circum- Boo V.
fiances relative to the combat, accompanied with mutual 'v--
reproaches, bordering on the most indecent scurrility, all asz8.
thoughts of this duel, more becoming the heroes of ro-
mance than the two greatef Monarchs of their age, were
entirely laid aside

'rFI example of two personages, so illultrious, drew

such general attention, and carried along with it so much
authority, as gave rife to an important change in manners
all over Europe. Duels, as has already been observed, The effe&
had long been permitted by the laws of all the European of this m

promoting

nations, and forming a part of their jurifprudcnce, were the cuflorn
authorized by the magistrate on many occasions as theof dueling.
molt proper method of terminating questions with regard
to property, or of deciding in those which respected crimes.
But single combats being confidered as solemn appeals to
the omniscience and justice of the supreme Being, they
were allowed only in public causes, according to the pre-
scription of law, and carried on in a judicial form. Men
accuflomed to this manner of decision in courts of justice,
were naturally led to apply it to personal and private quar-
rels. Duels, which at first could be appointtd by the
civil judge alone, were fought without the interposition
of his authority, and in cafes to which the laws did not
extend. The tranfaaion between Charles and Francis
firongly countenanced this practice. Upon every affront,
or injury which seemed to touch his honour, a gentleman
thought himfclf entitled to draw his Iword, and to call on
his adversary to make reparation. Such an opinion intro-
duced among men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and
of rude manners, when offence was often given, and re-
venge as always prompt, produced most fatal confe-
quences. Much of the bes blood in Christendom was
hed ; many useful lives were sacrificed and at some pe-
riods, war itself hath scarce been more deltrustive than
thele cntefts of honour. So powerful, however, is the
dominion of fashion, that neither the terror of penal laws,
nor reverence for religion, have been able entirely to abo-
lilh a practice unknown among the ancients, and not
justifiable by any principle of reason; though at the fame
time it mud be admitted, that to this absurd custom, we
muf afrcbe in some degree the extraordinary gentlenef

* Recueil d Tra;tez a. Mrm. de Bellay, 3, &c. Sd. Hifn.
I. 837

and

It

Boos V. and complaisance of modern manners, and that refpecful
~"'- 'attention of one man to another, which, at present, render

*5t8. the social intercourses of life far more agreeable and decent

than among the most civilized nations of antiquity.

Retreat of WH ILE the two monarchs seemed so eager to termi-
the mperi' natc their quarrel by a personal combat, Lautrec conti-
lift from
Rome. nued his operations which promised to be more decisive.
February. His army, which was now increaed to thirty-five thou-

sand men, advanced by great marches towards Naples.
The terror of their approach, as well as the remonstrances
and the intreaties of the prince of Orange, prevailed at
Jafi on the Imperial troops, though with difficulty, to quit
Rome, of which they had kept poffeflion during ten
months. But ot that flourishing army which had entered
the city, scarce one half remained; the reft, cut off by
the plague, or wafted by diseases, the effe&s of their in-
acivity, intemperance, and dbauchery, fell viaims to
their own crimes *. Lautrec made the greatest efforts to
attack them in their retreat towards the Neapolitan terri-
tories, which would have finilhed the war at one blow.
But the prudence of their leaders disappointed all his mea-
fures, and conduaed them with little loss to Naples.
The people of that kingdom, always the prey of every in-
vader, extremely impatient to ihake off the Spanith yoke,
received the French with open arms, wherever they ap-
peared to take pofeflion; and Gaeta and Naples except-
ed, scarce any place of importance remained in the hands
of the Imperialifis. The preservation of the former was
owing to the frength of its fortifications, that of the latter
freNh p to the presence of the Imperial army. Lautrec, however,

rat down before Naples, but finding it vain to think of re-
ducing by force a city defended by so many troops, he
was obliged to employ the flower, but less dangerous me-
thod of blockade; and having taken measures which ap-
peared to him effe&ual, he confidently assured his mafler,
that famine would oon compel the besieged to capitulate.
These hopes were strongly confirmed by the defeat of a
vigorous attempt made by the enemy in order to recover
the command of the sea. The gallies of Andrew Doria,
under the command of his nephew Philippino, guarded
the mouth of the harbour. Moncada, who had succeed-
ed Lannoy in the viceroyalty, rigged out a number of

* ui. . 4 R

gallies

gaillies superior to Doria's, and going on board himself, Boot V.
together with the marquis del Guafto, and the flower of -v
the Spanish officers and soldiers, attacked Doria before '51'
the arrival of the Venetian and French fleets. But Do-
ria, by his superior skill in naval operations, easily tri-
umphed over the valour and number of the Spaniards.
The viceroy was killed, most of his fleet destroyed, and
Guafto, with many officers of diftincion being taken pri-
foners, were put on board the captive gallies, and sent by
Philippino, as trophies of his victory, to his uncle *.

BUT notwithstanding this flattering profpe& of success, Circumnnn-

many circumstances concurred to frustrate Lautrec's ex- Cetthe
peaations. Clement, though he always acknowledged progrec of
his being indebted to Francis for the recovery of his liber- it
ty, and often complained of the cruel treatment he had
met with from the Emperor, was not influenced at this
junaure by principles of gratitude, nor, which is more
extraordinary, was he swayed by the desire of revenge.
His past misfortunes rendered him more cautious than
ever, and his recollecion of the errors which he had com-
mitted, increased the natural irresolution of his mind.
While he amused Francis with promises, he secretly ne-
gotiated with Charles; and being solicitous, above all
things, to re-eftablith his family in Florence with their
ancient authority, which he could not expea from Fran-
cis, who had entered into firia alliance with the new re-
publick, he leaned rather towards the fide of his enemy
than that of his benefaitor, and gave Lautrec no afliftance
towards carrying on his operations. The Venetians,
viewing with jealousy the progress of the French arms,
were intent only on recovering such maritime town in
the Neapolitan dominions as were to be poffefled by their
republick, while they were altogether careless about the
reduaion of Naples, on which the success of the common
cause depended t. The King of England, instead of be-
ing able, as had been projected, to embarrass the Empe-
ror by attacking his territories in the Low-Countries,
found his fubjets so averse to an unnecessary war, which
would have ruined the trade of the nation, that in order
to silence their clamours, and put a stop to the infurreCi-
ons ready to break out among them, he was compelled to
conclude a truce for eight months with the governess of the

* Guic. . 19. 487. P. Icutr. lib

t r .

i .

. . p. 3 .
t Gul. . 9. 4J1.

Nether-

BooK v. Netherlands *. Francis himself, with the fame unpar.
%ifV ' donable inattention of which lie had formerly been guilty,

'58.' and for which he had suffered so severely, negleaed to

make proper remittances to Lautrec for the support of his
army t.

Revolt of THESE unexpected events retarded the progress of the
AdrewDo- French, and discouraged both the general and his troops
ria from
Ftuacc. but the revolt of Andrew Doria proved a fatal blow to all

their measures. That gallant officer, the citizen of a re-
publick, and trained up from his infancy in the sea-ser-
vice, retained the spirit of independence natural to the
former, and the plain liberal manners peculiar to the lat-
ter. A perfect franger to the arts of fubmilion or flattery
necefiry in courts, and conscious at the fame time of his
own merit and importance, he always offered his advice
with freedom, and often preferred his complaints and re-
monflrances with boldness. The French ministers, un-
accuflomed to such liberties, determined to ruin a man
who treated them with so little deference; and though
Francis himfeif had a just sense of Doria's services, as
well as an high esteem for his characer, the courtiers, by
continually representing him as a man haughty, intrata-
ble, and more solicitous to aggrandize himself, than to
promote the interest of France, gradually undermined the
foundations of his credit, and filled the King's mind with
suspicion and diRruf. From thence proceeded several as-
fronts and indignities put upon Doria. His appointments
were not regularly pa:d ; his advice, even in naval affairs,
was often flighted; an attempt was made to seize the pri-
foners taken by his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples;
all which he bore with abundance of ill humour. But an
injury offered to his country, transported him beyond all
bounds of patience. The French began to fortify Savo-
na, to clear its harbour, and, removing thither fume
branches of trade carried on at Genoa, plainly hewed
that they intended to render that town, long the objec of
jealousy and hatred to the Genoese, their rival in wealth
and commerce. Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal
for the honour and interest of his country, remonsrated
againt this in the highest tone, not without threats, if
the measure were not instantly abandoned. This bold
action, aggravated by the malice of the courtiers, and
* Herbert, go. Rymer, 14. 158. t Guic, . xviii. 478.

placed

placed in the most odious light, irritated Francis to such Boo V.
a degree, that he commanded Barbefieux, whom he ap-
pointed admiral of the Levant, to fail directly to Genoa, 't
with the French fleet, to arrest Doria, and to seize his
gallies. This ra(h order, of which the most profound fe-
crecy alone could have secured the execution, was con-
cealed with so little care, that Doria got timely intelligence
of it, and retired with all his gallies to a place of safety.
GuafRo his prisoner, who had long observed and foment-
ed his growing discontent, and had often allured him by
magnificent promises to enter-into the Emperor's service,
laid hold on this favourable opportunity. While his in-
dignation and resentment were at their height, he prevail-
ed on him to dispatch one of his officel s to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The negotiation
was not long; Charles, fully feniible of the importance of
such an acquisition, granted him whatever terms he re-
quired. Doria sent back his commission, together with
the collar of St. Michael to Francis, and hoifiing the Im-
perial colours, failed with all his gallies towards Naples,
not to block up the harbour of that unhappy city as he
had formerly engaged, but to bring them protection and
deliverance.

His arrival opened the communication with the fea,wejiad

and restored plenty in Naples, which was now reduced tofitrtion of
the last extremity; and the French, having loll their fu- he Fre.nb
periority at sea, were oon reduced to great firaits for wantNaps.
of provisions. The prince of Orange, who succeeded the
viceroy in the command of the Imperial army, hewed
himself by his prudent conduct worthy of that honour
which his good fortune and the death of his generals had
twice acquired him. Beloved by the troops, who remem-
bering the prosperity they had enjoyed under his com-
mand, served him with the utmost alacrity, he let flip no
opportunity of harassing the enemy, and by continual
alarms or allies, fatigued and weakened them *. As an
addition to all these misfortunes, the diseases common in
that country during the sultry months, began to break
out among the French troops. The prisoners communi-
cated to them the pestilence which the Imperial army had
brought to Naples from Rome, and it raged with such
violence, that few, either officers or soldiers, escaped the

Jovii Hilt. lib. 36. p. 3I, &c. Sigonii Vita Dorir, p. 1139. Bcllay,
114, &c.

infcction.

Boo, V. infezion. Of the whole army, not four thousand men, a
'---'.- number scarce sufficient to defend the camp, were capa-

5. ble of doing duty i and being now besieged in their

turn, they suffered all the miseries of which the Imperial-
ifts were delivered. Lautrec, after firuggling long with
so many disappointments and calamities, which preyed on
his mind at the fame time that the pestilence wafted his
Aug.X5. body, died, lamenting the negligence of his sovereign,

and the infidelity of his allies, to which so many brave
men had fallen victims t. By his death, and the indif-
position of the other generals, the command devolved on
the marquis de Saluces, an officer altogether unequal to

Rtif the such a trust. He, with troops no less dispirited than re-
fleg.

duced, retreated in disorder to Averfa; which town being
invested by the prince of Orange, Saluces was under the
necessity of consenting, that he himself hould remain a
prifonerof war, that his troops hould lay down their
arms and colours, give up their baggage, and march un-
der a guard to the frontiers of France. By this igno-
minious capi:ulation, the wretched remains of the French
army were saved; and the Emperor by his own perfeve-
rance and the good condu6 of his generals, acquired once
more the superiority in Italy .

eoa re- THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon the
cove itli-ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his country
terty. from the dominion of foreigners was Doria's highest am-

bition, and had been his principal inducement to quit
the service of France, and enter into that of the Emperor.
A most favourable opportunity for executing this honour-
able enterprize now presented irfelf. The city of Genoa,
afflided by the peltilence, was almoR deferred by its in-
habitants; the French garrison being neither regularly
paid nor recruited, was reduced to an inconiderable num-
ber ; Doria's emiliries found that such of the citizens as
remained, being weary alike of the French and Imperial
yoke, the rigour of which they had alternately felt, were
ready to welcome him as their deliverer, and to second all
his measures. 1 hings wearing this promising afpe, he
failed towards the coaf of Genoa; on his approach the
French gallies retired; a fiDall body of men which he
landed, urpriecd one of the gates of Genoa in the night
s(pt. . time; Trivuki, the French governor, with his feeble

* Bellay, 1 7, &c. t P. Neuter. Renun Aufr. lib. . c. . 3 1.
I BeUlJy, , c. JoeiiHlt. lib. 15,16.

garrison,

garrifoh, hut himself up in the citadel, and Doria took Boo V.
possession of the town without bloodlhed or refifance. ---
Want of provisions quickly obliged Trivulci to capitulate; '5;8
the people, eager to abolish such an odious monument of
their servitude, ran together with a tumultuous violence,
and levelled the citadel with tbeground.

IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered himfelfDifintereft-

the sovereign of his country, which he had so happily ed condua
freed from oppreflion. The fame of his former aions, of Dra.
the success cf his present attempt, the attachment of his
friends, the gratitude of his countrymen, together with
the support of the Emperor, all conIpired to facilitate his
attaining the supreme authority, and invited him to lay
hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which there are
few examples, he sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing
himself to the virtuous fatisfacion of eflablilhing liberty
in his country, the highest object at which ambition can
aim. Having assembled the whole body of the pcople in
the court before his palace, he afiured them, that the
happiness of feeing them once more in poffeflion of free-
dom, was to him a full reward for all his services; that/
more delighted with the name of citizen than of sovereign,
he claimed no pre-eminence or power above his equals; \

.

but remitted entirely to them the right of fettling what
form of government they would now choo'e to be eflablifh -
ed among them. The people liflened to him with tears
of admiration, and of joy. Twelve persons were eleted
to new-model the conflitution of the republic. The in-
fluence of Doria's virtue and example, communicated it-
(elf to his countrymen; the factions which had long torn
and ruined the state, seemed to be forgotten; prudent
precautions were taken to prevent their reviving; and
the lame form of government which hath fubfifled with
little variation since that ine in Genoa, was eflablihed
with universal applause. Doria lived to a great age, be-
loved, rcfpeaed and honoured by his countrymen; and
adhering uniformly to his profeflionsof moderation, with-
out arrogating any thing unbecoming a private citizen, he
preserved a great ascendant over the councils of the re-
public, which owed its being to his generosity, The au-
thority he pofleffcd was more flattering, as well as more
fatisfatory, than that derived from fuvercignty a domi-
nion founded in love and in gratitude and upheld by ve-
neration for his virtues, not by the dread of his power.
His memory is fill reverenced by the Genocfe, and he is

VOL. I1. B ditin-

BooK V. distinguished in their public monuments, and celebrated
c'y' in the works of their historians by the most honourable

15"8. of all appellations, THE FATHER OF HIS COUN-

TRY, AND THE RESTORER OF ITS LIBER-
TY*.

,.i9. FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of his

Operations arms, discredited by so many loftes, made new efforts in
in the M- the Milanese. But the Count of St. Pol, a rash and un-

experienced officer, to whom he gave the command, was
no match for Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Impe-
rial generals. He, by his superior skill in war, checked
with a handful of men, the brisk, but ill-concerted mo-
tions of the French ; and though so infirm himself that he
was carried onftantly in a litter, he surpassed them when
occasion required, no less in aivity than in prudence.
By an unexpe&ed march he furprized, defeated, and took
the Count of St. Pol, and ruined the French army in the
Milanese as entirely as the prince of Orange had ruined
that which besieged Naples .

Negotiati- AMIDST there vigorous operations in the field, each
onsbetween party discovered an impatient defirt of peace, and conti-
Charles and nual negotiations were carried on for that purpose. The
rancis. French King discouraged, and almost exhausted by so

many unsuccessful enterpries, was reduced now to think
of obtaining the release of his sons by concessions, not by
the terror of his arms. The Pope hoped to recover by a
treaty whatever he had loft in the war. The Emperor,
notwitlftanding the advantages which he had gained, had
many reasons to make him wiih fbr an accommodation;
Solyman, having over-rn'Hungary, was ready to break
in upon the Auflrian territories with the whole force of
the Eaf ; the Reformation gained ground daily in Ger-
many, the princes who favoured it entered into a confe-
deracy, which he thought dangerous to the tranquillity
of the Empire; the Spaniards murmured at a war the
weight of which refted chiefly on them; the variety and
extent of his operations, far exceeded what his revenues
could support; his fucceAs hitherto had been owing chief-
ly to his own good fortune, and to the abilities ofhis ge-
nerals, nor could he fatter himself that they, with troops
(detFirte of every thing nceffry, would always triumph
over enemies still in a condition to renew their attacks.

* Cuil. .. p. 48. igonti Vha Dori, p. 46. Juli Hilt. lib. t6.

r 3i, c i. 1 19Oi.. i. 19. or.

a. cm er. RoAufr.
:ib. . . . 3.; 233. Mn. de Bellay, l ,1

All
t

Ail parties, however; were at equal pains to conceal, or Boo V.
to difflemc their real sentiments. The Emperor, that his t "i
inability to carry on the war night not be fufwated, in-
fiflad on high. terms in the tone of a conqueror. The
Pope4 folicdious not to le. his preifnt allies btfore he
came toa any agreeent with. ( laries ctminued to make
a thousand protetatiohs of fidelity to the former, while
he privately negotiatbd with the latter. ramwis afraid
that his confderates tnight prevent him by treating for
themselves *ith the Emperor, had reourfe to many dif-
honourable arfifies in order to turn their attentiom fomi
the measures wlicli he was taking to adjuf all diffcrences
with his riva,

Ii thik fitatioh of affairs; when all the otiendinr

powers wilhed f r peace, bt durst not vetture too hafily
on the fp e ar

fttp.e y for attalining It, two ladies under-

took to prboure this bising so itMuh desired by all Europe;
These were Margaret of Aufiria, dowager of Savoy, the
Empertcr' it; and Louise Franis's mother. They My i
agreed on an interviewt at Crmbray, ahd being lodged
in twoadjoin ing houfedbeiveen whi-c a comnunieation
was openedi 'ine together without ccremhony or obferva-
tion, atd held"ii, confcrnc~ to Which roeperfon what-
ever wat adinited, As both, Wee profoundly skilled in
bufinefsr thoroughli acquaintod *ih the secrets of their
retfpe&tve courts, and pol~efd with perse& cofidence
in each other, they soon made ~reat progress towards a
final aceonedidtion; and the ambaifadors of all the con-
Iederates waited in anxiou suspense to know their
fate, the dtnmernationr of which was entirely in their
hands *.

BuT whurver diligence they UIed tb hasen forward Separate

i general peat.o the Popt hd the address and industry to tety bw-
et. the fat bs his aliesi by concluding at Barceloia a twopee th
particular treaty for himself. The Enipror; impatient Charlet.
tb.viit: ltal in his way to Geiinahy and deifrous of J" io
te.ftabliting craquilitt iri the one country, befort he
attewipwrd;.comtbofe the difbr which abounded ia
ihe botkr, foutddit reeefliry to feoeue at left one alliance
_n which he miigt dependo adion the Italiin taIg.,
That with the Popek who courted it with uniwerled im-
pr'unity, sered more ptope than any other. Chaei.
iing ett&ctely foiioitous to re ome reparation for

& P. mt. Rsr. amr. I^, ,. c.. Fp3. MC. Mr
B *, p, ic.

B a thi.

Bon V. the insults which he had offered to his sacred characer,
x'/'%- and tO redeem past offences by new merit, g anted Cle-

t 59' ment, after all his misfortunes, terms more favourable

than hecould haveexpeEed after a continued feriesof fuc-
cess. Among other articles, he engaged to restore all the
territories belonging to the ecclesiastical state; to re efta-
blish the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander the head of
that family; and to put it in the Pope's power to decide
concerning the fate of Sforza, and the possession of the
Milanese. In return for these ample conceflions, Clement
gave the Emperor the investiture of Naples without the
reserve of any tribute, but the present of a white feed in
ackno*ledgment of his sovereignty; absolved all who
had been concerned in assaulting and plundering Rome;
and permitted Charles and his brother Ferdinard to levy
the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues throughout their
dominions *.

August 5. THE account of this tranfadion, quickened the nego-
Peace of tiations at Cambray, and brought Margaret and Louise to
Cambray an immmediate agreement. The treaty of Madrid served
Charles fd as the basis of that which they concluded; the latter being
Francis. intended to mitigate the rigour of the former. The chief

articles were, That the Emperor ihould not, for the pre-
sent, demand the restitution of Burgundy, reserving
however, in full force, his rights and pretensions to that
dutchy; That Francis hould pay two millions of crowns
as theranfom of his sons, and, before they were set at
liberty, hould restore such towns as he ill held in the
Milanese; That he Ihould resign the sovereignty of Flan-
and Artois, that he (hould renounce all his pretensions
to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every other place beyond
the Alps, that he hould immediately consummate the
marriage concluded between him and the Emperor's sifter
Elennora t.

Advantages 'THUS Francis, chiefly ftom his impatience to procure
for the Em- liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing which had at first
re*r"' prompted him to take arms, or which had induced him,

by continuing hostilities during nine uccelivecampaigns,
to protract the war at a length scarce known in Europe
btbre the eftablihmment of Rlanding armies, and the im-
positions of exorbitant taxes became universal. The
wperorv by this treaty, was rendered sole arbiter of

-CuIc.(. 5t1. . tP. Heuter. ter. Auar. lib. x..c.'3.
p .134. Sudlv. His. dil Emrcr. Crl.y. ii. t8.

the

the fate of Italy ; he delivered his territories in the Ne- BOOK V.
therlands from an ignominious badge of fubje&ion; and - -
after having baffled his rival in the field, he prescribed 9
to him the conditions of peace. The different conduf
and spirit with which the two Monarchs carried on the
operations of war, led naturally to such an iffiue of it.
Charles, inclined by temper, as well as obliged by his
fituaticn, concerted all his schemes with caution, pursued
them with perseverance; and observing circumfiances and
events with attention, let none escape that could be im-
proved to advantage. Francis, more enterprizing than
steady, undertook great designs with warmth, but execut-
ed them with remilfnefs; and, diverted by his pleasures,
or deceived by his favourites, he often loft the most pro-
mifing opportunities of success. Nor had the character
of the two rivals tliemfelves greater influence on the ope-
rations of the war, than the opposite qualities of the ge-
nerals whom they employed. Among the Imperialists,
valour tempered with prudence; fertility of invention
aided by experience; sagacity to penetrate 'the designs of
their enemies, as well as to conduct their own, with all
the talents that form great commanders and ensure vi&o-
ry, were confpicaous. Among the French, these quali-
ties were either wanting, or he very reverse of them
abounded; nor could they boast of one man (unless we
except Lautrec, who was always unfortunate)that equal-
led the merit of' Pescara, Leyva, Guafto, the prince of
Orange, and other leaders whom Charles had to set in
opposition to them. Bourbon, Morone, and Doria,
who might have ben capable of balancing by their abili-
ties and condu& the superiority which the Imperialifis had
acquired, were loft through the carelefifefs of the King,
and the malice -or injustice of his counsellors; and the
most fatal blows given to France during the pr6grefs of
the war, proceeded from the despair ard resentment of
these three persons, who were forced to abandon her
service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obliged to Dihonour.

submit, were not the most affliing circumstance to him ble to
in the treaty of Cambray. He loft his reputation and Francis.
the confidence of all Europe, by abandoning his allies to
his rival. Unwilling to enter into the details hecefliry for
adjusting their interefls, or afraid that whatever he claim-
ed for them must have been purchased by farther conccl-
ons on his own part, he ave them up in a body; and

B 3 without

sgo V.

V ithou tho letft prPY4oqn jn their behalf, lffi the Vez,0,-
'-v~~ 1itas, Ahe 1iorentipes, he duke of Ferrara, togetler

169 with fugh .of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his army,

to .e

I ercy of the mperor. They icsrmed loiy

arainfthisnsa(C and per.dioys aion, of wich Francis
himflfws'so much fbn)od, that, in order to avoid the
pain of hearing from their ambasThdors the eproaches
which he juUy merito, it was some time beore he woild
consent to allvw tbeni *w ~wience. C utle, onthe
otherhInyn, was attentivgo the intera of very pan
who had adhered to him; tht righzs ps lp, Ms ps kHs
FIerishuje , wo had eiates or pretfro~i~· F'rnk,
wre lectred one articp was inferred, obliging Frarpcs
tc, resRel xhe blood and memory gs he CciCftabwe iols-
h9 ' a4l 1o grant his heirs te pot4Jioil his ;Lnci
whbich id been forfeited; anohbrr, by which ridejppi-
flcatioo paRs ipulated far tofe Fiench gSnticmgn %Nho
hM d irpnied Boiirbon in )lis exile . Th'scpr4u,
lai~4able in itfeif, and ptaced in te q&ps riifing light by
i ,owrorison with that of Francis, gagnid Chles as
anuchcb'eem as thc s1Ccc 9f his arms 4;kd acqigre4 bip

lenry ic- slid n"t treat zac Xing f s-A wRi4 i11
quicfices In nggdet
it. fxme a Nsothr Uie. Yi e copqiik CO nic.

b" uiin alltw Ieps of his pegpgatipp at Qi~zpF~p, IY? )a
jly 4uaI.t~it A~oarci ip a FtjiQRavi lvhs

4 hip p9

} choi Pt to approve *wp-S49- cs, sq

Isis rcherne ggnii le pry hi hp

PM~~e ki~titgth lsp

of being dii- sprie ime in rr tq qin

; divgq

W~fram jt. ri

vorced from anpdypsg 4gi
':iia of Art o
hQu Qeen. . peiel aqres

prn)p t g he KCiss tp We thsj i: q.s b. H

r

tly n 4enced at (Ogris rifeng by rqojgipir co4Lre -
ii9~ip, he cnt~nain9 a~~py scrtlpRs o erp pg 1tTi

oif his marriage w~ji hts I* 1~ ipr b4 %
~eaULHH kap 19eB ~sL riltpgPd frolp:db Who

pli4 i~r, lC~~ls 9M had JoR gig tkephpktns iC

POsresse in the earlier part of her life; he Was paIir~oiw
ly Oefirppp of h;vig qjic jc; W94(gy "r#,lly (ortficd
Z4 pc1O9lqi ha hpjbe, chat hl milt

OCR OW g~ th~wqr9 C*019-

imn pepb ; uwore spvrblb wo rhapa im

gps 9DWUtDo han -l

4l4e aipite, tlw Kid bad slwuiv-
ed ;vl$nc love fAg!F0I41r0tpd A'ws Zqllys, A young

&uc. 9·IZ ntr Ic u. i . ( r ld

lady of great beauty, and of greater accomplithments, Boo V.
whom, as he found it impossible to gain her on other --
terms, he determined to raise to the throne. The papal 519
authority had often been interposed to grant divorces for
reasons less specious than those which Henry produced.
When the matter was first proposed to Clement, during
his imprisonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as his hopes
of recovering liberty depended entirely on the King of
England, and his ally of France, he expressed the warm-
eft inclination to gratify him. But no sooner was he set
free, than he discovered other featiments. Charles, who
espoused the protetion of his aunt with zeal inflamed
by resentment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand with
threats which made a deep imprefflon on his timid mind;
and allured him on the other with those promises in fa-
vour of his family, which he afterwards accomplilhed.
Upon the profpea of these Clement not only forgot all
his obligations to Henry, but ventured to endanger the
interest of the Romish religion in England, and to run
the risk of alienating that kingdom for ever from the obe-
dience of the Papal fee. After amusing Henry during
two years, with all the subtleties and chicane which the
court of Rome can so dextroufly employ to protra or
defeat any cause; after displaying the whole extent of his
ambiguous and deceitful policy, the intricacies of which
the Englifi historians, to whom it properly belongs, have
found it no easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at last,
recalled the powers of the delegates whom he had appoint-
ed to judge in the point, avocated the cause to Rome,
leaving the King no other hope of pbtaining a divorce but
from the personal decision of the Pope himself. As Cle-
ment was now in ftArj alliance with the Emperor, who
had purchaied his frjindhip by. fuh exorbitant concefli-
os, nry dcfpaired:of procurAiEg py ientence from the
former, but wit w0a diat4q y' ; lber, . His honour,
h9ever, ad pafqp cpncrrel' pn prrenltinh him from
relinquihing hi" Ichewe of a iyorcc, which he deter-
mined to accqmpfi(h by other meea, and at any rate;
and the coniruane of Frnci's irindthlip being nccef-
(ary to conbtcrblapF thi

e iperpr's power, he, in or-

d t, tp crc ,thy, pot only oaffored no rcmonftrances
auainet the total ncd of tbeir alies, in the treaty of
Cmbray, but mdeFrancis the prefcnt of a large fum,

B 4 a
_ _ _ _ t _ . _ s _

Bo v. as a brotherly contribution towards the payment of the
*"" ransom for his sons *.
Aug. 1z. MEAWHIL.E the Emperor landed in Italy with a nu-
The rEmpe- merous train of the Spanish nobility, and a contiderable
ror viits body of troops. He left the government of Spain during

y his absence to the Empress Isabella. By his lone residence

in that country, he had acquired such thorough know-
ledge of the charaaer of the people, that he could per-
fectly accommodate the maxims of his government to
their genius. He could even aume, upon some occafi-
ons, such popular maniers, as gained wonderfully upon
the Spaniards. A firiking instance of his disposition to
gratify them had occurred a few days before be embarked
for Italy: He was to make his public entry into' the city
of Barcelona; and some doubts having arisen among the
inhabitants, whether they (hould receive him as Emperor,
or as Count of Barcelona, Charles inflanly decided in
favour of the latter, declaring that he was more proud of
that ancient title, than of his Imperial crown. Soothed
with this flattering expreflion of his regard, the citizens
welcomed him with acclamations of joy, 'and the states
of the province swore allegiance to his son Philip, as heir
of the county of Barcelona. A similar oath had beern
taken in all the kingdoms of Spain, with equal fatisfac-
tion .

TPE Emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp and

power of a conqueror; and ambafladors frorm all the
princes and flates of that country attended his court wait-
ing to receive his decifi(n with regard to their fate. At
Genoa, where he first landed, ie was received with 'the
acclamations due to the protector of their libeties. Hav-
ing honoured Doria with- many marks of diftinion, and
belowed on the republick several new privileges, he pro-
ceeded to Bologna, the place fixed upon for 1his interview
with the Pope. He affeced to unite in hit publick entry
into that city the state and majesty that'fuited an Emperor,.
with the humility becoming an obedient son of the church'
and while at tht head oftwenty thousand veteran soldiers,
able to give'law to ll Italy, he kneeled down to kifs the
feet of that very Pope whom he had so lately detained i
prisoner. The Italians, after fuFering To much from the
ferocity and licentiousness of his armies, and after havin
been long accustomed to form in their imagination a pic.

* Herbert. Mem, de Bellay, p. %. ' Sandov ii . Se rerrer.
ix. 116.

ture

ture of Charles which bore some resemblance to that of BoOK V.
the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths or Huns, who had ''
formerly affli&ed their country with like calamities, were '529'
furprized to fee a prince of a graceful appearance, affable
and courteous in his deportment, of regular manners,
and of exemplary attention to all the offices of religion *.
They were still more allonifhed when he fettled all the
concerns of the princes and fates which now depended
upon him, with a degree of moderation and equity much
beyond what they had expeEted.

CHARI.ES himself, when he set- out from Spain, far His mode-
from intending to give any such extraordinary proof of ration a d

the motive,

this felf-denial, seens to have been resolved to avail him of it.
seif to the utmost of the superiority which he had acquir-
ed in Italy. But various circumstances concurred in point-
ing out the neceflity of pursuing a very different course.
The progress of the Turkish Sultan, who, atter over-
running Hungary, had penetrated into Auftna, and laid
siege to Vienna with an army of an hundred and fifty Se;:t. 3.
thousand men, loudly called on him to colleE his whole
force to oppose that torrent; and though the valour of
the Germans, the prudent conduE of erdinand, toge-
ther with the treachery of the Vizier soon obliged Soly- oa. 16.
man to abandon that enterprize with infamy and loss, the
religious disorders still growing in Germany made the Em-
peror's presence highly necessary there t: lThe Florentines,
inflead of giving their content to the re-establishment of
the Medici, which by the treaty of Barcelona the Em-
peror had bound himself to procure, were preparing to
defend their liberty by force of arms; the vati preparati-
ons for his journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and;on tiis, as ell as many other occasions, the multi-
plicity of his affairs, and the narrowness of his revenues
obliged tim to contrac his vaif scheme of ambition, and
to forego present and certain advantages, that he might
guard against more remote but unavoidable dangers.
Charles, from all there considerations, finding it necefary
to assume an air of moderation, ated his part with a good
grace. He admitted Sforza into his presence, and not
pnly gave him a full pardon of all pafl offences, but
granted him the invetiture of the duchy together with
his niece the King of Denmaik's daughter in marriage.
He allowcd the duke of Ferrara to keep poffeflion of all his

* Sndov. lif. dell Emp. Carl. V. ii. 5, 53, &c. t Bleidrn,
1l1. Guic. I, xx. o50.

dominions,

Boo v. dominions, adjuRfing the points in dispute between him
'- -'and the Pope with an impartiality not very agreeable to

'"S9' the latter. He came to a final accommodation with the

Venetians upon the reasonable condition of their restoring
whatever-they had usurped during the late war, either in
the Neapolitan or papal territories. In return for so ma-
ny concessions he exaaed considerable fums from each of
the powers with whom he treated, which they paid with-
out relutance, and which afforded him the means of
proceeding on his journey towards Germany with a mag-
nificence suitable to his dignity .

iS3o. THESE treaties, which reRfored tranquillity to Italy

blilhesthe aftera tedious war, the calamities of which had chiefly
uthority of affeaed that country, were published at Bologna with
the Medici great solemnity on the first day of the year one thousand
n Florenc five hundred and thirty, anidft the universal acclamations

of the people, applauding the Emperor to whose modera-
tion and generosity they ascribed the blessings of peace
which they had so long desired. The Florentines alone
did not partake of this general joy. Animated with azeal
for liberty more laudable than prudent, they determined
to oppose the restoration of the Medici. The Imperial
army had already entered their territories, and formed the
fiage of their capital. But though deserted by all their
allies, and left without any hope of f4ccour, they defended
themselves many months with an ohftinate valour worthy
f better success, nd eve when they surrendered they
obtained a capitulation which gave them hopes of fccuring

me remains of their liberty. But the Emperor, from
his defirc to gratify the Popt, fruftrted all their eesta-
tions, and aboliibed their ancient form of govrqent,
raised Alexander Medici to the fame abolute dopinion
over that fiate which his family have retained to thq preo
lent times. Phiiibert de Chalons prince of Orange the
Imperial general, was killed during this fige. Hi egate
and titles defcendd to his fifr Claude de Cbalons, who
was married to Rene count of Nafiu and she transmit.'
ted to her poflerity of the bouse of Nassau the title of
Princes of Orag~ .which they have rendered so illus-
trious t.

&A.t of.f- ArTIR the publication of the peace at Bologna, and
hira, c:vil the ceremony of his coronation as King of Lombardy and
*ad reliion. Emperor of the Romans, which the Pope performed with
in Gcrma-
y. *·8ndov. ii. 5S, &c. t Cuic.1. x.. p. 541, &c. P. Heuter. Rr.
Feb. Aufr. lib. x. c. .

4 36.
a. rthe

Italy t; and he began to prepare for his journey to (wr '-"
many. Hi presence became every day more necefiry '"5'
in that country, and was solicited with equal importunity
by the catholicks and by the favourers of the new doc-
trines. During that long interval of tranquillity which
the absence of the Emperor, the contelis between himn
and the Pope, and his attention to the war with - France
afforded them, the latter had gained much ground. M¶4
of the princes who bad embraced Luther's opinions, had
not only eftablilhed in their territories that form of woy-
{hip which he approved, but had entirely fupprefed the
rites of the Romflh church. Many of te free cities ha
imitated their conduct. AlmoR one half of the Ger-
manick body had revolted from the Papal fee, and its
dominion, even in that part which had not hitherto Ihak-
en off the yoke, was considerably weakened by the exam-.
pie of the neighbouring Iates, or by the secret progref
of those doarines which had undermined it among them.
Whatever fatisfaaion the Emperor, while he was at open
enmity with' the fee of Rome, might have felt in thok
events that tended to mortify and embarrass the ope, he
could not help perceiving now, that the religious divifi-
ons in Germany would, in the end, prove extrmeJy
hurtful to the npprial authority, The weanefs of fw-
mer Emperors had fuff.red the great vassals of the Ea,
pire to make such fucefsfil encroachments upon their
power and perogative, that during the whole course of a
war, which iad often required the exertion of his uttr
strength, harlcs fcarc dtew any effec ual aid from G(r
many, and fund tat mngnificent titles or QbfolCet prt.mn
sions were almorf theonly advantages whih Ihe bdg in.
cd by fwayiqg the Impesal sceptre. Hc pnow ~ecfs ful.
ly feiiblc that if he did not recover in irme dogr~ the
prerogatives which his prdeccffors had IjpA, and cqiire
the authority, as well as pogefi the name of head of the
Empire, his high dignity would contribute more to ob-
1truct than to promote hie arPbitious fchelme. Nothing, he
saw, was more efential towards attaining thji than ofmtp-
press opinions that miglt form new bonds of eonfederacy
among the princes of the mrpire, nd unite them by ties
flrongcr and more facrOd than any political connedtion.
Nothing ccmed to lead more ccrtaiily t9 the *ccomplii-
inent ot hia defcgns, than to employ eal for the edab-
t H. Cornel. Aglippt d duplici Cuionttione Cu. V. ap. Scad. ii. i66.

lithed

4
EMPEROR CHARLES..

*7

Boos V. lified religion, of which he was the natural protecor, as
''V"^ ^ the inflrument of extending his civil authority.
Pro!edings ACCORDINGLY, a profpea no sooner opened of com-
of the Diet ing to an accommodation with the Pope, than by the Em-
at Spires. peror's appointment, a diet of the Empire was held at
M5arh is. Spires, in order to take into consideration the Rate of re-

ligion. The decree of the diet affernb!ed there in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty fix, which was
almost equiva!ent to a toleration of Luther's opinions, had
given great offence to the reft of ChriRfendom. The
greatest delicacy of address, however, was requisite in
proceeding to any decision more rigorous. The minds of
men kept in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on during twelve years without intcrmiffion of debate, or
abatement of zeal, were now inflamed to an high degree.
They were accustomed to innovations, and saw the bold-
eft of them successful. Having not only abolished old
rites, but fbfituted new forms in their place, they were
influenced as much by attachment to the fyviem which
he had embraced, as by aversion to that which they had
abandoned. Luther himself, of a spirit not to be worn
out by the length and obstinacy of the combat, or to be-
come remiss upon success, continued the attack with as
much vigour as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom
many equalled him in zeal, and some surpassed him in
learning, were no less capable than their mafler to con-
duB the controversy in the propereft manner. Many of
the laiety, and even of the princes, trained up amidst
there inceflant disputations, and in the habit of lifening
to the arguments of the contending parties who alter-
nately appealed to them as judges, came to be profound-
ly killed in all the questions which were agitated, and,
upon occasion, could hew themselves not inexpert in any
of the arts with which these theological encounters were
managed. It was obvious from all there circumfiances,
that any violent decision of the diet muff have imme-
diately precipitated matters into confusion, and have
kindled in Germany the flames of a religious war. All,
therefore, that the Archduke, and the other commiiflo-
ners appointed by the Emperor demanded of the diet,
was, to enjoin those Rates of the Empire who had hither-
to obeyed the decree issued againf Luther at Worms in
the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-four, to
persevere in the observation of it, and to prohibit the other
fiatcs from attempting any farther innovation in religion,

particularly

particularly from abolishing the Mass, before the meeting BooK V.
of a general touncil. After much dispute, a decree to
that effect was approved of by a majority of voices*. '530

TIHE Eile&or of Saxony, the Marquis of Branden- The follow-

burgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the dukes of Lunenburgh, err of Lu-
the Prince of Anhalt together with the deputies of four- ther protet
teen Imperial or free cities t, entered a solemn protest th
against his decree, as unjut and impious. On that ac- April zg.
count they were distinguished by the name of PRO-
TESTANTS X, an appellation which hath since become
better known, and more honourable, by its being applied
indiscriminately to all the feEts of whatever denomination
which have revolted from the Roman fee. Not satisfied
with this declaration of their dissent from the decree of
the diet, the Protestants sent ambafadors into Italy to lay
their grievances before the Emperor, from whom they met
with the molt discouraging reception. Charles was at that Deliberti-
time in close union with'the Pope, and solicitous to attach one of the
him inviolably to his interest. During their long refi- Pope Dd
dence at Bologna, they held many consultations concern- Emperor
ing the mos effectual means of extirpating the herefies
which had sprung up in Germany. Clement, whose cau-
tious and timid mind the proposal of a general council
filled with horror, even beyond that which Popes, the
constant enemies of such aflemblies, usually feel, employ-
ed every argument to diffu.de the Emperor from consent-
ing to that measure. He represented general councils as
fatious, ungovernable, presumptuous, formidable to civil
authority, and too flow in their operations to remedy dif-
orders which required an immediate cure. Experience,
he said, had now taught both the Emperor and himself,
that forbearance and lenity exasperated the spirit of inno-
vation which they ought to have mollified; it was necef-
fary, therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous methods
which such a desperate cafe required; Leo's sentence of
excommunication, and the decree of the diet at Worms
should be carried into execution, and it was incumbent
on. the Emperor to employ his whole power, in order to
overawe tofe on whom the reverence due either to eccle-
fiaftical or civil authority had no longer any influence.
Charles, whose views were very different from the Pope's,

* Sleid. Hid. 7. f The fourteen cities were Stralburgh, Nu-

cemburgh, Unm, Cnftiace, Reutlingen, ,Windlheim, Minengen, Lindaw,
Krmpted, ttllbron, Ifns, Weitfemburb, Nurdlingen, and St. CGl.

$ icid. Hi lt. a 1 F. Pul. His. p. 45. &Sckend. ii. 1t7..

and

toe V. td who became daily more sensible how obtinate and
^Bss^ eep rooted the evil was, thought of reeoniiling the Pro-

wt4 teftahts by means less violent, and confided the convo-

cation of a council ar no improper epedient for that pur-
piTe; but promised, if these gentler arts failed of success,
thrt then he would exct hiimfef with vigour to reduce
thlbe fbbrn enemies of the Catholic faith .

Eere ScI were the sentiments with which the Emperor set
preitenitt for Germany, havig already appoited a.dit of the
Auglburg. 'Etmpire to be hed at AOgfitHgh. In his journey towards
March zz, that city, he had many opportmilies of observing the
:53o. disposition of de Grttans with rgard to the points in

elmtroverfy and found their mi ds every where so much
iltaetd and inflMned) *S onviled him that nothing
tetinng to feerity or rigour ought tt lbe attempted, till all
June 15. iher meafres wproed ineffeiul. He nude his public

Nitryinto Agfburgh with extraoiiary pmp ; and found
there fch a fui afifebly of the nMwtner of the diet as
was fitrble both to the impofaste of the affair which
were tr come *rder their cbfideit n amd to the h-
ntur of an Enperor, who, *s~er Ig bfencr, retamed
to them crowned with rrtfatbn and fuocefs. His pre-
fenrce feems-to have communicated to al parties an unu-
foal spirit of moderation and desire of peace. The Elec-
tot of Saxony would not permit Luther. to accompany
him to the diet, left he should offend the Emperor by
bringing into his presence a person excommunicated by
the Pope, and the author of all thOse dissensions which
it now appeared so difficult to compose. At the Em-
peror's desire,. all the Protctant princes sorbad the divines
who accompanied them to preach in publickt during thei
residence at Augiburgh. or the fame reason they. ema
ployed Melanahon, the man of the greatefl learning,
as well as of the mot pacific and gentle Ipiit among the
Reformers, to draw up a confettion of their faith, ex-
prefled in terms as little offentlive to the Roma: Cathlics,
as a regard for truth would permit, Melanhon, who
seldom fufferd the rancour of conttoverfy o envenom

The consef his kyle, even in writings purely polemica executed a
burgh." tlk so agreeble to his natural difpition with great mo-

deration and .fucifs. T'e Cl ed which he composed4
known by the name of the Confeflion of Augsburgh,

. P. Paul, 47. Sa-ck. . ys. HLA.~dc C ap . dAiwbsw per s
Chytreut, 4to. Antw. 7t, P. 6..

from the place where it was presented, was read publickly o80o v.
in the diet; some Popish divines were appointed to exa-
mine it; they brought in their animadverions; a dispute '5$'
ensued between them and Melanahon seconded by some
of his brethren ; but though Melanahon softened some
articles, made concessions with regard to others, and put
the least exceptionable sense upon all; though the Em-
peror himself laboured with great earnestness to reconcile
the contending parties, so many marks of diftin&ion were
now eftablifled, and such insuperable barriers placed be-
tween the two churches, that all hopes of bringing aboet
a coalition feerned utterly desperate *.

FROM the divines, among whom his endeavours -had

been so unsuccessful, Charles turned to the princes their
patrons. Nor did he find them, how desirous soever of
accommodation, or willing to oblige the Emperor, more
disposed than the former to renounce their opinions. At
that time, zeal for religion took poflefion of the minds of
men to a degree which can scarce be conceived by those
who live in an age when the patlions excited by the sirs
manifestation of truth, and the first recovery of liberty,
have in great meaure ceased to operate. This zeal was
then of such Rrength as to overcome attachment to their
political interest, which is commonly the predominant
motive among princes. The Eletor of Saxony, the
Landgrave of Hefe, and other chiefs of the Protef-
tants, though solicited feparatdy by. the Emperor, and
allured by the promise or profpea of those advantages
which it was known they were moR solicitous to attain,
refused, with a fortitude highly worthy of imitation, to
abandon what they deemed the cauif of God for the
fake of any earthly acquisition t.

EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Protef- severe de-

tant party proving abortive, nothing now remained for cree apin*
the Emperor but to take ome vigorous measures towards te Proi-
aflerting the docines and authority of the etablilhed
church. 'hefe, Campeggio, thePapal nuncio, had al-
ways recommended as the only proper and effeaual course
of dealing with such obstinate heretics. In compliance Nov. .
with his opinions and remonrlbnces, the diet issued a
decree, condemning oft of the peculiar tenets held by
the Protcftants forbidding any person to protca or tole.

*Seckeaid. lib. ii. 1 59, Sc. Abr. Sculteti Annalcs Evangeliti p. Herm.

Vun der Hard. Hilt. Liter. teform. Lips. 17 17. olp. p. I 9.
t Sleid. 132. Scullet. Annal. 15».

rate

Boox V. rate those who taught them; enjoining a trid obfervmce
-~ ~ of the etabli(hed rites; and prohibiting any further inno-
'53° vation under severe penalties. All orders of men were

required to aflift with their persons and fortunes in carry-
ingthis decree into execution; and such as refused to
obey it were declared incapable of ating asjudges, or of
appearing as parties in the imperial chamber, the supreme
court of judicature in the Empire. To all which was
Subjoined a promise that an application hould be made
to the Pope, requiring him to call a general council with-
in fix months, in order to terminate all controversies by
its foevreign decisions *.

They enter THE severity of this decree, which they confidered as
intoaleague a prelude to the moit violent persecutions, alarmed the
at Sinal- Protefants, and convinced them that the Emperor was

. resolved on their deftruaion. The dread of those cala-

mities which were ready to fall on the church, opprefled
the feeble spirit of Melanthon ; and as if the cause had
already been desperate, he gave himself up to melancholy
and lamentation. But Luther, who during the meeting
ofthediet had endeavoured to confirm and animate his
party by several treatises which he addressed to them, was
not disconcerted or dismayed at the profpea of this new
danger. He comforted Melanthon and his other de-
fponding disciples, and exhorted the princes not to aban-
don those truths which they had lately asserted with such
laudable boldness t. His exhortations made the deeper
impression upon them as they were greatly alarmed at
that time by the account of a combination among the
Popilh princes of the Empire for the maintenance of the
eftablilhed religion, to which Charles himself had acced-
ed . This convinced them that it was necessary to fland
on their guard; and that their own Jafety as well as the
success of their cause depended on union. Filled with
this dread of the adverse party, and with these sentiments
concerning the conduct proper for themselves, they al-
r e:em. al fembled at Smalkalde. There, they concluded a league

of mutual defence againfi all aggressors §, by which they
formed the ProteRfant flates of the Empire into one regu-
lar body, and beginning already to confider theinfelves as
luch, they resolved to apply to the Kings of France and
England, and to implore them to aflift and patronize
their hew confederacy.

t Seek. ii.

i 1. Slcid. 140.
§ 81 id. Hia. 14t.

t Sec. ii.

0 leid. s 39 .
'32. ii. a&.

AN affair not conneaed with religion furnished them Boo V.

with a pretence for courting the aid of foreign princes. - -o
Charles, whose ambitious views enlarged in proportion to The Empe-
the increase of his power and grandeur, had formed a ror propotes
scheme of continuing the Imperial crown in his family, tbo hve h
by procuring his brother Ferdinand to be eleaed king ofleaed King
the Romans. The present jun&ure was favourable for of the Ro-
the execution of that design. The Emperor's arms had m"ns.
been every where viaorious ; he had given law to all Eu-
rope at the late peace ; no rival now remained in a con-
dition to balance or to controul him; and the Ele&ors,
dazzled by the plendour of his success, or over-awed by
the greatnels of his power, durst scarce dispute the will of
a prince whose solicitations carried with them the author
rity of commands. Nor did he want plausible reasons to
enforce the measure. The affairs of his other kingdoms,
he said, obliged him to be often absent from Germany ;
the growing disorders occasioned by the controversies a-
bout religion, as well as the formidable neighbourhood of
the Turks, who continually threatened to break in with
their desolating armies into the heart of the Empire, re-
quired the constant presence of a prince, endowed with
prudence capable of composing the former, and with
power and valour sufficient to repel the latter. His bro-
ther Ferdinand possessed these qualities in an eminent de-
gree; by residing long in Germany, he had acquired a
thorough knowledge of their onflitution and manners;
having been present almost from the first rife of their reli-
gious dissensions, he knew what remedies were most pros
per, what they could bear, and how to apply them; as
his own dominions lay on the Turkish frontier, he was
the natural defender of Germany againfi the invasions of
the Infidels, being prompted by intercft no left than he
would be bound in duty to oppose them.

THES£ arguments made little impremflon on the Pro- TheProter-

tants aered.

teftants. Experience taught them, that nothing had con- to" it.
tributed more to the undiflurbed progress of their opini-
ons, than the interregnum after Maximilian's death, the
long absence of Charies and the slackness in the reins of
government which these occasioned after deriving such
advantages from a ate of anarchy, they were extremely
unwilling to give themselves a new and a fixed master.
They perceived clearly the extent of Charles's ambition,
that he aimed at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary
in his family, and would of course eftabligh in the Em-

VOL, II. C pir

Boot V. pire an absolute dominion, to which elecive princes
^'v could not have aspired with equal facility. They deter-

'530' mined therefore to oppose Ferdinand's eletion with the

utmost vigour, and to rouse their countrymen by their ex-
ample and exhortations, to withstand this encroachment

s13'. on their liberties. The Eletor of Saxony accordingly,
Janusry . not only refused to be present in the electoral college,

which the Emperor summoned to meet at Cologne, but
inftruaed his eldef son to appear there, and to protest
against the election as informal, illegal, contrary to the
articles of the golden bull, and subversive of the liberties

He ,s cho- of the Empire. But the other Ele&ors, whom Charles
if,,. had been at great pains to gain, without regarding either

his absence or protest, chose Ferdinand King of the Ro-
mans; who a few days after was crowned at Aix-la-Cha-
pelle *.

Nogot;,ti- THE account of this tranfaaion, as well as of the com-
ons of the mencement of some prosecutions against them on account
Proteftnta of their religions principles, in the Imperial chamber, be-
w"hFrnce ing brought to the Protestants, who were aflcmbled a fe-

cond time at Smalkalde, they thought it neceflary both
to renew their former confederacy, and immediately to
dispatch their ambafladors into France and England..
Feb. 29. Francis had observed, with all thejealoufy of a rival, the

reputation which the Emperor had acquired by his seem-
ing difintereltednefs and moderation in fettling the affairs
of Italy; and beheld with great concern, the successful
ftep which he had taken towards perpetuating and extend-
ing his authority in Germany by the elecion of a King of
the Romans. othing, however, would have been more
impolitic than to precipitate into a new war, his kingdom
cxhaufted by extraordinary efforts, and discouraged by ill
'uccels, before it had got time to recruit its strength, or
to forget past misfortunes. Nor could he, when no pro-
vocation had been given, and scarce a pretext had been
afforded him, violate a treaty of peace which he himself
had so lately solicitcd, without forfeiting the eficem of all
l urope, and being detefied as a prince void ot probity and
honour. He oblerved, with great joy, powerful factions
beginning to so mi in the Empire; he listened with the ut-
most cagernefs to the complaints of the ProteRant princes;
and without fceming to countenance their religious opini-
* Skicd. 14. Seck. iii. . P. Heuter. Ret. Aufr. lib. x. c. 6. p. 140.

one,

cns. determined secretly to cherish those sparks of politi- BooK V.
cal difcotid whch might be afterwards kindled into a'-v- "
tmi.e. For this purpose, he sent William deBellay, one 53'
,,f the b!cft negotiators in France, into Germany, who
.,firing the courts of the malecontent princes, and height-
ened their ill humour by various arts, concluded an alli-
ance between them and his matter *, which though con-
cealed at that time, and productive of no immediate es-
feEts, laid the foundation of an union fatal on many occa-
sions to Charles's ambitious projects; and hewed the dif-
.nlltented princes cf Germany, where they might, for the
!. ture, find a proteEtor no less powerful than willing to
undertake their defence againil the encroachments of the
i. mpeior.

TH E King of England, highly incensed agairft CharlesiWith Eng-

in complailance to whom, the Pope had long retarded, lld
and now openly opposed his divorce, was no less disposed
than Francis to firengthen a league which might be ren-
dered so formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite pro-
jea of the divorce led him into such a labyrinth of schemes
and negotiations; and he was, at the fame time, so intent
on aboli(hing the papal jurifdi6ion in England, that he
had no leisure for foreign affairs ; and was obliged to fa-
tisfy himself with giving general promises, together with
a small supply in money to the confederates of Smal-
kalde t.

M AWHILE; niany circumtances cohvinced Charleschbrles

that this was not a juncure when the extirpation of he- courts the
refy was to be attempted by violence and rigour; that, inPr'^Otc""'
compliance with the Pope's inclinations, he had already
proceeded with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into one united
and vigorous body, than to divide and enfeeble it by a ci-
vil ar. The Protestants, already considerable by their
numbers, and their zeal, had now acquired additional
weight and importance by their joining in that confede-
racy into which the rash steps taken at Augfburgh had
forced them. ' Having now discovered their own strength,
they despised the decisions of the Imperial chamber; and
being secure of foreign protecion, were ready to set the
head of the Empire at defiance. At the lame time his
peace with France was precarious, the friendship of an ir-

Belliy, 1194 . I30j k. Seck. iii. 14.
' Herbert, as , 1)4.

C. a

tefolute

Boo V. resolute and interested pontiff was not to be relied ol;

.- *' and Solyman, in order to repair the infamy and loss which
'53" his arms had futained in the former campaign, was pre-

paring to enter Austria with more numerous forces. On
all these accounts, especially the last, a speedy accommo-
dation with the malecontent princes, was neceflary not
only for the accomplishment of his future schemes, but
for ascertaining his present safety. Negotiations were, ac-
cordingly, carried on by his dire&ion with the Ele&or of
Saxony and his associates; after many delays occasioned
by the jealousy of the Emperor, and of each other, after
innumerable difficulties arising from the inflexible nature
of religious tenets, which cannot admit of being altered,

Crants modified, or relinquished in the fame manner as points of
them fou-political interest, terms of pacification were agreed upon at
"able termNuremberg, and ratified solemnly in the Diet at Ratif-
July 3. bon. In this treaty, it was stipulated, That universal
AuguR 3. peace be established in Germany, until the meeting of a

general council, the convocation of which within fix
months the Emperor (hall endeavour to procure; That
no person be molested on account of religion; That a flop
be put to all procedes begun by the Imperial chamber a-
gainft Protestants, and the sentences already passed to their
detriment be declared void. On their part, the Protef-
tants engaged to affif the Emperor with all their forces in
resisting the invasion of the Turks *. Thus by their
firmness in adhering to their principles, by the unanimity
with which they urged all their claims, and by their dex-
terity in availing themselves of the Emperor's situation,
the Protestants obtained terms which amounted almost to
a toleration of their religion; all the conceflions were made
by Charles, none by them; even the favourite point of
their approving his brother's elcaion was not mentioned;
and the Protefants of Germany, who had hitherto been
viewed only as a religious set, came henceforth to be con-
fidered as a political body of no small consequence t.
Campaign THe intelligence which Charles received of Solyman's

Hungar'. having entered Hungary at the head of three hundred

thousand men cut (hort the deliberations of the Diet at
Ratisbon; the contingent both of troops and money which
each prince was to furnish towards the defence of the Em-
pire having been already fettled. The ProteRants, as a

* D Moat Corps Diplomaique, tom. iv. pat ii. 87, 89.
leid. 49 &. S . k. i. II.

teRimony

testimony of their gratitude to the Emperor, exerted them- Boot V.
selves with extraordinary zeal, and brought into the field `
forces that exceeded in number the quota imposed on 32
them; and the Catholics imitating their example, one of
the greatefl and befl appointed armies that had ever been
levied in Germany, aflembled near Vienna. Being join-
ed by a body of Spanish and Italian veterans under the
marquis del Guafno; by some heavy armed cavalry from
the Low-Countries; and by the troops which Ferdinand
had raised in Bohemia, Autfria, and his other territories,
it amounted in all to ninety thousand dilciplined foot, and
thirty thousand horse, besides a prodigious swarm of irre-
gulars. Of this vast army, worthy the firfl prince in
Christendom, the Emperor took the command in person;
and mankind waited in suspense the issue of a decisive bat-
tle between the two greatef Monarchs in the world. But
each of them dreading the other's power and good for-
tune, they both conduced their operations with such ex-
celive caution, that a campaign, for which such immense
preparations had been made, ended without any memo-
rable event. Solyman finding it impoflble to gain ground September
upon an enemy always attentive, and on his guard,andOctober.
marched back to ConRantinople towards the end of au-
tumn . Itis remarkable that in such a martial age, when
every gentleman was a soldier, and every prince a gene-
ral, this was the rft time that Charles, who had already
carried on such extensive wars, and gained so many vic-
tories, appeared at the head of his troops. In this firt
eflay of his arms, to have opposed such a leader as Soly-
man, was no small honour; to have obliged him to re-
treat merited very considerable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Ele&or ofAugutn a6.

Saxony died, and was succeeded by his son John Frede-
rick. The Reformation rather gained than loft by that
event; the new Eleftor, no less attached than his prede.
ceflrs to the opinions of Luther, occupied the Ration
which they held at the head of the Proteiant party, and
defended, with the boldness and zeal of youth, the cause
which they had softered and reared with the caution of old
age.

IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks, Charles, e Empe-
impatient to revisit Spain, set out, on his way thither, for m' inter-

view with
Jovii HiR. lib. 3o, p. oo, S&c. Burn Hlft. de I'Empirn i. 8. 347. hiayto

_~~C I ~SBpin.
c3 Itt.

Boo i v. Italy. As he was extremely desirous of an interview witht
* ""'the Pope, they met a second time at Bologna, with the

153z. fame external demonfirations of refpe& and friend(hip,

but with little of that confidence which had fubfilcd be-
tween them during their late negotiations there. Clement
was much dissatisfied with the Emperor's proceedings at
Augfburgh ; his conceflions-with regard to the speedy con-
vocation of a council, having more than cancelled all the
merit of the severe decree against the doctrines of theRefor-
mers. The toleration granted to the Proteflants at Ratif-
bon, and the more explicit promise concerning a council
with which it was accompanied, had irritated him ill

Negotiat- farther. Charles, however, partly from conviction that
onsconcen-the meeting of a council would be attended with salutary
ing a gene. effeas, and partly from his desire to please the Germans,

ra co , having solicited him by his ambafiadors to call that as-

fembly without delay, and now urging the fame thing in
person, Clement was greatly embarrassed what reply he
shou!d make to a request, which it was indecent to refute,
and dangerous to grant. Hfe endeavoured at first to di-
vert Charles from the measure, but finding him inflexi-
ble, he bad recourse to artifices which he knew would de-
lay, if not entirely defeat the calling of that assembly.
Under the plausible pretext of its being previously neef-
fary to fettle, with all prties concerned, the plate of he
council's meeting; the manner of its proceedings; he
right of the persons who should be admitted to vote; and
the authority of their declfions; he dilpatched a nuncio,
accompanied by an ainbafldor frot the Emperor, to the
EleBor of Saxony as head of the Protestants. With re-
gard to each of these articles, inextricable difficulties and
contests arose. The Protestants demanded a council to
be held in Germany; the Pope insisted that it hould
meet in Italy; they contended that ll points in dispute
should be determined 'by 'the words of holy scripture
alone; he confidered the decrees of the church, and the
opinions of fathers'and doctors as of equal apthority;
they required a free council in which the dvines commilfi-
oned by different churches hould he allowed a voice; he
aimed at modelling the council in such a manner as would
reader It entirely dependent on his pleasure: Above all,
the Prote*ants thought it unteafonable that they should
bind themselves to submit to the decrees of a coun-
cil, before they knoew oh what pihciples there decrees
were to be founded, by what persons they were to
be pronounced, and what forms of proceeding they

would

would observe. The Pope maintained it to be altogether Boot V.
unnecessary to call a council, if those who demanded it
did not previously declare their resolution to acquiesce in '3
its decrees. In order to adjust such a variety of points,
many expedients were proposed, and the negotiations
spun out to such a length, as effe&ually answered Cle-
ment's purpose of putting off the meeting of a council,
without drawing on himnelf the whole infamy of obRruC-
ing a measure which all Europe deemed so essential to the
good of the church *.

TOGETHER with this negotiation about calling a coun- and for pr-
cil, the Emperor carried on another which Jie had ill fe^ving the

cl tranquillity

more at heart, for securing the peace eflabliflled in Italy. ofr taly.
As Francis had renounced his pretensions in that country
with great reluftance, Charles made no doubt but that
he would lay hold on the first pretext afforded him, or
embrace the first opportunity which presented itself of re-
covering what he had loft. It became neceflary, on this
account, to take mneafures for assembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long war,
could not supply the fums requisite for keeping such a bo-
dy conflantly on foot, he attempted to throw that burden
on his allies, and to provide for the safety of his own
dominions at their expence, by proposing that the Italian
states hould enter into a league of defence against all in-
vaders; that, on the first appearance of danger, an army
should be raised and maintained at the' common charge;
and that Antonio de Leyva hould be appointed the ge-
oeralillimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable to Cle-
ment, tho' for a reason very different from that which
induced the Emperor to make it. He hoped, by this ex- '533
pedient, to deliver Italy from the German and Spanilh
veterans which had so long filled all the powers in that
country with terror, and fill kept them in ubje&ion to
the Imperial yoke. A league was accordingly concluded; Feb. 1 4
all the Italian fates, the Venetiahs excepted, acceded to
it; the um which.eachof the conmrating parties hould
furnith towards maintaining the army was fixed ; the
Emperor agroed to withdraw the troops Which gave so
much umbrage to his allies, nd which he was unable
any longer to support. Having diflbndd lpart of them,
and removed the ref to Sicily and ,Spin he embarked on
board Doria's gallis, and arrived at Barcelona T. April at.

· P. Paul. His. 61. Seckeud. .ii. 7 t Cuc. 51.
Ferrer, i. 14. 9. -

NOT-
4

Boos V. NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for fecurin
<--* the peace of Germany and maintaining that system which
Defi33 and he had established in Italy, the Emperor became every
negotiations day more and more apprehensive that both would be
of the soon disturbed by the intrigues or arms of the French
Rainfl thng King. His apprehensions were well founded, as nothing
E.mperor; but the desperate situation of his affairs could have brought

Francis to give his consent to a treaty so dishonourable
and disadvantageous as that of Cambray: He, at the very
time of ratifying it, had formed a resolution to observe it
no longer than necessity compelled him, and took a so-
lemn protest, though with the most profound secrecy,
against several articles in the treaty, particularly that
whereby he renounced all pretensions to the dutchy of Mi-
lan, as unjuf, injurious to his heirs, and invalid. One
of the crown lawyers, by his command, entered a protest
to the fame purpose, and with the like secrecy, when the
ratification of the treaty was registered in the parliament
of Paris *; and Francis seems to have thought that, by
employing an artifice unworthy of a King, deftru&ivc
of public faith, and of the mutual confidence on which
all tranfadions between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the moRs solemn
promises, or to adhere to the most sacrcd engagements.
From the moment he concluded the peace of Cambray,
he wilhed and watched for an opportunity of violating it
with safety. He endeavoured for that reason to trengthen
his alliance with the King of England, whoke friendihip
he cultivated with the greatest afliduity. He put the
military force of his own kingdom on a better and more
refpetable footing than ever. He artfully fomented the
jealousy and discontent of the German praces.

prticolirly BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the ria
with the confederacy which fubifted between Charles and Cle.
Pr*p. ment; and he had oon the fatisfaaion to oferve ap-

pearances of dilguft and alienation arising in the mind of'
that suspicious and interested Pontiff, which gave him
hopes that their union would not be lifting. As the
Emperor's decision in favour of the duke of Ferrar4
had Weatly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the
injuftbe of that proceeding, and flattered Tim that the
Papal fee would find in him a more impartial and no less
powerful protecor. As the importunity with which

* Di Moat. Corp Dipul. tom. iv. put *. p. . ha

Chubi,

Charlee demanded a council was extremely offensive to Boor v.
the Pope, Francis artfully created obstacles to prevent it, '"
and attempted to divert the German princes, his allies, '533'
from insisting so obstinately on that point *. As the Em-
peror had gained such an acendant over Clement by
contributing to aggrandize his family, Francis endeavour-
ed to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, proposing
a marriage between his second son Henry duke of Orle-
ans, and Catharine the daughter of the Pope's cousin
Laurence di Medici. On the first oyertures of this match,
the Emperor could not persuade himself that Francis
really intended to debate the royal blood of France by an
alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors had been so late-
ly private citizens and merchants in Florence, and be-
lieved that he meant only to flatter or amuse the ambiti-
ous Pontiff. He thought it necessary, however, to efface
the impression which such a dazzling offer might have
made, by promising to break off the marriage which had
been agreed on between his own niece the King of Den-
mark's daughter, and the Duke of Milan, and to fubfti-
tute Cathaine in her place. But the French ambafladors
producing unexpecedly full powers to conclude the
marriage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this expedient
had no effe. Clement was so highly pleased with an
honour which added such lustre and dignity to the house
of Medici, that he offered to grant Catharine the inveRi-
ture of considerable territories in Italy by way of portion;
he seemed ready to support Francis in prosecuting his an-
cient claims in that country, and consented to a personal
interview with that Monarch t.

CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent a meet- Interview

ing, in which nothing was likely to pass but what would between the
be of detriment to him; nor could he bear, after he had rPope ac
twice condescended to visit the Pope in his own territories,
that Clement should bestow such a mark of diftinaion
on his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at an un-
favourable season, in order to pay court to Francis in
The French dominions. But the Pope's eagerness to ac-
complifi the match overcame all scruples of pride, or
fear, orjealouf, which must have influenced him on
any other occasion. The interview, notwithstanding fe-
yeral artifices of the Emperor to prevent it, took place

Belly, 141, &c. Seck. iii. 4. F. Pul, 63. t Guic. 1.
S, S33. Belly, 38.

at

Boot v. at Marseilles with extraordinary pomp, and demonftrati-

v-- ons of confidence on both fides; and the marriage,
'So3'3 which the ambition and abilities of Catharine rendered in

the fequal as fatal to France, as it was then thought dif-
honourable, was consummated. But whatever chemes
may have been secretly concerted by the Pope and Fran-
cis in favour of the duke of Orleans, to whom his father
proposed to make over all his rights in Italy, so careful
were they to avoid giving any cause of offence to the
Emperor, that no treaty was concluded between them *;
and even in the marri:ge-articles, Catharine renounced
all claims and pretensions in Italy, except to the dutchy
of Urbino .

pope's con BUT at the very time when he was carrying on there
dua with negotiations, and forming this connection with Francis,
th'Kg. of which gave so great umbrage to the Emperor, such was
England's the artifice and duplicity of Clement's charater, that he
divorce. suffered the latter to dire& all his proceedings with regard

to the King of England, and was no less attentive to
gratify him in that particular, than if the mos cordial
union had still fubfified between them. Henry's suit for
a divorce had now continued near fix years; during all
which period the Pope negotiated, promised, retracted,
and concluded nothing. After bearing repeated delays
and disappointments, longer than could have beerr.ex-
peAed from a prince of such a cholerick and impetuous
temper, his patience was at last so much exhaufled, that
he applied to another tribunal for that decree which he
had olicited in vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbishop of
Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the authority of
Univelfities, Dotors, and Rabbies, who had been con-
fulted with relpe& to the point, annulled the King's mar-
riage with Catl arine; her daughter was declared illegiti-
mate and Anne Boleyn acknowledged as Queen of Eng-
land. At the fame time Henry began to neglet and to
threaten the I'opc whom he had hitherto courted, and'
to make innovations in the church, of which he had for-
merly been such a zealous defender. Clement, who had
already seen so many provinces and kingdoms revolt from
the Holy See, became apprehensive at last that England
would imitate their example, and partly from his folici-
tude to prevent that fatal blow, partly in compliance
with the French King's solicitations, determined to give

Guic. . . 555. t Da Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. o.

Henry

Henry such fatisfaaion as might fill retain him within BooV.
the bosom of the church. But the violence of the Car-
dinals, devoted to the Emperor, did not allow -the Pope '534
leisure for executing this prudent resolution, and hurried
him with a precipitation fatal to the Roman fee, to iffiue March 13.
a bull rescinding Cranmer's sentence, confirming Henry's
marriage with Catharine, and declaring him excommu-
n;cated, if, within a time specified, he did not abandon
the wife he had taken, and return to her whom he had
deserted. Enraged at this unexpected decree, Henry Papa au-
kept no longer any measures with the court of Rome; thority bo-
his fubjeEs seconded his resentment and indignation; li.ed, n
an a of parliament was passed, abolishing the Papal
power andjurifdicion in England; by another, the King
was declared supreme head of the church, and all the
authority of which the Popes were deprived was veiled in
him. That vast fabrick of ecclefiatical dominion which
had been raised with such art, and whose foundations
seemed so deep, being no longer supported by the vene-
ration of the people, was overturned in a moment. Henry
hlimfelf, withthe caprice peculiar to his character, continu-
ed to defend the do&rines of the Romish churchas fierce-
ly as he attacked itsjurifdidion. Healternatelyperfecuted
the Protestants for rejeting the former, and the Catho-
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his subje&s being
once permitted to enter into new paths, did not choose to
flop hort at the precise point prescribed by him. Hav-
ing been encouraged by his example to break fomeof their
fetters, they were so impatient to (hake off all that re-
mained *, that in the following reign, with the general
applause of the nation, a total separation was made from
the church of Rome'in articles of doctrine, as well as it
matters of discipline and jurifdiaion.

A SHogT delay might'have Iaved the Seeof Rome Deth of

from all the unhappy consequences of Clment's ralhnefs. clmCns
Soon after his sentence againfI Henry, he fell into a lan- V
guifhing distemper, which gradually wafting his conftitu-
tion, put an end to its Pontificate, the most unfortunate, s' '
both during its continuance, and by its effets, that the
church had known for many ages. The very day on Eleaion of
which the Cardinals entered the conclave, they raised to Poul In.
the Papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred o. '3'
college, and the eldet member of that body, who afaumed

Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform

the

BOOK V. the came of Paul III. The account of his promotion
-I - was received with extraordinary acclamations of joy by the
's34 people of Rome, highly pleased, after an interval of more

than an hundred years to fee the crown of St. Peter placed
on the head of a Roman citizen. Persons more capable
of judging, formed a favourable presage of his adminif-
tration, from the experience which he had acquired under
four pontificates, as well as the characerof prudence and
moderation which he had uniformly maintained in a fa-
tion of great eminence, and during an aive and diffi-
cult junaure that required both talents and address *.

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance of its

peace to the death of Clement; for although no traces
remain in history of any league concluded between him
and Francis, it is scarce to be doubted but that he would
have seconded the operations of the French arms in Italy,
that he might have gratified his ambition by feeing one
of his family possessed of the supreme power in Florence,
and another in Milan. But upon the election of Paul
III. who had hitherto adhered uniformly to the Imperial
interest, Francis found it neceflary to suspend his operati-
ons for ome time, and to put off the commencement
of hostilities againt the Emperor, on which he was fully
determined.

nruarreaM WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to renew a
of he Anwar which had hitherto proved so fatal to himself and his

't,
t in fubjecs, a tranfactio of a very singular nature was car-

ried on in Germany, mong many beneficial and falu-
tary cfeas of which the Reformation was the immediate
cause, it was attended, as must be the cafe, in all afions
and events wherein men are concerned, with some confe-
quences of an opposite nature. When the human mind

roused by grand objces, and agitated by firong paii-

ons, its operatipqs acquire such force, that they are apt to
become irregular and extravagant. Upon any great re-
volution in religion, such irregularities abound most at
that particular period, when men having thrown offthe
authority of their ancient principles, do not yet fully com-
prehend the nature, or feel the obligation of those new
ones which they have embraced. The mind, in that
situation, puOling forward with the boldness which
prompted it to reject etablilhed opinions, and not guided
by a clear knowledge of the system fubdituted in their

* Gic. L so 56.. Paul. 64.

place,

place, disdains all restraint, and runs into wild notions, BOoK
that often lead to candalous or immoral condut. Thus, V'" '
in the firfi ages of the ChriRian church, many of the new
converts, having renounced their ancient Creeds, and
being but imperfetly acquainted with the docrines and
precepts of Christianity, broached the most extravagant
opinions equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which
errors disappeared or were exploded when the knowledge
of religion increased, and came to be more generally dif-
fused. In like manner, soon after Luther's appearance,
the rashness or ignorance of Come of his disciples led them
to publish absurd and pernicious tenets, which being pro-
posed to men extremely illiterate, but fond of novelty,
and at a time when their minds were turned wholly to-
wards religious peculations, gained too easy credit and
authority among them. To these causes must be im-
puted the extravagancies of Munster, in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as well as the ra-
pid progress which they made among the peasants; but
though the infurre&ion excited by that Fanatic was oon
suppressed, several of his followers lurked in different
places, and endeavoured privately to propagate his opi-
nions.

IN thoe provinces of Upper Germany, which had al- Otiin ad

ready been so cruelly wafted by their enthusiastic rage, _tt Of
the magistrates watched their motions with such severe
attention, that many of them found it necessary to retire
into other countries, some were punished, others driven
into exile, and their errors were entirely rooted out.
But in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where the per-
nicious tendency of their opinions was more unknown,
and guarded against with less care, they got admittance
into several towns, and spread the infection of their prin-
ciples. The most remarkable of their religious tenets
related to the Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they con-
tended, ought to be adminifted only to persons grown up
to years of understanding, ad hould be performed not
by prinkling them with water, but by dipping them in
it: For this reason they condemned the baptism of in-
sants, and rebaptizing all whom they admitted into their
society, the set came to be distinguished by the name of
Ambaptifts. To this peculiar notion concerning bap-
tifm, which has the appearance of being founded on the
pratice of the church in the apofolic age, and contains
noihing inconfftent with the peace and order of human

society,

Bcox v. society, they added other principles of a most enthusiastic,

-a.-s well as dangerous nature. They maintained that
z534.

among Christians who had the precepts of the gospel to
direc, and the spirit of God to guide them, the office
of magistracy was not only unneceflary, but an unlawful
encroachment on their spiritual liberty; that the diftinc-
tions occasioned by birth, or rank, or wealth, being con-
trary to the spirit of the gospel, which confiders all men
s equal, hould be entirely abolihed ; that all Christians
hrowing their poflefllons into one common stock, hould
ve together in that Lfate of equality which becomes
members of the fame family; that as neither the laws
of nature, nor the precepts of the New Testament had
placed any restraints upon men with regard to the num-
ber of wives which they might marry, they hould use that
liberty which God himself had granted to the patriarchs.

Settle in SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained with en-
Munster. thufiaftic zeal and boldness, were not long of producing

the violent effects natural to them. Two Anabaptist
prophets, John Matthias, a baker of Haerlem, and John
Boold, or Beiikels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden,
possessed with the rage of making proselytes, fixed their
residence at Munfier, an Imperial city in Westphalia, of
the first rank, under the sovereignty of its bishop, but
governed by its own senate and consuls. As neither of
there Fanatics wanted the talents necessary for such an
undertaking, great resolution, the appearance of fanAity#
bold pretensions to inspiration, and a confident and plau-
lible manner of discoursing, they soon gained many con-
verts. Among there were Rothman, who had firt
preached the Protestant docrine in Muntler, and Cnip-
perdoling, a citizen of good birth, and considerable
eminence. Emboldened by the countenance of such
difeiplcs, they openly taught their opinions ; and not fa-
tisfed with that liberty, they made several attempts,
though without success to fcize the town, in order to'

Become get their tenets cflabliflied.ly put;lck authority. At last
mtfttró of having secretly called in their ariates from the neigh.
dat ity. bouring country, they luddenly took polffflion of the

arlenal and lenate-houfe in the night time, and run-
ning through the streets with drawn words, and horrible
houtlint;, cried out alternately, " Repent, and be bap-
ebruary. tized," and "Depart ye ungodly." The fnators, the

canons, the nobility, together with the more fober citi-
zens, whether Papias or Proteftnts, terrified t their

threats

threats and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the city oi v.
under the dominion of a frantic multitude, confifing chiefly
of firangers. Nothing now remaining to overawe or 1534.
controul them, they set about modelling the government
according to their own wild ideas; and though at first
they hewed so much reverence for the ancient conflitution,
as to ele& senators of their own fe&, and to appoint
Cnipperdoling and another proselyte consuls, this was
nothing more than form; for all their proceedings were
dire&ted by Matthias, who in the file, and with the au-
thority of a prophet, uttered his commands, which it was
instant death to disobey. Having begun with encouraging Enablifli
the multitude to pillage the churches, and deface their new formof
ornaments; he enjoined them to defiroy all books except gern.
the Bible, as useless or impious; he appointed the es-
tates of such as fled to be confiscated, and fold to the
inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered every
man to bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effe&s,
and to lay them at his feet ; the wealth amaed by these
means, he deposited in a publick treasury, and named
deacons to dispense it for the common use of all. The
members of his commonwealth being thus brought to
a perse& equality, he commanded all of them to eat at
tables prepared in public, and even prescribed the dishes
which were to be lerved up each day. Having finished
his plan of Reformation, his next care was to provide for
the defence of the city; and he took measures for that
purpose with a prudence which favoured nothing of fana-
tlcilm. He colleced vail m.gazines of every kind ; he
repaired and extended the fortifications, obliging every
person without diftinstion to work in his turn; he formed
luch as were capable of bearing arms into regular bodies,
and endeavoured to add the vigour of difcipl.ne to the
impetuosity of ecthufiafn. He sent eiflaries to the
Anabaptists in the Low-Countries, inviting them to as-
femble at Munfier which le dignified with the name of
Mount-Sion, that from thence they might set out to re-
duce all the nations of the earth under their dominion.
He himself was unwearied in attending to every thing ne-
ceffary for the ecurity or increase of the feet; animating
his disciples by his own example to refuse no labour, as
well as to repine at no hardlhip; and their enthusiastic
paflions being kept from subsiding by a perpetual fuccef-
sion of exhortations, revelations and prophecies, they

seemed

Boot V. seemed ready to undertake or to susser any thing in main-

tenance of their opinions.

The Sb4lo MEANWHILE, the bilop of MunRer having assem-
of Mnfter bled a considerable army, advanced to besiege the town.
takes arms On his approach, Matthias sallied out at the head of ome

fthem chofcn troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced

it, and after great slaughter, returned to the city loaded
with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with this success he
appeared next day brandishing a spear, and declared, that
in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth with a hand-
ful of men and smite the hof of the ungodly. Thirty
May. persons, whom he named, followed him without hefita-

tion in this wild enterprize, and rushing on the enemy
with a frantic courage, were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at sirs great confterna-
tion among his disciples, but Boccold, by the fame gifts
and pretensions which had gained Matthias credit, foorl

John of revived their spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he
eyde act succeeded him in the fame absolute direction of ill theit
autSorit- affairs. As he did not poflefs that enterpriing courage
mong the which distinguished his predecessor, he satisfied himself
Anabaptist. with carrying on a defensive war, and without attempting

to annoy the enemy by allies, he waited for the succours
he expeced from the Low-Countries, the arrival of
which was often foretold and promised by their prophets.
But though les daring in aion than Matthias, he was a
wilder enthusiast, and of more unbounded ambition.
Soon after the death of his predeceflor, having by obscure
visions, and prophesies, prepared the multitude for ome
extraordinary event, he stripped himself naked, and
marching through the flreets, proclaimed with a loud
voice, " That the kingdom of Sion was at hand; that
whatever was highef on earth (hould be brought low,
and whatever was lowest hould be exalted." In order
to fulfil this, he commanded the churches, as the moll
lofty buildings in the city, to be levelled with the ground,
he degraded the senators chosen by Matthias,and depriving
Cnipperdoling of the consulship, the highest ffice in the
commonwealth, he appointed him to execute the lowes
and most infamous, that of common hangman, to which
frange transition the other agreed, not only without mur-
muring, but with the utmof joy and such was the def-
potifm and rigour of Boccofd's administration, that he
was called almoR every day to perform ome duty or other
of his wretched funtion. In place of the deposed kna-

ters

tors; he named twelvejudges, according to the number Boot V.
of tribes in Israel, to preside in all affairs; retaining to
himself the fame authority which Moles anciently poflef- '534
fed as legillator of that people.

NOT satisfied, however, with power or titles which Eliced

were not supreme, a prophet, whom he had gained and King.
tutored, having called the multitude together, declared it to
be the will of God, that John Boccold hould be King of
Sion, and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling down,
accepted of the heavenly call, which'he solemnly prote- Jne z4.
ed had been revealed likeife to himself, and was imme-
diately acknowledged as Monarch by the deluded multi-
tude. From that moment he assumed all the fate and
pomp of royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and the
richefr and most fmnptuous garments. A Bible was car-
ried on his one hand, a naked sword on the other. A
great body of guards accompanied him when he appeared
in public. He coined money Ramped with his own
image, and appointed the great officers of his houlhold
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was nomi-
nated governor of the city, as reward for his former
submission.

HAVING now attained the height of power, Boccold Hi; licenti.

began to discover passions, which he had hitherto restrain- ou, tenet'
ed or indulged only in secret. As the excefies of enthu- andcondu.
fiafm have been observed in every age to lead to enfual
gratifications, the fame constitution that is susceptible of
the former, being remarkably prone to the latter, he in-
firu&ed the prophets and teachers to harangue the peo-
ple for several days concerning the lawfulness, and even
neceflity of taking more wives than one, which they
afered to be one of the privileges granted by God to the
faints. When their ears were once accustomed to this
licentious docrine, and their paRions inflamed with the
profpe of such unbounded indulgence, he himself set
them an example of uing what he called their Christian
liberty, by marrying at once three wives, among which
the widow of Matthias, a woman of singular beauty was
one. As he was allured by beauty, or the love of variety,
he gradually added to thenumbe: of his wives until they
amounted tothe number.offourteen, though the widow of
Matthias was the only one dignified with the title of Queen,
orwho thued itth him the fplndor and ornaments of roy-
alt. After the exampe of their prophet, the multitude gave

Vo, UI. D themflives

Boor V. themselves up to the molt licentious and uncontrouled
'" '~ gratification of their desires. No man remained satisfied

534 with a single wife. Not to use their christian liberty was

deemed a crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young women grown up to maturity, whom
they instantly compelled to marry. Together with poly-
gamy, freedom of divorce, its inseparable attendant, was
introduced, and became a new source of corruption.
Every excess was committed, of which the paflions of
men are capable, when restrained neither by the authority
of laws nor the sense of decency *; and by a monfirous
and almost incredible conjuncion, voluptuoufnefs was
engrafted on religion, and dissolute riot accompanied the
sufterities of fanatical devotion.

A confede- MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly of-
!acy against fended at the insult offered to their dignity by Boc-
the Anabal'cold's presumptuous usurpation of royal honours; and

the profligate manners of his followers, which were a re-
proach to the Chrifian name, filled men of all profelfions
with horror. Luther who had testified against this fa-
natical fpitit on its sirs appearance, now deeply lamented
its progress, and exposing the delusion with great strength
of argument, as well as acrimony of tile, called loudly
on all the Rates of Germany to put a flop to a phrenzy
no less pernicious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and proje6s, had
no leisure to attend to such a distant objet. But the
princes of the Empire, afTembled by the King of the Ro-
mans, voted a supply of men and money to the bilhop of
Munfier, who being unable to keep a fuiflcient army on
foot, had converted the siege of the town into a blockade.

'.;un ter 'he forces raised in consequence of this resolution were
bIiicged. put under the command of an officer of experience, who

approaching the town towards the end of spring in the

* Prophets & conciontaorum utoritate juxta et exemplo, tots urbe

ad rpiLndta pulcherrimab quafque fmin;s difcurfum eit. Nec intrn
paucos dies, in tanta hominum turba, fere ull rperta eft fpra animum
decimum quartum, que tuprum p non fuerit. Limb. Hortcn. p. 303.
Vulgu iri, quinas cae uxores, pluribul £nu, nonnullis leptena & oo-
na. Pueilae luprn duodecimum tatil annum ftatim smarc. Id. 305.
Nemo nna contentus suit, n que cuiquam extra efftu & viris immturs
continenti cfle licuit. Id 307. Tcebo hie, ut it runs honor auribub, quain
ta brbarie et mlitia ufi funt in puelli vitiandis mondurm ptis matrimunic,
Id quad mihi reque ex vano, neque ex vlgi fermonaibu haullum eft, ed
ex r vetula, cui cur ic vitiatarum dmndata it, ujitum. Job.
Corinuf, 316.

. year
5S

year one thousand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it Boo V.
more closely than formerly, but found the fortifications ''0
so strong, and so diligently guarded, that he durst not attempt 35
an assault. It was now above fitteen months ince the
Anabaptifis had eftablilhed their dominion in Munster;
they had during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications, and performing military
duty. Notwithstanding the prudent attention of their My.
King to provide for their subsistence, and his frugal and Ditrefs and
regular economy in their publick meals, they began to f"nticifm
feel the approach of famine. Several small bodies of their GegetLe
brethren, who were advancing to their afiftance from the
Low-Countries, had been intercepted, and cut to pieces;
and while all Germany was ready to combine against
them, they had no profpea of succour. But such was
the ascendant which Boccold had acquired over the mul-
titude, and so powerful the fascination of enthusiasm,
that their hopes were as sanguine as ever, and they hear-
kened with implicit credulity to the visions and prediti-
ons of their prophets, which assured them, that the Al-
mighty would speedily interpose, in order to deliver the
city. The faith however, of ome few, shaken by the
violence and length of their sufferings, began to fail;
but being fufpe&ed of an inclination to surrender to the
enemy, they were punished with immediate death, as
guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of God. One
of the King's wives, having uttered certain words that
implied ome doubt concerning his divine mission, he in-
fantly.called the whole number together, and command-
ing the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel down, cut
off her head with his own hands; and so far were the
reft from expretling any horror at this cruel deed, that
they joined him in dancing with a frantick joy around the
bleeding body of their companion.

BY this time, the besieged endured the utmof rigor of The city

famine but they hose rather to susser liardfhips, the re- tuken.
cital of which is (hocking to humanity, than to lifen to Je *
the terms of capitulation offered them by the bishop.
At last, a deserter, whom they had taken into their frvlce,
being either less intoxicated with the fumes ofenthufiafm,or
unable any longer to bear such diflrefs, made his escape
to the enemy. He informed their general of a weak part
in the fortifications which he had observed, and assuring
him that the besieged, exhaufled with hunger and fatigue,
kept watch there with little care, he offered to lead a par-

D a ty

BooK v. ty thither in the night. The propofti was accepted, and

vV a chosen body of troops appointed for the service; who
's3;s scaling the walls unperceived, seized one of the gates,
JuC 4. and admitted the reft of the army. The Anabaptists,

though furprized, defended themselves in the market
place with valour, heightened by despair; but being over-
powered by numbers, and surrounded on every lhand,
most of them were slain, and the remainder taken prison-

Punnifhmet ers. Among the last were the King and Cnipperdoling.
of the King The King, loaded with chains# was carried from city to
And hs, city as a fpeaacle to gratify the curiosity of the people, and

was exposed to all their insults, His spirit, however, was
not broken or humbled by this fad reverse of his condi.
tion; and he adhered with unshaken firmness to the
difinguilhing tenets of his set. After this, he was
brought back to MunRer, the scene of his royalty and
crimes, and put to death with the most exquisite and lin-
gering tortures, all which he bore with aftoniihing forti-
tude. This extraordinary man who had been able to ac-
quire such amazing dominion over the minds of his fol.
lowers, and to excite commotions to dangerous to society,
was only twenty-fix years of age. *

Charaerof TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom of the
hbe fee Anabaptists came to an end. Their principles having
erod. taken deep root in the Low-Countries, the party still

subsists there, under the name of Mennonites; but by a
very singular revolution, this sea, so mutinous and fan-
guinary at its first origin, hath become altogether inno-
cent and pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage war, or to
accept of civil offices, they devote themfelos entirely to
the duties of private citizens, and by their industry and
charity endeavour to make reparation to human ibciety
for the violence committed by their founders t. A mall
number of this feE which is fettled in England, retain
its peculiartenets concerning baptism, but without any
dangerous mixture of enthusiasm.

Ptoree,ings 1 HE mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it drew ge-
aid utho- netal ttention, did not so entirely engross the princes of
rity t the
legue of Germany, as not to allow leisure for other tranfations.
imalklde.

*Stid. 19o, 8rc. tumultoum Anetialfttrum Liber *nu. Ant. Lm.
Le~ iortenfio autore p. Icardium vol. a. p. SaS &c. Do Miferabli
MmbrrienGumn obdiione, &c. liblluu Aoail Corvini p. . 3.
'Amlee Anabaptillici, Job. Recrico Ottio, 4to. BilO, 16y7. Car.
Hetlchrtffls Hft. Anb. dit. 1637 p. p40. t Byle Didion. Art.
Aurbapt _.

The alliance between the French King and the conedec Boos v.
rates at Smalkalde, began about this time to produce --
great effeas, Ulric, Duke of Wurtemberg, having '35
been expelled his dominions in the year one thousand five
hundred and nineteen, on account of his violent and op-
preffive administration, the oule of Autria. had got pof-
feion of his dutchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his condua, which were the
effed rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical difpo-
tition, was become the objec of general cornpaion. The
Landgrave of Hesse, in particular, his rnar relation,
warmly espoused his interest, and used many efforts to
recover for him his ancient inheritance. But the King of
the Romans obstinately refused to relinquifi a valuable
acquisition which his family had made with fC much, eaf;,
The Landgrave, unable to compel him, applied to the
King of France his new a'ly. Francis, eager t embrace
any opportunity of diftrefing the house of Austria, and
deGrous of wresting from it a territory, which gave it foot-
ing and influence in a part of Germany at a 4&ilanc from
its other dominions, encouraged the Landgrave to take
arms, and secretly supplied him with a large um of
money, This he employed to raise troops, an marching
with great expedition towards Wurtemberg, attacked, de-
feated, and dispersed a considerable body of Aufrians,
entrusted with the defence of the ountry, All the Duke's
fubjeda hatened, with emulation, to receive their native
Prince, and re-invested him wih that autority which is
still enjoyed by his defcendaats. At the fime time the
exercise of the ProteRftn; ;e0ion was eftalilhed m his
dominions *.

FlaDINAND, hw enfible fC~ of this unexpeed The King

blow, not daring to attack a. Princ whom. a t Pro- of the Ro-
teflant powers in Germaay weiC rea4y ta f t, '.1ged them COUt
it expedient to conclude a treaty with hiq by which he
recognised in the mos ample for bi' title ti t dutchy.
The success of the Landave' operationp inz klalf of the
Duke of Wurteaberg, aving conviaced Frdjai' that
a rupture with a league so formidable as tat of Salkalde,
was to be avoided with the utmost care, be entered like-
wife into negotiation wish the Elctor of Saxony, the
head of that union, and by some conefioins in favour of
the Protestant religion, and others of advantage to the

Sleid. i7t. Iklly, 159, c.

D 3

Eletc,-

Boos V. Eletor himself, he prevailed on him together with his
A-_- *' confederates to acknowledge his title as King of the Ro-

' mans. At the fame time, in order to prevent any such

precipitate or irregular election in times to come, it was
agreed that no person hould hereafter be promoted to that
dignity without the unanimous consent of the Elc6tors;
and the emperor soon after confirmed this tipulation *

Paul. rII. THR z a&s of indulgence towards the Protestants, and
calii a ge- the close union into which the King of the Romans seemed
'll o meUt to be entering with the Princes of that party, gave great
at Mantmz. offence at Rome. Paul III. though he had departed

from a resolution of his predecessor, never to content to
the calling of a general council, and had promired, in the
first consistory held after his elecion, that he would con-
voke that assembly so much desired by all Chrifiendom,
was no less enraged than Clement at the innovations in
Germany, and no less averse to any cheme for reforming
either the docrines of the church, or the abuses in the
court of Rome: But having been a witness of the universal
censure which Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with
regard to these points, he hoped to avoid the fame re-
proach by the seeming alacrity with which he proposed a
council; attering himself, however, that such difficulties
would arire concerning the time and place of meeting, the
persons who had a ight to be present, and the order of
their proceedings, as. would effecually defeat the inten-
tion of those who demanded that assembly, without cx-
poing himself to any imputation for refuFng to call it.
With this view he dispatched nuncios to the several
courts, in order to make known his intention, and that
he had fixed on Mantua as a proper placein which to bold
the council. Such diffculties as the Pope had foreseen,
immediately prefnted themfelvs in great number. The
French King did not approve of the place which Paul
had chosen, as the Papal! end Imperial influence would
necefarily be too great in a town situated in that part of
Italy. The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that obje&ion, but refited, beTides, to
acknowledge any council called in the name and by the
Dec. is. authority the ope. The German Protestants having

met together at Smalkalde, infifed on their original de-
mand of council to be held in Germany, and pleading
the emperor's promise, as well as the agreement at Ra-

* Skid. 173. Corpt Diplon. toa. iv. rp. i. t9

tiibon

tifbon to that effec, declared that they would not con- BOo V.
fider an assembly held at Mantua as a legal or free rpre- '
tentative of the church, By this diversity of sentiments '5
and views, such a field for intrigue and negotiation opened,
as made it easy for the Pope to assume the merit of
being eager to assemble a council, while at the fame time
he could put off its meeting at pleasure. The Protestants
on the other hand fufpe,.iing his designs, and sensible of
the importance which they derived from their union, re-
newed for ten years the league of Smalkalde, which now
became stronger and more formidable by the accefion of
several new members *.

DURING thele tranfa&ions in Germany, the Emperor The Epe.
undertook his famous enterprize against the piratical Rtates ror's expe-

dition to

in Arica. That part of the African continent lying along Africa, and
the coaf of the Mediterranean sea, which anciently forc- Hate of that
cd the kingdoms of Mauritania and Maflylia, together cou"try.
with the republick of Carthage, and which is now known
by the general name of Barbary, had undergone many
revolutions. Subdued by the Romans, it became a pro-
vince of their empire. Conquered afterwards by the Van-
dais, they ereted a kingdom there. That being over-
turned by Belisarius, the country continued subjea to the
Greek Emperors, until it was over-run towards the end
of the seventh century, by the rapid and irresistible arms
of the Arabs. It remained for ome time a part of that
vafi empire of which the Caliphs were the head. Its im-
mense distance, however, from the feat of government,
encouraged the descendants of those leaders, who had fib-
dued the country, or the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient
inhabitants, to throw off the yoke, and to set up for in-
dependence, The Caliphs, who derived their authority
from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for making con-
quefls than for preserving them, were obliged to connive
at ans of rebellion which they could not prevent; and
Barbary was divided into several kingdoms, of which

* This league was concluded December, one thoufind five hundred and

thirty-five, but not extended or signed in form till September in the follow-
lug yet. The Princer who acceded it were John Elector of Saxony, Er-
nell Duke of Brunfwic, Philip laodgrsve of HelTe, Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg,
Bat nim and Philip Duke, ofPomeranis, John George, and Joachim Princes
of Ahllt, Cebhhrd and Albert Counts of Manfield, William Count of
Nailn. The citie, &rsburg, Nuremberg. ConRfnce, Uim, MagQe-
burg, Bremen, eatlingen, Hailbron, Memrannen, indsw, Campen,
Il'nE Bibrac, Windheim, Augibur, Franckfort, Eilng, Bnfwick, Goolr,
Hanover, Gottingen, Eimbeck, HImburg, Minden.

D 4

Morocco,

Booa V. Morocco, Algiers and Tunis were the most considerable.
~- Thie inhabitants of these kingdoms were a mixed race,
s535' Arabs, Negroes from the southern provinces, and Moors,

either natives of Africa, or who had been expelled out of
Spain; all zealous professors of the Mahometan religion,
and inflamed againfi Christianity with a bigotted hatred
proporiional to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

Rife of the AMONG these people, no less daring, inconstant and
pirtical treacherous, than the ancient inhabitants of the fame
i teE. country described by the Roman historians, frequent fe-

dirions broke out, and many changes in government took
place. These, as they affecled only the internal tate of
a country so barbarous are but little known, and deserve
to be so: But about the beginning of the sixteenth century
a sudden revolution happened, which by rendering the
fates of Barbary formidable to the Europeans, had made
their history worthy of more attention. This revolution
was brought about by persons born in a rank of life which

and of the entitled them to a no such illultrious part. Horuc and
3arbaroffas. Hayradin the sons of a potter in the ie of Lesbos,

prompted by a restless and enterprizing spirit, forsook their
father's trade, ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates.
They soon distinguished themselves by their valour and ac-
tivity, and becoming masters of a small brigantine, carried
on their infamous trade with such condu& and success,
that they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys, beides many
veleils of smaller force. Of this fleet, Horuc, the elder
brother, called Barbarossa from the red colour of his beard,
was admiral, and Hayradin ficond in command, but with
almft equal authority. They called themselves the friends
of the sea, and the enemies of all who fail upon it; and
their names soon became terrible from the Straits of the
Dardahels to those of Gibraltar. Together with their fame
arid power, their abitious views opened and enlarged,
and while a&ing as Corsairs, they adopted the ideas, and
acquired the talents of conquerors. They often carried'
the prizes which they took on the coasts of Spain and Italy
into the ports of Barbary, and enriching the inhabitants
by the sale of their booty, and the thoughtles prodigality
of their crews, were wedomeguefts in every place at which
they touched. The convenient situation of these harbours
lying so near the greatet commercial states at that time in
Chrihendom, made the brothers with for an ecfablilhmen
in that country. An opportunity of ccbmplihing this
luickly presented itself, which they did not susser to pass

unimlproved

unimproved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having attempted BooK v.
several times, without success, to take a fort which the -.-
Spanish governors of Oran had built not far from his ca- '535.
pital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid to Barbarofa,
whose valour the Africans confidered as irresistible. The s116.
ative Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation, and leav-
ing his brother Hayradin with the fleet, marched at the
head f five thousand men to Algiers, where he was re-
ceived as their deliverer. Such a force gave him the com-
mand of the town; and observing that the Moors neither
fufpeaed him of any bad intention, nor were capable with
their light-armed troops of opposing his disciplined vete-
rans, he secretly murdered the Monarch whom he had Houc, the
come to affif, and caused himself to be proclaimed King eler bo-
of Algiers in his Read. The authority which he had thus com, mar-
boldly usurped, he endeavoured to establish by arts suited ter of Al-
to the genius of the people whom he had to govern; by giC".
liberality without bounds to thofi who favoured his
promotion, and by cruelty no less unbounded towards all
whom he had any reason to diftrut. Not satisfied with
the throne which he had acquired, he attacked the neigh-
bouring King of Tremecen, and having vanquished him
in battle, added his dominions to those of Algiers. At
the fame time, he continued to infest the coasts of Spain
and Italy with fleets which resembled the armaments of a
great Monarch, rather than the light squadrons of a Cor-
fair. The devastations which there committed, obliged As8s.
Charles about the beginning of his reign, to furnish the
Marquis de Comares, governor of Oran, with troops sus-
licient to attack him. 1 hat officer, aflifted by the de-
throned King of Tremecen, executed the commiflion with
such pirit, that Barbarofla's troops being beat in several
encounters, he himself was hut up in Tremecen after
defending it to the lat extremity, he was overtaken in at-
tempting to make his escape, and (lain while he fought
with an obstinate valour, worthy of his former fame and
exploits. The Pro-

His brother Hayradin, known ikcwife by the name of -,t of

Barbarofla, assumed the Iceptre of Algiers with the fame H,^yl ind
ambition and abilities, but with better fortune. His reign brother.
being undifiurbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which
had full occupation in the wars among the European pow-
era, he regulated with admirable prudence the interior
police, of his kingdom, carried on his naval operations
with great vigour, and extended his conquers on the con-
tinent of Africa. But, pcie:iving that the Moors and

Arabs

BooK v. Arabs Submitted to his government with the utmost im-

v--patience, and being afraid that his continual depredations
'535S would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the Chris-

Puts his do- tians, he put his dominions under the protection of the

idehn" u- Grand Seignior, and received from him a body of Turkith
teaionof soldiers sufficient for his security against his domestic
the Sultan. as well as his foreign enemies. At las the fame of his ex-

ploits daily increasing, Solyman offered him the command
of the Turkilh fleet, as the only person whose valour and
skill in naval affairs entitled him to command against An-
drew Doria, the greatet sea- officer of that age. Proud of
this diflinction, Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople,
and with a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the arts
of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair, gained the en-
tire confidence both of the Sultan and his Vizier. To
them he communicated a scheme that he had formed of
making himfelt master of Tunis, the moll flourishing
kingdom, at that time, on the coast of Africa; which be-
ing approved of by them, he obtained whatever he de-
manded for carrying it into execution.

His scheme His hopes of success in this undertaking were founded
for conquer-on the intefline divisions in the kingdom of Tunis.
ig Tunis. Mahmed, the las King of that country, having thirty-

four sons by different wives, named Muley-Halccn, one
of the younget among them, his successor. That weak
Prince, who owed his preference not to his own merit,
but to the ascendant which his mother had acquired over
an old doating monarch, firit poisoned his fatherin order
to prevent him from altering his deltination; and then,
with the barbarous policy which prevails wherever poly-
gamy is permitted, and the right of fucceflion is not pre-
cifely fixed, he put to death all his brothers whom he
could get into his power. Alrafchid, one of the eldest,
was so fortunate as to escape his rage; and finding a re-
treat among the wandering Arabs, made several attempts,
by the afliflance of some of their chiefs, to recover the
throne, which of right belonged to him. But there prov-
ing unsuccessful, and the Arabs, from their natural levity,
being ready to deliver him up to his merciless brother,he fled
to Algiers, the only place of refuge remaining, and implored
the proteion of Barbaroff ; who, discerning at once all
the advantages that might be gained by supporting his
title, received him with every pofible demonstration of
friendlhip and refpe&. Being ready at that time, to set
fail for Conflantinople, he easily persuaded Alrafchid,

whose

whose eagerness to obtain a crown disposed him to believe oot V.
or undertake any thing, to accompany him thither, pro-
mifing him effectual afllftance from Solyman, whom he '5
represented to be the moRs generous, as well as mos pow-
erful Monarch in the world. But no sooner were they
arrived at Confantinople, than the false Corsair, regard-
less of all his promises to him, opened to the Sultan a plan
for conquering Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish
empire, by making use of the name of tis exiled Prince,
and by means of the party ready to declare in his favour.
Solyman approved with too much facility, of this per-
fidious proposal, extremely suitable to the charater of its
author, but altogether unworthy of a great Prince. A
powerful fleet and numerous army were soon afembled;
at the fight of which the credulous Alrafchid flattered
himself, that he would oon enter his capital in triumph.

BUT jus as this unhappy Prince was going to embark, It ruccers.

he was arrested by order of the Sultan, hut up in the fe-
raglio, and was never heard of more. Barbarofla failed
with a fleet of two hundred and fifty vefils towards
Africa. After ravaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading
terror through .every part of that country, he appeared be-
fore Tunis; and landing his men, gave out that he came
to aert the right of Alrafchid, whom he pretended to
have left ick aboard the Admiral galley. The fort of
Goletta which commands the bay, soon fell into his
hands, partly by his own address, partly by the treachery
of its commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis, weary
of Muley-Hafcen's government, took arms, and declared
for Alrafchid with such zeal and unanimity, as obliged the
former to fly so precipitately, that he left all his treasures
behind him. The gates were immediately set open to
Barbarofla, as the restorer of their lawful sovereign. But
when Alrafchid himself did not appear, and when instead
of his name, that of Solyman alone was heard among the
acclamations of the Turkith soldiers marching into the
town, the people of Tunis began to fufpea the Corsair's
treachery; and their fu(picions being soon converted into
certainty, they ran to arms with the utmost fury, and fur-
rounded the citadel, into which Barbarofla had led his
troops. But having foreseen such a revolution, he was
not unprepared for it; he immediately turned against
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one brisk dif-
charge of it, and of his small arms, he dispersed the nu-

merous

BooK V. merous but undireced assailants, and forced them to ac-
e<r^ - knowledge Solyman as their fovercign, and to submit to

' 53' himself as his viceroy.

Barbrofira' His frft care was to put the kingdom, of which he
formtdable had thus got poffeflion, in a proper posture of defence.
power. 1He ftrenthened the citadel which commands the town;

and fortifying the Goletta in a regular manner, at vast
expence, made it the principal station for his fleet, and
his great arsenal both for military and naval stores. e-
ing now poflefed of such extensive territories, he carried
on his depredations againf the Christian fates to a greater
extent. and with more deftruaive violence than ever.
Daily complaints of the outrages committed by his cruiz-
ers were brought to the Emperor by his fubjeds, both
in Spain and kaly. All Christendom seemed to expe&
from him, as its greatert and most fortunate Prince, that
he would put an end to this new and odious species of

The exiled oppewfim. At rhe fame time Muley-Hafccn, the exiled
king of Tu- kti of Tunis, finding none of the Mahometan Princes
ni. implores in Africa wilng or able to afift him in recovering his
the Eme- throne, applied to Charles as the only person who could
tnce. afert hit rg hts in oppoinon to Asch a formidable usurp-
April is, r. The Emperor, equally defirousof delivering his do-
'535. minios from the dangeous neighbourhood of Barbarofla

of appearing as the prte&or of an unfortunate Prince;
and of acquiring the glory annexed in that age, to every
expedition agaif the ahomeans, readily concluded a
treaty with Muky-Hafen, and began to prepare for in-
vading Tunis. Having made trial of his own abilities
for war in the late campaign in Hungary, he was now
become so fond of the military characer, 'that he deter-

Hi preprcr- ined to command on thi. occasion in prfon. The
teped:tioa. united iregth of his dominions was called out upon an

enterie in which the Emperor was about to hazard
his glory, and which drew the attention of all Europe,
A Flemith fleet carried from the ports of the Low-Cuun-'
try a body of German infantry ; the gallies of Naples
and Sicily took on board the veteran bands of Italians and
Spaniards, which had diftinguilhed themselves by so ma-
ny tiaories over the French; the Emperor himself em-
barked at Barcelona with the flower of the Spanilh no-
bility, and was joined by a considerable squadron from
Portugl, under the command of the Infant Don Lewis,

* Hardi Annale Brahant. i. sr).

the

the Empress's brother; Andrew Doria conduied his .oao .
own gallics, the beat appointed at that time in urope,^t"~
and commanded by the most kilful officers: the Pope 53
turnifhed all the assistance in his power towards. such a
pious enterprize; and the order of Malta, the perpetual
enemies of the Infidels, equipped a :small squadron, but
formidable by the valour of the knights .who served on
board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia .was the ge-
neral place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed High
Admiral of the fleet; the command in chief of the land
forces was given to the marquis di Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, confting of near Laads in

five hundred velels, having on board above thirty thou- Africa.
land regular troops, set fail from Cagliari, and after a
prosperous navigation, landed within fight of Tunis.
Barbaroff having early intelligence of the Emperor's im-
mense armament, and suspecting its destination, prepared
with equal prudence and vigour for the defenoe of his
new conquest. He called in all his Corsairs from their
different stations; he drew from Algiers what forces could
be spared; he dispatched me&rgers to all the African
Princes, Moors as well as Arabs, and by representing
Muley-Hafcen as an infamous apolfate, prompted by
ambition and revenge, not only to become the vatll of a
Christian Prince, but to conspire with him to extirpate
the Mahomedan faith, he inflamed those ignorant and
bigotted chiefs to such a degree, that they took arms as in
a common cause. Twenty thousand horse together with
a vast body of foot, oon afrembled at Tunis; and Bar-
baroffa, by a proper difiribution of presents among them
from time to time, kept the ardour which had brought
them together from subsiding. But as he was too well
acquainted with the enemy whom he had to oppose, to
think that thee light troops could refif the heavy armed
cavalry and veteran infantry which compoed. the imperial
army, his chief confidence was in the frength of the
Goletta, and in his body of Turkith soldiers who were
armed and disciplined ater the European faision. Six Lays siel
thousnd of there, under the.. eomnuad . if Sina, a re- to Coleeta
negado Jew, the bravwftand most xperienced of all his
corairs, e threw into that frt, which the Emperor ,im-
mediately inverfed. As Charles had the command .of
the tea, his camp was so plentifully supplied .ot,oly
with the nectcfaries, but with all the luxuries of life, that
Muley-Hafecn, who had not been cciltomed to fee war

carried

Booz V. carried on with such order and magnificence, was filled
^*-y- with admiration of the Emperor's power. His troops,
'535. animated by his presence, and confidering it as meritori-

ous to shed their blood in such a pious cause, contended
with each other for the posts of honour and danger.
Three separate attacks were concerted, and theGermans,
Spaniards and Italians having one of these committed to
each of them, pulhed them forward with the eager cou-
rage which national emulation inspires. Sinan displayed
resolution and skill becoming the confidence which his
master had put in him ; the garrison performed the hard
service on which they were ordered with great fortitude,
But though he interrupted the besiegers by frequent fal-
lies; though the Moors and Arabs alarmed the camp
with their continual incursions; the breaches soon became
so considerable towards the land, while the fleet battered
the fortifications which it could approach, with no less
fury and success, that an aflault being given on all fides

Takesit b at once, the place was taken by storm; Sinan, with the
norm. remains of his garrison, retiring, after an obstinate re-
July 15 filance, over a hallow part of the bay towards the city.

By the reduction of the Goletta, the Emperor became
master of Barbarofla's fleet, confiting of eighty-feven
gallies and galliots, together with his arsenal, and three
hundred cannon mostly brass, which were planted on the
ramparts; a prodigious number in that age, and a re-
markable proof of the firength of the fort, as well as of the
greatness of the corsair's power. The Emperor marched
into the Goletta through the breach, and turning to
Muky-Hafcen who attended him, " Here," fays he,
" is a gate open to you, by which you (hall return to
" take poflefion of your dominions."

BARsAROSSA, though he felt the full weight of the

blow which he had received, did not, however, lose cou-
rage, or abandon the defence of Tunis. But as the walls
were of great extent, and extremely weak; as he could
not depend on the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope
that the Moors and Arabs would sustain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with his army,
which amounted to fifty thousand men , towards the
Imperial camp, and to decide the fate of his kingdom by
the ifueofa battle. This resolution hecommunicated to
his principal oficers, and representing to them the fatal

Epitm do Pri, par Ritf~ll, s, &c.

confcqtUences

consequences which might follow, if ten thousand Chris- Boor V.
tian slaves, whom he had (hut up in the citadel hould '-
attempt to mutiny during the absence of the army, he '535
proposed as a neceflary precaution for the publick security,
to massacre them without mercy before he began his
march. They all approved warmly of his intention to
fight; but inured as they were, in their piratical depre-
dations, to cenes of bloodshed and cruelty, the barba-
rity of his proposal concerning the slaves filled them with
horror; and Barbarossa, rather from the dread of irritat-
ing them, than swayed by motives of humanity, consent-
ed to spare the lives of the slaves.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to advance to- DefeatsBur-

wards Tunis; and though his troops suffered inconceiv- baroffl's u-
able hardships in their march over burning sands, destitute my.
of water, and exposed to the intolerable heat of the fun,
they soon came up with the enemy. The Moors and
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in number,
immediately ruihed on to the attack with loud houts,
but their undisciplined courage did not fland one mo-
ment the (hock of regular battalions; and though Bar-
barofli, with admirable presence of mind, and by expos-
ing his own person to the greatest dangers, endeavoured
to rally them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight back to
the city. There he found every thing in the utmolt con-
fusion; some of the inhabitants flying with their families
and effets ; others ready to set open their gates to the
conqueror; the Turkih soldiers preparing to retreat; and
the citadel, which in such circumstances might have as-
forded him some refuge, already in the pofreflion of the
Chrifian captives. These unhappy men, rendered def-
perate by their situation, had laid hold on the opportunity
which Barbarossa dreaded. As soon as his army was at
some distance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose aliftance, knocking off their fetters,
and bursting open their prisons, they overpowered the
Turkish garrison, and turned the artillery of the fort
againfi their former malters. Barbarnifa, disappointcd
and enraged, exclaimed ometimes againfi the false com-
palion of his officers, and ometimes condemning his
own imprudent compliance with their opinion, fled pre-
cipitately to Bona.

MtA^wHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy and al- Tn r..
most bloodlcfs viaory which he had gained, and advan- rentlcra.

cing

Boo V. cing fiowly with the precaution necessary in an enemy's

country, did not yet know the whole extent of his own
5s35 good fortune. But at last, a meflenger dispatched by the

laves acquainted him with the success of their noble es-
fort for the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame
time deputies arrived from the town, in order to present
him the keys of their gates, and to implore his proteai-
on from military violence. While he was deliberating
concerning the proper measures for this purpose, the fol-
diet fearing that they would be deprived of the booty
which they had expeced, broke suddenly, and without
orders, into the town, and began to kill and plunder
without diftintion. It was then too late to restrain their
cruelty, their avarice or licentiousness. All the outrages
of which soldiers are capable in the fury of a florm, all
the excefes of which men can be guilty when their pas-
sions are heightened by the contempt and hatred which
difference in manners and religion inspire, were commit-
ted. Above thirty thousand of the innocent inhabitants
perished on that unhappy day, and ten thousand were
carried away as slaves. Muley-Hafcen took poffefion of
a throne surrounded with carnage, abhorred by his sub-
jes on whom he had brought such calamites, and pitied
even by those whose ralhnefs had been the occasion of
them. The Emperor lamented the fatal accident which
had stained the lufire of his viaory; and amidst such a
scene of horror there was but one fpeaacle that afforded
him any fatisfadion. Ten thousand Christian laves,
among whom were several persons of diflinaion, met him
as he entered the town; and falling on their knees,
thanked and blessed him as their deliverer.

Restore the AT the fame time that Charles accomplished his pro-
exiled King mise to the Moorish King of re-eflablilhing him in his do-
tohi"''bo"minions, he did not neglet what was necessary for brid-

ling the power of the African corsairs, for the security of
his own fubjeas, and for the intercft of the Spanih
crown: In order to gain these ends, he concluded a trea-
ty with Muley-Hafcen on the following c nditions that
he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of the crown
of Spain, and do homage to the Emperor as his liege
lord; that all the Chrilfian saves now within his domi-
nions, of whatever nation, hould be et at liberty with-
out ransom; that no fubjeSt of the Emperor's Should for
the future be detained in servitude; that no Turkith
corsair ihould be admitted into the ports of his domini-

ons)

ons; that free trade, together with the publick exercise Boo V
of the Chriltian religion hould be allowed to all the Em- 'y
peror's subje&s ; that the Emperor hould not only retain '5
the Goletta, but all the other sea-ports in the kingdom
which were fortified, mhould be put into his hands; that
Muley-Hafcen hould pay annually twelve thousand
crowns for the fubfffience of the Spanish garrison in the
Goleta; that he (hould enter into no alliance with any
bs the Emperor's enemies, and should present to him
every year, as an acknowledgment of his vaflalage, fix
Moorish horses, and as many hawks*. Having thus
fettled the affairs of Africa; chastised the insolence of the
corsairs; secured a fte retreat for the hips of is fubjeas
and a proper flatioh for his own fleets, on that coast fom
which he was moR infefled by piratical depredations;
Charles embarked again for Europe, the tempestuous Augut I;
weather, and sickness among his troops, not permitting
him to pursue Barbarofla t.

BY this expedition, the merit of which feerms to have The glory

been eRfimated inthat age, rather by the appare;r gene- ich the
rofity of the undertaking, the hnagnifirn.ce wherewith acqnPid
it was conduEted, and the fuiccefs which crowned it, than.
by the importance of the consequences that attended it,
the Emperor attained a greater ilidght of glory than at any
other period of his reign. Twenty thousand slaves whom
he freed from bondage, either by his arms, or by his
treaty with Muley-Hdaicen $t each of whom he clothpd
and furhified with te means of returning to their re-
(pe&ive counries, 4fr;ad all over Europe the fame of
their benefaaor's aunificence, extolling his power and
abilities with the exaggeration flowing fromo gratitude and
admiration. In comparion wth him the oher Mo-
harchs of Europe iade am inconsiderable figur he, as
the chibf Prince in Chriftedoto, appeared to be conceaed
for the honour of t Chrifiiaa name, for the publicJ
security and welfare, avbite they were attentive only td
their private nd particular itecfs.

*D Moat Corpi Dipoumt. ii. tS. Sanoat g. di Ns
. Joh. etm'pil nirlrum pediion. Tetinr ap. a rd i P. be;
loii4iRor. lib., uiv. t3, &c. B&dov. ii. 54. &c. Vtt. Hin4. ed
rh» **R. , Jto, l ..

umnoteft. cs Ntp. vol. i1. p. 103.

VOL& II E THE~rP
VtoL II

E

THE

# BOOK VI.

TH
HISTORY

OF THE
R E G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.
0Kt V.T T NFORTUNATELY for the reputation of Fran

U*"" j c as . among his cotemporaries, his condu*, at

Th c5fe, this junture, appeared a perfet contrafi to that of his
of new rival, as he laid hold on the opportunity aforded him,
w'' be- by the Emperor's having turned his whole force againRf
Em~ror, the common enemy, to revive his pretensions in Italy, and
od Frina. to plunge Europe into a new war. The treaty of Cam-

bray as has been observed, did not remove the cause of
enmity between the two contending Princes it covered
up, but did not extinguish the lames of difeord. Fran-
cis, in particular, who waited with impatience for a pro-
per occasion of recovering the reputation as well u terri-
tori which he had lot, continued to carry on his ne-
odiations in dierent court againt the Emperor, taking
ihe utmost pains to heighten the jealousy which many
Princ entetined of his power or de~gns, and to in-
spire the reft with the fame ufpicon and fear: Among
others, he applied to Franci Sforza, who, thouh in-

rited

debted to Charles for the po1feffion of the dutchy of Mi-
lan, had received it on such hard conditions, as rendered BooK Vl;
him not only a vassal of the Empire, but a tributary de- ,3
pendant upon the Emperor. The honour of having 35
married the Emperor's niece, did not reconcile him
to this inominious fate of fubjedion, which became so
intolerable even to Sforza, a weak and poor spirited
Prince, that he listened with eagerness to the firfl propo-
fals Francis made of rescuing him from the yoke. These
proposals were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or Mer-
veille, as he is called by the French historians, a Milanese
gentleman residing at Paris; and soon after, in order to
carry on the negotiation with greater advantage, Mer-
veille was sent to Milan, on pretence of visiting his rela-
tions, but with secret credentials from Francis as his en-
voy. In this character he was received by Sforza. But
notwithstanding his care to keep that circumstance con.
cealed, Charles fufpeAing, or having received informati-'
on of it, remonstrated and threatened in such a high tone
that the Duke and his ministers, equally intimidated,
gave the world immediately a most infamous proof of their
servile fear of offending the Emperor. Having decoyed
Merveille, who had neither the prudence nor temper
which the fation wherein he was placed required, into a
quarrel, in which he happened to kill his antagonist, one of
the Duke's domestics, they inflantly commanded him to
be feizod, to be tried for that crime, and to be beheaded. Dec. 1533-
Francis, aftonilhed at this violation of a charaaer held
sacred among the most uncivilized nations, and enraged
at the insult offered to the dignity of his crown, threat-
ened Sforza with the effers of his indignation, and com-
plained to the Emperor, whom he confidered as the real
author of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with
no fisfation from either, he appealed to all the Princes
of Europe, and thought himself now entitled to take
vengeace for an injury, which it would have been
indecent and pusillanimous to let pass with impunity.

Batlo thus fumifhed with a pretext for beginning a Iraciu der.

war, on which he had already resolved, he multiplied his ttute
efforts in order to draw in other Princes to take prt in i
the quarrel. But all his measures for this purpof were
disconcerted by unforeseen events. After having acri-
siced the honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with CatbariM of Medici, in order to gain Clement, the

E a death

Boo, Vl. death of that Pontiff had deprived him of all the ad.
'-"^^ vantages which he expoted to derive from his friendship.
'535 Paul, his successor, though attached by inclination to

the Imperial interest, seemed determined to maintain the
neutrality suitable to his charater as the common father of
the contending Princes. The King of England, occu-
pied with domestic cares and projes, declined for once
engaging in the affairs of the continent, and refused to
assist Francis, unless he would imitate his example, in

His ngoti- throwing off the Papal supremacy. These disappoint-
ations with ments led him to solicit, with greater earnecfnefs, the
the 'ermn id of the Protestant Princes aflociated by the league of

Smalkalde. That he might the more eally acquire their
confidence, he endeavoured to accommodate himself to
their predominant passion, zeal for their religious tenets.
He asseted a wonderful moderation with regard to the
points in dispute; he permitted Bellay, his envoy in Ger-
many, to explain his entimelnts concerning some of the
most important articles, in terms not fr diferent from
thofeufed by the Protefants *; he even condescended to
invite Melanhon, owhfe gentle manners and pacific fpi-
tit diftinguithod him among the Reformers, to visit Paris,
that by his aflifiance he might conoest the mot proper
measures for reconcilihg the contending Ifest, which so
unhappily divided the church t' There conceflions mur
be confidered rather as arts of policy, than the result of
convifion ; for whatever impreflion the new opinions in
religion made on his fiters,- the Queen of Navarre and
Dutchess of Ferrara, thegaiety of Francis' owrn tem-
per, and his love of pleaiure, allowed inm little leisure
to examine theological controveries.

rir;tate, BUT oon after he loft all the fruits of this disingenuous
them. artifices by a flep very incontiftent with his declarations

to the German Prince. This ftep, howmer the pre-
judices of the age, and the mligiougantmmntsd hio in
subjec, rendered it necefary for him to take. iscloe
union with the KCing of Englan, *a mcxcm mim ed
hereik; his frequent Maotitions with the Geman
l~reftts ; but abovn;All, hi giv g pblick eudimoc
to an envoy from Sultin 9Sdyman, hd ecited violt
fuittions concerning thefincerity of i attachment.t
religion. To hive atacked the Empra, 'who, on. dl

- Pbhri S .

ript. IA. . i. ; 4 .4 c.

IL ji. I~

,L « 43.

ócifnd. lib. iii. to3. t Cwmenii Vi Pt. delua i

oa, itno.
Hlt. 65 . p. as.

occasions,

occasions, made high pretensions to zeal in defence of the Boor Vl.
Catholick faith, and at the very juncure, when he was
preparing for his expedition agailift Barbarofla, which was 's3S
then confidered as a pious enterprize, could not have fail-
ed to confirm such unfavourable sentiments with regard to
Francis, and called on him to vindicate himself by some
extraordinary demonfiration of his reverence for the efla-
blifhed dotrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
some of his fubjeas, who had imbibed the Protefiant
opinions, furnilhed him with such an occasion as he de-
fired. They had affixed to the gates of the Louvre, and
other public places, papers containing indecent refletions
on the doarines and rites of the Popilh church. Six of
the persons concerned in this ralh aaion were discovered
and seized. The King, in order to avert the judgments
which it was supposed their blafphcmies might draw down
upon the nation, appointed a folcmn proceiion. The
holy sacrament was carried through the city in great
pomp; Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a
torch in his hand; the princes of the blood supported
the canopy over it; the nobles marched in order behind.
In the pretence of this numerous assembly, the King ac-
cuflomed to express himself on every subjea in frong
and animated language, declared that if one of his hands
were infeaed with heresy, he would cut it off with- the
other, and would not spare even his own children, if
found guilty of that crime. As a dreadful proof of his
being in earnest, the fix unhappy persons were pub,
lickly burnt before the procelion was finished, with cir-
cumfances of the most hocking barbarity attending their
execution *.

THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled with They -

resentment and indignation at the cruelty with which ffe to join
their brethren were treated, could pot conceive Francis him.
to be sincere, when he offered to protea in Germany
those very tenets, which he persecuted with such rigour
in his own dominions; so that all BIlay's art a Id clo-
quence in vindicating his mailer, and apoligizing for his
condut, made but little impresion upon them. Besides
the Emperor, who hitherto had never employed violence
againf the doctrines of the Reformers, nor even given
them much molcation in their progress, was now bound
by the agreement at Ratilbon, not to disturb those who

Bclcrii Comment. er. Gallic. 646. Sleid, Hi. 7SI, &c.

E 3 had

Boos vL. had embraced the new opinions; and the Protestants
'V'^ wifely confidered this as a more certain and immediate

'S3" security, than the precarious and distant hopes with which

Francis endeavoured to allure them. The manner too in
which he had behaved to his allies at the peace of Cam-
bray, was too recent to be forgotter, and did not encour-
age others to rely much on his friendship or generosity.
Upon all these accounts, the Protefant Princes refused to
assist the French King in any hoflile attempt againtf
the Emperor. The Elesor of Saxony, the molt zealous
among them, in order to avoid giving any umbrage to
Charles, would not permit Melandhon to visit the court
of France, although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by
the invitation of so great a Monarch, or hoping that his
presence there might be of signal advantage to the Protef-
tant cause, discovered a strong inclination to undertake
the ourney '.

The Frenc BUT though none of the many Princes who envied or
srmy ad- dreaded the power of Charles would second Francis's es-
va"'estq forts in order to reduce and circumicribe it, he, never-
w d,'7* thelefs, commanded his army to advance towards the

frontiers of Italy. As his sole pretext for taking arms
was, that he might chastise the Duke of Milan for hisin-
solent and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might
have been expeced that the whole weight of his venge-
ance was to have fallen on his territories. But on a fud-
den, and at their very commencement, the operations of
war took another direction. Charles Duke of Savoy,
one of the least aive and able Princes of the line from
which he descended, had married Bearix of Portugal,
the Emprcfs's siser. By her great talents, the oon ac.
quired an absolute ascendant over her hutband ; and proud
of her affinity to the Emperor, or allured by the manui-
ficent promies with which he flattered her ambition, she
formed an union between the Dukeand the Imperial coust,
extremely inconsistent with that neutrality, which wife po-
licy, as well as the situation of his dominions, had hitherto
induced him to observe in all the quarrels between the
contending Monarchs. Francis was abundantly sensible
of the diflrefs to which he might be exposed, if when he
entered Italy, he Should leave behind him the territories
of a Prince, devoted so obsequiously to the Emperor,
that he bad sent his eldest son to be educated in the court

Cmarai Vitt 11.m 34a, k. 435 . Bchd. Rib. iii. 107.

of

of Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement BooK VI.
the Seventh, who had represented this danger in a strong -v**
light during his interview with Francis at Marseilles, 15
suggestgd to him, at the fame time, the proper method
of guarding against it, having advised him to begin his
operations against the Milanese, by taking poffeflion of
Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way of securing
a communication with his own dominions. Francis,
highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts, particu-
larly for having supplied the Constable Bourbon with the
money, which enabled him to levy that body of troops
which ruined the French army in the fatal battle of Pavia,
was not unwilling to let him now feel both how deeply he
relented, and how severely he could punih there injuries.
Nor did he want several pretexts that would give some
colour of equity to the violence which he intended. The
territories of France and Savoy lying contiguous to each
other, and intermingled in many places, various disputes,
unavoidable in such a situation, fubfiled concerning the
limits of their refpeaive property; and besides, Francis
had, in right of his mother Louise of Savoy, large claims
upon the puke her brother, for her share in their father's
fucceflion. Being unwilling, however, to begin hofti-
lities without some cause of quarrel more specious than
these pretensions, many of which were obsolete, and others
dubious, he demanded permiflion to march through
Piedmont in his way to the Milanese, hoping that the
Duke, from an excess of attachment to the Imperial in-
terest, might refute this request, and thus give a greater
appearance of justice to all his operations against him.
But, if we may believe the hiitorians of Savoy, better
informed with regard to this particular than thole of
France, the Duke readily, and with a good grace, grant-
ed what it was not in his power to deny, promising free
palage to the French troops as was desired; so that Fran-
cit, as the only method now left of justifying the mea-
fures which he determined to take, was obliged to inft
for full fatisfaCion with regard to every thing that either
the crown of France or his mother Louise could demand
of the house of Savoy *. Such an evasive answer, s r
might have been expeded, being made to this requisitio r, of
the French army under the admiral Brion poured at once the Duke

of &fvoy',

* Hiftoire Oenelogque de 8Saoye, per Oucbhenoa. . tco. foL Lye. d egas,.
*16o. i. e3b TIc.

into
A24

1oot Vl. into the Duke's territories at differet places. The
. "'countries of Breffe and Bugey, united at that time to

'S3' Savoy, were over-rUnt in a moment. Molf of the towns

in the dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the approach
of the enemy ; a few which attempted to make refilance
were easily forced ; and before the end of the campaign,
the Duke saw himself stripped of all his dominions, but
the province of Piedmont, in which 'there were not many
places in a condition to be defended.

The city of To compleat the Duke's misfortunes, the city of Ge-
Qenevs re- neva, the fovereigmy of which he claimed, and in some
overi' degree pof*efled, threw off his yoke, and its revolt drew
liber. along with it the loss of the adjacent territories. Geneva

was, at that time, an Imperial city; and though under
the dire& dominion of its own bilhops, and the remote
sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of its inter-
nal coiftitution was purely republican, beinggoverned by
syndics and a council chosen by the citizens. From these
diftin and often clashing jurifdiaions, two opposite par-
tiestook their rife, and had long fubrfled in the state
the one compored of the 'advocates for the privileges of
the community, afliumed the name of Eigirotz, or confe,
derates in defence of liberty; and branded the other,
*hich (upported the episcopal or ducal prerogatives, with
532. the name ot Marmrelkes or aves. At length, the Pro-

teftant opinions beginning to spread among the citizens,
inspired uch as embraced them with that bold enterpriz-'
ilg' spirit which 'always accompanied or was naturally
produced by them in their first operations. As both the
Duke and BifhoJp were from interest, from prejudice, and
from political considerations, violent' enemies of the Re-
formatitn, all the new converts joined with warmth the,
party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religions mingling
with the love of liberty, added strength to that gene-
rou passion. The rage and aniofi6ty of two facions,
(but up within the fame walls, occafione frequent infur-
retions, which terminating moRly to the advantage of
ihe friendl of liberty, they daily gained ground.

THE Duke and BiShop, forgetting their ancient contei

about jurifdiaion, had united against their common ene-
mies, and each attacked them with his proper weapons.
The Bishop excommunicated the people of Geneva as
guilty of a double crime; of impiety, in apotatifing from
te eftablithed religion and of farilege, in invading
the rights of his fee. The Duke attacked them as rebels

againfi

against their lawful Prince, and attempted to render himn- goe V1.
self master of the city, first by furprize, and then. by open
force. The citizens, despising the thunder of the Bi- '53
Shop's censures, boldly asserted their independence againdf
the Duke i and partly by their own valour, partly by the
powerful assistance which they received from their allies,
the canton of Berne, together with some small supplies
both of men and money, secretly furnished by the King
of France, they defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied
with having repulsed him, or with remaining always upon
the defensive themselves, they now took advantage of the
Duke's inability to refill them, while overwhelmed by
the armies of F rance, and seized several cables and places
of frength which he poffefled in the neighbourhood of
Geneva; thus delivering the city from these odious mo-
numents of its former fubjedion, and rendering the pub-
lic liberty more secure for the future. At the fame time
the canton of Berne invaded and conquered the Pais de
Vaud, to which it had some pretensions. The canton
of Friburgh, though zaloufly attached to the Catholic
religion, and having no subjea of contest with the Duke,
laid hold on part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince.
A great portion of there conquests or ufutpations being
still retained by the two cantons, add considerably to their
power, and have become the most valuable part of their
territories. Geneva, notwithilanding many schemes and
enterprizes of the Dukes of Savoy to re-eflablifh their
dominion there, fill keeps paffefion of its independence;
and in consequence of that blcfiing, has attained a degree
of consideration, wealth and elegance, which it could not
otherwise have reached .

AMIDST such a fucceflion of difafrous events, the The EmptF

Duke of Savoy had no other resource but the Emperor's or unable
protecion, which, upon his return from Tunis, he de- tuk fth
tnanded with the molt earnest importunity; and as his Savoy.
misfortunes were occasioned chiefly by his attachment to
the imperial interest, he had a just title to immediate as-
fiftance. Charles, however, was not in a condition to
support him with that vigour and dispatch which the exi-
gency of his affairs called for. Moll of the troops em-

Hi. de l Ville de Gtneve, par Spon. iio. Utr. 1615. p. 99. Hilt.

de I Reformatinn de Suilse, pir Rouchat, Gen. ;8. t. to iv. p. a94, &c.
tom. v. p. z11, Sc. Mcm cd Bellpy, 181.

ployed

Boot VI. ployed in the African expedition, having been railed for
X. _E i that service alone, were disbanded as soon as it was finish-

153S5 ed ; the veteran forces under Antonio de Leyva were scarce

fufcient for the defence of the Milanfee; and thpe m-
peror's treafiry was entirely drained by his vast efforts
against the infidels.

Oa. 14. BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned, according to
Death of some historian s, by the terror ofa French invasion, which had
sforza.
1Duke of twice been fatal to his family, afforded the Emperor full
.ilua leisure to prepare for adion. By this unexpeced event,

the nature of the war, and the causes of discord, were to-
tally changed. Francis's first pretext for taking arms, in
order to chastise Sforza for the insult offered to the dignity

Franci 's of his crown, was at once cut off; but as that Prince died
pretenfiom without issue, all Francis's right to the dutchy of Milan,
to that which be had yielded only to 'forza and his posterity, re-

turned back to him in full force. As the recovery of the
Milanese was the favourite obje& of that Monarch, he in-
fantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported
his pretensions by or |.,ir.g the powerful army quartered
in Savoy to advance, without losing a moment, towards
Milan, be could farce have failed to secure the important
point of poiffion. But Francis, who became daily less
enterprizing as he advanced in years, and who was over-
awed at some times into an excess of caution by the re-
membrance of his pati misfortunes, endeavoured to efa-
blih his rights by negotiation, not by arms; and from a
timid moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negle&cd to
improve the favourable opportunity which presented itself.
Charles, meanwhile, in quality of sovereign, took pof-
fefion of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and
while Francis endeavoured to explain and aert his tite to
it, by arguments and memorials, using every art in order to
reconcile the Italian powers to the thoughts of his regaining
footing in Italy, his rival was silently taking effeaual fleps
to prevent it. The Emperor, however, was very care-
ful not to discover too early any intention of this kind;
but eeming to admit the equity of Francis's claim, he
appeared solicitous only about giving him pollelion in
such a manner as might not disturb the peace of Europe,
or overturn the balance of power in Italy, which the po-
liticians of that country were so fond of preserving. By
this artifice he deceived Francis, and gained so much con-
fidence with the reft of Europe, that almost without in-
'curring any suspicion, he involved the affair in new diffi-

culties,

culties, and protracted the negotiations at pleasure. Some- Boot Vi.
times he proposed to grant the investiture of Milan to the C-vt
Duke of Orleans, Francis's second son, sometimes to the 53s
Duke of Angouleme, his third Con; as the views and in-
clinations of the French court varied, he transferred his
choice alternately from the one to the other, with such
profound and well conducted dissimulation, that neither
Francis nor his miniters eem to have penetrated his real
intention; and all military operations were entirely sus-
pended, as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly
into possession of what they demanded.

DURING the interval gained in this manner, Charles 53s.

prevailed on the states both of Sicily and Naples, who Charies'
thought themselves greatly honoured by the presence of rpt'oa
their sovereign on his return from Tunis, and who were
no iefs pleased with the apparent disinterestedness of his exT
pedition into Africa, than dazzled by the success which
had attended his arms, to vote him such liberal subsidies
as were seldom granted in that age. This'enabled him to
recruit his veteran troops, to levy a body of Germans,
and to take every other proper precaution for executing or
supporting the measures on which he had determined.
Bellay, the French envoy in Germany, having discovered
the intention of raising troops in that country, notwitb-
tanding all the pretexts employed in order to conceal it,
first alarmed his master with this evident proof of the Em-
peror's insincerity . But Francis was o poffilled at
that time with the rage of negotiation, in all the artifices
and refinements of which his rival far furpafted him, that
infead of beginning his military operations, and puthing
them with vigour, or seizing the Milanese before the im-
perial army was affimbled, he satisfied himself with mak-
ing new offers to the Emperor, in order to procure the
investiture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, in-
deed, so liberal and advantageous, that if ever Charles
had intended to grant his demand, he could not have re-
jeaed them with decency. He dextroufly eluded them by
declaring that, until he consulted the Pop in person, he
could not take his final resolution with regard to a point
which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy. By this
evasion he gained Come farther time for ripening the schemes
he had in view.

M. de Bdlsy, 192..

TH

so< Vi. THE Emperor at las advanced towards Rome, and
'l".r made his public entry into that city with extraordinary
The Sipe PMPi but it being found necessary to remove the ruins
ror enters of an ancient temple of peace, in order to widen one of
Rome. the streets, through which the cavalcade had to pas, all
April 6. the hifsorians take notice of this trivial circumstance, which

they are fond to interpret as an omen of the bloody war that
followed. Charles, it is certain, had by this time banilh-
ed all thoughts of peace; and at last threw off the mask,
with which he had so long covered his deflgns from the
court of France, by a declaration of his sentiments no less
singular than explicit. The French ambassadors having
in their master's name demanded a definitive reply to his
propositions concerning the invefliture of Milan, Charles
promised to give it next day in preence of the Pope and

His public Cardinals afiembled in full consistory. These being ac.
inveQive cordingly met, and all the foreign ambalfadors invited to

i attend, the emperor flood up, and addrefling himself to

the Pope, expatiated for some time on the sincerity of his
own withes for the peace of Christendom, and his abhor-
rence of war, the miseries of which he enumerated at
great length, with Rudied and elaborate oratory; he com-
plained that all his endeavours to preserve the tranquillity
of Europe had hitherto been defeated by the retlefs and
unjust ambition of the French King; that even during
his minority he had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile
intentions of that Monarch; that, afterwards, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Imperial crown
which belonged to him by a title no leTs just than natural;
that he had next invaded his kingdom of Navarre; that
not satisfied with this, he had attacked his teriitories as well
as those of his allies both in Italy and the Low-Countries;
that when the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered ir-
refitible by the protection of the Almighty, had checked
his progre, runed his armies, and seized his person, he.
continued to pursue by deceit, what he had undertaken
with injustice; that he had violated every article in the
treaty of Madrid to which he owed his liberty, and as
soon as he returned to his dominions, took measures
forrekindling the war which that pacification had happily
extinguithed; that when new misfortunes compelled him
to sue again for peace at Cambray, he concluded and ob.
served it with great insincerity; that soon thereafter he
had formed dangerous connetionr with the heretical
Princes in Germany, and incited them to diturb the tran.

quillity

quillity .of the Empire; that now he had driven the Duke Bs VI.
of Savoy,, his brother-in-law-and ally, out of the greater -
part of his erritories; that after injuries fp often repeated, 153
and amidlt o many sources of discord, all hope of amity
or concord became desperate; and though he weasill wil.
ling to grant the investiture of Milan to one ofthe Princes of
France, there was little probabiity of that event's taking
place, as Francis, on the one hand, would not conteat
to what be judged neeflary for securing the tanqillity
of Europe. nor, on the other, coula he think it reatf
able or fate to give him the unconditional poflion of al
that he demanded. Let us not, however, added he, c-
tinue wantonly to:lhed theiblood of ourinoocent fubje& ;
let us decide tie quarre man to man, with what arms be Cballeg
pleases to choose, in.our irts, o an ..iland, a bridge him on'
or aboard a galley moored in river; letthedutchr of Br- c

g

gundy be put in deposit on is part,and that of Miian on
mine these Ihall be thepri e

of the coeq r.; and after

that, lit the united some of Germany,Spain and France,
-be empioyd to humble the power of the Trk, :ad to
extirpate hbarey out of Cbaiftendom. ut f be, by de.
dining 4dis method of terminating our disernces, ren.
ders warievitable, nothing shall divert me tfi profb
cuting it Mo such xtremity, as shall redue one us m be
the .jport gentleman in ns own domiimn . Ncr do I
fear that it will be on me this misfortue hall all; I en-
ter upo ation with bh fairest profpe&t of .Acess; the
juaice of my cause, 'the union of my fbje&s, the mum-
:ber and valour of my troops, the experience andfidelity o
my gnerals, all combine to. ensure it. Of aln there ,ad
.vantagesthe King of France ideltiute; and wereimyre.
sources no more certain, .and.my bopes of viory no bet.
ter founded than his, I would infantly throw ;myfef at
his feat, nd with folded .hb ds .andarope about my neck,
impore his ,mercy *.

T : :long harangue the emperor delivered with M

elevated voioe, a haughty ~e, and the greatet Veh~
mece eiofp ~ effi and gde The Ermech ambat.
dom, who did not fully aiapehd his maning, at ha
pbe in dtb Spanh aoeaue, ere teally :difcomnrd,
and at at heaow they thoua1 aafwer ihh an uneapedt

vwedAiv; wren ow of:thmtbwn to vimdi~te hia mm
ter.s amdu, Ch arla o edabrupy,andw .t s

* lly, Sdt . Wadr. di l mper. ii. ;s6.

p-dt

Boot V. perit him to proceed. The Pope, without entering in,
'3 ' to any particular detail5 satisfied himself with a hort but
153ó- pathetic recommendation of peace, together with an offer

of employing his sincere endeavours, in order to procure
that blessing to Christendom; and the aflembly broke up
in the greatet astonishment at the extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited. In no part of his condu&,
indeed, did Charles ever deviate so widely from his gene-

The o. ral charater. Instead of that prudent recolleion, that
tive- of thi composed and regular deportment so tricly attentive to
ih mt- decorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his own

ptiions, for which he was at all other times confiicuous,
he appears on this occasion before the molt august aflem.
bly in Europe, boasting of his own power and exploits
with insolence 1 inveighing againf his enemy with inde.
cency; and challenging him to eombat with an oftenta.
tious valour, more becoming a champion in romance, than
the firRf Monarch in Chrifendom.: But the well known
and powerful operation of continued prosperity, and of ex-
ggrated praise, even upon the fimeft minds, fuiciendy
account for this eeming inconitncy. After having com-
pelled Solymn to rtreat, and having firipped BaIbar~ of
a kingdom, Charles began to confider his arm as invincible.
He had been entertained, evr ince his return from AMca
with repeated fenes of triumphs and public tejoidpgs;
the orators and poets of Italy, the mot elegant at that
time in Erope, had echaufted their genius in panegyric,
to' which the aftrlogers added magnificent promises of a
more fpkndid fortune till in fwoe. Intoxicated with all
tbiee, he forgot his usual reserve and moderation, and
was unable to rerain this extravagant ally of vanity,
which became the more rmarkable, by being both fo.un-
common and so public.

HI himself eemns to have- benimmediately onfible of

the impropriety of his behaviour, and when the French
ambafadon demanded next day a more clear explanation
of what he had fid concerning the combat, he told them,
that they were not to conir hbs propoi as a froma
challenge to their mater, bt ts an ekpediet for prent
ing bloMd o he endevoured to often other e epWfos
laini difeourfe and fpoe in' terms il of ree toward
futud. BIl *oigh this fiaht'apoloP ws far from ba-
_ uig tieoe

rmo ,e the oeoe which haL bee givsn,
Francis, by an unaccountable infatuation, continued to

negotiate,

negotiate, as if it had still been possible to bring their dif- Booc V
ferences to a period by an amicable composition. Charles, '/ e
finding him so eager to run into the snare, favoured 1'3
the deception, and by seeming to liften to his proposals
gained time to prepare for the execution of his own
designs *.

AT last, the Imperial army assembled on the frontiers Charle i-

of the Milanese, to the amount of forty thousand foot, and w~de
ten thousand horse, while that of France encamped ner Frm e
Vercelli in Piedmont, being greatly inferior in number,
and weakened by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom
Charles artfully persuaded the Popilh cantons to recall,
that they might not serve againf the Duke of Savoy, their
ancient ally. The French general, not daring to rifque a
battle, retired as loon as the Imperialist advanced. The
Emperor put himself at the head of his forces, which the May ó.
Marquis del GuaRo, the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand
de Gonzaga commanded under him, though the supreme
dir&ion of the whole was committed to Antonio de
Leyva, whose abilities and experience jufly entitled him
to that diftintion. Charles soon dicovered his intention
not to confine his operations to the recovery of Piedmont
and Sayoy, but to puth forward and invade the souther
provinces of France. This scheme he had long medi-
tated, and had long been taking measures for executing it
with such vigour as might ensure fucce. He had re-
mitted large ums to his iter, the governes of the Low-
Countries, and to his brother, the King of the Romans,
inftruing them to levy all the forces in their power, in
order to form two separate bodies, the one to enr France
on the fide of Picardy, the other on the fide of Cham-
pagne; while he, with the main army, fell upon the op-
pofite frontier of the kingdom. Trusting to thee vat
preparations, he thought it impoflible that Frncis uld
rft Co many unexpected attacks, on fueh disient qur-
te and begun his enterprise with such confidence ofits
happy issue, that he desired Paul Jovius the hiftorin, to
make a large provision of paper sufficient to mord the vic-
tories which he was going to acquire.

His minister and generals, instead of enterting the

fame hngine hopes, nprefted to him in tih ftr yf
terms thedanger of leading his troops so far from hir m
territori to such a distance from his mag~ , and

* Ms. & hay, 05, &C.

into

Boo vI. iuto provinces which did not )ield sufficient fubfiflence
^^3^ for their own inhabitants. They entreated him to confi.

'i36' der the inexhauflible resources of France in maintaining a

defensive war, and the ative zeal with which a gallant
nobilty would serve a Prince whom they loved, in repel.
ling the enemies of their country; they recalled to his re.
mcmbrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon and Pescara.
whn they ventured upon the fame enterprize under cir-
cunatnces which eemed as certainly to promise fuc-
cess; the marquis del Guafto, in particular, fell on his
inees, and conjured him to abandon the undertaking
asddperate, But many crcumflances combined in lead-
ing harles to disregard all their remonstrances. He
coul Jeldom be brought, on anyoccaGon, to depart from
a refoltion which he had once taken; he was too apt to
under-rate and despise the talents of his rival the King of
Fraae, which differed so widely from his own; he was
blinded by the presumption which accompanies profperi-
ty; and relied, perhaps, in lome degree, on the prophe-
ces which predided the increase of his own grandeur.
He not only adhered obftinateJy to his own plan, but de-
termi to advance towards France without waiting for
the dudio of any part of Piedmont, except such towns
as wer absolutely necefliry for preserving his communi.
cation with the Milanese.

Recovers THE .marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had en-
partofthe tfted the command of a small body of troops left for
sDoy°f do- the dcnce of Piedmont, rendered this more easy than
rmnionh. he had any reason to exped. That nobleman, educated

in the court of France, diftinguilhed by continual marks
of the king's favour, and honoured so lately with a charge
of such importance, suddenly, and without any provoca-
tion or pretext of disgust, revolted from his benefaaor.
His motives to this treacherous aion, were as childish
as the deed itself was bak. Being Rrongly poeftled with
a fuperRitious faith in divination and afrology, he be-
lieyed with full assurance, that the fatal period of the
French nation was at hand; that on its ruins the m-
peror would establish an universal monarchy j that there-

be M ought to follow the ditates of prudence, in at-
tchinA himself to hi rifin&foun., and would incur no
blMuaeT deserting a Prince whom heaven had devoted
:deiuaion a. His treabn became Aill more odious,

* ·ellA, at.. M4. .

by

by his employing that very authority with which Fran- BooK Vt.
cis had invelted him, in order to open the kingdom to
his enemies. Whatever was proposed or undertaken by 536.
the officers under his command for the defence of their
conquests, he rejected or defeated. Whatever properly
belonged to himself as commander in chief, to provide
or perform for that purpose, he totally negleted. In this
manner, he rendered towns even of the greatest cnfe-
quence untenable, by leaving them deRlitute either of pro-
visions, or ammunition, or artillery, or afufficient garrison;
and the Imperialilts must have reduced Piedmont in as
short a time as was necessary to march through it, if
Montpezats the governor of Foffano, had not, by an
extraordinary effort of courage and military condua, de-
tained them, almost a month, before that inconsiderable
place.

BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he gained F'ancis's
his master sufficient time for aflembling his forces, and plan for the

for a of defence defence of

for concerting a system of defence against a danger which hkingdom.
he now saw to be inevitable. Francis fixed upon the on-
ly proper and effetual plan for defeating the invasion
of a powerful enemy; and his prudence in choofing this
plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it, deserve
the greater praise, as it was equally contrary to his own
natural temper, and to the genius of the French nation.
He determined to remain altogether upon the defensive;
never to hazard a battle, or even a great kirmifh, with-
out certainty of success ; to fortify his camps in a regular
manner; to throw garrisons only into towns of great
strength; to deprive the enemy of subsistence, by laying
wafie the country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces. The exe- Entrust
cution of this plan he committed entirely to the marechal Monitmn
Montmorency, who was the author of it ; a man won- the ecith
derfully fitted by nature for such a truf. Haughty, fe. onofit.
vere, confident in his own abilities, and despising those
of other men ; incapable of being diverted from any refo-
lution by remonstrances or intreaties ; and in prose-
cuting any fcheine, regardleft alike of love and of
pit y.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a firong camp, He encamps

under the walls of Avignon, at the confluence of the *t AvignSn.
Rhofne and Durance, one of which plentifully supplied
his troops with all necessaries from the inland provinces,
and the other covered his camp on that fids, whecre it was

VoL. 11. f mist

BooK V. mos probable the enemy would approach. He laboured
~'^~ v-with unwearied indufiry to render the fortifications of this

1536. camp impregnable, and aembled there a considerable

army, though greatly inferior to that of the enemy;
while the king with another body of troops encamped at
Valence,,higher up the Rhofne. Marseilles and Aries
were the only towns he though it neceftary to defend;
the former, in order to retain the command of the sea
the latter, as the barrier of the province of Languedoc;
and each of these he furnished with numerous garifons of
his belt troops, commanded by officers, on whole fideli-
ty and valour he could rely. The inhabitants of the
other towns as well as of the open country, were com-
pelled to abandon their houcfs, and were conducted to
tie mountains, to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland
provinces. The fortifications of uch places as might
have afforded helter or defence to the enemy, were
thrown down. Corn, forage and provisions of every
kind, were carried away or destroyed; all the mills and
ovens were ruined, and the wells filled up or rendered
useless. The devastation extended from the Alps to
Marseilles, and from the sea to the confines of Dauphine;
nor does history afford any instance among civilized na-
tions, in which this cruel expedient for the public safe.
ty was employed with the fame rigour.

Charles en- MEIANWIILE, the Emperor arrived with the van of
ter Pro- his army on the frontiers of Provence, and was still
vence. so poflefd wih confidence of success, that during a few

days, when he was obliged to halt until the reft of his
troops came up, he began to divide his future conquests
among his officers; and as a new incitement to serve
him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of offices,
lands and honours in France *. The face of defola-
tion, however, which presented itself to him, when he
entered the country, could scarce fail to damp his hopes ;
and to convince him that a Monarch, who, in order to
d.flrefs an enemy, had voluntarily ruined one of his rich-
ell provinces, would defend the reft with obstinate def-
pair. Nor was it long before he became sensible, that
Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it appeared
to be extraordinary. His fleet, on which Charles chief-
ly depended for fubffifencc, was prevented for fomc
time by contrary winds, and other accidents to which na al

* Bliay, 266 .

operations

*perations are fulle&, from approaching the French Boot v.
~oaRs; and even after its arrival, it afforded at best a pre- '-v-
:arious and scanty fpply to such a numerous body of 1536.
troops t; nothing was to be found in the coun-
try itself for their support; nor could they draw any
confiderabe aid from the dominions of the Duke of Savoy,
exhausted already by maintaining two great armies. Thle
Emperor was no less embarrafld how to employ, than
how to fubifil his forces; for, though he was now in
possession of almofl an entire province, he could not
however be said to have the command of it, while he
held only dctfncelefs towns; and while the French, be-
fides their camp at Avignon, continued masters of Mar-
feilles and Arles, At first he thought of attacking the
camp, and of determinating the war by one decisive
blow ; but skilful officers, who were appointed to view it,
declared the attempt to be utterly impracticable. He then Pefligec
commanded Marseilles and Aries to be invefled, hoping Mariillcs.
that the French would quit their advantageous poll in order
to relieve them; but Montmorency adhering firmly to his
plan, remained immovable at Avignon, and the Impe-
rialifis met wit; such a warm reception from the garrisons
of both tawns, that they relinquished their enterprizes
with loss and disgrace. As a last effort, the Emperor
advanced once more towards Avignon, tho' with an army
harafled by the perpetual incursions cf small parties of
the French light troops, weakened by diseases, and di-
Ipirited by difaflers, which seemed more intolerable, be-
cause they were unexpected.

Du rING these operations Montmorency found himself Montmo-

txpofed to greater danger from his own troops than from tncdYi in as
the enemy; and their inconsiderate valour went near to hering to
have precipitated the kingdom into thole caamities, which his plan of
le with such industry and caution had endeavoured to detlc"e
avoid. Unaccuflomed to behold an enemy ravaging their
country ahnoft without controul; impatient of luch long
inaction; unacquainted with the llow and remote,
but certain effeas of Montmorcncy' f(yltcr of defence
the French wilhed for a battle with no lets ardour than
the Imperialifls. They confidored the condut of their
general as a disgrace to their country. His caution they
imputed to timidity; his circumfpedion to want of fpi.
:'t; and the cnftancy with which he pursued his plan

·* Panov. ii. al.

F 2 to

Bor V. to obstinacy or pride. These refle&ions, whispered, at
''J ~' first, among the Ioldiers and fubarterns, were adopted,
'536. by degrees, by cfficers of higher rank : and as many of

there envied Montmorency's favour with the King, and
more were dissatisfied with his har(h disgusting manner,
the discontent soon became great in his camp, which was
filled with general murmurings and almoit open com-
plaints against his measures. Montmorency, on whom
the sentiments of his own troops made as little impreflion
as the insults of the enemy, adhered teadily to his sys.
tem; though in order to reconcile the army to his max-
ims, no less contrary to the genius of the nation, than
to the ideas of war among undisciplined troops, he as-
fumed an unufal affability in his deportment, and often
explained ith great condefcenfionthe motives of his con-
du&t, the advantages which had already resulted from
it, and the certain success with which it would be attended.
At lafi Francis joined his army at Avignon, which hav-
ing received several reinforcements, he now confidered as
of flrength sufficient to face the enemy. As he had put
upon himself no small conflraint, in having consented
that his troops hould remain so long upon the defensive,
it can be scarce doubted but that his fondness for what
was daring and splendid, added to the impatience both of
officers and foldiers,'would have over-ruled Montmo-
rency's salutary caution *.

The retreat HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered the king-
and wretLh- dom from the danger which any rash resolution might
rd condition have occasioned. The Emperor, after spending two in-
of the Im glorious months in Provence, having performed nothing
penl amy. luitable to his vail preparations, or that could juflify the

confidence with which he had boafled of his own power,
found that, besides Antonio de Leyva, and other officers
of diftinaion, he had loft one half of his troops by dif-
cafes, or by famine ; and that the reft were in no condi-
tion to fruggle any longer with calamities, by which of
many of their companions had peri(hed. Necelsity,
therefore, extorted from him orders to retire; and though
he was some time in motion before the French fufpeded
his intention, a body of light troops, aflifted by crowds
of pealants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought such dcfolation on their country, hung upon the
rear of the ImperialiRs, and by seizing every favourable

Mem. de Bellay, 69, &c. a31, &c.

oppor-

opportunity of attacking them, threw them often into Boo V-
confusion. The road by which they fled, for they pur- '-
sued their march with such disorder and precipitation, that 1536.
it fcarcedeferves the name of a retreat, was strewcd with
arms or baggage, which in their hurry and trepidation
they had abandoned, and covered with the sick, the
wounded, and the dead; insomuch that Martin Bellay,
an eye-witness of their calamities, endeavours to give his
readers ome idea of it, by comparing their miseries to
those which the Jews suffered from the vidorious and de-
firuaive arms of the Romans *. If Montmorency at
this critical moment had advanced with all his forces, no-
thing could have saved the whole Imperial army from ut-
ter ruin. But that general, by standing so long and so
obstinately on thedefenfive, had becomecautious toexcefs:
his mind,tenacious of any bent it had once taken, could not
afumea contrary one as suddenly as the change of circum-
flances required ; and he fill continued to repeat his favou-
rite maxims, that it was more prudent to allow the lion to
escape, than to drive him to despair, and that a bridge of
gold hould be made for a retreating enemy.

THE Emperor having conducted the ihattered remains

of his troops to the frontiers of Milan, and appointed the
marquis del Guafo to succeed Leyva in the government
of the dutchy, set out for Genoa. As be could not bear
to expose himself to the scorn of the Italians, after such
a fad reverse of fortune; and. did not choose, under his
present circumstances, to revisit those cities through
which he had so lately passed in triumph for one conquest,
and in certain expectation of another; he embarked di- Novcnb.
redly for Spain t.

NOR was the progress of his arms on the opposite fron-

tier of France such as to alleviate in any degree the loftes
which he had sustained in Provence. Bellay by his address
and intrigues had prevailed on so many of the German
Princes to withdraw the contingent of troops which they
furnilhed to the King of the Romans, that he was oblig-
ed to lay aside all thoughts of his intended irruption Operstions
into Champagne. Though a powerful army levied in in t'icardy.
the Low-Countries entered Picardy, which they found
but feebly guarded, while the strength of the kingdom

* em. de Bellay, 36. Sdov. Hit. dl Emcr. ii 3. I Jovii

Hillor. lib. 35 ,
p. 74, &c.

85
F 3

was

BooK vl, was drawn towards the outlh; yet the nobility takinr
- a~'arms with their usual alacrity, upplied by their pirit the
15 6. defects of the King's preparations, and defended witi,

such vigour Peronne, and other towns which were attack.
ed, as obliged the enemy to retire without making any
conquest of importance .

HUS Francis, by the prudenze of his own mealures.

and by the union and valour of his fubjets, rendered
abortive ilo()e vast efforts by which his rival had almost
exhaulled his whole force. As this humbled the Empe-
ror's arrogan e no lets than it checked his power, he was
mortified more sensibly on this occasion than on any other,
during the course of the long contests between him and
the French Monarch.

Death of the ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy with which
Dauphin. the ficcefs of the campaign inspired Francis. That was

the death of the Dauphin, his eldest son, a Prince of great
hopes, and extremely beloved by the people on account of
his resemblance to his father. This happening fuddenlv,
was imputed to poison, not only by the vulgar, fond or
describing the death of illufirious personages to extraordi-
nary causes, but by the King and his minietcrs. The
rJ . 10 count de Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cupbearer

to the Dauphin, being seized on suspicion, and put to the
torture, openly charged the imperial generals, Gonzaga
and Leyva, with having instigated him to the comniffion
of that crime, and threw out some indireet and obscure
accusations against the Emperor himself. At a time when
all France was animated with implacable hatred againlf
Charles, this was confidered as an incontestable proof o:
guilt; while the confidence with which both he and his
officers aflerted their own innocence, together with the
indignation and horror which they exprefed on their be-
ing uppofed capable of such a detestable ation, were lit.
tie attended to, and less regarded t. It is evident, how-
ever, that the mperor could have no inducement to per-
petrate fucl a crime, as Francis was fill in the vigour ot
life himself, and had two sons, besides the Dauphin,
grown up to a good age. That fingleconfideration, with-
out mentioning the I.mperor's general characer, unble-
mifhed by the imputation of any deed resembling this in
atrocity, is more than sufficient to counterbalance the
weight of a dubious tefimony uttered during the anguilh

*Memr. de B!')y , 3,S .;. t Mcnn. e Bcllay, ag.

ol

:,f torture . Acccording to the mos unprejudiced his- Boor. VI.
rorians, the Dauphin's death was occasioned by his hav- -_
ing drunk too freely of cold water after overheating him- 1536.
f.lf at tennis; and this account, as it is the most simple,
is likewise the most credible. But if his days were cut
short by poison, it is not improbable that the Emperor
conjeEtured rightly, when he affirmed that it had been
adminifered by the direCtion of Catharine of Medici, in
order to secure the crown to the Duke of Orleans, her
husband. t The advantages resulting to her by the
Dauphin's death, were obvious as well-as great; nor did
her boundless and daring ambition ever cruple at any
a&ionneceffarytowaids attaining the objects which she
had in view.

NEXT year opened with a tranfaaion very uncommon, ,537.

but so incapable of producing any cffect, that it would Decrees of
not deserve to be mentioned, if it were not a Rtriking the P"ai-
proof of that personal animosity which mingled itself in rnt ,gin
all the hostilitics between Charles and Francis, and which the Emrc.
often betrayed them into such indecencies towards each ro
other, as lessened the dignity of both. Francis, accom-
panied by the peers and princes of the blood, having ta-
ken his feat in the parliament of Paris with the usual so-
lemnites, the advocate-general appeared ; and after accuf-
ing Charles of Austria, (for so he affeced to call the
Emperor) of having violated the treaty of Cambray, by
which he was absolved from the homage due to the crown
of France for the counties of Artois and Slanders; in-
fifled that this treaty being now void, he was ill to be
confidered as a vassal of the crown, and, by cor!fequcnce,
had been guilty of rebellion in taking arms agi;iift his so-
vercign; and therefore he demanded that Charies (huuld
be summoned to appear in perfun, or by his counsel, be-
fore the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to anfxwer
for his crime. The request was granted; a herald re-
paired to the frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him,
with the accuflomed formalities, to appear aainft a day
prefixed. That term being extpiid, and io person ap-
pearing in his name, the parliancrnt gave jutJgnntr,
'' That Charles of Aufiria had forfeited by rebellioi and
:ontumacy there fiefs; declared Slanders nd Artuis to
be re-united to the crown of France ; anrd urdccd theit

S* Rkiov. Hifl ikl Enpcr. ii. 13. . Vla ) Zunis;ia '..
':,lo V pr 75.

F4 ,.,

Boot VI. decree for this purpose to be published by found of trumpet

on the frontiers of these provinces *."

Cam3gn SOON after this vain display of his resentment, rather
opens in thethan of his power, Francis marched towards the Low-
Low'- Countries, as if he had intended to execute the sentence
Countrie
March. r which his parliament had pronounced, and to seize those

territories which it had awarded to him. As the Queen
of Hungary, to whom her brother the Emperor had com-
mitted the government of that part of his dominions, was
not prepared for so early a campaign, he at first made rome
progress, and took several towns of importance. But be-
ing ohiiged oon to leave his army, in order to superintend
the other operations of war, the Flemings having assem-
bled a numerous army, not only recovered moif of the
places which they had loft, but began to make conquefis
in their turn. At last they invefled Ter uenne, and the
Duke of Orleans, now Dauphin, by the death of his
brother, and Montmorency, whom Francis had honour-
ed with the conflable's sword, as the reward of his great
services during the former campaign, determined to ha-

A rurpenf- zard a battle in order to relieve it. While they were ad-
on of arms vancing for this purpose, and within a few miles of the
there. enemy, they were Afopt hort by the arrival of an herald

from the Queen of Hungary, acquainting him that a sus-
pension of arms was now agreed upon.

THIS unexpected event was owing to the zealous en-

deavours of the two sifters, the Queens of France and
of Hungary, who had long laboured to reconcile the con-
tending Monarchs. The war in the Netherlands had laid
wafle the frontier provinces of both countries, without
any real advantage to either the French and Flemings
equally regretted the interruption of their commerce,
which was beneficial to both; and Charles and Francis,
who had each irained to the utmofi, in order to support
the vast operations of the former campaign, found that
they could not now keep armies on foot in this quarter,
without weakening their operations in Piedmont, where
both wished to pulh the war with the greatcft vigour. All
JUlY 30 these circumfances facilitated the negotiations of the two

Queens; a truce was concluded,to continue in force for ten
months, but it extended no farther than the Low-Coun-
tries .

* L.ertres et Memoires d'Ptat, r Ribier, 1 tom. Bloir. 666. tom. i. p. .
t Memoires de Ribier, 6.

IN Piedmont the war was fiill prosecuted with great ani- BooK Vl.

nmfity; and though neither Charles nor Francis could-'~
make the powerful efforts to which their animosity prompt-And3n'
ed t'liLl, they continued to exert themselves like comba-Piedmont.
tants, whose ancour remains after their trength is ex-
haulted. Towns were alternately loft and retaken; fkir-
milhes were fought every day; and much blood was hed,
without any decisive aion, that gave the fupeuiorit to
either file. At last the two Queens determining not to
leave unfinilhed the good work which they had begun,
prevailed, by their importunate foiicitations, the one on
her brother, the other on her husband, to confept also to
a truce in Piedmont for three months, upon condition
that each hould keep poffeflion of what was in his hands,
and leaving garrit<ns in the towns, withdraw his army
out of the province; and that plenipotentiaries (hould be
appointed to adjust all matters in dispute by a final trea-
t) *.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Princes toMotices of

this accommodation, have been often mentioned. Their
expences of the war had far exceeded the rums which their
revenues were capable of supplying, nor durRf they ven-
ture upon any great addition to the mpofitions then efta-
blilied, as fubjedts were not yet taught to bear with pati-
ence the immense burdens to which they have become
accultomed in modern times. The Emperor, in parti-
cular, though he had contrated debts which in that age
appeared prodigious t, had it not in his power to pay the
large arrears which had been long due to his army. At
the fame time he had no profpea of deriving any aid in
money or men either from the Pope or Venetians, tho'
he had employed promises and threats, alternately, in or-
der to procure it. But lie found the former fixed in his
resolution of adhering steadily to the neutrality which he
had always declared to be suitable to his charaaer, and
pallionately desirous of bringing about a peace. He per-
ceived that the latter were fill intent on their ancient ob-
jeCt of holding the balance even between the rivals, and
oflicitous not to throw too great a weight into either
fcale.fw

VWHAT made a deeper impression on Charles than all Prncis*
thcfe, was the dread of the Turki(h arms, which Francis'"altiate

with the
Turkish
* Mem. de Ribier, 6X. t Rlbier, i. 194. Emnpror

the mod
coanidra
aad bi.

Boot VT. had drawn upon him by his league with Solyman. Tho'
A~i-.j Francis, without the assistance of a single ally, had a war

537' to maintain againt an enemy greatly fiperior in power to

himself, yet so great was the horror of Christians, in that
age, at any union with Infidels, which they confidered
not only as dishonourable but profane, that it was long
before he could be brought to avail himself of the obvious
advantages resulting from such a confederacy. Neceflity
atlat surmounted his delicacy and scruples ; and towards
the close of the preceding year, La Forest, a secret agent
at the Ottoman porte, had concluded a treaty with the
Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to invade, next cam-
paign, the kingdom of Naples, and to attack the King of
the Romans in Hungary with a powerful army, while
Francis undertook to enter the Milanese at the fame time
with a proper force. Solyman had puncually performed
what was incumbent on him. Barbarofia with a great
fleet appeared on the coalt of Naples, filled that kingdom,
from which all the troops had been drawn towards Pied-
mont, with conternation, landed without refitance near
Tarento, obliged Callro, a place of some Rrength, to
surrender, plundered the adjacent country, and was tak-
ing measures for securing and extending his conquests,
when the unexpeced arrival of Doria, together with the
Pope's gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian fleet, made
it prudent for him to retire. In Hungary the progress of
the Turks was more formidable. Mahmet, their gene-
ral, after gaining several small advantages, defeated the
Germans in a great battle at Effeck on the Drave *.
Happily for Chrifendom, it was not in Francis's power
to execute with equal exa&nefs what he had stipulated;
nor could he aiemble at this jurqEure an army strong e-
nough to penetrate into the Milanese. By this he failed
in recovering pofleiion of that dutchy ; and Italy was not
only saved from the calamities of a new war, but from
feeling as an addition to all that it had suffered the defo-.
lating rage of the Turkish arms t. As the Emperc!
knew that he could not long reift the efforts of two fuci
powerful confederates, nor could expec that the fame for-
tunatc accidents would concur a econd time to deliver
Naples, and to preserve the Milanese : As he foresaw that
the Italian flates would not only tax him loudly with infa-

* Itnl.b Hffi .

H li. xii.

i . p. ;q.

t Jw vli:to. ,, :X'. ?. ;
; j

tiable ambition, but might even turn their arms against Boor. V.
him, if he should be so regardless of their danger as ob- -''
Itnately to protract the war, he thought it necessary, '5
both for his safety and reputation, to give his consent to
a truce. Nor was Francis willing to fufiain all the blame
of obflruEting the re-establishment of peace, or to expose
lumfelfon that account to the danger of being deferied by
the Swiss and other foreigners in his service. He even
began to apprehend that his own fubjeas would serve him
coldly, if by contributing to aggrandize the power of the
Infidels, which it was his duty, and had been the ambition
of his ancellors to depress, he continued to a~t in dire&
oppolition to all the principles which ought to influence a
Monarch distinguished by the title of Most Christian
King. He chole, for all there reasons, rather to run the
rifque ofdifobliging his new ally the Sultan, than, by an
unseasonable adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit
what was of greater confequencc.

BUT though both parties consented to a truce, the ple-Ncgotiati-

nipotentiaries found insuperable difficulties in fettling theons of a
articles of a definitive treaty. Each of the Monarchs, P"e'be'
with the arrogance of a conqueror, aimed at giving lawChries
to the other; and neither would so far acknowledge his and Fran-
inferiority, as to sacrifice any point of honour, or to re-"'
linquifh any matter of right; so that the plenipotentiaries ,35s.
spent the time in long and fruitless negotiations, and fe-
parated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a few
months.

THE Pope, however, did not despair of accomplifhingThe Pope
a point in which the plenipotentiaries had failed, and tookc"':.lu^

thete in per-

upon himfelfthe sole burden of negotiating a peace. To,,."
form a confederacy capable of defending Christendom
from tie formidable inroads of the Turkiih arms, and to
concert effectual measures for the extirpation of the Lu-
theran heresy, were two great objects which Paul h d
much at heart, and he confidered the union of the Empe-
ror with the King of France as an efential preliminary to
both. To be the instrument of reconciling there con-
tending Monarchs, whom his predecessors by their in-
terested and indecent intrigues had so often embroiled,
was a circumstance which could not fail of throwing dif-
tinguiflced luire on his characer and adininftation.
Nor was he without hopes that while he purlued this lau-
dable end, he might lecure advantages to his own family,
the aggrandizing of which he did not neglect, though ie

ainud

91

Boot VI. aimed at it with a less audacious ambition than was com-

mon among the Popes of that century. Influenced by
153. 'these considerations, he proposed an interview between

the two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair thither
in perfcn, that he might aft as mediator in composing all
their differences. When a Pontiff of a venerable charac-
ter, and of very advanced age, was willing, from his
zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues of such a ditfant
journey, neither Charles nor Francis could with decency
decline the interview. But though both came to the
place of rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of adjust-
ing the ceremonial, or such the remains of distrust and
rancour on each fide, that they refused to fee one another,
and every'thing was tranfaEed by the intervention of the
Pope, who visited them alternately. Nor could he, with
all his zeal and ingenuity, find out any method of re-
moving the obstacles, particularly those arising from the
possession of the Milanese, which prevented a final ac-
commodation; nor was all the weight of his authority,
sufficient to overcome the obstinate perseverance of either

A truce for Monarch in asserting his own claims. At aft, that he
ten yers might not seem to have laboured altogether without es-
concluded sea, he prevailed on them to sign a truce for ten years,
at Nice.
june . uporn the fame condition with the former, that each

hould retain what was now in his pofleflion, and in the
mean time hould fend ambassadors to Rome, to discuss
their pretensions at leisure *.

THUS ended a war of no long continuance, but very

extensive in its operations, and in which both parties exerted
their utmost firength. Tho' Francis failed in the obje&
that he had principally in view, the recovery of the Mi-
lanefe, he acquired, nevertheless, great reputation by the
wildom of his measures, as well as the success of his arms
in repulsing a formidable invasion ; and by securing pof-
feflion of one half of the Duke of Savoy's dominions,
he added no inconsiderable acceflion to his kingdom.
Whereas, Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having
boasted so arrogantly of victory, purchafec an inglorious
truce, by sacrificing an ally who had rashly confided too
much in his friendship and power. The unfortunate Duke
murmured, complained, and remronrated against a

* Recueil de. Traitez, ii. i o. Relatione del Nicolo Tiepolo de 'abo-
"rmento di Nitz chez. Du Munt Corps Diplumt. per. ii. p. a71.

treaty
.92

treaty so much to his disadvantage; but in vain; he had oaioW.
no means of redress, and was obliged to submit. Of all '
his dominions, Nice, with its dependencies, was the on- 53
ly corner of which he himself kept poffeflion. He saw
the reft divided between a powerful invader, and the ally
to whose protection he had trustcd, while he remained a
fad monument of the imprudence of weak Princes, who,
by taking part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours, be-
tween whom they happen to be situated, are crushed and
overwhelmed in the hock.

A FW days after signing the treaty of truce, the Em- nterview

peror set fail for Barcelona, but was driven by contrary btwten
winds to the island St. Margaret on the coast of Provence. Frrj at
When Francis, who happened to be not far difant, Aigue-
heard of this, he confidered it as an office of civility, tom"°'t'
invite him to take helter in his dominions, and proposed
a personal interview with him at Aigues-mortes. The
Emperor, who would not be outdone by his rival in com-
plaifance, instantly repaired thither. As soon as he cast
anchor in the road, Francis, without waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relying implicitly on the Empe-
ror's honour for his fecuriry, visited him on board his
gAlley, and was received and entertained with the warm-
eft demonstrations of eeem and affetion. Next day,
the Emperor repaid the confidence which the King had
placed in him. He landed at Aigues-mortes with as lit-
tle precaution, and met with a reception equally cordial.
He remained on (hore during the night, and in both vi-
fits, they vied with each other in exprefflons of refpea
and friendlhip *. After twenty years of open holtilities,
or of secret enmity; after so many injuries reciprocally
infliced or endured; after having formally given the lie,
and challenged one another to ingle combat; atter the
Emperor had inveighed so publicly against Francis, as a
Prince void of honour or integrity; and Francis had ac-
cufed him as accessary to the murder of his eldelt son;
such an interview appears altogether singular, and even
unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs abounds
with such furprizing tralitions. From implacable en-
mity, they appeared to pass, in a moment, to the most
cordial reconcilement; from suspicion and difiruft, to

Sandov. Hill. vol. ii. 138. Rclation de 'entrevue de Charl. V

rM, 1,. par M. de li Rivoire. Hill, d L.egd. .par. D. D. Uc Vic &
iliette, tom. v. Prcuvcb, p. 93.

perfect

BooaVI. perfect confidence; and from praaifing all the dark arts
'--v~o of a deceitful policy, they could assume, of a sudden, the

1538. liberal and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

The ffifl- THE Pope, besides the glory of having restored peace
nati,,n of to Europe, gained, according to his expcetation, a point
Alexander Of great consequence to his family, by prevailing on te
it Mtdici. Emperor to betroth Margaret of Aufiria his natural

daughter, formerly the wife of Alexander de Medici, to
his grandson O&avio Farnese, and in consideration
this marriage, to befiow several honours and territories
upon his future fon-in-law. A very tragical event, which
happened about the beginning of the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-feven, had deprived Margaret of
her firfl hulband. That young prince, whom the Em-
peror's partiality had raised to the supreme power in Flo-
rence, upon the ruins of the public liberty, negleaed en-
tirely the cares js government, and abandoned himself to
the moR dissolute debauchery. Lorenzo d Medici his
nearest kinsman, was not only the companion, but direc-
tor of his pleasures, and employing all the powers of a
cultivated and inventive genius in this dishonourable mi-
niftry, added such elegance and variety to vice, as gained
him an absolute ascendant over the mind of Alexander.
But while Lorenzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and as-
fe&ed such an appearance of indolence and effeminacy,
that he would not wear a sword, and trembled at the fight
of blood, he concealed under that disguise, a dark, de-
signing, audacious spirit. Prompted either by the love of
liberty, or allured by the hope of attaining the supreme
power, he determined to affinmate Alexander his bene-
fa&or and friend. Though he long revolved this ddign
in his mind, his reserved and suspicious temper prevented'
him from communicating it to any person whatever; and
continuing to live with Alexander in their usual familiari-
ty, he, one night, under pretence of having secured him
an aflignation with a lady of high rank, whom he had of-
ten solicited, drew that unwary Prince into a secret apart-
ment of his house, and there tabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch, expeting the arrival of the lady
whole company he had been promied. But no sooner
was the deed done, than anding aftonihed, and truck
with horror at its atrocity, he forgot, in a moment, all
the motives which had induced him to commit it, and,
instead of roazing the people to recover their liberty, by
publishing tht death of the tyrant, instead of taking any

Rep

tep towards opening his own way to the dignity now va- Boos V1.
cant, he locked the door of the apartment, and, like a" -'
man bereaved of reason and presence of mind, fled with
the utmost precipitation out of the Florentine territories.
It was late next morning before the fate of the unfortu-
nate Prince was known, as his attendants, accuttomed to
,is irregularities, never entered his apartment early. Im-
mediately the chief persons in the state aifembles. Being
induced partly by the zeal us caidinal Cibo for the house
of Medici, to which he was nearly related, partly by the
authority of Francis Guicciardini, who recalled to their
memory, and represented in firiking colours the caprice,
as well as turbulence of their ancient popular government,
they agreed to place Cosmo de Medici, a youth of eigh-cormo de
teen, the only male heir of that illustrious house, at theMedici p-
head of the government; though at the fame time such ced at the
was their love of liberty, that they cftablihwd several re-Florentine
gulations in order to circumscribe and moderate his pow- tate.
er.

MEANWHILE Loretzo having reached a place of safety, His gove-

made known what h had dne, to Philip Strozzi and""P^"
the other Florentines who had been driven into exile, orFioeatie
who had voluntarily retired, when the republican form of eiles.
government was abolished in order to make way for the
dominion of the Medici. By them, the deed was extoll-
ed with extravagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo
was compared with that of the elder Brutus, who difre-
garded the ties of blood, or with that of the younger, who
forgot the friendship and favours of the tyrant, that they
might preserve or recover the liberty of their country *.
Nor did they refi satisfied with empty panegyricks; they
immediately quitted their different places of retreat, aflem-
bled forces, animated their vaflils and partizans to take
arms, and to seize this opportunity of re-eftablifing the
public liberty on its ancient foundation. Being openly
assisted by the French ambassador at Rome, and secretly
encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good will to the
house ofMedici, they entered the Florentine dominions
with a considerable body of men. But the persons who
had elected Cosmo, poflfed both the means of support-
ing his. government, and abilities to employ them in the
mos proper manner. They levied, with the greatest cx-

· Lcttere di Principi, torn. iii p. 5t.

pedition.

Boot Vi. pedition, a good number of troops; they endeavoured by

v'^ *e-very art, to gain the citizens of greatest authority, and to
1538' render the administration of the young Prince agreeable to

the people. Above all, they courted the Emperor's pro.
te&ion, as the only firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity
and power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the
Florentines to the friendship of France, and how much
all the partizans of a republican government detested him
as the oppressor of their liberties, saw it to be greatly for
his interest to prevent the re-establishment of the ancient
constitution in Florence. For this reason, he not only
acknowledged Cosmo as head of the Florentine fate, and
conferred on him all the titles of honour with which Alex-
ander had been dignified, but engaged to defend him to
the utmost; and as a pledge of this, ordered the com-
manders of futh of his troops as were Rationed on the
frontiers of Tuscany, to support him against all aggref-
fors. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy victory over
the exiles, whose troops he furprized in the night-time,
and took most of the chiefs prisoners; an event which
broke all their measures, and fully established his own
authority. But though he was extremely desirous of the
additional honour of marrying the Emperor's daughter,
the widow of his predecessor, Charles, secure already of
his attachment, chose rather to gratify the Pope by be.
flowing her on his nephew *.

The riend- DURING the war between the Emperor and Francis,
FiPmbt*,dnan event had happened which abated in some degree the
Henry ill. warmth and cordiality of friendhip which had long ub.
begin to fited between the latter and the King of England. James
'bte. the fifth of Scotland, an enterprizingyoung Prince, hav-

ing heard of the Emperor's intention to invade Proveote,
and being fond of Ihewing that he did not yield to any of
his anceon in the incerity of his attachment to the
French crown, as well as eager to diftinguih himself by
some military exploit, levied a body of troops with an in-
tention of leading them in person to the aiftance of the
King of France. Though some unfortunate accident pre-
vented his carrying any troops into France, nothing could
divert him from going thither in person. Immediately
upon his landing he hastened to Provence, but had been

* Jovi Hilt. lib. xcviii. p. ti8, &c. elctril Coament. U. p. 4d.
Iftonr de i tempi di Oiov. Bit. Adritoa. Va. a7. P, 0o.

- detained

detained so long in his voyage that he could not have any Boor V.
share in the military operations, and he met the King on
his return after the retreat of the Imperialifis. Francis, 1538.
greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with his man-
ners and conversation, could not refuse him his daughter
Magdalen, whom he demanded in marriage. It mortifi Jan.. 1537.
ed Henry extremely to fee a Prince of whom he was lately
become jealous, after having long treated him and his
fubjeas with contempt, form an alliance, from wh ch he
derived such an accefiion both of reputation and security *.
He could not, however, with decency oppose Francis's
heftowing his daughter upon a Monarch descended from a
lace of Princes, the most ancient and faithful allies of the
French crown. But when James, upon the sudden death
of Magdalen, demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise,
he warmly solicited Francis to deny his suit, and in order
to disappoint him, asked that lady in marriage for him-
self. When Francis preferred the Scortifh King's sincere
courtfhipto his artful and malevolent proposal, he disco-
vered much diflatisfaEion. The pacification agreed upon
at Nice, and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new suspicions,
as if Francis had altogether renounced his friendlhip for
the fake of new connetions with the Emperor. Charles, The Empe.
thoroughly acquainted with the temper of the Englih ror court
King, and watchful to observe all the hiftings and ca- HCery'
prices of his passions, thought this a favourable opportu-
nity of renewing his negotiations with him, which had
long been broken off. By the death of Queen Cathe-
rine, whose interest the Emperor could not with decency
have abandoned, the chief caule of their discord was re-
moved; so that without touching upon the delicate quef-
tion of her divorce, he might now take what me3fures he
thought most effectual for regaining Henry's good will.
For this purpose, he began with proposing several mar-
riage-treaties to the King. He offered his niece, a daugh-
ter of the King of Denmark, to Henry himself; he de-
manded the Princess Mary tor one of the Princes of Por-
tugal, and was even willing to receive her as the King's
illegitimate daughter t. 'hough none of these projeted
alliances ever took place, or perhaps were ever seriously in-
tended, they occasioned such frequent intercourse between
tile courts, and so many reciprocal profefions of civility

* Hifl. of Scotland, vol i. p 7. t Mem. de libier, t. i. 495.
VoL. II. G and

BooK Vt. and esteem, as confiderabty abated the edge of Henry'

V----, rancour againfi the Emperor, and paved the way for tha;
1538. union between them which afterwards proved so difad.

vantageous to the French King.

tfhe rfl THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor hac
mirion. been engaged, and the wars he had been carrying on so

some years proved, as usual, extremely favourable to the
progress of the reformation in Germany. While Charle!
was absent upon his African expedition, or intent or
his vast projetts against France, his chief objec in Ger.
many was to prevent the dissentions about religion from
disturbing the publick tranquillity, by granting such in-
dulgence to the Protefant Princes as might induce them
to concur with his measures, or at lead hinder them from
taking part with his rival. For this reason, he was care.
ful to secure to the Protestants the poffeflion of all the ad.
vantages which they had gained by the articles of pacifi-
cation at Nuremberg, in the year one thouland five hun-
dred and thirty-two '; and except some flight trouble
from the proceedings of the imperial Chamber, they met
with nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their reli-
gion, or to interrupt the successful zeal with which they

nslnd'ittl. propagated their opinions. Mean while the Pope conti.
tige, nued his negotiations for convoking a general council;
with ref- and though the Protestants had exprefled great diffatisfac-
pea tol tion with his intention to fix upon Mantua as the place of
council. meeting, be adhered obflinatcly to his choice, iflued a

bull on the second of June, one thouland five hundred
and thirty-fix, appointing to affmble in that city on the
twenty-third of May the year following; he nominated
three cardinals to precide in his name; enjoined all Chris-
tian Princes to countenance it by their authority, and in-
vited the prelates of every nation to attend in person. This
citation of a council, an aflembly which from its nature
and intention demanded quiet times, as well as pacific dif-
positions, at the very juncture, when the Emperor was n
his march towards France, and ready to involve a great
part of Europe in the confusions of war, appeared to eve-
ry person extremely unseasonable. It was intimated,
however, to all the different courts by nuncios dispatched
of purpose t. The Emperor, with an intention to grati-
fy the Germans, had, during his residence at Rome,

* D Mont Corpl Diplom. tom. iv. Art . p. 138.
t Plvic. Hilt. Co. Td. ,13.

warmly

warmly solicited the Pope to call a council; but being at Boox VI.
the fame time willing to try every art in order to persuade "~T
Paul to depart from the neutrality which he preserved be- 538.
tween him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice chancellor
along with the nuncio whom the Pope employed in Ger-
many, inftru&ing him to second all the nuncio's repre-
fentations, and to enforce them with the whole weight of
the imperial authority The protestants gave them audi- February
ence at Smalkalde, where they had affembledin a body, in 5, 1537
order to receive them. But after weighing all their argu-
ments, they unanimously refused to acknowledge a coun-
cil summoned in the name and by the authority of the
Pope alone; in which he assumed the sole right of
presiding; which was to be held in a city not only far
diflant from Germany, but subjet to a Prince, a firanger
to them, and closely conneced with the court of Rome;
and to which their Divines could not repair with safety,
especially after their doarines had been fRigmatized in the
very bull of convocation with the name of heresy. These
and many other objections against the council, which ap-
peared to them unanswerable, they enumerated in a large
manifesto, which they published in vindication of their con-
dua '.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as a fla-

grant proof of their obfiinacy and presumption, and the
Pope fill persisted in his resolution to hold the council at
the time and in the place appointed. But ome unex-
peaed difficulties being flarted by the Duke of Mantua,
both about the right of jurifdidion over those who resort-
ed to the council, and the security of his capital amidst
such a concourse of firangers, the Pope, after fruitless en-
deavours to adjust there, first prorogued the council for
some months, and afterwards transferring the place ofoa. 8,
meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian territories, appointed 1s38.
it to afemble on the first of May in the following year.
As neither the Emperor nor French King, who had not
then come to any accommodation, would permit their sub-
jetb to repair thither, not a single prelate appeared on
the day prefixed, and the Pope, that his authority might
not become altogether contemptible by so many ineffectu,
al intimations, put off the meeting by an indefinitive pro-
rogation t.

leidma, 1. xii. lt3, &c. Seckcad. Cor. lib. iii. p. 43, i&c.
t F. Paul, 17. Ptllhvic. 117.

G 2

M£AriwklxEz

BooK V. MEANWH:LE, that he might not seem to have turned
-*.v-J his whole attention towards a reformation which he was
Apti3l re- not able to accomplish, while he negle&ed that which
formntionof was in his power, he deputed a certain number of cardi-
abues lay nals and biihops with full authority to inquire into the a-
the Pope. buses and corruptions of the Roman court; and to pro-

pose the most effecual method of removing them. This
scrutiny, undertaken with relucance, was carried on flow-
ly and with remissness. All defe&s were touched with a
gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep, or of discovering
too much. But even by this partial examination,
many irregularities were detected, and many enormities
exposed to light, while the remedies which they suggested
as most proper were either inadequate, or were never ap-
plied. The report and resolutions of these deputies,
though intended to be kept secret, were transmitted by
some accident into Germany, and being immediately
made public, afforded ample matter for refle&ion and tri-
umph to the Proeftants *. On the one hand, they de-
monftrated the necessity of a reformation in the head as
well as the members of the church, and even pointed out
many of the corruptions against which Luther and his
followers had remonstrated with the greatef vehemence.
They hewed, on the other hand, that it was vaidn to ex-
pe this reformation from ecclefiafticks themselves, who,
as .uther tfrongly expressed it, piddled at curing warts,
while they overlooked or confirmed ulcers t.

A iagut THE earnetinefs with which the Emperor seemed, at
formrd n firfi, to press their acquiecing in the Pope's scheme of
to that t holding a council in Italy, having alarmed the'Protelant
Smnalkridr. Princes so much, that they thought it prudent toftrength-

en their confederacy, by admitting several new members
who solicited that privilege, particularly the King of Den-
mark Heldo, who, during his residence in Germany,
had observed all the advantages which they derived from
that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its effets by
an alliance among the catholick powers of the empire.
This league, distinguished by the name of HNoy, was
merely defensive, and though concluded by Heldo in the
Emperor's name, was afterwards disowned by him, and
subscribed by very few Princes :

*Sleidan, 33. Seek. . iii. 164.
Seek. . iii. 7 . Recucil del Traites.

THE
100

THE Proteflants soon got intelligence of this affociati- Boor Vt.

on, notwithstanding all the endeavours of the contraa- "^'
ing parties to conceal it; and their zeal, always apt toj,9h9
fufpe& and to dread, even to excess, every thing that Protestants.
seemed to threaten religion, inflantly took the alarm, as if
the Emperor had been just ready to enter upon the execu-
tion of some formidable plan for the extirpation of their
opinions. In order to disappoint this, they held frequent
consultations; they courted the Kings of France and Eng-
land with great assiduity, and even began to think of raif-
ing the refpefive contingents both in men and money,
which they were obliged to furni(h by the treaty of Smal-
kalde. But it was not long before they were convinced,
that these apprehensions were without foundation, and
that the Emperor, to whom repofewas absolutely neceffa-
ry, after being exhausted by efforts beyond his strength
in the war with France, had no thoughts ofditturbing the
tranquillity of Germany. As a proof of this, his ambaf- April 9.
fadors, at an interview with the Protestant Princes in
Francfort, agreed that all concessions in their favour, par-
ticularly those contained in the pacification of Nurem-
berg, hould continue in force for fifteen months; that
during this period, all proceedings of the imperial cham-
ber againf them hould be suspended; that a conference
should be held by a few divines of each party, in order to
discuss the points in controversy, and to propose articles of
accommodation, which should be laid before the next
diet. Though the emperor, that he might not irritate
the Pope, who remonfirated againfi the first part of this
agreement as impolitick, and against the latter, as an im-
pious encroachment upon his prerogative, never formally
ratified this convention, it was observed with considerable
exacnefs, and greatly strengthened the basis of that ec-
clefiaftical liberty, for which the i'roteltants contended ".

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, hap- April 14.

pened the death of George Duke of Saxony, an event Reforma-
of great advantage to the reformation. That Prince, the tion ftb-
head of the Albertine or younger branch of the Saxon fa- very prt of
mily, poiffeisd, as marquis of Mifnia and Thuringia, saony.
extelnive territories, comprehending )refden, Leipfick,
and other cities now the mofi considerable in the elecorate.
From the firfi dawn of the Reformation, he had been its
enemy as avowedly, as the elecoral Princes were its pro-

P. Paul, 81. Sleid. 147 Scek. I. iii. oo.

G 3 tclors,

BooK VI. teaors, and had carried on his opposition not only with
'- ~' all the zeal flowing from religious prejudices, but with a
'53 .virulence inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and

imbittered by the domestic animosity, subsisting between
him and the'other branch of his family. 'By his death
without issue, his 'fucceflion fell to his brother Henry,
whole attachment to the Protestant religion, furpafled, if
poflible, that of his predecefor to popery. Henry no
sooner took pofleflion of his new dominions, than, dif-
regarding a clause in George's will, dicated by his bigo-
try, whereby he bequeathed all his territories to the Em-
peror and king of the Romans, if his brother hould at-
tempt to make any innovation in religion; he invited
some Protefant divines, and among them Luther himself,
to Leipfick. By their advice and affifancc, he overturned,
in a few weeks,the whole system of ancient rites, eftablilhing
the full exercise of the reformed religion, with the universal
applaufeof hi, subje6s, who had long wifhedfor this change,
which the authority of their Duke alone had hitherto pre-
vented . This r.volution delivered the Protefants from
the danger to which they were exposed, by having an in-
veterate enemy situated in the middle of their territories;
and their dominions now extended in one great and almof
unbroken line, from the shore of the Baltick to the banks
of the Rhine.

SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice, an

A mutiny of event happened, which satisfied all Europe, that Charles
the mperial had prosecuted the war to the utmost extremity, that the
troOP>. state of his affairs would permit. Vast arrears were due

to his troops, whom he had long amused with vain hopes
and promires. As they now foresaw that little attention
would be paid to their demands, when by the re-establish-
ment of peace, their services became of less importance,
they loft all patience, broke out into an open mutiny, and
declared, that they thought themselves entitled to seize by
violence, what was detained from them contrary to all
justice. Nor was this spirit of sedition confined to one
part of the Emperor's dominions the mutiny was almost
as general as the grievance which gave rife to it. The
soldiers in the Milanese, plundered the open country
without controul, and filled the capital itself with coniter-
nation. Those in garrison at Goletta, threatened to give

* s;eid, 149.

up that important fortress to Barbarofla. In Sicily, the BooK Vl.
troops proceeded to fill greater excesses; having chaced -
away their officers, they elected others in their stead, de- I539
feated a body of men whom the viceroy sent againa them,
took and pillaged several cities, conducting themselves all
the while, in such a manner, that their operations refem-
bled rather the regular proceedings of a concerted rebel-
lion, than the rashness and violence of a military mutiny.
But by the address and prudence of the generals, who,
partly by borrowing money in their own name, or in that
of their master, partly by extorting large fums from the
cities in their respective provinces, raised what was fuffi-
cient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers, these infur-
redions were quelled. The greater part of the troops be-
ing disbanded, such a number only as was necessary for
garrisoning the principal towns, and proteaing the sea
coasts from the insults of the Turks, was kept in pay .

IT was happy for the Empefor, that the abilities of his Cortes of

generals extricated him out of there difficulties, which it Castile held
exceeded his own power to have removed. He had de- at Toledo-
pended, as his chief resource for discharging the arrears
due to his soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expeaed
from his Castilian subje&s. For this purpose, he aflem-
bled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo, and having repre-
sented to them the great expence of his military operations,
together with the vaRi debts in which there had neceflarily
involved him, he proposed to levy such supplies as the pre-
sent exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general excise
on commodities. But the Spaniards who already felt The Corn.
themselves opprefed with a load of taxes unknown to their plaints and
ancestors, and who had often complained that their coun- fti, o that
try, in order to prosecute quarrels in which it was not in- sfTembly.
terefled, and to fight battles from which it could reap no
benefit, was drained not only of its wealth but of its inha-
bitants, determined not to add voluntarily to their own
burdens, or to furnish the Emperor with the means of en-
gaging in new enterprizes no less ruinous to the kingdom,
than mos of those which he had hitherto carried on.
The nobles, in particular, inveighed with great vehemence
againfl the imposition proposed, as an encroachment upon
the valuable and ditlinguithing privilege of their order,
that of being exempted from the payment of any tax.
They demanded a conference with the representatives of

* Jovii Hior. I, 3vii. o03. . Sndov. Fcrrera., ix. og9.

G 4

tile

Boor Vl. the cities concerning the ate of the nation. They col-

%v'' tended that if Charles would imitate the example of his
'539 predecessors, who had resided conflantly in Spain, and

would avoid entangling himself in a multiplicity of tranf-
ations foreign to the concerns of his Spanilh dominions,
the flated revenues of the crown would be fully sufficient
to defray the necessary expences of government. They
reprefentedto him that it would be unjust to lay new bur-
dens upon the people, while this prudent and effectual
method of re-eflablifhing public credit, and securing na-
tional opulence, was totally negle&ed *. Charles, after
employing arguments, entreaties and promises, but with-
out filccels, in order to overcome their obflinacy, dil:

The ancient miffed the assembly with great indignation. From that
confsitution period neither the nobles nor the prelates have been called
oftheCorte to these assemblies, on pretence that such as pay no part

of the public taxes, hould claim no vote in laying them
on. None have been admitted to the Cortes but the pro-
curators or representatives of eighteen cities. These, to
the number of thirty-fix, being two from each commu-
nity, form an assembly which bears no refemblanceeither
in power or dignity or idependence to the ancient Cortes,
and are absolutely at the devotion of the court in all their
determinations t. Thus the imprudent zeal with which
the Caflilian nobles had supported the regal prerogative,
in opposition to the claims of the commons during the
commotions in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-one, proved at last fatal to their own body. By
enabling Charles to depress one of the orders in the Rfate,
they detroyed that balance to which the constitution owed
its security, and put it in his power and that of his fuccef-
fors to humble the other, and to strip it of its moR valua-
ble privileges.

hle Spani(h AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees flill pof.
crade.. sessed extraordinary power as well as privileges, which
ittip,,'T,'d they exercised and detended with an haughtinefi peculiar
hitc1,- to, themselves. Of this the Emperor himself had a mor-

tifying proof during the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo.
As he was returning one day from a tournament accom-
panied by most of the nobility, one of the serjeants of the
court, out of officious zeal to clear the way for the Em-
peror, struck the Duke of Infantado's horn with his bat-

* Sandnv. Hilt. vol. ii. 69. Sndov. ibid. I.1 Sciencc du Couvc
iinmlent pnr M. de Re41, tom. ii. p. ioa.

tOn

ton, which that haughty grandee relenting, drew his Bool Vl.
sword, beat and wounded the officer. Charles, provok- `v
ed at such an insolent deed in his presence, immediately '539
ordered Ronquillo the judge of the court, to arrest the
Duke; Ronquillo advanced to execute his charge, when
the constable of Catlle interpoing, checked him, claimed
the right of jurifdi&on over a grandee as a privilege of his
office, and conduted Infantado to his own apartment.
All the nobles present were so pleated with the boldness of
the constable in aferting the rights of their order, that
deserting the Emperor, they attended him to his house
with infinite applauics, and Charles returned to the palace
without any person along with him but the cardinal Ta-
vera. The Emperor, how sensible soever of the affront,
saw the danger of irritating a jealous and high spirited
order of men, whom the lightest appearance of offence
might drive to the most unwarrantable extremes. For
that reason, inltead of raining at any ill-timed exertion
of his prerogative, he prudently connived at the arrogance
of a body too potent for him to controul, and sent next
morning to the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflic
what punishment he pleased on the person who had
affronted him. The Duke confidering this as a full re-
paration to his honour, instantly forgave the officer; be-
flowing on him, besides, a considerable present as a com-
penfation for his wound. Thus the affair was entirely
forgotten *; nor would it have deserved to be mentioned,
if it were not a iRriking example of the haughty and in-
dependent spirit of the panith nobles in that age, as well
as an instance of the Emperor's dexterity in accommodat-
ing his condut to the circumstances in which he was
placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering any such con-lInrrreeion

descension or lenity towards the citizens of Ghent, who t Chat.
not long after broke out into open rebellion against his
government. An event which happened in the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this
rath infurre&ion so fatal to that flourishing city. At that
time the Queen Dowager of Hungary, govemefs of the
Netherlands, having received orders from her brother to
invade France with all the forces which the could raise,
the alrembled the tates of the united Provinces, and ob-
tained from them a ubfidy o twelve hundred thouland

SadJuv xi. 74. Prrcris, ix. ils. Minia*, II3.

florins,

105

BooK VI. florins, to defray the expence of that undertaking. Of
~'' - this fum, the county of Slanders was obliged to pay a
preon, third part as its proportion. But the citizens of Ghent,
of the citi- the most considerable city in that country, averse to a war
zens. twith France with which they carried on an extensive and

gainful commerce, refused to pay their quota, and con-
tended that in consequence of stipulations between them
and the ancestors of their present sovereign the Emperor,
no tax could be levied upon them, unless they had given
their express consent to the imposition of it. The go-
vernefs, on the other hand, maintained, that as the sub-
fidy of twelve hundred thousand florins had been granted
by the flates of Slanders, of which their representatives
were members, they were bound, of course, to conform
to what was enaaed by them, as it is the firt principle in
society, on which the tranquillity and order of government
depend, that the inclinations of the minority mull be
over-ruled by the judgment and decision of the superior
number.

Proceeding THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not willing to
uloa them. relinquish a privilege of such high importance as that which

they claimed. Having been accustomed, under the govern-
ment of the house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immuni.
ties, andtobetreated with much indulgence, they disdained to
sacrifice to the delegated power of a regent, those rights and
liberties which they had often and successfully aferted
againfi their greatest princes. The Queen, though the
endeavoured at firfi to sooth them, and to reconcile them
to their duty by various concelfions, was at last so much
irritated by the obfinacy with which they adhered to their
claim, that he ordered all the citizens of Ghent, on
whom he could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands,
to be arrefied. But this ra(h aion made an impreflion,
very different from what the expected, on men, whose
minds were agitated with all the violent pafions which in-
dignation at oppreiflon and zeal for liberty inspire. Left
aflfed with the danger of their friends and companions,
than irritated at the governess, they openly despised her
authority, and sent deputies to the other towns of Flan-
ders, conjuring them not to abandon their country at
such a junature, but to concur with them in vindicating
its rights against the encroachments of a woman, who
either did not know or did not regard their immunities.
All but a few inconsiderable towns declined entering into
any confederacy against the governels; however, they

joined

joined in petitioning her to put off the term for payment Booi Vl.
of the tax so long, that they might have it in their power '-3
to fend some of their number into Spain, in order to lay '539
their title to exemption before their sovereign. This he
granted with some difficulty. But Charles received their
commiflioners with an haughtiness to which they were
not accuflomed from their ancient Princes, and enjoining
them to yield the fame refpe&ful obedience to his ifter,
which they owed to him in person, remitted the examina-
tion of their claim to the council of Malines. This court,
which is properly a flanding committee of the parliament
or ates of the county, and which possesses the supreme
jurifdiion in all matters civil as well as criminal , pro-
nounced the claim of the citizens of Ghent to be ill found-
ed, and appointed them forthwith to pay the proportion
of the tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they confidered as They take
notoriouflv unjust, and rendered desperate on feeing their' I', and

otter to Ubw.

rights betrayed by that very court which was bound to mt t
protec2 them, the people of Ghent ran to arms in a tu- rance.
multuary manner, drove such of the nobility as resided
among them out of the city; secured several of the Em-
peror's officers; put one of them to the torture, whom
they accused of having stolen or destroyed the record, that
contained the privileges of exemption from taxes which
they pleaded; chose a council to whom they committed
the diretion of their affairs; gave orders for repairing and
adding to their fortifications; and openly ereaed the
standard of rebellion againfi their sovereign t. Sensible,
however, of their inabilitv to support what their zeal had
prompted them to undertake, and desirous of securing a
protector against the formidable forces by which they
might expedt soon to be attacked, they sent some of their
number to Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him
as their sovereign, and to put him in immediate pofiedion
of Ghent, but to aflift him with all their forces in recover-
ing those provinces in the Netherlands, wluch had an-
ciently belonged to the crown of France, and had been
To lately re-united to it by the decree of the parliament of
Paris. This unexpeced proposition coming from person

Decritione di tutti pefi bats di Lad. Guicciardini. At. u571.

so1. p. 5

t Menirec fur Is revolte de Gitoht en 39, per Jtm d'Holuder,

rcrit en 547. A I Hat 1747. P .

Heate . Aurtr. li xi. p. A.
Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. p. ass.

who

Booc V. who had it in their power to have performed instantly one

v- ^ part of what they undertook, and who could contribute o
'539. - effetually towards the execution of the whole, opened vast

as well as alluring profpeas to Francis's ambition. The
counties of Slanders and Artois were of greater value than
the dutchy of Milan, which he had o long laboured to
acquire with paflionate but fruitless desire; their situation
with refpe& to France rendered it more easy to conquer
or to defend them; and they might be formed into a fe-
parate principality for the Duke of Orleans, no lets fuita-
ble to his dignity than that which his father aimed at ob-
taining. From this, the Flemings, who were acquain.d
with the French manners and government, would not
have been averse; and his own ubjets, weary of their
defiruAive expeditions into Italy, would have turned their
arms towards this quarter with more good will, and with

Francis de-greater vigour. Several considerations, nevertheless, pre-
clines theirvented Francis from laying hold of this opportunity, the
fser." mos favourable in appearance which had ever presented

itself, of extend ing his dominions, or diftreflTng the Em-
peror. From the time of their interview at Aigues-
mortes, Charles had continued to court the King of
France with wonderful attention; and often flattered him
with hopes of gratifying at las his wishes concerning the
Milanese, by granting the investiture of it either to him
or to one of his sons. But though there hopes and pro-
mises were thrown out with no other intention than to de-
tach him from his confederacy with the grand Seignior,
or to raise suspicions in Sdoyman's mind by the appearance
of a cordial and familiar intercourse fubifting between the
courts of Paris and Madrid, Francis was weak enough to
catch at the hadow by which he had been so often de-
ceived, and from eagerness to seize it, relinquished what
muf have proved a more substantial acquisition. Besides
this, the Dauphin, jealous to excess of his brother, and
unwilling that a Prince who seemed to be of a reflefs and
enterpriing nature hould obtain an establishment, which
from its situation might be confidered almost as a do-
meftic one, made use of Montmorency, who by a singular
piece of good fortune, was at the fame time the favourite
of the father and of the on, to defeat the application of
the Flemings, and to divert the King from espousing their
cause. Montmorency represented accordingly the repu-
tation and power which Francis would acquire by reco-
vering that footing which he had formerly in Italy, and

that

that nothing could be so efficacious to overcome the Efl- Boot Vl.
peror's aversion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the
truce, and refusing on this occasion to countenance his '539
rebellious subjes. Francis, apt of himself to over-rate
the value of the Milanese, because he estimated it from
the length of time as well as from the great efforts which he
had employed in order to re-conquer it, and fond of eve-
ry aion which had the appearance of generosity, affenred
without difficulty to sentiments so agreeable to his own,
rejeced the propositions of the citizens of Ghent, and dif-
miffed their deputies with an har(h answer *.

NOT satisfied with this, by a farther refinement in ge- Communi-
nerofity, he communicated to the Emperor his whole ne- cates their

w* th

* m*

i

* i ** * * * ..~~intentionsa

gotiation with the malecontents, and all that he knew of t the Em-
their schemes and intentions t. This convincing proof peror.
of Francis's disinterestedness relieved Charles from the
most disquieting apprehensions, and opened a way to ex-
tricate himself out of all difficulties. He had already re-
ceived full information of all the tranfa&ions in the Ne-
therlands, and of the rage with which the people of
Ghent had taken arms against his government. He was
thoroughly acquainted with the genius and qualities of
his fubjets in that country; with their love of liberty;
their attachment to their ancient privileges and customs;

well as the invincible obstinacy with which their minds,

flow but firm and persevering, adhered to any measure on
which they had leisure to fix. He easily saw what encou-
ragement and support they would have derived from the
afliftance of France; though now free from any danger
on that quarter, he was fill fnfible that ome immedi-
ate and vigorous interposition was neceflary in order to
prevent the spirit of difaffcaion and rebellion from spread-
ing in a country where the number of cities, the multi-
tude of people, together with the great wealth diffused
among them by commerce, rendered it peculiarly formi-
dable, and would supply it with inexhaufiblerefources.
No expedient, after long deliberation, appeared to him so Charlees
efiecual as his going in person to the Netherlands and delibea-
the governes his iftRer being of the fame opinion, warmly cening ti
foicited him to undertake the journey. There were only journey to
two different routs which he could take; one by land theNeth-
through Italy and Germany, the other, entirely by a, luid".

*Mee. de eIly, p. 03. P. Heater. Rcr. Autr. lib. xi, *63.
tB andso. Hlflto. trn. ii. at. "

from

BooK vl. from some port in Spain to one in the Low-Countries
'" `J But the former was more tedious than suited the present

3 exigency of his affairs; nor could he in consistency witl

his dignity or even his safety pass through Germany with-
out such a train both of attendants and of troops, as
would have added greatly to the time that he mutl have
consumed in his journey; the latter was dangerous at this
season, and not to be ventured upon, while he was on
bad terms with the King of England, unless under the

Proposes to convoy of a powerful fleet. This perplexing situation, in
pas& thro' which he was under a necessity of choofing, and did not
Frace. know what to choose, inspired him at last with the fingu-

lar and seemingly extravagant thought of paling through
France, as the most expeditious way of reaching the Ne.
therlands. He proposed in his council to demand Fran-
cis's permiflion for that purpose. All his counsellors join-
ed with one voice in condemning the measure as no less
rafl than unprecedented, and which must infallibly expose
him to disgrace or to danger; to disgrace, if the demand
were rejeced in the manner that he had reason to exped;
to danger, if he put his person in the power of an enemy
whom he had often offended, who had ancient injuries to
revenge, as well as subje&s of present contest frill remain-
ing undecided. But Charles who had fludied the charac-
ter of his rival with greater care, and more profound dif-
cernment than any of his ministers, persisted in his plan,
and flattered himself that it might be accomplished not
only without danger to his own person, but even without
the expence of any concelion detrimental to his crown.

To which WITH this view he communicated the matter to the
PFracicon- French ambaflador at his court, and sent Granville his
fenr chief minifRer to Paris, in order to obtain from Francis

permission to pass through his dominions, and to promise
that he would soon fettle the affair of the Milanee to his
fatisfa&ion; but at the fame time to intreat that he would
not exat any new promise, or even insist on former engage-
ments, at this juncure, left whatever he Ihould grant,
under his present circumstances, might eem rather to be
extorted by necessity, than to flow from friendhip or the
love of jultice. Francis, instead of attending to the (nare
which such a flight artifice scarce concealed, was so daz-
zled with the fplcndour of overcoming an enemy by acts
of enerofity, and so pleased with the air of fupenority,
which the reaitude and difinteretednefs of his proceedings
gave him on this occasion, that he at once aflnted to all

that

that was demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by Boov v.
his own, he imagined that the sentiments of gratitude, 15"'
arising from the remembrance of gocd offices and liberal 53
treatment, would determine him more forcibly to fulfill
what he had so often promied, than the most precise i-
pulations that could be inserted in any treaty.

UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment was pre- His recep

cious, set out, notwithfianding the fears and suspicions of ko i that
his Spanish fubjeds, with a small but splendid train of an
hundred persons. At Bayonne, onthe frontiers of France,
he was received by the Dauphin and the Duke of Orleans,
attended by the con lable Montmorency. The two Prin-
ces offered to go into Spain, and to remain there as hosta-
ges for the Emperor's safety; but this he rejected, declar-
ing, that he relied with implicit confidence on the
King's honour, and had never demanded, nor would ac-
cept of any other pledge for his security. In all the
towns through which he pafied, the greatest possible
magnificence was displayed; the magistrates presented
him the keys of the gates; the prison doors were set o-
pen; and by the royal honours paid to him, he appeared
more like the sovereign of the country, than a firanger.
The king advanced as far as Chatelherault to meet him;
their interview was diftinguilhed by the warmest expreffi-
ons of friendship and regard. They proceeded together
towards Pans, and presented to the inhabitants of that
city, the extraordinary fpeacle of two rival Monarchs,
whose enmity had diflurbed and laid waste Europe, dur-
ing twenty years, making their solemn entry together,
with all the lymptoms of confidence and harmony, as if
the) nad forgotten, for ever, pas injuries, and would ne-
ver revive hostilities for the future*.

CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but amidf the The Em-

perpetual carcfles of the French court, and the various peror' soli-
entertainments contrived to amuse or to do him honour, citude.l
he discovered an extreme impatience to continue his jour-
ney, arising as much from an apprehension of danger
which confantly oppressed him, as from the necelity of
his presence in the Low-Countries. Confeious of the
difingenuity of his own intentions, he trembled when
he refleaed, that ome fatal accident might betray them
to his rival, or lead him to fufped them; and tho' his

Thma. Hi. lib. . c. 4. Mem. de Bllay, 64.

artifices

Boot vt. artifices to conceal these hould be successful, he could not
- '.-i' help fearing that motives of interest, might at las triumph
'539. over the scruples of honour, and tempt Francis to avail

himself of the advantage now in his hands. Nor were
there wanting persons among the French rninifters, who
advised the King to turn his own arts against the Empe-
ror, and as the retribution due for so many inflances of
fraud or falsehood, to seize and detain his person, till he
granted him full satisfaction with regard to all the just
claims of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had pledged,
nor could any argument convince him, that Charles, as-
ter all the promises that he had given, and all the favours
which he had received, might till be capable of deceiv-
ing him. Full of this false confidence, he accompanied
him to St. Quintin, and the two Princes, who had met
him on the borders of Spain, did not take leave of him,
until he entered his dominions in the Low-Countries.

and difin- As soon as the Emperor reached his own territories, the
jnuar¥.4 French ambafladors demanded the accomplilhment of

1540. what he had promised, concerning the inveltiture of Mi-

lan, but Charles, under the plausible pretext, that his
whole attention was then engrossed by the consultations ne-
cefliry towards fupprefling the rebellion in Ghent, put off
the matter for some time. But in order to prevent Francis
from fufpeaing his sincerity, he still continued to talk of
his resolutions with rfpet to that matter, in the fame
firain as when he entered France, and even wrote to the
King much to the fame purpose, though in general terms,
and with equivocal expreilions, which he might after-
wards explain away or interpret at pleasure .

. i a;on MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, def-
qo Ghent. titute of leaders capable either of directing their councils,

or conducing their troops; abandoned by the French
King, and unsupported by their countrymen; were una-
ble to refit their offended sovereign, who was rea-
dy to advance againt them with one body of troops,
which he had raised in the Netherlands, with ano-
ther drawn out of Germany, and a third which had ar-
rived from Spain by sea. The near approach of danger
made them, at last, so sensible of their own folly, that
they lent ambafiadors to the emperor imploring his mercy,

* Meoire d Ribier, i. le4.

and

and offering to set open theit gates at his approach. Chaies t oot *L
wirthout vouchsafing them any other answer, than that'"-'"
he would appear atong thtiii as their fovercign, witli the '5*
sceptre and the fwerd in his hand, began his 'iaiM h at the
head of his troops. Though he choe to enter the cify
on the twenty-fourth of Februtry; his birth day, he was
touched with nothing of that tendetnefs r indulgeice
which was natural towards the place of his nativity;
Twenty-fix of the principal citizens were put to death ; nd pnuiil-
a greater number was sent into banishment: the city as mealt of the
declared to have forfeited all its privileges iand ittinunities; l trenso.
the revenues belonging to it were confeated; its ancient
form of government was abolished ; the riominition of
its niagiftrates was vested for the future in the Eperor
and his fuceffors; a new systen of laws and political ad-
minifratiotn '*a peftfribed , arfd in order to bidle the
feditioeu fpirir of the chitens a Rrong citadel was appoint-
ed to be erected, sot defraying the expence of which
fine of an hun&ted and fifty thodtfand tflins was iofed
on the inhabitants, together toit an annual tak f fit
thousand ofitifis for the fuppdrt of a garrison t. By these
rigorous proceedingt, Charles not only puhithed the ci-
tizenS ofhtent, biir set an awfil example offeverity before
is other ftbjets in the Nletherlahd, whose irimonities and
privileges, partly the effe&, partly the cause of their ex-
tedfive cotmerce; eircumfcribed the royal prerOgative
within very hntro* bounds, and often od in the way of
meafutre whteh he wished to untdetaike or fettered and
retarded hith in his operations.

Cit AKES having thus vindicated arid re-eftablihec his Chgrle re-

authority in the LtowCountries, an& being now undti nd fs to f.
necefIty of cbntitIoing the tfle fcere otffaithoad arid gagemeent
difitniulation With which he had long amused Francis, to Facir.
began gridually t6 throw afidMl te veil under which he had
cohealed his inhi'brt with rteft to the Milanese. At
firl he eluded the deands of he French aribaflfdort
When they iagLi emitminded hitt ofa his ptoifeh; thet hd
ptopofti, b ay ayt f quivalent for lti dutchy of Milan,
to griat the Duke of scn>s the i, dfite ure of Fhlandrti
clogging the offer, however, with impraCdiable ctthdtifd

Les tume~n r Ibi d Compte Ide FtrtitdV pt Alex. e Ofrde, 1 1

tOr. fol. Cmbray, 1719, tom. i. p. t19.

t Hat.l Alb Btlotfo, 1. i. 6

. i .
Vo, II1. t- on,

BooxVI. ons, or such as he knew would be rejeEted *. At lad,

C^ *' being driven from all his evasions and subterfuges by their
'540. infiftingfor a categorical answer, he peremptorily refuf-

ed to give up a territory of such value, or voluntarily to
make such a liberal addition to the strength of an enemy
by diminishing his own power t. He denied at the fame
time, that he had ever made any promise which could bind
him to an aicn so foolish, and o contrary to his own
interest .

OF all the aaions in the Emperor's life, this, without

doubt, refleas the greatest dishonour on his reputation .
Tho' Charles was not extremely scrupulous at other times
about the means which he employed for accomplilh;ng
his ends, or always observant of the stria precepts of ve.
racity and honou:, he had hitherto maintained ome regard
for the maxims of that less precise and rigid morality by
which monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their ccndut. But, on this occasion, the scheme that
he formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted
Prince; the illiberal and mean artifices by which he car-
ried it on; the insensibility with which he received all the
marks of his friendlhip, and the ingratitude with which
he requited them; are all equally unbecoming the digni-
ty of his charater, and inconsistent with the grandeur of
his views.

THIS tranfaaion exposed Francis to as much fcor as

it did the Emperor to censure. After the experience of a
long reign, after so many opportunities of discovering the
duplicity and artifices of his rival, thecredulous simplicity
with which he trusted him at this juncure seemed to me-
rit no other return than it actually met with. Francis,
however, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this had
been the firt instance in which the Emperor had deceived
him. Feeling, as is usual, the insult which was offered to
his understanding fill more sensibly than the injury done
to his interest, he discovert such resentment as made it
obvious that he would lay hold on the firt opportunity of
being revenged, and that a war, no less rancorous than
that which had so lately raged, would soon break out a-
new in Europe.

The Pope THIs year is rendered memorable by the establishment
authorizes of the order of Jcfuits; a body whose influence on eccl
the innitu-
gion of the
Order of Mem.deRibir ; V Ribbi
Jcfuits. Bellay, 365-(. \ Jovi His. lib. xri. . p. 23. a.

fialtical

fiafRical as well as civil affairs hath been so considerable, Boor Vi.
that an account of the genius of its laws and government a_
justly merits a place in history. When men take a view '543'
of the rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable prudence
with which it has been governed; when they attend to
the persevering and fyftematick spirit with which its fchemcs
have been carried on they are apt to acribe such a fin-
gular institution to the superior wisdom of its founder, and
to suppose that he had formed and digceted his plan with
profound policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other
monastic orders, are indebted for the existence of their or-
der not to the wisdom of their founder, but to his enihu-
fiafm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have already mentioned
on occasion of the wound which he received in defending
Pampeluna *, was a fanatick distinguished by extravagan-
cies in sentiment and condu&, no lets incompatible with
the maxims of fober reason, than repugnant to the spirit
of true religion, The wild adventures, and visionary
schemes, in which his enthusiasm engaged him, equal any
thing recorded in the legends of the Romith faints; but
unworthy of notice in history.

PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the F"ant"cirm

love of power and diftihftion, from which such preten- itfoudr.
ders to superior fanaity are not exempt, Loyola was am-
bitious of becoming the founder of a religious order.
The plan which he formed of its constitution and laws,
was suggested, as he gave ours and his followers still
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven t. But
notwithtanding this high pretension, his dcfign met at firt
with violent oppolition. The Pope, to whom Loyola
had applied for the fanaion of his authority to confirm
the inRitution, referred his petition to a committee of
Cardinals. They rprefented the eftablihment to be un-
neceflary as well as dangetous, and Paul refused to grant
his approbation of it. At last, Loyola removed al his
scruples by an offer which it was impofihble for any Pope
to resist. Hepropofed that'befides the three vows of po- The Pep's
vertyi of charity, and of monmtic oedience, which are *motin* or
common to all monastic orders, the members of his so- te order
ciety hould take a fourth vow of obedience to the Pope,
binding themselves to go whitherfoevcr he hould com-

Book ii. . t..

t Coptte Pr de i Coaftituaio do Jfultec, sa Parlement d Pro.
traec, pr Mt. do Monclr. p. sls.

H 2 mand,

8lot vi. mand for the service of religion, and without requiring
"L ' any thing from the Holy See for their support. At a

s4'. time when the papal authority had received such a hock

by the revolt of so many nations from the Romish church;
at a time whenevery partof the popith fyiRem was attack-
ed with-fo much violence and success, tde acquisition of a
body of men, thus peculiarly devoted to the See of
Rome, and whom it might et in oppoition to all its ene-
scrt 7. mics, was an objet of the highest consequence. Paul,

instantly perceived this, confirmed the institution of the
Jesuits by his bull ; granted the reft ample privileges to
the members of the society; and appointed Loyola to be
the rRf General of the order. The event had fully jufC
tiied Paul's discernment in expecing foch beneficial con-
sequences to the See of Rome ftrm tisinfittion. hI less
than half a century, the society obtained eltablihments in
every country that adhered to the Roman catholic church;
its power and wealth inceafed amazingly; the number of
its members became great; their charaer and accom-
plilnhents were fil greater; and the Jefuitt were celebrat-
ed bythe fiends, and.dreaded by the enemies of the Ro-
mith faith, as the mofi able and enterprising order in the
church.

ltsdenCitu- TuE conflitution and laws of the ocity were perse-
ioUS merit ed by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two generals who sue-
puticulr ceeded Loyola, men fat fperiortt tohe i n er in abili-
tlotioo. ties, and in the science of government. They framed

that fyftcm of profound and artful policy which diftin-
guithed the order. The large infion of fnaticifm,
mingled with its regulations, e ~oul be im ed to Loy-
oh its founder. Many citcumfnnca eoncUrred in giv-
ing a peuliarity of characer to the eederaf Jefiita, and
in formine the members of it not only to take grater pan
in' te afairs of the word than any other ody of
mobki, but to acquire superior induence in the condut

TLe ojea tHn primary objet of altioft all te lmiic lrders
v'the ordr is to fepitrate men from the world, andt *

rk hy conern
sw mthr ini alfin. In the foitude and filenceof the dle,

- e tonk hI called to work out his on falicaMt by 'x-
traordinay as of mortifieatin and piety.' e is dead
to he worid and ought notto mihglke i .ie trmnSlions.
He can be of no benefit to mankind, but by his example
and. by his prayers. On the contrary, the Jefuin are
taught to confider themnflves as formed for itlion.Thy arc

chosen

chosen fokliers, bound to exert themselves continually in; Boot vt.
the lervice of God, and of the Pope, his vicar on earth. ' u-
Whatever tends to inflrud the ignorant; whatever can '
be of use to reclaim or to oppose the enemies of the Holy
See, is theirproperobjea. That they may have full leiiure
for this a&ive service, they are totally exempted from
those fun&ions, the performance of which is the chief
business of other monks. They appear in no procefi-
ons; they praaife no rigorous aufterities; they do not
consume one half of their time in the repetition of tedious
offices *. But they are required to attend to all the tranf-
aQions of the world, on account of the influence which:
these may have on religion; they are direced to study
the dispositions of per~ s in high rank, and to cultivate
their friendlhip t; and by the very constitution as well as
genius of the order, a spirit of adion and intrigue is in-
fused into all its members.

As the o~e& of the society of Jesuits differed from Peculiitie

that of the other monastic orders, the diversity was no i te rm
less in the form of its government. The other orders ptoi
are to be conidered as volhtary aflociations, in which with refp~
whatever ~s the whole body, is regulated by the com tower
mon suffrage of all its members. The executive power rl.
is vested in the persons placed at the head of each coo-
vent, or of the whole fbciety; the legislative authority re-
fides in the community. Affairs of moment, reling to
particular convents, are determined in convetua chap-
ter; such as rfped the whole order are confidere in
general congregations. But Loyola, full of the ideas of
implicit obedience, which he had derived from his mii.
tary profdfion, appointed that the gw~ern nt of his or.
der should be purely monarchical. A General, chosen
for life by the dputie from the feveal proviwce po-
fed power that was supreme and independent, extend-
ing to every perbn, and to every cafe. He, by his
ole authority nominated provincias, re~os, and every
other oer employed in the government of the
icty, and emuld remov them at pafure. In him was
vecfld the fevereg adminiftraion of the reveues and
fund# of the order. Every meber belonging to it was
at his difpo&l; and by his uncontrolable mandate, he
could impose on them any talk, or employ them in what

C ,aptmId pb,. d. cs clr. p. 3,.»o. Sur lader ar. de

Jdute., ita. D'Al~ t, p. 4
p.

t Compte pr M. de Monclar. aI t.

3 fcrvice

Boot v. service soever he pleased. To his commands they wer

.-- -'required to yield not only outward obedience, but tc
'540' resign up to him the inclinations of their own wills, ant

the entiments of their own understandings. They wen
toliften to his injunaions, as if they had been utterec
by Christ himself. Under his direction, they were to be
mere pafive instruments, like clay in the hands of the
potter, or like dead carcases incapable of resistance *,
Such a singular form of policy could not fail to impress
its characr on all the members of the order, and to give
a peculiar force to all its operations. There is not in the
annals of mankind any example of such a perfea despot.
ism, exercised not over monks (hut up in the cells of a
convent, but over men dispersed among all the nations ol
the earth.

Circummnn- As the conflitutions of the order vest, in the General.
cc which such absolute dominion over all its members, they care-
enablelhir fully provide for his being perfecly informed with refped
it xththrc to the characer and abilities of his fubjeas. Every no.
gresteftad- vice who offers himself as a candidate for entering intc
virntge. the order, is ob'iged to manifef bis teoftine to the fu-

perior, or to a person appointed by him; and is required
to confess not only his fins and defets, but to difcovel
the inclinations, the pafions, and the bent of his foul.
This manifestation must be renewed every fix months t,
The society not satisfied with penetrating in this manne
into the innermolt recesses of the heart, directs each
member to obterve the words and aions of the novices;
they are constituted spies upon their conduct; and are
bound to disclose every thing of importance concerning
them to the superior. In order that this scrutiny into
their charaAer may be as compleat as poflible, a long
noviciate must expire, during which they pars through the
several gradations of ranks in the society, and they must
have attained the full age of thirty three years, before
they can be admitted to take the final vows, by which
they become proeffid members *. By there various me-
thods, the superiors, under whose immediate infpeicion
the novices are placed, acquire a thorough knowledge of
their dilpostions and talents. In order that the General,

* Compte rendu ut Prlem. de Bretqne. par M. de Chalottis, p. 4,
&c. Compte per M. de Monclar. 83, Il 8 334.

t Compte par M. de Monclar. p. Is , &c.
t Compte par M. de Monclar. t1, S41. r Iadef. dlJe£ pr

lM.
D'Altmb. p. 39.

who
.. , . Cello~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~»

who is the foul that animates and moves the whole focie- Boo V.
ty, may have under his eye every thing neceflary to in- -
form or dire& him, the provincills and heads of the fe- 1540
veral houses are obliged to transmit to him regular and
frequent reports concerning the members under their in-
fpetion. In these they descend into minute details with
recpet to the charaaer of each person, his abilities natu-
ral or acquired, his temper, his experience in affairs, and
the particular department for which he is best fitted *.
These reports, when digested and arranged, are entered
into registers, kept of purpose that the General may, at
)oe comprehensive view, survey the state of the society in
every corner of the earth; observe the qualifications and
talents of its members; and thus choose, with perfec in-
formation, the infiruments, which his absolute power
can employ in any ervice for which he thinks meet to
destine them t.

As it was the profelled intention of the order of Jesuits Progress of

to labour with unwearied zeal in promoting the salvation the power
of men, this engaged them, of course, in many a&ive nce'of th
fun&ions. From their first institution, they confidered order.
the education of youth as their peculiar province; they
aimed at being piritual guides and confeflors; they
preached frequently in order to inflru6 the people; they
set out as missionaries to convert unbelieving nations.
The novelty of the inflitution, as well as the ingularity
of its objess, procured the Order many admirers and
patrons. The governors of the society had the address

M. de Chalotais has made a calcuhtion of the number of there reports,

which the general of the Jesuits mut annually receive according to the rc-
gulationa of the ociety. These amount in all to 6584. If this lum be di-
vided by 37, the nunber of provinces in the order, it appears that 177 re-
orts concerning the site of ech province are transmitted to Rome annual-
Iy. Cnmpte, p. i. Besides this there may be extraordinar leters, or
such as are feat by the monitors or fpiea which the eneral and provincials
entertain in each house. Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 431. Hil. des
Jesuites, Amll 1761, tom. iv. p. 6. The provincial and heads of bouale
not only report concerning the members of the lociety, but are bound to
givete the geril an ccosnt ofthe civil affairs of the country wherein they
are fettled, info far as the knowledge of these may be of benefit to religion.
This condition may extend to every prticular, o that the general is fur-
nilhed with full information concerning the tranfiions of every Prine and
ftitein the world. Compt par Mde Moacl. 443. Hill. des Jesuit. ibid.
P. 58. When the afairs with rSp~t to which the proincials or reQors
write are of importnce, they are direaed to aft cypher*, ond each of them
ht particular cypher from the eneral. Compte pir M. de Chalotis,

tCmpte pr M. de Moscl. p. s l, 439.Conprte pr M. de Chalotais,
P. S, 221.

1"9
4

to.

Boo VI. to avail tIfdvohes ps every crcumflance in its favour

'-'~ arndt in a hort time, the number as. well as influence of
·'r44 its members inrma(ed wornderfully. Before the expirati.

on of the fixtecoth century, the Jdeuits had obtained the
chief direcaion of the education of youth in every catho.
lic country in Europe. They had become the confefors
of ampft all its monarchs, a funion of no fmali im.
portance in any reign, but under a weak Prince, superior
even to that of minister. They were the firitual guidei
of almof every perfoneminent for rank or power. They
podfcd&d the highest degree of corfidence and interest
with the papal court, as the most zealous and able chain.
pious for its authority, The advantages which an aive
and enterprizing body of men might derive from all theft
circumRtanccs are obviou. They formed the minds of
men in their youth. They retained an ascendant over
them in their advanced years. They polfefled, at dif-
ferent period4, the direction of the mod considerable
courts in Europe. They mingled in all affairs. They
took part in every intrigue apd revolution. The General,
by means of the extenlive intelligePce which he received,
could regulate the opratios of tbh order wit. the most
perft difcemmn nti a by ijeaps of hi absolute
pRwer could carry them on wih the thtm)o vigvur and
d~et *.

Progress of TOOETHE. with the power of the order, ita wealth
;i wealth. continued to increaIf. Various eWp iet s were devised

for eluding the obligation of the vow of poerty. The
order acquired ample pofleffions in ever catholic country;
and by the number a well as magniicence of its publick
buildings, together with the value of its property, move-
able or real, it vied with the molt opulent of the monas-
tick fraternities. Beides the ources of wealth common
to all the regular clergy, the Jesuits ptffe one which
was peculiar to themselves. Uoder pretext of promoting
the fucce& of their miliona, and of facilitting the (up-
port of their missionaries, they obtained a special licenf'
from the court of Rome, to trade with the nations which

* Wen Lnalnl in the y r 54D prttiod the Pops to athoize the i-

Mution of the ordr, he Ibd orly tea difcips. Oi a the leu io, sixty
eight year after their. hrs iafitutier , the uwbre of JefiLt kd in fed to
ten thourend sfve hu nd edaeihty one. In the year lTl7, the order
pffeffed twenty-foorp Prf#P houses i ffty-nne hbua. of probtioo ; three
'undredl and fory refidenceq; fix hundred and twelve colleges two hun-
.red mifins;i one hundred arn sift fvrminries and boarding chool a'ti
-on!llled of 19,998 Jrfurt. Hist. dr Jesuites, tomrn. i. p.o.

tho,

they laboured to convert. In consequence of this, they BooK Vl.
enagaed in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in ,.
the East and Weft Indies. They opened wae-houes 54
in difierent parts of Europe, in which they vended their
commodities Not satisfied with trade alone, they imi-
tated the example of other commercial societies, and aim-
ed at obtaining settlements. They acquired pofieflon
accordingly of a lrge and fertile province in the foutbern
continent of America, and reigned as fovCTigns over
some hundred thousand fubjeds .

UNHAPPrLY for mankind, the vast infl ce which:Pemiciou

the order of Jesuits acquired by all these different means, ^e ;.

'of

has been. often exeted with the most pemicious e. ii society.
Such was the tedency of that discipline obfieed by the
society in fring its members, and such tbh fundamen-
tal naxims in its contutinti, that every Jesuit was.
taught to regard the interft of the order, a t capital
obje, to which every ontideration was to be farificed.
This fpiit of attachment to their order the mot ardent,
perhaps, that ever influenced any body. of omea , is the
chara&ieric principlk of the. Jesuits, and serves s a key
to the genius of their policy, and. o te. peculiarities in
their ntriments and. conud&.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the (bicety,

that its members (hould pofefi an ascendant over pertab.
in high:rank:orof great power, the defim o~ acquring
and preserving such. a dire&ion of their cduct, with
greater facility, has led the Jesuits to propagato a system
of relaxed and pliant moraity, which accommodate it-
self to the paflons of men, which jultifiea their vice,.
which tolers their imperfeations, which. atborie. ai-
molf every aaion that the mos audacious or cafty poli
tician would wih to perpetrate.

As the profperit of the order wa intimately cqama ;

with the pmefration of the papal authoity, the Jttui
iniuencd by the fame principle of attchmnt t tho iu-
terests of their society, have been the o&ltam- para.
ofthofe do&rine wbich tend to exalt ec itlal er
on the ruins of civil government. Theyi hav atribtd
to the coOt of Rome a jurifdi&ion a exMenfi andabfe-
lute u was claimed by the mot prefumpa t pon~ in
the dark ages. They have codtended for the entire inde

HiR. deg Jef. i. 168-1 96, rc.
t Compte p M. de Mu;!ar. SS.

pendenm

Sool vI. pendence of ecclefiafticks on the civil magistrate. They

1*--- have published such tenets concerning the duty of oppos.
'540. ing Princes who were enemies of the catholick faith,

as countenanced the mos atrocious crimes, and tended
to difrolve all the ties which conne& fubjeds with their
rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and authority

from the zeal with which it flood forth in defence of the
Romish church againf the attacks of the reformers, its
members, proud of this diftinaion, have confidered it
as their peculiar funcion to combat the opinions, and to
check the progress of the Protestants. They have made
use of every art, and have employed every weapon againfR
them. They have set themselves in opposition to every
gentle or tolerating measure in their favour. They have
incessantly irred up against them all the rage of eccleli.
aRical and civil persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed, ventur-

ed to teach the fame pernicious doarines, and have held
opinions equally inconsistent with the order and happiness
of civil society. But they, from reasons which are ob-
vious, have either delivered such opinions with greater
reserve, or have propagated them with less success. Who-
ever recollets the events which have happened in Europe
during two centuries, will find that the Jesuits mayjutly
be confidered as responsible for moit of tbe pernicious es-
seas ariing from that corrupt and dangerous cafuiRry,
from thofl extravagant tenets concerning ecclesiastical
power, and from that intolerant spirit, which have been
the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout that pe-
riod, and which have brought so many calamities upon
civil society *.

&m ad. BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing from the
va se cre- infRitution of this order, mankind, it muf be acknow-
f"lti.rrf ledged, have derived from it some considerable advan-

.e of

i ta ges. As the Jesuits made the education of youth one
order. of their capital objes, and as their sirs attempts to eta-

blilh colleges for the reception of Rudents were violently
opposed by the universities in dierent countries, it be-
came neceffry for them, as the most effeaual method of
acquiring the publick favour, to furpafis their rivals in

Particularly science and induRry. This prompted them to cultivate
to liter- with great ardour the study of ancient literature. This..

* Encyclopedic, Art. 7rfsins, tow. viii. 3.

put

Liv r i

^ ^A. n A L L V. 123

put them upon various methods for facilitating the in- Boox VI.
firu&ion of youth; and by the improvements which they 'v/
made in it, they have contributed not a little towards the 0'
pregrefs of polite learning, and have on this account
merited well of focicty. Nor has the order of Jesuits
been successful only in teaching the elements of literature,
it has produced likewise eminent masters in many branches
of science, and can alone boast of a greater number of
ingenious authors, than all the other religious fraternities
taken together *.

BuT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have ex- Moreefpe-

hibited the moR wonderful display of their abilities, and cilly from
have contributed most effe&ually to the benefit of the hu- mte n ofthe
man species. The conquerors of that unfortunate quar- Jefait in
ter of the globe had nothing in view but to plunder, to P,"rgua.
enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants. The Jcfuits
alone have made humanity the objet of their fettling
there. About the beginning of the laR century they ob-
tained admission into the fertile province of Paraguay,
which firetches across the southem continent of America,
from the bottom of the Mountains of Potofi to the con-
fines of the Spanish and Portuguese settlements on the
banks of the river de la Plata: they found the inhabitants
in a Rate little different from that which takes place among
men when they firfl begin to unite together; frangers to
the arts; fubfiRing precariouly by hunting or filhing
and scarce acquainted with the first principles of fubordi.
nation and government. The Jesuits et themselves to
infrua and to civilise there savages. They taught them
to cultivate the ground, to rear tame animals, and to

t M. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jefuitc have made etrn-
ordinary proFCia erudition of every specie,; though they can d up
mny of thir brethren who have been eminent mathenmtici", atiquriu,
and c'iticks; thoh they hve even Brmed some orators of reptatioa; yet
the order b never poduced one man, whoe mind wa so mh ealieht ed
with soud Iknoyrlege, tomerit the name of a philoepher. Bt it fem to
be the uCvqidbie ee of monaiick education to contrat and fetter the
humn mind. The artial nattchment of monk to the interest of his order,
which i often iocoMpatible with that of other citiena \ the habit of impli-
cit obddienc to the will of a superior, togetber with the frequt etur of
the wriom an d frivolous duties of the cllter, derfe hi facultin, and
c.tinpil that IgC rofty of sentiment and spirit, which qualiies men for
thinking or feelingjutly with rfpot to what i proper in life nd comdut.
Father Pau f Ve rhp

nice ,l per

te only per educated in coifer,

thu ever war iltogether superior to its prejdices, or who viewed the tnnf
"*iob mdti fd; r iii iJ concerning the intere of ociety, with the

uiirped fentimenta of a philoiphrr, with the dirccrnment of a man covetr-
ot in dfiinr, *d with the liberality of a gentleman.

build

BooVT. build houses. They brought them to live together in

-->"' villages. They trained them to arts and manufaaures.
3540' They made them taste the sweets of society ; and accur.

tomed them to the blessings of security and order. These
people became the fubjeas of their benefators; who have
governed them with a tender attention, resembling that,
with which a father direcs his children. Refpe&ed and
beloved almost to adoration, asew Jesuits prcfided over some
hundred thousand Indians. They maintained a perfeCt
equality among all the members of the community. Each of
them was obliged to labour not for himself alone, but for
the public. The produce of their fields, together with the
fruits of their indutry of every species, were deposited in
common storehouses, from wich each individual received
every thing necefiary for the fupply'of his wans. By this
institution, almost all the pafoos which disturb the peace
of society, and reader the members of it unhappy, were
extinguihed. A few magilrates, chosen by the Indians
thecmilves, watched over the publick tranquillity, and
secured obedience to the laws. The sanguinary punish-
ments frequent under ether governments were ukown.
An admonition from a Jecuir; a flight mark of infamy
er, on fme fingula occasion, a few iafh with a whip,
were fufficieat to maintain good order among thefr inno-
cent and happy people .

Even here BuT even in this meritorio effort of the Jefuts for
the mnbition the good of manind, the genius and spirit of their order
and policy of hayv mingled are discernible. They plainly aimed at
the older *flablihing in Paraguay and independent empire, fuIbje

tdi . the fociy aionevand which, by the superior excellnc
of its conftiturion and police, could scarce have failed to
extend its dominion over all the southern continent of
America. With this view, in order to prevent the Spa-
niards or Portuguese in the adjacent settlements, from
acquiring any influence over the people whom they go-
verned that might be dangerous, the Jesuits endeavoured
to infire the Indians with hatred and contempt of there
nations. They cut off all intercourse between their sub-
je&s and the Spanif or Porruguefe settlement. They
prohibited any private trader of either nation from enter-

* it. do 1MeAuiy rer Per ds Charleoir, tom. ii. 47, &c. Voyage
am lProw pt Dol C. J n & D. Ant. de Ulloa, torn. i. 54, 0. Par. 4to.

ing

ing their territories. When they were obliged to admit oom vI.
any person in a public chara&ter from the neighbouring --'v.--
governments, they did not permit him to have any con-
verfition wih their fubjets, and no Indian was allowed
even to enter the house where there Rrangers redided, un-
less in the pr~nce of a Jefit. I n order to render any
communication between thenm as 4ifficult as poilible, they
industriously avoided giving the Indians any knowledge
of the Spanish or any other European language; but en-
couraged tih different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a ertain dialet of the Indian tongue, and ia-
boured to make that the univerfil language thoaughout
their dominions. As all these precations, without mili-
tary force, would have been aficient to hae tendered
their empirefecure and permanent, they inftmrted their
fubjets in the European arts of war. They frmed them
into bodies of cavalry and infantry, completelyarmed and
regularly Adiipined. They provided a great rin of ar-
tillery, as well as magazines toed with all the imple-
ments of war Thus they efiabldhed an army so nume-
rous and well appointed, as be formidable in a country,
where a few sicEy and il-difciplined battalions compoed
all the mility force kept on foot by the Spaniards or
Potuguefe .

Ti Jeuiits gained no coniderable degre of power Re.foa for

daring the reig of Chales V. who, with his fual fga- giving ro fll
city, difcrmed the gerous. tendency of the inatitution "o
and checked it ~ s . But as the order wafounded nd p
in the petid of 'wich , writehe hiltory, and as the ae of the order.
to which I dd~ef tbhis wo hath een its fall, the view
which I hwe eahibited dfthe hlaw ad mniuaof this for-
midabe body wi not, bope, be unacceable eo my
readers; efpeciay as ne cirnaftance h enabled me o
enter inoit deail with paricular advantage. Europe
had obfeeed, fortwo.cernturS, the amditin h ad power
of the order. But while it felt many fatal effeAs of there,
it coubtiifltly d~icem the coauf to which they were
to be itiuied. It was unacfuainted with mnatiy of the
singular rgplations in the political cootioo rpbvem-
ment of tlhe d*it., whick .sermd hatriit 4f intrigue
and nterprize which diftiuguibd its tmemben, andl de-

* Voyge i Jua & de U, tMl.i.

. 149. l

4c tak~ I Pree

q1 ot ptar fur lea Al'tire des Jesuites e Portual, tom. i p. 7, c.
t Compte par M. de UMonc'er. p .. .

vated

Boo, V. vated the body itself to such a height of power. It was

a favourite maxim with the Jesuits, from their firtf in.
54o° ftitution, not to publih the rules of their order. These

they kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery. They
never communicated them to firangers; nor even to the
greater part of their own members. They refused to
produce them when required by courts ofjuftice ; and by
a strange solecism in policy, the civil power in different
countries authorized or connived at the eablithment of
an order of men, whose constitution and laws were con.
cealed with a solicitude, which alone was a good reason
for having excluded them. During the prosecutions late.
ly carried on against them in Portugal and France, the
efuits have been so inconsiderate as to produce the mvf.
terious volumes of their institute. By the aid of there au-
thentic records, the principles of their government may
be delineated, and the sources of their power investigated
with a degree of certainty and preciion, which, previous
to that event, it was impoflible to attain t. But as I have
pointed out the dangerous tendency of the constitution
and spirit of :the order with the freedom becoming an his-
torian, the candour and impartiality no ife requisite i
.that cura&er. call on me to add one observation, That no
class of regular clergy in the Romih church has= been
more eminent for dee~cy, and. even purity of manners,
than the major part of the order of Jeluits . The max-
ims of an intriing, ambitious, interested. policy, might
influence thobe who governed the society, and might even
corrupt the heart, and prrt the conduEa f some indi-
viduals, while the greater number, engad in literary
pursuits, or employed in the funtions or religion, was
left to the guidance of those com on principle which re-
train men from vice, and excite them to wht is becom-
ing and audable. The caufis which occaficnod the ruin
of this mighty body, as well as the circumfance and es-

* H.s .

d'.. l j i. up

C ep rM. de Cahdip. 38.

t Theetr tert of my hiafnmti cocerni tkpemm nt «nd
law of rhe odr of jefit, helriied fnm r nretf M. de Cht-
boti ad K

hi d mr. lid s nt, b 4Iowr, afrulpr yetwn of

these rnpd~

bl mrat, nd dl t wriws, bit u pa' ilumenble

psfe whisc tbhy bhve trrad frm tkhe reHittiw d sos w qrer, d'
psod ii tirp

h d b,

HdptLa, * Prodatett divia of Zurich i hi

-.isd Jirfit, printed A. . 1619, publiled * frYall p of the conftr
utioedr_ iM Jeti,, t whicl by eMeraiyddt toe ad pe a copy; p. 13-
54.

sur h dtra. des.J. pr M.D'AJmbmr, p. SS.

fetAs

seas with which it has been attended in the different ooK vI.
countries of Europe, though objecs extremely worthy.the '. v.
attention of every intelligent observer of human affairs, do J540.
not fall within the period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-established order in the Low- Aitin, of

Countries, than he was obliged to turn his attention to Germtny.
the affairs of Germany. The Protestants pressed him
earnestly to appoint that conference between a felea num-
ber of the divines of each party, which had been ftipu-
lated in the convention at Francfort. The Pope, con-
fidering such an attempt to examine or decide the points
in dispute as derogatory to his right of being the supreme
judge in controversy, and persuaded that it would either
be ineffetual by determining nothing, or prove dange-
rous by determining too much, employed every art to
prevent the meeting. The Emperor, however, findng
it more for his interest to ooth the Germans, than to gra-
tify Paul, paid little regard to his remonstrances. In a
diet held at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for the con-
ference. In another diet aflembled at Worms, the con- A coafe-
ference was begun, Melanahon on the one ide, and tree,
Eckius on the other, furtaining the principal part in the Popith a
dispute; but after they had made ome progress, though Protelftnt
without concluding any thing, it was suspended by the dJi''.
Emperor's command, that it might be renewed with bec. 6.
greater solemnity in his own presence in a diet summoned
to meet at Ratilbon. This aembly was opened with Is4.
great pomp, and with a general expetation that its pro-
ceedings would be vigorous and decisive. By the consent
of both parties, the Emperor was entrusted with the pow-
er of nominating the perbnr who Ihould manage the con-
ference, which it was agreed (hould be conduced not in
the form of a public diputation, but as a friendly scrutiny
or examipation into the articles which had given rife to the
present controversies. He appointed EcEius, Gropper
and Plug, on the pat of the Catholics, and Melanc-
thon, Bucer and Piftorius, on that of the Protestants, all
men of 'diinguihed reputation among their wn adhe-
rents, aiid except Eckius, all eminent for their modera-
tion, as well as desirous of peace. As they were about to
begin their consultations, the Emperor put into their
hands a book, composed, as he (aid, by a learned divine
in the Low-Countries, with such extraordinary perfpi-
cuity and temper, as might go far, in his opinion, to
unite and comprehend the two contending parties. Grop-

per,

*»7

Boot VI. per, a canon of Cologne, whom he had named among
L- ~- the managers of the conference, a man of address as well

'54' as of rudition, was afterward fui~ ed to be the author

of this lhort treatise. It contained positions with rard
to twenty-two of the chief articles in theology, whii in.
duded mtft of the questions then agitated in the contro.
verfy between the Lutherans and the church of Rome.
By ranging his sentiments in antural order, and express-
ing them with great fiplicity; by employing often the
vey words of fcriprure, or of the primitive fathers; by
fofteing the rigour of- ome opinions, and explaining a-
way what was abturd in others; by coneeffions, now on
one ide, and now on the other; and fptially by ba-
nilhing aa much as pollible fchohiic phrases, those words
and terms of rtin controversy, which serve as badges of
diftinion to the diferent sets, and for which theotogi-
mm often contend more fiercey than for opiniots them-
selves; he framed his work in uch 'a manner, asptbtnifd
firer than any thing that had hitherto bleen ttentd, to
compoe and to terminate religios tldienfions *.
Fnli. BT.thc Kttcntinos f theage was turned, withfuch acute

obfetvati, towrds theologicl controvetfies, that it was
not ea;y to ainpdfe on it by any gloss how artl or rpcci-
ons (bever. The length and eagnefs of the difpltte had
seuratcd the contending partie so compleatly, ahd had
set their mihds a ich varace, that they wee not to be
teconciled b atial coneffions. All the zeah Catho-
lics, patichrty the ecceftia cs who had ll,*c in the
iiet, joined in condemning Grpper's teafie * too fa-
ourable to the Lutheran ophio;s, the pb.l of which
heresy it cotieyed, Ia they .prtended with 'eate dan-
get, e si wat in foa degre diguifed. The rigid
Proteftats, efpecdllly Luther iimfelf, and his patron the
Eletor of Smony, were for tjeing it an at hpious
compodnd of etror and truth, crafily preprd that it
might npol,on the eat, the timid, and th ithink-
ing. But the divines, towhom the aainnialn of it
was commited, ntered u ton that bmltf Wth grter
deiberation andi temper. A it was moe vE -as tfdf,
as well at mote coifment- with the dignity of th¢ 'hurch
to make onldef6ot and even ~htmiions ith :terd to
speculative opnlns, the dl*urd n wheres ih tcoined

* bes. Coeftit. lapr..p. s ,.

chiey

chiefly to schools, and which present nothing to the peo- BooK vl.
pie that either strikes their imagination or affects h:ir senses,
they came to an accommodation about thcfe without '54'
much labour, and even defined the great article concern-
ing jutification to their mutual atisfaction. But, when
they proceeded to points of jurifdidion, where the inte-
reft and authority of the Roman See were concerned, or
the rites and forms of external worship, where every
change that could be made must be public, and draw the
observation of the people, there the Catholics were alto-
gether untracsable; nor could the church either with
safety or with honour abolish its ancient infRitutions. All
the articles relative to the power of the Pope, the autho-
rity of councils, the administration of the sacraments, the
,xorfhip of faints, and many other pa ticulars, did not in
their nature admit of any temperament; so that after la-
bouring long to bring about an accommodation with re-
fpea to these, the Emperor found all his endeavours in-
effectual. Being impatient, however, to close the diet, Recefsofthe
he at lafi prevailed on a majority of the members to ap- diet of ta-

t:fbon in f-

prove of the following recels; " That the articles con- vourof ge-
tained which the divines had agreed in the conference, neral coun-
hould be held as points decided, and be observed invio- cil.
lably by all; that the other articles about which they had July :s.
differed, hould be referred to the determination of a ge-
neral councils or if that could not be obtained, to a na-
tional fynod of Germany ; and if it hould prove imprac-
ticable, likewise, to assemble a fynod, that a general diet
of the Empire hould be called within eighteen months,
in order to give ome final judgment upon the whole con-
troverfy; that the Emperor hould use all his interef and
authority with the Pope, to procure the meeting either of
a general council or fynod; that, in the mean time, no
innovations Ihould be attempted, no endeavours should
be employed to gain proselytes; and neither the revenues
of the church, nor the rights of the monasteries, hould
be invaded *,"

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the rcefs c;ve of.

in which they terminated, gave great offence to the Pope. fenc" thto
'I he power which the Germans had aflumed of appointing Pt.ftn,,
their own divines to examine and determine matters of

kSledn, t167, At&. Pllv. 1. 4 c. . p 136. F. Pul, p 6. Sec-
k,. . iii. iS6.

oL. II.

co;ltroverry,
I

omc V. controversy, he confidered as a very dangerous invasion

on his rights; the renewing of their ancient proposal con-
'54' cerning a national fynod, which had been so often rejea.

ed by him and his predecessors, appeared extremely un-
dutiful; but the bare mention of allowing a diet, com.
pod chiefly of laymen, to pass judgment with refpe to
articles of faith, was deemed no less criminal and profane,
than the worst of those herefies which they seemed zealous
to suppress. On the other hand, the Proteflants were no
less diflitisfied with a recess, which considerably abridged

Charles the liberty which they enjoyed at that time. As they
ourtt the murmured loudly againfi it, Charles, unwilling to leave

any feods of discontent in the Empire, granted them a pri-
vate declaration, in the most ample terms, exempting
them from whatever they thought oppreifive or injurious
in the recess, and ascertaining to them the full pofieffion
of all the privileges which they had ever enjoyed *.

A.airs of EXTRAORDI NARY as thee concefiions may appear,
nasary. the situation of his affairs at this juncure made it necd-

fary for the Emperor to grant them. He foreaw a rup-
ture with France to be unavoidable, as well as near at
hand, and durst not give any such cause of diguft or fear
to the Protestants, as might force them, in felf-defence,
to court the protection of the French King, from whom,
at present, they were much alienated. The rapid pro-
grefs of the Turks in Hungary, was a more powerful and
present cause of the moderation which Charles discovered.
A great revolution had happened in that kingdom; John
Zapol Scatpus having chosen, as has been related, rather
to poffefh a tributary kingdom, than to renounce the royal
dignity to which he had been accustomed; had, by the
afliance of his mighty proteor Solyman, wrested from
Ferdinand a great part of the country, and left him only
the precarious poflefion of the reft. But being a prince
of pacific qualties, the frequent attempts of Perdinand,
or of his panians among the Hungarians, to recover what
they had loft, gave him great pain; and the neceliy, on
these oecafonr, of calling in the Turks, whom he confi-
dered and fek to be his rafers rather than auxiliaries,
were fecare fs mortif) ing. In order, therefore, to avoid
these dire , and to secure quiet and leisure to enjoy
the arts and amusements in whicl he delighted, he fc-

Iled. t3. Seckad. . Dwuoat Corp Diplom. iv.v.ii.p. so.

crctly

cretly came to an agreement with his competitor, on this Boo, VIL
condition; That Ferdinand hould acknowledge him as ~
King of Hungary, and leave him, during life, the un- A. S.435
molested poffeflion of that part of the kingdom now in his
power; but that, upon his demise, the sole right to the
whole hould devolve upon Ferdinand *. As John had
never been married, and was then far advanced in life,
the terms of the contra& seemed very favourable to Ser-
dinand. But, soon after, some of the Hungarian nobles,
folicious to prevent a foreigner from ascending their
throne, prevailed on John to put an end to a long celi-
bacy, by marrying Ifabclla, the daughter of Sigifmond,
King ot Poland. John had the fatisfa&ion, before his Death of
death, which happened within less than a year thereafter, the King of
to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom. To him, with- ungy.
out regarding-his treaty with Ferdinand, which he confi-
dered, no doibt, as void, upon an event not foreseen
when it was conduded he bequeathed his crown; ap-
pointing the Q~en and George Martinuzzi, bishop of
Waradin, guardian of his son; and regents of the king-
dom. Th greater.part of the Hungarians immediately
acknowledged.the young King, to whom, in memory of
the founder of their monarchy, they gave the name of
Stephen .

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by this Ferdinand's

unexpected event, refblved not to abandon the kingdom effort.toob.
which he had acquired by his compaC'with John. He t^ n
sent ambafsadr to the Queen to claim poifeiion, and
to offer the province of Transylvania as a settlement for
her feon preparing at the fame time to aflert his right by
force of arms. But John had committed the care of his
son to persons, who had too much spirit to give up the
crown tamely, and who posleed abilities sufficient to de-
fend it. The Queen, to all the addrecs peculiar to her
own s(ex added a masculine courage, ambition, and
magnanimity. Martinuzzi, who had raised himself from Charaer
the lowest rank in life to his present dignity, was one of nd powe
those extraordinary men, who, by the extent as well as nu.si
variety of their talents, are fitted to at a uperior part in
buafling and fa&ious times. In dikharging the funCtions
of his ccfi;.lical office, he put on the fenblance of an

Iflnunhai Hist. Hung. b. xii. p. 35.
t Jovii HUl. lib. ,.p. 39, L c .

humble

13x
I 2

Boog vI. humble arid austere sanity. He discovered, in civi

:y'' tranfationss industry, dexterity and boldness. During
54'' war he laid alide the cassock, and appeared on horseback

with his fcitnitar and buckler, as aive, as ostentatious,
and as gallant as any of his countrymen. Amidst all these
different and contraditory forms which be could assume,
an insatiable desire of dominion and authority was con-
fpicuous. From such persons it was obvious what aufwer
Ferdinand had to expet. He soon perceived that he muff
depend on arms alone for recovering Hungary. Having
levied for this purpose a considerable body of Germans,
whom his artizans among the Hungarians joined with
their vaflals, he ordered them to march into that part of
the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi,
unable to make head againfi such a powerful army in the
field, satisfied himself with holding out the towns, all of
which, especially Buda, the placeof greatest consequence,
he provided with every thing necessary for defence; and

:i! in the in the mean time he Tent ambassadors to Solyman, be-
Turk. feeching him to extend towards the son, the fame Impe-

rial protection which had o long maintainedthe father on
his throne. The Sultan, though Ferdinand used his ut-
molf endeavours to thwart this negotiation, .and even of-
sered to accept of the Hungarian crown on the fame ig-
nominious condition of paying tribute to the Ottoman
Porte, by which John had held it, hfw such profpeas of
advantage from eipoufing the interest of, the young King,
that lie instantly promised him his prote&io ; and:com-
manding one army to advance towards Hungary, he him-
self followed with another. Meanwhile.the Germans,
hoping to terminate the war by the reducaion of.a city in
which the King and his mother wercehut p, had form-
ed the siege of l3uda. Martnuzzi, -having drawn thither
rhe ttrength of the Hungauian nobility, deirnded the. tin
with such courage and itill, as allowed.the TurkiUh forcs
time to come up to its relief. They instantly. attacked the
Germans, weakened by fatigue, diseases and de~rtion,
and deteated them with great laughter *.

f .lyml,'c SOLYMAN soon after joined his vitorious troops, and
igCnrn," being weary of so many expensive expeditions undertaken

in defence of dominions which werenot.his own, or be-
ing unable to refill this alluring opportunity of seizing a

* Iduarl.hlb hill. HUagC lib. 4. p.'lr .

kingdo

kingdom, while poffefled by an infant, under the guar- Boo V.
dian/hip of a woman and a pried, he allowed interested --'--'
considerations to triumph with too much facility over the '54'
principles of honour and the fentimcnts of humanity.
What he planned ungeneroufl, he executed by fraud.
Having prevailed on the Queen to fend her son, whom he
pretended to be desirous of feeing, into his camp, and
having at the fame time invited the chief of the nobility to
an entertainment there, while they, fufpeing no treache-
ry, gave themselves up to the mirth and jollity of the
feafi, a fele& band of troops by the Sultan's orders seized
one of the gates of Buda. Being thus mailer of the ca-
pital, of the King's person and of the leading men among
the nobles, he ordered the Queen together with her son
to be conducted to Tranfilvania, which province he allot-
ted to them, and appointing a Bafha to reside in Buda
with a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary to the
Ottoman Empire. The tears and complaints of the un-
happy Queen had no influence to change his purpose, nor
could Martinuzzi either resist his absolute and uncontro-
hble command, or prevail on him to recall it *.

BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation reached Ferdinand';

Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to have dispatched new oveture, .
ambafiadors to Solyman with a fresh representation of his So!yrma'
right to the crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of
his former overture to hold the kingdom, of the Ottoman
Porte, and to pay for it an annual tribute. This ill-
timed proposal was rejeaed with scorn. The sultan elat-
ed with success, and thinking that he might prescribe what
termshe pleased to a prince who voluntarily proffered con-
ditions so unbecoming his own dignity, declared that
he would not suspend the operations of war, unless
Ferdinand instantly evacuated all the towns which he held
in.Hungary, and consented to the imposition of a tribute
upon Austria, in order to reimburse the fums, which
his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had obliged the
Ottoman Porte to expend in defence of that kingdom t.

SuCH was the slate of afflair in Hungary. As he

unfortunate events there had either happened before the
dilfolution of the diet at Ratibon, or were dreaded at that'
time, Charles saw the danger of irritating and inflaming
the minds of the Germans, while such a formidable one-'

*I;nlnhM ffbilf. Hang. lib. 14. p. S6. Jovii his, lib. 39. P 476, &c.
l IRahifi 1, 14. p. i 5.

1 3

my

' "~' that he could not expet any vigorous afliftance either to-

'54'' wards the recovery of Huigary or the defence of the Auf.

trian frontiers, unless he courted and satisfied the Protef.
tants. By the conceflions which have been mentioned,
he gained this point, and such liberal supplies both of
men and money were voted for carrying on the war a.
gainfi the Turks, as left him under little anxiety about
the security of Germany during the next campaign .

Emperor IMMI DIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, the
visits Italy. Emperor set out for Italy. As he pased through Lucca

he had a short interview with the Pope, but nothing could
be concluded concerning the proper method of compos.
ing the religious dilputes in Germany, between two Prin.
ces whose views and interest with regard to that matter
were at this junture so oppofire. The Pope's endeavours
to remove the causes ofdifcord between Charles and Fran-
cis, and to extinguish all those mutual animofities which
threatened to break out suddenly into open hofility, were
not more successful.

His expedi- THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, at that
tion againf time, on the great enterprize which he had concerted a-
Algiers, and gainfi Algiers, that he litened with little attention to the
iotive, o Pope's chemes or overtures, and hastened to join his ar-

my and fleet t.

ALGIERS fill continued in that slate ofdependance on

the Turkish empire to which Barbarofi had fuhjeAed
it. Ever since he, as captain Balha, commanded the
Ottoman fleet, Algiers had been governed by Hafcen-
Aga, a renegado eunuch, who by paling through every
ftarion in the Corsair's service, had acquired great experi-
ence in war, and was well fitted for a flation which requir-
ed a man of tried and daring courage. Hafcen, in order
to hew how well he deserved that dignity, carried on his
piratical depredations againfi the Christian States with a-
mazing aivity, and out-did, if poible, Barbaroi him-
seif in boldness and cruelty. The commerce of the Me-
diterranean was greatly interrupted by his cruiser, and
such 'frequent alarms given to the coalss of Spain, that
there was a neefity of erc ing watch-tower at proper
distances, and of keeping guards conflntly on fou, in or-
der to decry the approach of his fquadrom, i dt pro-

* Sloid. 8. S ido. iSo . to. .
ls

tea

THE REIGN OF THE
734

tea the inhabitants from their descents . Of this the .B.o vi-
Emperor's subje&s had long complained, representing it -*'
as an enterprise corresponding to his power, and becoin- ' 1'
ing his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which since the
conquest of Tunis, was the common receptacle of all
the free-booters; and to exterminate that lawless race,.
the implacable enemies of the Christian name. Moved
partly by their intreaties, and partly allured by the hope
of adding to the glory which he had acquired by his last
expedition into Africa, Charles before he left Madrid in
his way to the Low-Countries, had issued orders both in
Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this pur-
pose. No change in circumstances, since that time, could
divert him from this resolution, or prevail on him to turn
his arms towards Hungary; though the success of the
Turks in that country seemed more immediately to re-
quire his presence there; though many of his mol faith-
ful adherents in Germany urged that the defence of the
Empire ought to be his first and peculiar care; though
such as bore him no good will, ridiculed his preposterous
condut in flying from an enemy almost at hand, that he
might go in quest of a remote and more ignoble foe. But
to attack the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that
meaure might appear, was an undertaking which exceeded
his power, and was not confifent with his interelf. To
draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them into a
country so distant as Hungary, to provide the vafi appa-
ratus necessary for transporting thither the artillery, am-
munition and baggage of a regular army, and to push
the war in that quarter, where it could scarce be brought
to any issue during several campaigns, were undertakings
so extensive and Unwieldy as did not correspond with the
low condition of the Emperor's treasury. While his
principal frce was thus employed, his dominions in Ita-
ly and the Low-Countries must have lain open to the
French King, who would not have allowed such a fa-
vourable opportunity of attacking them to go unimprov-
ed. Whereas the African expedition, the preparations
for which were already finiled, and almolt the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, would depend upon a single effort,
and beide the fccurity and fatiaion which the fucefs
of it must give his subje&s, would detain him during so

* ovii hit. 1. 40. p. r66.

1 4

flort

BooK vi. hort a space, that Francis could scarce take advantage cf
9'--v - his absence, io invade his dominions in Europe.

154'. OC) all these accounts, Charles adhered to his firfl plan,
,ri.tio* and with such determined obstinacy, that he paid no re.

gard to the Pope who advised, or to Andrew Doria who
conjured him not to expose his whole armament to al-
meft unavoidable defirution, by venturing at such an ad-
vanced season of the year, and while the autumnal winds
were so violent, to approach the dangerous coast of Al-
giers. Having embarked on board Doria's gallies at Por-
to Venere in the Genoese territories, he soon found that
this experienced sailor had not judged wrong concerning
the element with which he was-fo well acquainted; fr
such a storm arose that it was with the utmost difficulty
and danger he reached Sardinia, the place of general ren-
dezvous. But as his courage was undaunted, and his
temperoften inflexible, neither the remonfirances of the
Pope and Doria, nor the danger to which he had already
been exposed by disregarding them, had any other effect
than to confirm him in his fatal resolution. The force, in.
deed, which he had colleced was such as might have infpir-
ed a Prince less adventurous, and less confident in his own
schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of success. It
confifed of twenty thousand toot and two thousand horse,
Spaniards, Italians and Germans, mostly veterans, toge-
ther with three thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spa-
nifh and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Em-
peror by attending him in this favourite expedition, and
eager to hare in the glory which they believed he was
going to reap; to these were added a thoufatd soldiers sent
from Malta by the order of St. John, led by an hundred
of its most gallant Knights.

Lar.d. in T' E voyage, from Majorca to the African coast, was
Africi. not less tedious, or full of hazard, than that which he had

just finilhed. When he approached the land, the roll of
the sea, and vehemence of the winds, would not permit
the troops to disembark. But at last, the Emperor seizing
a favourable opportunity, landed them without opposition,
not far from Algiers, and immediately advanced towards
the own. 'o oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had
only. eight hundred Turks, and five thousand Moors,
partly natives of Africa, anid partly refugees from Grana-
da. He returned, however, a fierce and haughty anfwcr
when ummoned to furrcndcr. 'But with such a handful
es soldiers, neither his dclperate courage, nor confummatc

skill

rhill in war could have long resifted forces superior to those BooK Vl.
vhich had defeated Barbarossa at the head of sixty thou- ' .
sand men, and had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his en- s54'.
deavours to save it.

BUT how far soever the Emperor might think himfelfThe diritl-

beyond the reach of any danger from the enemy, he was ers which
suddenly exposed to a more dreadful camity, and one befl hr
against which human prudence, and huiRn efforts avail-
ed nothing. On the second day after -his landing, and
before he had time for any thing but to disperse ome light
armed Arabs who molefled his troops on their march,
the clouds began to gather, and the heavens to appear
with a fierce and threatening afpe&. Towards evening
rain began to fall acccmpanied with violent wind, and
the rage of the tempeit increasing during the night, the
soldiers who had brought nothing ahore but their arms,
remained exposed to all its fury without tents, or shelter,
or cover of any kind. The ground was so wet that they
could not lie down on it; their camp being in a low situ-
ation was overflowed with water, and they funk at every
siep to the ankles in mud; while the wind blew with such
impetuosity, that to prevent their falling they were oblig-
ed to thrust their spears into the ground, and to support
themselves by taking hold of them. I-afcen was too vi-
gilant an officer to allow an enemy in such difrefs to re-
main unmolested. About the dawn of morning, he fal-
lied out with soldiers, who having been screened from
the florm under their own roofs, were fresh and vigorous.
A body of Italians who were flationed nearet the city,
dispirited and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach
of the Turks. The troops at the post behind them, dif-
covered greater courage, but as the rain had extinguihed
their matches and wet their powder, their muskets were
useless, and having carce trength to handle their other
arms, they were oon thrown into confusion. Almot
the whole army, with the Emperor himself in person,
was obliged to advance before the enemy could be repulf-
ed, who, after spreading such general confiernation, and
killing a considerable number of men, retired at last in
good order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and dahger md eet.

were quickly obliterated by a more dreadful as well a as-
seCing fpetacle. It was now broad day ; the hurrcane
had abated nothing of its violence, and the sea appeared
agitated with all the rage of which that deftrulive ele-

ment

Boox vi. nent is capable; all the (hips, on which alone the whole

L " army knew that their safety and subsistence depended,
54«' were seen driven from their anchors, some dahing againfi

each other, some beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced
ashore, and not a few finking in the waves. In less than
an hour, fifteen (hips of war, and an hundred and forty
ti'anfports with eight thousand men perifled ; and such of
the unhappy c4s, as escaped the fury of the sea, were
murdered, without mercy, by the Arabs, as oon as they
reached land. The Emperor flood in flent anguish and
afonifhment beholding this fatal event, which at once
blasted all his hopes of success, and buried in the depths
the vast fores which he had provided as well for annoy.
ing the enemy, as for fubifing his own troops. He had
it not in his power to afford them any other aflifance or
relief than by fending some troops to drive away the Arabs,
and thus delivering a few who were so fortunate as to get
aihore from the cruel fate which their companions had
pmet with. At lat the wind began to fall, and to give
some hopes that as many (hips might escape, as to flve
the army from peribhing by famine, and transport them
back to Europe. But these were only hopes; the ap-
proach of evening covered the fa with darkness; and it
being impollible for the officers aboard the hips that had
outlived the orm to fend any intelligence to their com-
panions who were ashore, they remained during the night
in all the anguith of fupenfe and uncertainty. Next day,
a boat dispatched by Doria made shift to reach land, with
information, that having weathered out the form, to
which, during fifty years knowledge of the ea, he had
never teen any equal in fierceness and horror, he had
found it necelry to bear away with his hattered ihips to
Cape Maafuz. He advised the Emperor, as the face of
t sky was fill lowering and tempetuous, to march with
a peed to that place, where the troops could reimbark
w ithreater as.

Obliged to WHATZVa comfort this intelligence afforded Charles,
retreot. (t n being alred that part of his fleet had escaped, was

balused by the new cares and perplexity in which it in-
volved him with regard to his army. Metafuz was at
- three days march from his present camp; all the

iruos which he had brought a(hore at his sirs landing

wa now consumed his oldiers, worn out with fatigue
_w farce able for such a journey, evn in a friendly
Country; nd being dispirited by a fuccoflion of hardlhips,

which

which victory itself would scarce have rendered tolerable, oox vI.
they were in no condition to undergo new toils. Butthe '-v-
fSiuation of the army was such, as allowed not one me- '54'
ment for deliberation, nor left it in the leift d:tfiu
what to choose. They were ordered instantly to mch,
the wounded, the sick and the feeble being placrd in tht:
centre ; such as seemed most vigorous were lationed itr
ihe front and rear. I hen the fad effe&s of what they
had suffered began to appear more manifestly than ever,
and new calamities were added to all the;c whcih they
had already endured. Some could scarce btar the weight
of their arms; others, pent with the toil of torcing their
way through deep and almost impassable roads, funk
down and died; many perfhed by amine, as the whole
army fubfifitd chiefly on roots and berries, or the flesh of
horses, killed by the Emperor's order, and difiributed a-
mong the several battalions; many were drowned mi brooks
which were fwoln so much by the excessive rains, that in
paling them they waded up to the chin; not a few were
killed by the enemy, who during the greatest part of their
retreat, alarmed, harassed and annoyed them night and
day. At last they arrived at Metafuz; and the weather
being now so calm as to restore their communication with
the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of provisions,
and cheered with the profpe& of safety.

DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the Empe- His orti

ror discovered great qualities, many of which an almost tude f
uninterrupted flow of prosperity had hitherto afforded him m"
no opportunity of dilplaying. He was conspicuous for
firmness and constancy of spirit, for magnanimity, forti-
tude, humanity and compaflion. He endured as great
hardlhips as the meanef loldier; he exposed his own per-
son wherever danger appeared; he encouraged the def-
ponding visited the lick and wounded; and animated
gll by his words and example. When the army embark-
ed, he was among the last who left the hore, although a
body of Arabs hovered at no great distance, ready tofall
on the rear. By there virtues, Charles atoned, in ome
degree, for his obstinacy and presumption in undertaking
an expedition so fatal to his fubjeas.

TH calamities which attended this unfortunate enter- Retarns to

prize did not end here; for no sooner were the forces got urop~.
On board, than a new florm arising, though less furious
than the former, scattered the fleet, and obliged them,
sparately, to make towards such ports in Spain or Italy

as

739

Boot VL as they could first reach; thus spreading the account o
'-'"' their disasters, with all the circumstances of aggravatiot

'541' and horror, which their fear or fancy fuggefled. Th,

Emperor himself, after escaping great dangers, and being
forced into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he wa'
Decemb. . obliged by contrary winds to remain several weeks, arriv.

ed at last in Spain, in a condition very different from thai
in which he had returned from his former expedition a.
gainft the Infidels *.

Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villignonem Equitera

Rhodium p. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovi; Hilt. . xl. p. 69.b. Vera y
Zuniga vida de Carlo* V. p. 83. andov. Hiltor. ii. 99o, &c.

T

# BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.

HE calamities which the Emperor suffered in his Boo Vti.
unfortunate enterprize againt Algiers were great; -

and the account of there, which augmented in proportion Ree 54^1'
as it spread at a greater distance from the scene of his dif- honilitiebbv
afters, encouraged Francis to begin hostilities, on which Francia.r.d
he had been for some time resolved. But he did not think his motivc
it prudent, to produce as the motives of this resolution, i- for
ther his ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the
Emperor's difingenuity in violating his repeated promises
with regard to the restitution of that country. The for-
mer might have been a good reason against concluding the
truce of Nice, but was none for breaking it i the latter
could not be urged without exposing his own credulity as
much as the emperor's want of integrity. A violent and
unwarrantable a&ion of one of, the imperial generals fur-
"ilhed him with a reason tojuftify his taking arms, which
was of greater weight than either of these, and (fch as
would have rouzed him, if he had been a desirous of
Peace, as he was eager for war. Francis, by signing the

treaty

Boor VII. treaty of truce at Nice, without consulting Solyman, ga,
^--v--' (as he foresaw) great offence to that haughty Monarli,
'54' who confidered an alliance with him as an honour i

which a Christian prince had cause to be proud. The
French King's friendly interview with the Emperoriln
Provence, followed by such extraordinary appearances i
union and confidence as accompanied Charles's reception
in France, induced the Sultan to fufpe& that the two rival,
bad at last forgotten their ancient enmity, in order that
they might form such a general confederacy against t;.e
Ottoman power, as had beeen long wihed forin Chrifien.
dom and often attempted in vain. Charles with his ufu.
al art, endeavoured to confirm and strengthen these us.
picions, by inflruting his emissaries at Constantinople as
well as in those courts with which Solyman held any intel.
ligence, to represent the concord between him and Francis
to be so entire, that their sentiments, views and pursuits,
would be the fame for the future *. It was not without
difficulty that Francis effaced these impreflions; but the
address of Rincon, the French ambanfador at the Porte,to.
gether with the manifest advantage of carrying on hostilities
against the house of Austria in concert with France, pre.
vailed at length on the Sultan to enter into a closer con-
junaion with Francis than ever. Rincon returned into
France, in order to communicate to his master a scheme
of the Sultan's for gaining the concurrence of the Vene.
tians in their operations against the common enemy. So
lyman having lately concluded * peace with the republic,
to which the mediation of Francis, and the good offices of
Rincon had greatlycontributed, thought it not impofli.
ble to allure the senate by such advantages as, together
with the example of the French Monarch, might overba-
lnce any kfruplea ariing either from decency or caution

The murder that coud operate on the other fide. Francis, warmly
of his mn-* pprig of thi measure, dispatched Rincon back to
aprexdotn s^i Contantnople, and directing him to go by Venice along
thi. with Fergof a Onoefe exile whom he appointed his am-

bdador to that republic, empowered them to negotiate
the matter with the Senate, to whom Solyman had sent
an envoy for the fame purpose f. The Marquis del Guaf-
to, govwmor of the Mdanes, an officer of great abili-

* i. de ibiw, m. L p: et.
t ift. V Ve. PwmhI iv. atS.

ties,

ties, but capable of attempting and executing the mol a- Boot vn.
tfocious a&ions, got intelligence of the motions and defti-
nation of these ambafladors. As he knew how much his L54'
mafler wilhed to discover the intentions of the French
King, and of what consequence it was to retard the exe-
cution of his measures, he employed some soldiers be-
longing to the garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon
and Fergofo as they failed down the Po, who murdered
them and moil of their attendants and seized their papers.
Upon receiving an account of this barbarous outrage,
committed, during the fubfirtence of truce, againt per-
sons held sacred by the mofi uncivilized nations, Francis's
grief for the unhappy fate of two servants whom he loved
and trusted, his uneasiness at the interruption of his
schemes by their death, and every other passion were
swallowed up and loft in the indignation which this insult
on the honour of his crown excited. He exclaimed loud-
ly againfl Guafto, who, having drawn upon himself all
the infamy of aflaination without making any discovery
of importance, as the ambafladors had left their inftruc-
tiors and other papers of consequence behind them, now
boldly denied his being accessary in any wife to the crime.
He ent an ambaflador to the Emperor to demand fuita-
ble reparation for an indignity, which no Prince, how
inconsiderable soever or pusillanimous, could tamely en-
dure: And when Charles, impatient at that time to set
out on hi African expedition, endeavoured to put him
off with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the courts
in Europe, setting forth the heinousness of the injury, the
spirit of moderation with which he had applied for re-
dreh, and the iniquity of the Emperor in disregarding this
just request.

NOTWITHSTADING the confidence with which Guaf-

to afierted his own innocence, the accusations of the
French gaind greater credit than all his protestations;
and Bellay, the French commander in Piedmont, pro-
cured, at length, by his industry and address, uch a mi-
nute detail of the tranfaions, with the testimony of so
Many of the partis concerned, as amounted almoR to a
legal proof of the mrquis's guilt. In consequence of this
Oinion of the public, confirmed by such rong evidence,
rancis's complaints were univerflly allowed to be well
founded, and the fleps he took towards renewing hoftili-
ties were ascribed not merely to ambition or resentment,

but

Boot Vll. but to the unavoidable neceflity of vindicating the honour
s"r *j of his crown *.

'54'. BUT how juR soever Francis might eteem his own

cause, he did not truRf so much to that, as to neglect the
proper precautions for gaining other allies besides the Sul-
tan, by whose aid he might counterbalance the Emperor's
superior power. But his negotiations to this effect were
attended with ver' little success. Henry VIII. more and
more bent upon schemes against cotland, which he knew
would at once dissolve his union with France, was incli-
nable rather to take part with the Emperor than to contri-
bute in any degree towards favouring the operations a.
gainft him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient
lyftem of neutrality. The Venetians, notwithstanding
Solyman's solicitations, imitated the Pope's example.
The Germans, satisfied with the religious liberty which
they enjoyed, found it more their interest to gratify than to
irritate the Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, who on this occasion were first drawn in to inte-
reft themselves in the quarrels of the more potent Mo-
narchs of the south, and the duke of Cleves, who had a
dispute with the Emperor about the possession of Gueldres,
were the only confederates Francis secured. But the do.
minions of the two former lay at such a distance, and the
power of the latter was so inconsiderable, that he gained
little by their alliance.

Franci,'. FRANCIS, however, supplied all defecs by his own
indulry in ativity. Being affli&ed at this time with a distemper,
fr ng the effea of his irregular pleasures, and which prevented

his pursuing them with the fame licentious indulgence, he
applied to buflnefs with more than his usual industry.
The fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary at-
tention to his affairs, rendered him morose and diflatisied
with the miniftcrs whom he had hitherto employed. This
accidental peevishness of temper being sharpened by re-
flecing on the faife steps into which he had lately been
betrayed, and the insults to which he had been exposed,
some of those in whom he had hitherto placed the greatest
confidence felt the effects of this change in his temper,
and were deprived of their offices. At lad he disgraced
Montmorency himself, who had long directed affairs as
well civil as military with all the authority of a minitler
no less beloved than trusted by his master; and Francis
* Bellay, 36,, &c. Jovii Hi*. lib. xl. sai.

being

being fond of hewing that the fall of such a powerful fa- Boo VII.
vourire did not asset the vigour or prudence of his ad- ---
minitrration, this was a new motive to redouble his dili- 1541.
gence in preparing to open the war by some splendid and
extraordinary effort.

FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field five ar- ,542

mies. One to a in Luxembourg under the Duke of He brings
Orleans, accompanied by the duke of Lorraine as his in- five armies

,nta the

ftru&or in the art of war. Another commanded by the tel'.
dauphin marched towards the frontiers of Spain. A third
led by Van Roffem the mar(hal of Guelders, and con-
posed chiefly of the troops of Cleves, had Brabant allotted
for the theatre of its operations. A fourth, of which the
duke of Vendome was general, hovered on the borders of
Slanders. The las, confifing of the forces cantoned in
Piedmont, was destined for the admiral Annibaut. The
dauphin and his brother were appointed to command
where the chief exertion was intended, and the greatest
honour to be reaped; the army of the former amounted
to forty thousand, that of the latter to thirty thou-
sand men. Nothing appears more furprizing than
that Francis did not pour with these numerous and
irrefiRfible armies into the Milanese, which had so long
been the objet of his withes as well as enterprizes, and
that he hould choose rather to turn almost his whole
strength into another direcion,'and towards new con-
quefls. But the remembrance of the difaflers which he
had met with in his former expeditions into Italy, together
with the difficulty of supporting a war carried on at such a
difiance from his own dominions, had gradually abated
his violent irclination to obtain footing in that country,
and made him willing to try the fortune of his arms in
another quarter. At the fame time he expected to make
such a powerful impreflion on the frontier of Spain, where
there were few towns of any ftrcngth, and no army as-
fembled to oppose him, as might enable him to recover
polfellfon of the county of Roufillon lately dismembered
from the French crown, before Charles could bring into
tle field any force able to obfiru6c his progress. The
neceeflty of supporting his ally the duke of Cleves, nd
tile hope of drawing a considerable body of soldiers out of
Germany by his means, determined him to a with
vigour in the Low-Countries.

THE dauphin and Duke of Orleans opened the cam- Jnne.

pailn much about the fame time, the former laying siege Their ope.
to rPipgnan the capital of Roufillon, and the latter enter- rt, ,n.*

VoL. II. K ing

Boos V. ing Luxembourg. The duke of Orleans pushed his ope-

v.c-D\ rations with the greatefl rapidity and success, one town
54Z' falling after another, until no place in that large dutclhy

remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville. Nor
could he have failed of over-running the adjacent pro.
vinces with the fame cafe, if he had not voluntarily flopt
lhort. in this career of victory. But a report prevailing
that the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle ill
order to save Perpignan, on a sudden, the Duke prompted
by youthful ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy of
his brother, whom he both envied and ated, abandoned
his own conquests, and hastened towards Roufillon in
order to divide with him the glory of the vicory.

ON his departure tome of his troops were disbanded,

others deserted their colours, and the reft, cantoned in
the towns which he had taken, remained inafive. By
this condul, which leaves a dishonourable imputation
either on his understanding or his heart, or on both, he
not only renounced whatever he could have hoped from
such a promising opening of the campaign, but gave the
enemy an opportunity of recovering, before the end of
summer, all the conquests which he had gained. On the
Spanish frontier, the Emperor was not so inconsiderate as
to venture on a battle, the loss of which might have en-
dangered his kingdom. Perpignan, though poorly forti-
sied, and briskly attacked, having been largely supplied
with ammunition and provisions by the vigilance of Do-
ria *, was defended so long and so vigorously by the duke
of Alva, the persevering obstinacy of whose temper fitted
himi admirably for such service, that at las the French,
after a siege of three months, wafted by diseases, repulsed
in several assaults, and derpairing of success, relinquished
the undertaking, and retired into their own countryt.
Thus all Francis's mighty preparations, either from some
defect in his own conduia, or from the uperior power and
prudence of his rival, produced no effecs that bore any
proportion to his expence and efforts, or such as gratified,
in any degree, his own hopes, or answered the expec-
tation of Europe. The only solid advantage of the cam-
paign was the acquifilion of a few towns in Piedmont,
wich Bellay gained rather by stratagem and address, than
by the force of his arms X.

Silonii Vita A. Doria, p. 1191. t Sandov. Hill. tom. ii. 315

1 Sandov.Hilt. ii. . e.
3 ally, 387, &c Fcrir. 9. 137.

MEANWHI LE

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though both RooK vy

considerably exhaufled by such- great but indecisive efforts,
discovering no batement of their mutual: annofimy, em- prtl-
ployed all their attention, tried every expedient, and turned on for ano-
themselves towards every quarter, in order to acquire new ther cam-
allies, together with such a reinforcement of firengtly as paig".
would give them the superiority in the ensuing campaign.
Charles, taking advantage of the terror and refentm ent
of the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of their
country, prevailed on the Cores of the everai kingdoms
to grant him subsidies with a more liberal hand tha. uual.
At the fame time, he borrowed a large fum from John,
King of Portugal, putting him in poffeflion by way of fe-
curity for his being epayed, of the Molucca iles in the
East Indies, with the gainful commerce of precious spices,
which that sequestered corer of the globe yields. Not
satisfied with this, he negotiated a marriage between
Philip his only son, now in his sixteenth ear, and Mary
daughter of that AMonarch with whom her father, the'
most opulent prince in Europe, gave a large dower; and
having likewise persuaded the Cortes of Arragon and Va-
lencia to recognize Phiip as the heir of these crowns, he
obtained from them the donative ufsa4 on such oceafionso*.
These extraordinary fuppies enabled him to make such
additions to his forces in Spain, that he could detach a
great body into the Low.Countries, and yet reserve as
many as were sufficient for the defence of the kingdom.
Having thus provided for the security of Spain, and corn- May.
mitted the government of it to his on, he failed for Italy,
in his way to Germany, But how atten-ive soever to
raise the funds for carrying on the war, or eager to grasp
at any new expedient tor that purpose, he was not so in-
considerate as to accept of the overture which Paul, know-
ing his neceflities, artfully threw out to him. That am-
bitious Pontiff, no less sagacious to discern, ttan wch-
ful to seize opportunities of aggrandizing his family, so-
licited him to grant Ocavio his grandclild, whom the
Emperor had admitted to the honour of being his fon-in-
law, the investiture of the dutchy of Milan, in return
for which he promised such a vaR fum of money as would
have gone far towards supplying his present exigencies,
But Charles, 9a well from unwallingnefk to alienae a pro-
vince of so much value as from difgult at the Pope, who

* Ferreria, . ij3, 141. Jovi Hist. lib. 41. 2B. 5.

K.

had

Boor Vll. had hitherto refused to join in the war againfi Francis
-- ' rejected the proposal. His diffatisfaaion with Paul at
'54}3 that junture was so great, that he even refued to approve

his alienating Parma and Placentia from the patrimony of
St. Peter, and fettling them on his own son and grandson
as a fief to be held of the Holy fee. As no other expe-
dient for raising money among the Italian dates remained,
he consented to withdraw the garrisons which he had hi.
therto kept in the citadels of Florence and Leghorn, in
consideration for which, he received a large present from
(ofmodi Medici, who by this means secured his own
independence, and got poieflion of two forts, which were
jufly called the fetters of Tuscany .

The Empe- BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned his
ror's no- whole attention towards raising the fums neceflary for de-
twhtiHnry fraying the expences of the year, had not been negligent
Vi. r of objeas more distant, though no less important, and

had concluded a league offensive and defensive with Hen-
ry VIII. from which he derived in the end, greater ad-
vantage than from all his other preparations. Several flight
circumstances, which have already been mentioned, had
begun to alienate the affceions of that Monarch from
Francis his present ally, and new incidents of greater
moment had occurred to increase his disgust and animosity.

H"nry' . Henry, desirous of eflablilhing an uniformity in religion
Urance and in Great Britain, as well as fond of making proselytes to
&otland. his own opinions, had formed a scheme of persuading

his nephew the King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's
supremacy, and to adopt the fame yftem of reformation
which he had introduced into England. This measure
he pursued with his uual eagerness and impetuosity, mak-
ing such advantageous overtures to James, whom he
conidered as not over scrupulously attached to any religi-
ous tenets, that he scarce doubted of fuccefi. Hlis propo-
fitions were accordingly received in such a manner that
he flatterred himfelfwith having gained his point. But
the Scottifl cccleGaftics, foreseeing the ruin of the
church to be the consequence of the King's union with
England and the partizans of France, no lesa convinced
(hat it would put an end to the influence of that crown
upon the publick councils of Scotland, combined toge-
iher, and by their insinuations defeated Henry's scheme

the very moment when he expeced it to have taken
lt& . Too haughty to brook such a disappointment,

* Adriani Inlria i. 195. Slid. 31 . Jovii Hit. lib. 43. . 301, Vita
d<: Col Medici di Bladini, p. 34

which

which he imputed as much to the arts of the French as to BooK VI1.
the levity of the Scottilh Monarch, he took arms against '- '
Scotland, threatening to subdue the kingdom, fincee e 543
could not gain the friendship of its King. At the fame
time, his resentment at Francis quickened his negotiations
with the Emperor, an alliance with whom he was now as
forward to accept as the other could be to offer it. Du-
ring this war with Scotland, and before the conclusion of
his negotiations with Charles, James V. died, leaving
his crown to Mary his only daughter,- an infant a few
days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once his
whole system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning
all thoughts of conquering it, aimed at what was more
advantageous as well as pracicable, an union with that
kingdom by a marriage between Edward his only on and
the young Queen. But here, too, he apprehended a
vigorous opposition from the French faction in Scotland,
which began to bestir itself in order to thwart the mea-
sure. The necessity of crushing this party among the
Scots, and of preventing Francis from furnishing them
with any effe&ual aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of
breaking with France, and pu/hed him on to put a finifsh
ing hand to the treaty of confederacy with the Em-
peror.

IN this league were contained first of all, articles for fe- February

curing their future amity and mutual defence; then were " Alli.
enumerated the demands which they were refpeaively to t.ee
make upon Francis; and the plan of their proceedings was Chals
fixed if he hould refuse to grant them fatisfadion. They ad Henry.
agreed to require, that Francis hould not only renounce
his alliance with Solyman, which had been the source of
infinite calamities to Christendom, but also that he hould
make reparation for the damages which that unnatural
union had occasioned; that he hould reitore Burgundy
to the Emperor; that he hould dofi( immediately from
hostilities, and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the corn.
mon enemy of the Chrifian faith; a! that he hould im-
mediately pay the fums due to Henry, or put some towns
in his hands security to that esea. If, within forty days,
he did not comply with there demands, they then engaged
to invade France each with twenty thousand foot apd five
thousand horfk, and not to lay down their arms until they
had recovered Burgundy, together with the towns on the
SomRe, for the Emperor, and Normandy and Guicnne,

K 3 or

Boo Vu. or even the whole realm of France for Henry . Their
'"^^"^ heralds, acoordingly, set out with these haughty requifiti-

e' ons; but not being permitted to enter France could not
perform their commilion, and the two Monarchs held
themselves fully entitled to execute whatever was flipulated
in their treaty.

Prancis's FRANCI on his part was no less diligent in preparing
hotiatihnS for the approaching campaign. Having early observed
man. the symptoms of Henry's difguR and alienation, and find-

ing all his endeavours to sooth and reconcile him ioeffec.
tual, he knew his temper too well not to expea that open
hoffilities would quickly follow upon this cefiation of
friend hip. For this reason he redoubled his endeavours
to obtain from olyman such aid as might counterbalance
the great accelion of Arength which the Emperor would
receive by his alliance with England. Il order to fppply
the place of histwo ambassadors murdered by Guafto, he
sent as his envoy first to Venice, and then to Conflanti.
nople, Paulin, a captain of sot, a man of a daring ac-
tive spirit, and on account of these qualities thought wor-
thy of this service, to which he was recommended by
Bellay, who had trained him to the arts of negotiation,
and made trial of his talents and address on several occa-
sions. Nor did he belie the opinion conceived of his cou.
rage and abilities. Hafeniag to Conflantinope, without
regarding the dangers to which he was expoid, he urged
his master's demands with such boldnef. and availed him-
self of every circumflance with such dexterity, that he
removed all the Sultan's own dificuatie. He silenced
likewise ome of the Balis, who either swayed by opini-
on, or having been gained by the Emperor, who em/f.
saries had made ther way even into that court, had de.
clared in the Divan againfA atg in oonert with Francet.
At las he obtained orders for Barbarde to il with a
powerful feet, and to regulate all his operatia by the
direations of the French King. Franci was not eqally
successful in his attempts to gain the prinoe of the Em-
pire. The extraordinary rigour with wichhe thoughtit
neceflry to punish such f his iubjeas a had embraced
the prot~ ant opinions, in order to give me notable evi.
dence of his own zeal for the Catholick faith, and to
wipe off the imputations to which he als libk from his

R m. xiv. 768. Herb. ti. t' hdov. Hlll. ton. ii. 346.
jovii illn. lib. 41. Z65, &c. 3o, &c. Bretomne.

confede-

confederacy with the Turks, placed an insuperable bar- Booz vI.
rier between -him and such of the Germans as interef and ' '
inclination would have prompted moit readily to join '543
himt. His chief advantage, however, over the Em-
peror, he derived on this, as on other occasions, from the
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the extent
of the royal authority in France, which exempted him
from all the delays and disappointments unavoidable
wherever popular assemblies provide for the expences of
government by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence
his domeftick preparations were always carried on with
vigour, and rapidity, while those of the Emperor, unless
when quickened by some foreign supply, or some tempo-
rary expedient, were to the last degree flow and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to oppose him, Operaton

Francis took the field in the Low-Countries, against i the Low-
which he turned the whole weight of the war. He made untr
himself mater of Landrecy, which he determined to keep
as the key to the whole province of Hainault; and order-
ed it to be fortified with great care. Turning from thence
to the right, lie entered the dutchy of Luxembourg, and
found it in the fame defenceless state as in the former
year. Meanwhile, the Emperor, having drawn toge-
ther an army composed of all the different nations fubje&
to his government, entered the territories of the Duke of
Cleves, on whom he had vowed to inflict exemplary ven-
geance. This prince, whofl condua and situation were
similar to that of Robert de la Mark in the first war be-
tween Charles and Francis, resembled him likewise in
his fate, Unable, with his feeble army, to face the Em-
perot, who advanced at the head of forty-four thousand
men, he retired at his approach, and the Imperialists be-
ing at liberty to a& as they pleated, immediately inveRed
Duren. That town, though gallantly defended, was The Empe-
won by afiilt, all the inhabitants put to the sword, and ror becomes
the place itself reduced to ashes. This dreadful example m,, of,
of severity struck the people of the country with such ge- of cieve,.
neral terror, that all the other towns, even such as were August 4.
capable of refitance, lent their keys to the Emperor;
and before a body of French detached to his aiftance
could come up, the duke himself was obliged to make his
fubmifrion to Charles in the most abjea manner. Being
admitted into the Imperial presence, he kneeled together

' Seek. lib. ii. 403.

K 4 with

r51

BooK V. with eight of his principal fubjets, and implored mercy.
'-'~*' The Emperor allowed him to remain in that ignominious

543' posture, and eying him with an haughty and implacable

look, without deigning to answer a single word, remitted
him to his ministers. The conditions, however, which
they prescribed were not so rigorous as he had reason to

S6cten- have expeEed after such a reception. He was obliged to
,bc 7. renounce his alliance with France and Denmark; to re-

sign all his pretensions to the dutchy of Gueldres; to en-
ter into perpetual amity with the Emperor and King of
the Romans. In return for which all his hereditary do-
minions were reflored, except two towns which the Em-
peror kept as pledges of his fidelity during the continu-
ance of the war, and he was re-inflated in his privileges
as a prince of the Empire. Not long after Charles, as a
proof of the sincerity of his reconcilement, gave him in
marriage one of the daughters of his brother Ferdinand .

BefGegs HAVING thus chastised the presumption of the Duke
Landccy. of Cleves, detached one of his allies from Francis, and

added to his dominions in the Low-Countries a confide-
ral;le province which lay contiguous to them, Charles ad-
vanced towards Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy.
There, as the first fruits of his alliance with Henry, he
was joined by fix thousand English under Sir John Wal-
lop. The garrison, confifing of veteran troops com-
manded by de la Lande and Defle, two officers of repu-
tation, made a vigorous refitance. Franeis approached
with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles covered
the siege; both were determined to hazard an engage.
ment; and all Europe expeaed to fee this contest, which
had continued so long, decided at lad by a battle between
two great armies led by them in person. But the ground
which separated their two camps was such, as put the
disadvantage manifefily on his fide who hould venture to
attack, and neither of them chose to run that rifque:
amidf a variety of movements, in order to draw the ene-
my into this snare, or to avoid it thenmelves, Francis,
with admirable conduce, and equal good fortune, threw
first a supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of pro-
visions into the town, so that the Emperor despairing of
fucccfs, withdrew into winter quarters t in order to pre-
serve his army from being entirely ruined by the rigour
of the season.

* Harr;. Annal. Brabant, t. I. 66. Rcueil dneTrite, (, ii. t16.
' M:x!,v,, 40o, &c.

;\E .A N-

MEANWHILE, Solyman fulfilled his engagements to BooVII.

the French King with great puncuality. He himself '
marched into Hungary with a numerous army, and as the No;4mber.
princes of the Empire made no great effort to save a coun- Solyman in-
try which Charles, by employing his whole force against vades H40-
Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was no appear- gary
ance of any body of troops to oppose his progress. He
besieged one after another, Quinque Ecclefiae, Alba and
Gran, the three moRs considerable towns in the kingdom,
of which Ferdinand kept pofflefion. The firfi was taken
by storm, the other two surrendered and the whole
kingdom, a small corner excepted, was fubjeaed to the Brbroffi's
Turkih yokee. About the fame time, Barbarofa failed descent on
with a fleet of an hundred and ten gallies, and coafing Itly.
along the hore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio
which he plundered and burnt; and advancing from
thence to the moutl of the Tiber he ftopt there to water.
The citizens of Rome, ignorant of his destination, and
filled with terror, began to fly with such general precipita-
tion, that the city would have been left deserted, if they
had not resumed courage upon letters from Polin the
French Envoy, assuring them that no violence or injury
would be offered by the Turks to any fate in alliance
with the King his master t. From Ostia Barbarofli fail-
ed to Marseilles, and being joined by the French fleet
with a body of land forces on board under the count
d'Enguien, a gallant young prince of the house of Bour-
bon, they direted their course towards Nice, the sole re-
treat of the unfortunate duke of Savoy. There to the afto- .
nliment and scandal of allChriftendom,the Lilies of France Asu ~o
and Crfccent of Mahomet appeared in conjunction againf
the fortress on which theCrof of Savoy was displayed. The
town, however, was bravely defended aainf their com-
bined force by lontfort a Savoyard gentean, who food
a general afault, and repulsed the enemy with great loft,
before he retired into the cafle. That fort ituated upon
a rock, on which the artillery made no impression, and
which could not be undermined, he held out so long, that
Doria had time to approach with his fleet, and the mar-
quis del Guafto to march with a body of troops from Mi-
lan. Upon intelligence of this, the French and Turks scpm.

ber *.

lnuanhafi, Hifor. HunR. I. 1. 167.
t Jcvii Hl. . 4. 304 &c. I'tllavic. ee.

raised

BooK VII. railed the liege *: and Francis had not even the conrola.
- -' tion of fuccels to render the infamy, which he drew on
t'54' himself by calling in such an auxiliary, more tolera.

ble.

Prreparti- FROM the small progress of either party during this
ona for campaign, it was obvious to what a length the war might
netw cam- be drawn out between two princes, whose power was o
pa''n equally balanced, and who by their own talents or activi-

ty could so vary and multiply their resources. The trial
they had now made of each others strength might have
taught them the imprudence of persisting in a war, where-
in there was greater appearance of their distressing their
own dominions than of conquering those of their adverfa-
ry, and hould have disposed both to wish for peace. If
Charles and Francis had been influenced by confiderati.
ons of interest or prudence alone, this, without doubt,
nut have been the manner in which they would have
reasoned, but the personal animosity, which mingled it-
self in all their quarrels, had grown to be so violent and
implacable, that for the pleasure of gratifying it, they dif-
regarded every thing ele; and were infinitely more solicit-
ous how to hurt their enemy, than how to secure what
would be of advantage to themdelves. No sooner then
did the fecao force them to suspend hotilities, than,
without paying any attention to the Pope's repeated en-
deavours or paternal exhortations to re-eftablih peace,
they began to provide for the operations of the next year
with new vigour, and an aivity increasing with their ha
tred. Charles turned his chief attention towards gaining
the princes of the Empire, and endeavouring to roue
the tormidable but unweildy strength of the Germanick

Aff;rs of body againf Francis. In order to underfand the propriety
Cermany. of the fReps which he took for that purpose, it is necefia-

ry to review the chief tranfa&ions in that country since
the diet of Ratilbon in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty one.

Mmrice or MuCH about the time that assembly broke up, Mau-
Saxony (uc.rice succeeded his father Henry in the government of that
ed' h" f part of Saxony which belonged to the Albertine branch

ofthe Saxon family. This young prince, then only in his
twentieth year, had, even at that early period, begun to
discover the great talents which qualified him for aing
such a difinguithed part in the affairs of Germany. As
9 Guihenon hidoire de Savoyet. . p. 6a. Ik#lAY, 415, &C.

loon as he entered upon the administration he struck out BooK vI.
into such a new and singular path, as shewed that he '
aimed, from the beginning, at something great and un- '543'
common. Though zealously attached to the Protestant The iews
opinions both from education and principle, he refused and condua
to accede to the league of Smalkalde, being determined, f this
as he said, to maintain the purity of religion which was Priace.
the original objec of that confederacy, but not to en-
tangle himself in the political interests or combinations to
which it had given rife. At the fame time, foreseeing a
rupture between Charles and the confederates of Smal-
kalde, and perceiving which of them was most likely to
prevail in the contest, instead of that jealousy and distrust
which the other Protestants expressed of all the Empe-
ror's designs, he affe&ed to place in him an unbounded
confidence; and courted his favour with the utmost ai-
duity. When the other protestants, in the year fif.een
hundred and forty two, either declined aflifting Ferdi-
nand in Hungary, or afforded hm reluctant and ieeble
aid, Murice marched thither in person, and rendered
himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage. From the
fame motive he had led to the Emperor's aflillance, dur-
ing the former campaign a body of his own troops; and
the gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in all military
exercises, together with his intrepidity which courted and
delighted in dangers, did not distinguish him more in the
field, than his great abilities and insinuating address won
upon the Emperor's confidence and favour . While by
this condut, which appeared extraordinary to those who
held the fame opinions with him concerning religion,
Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the Emperor, he
began to discover some degree of jealousy of his cousin
the Elecor of Saxony. This, which proved in the fe-
quel so fatal to the Elecor, had almost occasioned an open
rupture between them; and loon after Maurice's accellion
to the government, they both took arms with equal rage,
upon account of a dispute about the right of jurifdiaion
over a paltry town situated on the Moldaw. They were
prevented, however, from coming to blows by the medi-
ation of the Landgrave of Hesse, whose daughter Mau-
rice had married, as well as by tie powerful and authori-
tative admonitions of Luther .

* Sld id3. 3 eck. 1. iii. 371, 36, 48.
t Slcid. lk. I.ck. iii. 43.

MEAN-

BooK VII. MEANWHILE the Pope, though extremely irritated at
%''--' the Emperor's conceflions to the Protestants in the diet of

'The3p Ratisbon, was so warmly olicited on all hands, by such

rropoes to as were moR devoutly attached to the fee of Rome, no
old gene. sis than by those whose fidelity or designs he fufpe&ed,
rn! council
at Trent. to summon a general council, that he found it impoffibic

to avoid any longer calling that afflmbly. The impati-
ence for its meeting, and the expectations of great effeas
from its decisions, seemed to grow in proportion to the
difficulty of obtaining it. He fill adhered, however, to
his original resolution of holding it in some town of Italy,
where, by the number of ecclefiafiicks, retainers to his
court, and depending on his favour, who could repair to
it without difficulty or expence, he might influence and
even direa all its proceedings. This proposition, though
often rejected by the Germans, he infruAed his nuncio
Macb 3. to the diet held at Spires, in the year one thousand five

hundred and forty two, to renew once more and if he
found it gave no greater fatisfaion than formerly, he em-
powered him, as a aft conceflion, to propose for the place
of meeting, Trent, a city in the Tyrol, fubje& to the
King of the Romans, and situated on the confines between
Germany and Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet,
after giving it as their opinion that the council might have
been held with greater advantage in Ratiibon, Cologne,
or some of the great cities in the Empire, approved of the
place which the Pope had named. The Protefiants una-
nimoufly expressed their diflatisfa&ion, declaring that they
would pay no regard to a council held without the pre-
/ cin&s ot the Empire, called by the Pope's authority, and

in which he assumed the right of presiding .

MAy Tt. THE Pope, without taking any notice of their objeAi-

'S4 - ons, publilhed the bull of intimation, named three cardi-
t" 't nals to preside as his legates, and appointed them to repair

to Trent before the first of November, the day he had
fixed for opening the council. But if Paul had desired
the meeting of a council as sincerely as he pretended, he
would not have pitched on such an improper time for call-
ing it. Inflead of that general union and tranquillity,
without which the deliberations of a council could neither
be conduded with security, nor attended with authority,
such a fierce war was ju(t kindled between the Emperor
and Francis, as rendered it impolible for the ecclefialticks

Sle;d,
S . Feck. I* ;;i asj.

from

from many parts of Europe to resort thither in safety. "BOOVI
'The legates, accordingly, remained several months at .43.
Trent without any persons appearing, except a few pre-
lates from the ecclesiastical fate; upon which the Pope, Obliged to
in order to avoid the ridicule and contempt which this proroLe it.
drew upon him from the enemies of the church, recalled
them and prorogued the council *.

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the Papal fee, at the The e-pe-

very time that the German Protestants took every occasion thre rot,"s
of pouring contempt upon it, the Emperor and King of tat,.
the Romans found it neceflary not only t connive at their
conduct, but to court their favour by repeated acts of in-
dulgence. In the fame diet of Spires, wherein they had
protested in the mofR difrefpe&ful terms against aflembling
a council at Trent, Ferdinand who depended on their aid
for the defence of Hungary, not only permitted that pro-
teftation to be inserted in the records of the diet, but re-
newed in their favour all the Emperor's concessions at Ra-
tilbon, adding to them whatever they could demand for
their farther security. Among other particulars, he grant-
ed a suspension of a decree of the Imperial chamber against
the city of Goflar, one of those which had entered into
the league of Smalkalde, on account of its having seized
the ecclesiastical revenues within its domains, and enjoin-
ed Henry duke of Brunswick to defif from his attempts to
carry that decree into execution. But Henry, a furious
bigot, and no less obstinate than rath in all his undertak-
ings, continuing to disquiet the people of Goflar by his
incurions, the EleCor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, Their vigo-
that they might not susser any member of the Smalkaldick tro, pro
body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, declared war
in form against Henry, and in the space of a few weeks
fiript him intirely of his dominions, and drove him as a
wretched exile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this a of vengeance, no left evere than fuddcn, they
filled all Germany with dread of their power, and the
confederates of Smalkalde appeared, by this first effort of
their arms, to be as prompt as capable to protect those
who had joined their aociation t.

EMBOLDEN ED by so many conccffions in their favour,
as well as by the progress which their opinions daily made,

F. Pal p. 9. leid. l96.
t Sleid s9. Comrmmoilato ucclnag caurtrum Belli, &c. Sm·lc.-
dici, contr Hear. Bunl'w. b iildem dita i p. rScrdium. Tom. ii. 307.

the

Boor vii. the princes of the league of Smalkalde took a solemn pro-
'---~ test agninft the Imperial chamber, and declined its jurif-

1543. diction for the future, because that court had not been vi-

fired or reformed according to the decree of Ratiffon, and
continued to discover a mod indecent partiality in all its
proceedings. Not long after this, they ventured a ftep
farther, and protefRing against the recess of a diet held at
April 23. Nuremberg, which provided for the defence of Hungary,

'543. refused to furnish their contingent for that purpose, unless

the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full security
granted them in every point with regard to religion *.

Diet at SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants had
SpireL proceeded, and such their confidence in their own power,
1544 when the Emperor returned from the Low-Countries, to

hold a diet which he had summoned to meet at Spires.
The refpe& due to the Emperor, as well as the impor-
tance of the affairs which were to be laid before it, ren-
dered this aflembly extremely full. All the Eleaors, a
great number of princes ecclefiafieal and secular, with
the deputies of mot of the cities were present. Charles
soon perceived that this was not a time to offend the jea-
lous spirit of the Protestants, by asserting in any high tone
the authority and dotrines of the church, or by abridg-
ing in the smallest article, the liberty which they now en-
joyed; but that, on the contrary, if he expeaed any sup-
port from them, or wilhed to preserve Germany from in-
teftine disorders while he was engaged in a foreign war,
he mull ooth them by new conceflions, and a more am-
ple extension of their religions privileges. He began, ac-
cordingly, with courting the Ele&or of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hefle, the heads of the Protestant party, and by
giving up some things in their favour, and granting libe-
ral promires with regard to others, he secured himflf

The Frmpe- from any danger of opposition on their part. Having as-
'ro fo'icit certained this capital point, he then ventured to address
gainit the diet with greater freedom. He began by representing
France. his own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to two

things most ceIntial to Chrilendom, the procuring of a
general council in order to compose the religious difenfi-
ons which had unhappily arisen in Germany, and the pro-
viding ome proper means for checking 'the formidable
progress of the Turkiih arms. But that his pious endea-
vous had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable ambi-

li* e . j S4,
37. k. L i ii.44, 4 6.

tion

tion of the French King, who having wantonly kindled Boo1 Vl.
the flame of war in Europe, which had been so lately ex. 4.a
tinguifhed by the truce of Nice, rendered it impoflble AS4
for the fathers of the church to assemble in council, or to
deliberate with security; and obliged him to employ those
forces in his own defence, which with greater fatisfation
to himrelf, as well as more honour to Chriflendom, he
would have turned againf the Infidels. That Francis not
thinking it enough to have called him off from opposing
the Infidels, had, with unexampled impiety, invited
them into the heart of Christendom, and joining his arms
to theirs, had openly attacked the Duke of Savoy a mem-
ber of the Empire. That Barbarossa's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the return of
spring to carry terror and desolation to the coast of ome
Christian slate. 1 hat in such a situation it was folly to
think of distant expeditions against the Turk, or of march-
ing to oppose his armies in Hungary, while such a power-
ful ally received him into the centre of Europe, and gave
him footing there. That prudence ditated to oppose,
first of all, the nearest and most imminent danger, and by
humbling the power of France, to deprive Solyman of
the advantages, which he derived from the unnatural
confederacy formed between him and a Monarch, who
fill arrogated the name of Most Christian. That, in
truth, a war against the French King and the Sultan
ought to be confidered as the fame thing; and that every
advantage gained over the former, was a revere and fenfi-
ble blow to the latter. That, therefore, he now de-
manded their aid against Francis, not merely as an ene-
my of the Germanick body, or of him who was its head,
but as an avowed ally of the Infidels, and a public enemy
to the Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent invecive

of the Emperor, the King of the Romans flood up,
and related the rapid conquests of the Sultan in Hungary,
occasioned, as he said, by the fatal neceflity imposed on
his brother of employing his arms againfi France; and
the ambassadors of Savoy gave a detail of Barbarofla's
operations at Nice, and of the ravages which he had com-
mitted on that coast. All these, added to the general in-
dignation which Francis's unprecedented union with the
Turks excited in Europe, made such an impreflion on
the diet as the Emperor wificd, and disposed most of the
members to grant him fuc effitlual aid as he had de-

manded.

Boot Vl. manded. The ambafladors Francis had sent to explain
'-v^ the motives of his conduS, were not permitted to enter

'544- the bounds of the Empire; and the apology which they

published for their master, vindicating his alliance with
Solyman, by examples drawn from scripture, and the
pracice of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already, or prejudiced against him to such a de-
gree, as to be incapable of allowing their proper weight
to any arguments in his behalf.

His vl SucH being the favourable disposition of the Germans,
concessions Charles perceived that nothing could now obftru& his
in order to
,indthe 0 gaining all that he aimed at, but the fears and jealousies

ePoteftnts. of the Proteflants, which he determined to quiet by

granting every thing, that the utmost olicitude of these
paRlions could desire for the security of their religion.
With this view, he contented to a recess, whereby all
the rigorous edias hitherto issued against the Protestants
were Ifipended; a council either general or national to be
aflcmbled in Germany was declared necessary in order to
re-efablifh peace in the church; until one of there hould
be held, (which the Emperor undertook to bring about
as soon as posSible) the free and public exercise of the Pro-
teRfant religion was authorized; the Imperial chamber
was to give no molestation to the Protestants; and when
the term, for which the present judges in that court were
eleced, hould expire, persons duly qualified were then
to be admitted as members, without any diftin&ion on

And granted account of religion. In return for there extraordinary
by the diet. acts of indulgence, the Protestants concurred, with the

other members of the diet, in declaring war againt Fran-
cis in the name of the Empire; in voting the Emperor
a body of twenty-four thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, to be maintained at the public expence for ix
months, and to be employed against France; and at the
fame time the diet imposed a poll-tax tobe levied through-
out all Germany on every person without exception, tor
the fuppon of the war against the Turks.

Charles's CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention to
negotiatios the minute and intricate detail of particulars neceflary to-
with Den-
m.rk and wards conducting the deliberations of a numerous and
England. divided assembly to such a successful period, negotiated a

separate peace with the King of Denmark, who, though
he had hitherto performed nothing considerable in confe-
quence of his alliance with Francis, had it in his power,
however, to make a formidable diversion in favour of

that

that monarch *. At the fame time, he did not negle6 BooI Vii.
proper applications to the King of England, in order to ---
rouze him to more vigorous efforts against their common 44
enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this;
for such events had happened in Scotland as inflamed
Henry to the most violent pitch of rerentment againf
Francis. Having concluded with the parliament of Scot-
land a treaty of marriage between his son and their young
Queen, by which he reckoned himself fccure of effecting
the union of the two kingdoms, which had been long
desired, and often attempted without success by his prede-
ceffors, Mary of Guise the Queen mother, cardinal Bea-
toun, and other partizans or France, found means not
only to break off the match, but to alienate the Scottish
nation entirely from the friendship of England, and to
firengthen its ancient attachment to France. Henry,
however, did not abandon an obje& of so much impor-
tance. As the humbling of Francis, besides the plea-
sure of taking revenge upon an enemy who had difap-
pointed a favourite measure, appeared the moll effe&ual
method of bringing the Scots to accept once more of the
treaty which they had rejeced, he was so fond of this
scheme, that he was ready to second whatever the Em-
peror could propose to be attempted against that monarch.
The plan, accordingly, which they concerted, was such
as, if it had been punaually executed, muRf have ruined
France in the first place, and would have augmented so
prodigiouly the Emperor's power and territories, as might
in the end have proved fatal to the liberties of Europe.
They agreed to invade France each with an army of
twenty.five thousand men, and, without losing time in
besieging the frontier towns, to advance direaly towards
the interior provinces, and to join their forces near
Paris t.

MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in opposition to all The French

the enemies that Charles was mustering againi him. So- take he
lyman was the only ally who had not deserted him; but n nt.
the afliflance he received from him had rendered him o
odious to all Christendom, that he resolved rather to
forego all the advantages of his friendlhip, than to be-
Come, on that account, the objea of general horror and
detestation. For this reason, he difmilld Barbarofia as

*Dumoat CorpsDiplo. t. iv. p. ii. p. 174.
t Hrlert . Bell , 448.
VoL. I1.

1.

soon

BooK VII. oon as winter was over, who after ravaging the coast
~'--y- of Naples and Tuscany, returned to Constantinople. As

'544 Francis could not hope to equal the forces of his rival,

he endeavoured to supply that defet by dispatch, which
was more in his power, and to get the start of him ,

Tnvent ca- taking the field. Early in the spring the count d'En.
rignan. guien invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont, which tile

marquis de Guato the Imperial general having furprized
the former year confidered as of so much importance, that
he had fortified it at great expence. The count pushed
the siege with such vigour, that Guafo, fond of his own
conquest, and feeing no other way of saving it from falling
into the hands of the French, resolved to hazard a battle

Tle Impe- in order to relieve it. He began his mar<h from Milan
iallhto re for this purpose, and as he was at no pains to conceal his
ive it. intention, it was soon known in the French camp. En-

guien, a gallant and enterprizing young man, wished pas-
iionately to try the fortune of a battle; his troops desired
it with no lcfs ardour; but the peremptory injunaion of
the King not to venture a general engagement, flowing
from a prudent attention to the present situation of affairs,
as well as from the remembrance of former disasters, tied
up his hands, Unwilling, however, to abandon Carig-
nan, when it was jus ready to yield, and eager to diftin-
guifh his command by some memorable aaion, be dif-
patched Monluc to court in order to lay before the King
the advantages of fighting the enemy, and the hopes
which he had of vicory. The King referred the mat-
ter to the council; all the ministers declared, one after
another, againf fighting, and supported their sentiments
by reasons extremely plausible. While theywere deliver-
ing their opinions, Monluc, who was permitted to be
present, discovered such visible and extravagant symptoms
of impatience to speak, as well as such diffatisfaaion
with what he heard, that Francis, diverted with his ap-
pearance, called on him to declare what he could offer in
reply to sentiments which seemed to be as just as they
were general. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but spirited
soldier, and of known courage, represented the good con-
dition of the troops, their eagerness to meet the enemy in
the field, their confidence in their officers, together with
the everlasting infamy which the declining of battle
would bring on the French arms; and urged his argu-
ments with such lively impetuolity, and such a flow of
military eloquence, as gained over to his opinion, not
only the King, naturally, fond of daring aiona, but fe

vcral

veral of the council. Francis catching the fame enthuli- Boat VI.
afm which had animated his troops, suddenly flarted up,
and having lifted his hands to heaven, and implored the '54
divine protecion and aid, he then addressed himself to
Monluc, "Go, fays he, return to Piedmont, and fight
in the name of God * "

No sooner was it known that the King had given En- Battle of

guien leave to fight the Imperialists, than such was the Cerifols,.
martial ardour of the gallant and high spirited gentlemen
of that age, that the court was quite defeted, every pet-
son desirous of reputation, or capable of service, hrrying
to Piedmont in order to hare, as volunteers, in the dan-
ger and glory of the ation. Encouraged by thearrival
of so many brave officers, Enguien immediately prepared
for battle, nor did Guafto decline the combat. The num-
ber of cavalry was almost equal, but the imperial infan-
try exceeded the French by at leaf ten thousand men.
They met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which as- April 1.
forded to neither any advantage of ground, and both had
full time to form their army in proper order. The shock
was such as might have been expeced between veteran
troops, violent and obstinate. The French cavalryrun-
ning to the charge with theit ufuat vivacity bore down
every thing that opposed them, but on the other hand,
the steady and disciplined veor of the Spanish infantry
having forced the body which they encountered to give
way, viaory remained in suspense, ready to declare for
which ever general could make the best use of that criti-
cal moment. Guafo, engaged in that part of his army
which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling in-
to the hands of the French whos vengeance he dreaded
on account of the murder of Rincon and Fregob, iof his
pretence of mind, and forgot to order a large body of re-
serve to advance wherea Enguien, with admirable cou-
rage and equal condua, supported, at the head of his
gens d'armes, such of his balions as began to yield;
and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss in his service,
who had been victorious wherever they ught, to fall
upon the Spaniards. This Motion proved deciive. All
that followed was confusion and Iaughter. The mar-
quit de Guafo wounded in the thigh, escaped erly by
the swiftness of his horse. The vi&ory of the French
was complete, ten thousand of the Imperialits being lain,

Memoirel do Monluc.

L 2

and

Boo V11. and a considerable number, with all their tents, baggaFe
-- -- and artillery, taken. On the part of the conquerors

'544' their joy was without allay, a few only being killed, and

among there no officer of diftinaion *.
EfLcs ofi'. THIS splendid aion, besides the reputation with which

it was attended, delivered France from an imminent dan.
ger, as it ruined the army with which Guafto had intended to
invade the country between the Rhofne and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op-
pose his progress. But it was not in Francis's power to
pursue the victory with such vigour as to reap the advan.
tages which it might have yielded; for tho' the Milanese
remained now alnoft defenceless; though the inhabitants,
who had long murmured under the rigour of the Impe.
rial government, were ready to throw off the yoke ; though
Enguien, flushed with success, urged the King to seize
this happy opportunity of recovering a country, the ac-
quifition of which had been long his favourite object;
yet as the Emperor and King of England were preparing
to break in upon the opposite frontier of France with such
superior force, it became necefary to sacrifice all thoughts
of conquest to the publick safety, and to recall twelve thou-
sand of Enguien's belt troops to be employed in defence
of the kingdom. Enguien's subsequent operations were,
of consequence, so languid and inconsiderable, that the
reduction of Carignan and f me other towns in Piedmont,
was all he gained by his great viaory at Cerifoles .

'i H E Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the field;

ipth now- but he appeared, towards the beginning of June, at the
Countric. head of an army more numerous, and better appointed

than any which he had hitherto led against; France. It
amounted almost to fifty thousand men, and part of it
having reduced Luxembourg and some other towns in the
Netherlands, before he himself joined it, he now march-
ed with the whole towards the frontiers of Champagne.
J:l!c. Charles, according to his agreement with the Kingof

England, ought to have advanced diretly towards Paris;
and the dauphin, who commanded the only army to
which Francis trusted for the security of his dominions,
was in no condition to oppose him. But the success with
which the French had defended Provence in the year one
tliouand five hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them

* BUUy, 419, &c. Mcmoiret de Monluc. Jovii hifi. 1. 44 p. 317. 6.
t BellI), 431, &c.ti

tillc

,he most effe&ual method of diftreling an invading ene- BooK Vll.
my. Champagne, a country abounding more in vines 4.
than corn, was incapable of maintaining a great army, 44
and before the Emperor's approach, whatever could be
of any use to him had been carried off or destroyed.
This rendered it necessary for him to be mailer of foirme
places of itrength, in order to secure the convoys on which
alone he now perceived that he must depend for fubfit-
ence; and he found the frontier towns so ill provided for
defence, that he hoped it would not be awork either of
much time or difficulty to reduce them. Accordingly
Ligny and Commercy, which he firi attacked, surrender-
ed after a hort refitance. He then inveRted St. Difier, The Emp-
which, though it commanded an important pass on the rorinveth
Marne, was destitute of every thing necessary for sustain- st. Dii'r.
ing a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M. de la
Lande, who had acquired such reputation by the defcnce
of Landrecy, generously threw themselves into the town,
and undertook to hold it out to the last extremity. The
Emperor oon found how capable they were of making
good their promise, and that he could not expea to take
the town without befeging it in form. This according-
ly he undertook; and as it was his nature never to aban-
don any enterprize in which he had once engaged, he
persisted in it with an inconsiderate obitinacy.

THE King of England's preparations for the campaign Henry VIIf

were compleat long before the Emperor's; but as he did invefn BLu.
not choose, on the one hand, to encounter alone the whole
power of France, and was unwilling, on the other, that
his troops (hould remain unadive, he took that opportu-
nity of chastising the Scots, by fending his fleet, together
with a considerable part of his infantry, under the earl of
Hertford, to invade their country. Hertford executed his
commiflion with vigour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh
and Leith, laid waste the adjacent country, and reim-
h1arked his men with such dispatch, that they joined their
iovereign soon after his landing in France. WVhen Hcnry July ,4.
arrived in that kingdom, he found the Emperor engaged
in the siege of St. Difer; an ambaffdor, however, whom
he sent to congratulate the English Monarch on his ffce
arrival on the continent, olicited him to march in terms
of the treaty directly to Paris. But Chailes had set his
Ally uch an ill example of fulfilling the conditions of their
Confederacy with exanefs, that Henry, obfcrving him

L 3 employ

- v- behoof, saw no reason why he hould not attempt the re-
1544. duftion of some places that lay conveniently for himself.

Without paying any regard to the Emperor's remon-
ftrances, he immediately invested Boulogne, and corn
manded the Duke of Norfolk to press the siege of Mon-
treuil, which had been begun before his arrival, by a bo.
dy of Flemings, in conjunction with fame Englifl troops.
While Charles and Henry hewed such attention each to
his own interest, they both negleced the common cause;
and, instead of the union and confidence requlfite towards
conduaing the great plan they had formed, they early dif-
covered a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by de-
grees, begot diftru t, and ended in open hatred t.

Gal!«nt de- MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied induflry,
fence of St. drawn together an army capable, as well from the num-

. ber as from the valour of the troops, of making head

against the enemy. But the dauphin, who fill ated as
general, prudently declining a battle, the loss of which
would have endangered the kingdom, satisfied himself
with harassing the Emperor with his light troops, cutting
off his convoys, and laying waste the country around him.
Though extremely diftreficd by these operations, Charles
still preflid the siege of St. Difier, which Sancerre defend-
ed with astonishing fortitude and condua. He stood re-
peated assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all ; and
undismayed even by the death of the brave de la
Lande, who was killed by a cannon ball, he continued
to thew the fame bold countenance and obstinate refoluti-
on. At the end of five weeks, he was fill capable of
holding out some time longer, when an artifice of Gran-
velle's induced him to surrender. That crafty politician,
having intercepted the key to the cypher which the Duke
of Guise used in communicating intelligence to Sancerre,
forged a letter in his name authorizing Sancerre to capitu-
late, as the King, though highly satisfied with his be-
haviour, thought it imprudent to hazard a battle for his
relief. This letter he conveyed into the town in a man-
ner which could raise no suspicion, and the governor fell
into the snare. Even then, he obtained such honourable
conditions as his gallant defence merited, and among
others a ccffation of hostilities for eight days, at the expi-

t Heibert.

ration

.T HE RIG GN O F TE
x66

ration of which he bound himself to open the gates, ifBooi VIl.
francis, during that time, did not atack the Imperial lv--
army, and throw fresh troops into the town . hus San- '1544
cerre, by detaining the Emperor so long before an incon-
fiderable place, afforded his overeign full time to assem-
ble all his forces, and, what rarely falls to an officer in
such an inferior command, acquired the glory of having
saved his country.

As oon as St. Difier surrendered, the Emperor ad- Auilg 17.

vanced into the heart of Champagne, but Sancerre's ob- The r.npc-
ftinate resistance had damped his languine hopes of pene- r' pno
trating to Paris, and led him ferioully to reflet on what the heart of
he might expea before towns of greater strength, and de- France.
fended by more numerous garrisons. At the fame time,
the procuring subsistence for his army was attended with
great difficulty, which increased in proportion as he with-
drew from his own frontier. He had loft a great number
of his best troops in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell
daily in kirmifhes, which it was not in his power to a-
void, though they wafted his army insensibly, without
leading toany decisive ation. The season advanced a-
pace, and he had not yet the command either of a fuffi-
cient extent of territory, or of any such considerable town
as rendered it safe to winter in the enemies country.
Great arrears too, were due to his soldiers, who were
upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while he knew
not from what funds to satisfy them. All these confidera-
tions induced him to liften to the overtures of peace which
a Spanish Dominican, the confessor of his sifter the Queen
of France, had secretly made to his confefTor, a monk of
the fame order. In consequence of this, plenipotentiaries
were named on both fides, and began their conferences in
ChauflE, a small village near Chalons. At the fame
time, Charles, either from a desire of making one great
final effort againf France, or merely to gain a pretext for
deserting his ally and concluding a leparate peace, sent an
ambassador formally to require Henry, according to the
flipulation in their treaty, to advance towards Paris.
While he expeied a return from him, and waited the
issue of the conference at Chaufl, he continued to march
forward, though in the utmoR diRrefs from scarcity of
provisions. But at last, by a fortunate motion on his
part, or through ome neglec or treachery on that of the

*Brantome, tom. vi. 49.

Frenc h,
L 4

Boos VI. French, he furprized first Efpernay and then Chateau
--~ Thierry, in both which were considerable magazines.
'544 No sooner was it known that these towns, the latter of

which is not two days march from Paris, were in the
bands of the enemy, than that great capital, defenceless,
and susceptible of any violent alarm in proportion to its
greatness, was filled with confiernation. The inhabi.
tants, as if the Emperor had been already at their gates,
fled in the wildest confusion and defpjir, many fending
their wives and children down the Seine to Rouin, others
to Orleans, and the towns upon the Loire. Francis him.
self, more afflited with this, than with any other event
during his reign, and fenfble as well of the triumph hs
rival would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of the danger
to which the kingdom was exposed, could not refrain, in
the firfi emotion of his furprize and sorrow, from crying
out, " How dear, O my God, do I pay for this crown,
which I thought thou hadst granted me freely ." But
recovering in a moment from this sudden filly of peevilh-
ne's and impatience, he devoutly added, " Th) will,
however, be done ;" and proceeded to issue the necessary
orders for opposing the enemy with his usual composure
anti presence of mind. The dauphin detached eight thou-
sand men to Paris, which revived the courage of the as-
frighted citizens; he threw a strong garrison into Meaux,
and by a forced march got into Ferte, between the Impe.
rialifts and the capital.

,.'i::ged to U'ON this, the Emperor, who began again to feel th
realC. want of provisions, perceiving that the dauphin fill pru-

dently declined a battle, and not daring to attack his
camp with forces so much Ihattered and reduced by hard
service, turncd suddenly to the right, and began to fall
back towards Soissons. Having about this time received
Henry's answer whereby he refused to abandon the sieges
of Boulogne and Montreuil, of both which he expcted
every moment to get poffeflion, he thought himfclf ab-
lolved from all obligations of adhering to the treaty with
him, and at full liberty to consult his own interest in what
manner soever he plcafed. He consented, therefore, to
renew the conference, which the lurprize of Lfpernay had

er-t hr- broke oft. To conclude a peace between two princes,
iwe n him one of whom greatly desired, and the other greatly need-
and !?rnci · -
c..nclueid l cd it, did not require a long negotiation. It was signed

· B r.tJme, tom. 6. 36i.

at Crefpy, a small town near Meaux, on the eigthteenth Boo1 VII.
of September. The chief articles of it were, That all the 's4
conquefis which either party had made since the truce of 54
Nice (hall be refiored; that the Emperor hall give in
marriage to the Duke of Orleans, either his own eldest
daughter, or the second daughter of his brother Ferdi-
nanl ; that if he chose to bestow on him his own daugh-
ter, he hall fettle on her all the provinces of the Low-
Countries, to be erected into an independent late, which
(hall descend to the male issue of the marriage; that if he
determined to give his niece, he (hall, with her, grant
him the investiture of Milan and its dependencies; that
he (hall within four months declare which of there two
princefles 4he had pitched upon, and fulfil the refpedive
conditions upon the consummation of the marriage, which
(hall take place within a year from the date of the treaty;
that as soon as the Duke of Orleans is put in pofCeflion ei-
ther of the Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis (hall re-
store to the Duke of Savoy all that he now poflffes of
his territories, except Pignerol and Montmilian; that
Francis (hall renounce all pretensions to the kingdom of
Naples, or to the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois, and
Charles (hall give up his claim to the datchy of Burgundy
and county of Charolois; that Francis (hall give no aid
to the exiled King of Navarre ; that both Monarchs (hall
join in making war upon the Turk, towards which the
King (hall furnish, when required by the Emperor and
Empire, fix hundred men at arms, and ten thousand
foot .

BESIDE the immediate motives to this peace arising Motives ot

from the diflrefs of his army through want of provisions; cnludin
from the difficulty of retreating out of France; and the
impolfibility of securing winter quarters there; the Em-
peror was influenced by other considerations, more dif-
tant, indeed, but not less weighty. The Pope was of-
fended to a great degree, as well at his concessions to the
Proteftnts in the late diet, as at his consenting to call a
council, and to admit of public disputations in Germany
with a view of determining the doctrines in controversy;
and confidering both these steps as sacrilegious encroach-
ments on the jurifdiaion as well as privileges of the Holy
fee, he had addrefled to him a remonstrance rather than a

* Recueil de Trailes, t. i. t Biius de ctufi Pacis Crepiac. in Aoil
irudit. iilf 1763.

letter

Boot vi. letter on this fubje&, written with such acrimony of lan.

Iv- guage, and in a file of such high authority, as discovered
ó'44 more of an intention to draw on a quarrel than of a desire

to reclaim him. This ill humour was not a little enflam-
ed by the Emperor's league with Henry, which being
contracted with an heretick, excommunicated by the apof-
tolic fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and
was not less dreaded by him, than that of Francis with
Solyman. Paul's son and grandson, highly incensed at
the Emperor for having refused to gratify them with re-
gard to the alienation of Parma and Placentia, contribut-
ed by their infusions to four and diguft him fill more.
To all which was added the powerful operation of the flat-
tery and promies which Francis inceflantly employed to
gain him. Though from his desire of maintaining a neu.
trality, the Pope had hitherto fupprefid his own resent-
ment, had eluded the artifices of his own family, and re-
hifled the solicitations of the French King, it was not safe
to rely much on the fleddinefs of a man whom his pafli.
ons, his friends, and his interest combined to hake.
The union of the Pope with France, Charles well knew
would inflantly expofc his dominions in Italy to be at-
tacked, The Venetians he foresaw, would probably fol-
low the example of a Pontiff, who was confidered as a
model of political wisdom among the Italians; and thus
at a junaure when he felt himself scarce equal to the bur-
den of the present war, he would be overwhelmed with
the weight of a new confederacy against him *. At the
fame time, the Turks, almost unresisted, made such pro-
grefs in Hungary, reducing town after town, that they
approached near to the confines of the Aufrian provin-
ces t. Above all these, the extraordinary progress of the
Protestant dotrines in Germany, and the dangerous
combination into which the Princes of that profeflion had
entered, called for his immediate attention. Almost one
half of Germany had revolted from the efablilhed church;
the fidelity of the reft was much haken; the nobility of
Aufria had demanded of Ferdinand the free exercise of
religion ; the Bohemians, among whom some feeds of
the dodrinec of Huss fill remained, openly avoured the new
opinions; the archbishop of Cologne, with a eal rare
among eccleiafticks, had begun the reformation of his

F. Paul, z0o. Plavic, 163. t Iuanhffi HiR. Heng. s77.

Slei4dio. cci.;

dioccfe;

diocese; nor was it poflible, unless some timely and es- BootVII.
feaual check were given to the spirit of innovation, to s-
foresee where it would end. He himself had been a wit- 544
ness, in the late diet, to the preremptory and decifivetone
which the Protestants had now assumed; and had seen
how, from confidence in their number and union, they
had forgotten the humble flile of their sirs petitions, hav-
ing grown to such boldness as openly to deipife the Pope,
and to hew no great reverence for the Imperial dignity
itself. If, therefore, he wished to maintain either the an-
cient religion, or his own authority, and would not choose
to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the Empire, some
vigorous effort was requisite, which could not be made
during a war that required the greatest exertion of his
strength against a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to peace, he

had the address to frame the treaty of Crefpy so as to pro-
mote all the ends which he had in view. By coming to
an agreement with Francis, he took from the Pope all
profpea of advantage in courting the friendthip of that
Monarch in preference to his. By the proviso with re-
gard to a war with the Turks, he not only deprived Soly-
man of a powerful ally, but turned the arms of that al-
ly againfi him. By a private article, not inserted in the
treaty, that it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he
agreed with Francis that both ihould exert all their influ-
ence and power in order to procure a general council, to
assert its authority, and to exterminate the protestant
heresy out of their dominions. This cut off all hopes of
afliftance which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-
pe from the French King ; and les their solicitations,
or hisjealoufy of an ancient rival, hould hereafter tempt
Francis to forget this engagement, he left him embarrafled
with a war against England, which would put it out of
his power to take any part in the affairs of Germany.

HFNRY, possesed at all times with an high idea of his War con.
own power and importance, felt, in the most sensible tinue be.

tween

manner, the neglec with which the Emperor had treated France and
him in concluding a eparate peace. But the situation of England.
his affairs was such as somewhat alleviated the mortifica-
tion which this occasioned. For though he was obliged sep&em. 14
to recall the Duke of Norfolk from the siege of Mon-
treuil, becaufc the Flemiih troops received orders to re-

* Sck. 1. iii. 4S.

Boos VII. tire, Boulogne had surrendered before the negotiations at

c
-" -^ Crefpy were brought to an iflue. While elated with va-
£544. nity on account of this conquest, and inflamed with in-

dignation against the Emperor, the ambassadors whom
Francis ent to make overtures of Peace found him too
arrogant to grant what was moderate or equitable. His
demands were indeed extravagant, and made in the tone
of a conqueror; that Francis Ihould renounce his alliance
with Scotland, and not only pay up the arrears of former
debts, but reimburse the money which he had expended
in the present war. Francis though sincerely desirous of
peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order to ob-
tain it, being now free from the pressure of the imperial
arms, rejeted these ignominious propositions with dif-
dain; and Henry departing for England, hostilities con-
tinued between the two nations *.

The dau- THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to the
phi dife,- people of France, whom it delivered from the dread of
tisfi<d With an enemy who had penetrated into the heart of the king-
HC''e fdom, was loudly complained of by the dauphin. He

confidered it as a manifest proof of the King his father's
extraordinary partiality towards his younger brother, now
Duke of Orleans, and complained that from his eager-
ness to gain an eflablifhment for a favourite son, he had
sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and renounced the
smoR ancient and valuable rights of the crown. But as
he durfi not venture to offend the King by refusing to ra-
tify it, though extremely desirous at the fame time of e-
curing to himself the privilege of reclaiming what was
now alienated so much to his detriment, he secretly pro-
tested, in pretence of ome of his adherents, againfl the
whole tranfaiion; and declared whatever he hould be
obliged to do in order to confirm it, null in itself, and
void of all obligation. The parliament of Thouloufe,
probably by the instigation of his partizans, did the
fame . But Francis, highly pleased as well with having
delivered his subje&s from the miseries of an invasion,
as with the prospect of acquiring an independent fettle-
ment for his son at no greater price than the renouncing
conquests to which he had no just claim; titles which had
hitherto proved the source of expence or disasters to the
nation; and rights grown to be obsolete and of no value;

* Mem. de Ribier, t. i. p. . Hr:bert, :44.
t Recueil ds Triter, t. ii 3;, r:

ratified

ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles, within the Boo viI.
time prescribed by the treaty, declared his intention of '"*
giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the Duke of '544
Orleans, together with the dutchy of Milan as her
dowry . Every circumfiance seemed to prbmife the
continuance of peace. The Emperor, cruelly afflicted
with the gout, appeared to be in no condition to undertake
any enterprize where great aaivity was requisite, or much
fatigue to be endured. He himself felt this, or wilhed at
least that it hould be believed ; and being so much dif-
abled by this excruciating distemper, when a French am-
baffador followed him to Brufels in order to be present at
his ratification of the treaty of peace, that it was with the
utmost difficulty he signed his name, he observed, that
there was no great danger of his violating these articles, as
a hand that could scarce hold a pen, was little able to
brandish a lance.

THE violence of his difeale confined the Emperor fe- The Empe-
veral months in Brussels, and was the apparent cause of rorn

·chemes

putting off the execution of the vafR schemes which he with refjet
had formed in order to humble the Protestant party in toGenrny.
Germany. But there were other reasons for this delay.
For, how prevalent soever the motives were which deter-
mined him to undertake this enterprize, the nature of
thai great body which he was about to attack, as well as
the situation of his own affairs, made it necefiary to de-
liberate long, to proceed with caution, and not to throw
aside too suddenly the veil under which he had hitherto
concealed his real sentiments and schemes. He was fenfi-
ble that the Protestants, conscious of their own strength,
but under continual apprehensions of his designs, had all
the boldness of a powerful party, and all the jealousy of a
feeble falion; and were no less quick-fighted to discern
the first appearance of danger, than ready to take arms in
order to repel it. At the fame time, he continued in-
volved in a Turkish war; and though, in order to deli-
ver himself from this incumbrance, he had determined to
fend an envoy to the Porte with most advantageous
and even submissive overtures of peace, the resolutions of
that haughty court were so uncertain, that, before there
were known, it would have been the height of imprudence
to have kindled the fames of civil war in his own domi-
nions.

R*cueil dte Taiter, f. ii. 13R.

UPON

BooKVII. UPON this account, he appeared diflitisfied with a bull
'" 'issued by the Pope immediately after the peace of Crefpy

ThSp4.p summoning the council to assemble at Trent early next
summonser spring, and exhorting all Chriflian Princes to embrace the
ua geeral opportunity that the present happy interval of tranquillity
eet tt afforded them, of fupprefling those heretics which threat.
Trent. ened to subvert whatever was sacred or venerable, among
Novem. 19. Christians. But after such a flight expression of dislike as

was neceflary in order to cover his designs, he determin-
ed to countenance the council, which might become no
inconsiderable instrument towards accomplishing his pro-
je&s, and therefore not only appointed ambafiadors to ap.
pear there in his name, but ordered the ecclefiafticks in his
dominions to attend at the time prefixed *.

154S5 SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Imperial

Diet at diet, after several prorogations, was opened at Worms.
WMc4. The ProteRants, who enjoyed the free exercise of their

religion by a very precarious tenure, having no other fe-
curity for it than the recess of the last diet, which was to
continue in force only until the meeting of a council, with.
ed earnestly to establish that important privilege upon
some firmer basis, and to hold it by a perpetual not a
temporary title. But, instead of offering them any additi-
onal security, Ferdinand opened the diet with observing,
that there were two points, chiefly, which required confi-
deration, the prosecution of the war againt the Turks,
and the ate of religion; that the former was the mos
urgent, as Solyman, after conquering the greatest part of
Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the Austrian pro-
vinces; that the Emperor, who, from the beginning of his
reign, had negleced no opportunity of annoying this
formidable enemy, and with the hazard of his own per-
son had reited his attacks, being animated fill with the
fame eal, had now consented to flop short in the ca-
ree of his uccefs against France, that, in conjunction
with his ancient rival, he might turn his arms with greater
vigour against the common adversary of the Christian
faith i that it became all the members of the Empire tu
second these pious endeavours of its head; that, therefore,
they ought, without delay, to vote him such effectual
aid as both their duty and their interest called upon them
to furnilh; that the controversies about religion were so
intricate, and of such difficult difcuflion, as to give no

. alI, e04.

Iol)C

hope of its being possible to bring them at present to any Booz vII.
final itue; that by perseverance and repeated solicitations '
the Emperor had at length prevailed on the Pope to call a FerdiS d
council, for which they had so often wished and petitioned; requires the
that the time appointed for its meeting was now come, Cermans to
and both parties ought to wait for its decrees, and submit acknow-
to them as the decisions of the universal church. council.

THE popilh members of the diet received this declara-

tion with great applause, and signified their entire acqui-
efcence in every particular which it contained. The
ProteRants expressed great furprize at propositions, which
were To mranifeftly repugnant to the recess of the former
diet; they insisted that the questions with regard to reli-
gion, as first in dignity and importance, ought to come
tirft under deliberation ; that alarming as the progress of
the Turks was to all Germany, the securing the free ex-
ercife of their religion touched them fill more nearly, nor
could they prosecute a foreign war with spirit, while soli-
citous and concerned about their domefic tranquillity;
that if the latter were once rendered firm and permanent,
they would concur with their countrymen in pushing the
former, and yield to none of them in acivity or zeal.
But if the danger from the Turkish arms was indeed so
imminent, as not to admit of such a delay as would be
occasioned by an immediate examination of the contro.
verted points in religion, they required that a diet should
be infiantly appointed, to which the final settlement of
their religious disputes should be referred; and that in the
mean time the decree of the former diet concerning reli-
gion should be explained in a point which they deemed
essential. By the recess of Spires it was provided, that
they should enjoy unmolested the public exercise of their
religion, until the meeting of a legal council; but as
the Pope had now called a council, to which Ferdinand
had required them to submit, they began to fufpea that
their adversaries might take advantage of an ambiguity in
the terms of the recess, and pretending that the event
therein mentioned had taken place, might pronounce
them to be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In
order to guard against this interpretation, they renewed their
former remonfrance againfa council called tomeet with-
out the bounds of the Empire, summoned by the Pope's
authority, and in which he aflumed the right of prclid-
ing; and declared that, notwithstanding the convocation

of

Bono Vll. of any such illegal afembly, they ill held the recess of
--' the late diet to be in full force.
Emperor AT other junctures, when the Emperor thought it oi
a, rives at advantage to ooth and gain the Proteflants, he had de.
Wormr. vised expedients for giving them fatisfation with re-

gard to demands seemingly more extravagant; but his
views at present being very different, Ferdinand by his
command adhered inflexibly to his firIt propositions, and
would make no conceflions which had the most remote
tendency to throw discredit on the council, or to weaken
its authority. The Protestants on their part, were no lets
inflexible; and after much time spent in fruitless endea-
vours to convince each other, the) came to no conclusion.
May 15. Nor did the presence of the Emperor, who upon his re-

covery arrived at Worms, contribute in any degree to
render the Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced
that they were maintaining the cause of God and of
truth, they hewed themselves superior to the allurements
of interest, or the fuggeLt;ons of fear; and in proportion
as the Emperor redoubled his solicitations, or difcovcr-

The Protef- ed his designs, their boldness seems to have increased. At
teant dif- last they openly declared, that they would not even deign
claim ll to vindicate their tenets in pretence of a council, assem-
cnecioo
with the bled not to examine, but to condemn them; and that
council of they would pay no regard to an alfembly held under the
Tlent. influence of a Pope, who had already precluded himself

from all title to aa as a judge, by his having fligmatized
their opinions with the name of heresy, and denounced
against them the heaviet censures, which, in the plenitude
of his usurped power, he could infli *.

Condua of WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well as
Mauriceof firmners, rejeaed all intercourse with the council, and
tShi° diet refused their assent to the Imperial demands in refpe& to

the Turkith war, Maurice of Saxony alone hewed an
inclination to gratify the Emperor with regard to both.
Though he profeifed an inviolable regard for the Proteflant
religion, he assumed an appearance of moderation pecu-
liar to himself, by which he confirmed the favourable fen-
timents that the Emperor already entertained of him, and
gradually paved the way for executing the ambitious dec
signs which always occupied his aaive and enterprizing
mind t. His example, however, had little inftuence up-

'Sleid. 33, Ar. &ck.iii. 43, &c. Thus'n. Hiltor. b. ii. p 6.
; &ckr. iii. g.., i

oh such as agreed with him in their religious opinions; Boot vil.
and Charles perceived that he could not hope either to m-'
procure present aid from the Protestants againfi the '545
Turks, or to quiet their fears and jealousies on account
of their religion. But as his schemes were not yet ripe
for execution, nor his preparations so far advanced that
he could force their compliance, or punish their obstinacy,
he artfully concealed his own intentions; and that he
might augment their security, he appointed a diet to be Augunl 4.
held at Ratilbon early next year, in order to adjufi what
was now left undetermined; and previous to it, he agreed
that a certain number of divinesof each party (hould meet,
in order to confer upon the points in dispute *.

BUT how far soever this appearance of a desire to main- The ProteC-
tain the present tranquillity might have imposed upon the ^tts begin

. cto Imuipet

Protestants, the Emperor was incapable of such uniform the Empe.
and thorough dissimulation, as to hide altogether from ror.
their view the dangerous designs which he was meditating
againfl them. Herman count de Wied, Archbihop and
Eleor of Cologn, a prelate conspicuous for his virtue
and primitive simplicity of manners, though not more
diflinguifhed for learning than the other descendants of
noble families, who in that age possessed most of the great
benefices in Germany, having become a proselyte to the
docrines of the Reformers, had begun in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-three, with the afiftance
ofMelanahon and Bucer, to abolih the ancient superstition
in his diocese, and to introduce in its place the rites eflab-
lilhed among the Protestants. But the canons of his ca-
thedral who were not possessed with the fame spirit of in-
novation, and who foresaw how fatal the levelling genius
of the new fee would prove to their dignity and wealth,
opposed, from the beginning, this unprecedented enter-
prize of their archbithop with all the zeal flowing from
reverence for old institutions, heightened by concern for
their own interet. This opposition, which the Archbi-
shop confidered only a a new argument to demonstrate
the neceflity of a reformation, neither hfook his refolmi-
on nor fackned his ardour in prosecuting his plan. The
canons, perceiving all their endeavours to check his ca.
reer to be inefleual, folemnty protefed against his pro-
ccdings, and appealed for dre to the Pope and m-
peror, the former as his eocleiatical, the latter as his

* Sleid. 31s.
VOL. II. M civil

sooK vt. civil superior. This appeal being laid before the Empe.

ror, during his residence in Worms, he took the canons
]s45' of Cologne under his immediate prote&tion; enjoined

them to proceed with rigour against al who revolted from
the eablithed church; prohibited the Archbishop to
make any innovation in his diocese; and summoned him
to appear at Brufiels within thirty days, to answer the ac-
cufations which should be preferred againfi him *.

To this clear evidence of his hoftil intentions again

the Proteflant party, Charles added other proofs till more
explicit. In his hereditary dominions of the Low-Coun.
tries, he persecuted all who were fufpeaed of Luthera-
nifm with unrelenting vigour. As oon as he arrived at
Worms, he silenced the Protestant preachers in that city,
He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the Luthe
rans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to call upon him,
as he regarded the favour of God, toexterminate that pes.
tilent heresy. He dispatched the embassy, which has been
already mentioned, to Confantinopk, with overtures o
peace, that he might be free from any apprehensions
of danger or interruption from that quarter. Nor did any
of there feps, or their dangerous tendency, escape the
jealous observation of the Protestants, or fail to alarm
their fears, and to excite their solicitude for the fafty of
their set.

Death of MEANWHILE Charles's good fortune which predomi-
tIe Duke ofrntd, on all occasions over that of his rival Francis, ex-

tricated him out of a dificulty, from which, with all his
sagacity and addref, he would have found it no efy mat-
ter to have disentangled himself. Jus about the time
when the Duke of Orleans should have received Ferdi-
nand's daughter in marriage, and together with her the
sept. oeflion of the Milanee, he died of a pestilential fever.

By this event, the Emperor was si~ed from the necessity
of giving up an impotat province into the hands of an
enemy, a from ihe indeccy of violating a recent ad.
fulema engagement, which muf have oci od an in
mediate rapture with France. He aoed, however, to
expres gret orrow. for the untimely det of,a young
prince, who was to have been so newly allied to him;
but he carefully avoided eatwing into any f difcuffionr
concerning the Miles, and would noe lftcn to a propo-
fa which came from Fanoa of new modli the. u

*Uie 31jg33,3SI. k~1d.UL44,SS 3.

. -- y

ty of Crefpy, so as to make him fotne reparation for the Boot vii
advantages which he had loft by the demise of his son. In --v-
the more a&ive and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a de- '545
claration of war would have been the certain and inftan-
taneous consequence of such a flat refusal to comply with
a demand seemingly so equitable ; but the declining fate
of his own health, the exhausted condition of his king-
doms, together with the burden of the war against Eng-
land, obliged him, at present, to dissemble his resentment
and to put off thoughts of revenge to ome other juncture.
In consequence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of
Savoy loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of his ter-
ritories; and the rights or claims relinquished by the
treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force to the crown of
France, to serve as pretexts for future wars *.

UPON the firfl intelligence of the Duke of Orleans's

death, the Confederates of Smlkalde flattered them elves
that the eflentl alterations which it occasioned could
scarce fail of producing a rupture, which would prove
the means of their safety. But they were not more dif-
appointed with regard to this, than in their expeations
from an event which seemed to be the certain prelude of
a quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope. Paul, The Pore
whose pflion for aggrandising his family, 'increased as grents the
he advanced in years, and as he saw the dignity and porer dutchie of
which they derived.immediately from him becoming more l,,a ,nd

Pllcenti to

precarious, finding that he could not bring the Emperor hi. roo.
to approve of his ambitious fehemes, ventured, though
at the rifque of incurring hit: dltplefure, to grant his son
Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia. At
a time when a great part of Europe inveighed openly a.
gaint the corrupt manners and exorbitant power of Eccle-
Lf.ics, aind when a council was summoned to reform the
disorders in, the churh, this indecent grant of such a prin-
cipality to a son of whose itlegitate birth the Pope ought
to have been :ahtmed, and whose licentious morals all good
men detested gave general offence. Some Cardinals in the
Imperial intere remonstrated agalnf such an unbecom-
ing aliention of the patrimony of the church; the Spa-
nilh mbafador would not be prent at the solemnity of
his enfeofment; and the Emperr peemptorily refused,
upon pretext that there cities were part of the Milanese
tate, to confirm the deed of investiture. But both the
Emperor and Pope being intent upon one common ob.

* Belclri Cmment. 769. Prots, Hit Veat. iv, . p.77.

M 2

jea

Boot v1. je& in Germany, sacrificed their particular passions to that
'-v--' public cause, and fupprcffed the emotions of jealousy or

'5 resentment which were rising on this occasion, that they

might jointly pursue what eachlcfteemed of greater am.
portance

Henry of ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was diflurbed
Brunswick by a violent but flort eruption of Henry Duke of Brunf.
kidtrine er wick. This Prince, though fill fiript of his dominions,
many. which the Emperor held in fequefration, until his diffe.

rences with the confederates of Smalkalde hould be ad.
jufited, pffled however so much credit in Germany that
he undertook to raise for the French King a considerable
body of troops to be employed in the war against Eng.
land. The money stipulated for this purpole was duly
advanced by Francis; the troops were levied ; but Hen-
ry, instead of leading them towards France, suddenly en-
tered his own dominions at their head, in hopes of re-
covering them before any army could be aftembled to op.
pose him. The confederates were not more furprized at
this unexpeaed attack, than the King of France was as.
tonifhed at a mean thievif fraud To unbecoming the cha.
rader of a Prince. But the Landgrave of Hefe, with
incredible expedition, collected as many men as put a flop
to the progress of Henry's undisciplined force, and being
joined by his fon-in-law Maurice, and some ot the troops
of the Eletor of Saxony, he gained such advantage
over Henry, who was rath and bold in f6rming his
shemes, but feeble and undetermined in executing them,
as obliged him to disband his army, and to surrender
himlelf together with his eldest on prioners at diferetion
he was kept in close confiement, until a 'new reverse
of affairs procured him liberty t.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise added new

iW~ot. reputation to the arms of the Protestants the reformation
nuti o of the Palatinate broht great accelion of strength to
the Paati- their party. Frederick, wti fuceeeded his brother Lewis

in that fleorate, had long been fufpeded of a secret
propenity to the docrines of the Reformers, which upon
is accefion to the principality he openly mnifelted. But
as he expe&ed that fomethin effetul towards a general
and legal efablilhment of religion would be the fruit of
to many diets, conferces, and negotiations, he did not,

Psarut, Hi. Veat. iv. 78. Paavic. 8a.
t is. s.- eck. in. 57.

at

at first, attempt any public innovations in his dominions. BooK Vi(.
Finding all these iue in nothing, he thought himself call- ''-
ed, at length, to countenance by his authority the sys- Tunelr .
tern which he approved of, and to gratify the wishes of
his fubjeas, who by their intercourse with the Protestant
lates had universally imbibed their opinions. As the
warmth and impetuosity which accompanied the spirit of
Reformation in its first efforts had somewhat abated, this
change was made with great order and regularity i the an-
cient rights were abolished, and new forms introduced
without any a of violence, or symptom of discontent,
Though Frederick adopted the religious fygtem of the Pro-
tefants, he imitated the example of Maurice, and did not
accede to the league of Smalkalde *.

A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Palatinate, The council

the general council was opened with the accustomed so- *fembles st
leinities at Trent. The eyes of the Catholick flates 'Trut
were turned with much expecation towards an aembly,
which all had confidered as a natural and adequate reme-
dy for the difordcrs of the church when they first broke
out, though many were afraid that it was now too late
to hope for great benefit from it, when the malady, by
being suffered to make progrets during twenty eight
years, had become inveterate, and grown to such extreme
violence, The Pope, by his las bull of convocation, had
appointed the firt meeting to be held in March. But his
views and those of the Empror were so different, that
almof the whole year was spent in negotiations. Charles,
who forelaw that the rigorous decrees of the council
against the Protestants would soon drive them, in elf-de.
fence as well as from resentment, to ome desperate ex-
treme, laboured to put off its meeting until his warlike
preparations were so far advanced, that he might be in a
condition to second its decisions by the force of his arms.
The Pope, who had early sent to Trent the legates who
were to preide in his name, knowing to what contempt
it would expose his authority, and what suspicions it would
beget of his intentions, if the fathers of the council hould
remain in a slate of inactivity, Ywhen the church was in
such danger as to require their immediate and vigorous
interpofiton, inifted either upon translating the council
to some city in Italy, or upon suspending its proceedings
at that junture, or upon authorising it to begin ita dehls

Sleid. $6. Seek. 1. iii. 616

M 3 herations

BOOK vn. berations immediately. The Emperor rjeed thetwo
"-" former as equally offlnfive to the Germans of every de.

54 nomination, but finding it impofiible to elude the latter,

he proposed that the council hould begin with reforming
the disorders in the church, before it proceeded to exa-
mine or define articles of Faith. This was the very thing
which the court of Rome dreaded molf, and which had
prompted it to employ so many artifices in orderto prevent
the meeting of such a dangerousjudicatory. Paul, though
more compliant than some of his predcceflors with regard
to calling a council, was no less jealous than they had
been of its jurifdieion, and saw what matter of triumph
such a method of proceeding would afford the heretics.
He apprebended confequenccs not only humbling but fatal
to the papal fee, if the council came to confider an in-
quef into abuses as their only bufinfs i or if inferior pre-
lates were allowed to gratify their own envy and peevish.
ness by prescribing rules to those who were exalted above
them in dignity and power. Without listening, there.
fore, to this insidious proposal of the Emperor, be in.
trupted his legates to open the council.
Jan.i8. THE first eflion was spent in matters of form. In a

°, proctd- subsequent one, it was agreed that the framing of a con-

feflion of faith, containing all the articles which the church
required its members to believe, ought to be the first and
principal buflnefs of the council; but that at the fame
time, it should give attention to what was neccfiary to-
wards the reformation of manners and discipline. From
this sirs symptom of the pirit with which the council was
animated, from the high tone of authorty which the le-
gates who presided in it assumed, and from thC implicit
deference with which molt of the members followed their
direcions, the Protefants copjetured with afe what de-
cifions they might expect. It aftoniffed them, however,
to fee forty prelates, (for no greater number was yet as-
fembled) assume authority as representatives of the uni-
versal church, and proceed to determine the mot import-
ant points of doarine in its name. Sensible of this in-
decency, as well as of the ridicule with which it might be
attended, the council advanced lowly in its deliberati
ons, and all its proceedings were for ome time languish-
ing and feeble . As loon as the confederate of Smal-
kalde received information of the opening of the coun-

9 F. Paul iao, &c. Pallsvi p. 1 , &c,

cil,

c11, they published a long tanifefto containing a renewal Boos VII.
of their protest against its meeting, together with the rea-
sons which induced them to decline it jurifdiions*. 1546
The Pope and Emperor, meanwhile, were o little soli-
citous to quicken or add vigour to its operations, as plain-
ly discovered that some objet of greater importance oc-
cupied and interested them.

THE Protefants, as they were not inattentive or un- Apprehen-

concerned fpc&ators of their motions, entertained every sions of the
day more violent suspicions of their intentions, and re- ts
ceived intelligence from different quarters of the machi-
nations carrying on against them. The King of Eng-
land informed them, that the Emperor having long re-
solved to exterminate their opinions, would not fail to
employ this interval of tranquillity which he now enjoyed,
as the moR favourable juncture for carrying his design in-
to execution. The merchants of Auglburg, which was
at that time a city of extensive trade, received advice by
means of their correspondents in Italy, among whom
were ome who secretly favoured the Protestant cause, $
that a dangerous confederacy againt it was forming be-
tween the Pope and Emperor. In confirmation of this,
they heard from the Low-Countries that Charles had if-
sued orders, though with every precaution which could
keep the measure concealed, for raising troops both there
and in other parts of his dominions. Such a variety of
information, corroborating all that their own jealousy or
observation led them to apprehend, left the Protctants
little reason to doubt of the Emperor's hotile intentions.
Under this impreflion, the deputies of the confederates Their deli-
of Smalkllde aflmbled at Francfort, and by communi- bertiona.
cating their intelligence and sentiments to each other, re.
ciprocally heightened their fene of the impending danger.
But their union was not fuc their ir tution required,
or the preparations of their enemies rendered necfary.
Their league had now fubifted ten years. Among so
many members whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom of Ger-
many, had created an ininite variety of mutual rights and
claims by intermarriage, alliances, and contraas of dif-
ferent kinds, fobjes of jealousy and difeord had una.
voidably arisen, Some of the confederates, being con.
neted with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly dif.

* Sked. L iii. 6ao, &c. j Srck. . ii. 579.

M 4 ged

BooK vii. gufled with the Landgrave, on account of the rigour with

C"-'V which he had treated that rash but unfortunate Prince.
s546 Others taxed the Eleaor of Saxony and Landgrave, the

heads of the league, with having involved the members
in unnecessary and exorbitant expences by their profuse-
ness or want of oeconomy. The views, likewise, of there
two great Princes, who, by their superior power and au-
thority, influenced ad direaed the whole body, being
extremely different, rendered all its motions languid, at a
time when the utnoft vigour and dispatch were requisite.
The Landgrave, of a violent and enterprizing temper,
but not forgetful, amidfl his zeal for religion, of the usual
maxims of human policy, infifed that the danger which
threatened them, being manifest and unavoidable, they
should have recourse to the most effeaual expedient for fe-
curing their own safety, by courting the protecion of the
Kings of France and England, or by joining in alliance
with the proteflant cantons of Switzerland, from whom
they might expe6t such powerful and present aflifance as
their fitatjon demanded. The Ele&or on the other
hand, with the molt upright intentions of any Prince in
that age, and with talents which might have qualified him
abundantly for the adminifiration of government in any
tranquil period, was pofleffed with such fuperflitious vene.
ration for all the parts of the Lutheran fyfiem, and such
bigotted attachment to all its tenets, as made him averse
to an union with those who differed from him in any arti-
cle of faith, and rendered him very incapable of under-
taking its defence in times of difficulty and danger. He
f:emed to think, that the concerns of religion were to be
regulated entirely by principles and maxims different from
those which apply to the common affairs of life; and be-
ing swayed too much by the opinions of Luther who was
not only a franger to the rules of political condut, but
derpifed them he often discovered an uncomplying spirit
which proved of the greatest detriment to the cause that
be wi(hed to support. Influenced, on this occasion by
the revere and rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused
to enter into any confederacy with Francis, because he
was a perfccutor of the truth or to solicit the friendmhip
of Henry, because he was no less impious and profane
than the Pope bimfelf; or even to join in alliance with
the Swiss, because they differed from him in several eden-
tial articles of faith. This difention, about a point of

fuchl

such consequence, produced its natural effets. Each fe- Booc Vi.
cretly censured and reproached the other. The Land- ' '
grave confidered the Ele&or as fettered by narrow preju- '546
dices unworthy of a Prince called to a a chief part in a
scene of. uch importance. The Elecor fufpe&ed him of
loose principles and ambitious views, which corresponded
ill with the sacred cause in which they were engaged. But
though the Eletor's scruples prevented their timely appli-
cation for foreign aid ; and the jealousy or discontent of
the other princes defeated a proposal for-renewing their
original confederacy, the term during which it was to
continue in force being on the point of expiring; yet the
sense of their common danger induced them to agree with
regard to other points, particularly that they would never
acknowledge the afTembly at Trent as a lawful council,
nor susser the Archbi(hop of Cologne to be oppressed on
account of the Reps which-he had taken towards the re-
formation of his diocese *.

THE Landgrave, me nwhile, desirous of penetrating The eo-
to the bottom of the Emperor's intentions, wrote to th' Emp
Granvelle, whom he knew to be thoroughly acquainted , .pe
with all his master's schemes, informing him of the eve-
ral particulars which raised the suspicions of the Protest-
ants, and begging an explicit declaration of what they
had to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, aured
them that the intelligence which they had received of the
Emperor's military preparations was exaggerated, and all
their suspicions destitute of foundation; that, though in
order to guard his frontiers againR any insult of the
French or Englilh, he had commanded a small body of
men to be railed in the Low-Countries, he was as folici-
tous as ever to maintain tranquillity in Germany .

BUT the Emperor's aions did not correspond with

these professions. For, instead of appointing men of
known moderation and a pacific temper to appear in de-
fence of the Catholic dotrines at the conference which
had been agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots, at-
tached to their own system with a blind obstinacy, which
rendered all hope of reconcilement desperate. Malvenda,
a Spanih divine, who took the condua of the debate on
the part of the Catholics, managed it with all the subtle
dexterity of a scholastic metaphysician, more studious to
perplex his adversaries than to convince them, and more
* sck. i. iii. 66, j70, ój. SIld. 355.

5ó35.intent

aOss VI. intent on palliating error than on discovering truth. The

v-to Protestants filled with indignation, as well at his sophistry
3546. as at some regulations which the Emperor endeavoured to

impose on the disputants, broke off the conference abruptly,
being fully convinced of the Emperor's having had no.
thing in view but to amuse them, and to gain time tor
ripening his own schemes .

* Sleid 351. Seck. . iii. 61 .

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OP THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.

HILE appearances of danger daily encread, ad 8o rl;
the tenpeft which had been o lon a gathering ,

was ready to break forth in all its violence againf the Pro- De, f
tftant church, Luther was saved, by a seasonable death, Lather.
from feeling or beholding its deftruaive rage. Having
gone, though in a declining fate of health, and during
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eylleben, in order
to compoQe, by his authority, a diflintion among the ,
counts of Mansdid, he was seiacd with a violent inlhm-
mation in his ftonach, which in a few days put an end
to his life, in the fixty-third year of his age. As he was
raised up by providence to be the authpr of one of the
gateR and alof difintcretig revolutions recorded in his-
tory, there is not any person perhaps whose charaer has
been drawn with such oppoite colours. In his own age,
one party, ruck with horror and inflamed with rage
When they saw with what a daring hand be overturned
eVery thing which they held to be acred, or valued a be-
Pefici, impute to him not only all the defe~s and vices

of

Rool VII1. of a man, but the qualities of a damon. The other
'"v l warmed with admiration and gratitude, which they

3546. thought he merited as the reftRrer of light and liberty to

the ChriRian church, ascribed to him perfecions above
the condition of humanity, and viewed all his aions
with a veneration bordering on that which hould be paid
only to those who aro guided by the immediate inspiration

i chIIc- of heaven. It is his own conduc, not the undiftinguifh.
tcr. ing censure or the exaggerated praise of his contempora.

ries, which ought to regulate the opinions of the present
age concerning him. Zeal for what he regarded as truth,
undaunted intrepidity to maintain it, abilities both natu.
ral and acquired to defend it, and unwearied industry to
propagate it, are virtues which hine so conspicuously in
every part of his behaviour, that even his enemies mufl
allow him to have poflefled them in an eminent degree.
To there may be added with equal juflice, such purity and
even austerity of manners, as became one who assumed
the charaaer of a Reformer; such fanaity of life as suit.
ed the docrine which he delivered; and such perfea dilin.
tereftednefs as affords no flight presumption of his finceri-
t. Superior to all felfilh confideraions, a firanger to
te legancies of life, and despising its pleasures, he left
the honours and emoluments of the church to his difi-
ples, remaining satisfied himself in his original tate of pro.
felior in the university, and palor of the town of Wit.
temberg, with the moderate appointments annexed to
there offices. Wis extraordinary qualities were allayed
with no inconsiderable mixture of human frailty and hu-
man passions. These, however, were of such a nature,
that they cannot be imputed to malevolence or corruption
of heart, but teem to have taken their rife from the fame
source with many of his virtues. His mind forcible and
vehement in all it; operations, rouzed by great objeas,
or agitated by violent paflions, broke out, on many oc-
cafions, with an impetoofity which aftonifihe men of
feebler pirits, or such as are placed in a more tranquil
situation. By carrying some praise-worthy dispositions to
cxccfs, he bordered sometimes on what was ulpable, and
was often betrayed into ations which exposed him to
censure. His confidence that his own opinions were well
founded, approached to arrogance i his courage in aferrt-
ing them, to rbnef i his frmnefl in adhering to them,
to obstinacy and his eal in confuting his adversaries,
to rage and scurrility. Accustoming imfelf to onfider

every

every thing as subordinate to truth, he expected the fame Boos vI1
deference for it from other men; and without making '
any allowances for their timidity or prejudices, he poured t'4
forth against those, who disappointed him in this parti-
cular, a torrent of invective mingled with contempt. Re-
gardlefs of any diftinaion of rank or charater when his
doctrines were attacked, he chaRtifed all his adversaries,
indiscriminately, with the fame rough hand; neither the
royal dignity of Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning
and abilities of Erasmus, fceened them from the fame
grPfs abuse with which he treated Tetzel or Eccius.

'tir these indecencies of which Luther was guilty,
must not be imputed wholly to the violence of his temper.
They ought to be charged in part on the manners of the
age. Among a rude people, unacquainted with those
maxims, which, by putting continual rcftraint on the
pafiions of individuals, have polished society and rendered
it agreeable, disputes of every kind were managed with
heat, and Rrong emotions were uttered in their natural
language, without reserve or delicacy. At the fame time,
the works of learned men were all composed in Latin,
and they were not only authorized, by the example of
eminent writers in that language, touse their antagonists
with the most illiberal scurrility but, in a dead tongue,
indecencies of every kind appear less hocking than in
a living language, whose idioms and phrases feemgrots,
because they are familiar.

IN pasing judgment upon the chara6kers of men, we

ought to try them by the principles and maxims of their
own age, not by those of another. For, although
virtue and vice are at all times the fame, marners and
customs vary continually. Some parts of Luther's behavi-
our, which to us appear moR culpable, gave no disgust
to his contemporaries. It was even by some of those
qualities, which we are now apt to blame, that he was
sied for ncomplithing the great work which he under-
took. To rouze mankind, when funk in ignorance or
fuperlition, and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with power, required the utmost vehemence of zeal, and a
temper daring,to exceGs. A gentle call would neither have
reached, nor have excited those to whom it was addressid.
A (pirit. more amiable, le

but vigorous than Luther's,

would have shrunk back from the dangers which he
braved and surmounted. ' owards the close of Luther's
lifc, though without any perceptible declenion of lis

.. e .... a!

Booc VIlL zeal or abilities, the infirmities of his temper increased
~'V^ ' upon him, so that he grew daily more peevilh, more

S4L irascible, and more impatient of contradiction. Having

lived to be witncis of his own amazing success; to fee a
great part of Europe embrace his dotrines ; and to thake
the foundation of the Papal throne, before which the
mightiest Monarchs had trembled, be discovered, on some
occalions, symptoms of vanity and felf-applaufe. He
must have been indeed more than man, if upon contem-
plating all that he aaually accomplithed, he had never felt
any sentiment of this kind rising in his breast *.

SoME time before his death he felt his strength declin.

ihg, his constitution being worn out by a prodigious mul-
tiplicity of bulinefi, added to the labour of discharging
his ministerial funAion with unremitting diligence, to the
fatigue of confant study, besides the composition of works
as voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted leisure and
retirement. His natural intrepidity did not forlke him at
the approach of death; his lait converiation with his friends
was concerning the happiaefs reserved for goo-l men in a
future world, of which he spoke with the fervour and de-
light natural to one who expedd and wilhod to enter
soon upon the enjoyment of it t. The account of his
death filled the Ronian Catholic party with excedive as
well as iidecentjoy, and damped the spirits of all his
followers; neither party fuliciently confiding that his
ditrines were now so firmly rooted, as to be in a condi-
tion to lourit independent of the hand which firt had
lanted them. His funeral was celebrated by order of the
Eleor of Saxony with extraordinary pomp. He left fe.
veral children by his wife Catharine Bore, who survived
him towards the end of the last century, there were in
Saony ame of his defcendmn in decent and honourable
Oations .

* A remasbe icoe ofthis, u well a of certain fhgnlrity ind

eSevti o feiximat, i sod in his Lt Will. Thougn the cefts

hich he bad to beqath were wy inmofideble, he though t t ncelttry
to Mak a* TedlmLnt bt f(ndl to tfae It with the ufal legal for lli-
til Notiat fn, fay he, coin, in terra, & in intrneo, amsrits-
b ad bee fficIenttem habeo. w rihi soli credatir, cum DeC mihi, h.
laiNlidt dealMli, at m;felbili pecceton, ex ptertn mi' ricordia Evan-
eiH Mfintli- i*rirt, ddiarouel. in w vwrax & fidelb (feerm, it#
ut iqis in muado illnd per me aicrgprint, & me po lt4.i. ver,itati
qoulint; fpret beo Pal|, Ci'leuis, Regum, Piincpum & facerdo-
m, iam mur dlmnnmn odio Qlidli, igitti;, d difpdit;.,nem
Lh, ree m~a fisiit; b adfir raus wra t. itjmoniom, & dici podit
lme.fiPrdt D.M dawu Lther, No~liu . Dei, & tc(ili Bg~leii ji.

&*.'l. p. 61l. t d 6: Scd .

6 lb

Scz. li. tt. 1 , &c.
.ki Lt iis. p. T.

TH

THs Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of diffi- Bsoc via.
mulation with which he had set out, employing every art "v '
to amuse the Protestants, and to quiet their fears and jea- Ti54,
lousics. For this purpose he contrived to have an inter- ,rr end
view with the Landgrave of Hefe, the mot active of all wn te e-
the confederates, and the mos suspicious of his d eigns. mile
To him he made such warm professions of his concern for rotiem.
the happiness of Germany, and of his aversion to all vio- Madh %L
lent measures; he denied, in such express terms, his hav-
ing entered into any league, or having begun any military
preparations which ihould give cause of alarm to the Pro-
teftants, as seem to have dispelled all the Landgrave's
doubts and apprehensions, and ent him away fully satis-
sied of his pacific intentions. This artifice was of great
advantage, and effeaually answered the purpose for which
it was intended. The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires,
where he had been admitted to this interview, went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldic confederates were aflet
bled, and gave them such a flattering representation of
the Emperor's favourable disposition towards them, that
they, too apt, as well from the temper of the German
nation as from the genius of all great afibciations or bo-
dies of men, to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in
their deliberations, thought there was no necessity of tak-
ing any immediate measures againf danger, which ap-
peared to be distant or imaginary .

SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as aggered Proceeda:n

the credit which the Protefants had given to the Empe- the C
ror's declarations. The council of Trent, though till the rotd-
compored of a froall number of Italian and Spanish pre- tts.
lates, without a single deputy from many of the kingdoms
which it aflumed the right of binding by its decrees, be-
ing aamed of its long inaivity, proceede now to set
ti articles of the greatest importance. Having begun with
examining the sirs and chief point in controvfy between
the church of Rome and the Reformers, concerning the /
rule which hiould be held supreme or decifve in matter
of faith, the council, by its infallible authority, deter. Aprl s.
mined, ,, That the books to which the deignation f
Aporjphal hath been given, are of equal authority with
thoe which were received by the Jews and prinitive
Chriians into the acred canon; that the traditions
handed down from the apostolic age, and preserved in

*Sid. Hief. 367, 373.

the

BooK Vll.the church, are entitled to as much regard as the doc.
i -I1 trines and precepts which the inspired authors have corn.

546 mitted to writing; that the Latin trannation of the Scrip.

tures, made or revised by St. Jerome, and known by the
name of the Vldgate translation, flould be read in churches,
and appealed to in the schools as authentic and canonical.
Against all who disclaimed the truth of there tenets, ana.
themas were denounced in the name and by the authority
of the Holy Ghof. The decision of there points, which
undermined the main pillar of the Lutheran system, was
a plain warning to the Protestants what judgment they
might expe& when the council hould have leisure to take
into consideration the particular and subordinate articles
of their Creed'."

THIS discovery of the council's readines to condemn

their opinions, was soon followed by a firiking instance
of the Pope's resolution to punilh such as embraced them.
The appeal of the canons of Cologne against their arch-
bilhop having been carried to Rome, Paul eagerly seized
on that opportunity, both of displaying the extent of his
own authority, and of teaching the German ecclesiastics
the danger of revolting from the eftablified church. As
no person appeared in behalf of the archbilhop, he was
April 1. held tobe conviced of the crime of herey, and a Papal bull

was iffned, depriving him of his ecclefiatical dignity, in-
fli&ing on him the sentence of excommunication, and ab-
solving his subje&s from the oath of allegiance which they
had taken to him as their civil superior. The counte-
nance which he had given to the Lutheran heresy was
the only crime imputed to him, as well, as the only
reason afigned to juftfy the extraordinary rigour of
this decree. The Prottanrs could scarce believe that
Paul, how zealous soever to defend the elablilhed fofim,
or to bumble thole who invaded it, would have ventured
to proceedb such extremities againt a Prince and Elec-
tor of the Empire, without having previously secured such
powrful prosction as would render his cenure something
more than an impotent and despicable rally of resentment.
The were of course deeply alarmed at this sentence a-

the Archmlhop, confidering jt as a sure indication

of the malevolent intentions not only of the Pope, but of
the Emperor, against the whole party t.

* F. PauL 141. Pallaic. soC.
+ aid. 114. . PI, IS$. dllaic r1:

UPON

UPON this freth revival of their fears, with such vio- Boot Vil.

)ence as is natural to men rouzed from a false security, and --
conscious of their having been deceived, Charles saw that ch:s46
it was now neceflary to throw aside the veil, and to de- bout to
dare openly what part he determined to a&. By a long commence
series of artifice and fallacy, he had gained so much time, hofit'ie
that his measures, though not altogether ripe for executi- Proteiants.
on, were greatly matured. The Pope, by his proceed-
ings againlt the Elecor of Cologne, as well as by the de-
cree of the council, had precipitated matters into such a
situation, as rendered a breach between the Emperor and
the ProteRants almost unavoidable. Charles-had no choice
left him but either to take part with them in overturning
what the See of Rome had determined, or to support the
authority of the church openly by force of arms. Nor
did the Pope think it enough to have brought the Empe- Ntgot;tc
ror under a necessity of aing; he prefled him to begin Pop,.
his operations, by promising to second him with such vi-
gour as could scarce fail of securing his success. Tranf-
ported by his zeal againf heresy, he forgot all the pru-
dent and cautious maxims of the Papal See, with regard
to the danger of extending the Imperial authority beyond
due bounds, and in order to crush the Lutherans, he
was willing to contribute towards raising up a matter that
might prove formidable to himself as well as to the ref of
Italy.

But besides the certain expec&ation of afifanee from Concluden

the Pope, Charles was now ecure from any danger of trce with
interruption to his deigns by the Turkilh arms. His ne- 6'rm
gotiations at the Portne which he had carried on with
great assiduity since the peace of Crefpy, were on the point
of being terminated in iuch a manner as he desired. So-
lyman, partly in compliance with the French King, who,
in order to avoid the disagreeable obligation of joining the
Emperor against his ancient ally, laboured with great zeal
to bring about an accommodation between them; and
partly from its being necessary o turn his arms towards
the eaf, where the Persians threatened to invade his do,
minions consented without difficulty to a truce for five
years. The chief article of it was, that each Ihould re-
tain poleffion of what he now held in Hungary; and
Ferdinand as a sacrifice tothe pride of the Sultan, submitted
to pay an annual tribute of fifty thousand crowns @,

* Iflal f.

tl g. s

H J .

10 M .do Riblrr, we. I, ASl
VOL. I. N BUT

BOuK VnI. BuT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the Ger.

mans themselves that the Emperor relied with the greatest

Gtati,,n- confidence. The Germanicbody, he knew, was of fu
rice sad vail frength, as to be invincible if it were united, and
other Prin- that it was only by employing its own force that he could
ces of Ger-
U^Y. hope to subdue it. fappily for him, the union of the

several members in this great fyflem was so feeble, the
whole frame was so loosely compated, and its different
parts tended so violently towards separation from each o.
ther, that it was almost impoflible for it, on any impor.
tant emergence, to join in a general or vigorous effort.
In the present pun&ture, the sources of discord were as
many, and as various as had been known on any occafi.
on. The Roman Catholics, animated with a zeal in de-
fence of their religion proportional to the fierceness with
which it had been attacked, were eager to second any at.
-tempt to humble those innovators, who had overturned
it in many provinces, and endangered it in more. John
and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several other
Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and rigour with
which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated by the
confederates'of Smalkalde, were impatient to efcue him,
and to be revenged on them. Charles observe4d with satis-
facion, the working of there paflions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he hould
:think it proper to at, be found it, meanwhile, more ne-
ceflary to moderate than to inflame their rage.

ilds a diet SUCH was the situation of affairs, such the di(cernment
t i*ti bo,. with which the Emperor foresaw and provided for every

event, when the diet of the Empire met at Ratilbon.
Many of the Roman Catholic members appeared there in
perSon, but molf of the confederates of Smalkalde, un-
der pretence of their being unable to bear the expence oc-
cafioned by the late unneccflary frequency of such assem-
blies, sent only deputies. Their jealousy of the Empe-
ror, and apprehension that violence, perhaps,. might be
employed in order to force their approbation of what he
should propose in the diet, was the true cause of their ab-
fence. The speech with which the Emperor opened the
diet was extremely artful. After profeiling, in common
form, his regard for the prosperity of the Germanic body,
and declaring that in order to bestow his whole attention
uon the re-efablifhment of its order and tranquillity, he
had at present abandoned all other cares, rjeced the
molt preling solicitations of his other fubjeoa to reside a-

tnong

rong them, and postponed affairs of the greatest impor- Boo. VUI.
tance; he took notice, with ome indignation, that his '
disinterestcd example had not been imitated; many mn- 546.
bers of chief consideration having negleted to attend an
aflmbly to which he had repaired with such manifest in-
convenience to himself. He then mentioned their unhap-
py dissensions about religion; lamented the il success of
his pail endeavours to compose them; complained of the
abrupt dissolution of thelate conference. and craved their
advice with regard to-the bes and mot eft&ual method
of restoring union to the churches of Germany, together
with that happy agreement in articles of faith, which
their ancestors had found to be of no less advantage to
their civil interest,. than becoming their Christian profefli-
on.

BY this gracious and popular method of consulting the

members of the diet, rather than of obtruding upon them
any opinion of his pwn, besides the appearance of great
moderation and.the merit of paying much refpe& to their
judgment, the Empror dextrouly avoided discovering his
own sentiments, and refrved to himself, as his only
part, that of carrying into execution what they should re-
commend. Nor was he less secure of such a decision as
he wished for by referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman Catholic members, prompted by their own zeal,
or prepared by. his intrigues, joined immediately in repre-
senting that the authority of the council now met at Trent
ought to be final in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians ihould submit to its decrees as the infallible
rule of their faith; and therefore they besought him to
exert the power, with which he was invefled by the Al-
mighty, in protecting that assembly, and in compelling
the Protestants to acquiefcc in its determinations. The
Protefants, on the other hand, presented a memorial, in
which, after repeating their objecions to the council of
Trent, they proposed, as the only effecual method of
deciding the points in dispute, that either a free general
council Ihould be aflbled in Germany, or a national
council of the Empire Ihould be called, or a felet num-
ber of divines hould be appointed out of each party to
examine and deine article of faith; they mentioned the
recefle of feveal diets favourable to this proposition, and
which gave them hope of terminating all their differences
in this amicable manner they now conjured the Empe-
ror not to depart from h fomer plan, ad by offering

N a violence

Boor VIII. violence to their consciences to bring calamities upon Get.

many, the very thought of-which must fill every lover f
<546. his country with horror. The Emperor receiving this

paper, with a contemptuous smile, paid no farther regard
to it. Having already taken his final resolution, and per.
ceiving that nothing but force could compel them to ac.
quiefce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of Trent to
June 9 Rome, in order to conclude an alliance with the Pope,

the terms of which were already agreed on; he com.
manded a body of troops, levied on purpose in the Low.
Countries, to advance twards Germany; he gave com-
miflions to several officers for raising men in different
parts of the Empire; he warned John and Albert of
Brandenburg, that now was the proper time of exerting
themselves, in order to rescue their ally, Henry of Brunl-
wick, from captivity .

Thf Pro- ALL these things could not be tranfaaed without the
teiants observation and knowledge of the Protestants. The fe-
alarmed. cret was now in many hands; under whatever veil of ar-

tifice or secrecy the Emperor ill affe~ed to conceal his
designs, his officers kept no such mysterious reserve, and
his allies and fubjec6s spoke out his intentions plainly.
Alarmed with reports of this kind, from every quarter,
as well as with the preparations of war which they saw
.begun, the deputies of the confederates demanded audi-
ence of the Emperor, and in the name of their mailers,
required to know whether these military preparations were
carried on by his command, and for what end, and a-
gainfl what enemy. To a question put in such a tone,
and at a time when sacs were become too notorious to
be denied, it was necessary to give an explicit answer. He
owned the orders which he had iued, and profefling his
purpose not to molct any on account of religion who
hould at as dutiful fubjets, declared that he had no-
thing in view but to maintain the rights and prerogatives
of the Imperial dignity, and by punilhing sonic facious
members to preserve the ancient constitution of the Em-
pire from being impaired or dissolved by their irregular or
licentious condu6. Though the Emperor did not name
the persons whom he charged with such high crimes, and
deflined to be the objeas of his vengeance, it was obvi-
ous that he had the EleCtor of Saxony and Landgrave of
Het in view. Their deputies, confidering what he had

*Sklid. 4. alck. i. 65.

said,

said, as a plain declaration of his hostile intentions, im- Booc VIII.
mediately retired from Ratisbon .

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult matter to The5mpe-

treat with thePope, who having at length brought the Em- ror', treaty
peror to adopt that plan which he had long recommended, with the
assented with eagerness to every article that he proposed. Pope.
The league was signed a few days after the Cardinal's ar- July 26.
rival at Rome. The pernicious herefies which abounded
in Germany, the obstinacy of the Protestants in rejecing
the holy council assembled at Trent,. and the neceflity of
maintaining found docrine together with good order in the
church, are mentioned as the motives of this union be-
tween the contrating parties. In order to check the
growth ofthefe evils, and to puni(h such as had impiouly
contributed to spread them, the Emperor, having long
and without success made trial of gentler remedies, engaged
infiantly to take the field with a sufficient army, that
he might compel by force all who disowned the council,
or had apostatized from the religion of their forefathers,
to return into the bosom of the church, and to submit
with due obedience to the Holy See. He likewise bound
himself not to conclude a peace with them during fix
months without the Pope's content, nor without aflign-
ing him his ihare in any conquest which' hould be made
upon them; and that even after that period he hould
not agree to anyaccommodation which might be detrimen-
tal to the church or the interest of religion. On his part,
the Pope stipulated to depofite a large fum in the bank of
Venice towards defraying the expence of the war; t6
maintain at his own charge, during the space of fix months,
twelve thousand foot, and five hundred horse; to grant
the Emperor for one year half of the ecclesiastical teve-
nues throughout Spain; to authorize him by a bull to
alienate as much of the lands belonging to rejigious houses
in that country, as would amount to the um of fve hun-
dred thousand crowns ; and to employ not only spiritual
censures but military force against any Prihce' who hould
attempt to interrupt or defeat the ecicction of hi tre-.
ty t.

NOTWITHSTAMNING the explicit terms in which the Endeavours
extirpation of hercfy was declared to be the objc of the c.lt hi

intentions

_*SI4 "i31~~

id. 371i. from the

le*d 1. i37. Protestant .
T81cid. Si. PNllav. »tc. Dumout Corp iipiom. tt.

N3

war

BoOr VIIL war which was to follow upon this treaty, Charles ftil

v_^ endeavoured to persuade the Germans that he had no de-
1546' sign to abridge their religious liberty, but that heaimed

only at vindicating his own authority, and prdling the
insolence of those who had encroached upon it. With
this view, he wrote circular letters, in the fame strain
with his answer to the deputies at Ratisbon, to mos of the
free cities, and to several of the Princes who had embrac.
ed the Protestant docrines. In there he complained
loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt into which
the Imperial dignity had fallen, and of the presumptuous
as well as disorderly behaviour of rome members of the
Empire. He declared he now took arms, not in a religi-
ous but in a civil quarrel; not to oppress those who con-
tinued to behave as quiet and dutiful fubjeas, but to hum-
ble the arrogance of such as had thrown off all sense of
that fuboldination in which they were -placed under him
as head of the Germanicbody. Gross as this deception
was, and manifest as it might hive appeared to all who
eonfidered the Emperor's condua.with attention, it be-
came necefiary for him to make trial of its effea; and
such was the confidence and dexterity with which he em-
ployed it, thathederivedthe moftfolid advantages'from this
artifice. If he had avowed at once an intention of over-
turning the Proteflant church, and of reducing all Ger-
many under its ancient slate of fubjeEtion to the Papil
See, none of the cities or Princes who had embraced the
hew opinions could have remained neutral after such a
declaration, far less could they have ventured to afit the
Emperor in such an enterprie. Whereas by concealing,
and even disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being overwhelmed
by a general confederacy of all the Protelanfiit ates, but
he fumnihed the timid with an excuse for continuing in-
ative, and the designing or interfted with a pretext for
joining him without expoing thfelves to the infamy of
abandoning'their own principle, or having an ative
hand in fupprefling them. At the fame time the Empe-
ror well knew that if he were enabled, by their afiftance,
to break the.power of the Eldeor of Saxony and Land-
grave, he might ifterwards prefcrib whit terms he plead-
ed to the feeble remains of a party without union or lea-
ders, who would then regret, too late, their milhken
confidence in him, and their wconfiderate ddertion of their
';.ociates.

-THE

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforefecn display of his Boot Vmi;,

zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this plan which the Em- h-v-
peror had formed with so much care and art. Proud of The-
havinlgbeen the author of such a formidable confederacy disconcert
againf the Lutheran heresy, and happy in thinking that his plan.
the glory of extirpating it was reserved for his Pontificate,
he published the artickes of his league with the Emperor
as a proof of their pious intention, as well as of the extraor-
dinary effeots which he himsef was about to make for
maintaining the faith in its purity. Not satisfied with this,
he soon after issued a bull containing most liberal promises
of indulgence to all who hould engage in this holy enter-
prize, together with warm exhortations to such as. could
not bear a part in it themfelvet to increase the fervour of
theirprayers, and the fevetity of their mortifications, that
they might draw down. the blessing of heaven upon those
who undertook it . Nor was it zeal alone which pulhed
the Pope to make declarations so inconfitent with the ac-
count which the Emperor himself gave of his motives for
taking arms. e was much fcandaJized at Charles's dif-
limulation in'uch i cause; at his fewming to be atamed.
of owning his eal for the church ;.and at his endeavours
to make that pa.or a political onet which. he ought
to have gloried in isa war whide bad no other objea than
the defence of relion With as much foliitcde, there-
fore, as the Emperor laboured to disguise the purpose of
the confeeracy, did the Pope adeavour to publim their
real plan, in order tkit they might come atone to a rup,
ture with the Protetant, tha all hope "of concilenent
might be cut o aihd,.that Chlsmes might be underfrer
temptadions tnd:iive it less in his power than at preknt,
to betray the'ihftee'of the church by an acconmodation,
beneficial tb htnfef t.

TH jxrorthough not little offended at the Ppe's

indiscretion in mairce in. making this discover, continued
boldly to prfi"e hisown plan, and to aftert his intentions
to be no otlirith.what he had originally avowed. Seve-
al of the Protestant thtes, whom he had prviouly
gained, thought themselves juftifed in some eafire, by
his declarations, for abandoning their affociaes and even
for giving ai nce to him,

Dau Mwt Corp Diploua
t ., ill Tb tm.Hift.. 6s.

N 4 Bwr.

Boox Vili. BUT there artifices did not impoe on the greater and
'f"-v-founder part of the Protestant confederates. They clearly
Tb546. perceived it to be against the reformed religion that the
The preps -1
rtions of Emperor had taken arms, and that not only the fuppreflion
the Proter- of it, but the cxtinlion of the German liberties, would
tntsr for be the certain consequence of his obtaining such an entire
$Cr own .ier*
defence. superiority as would enable him to execute his chemes in

their full extent. They determined, therefore, to prepare
for their own defence, and neither to renounce thole re-
ligious truths, to the knowledge of which they had attained
by means o wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights
which had been transmitted to them by their ancestors.
In order to give the neceflary dire&ions for this purpose,
their deputies met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure
from Ratibon. Their deliberations were now conduced
with such vigour and unanimity, as the imminent danger
which threatened them required. The. contingent of
troops, which each of the confederates: was to fumifh,
having been fixed by the original treaty of union, orders
were given for bringing them immediately into the field.
Being sensible, at last, .that through t' narrow prejudices
of some of their members, and the jipient security of
others, they had ncgle.ed too long t trengthen them-
selves by foreign alliances, they now applied with great
earnenefs to the Venetians and Swiss,'.. .

They solicit To the f9rmer, they represented the Emperor's inten-
the lid of tion of overturning the prc~nt syRem, of Germany, and
^yvenc of railing himsel to 'b lute power. in that countryby

means ofoein for ce funmhed by tih Pope they warn-
ed them how fatal this event would prove t the liberties
of Italy, anid that by fuffring Charles to acquire unlimited
authority in the one country, they Dwoul toon fed his
dominion to be no les ddpotic in the other ithey bou ht
them, therefore, not t grant a pag rough their
territories t those troop, which oulgh tó be treated as
common enemies, becaup;.by fubdwngGcrmany they
prepared chains for the red of Europe. 7T4le rdleaions
had not fsaped the sagacity of those, wi republicans.
They had communicated their sentiment to the Pope,
and had endeavoured to divert him frpmqn A iance which
tended to render irrefftible the power of a potentate, whose
ambition he already knew to be boundless. ut they had
found Pauld o eager in the prosecution of hia on plan,
that he disregarded all their remontrancers. They

* Adriu Iftoria di fool tempi, lib. v. p. 33'.

would

would do nothing more towards preventing the dangers BooK vIII
,which they foresaw; and in return to the application 7"'
from the confederates of Smalkalde, informed them, that 54
they could not obftrua the march of the Pope's troops
through an open country, but by levying an army strong
enough to face them in the field, and that this would
draw upon themselves the whole weight of his as well as
of the Emperor's indignation. For the fame reason they
declined lending a fum of money, which the Ele&or of
Saxony and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them, to.
wards carrying on the war *.

THEIR demands upon the Swiif were not confined to ofthcSwir.

the obftruacing of the entrance of foreigners into Ger-
many; they required of them, as the nearest neighbours,
and closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with their
wonted vigour for the preservation of its liberties, and not
to land as inaive fpe&ators, while their brethren were op.
preficd and enslaved. But with what zeal soever the re-
formed cantons might have been disposed to at when the
cause of the Reformation was in danger, the Helvetie
body was so divided with regard to eligion, as rendered
it unsafe for the Protestants to take any ftep without con-
fulting their a tciates; and among them the emissaries of
the Pope and Emperor had such influence, that a refo-
lution of maintaining an exaa neutrality between the
contending parties, was the utmost which could be
procured t.

BEIN.G disappointed in both there applications, they of rn-
not long after had recourse to the Kings of Franne and ci . ad
England; the approach of danger eithei overcoming the He"n Vii
Elector of Saxony's fcruplei, or obliging him to yield to
the importbnjties of his confder fiat. The it on of
the two Monarchs flattered them with hopes of success.
Hoftgities between them had continued or some time
after the Eaci of Crefpy. But becoming weary at last of
a war, ateftred' with no glory or advante to either, they
had lately terminated ll their diference b a peace con-
eluded at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great
difficulty pCoured his allies, the Scots, to be ncluded in
the treaty, j return for that conceflion he engged to
Pay a gtret fum, which Henry demanded as dte to him

de *leid.' 31. rtsI. *e . 1to.

iv. s1a.4 lambtm HMwd

e belo O.i~cco aspd SIcrdiua, VL .

. 547.
t -lcid. jp,

on

Boo VllI.on several accounts, and he left Bologne in the hands of
'-~
V the Engliih as a pledge for his faithful performance of

'S46 that article. But though the re-eRablifhment of peace

seemed to leave the two Monarchs at liberty to turn their
attention towards Germany, so unfortunate were the
Proteflants, that they derived no immediate advantage
from this circumstance. Henry appeared unwilling to
enter into any alliance with them, but on such conditions
as would render him not only the head, but the supreme
diretor of their league; a pre-eminence which, as the
bonds of union or interest between them were but feeble,
and as he differed from them so widely ia his religious fen.
timents, they had no inclination to admit *. Francis,
more powerfully inclined by political considerations to
furnish them with assistance, found his kingdom so much
exhaufed by a long war, and was so much afraid of irri.
tating the Pope by entering into clefe union with excommu.
nicated Heretics, that he durfR not undertake the protec.
tion of the Smalkaldic league. By this ill-timed caution,
or superstitious deference to scruples, to which at other
times he was not much addiacd, he oft the most
promising opportunity of .mortifying and ditreffing his
rival, which prefcnted itflfd urig his whole reign.

Protestants BUT, notwitlfanding their ill fuccec in their negotia.
take the tions with foreign courts, the confederates found no dif.
siid with · ficulty at hme, in bringing a -ufficient force into the
grct 'my. field. Germany abounded at that time in inhabitants,

-the feudal infitutions fubfited in full force, 4dd'enabled

the nob: to lt out their umerous vaflls, and to put
them in moin on the (hortel warning; the partial fpi.
rit of the Oteranrs, not broken or enervated by the in.
troduion of commerce and arts, had acquired additio·
nal vigour during the continual wars in which they had
been ea oyed, for half a century, either in the pay d
the Eperors, or Kings of France. Upon . y ppor-
tunhy- of enterg into fcrvice, they wen aicuroomed to
run eagerly to arms and o every fandard that was mre-
ed, voluntier flocked from all quarters t. Zeal second-
ed, on this ccan, their native ardour. Megi, on whom
the dorsohe he Reforation had made bit deep i-
~idon which accompaniw truth when r di covered,
prepared to maintain it with proportional vigour; and
among a warlike people, it appered infamous to remain

· Rymer, av. 93. Herbert, aI Seck. 1W.iii. ls.

inaive, when the defence of religion was the motive Boi via.
for taking arms. Accident combined with all these cir- '
cumfrances in facilitating the levy of soldiers among the Ls46'
confederates. A considerable numberof Germans in the
pay of France, being difmifed by the King on the prof-
ped of peace with England, joined in a body the standard
of the Protestants *. By such a concurrence of causes,
they ere enabled to alfemble in a few weeks an army
composed of seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand
horse; provided with a train of an hundred and twenty
cannon, eight hundred ammunition waggons, eight thou-
sand beads of burden, and fx thousand pioneers t. 'Nor
was this army, one of the moR numerous, and undoubt-
edly the ber appointed of any which had been levied in
Europe during that century, raised by the united effort
of the whole Protestant body. The Eleaor of Saxony,
the Landgrave of Heci, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the
Princes of Anhault, and the Imperial cities of Augsburg,
Ulm, and Strafburg were the only powers which con-
tributed towards this great armament: The lecors of
Cologne, of Brandenbu*g, and-the Count Palatine,
overawed by the Emperor's threats, or deceived by his
professions, remained neuter. John marquis of Bran-'
4denburg Bareith, and Albert of Brandenburg Anfpach,
though both early converts to Lutheranifm, entered o-
penly into the Emperor's service, under pretext of having
obtained his promise for the security of the Protefant re-
ligion; and Maurice of Saxony soon followed their ex-
ample.

THE immense number of their troops, as well as the Thei nequ.

amazing rapidity wherewith they had a&mbled them, )ity ofthe
aftoniled the Emperor, and filled him with the most dif- pPest'q
quting apprehen~.ris., He was, indeed, in no condition their.
toreMt such a mighty force. Shut up in Ratilbon, a
town of no great tregth, whole inhabitants, being
mofily Lutherans, would have been more ready to be-
tray than to afflt him, with only three thousand Spanilh
foot, whom he had called from the frontiers of Hungary,
and about ive thousand Germans who had joined him
trom diffrnt parts of the Empire, he must have been
overwhelmed by the approach of such a numerous army,

* Thnun. I. i. 6.
t Thuars. .

i . . Ludrvici b Avil & Zongs Commenttriorom de bet.
erm. libdo. uo 550. , A rmo . 3. .

which

Boos vIm. which he could not fight, nor even hope to retreat from it
-'"^'in safety. The Pope's troops, though in full march to
3546' his relief, had carce reached the frontiers of Germany;

the forces which he expeced from the Low-Countries
had not yet begun to move, and were even far from be-
ing complete *. His situation, however, called for more
immediate succour, nor did it seem pracicable for him to
wait for such distant auxiliaries, with whom his junction
was so precarious.

They im- But it happened fortunately for Charles, that the con.
prudently federates did not avail themselves of the advantage which
negotiate
iiftad of lay so full in their view. In civil wars, the first feps are
aing. commonly taken with much timidity and hesitation. Men

are olicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance of
moderation and equity; they strive to gain partizans by
seeming to adhere ftri&ly to known forms; nor can they
be brought, at once, to violate those eftablilhed inftituti-
ons, which in times of tranquillity they have been accuf-
tomed to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be mofi vigorous
and decisive. Influenced by there considerations, which,
happily for the peace of society, operate powerfully on
the human mind, the confederates could not think of
throwing off that allegiance which they regularly owed
to the head of the Empire, of turning their arms againfi
him without one solemn appeal more to his candour,
and the impartial judgment of their fellow subje&s. For
Juy '. this purpose, they addrefied a letter to the Emperor, and

a manifesto to all the inhabitants of Germany. The te-
nor of both was the fame. They represented their own
condu& with regard to civil affairs as dutiful and fubmil-
five; they mentioned the inviolable union in which they
had lived with the Emperor, as well as. the many and re-
cent marks of his good will and gratitude wherewithal thev
had been honoured; they aflerted religion to be the sole
cause of the violence which the Emperor now meditated
against them; and in proof of this adduced many argu-
ments to convince those who were so weak as to be de-
ceived by the artifices with which he endeavoured to co-
ver his real intentions ; they declared their own refoluti-
on to rifque every thing in maintenance of their religious
rights, and foretold the diliolution of the German con-

*Sleid 89. Avila, 8. a.

ftitutin,

ftitution, if the Emperor hould finally prevail against Booz VII.
them . w

BUT Charles, though in such a perilous situation as T 4ZEpc-

might have inspired him with moderate sentiments, ap- ror puts
peared as inflexible and haughty as if his affairs had been them uner
ji the most prosperous state. His only reply to the ad- tht Fp.
dress and manifesto of the Protefants, was to publilh the jaly o.
ban of the Empire againf the Eleor of Saxony and
Landgrave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all who
should dare to assist them. By this sentence, the ulti-
mate and most rigorous one which the German jurifpru-
dence has provided for the punishment of traitors, or ene-
mies to their country, they were declared rebels and out-
laws, and deprived of every privilege which they enjoy-
ed as members of the Germanic body; their goods were
confiscated; their fubjeas absolved from their oath of al-
legiance; and it became not only lawful but meritorious
to invade their territories. The nobles, and free cities,
who framed or perseed the conflitution of the German
government, had not been so negligent of their own
lafety and privileges as to trufl the Emperor with this
formidable jurifdiEtion. The authority of a diet of the
empire ought to have been interposed before any of its
members could be put under the ban. But Charles o-
verlooked that formality, well knowing that, if his arms
were crowned with success, there would remain none who
would have either poweror courage to call in question what
he had done t. The Emperor, however, did not found
his sentence aganift the Eleor and Landgrave on their
revolt from the eltablifhed church, or their conduct with
regard to religion ; he affeaed to aflign for it reasons pure-
ly civil, and these too exprefled in such general and ambi-
guous terms, without specifying the nature or circumflan-
ces of their guilt, as rendered it more like an a of def-
potic power, than of a legal and limited jurifdiaion.
Nor was it altogether from choice, or to conceal his in-
tentions, that Charles had recourse to the ambiguity of
general expreflions, he durfi not mention too particular-
ly the causes of his sentence, as every aion which he
could have charged upon the Eleor and Landgrave as a
crime, might have been employed with equal justice to

Sleid. 34.
Sleid. 386. D Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 11, 314. Pfefel Ht.
Abret du D)rit Publ, 68, 736, 5l.

condemn

Boo: VII{. condemn such of the Protestants whom he Rill pretended

to confider as faithful fubjcts, and whom it would have

1546' been extremelg imprudent to alarm or difgut.

They de- THr celfederates, now perceiving all hopes of accom.
dare war modationto be at an end, had only to choose whether
*kin"« they would submit without reserve to the Emperor's will,
Cbale'. or proceed to open hostilities. Nor did they want public

spirit and resolution to make the proper choice. A few
days after the ban of the Empire was published, they,
according to the custom of that age, ent a herald to the
imperial camp with a foleinn declaration of war againfi
Charles, to whom they no longer gave any other title than
that of pretended Emperor, and renounced all allegiance,
homage or duty he might claim,or they had hitherto yielded
to him. But previous to this formality, part of their troops
had begun to a& The command of a considerable body

Their irn of troops railed by the city of Augiburg having been given
operatioos, to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who by the

booty he had got when the Imperialifs plundered Rome,
together with the merit of long service, had acquired
wealth and authority, which placed him on a level with
the chief of the German nobles; that gallant veteran re.
solved before hejoined the main body of the confederates,
to attempt Something suitable to his former fame and to the
expe&ation of his countrymen. As the Pope's forces were
hastening towards Tyrol, in order to penetrate into Ger-
many, by the narrow pafIes through the mountains which
run across that country, be advanced thither with the ut-
most rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cufflein, tw
irong calfes which commanded the principal defiles.
Without opping a moment, he continued his march
towards nfpruck, by getting poffelion of which he would
have obliged the Italians to op short, and with a small
body of men could have refifed all the efforts of the
greatest armies. Caflealto, the governor of Trent,
knowing what a fatal blow this would be to the Emperor,
all whose designs must have proved abortive if his Italia,
auxiliaries had been intercepted, railed a few troops witl
the utmot dispatch, and threw himself into the town.
Schertel, however, did not abandon the enterprize, and
was preparing to attack the 'place, when the intelligence
of the approach of the Italians, and an order troM
the Eledor and Landgrave obliged him to delilt. By
his retreat the palcs were left open, and the Italians

entered

entered Germany without any opposition, but from the BoK VIII.
garrisons that Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg and Cuff- '
flein, which having no hopes of being relieved, were not 1546.
long in surrendering * t.

NOR was the recalling of Schertel the only error ofand ill con-

which the confederates were guilty. As the fupremeduo.
command of their army was committed, in terms of the
league of Smalkalde, to the Elector of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse with equal authority, all the inconvenien-
cies arising from a divided and co-ordinate jurifdi6tion,
which is always of fatal consequence in the operations of
war, were immediately felt. The Eleor, though in-
trepid in his own person to excess, and most ardently zeal-
ous in the cause, was flow in deliberating, uncertain as
well as irresolute in his determinations, and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and safe, to such
as were bold and decisive. The Landgrave, of a more
a&ive and enterprizing nature, formed all his resolutions
with promptitude, wilhed to execute them with spirit, and
uniformly preferred such schemes as tended to bring the
contelt to a speedy issue. Thus their maxims, with re-
gard to the conduc of the war, differed as widely as
those y which they were influenced in preparing for
it. Such perpetual contrariety in their sentiments
gave rife, imperceptibly, to jealousy and the spirit
of contention. These multiplied the difenfions flowing
from the incompatibility of their natural temper, and
rendered them more violent. The other members of
the league, confidering themselves as independent, and
subjed to the Eleftor and Landgrave, only in confe-
quence of a voluntary confederacy, did not long retain
a proper veneration for commanders, who proceeded with
to little unanimity ; and the numerous army of the Pro-
teftants, like a vast machine whose parts are all compaca-

Seckend. lib. ii. 7o. Adriani Ifioria di fuoi tempi, lib. 335.

t Seckendorf, the indufirious author of the Conimentarius Apologeticus

de Ljthernifmo, whom I have so long and safely followed as my guide 'in
Cenman dafair, was deicended from Sihertel. With the cre and solicitude
of a German, who wa himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has published
long digreflio concernina hicr ncefior, calculated chiefly to Ihew how 8cher-
tel wa ennobled, and his pofleritv allied to many of the mod ancient fami.
lie" in the Empire. Among other curious particulars, he gives us an ac-
count of his wealth, the chieffource of which wa the plunder he g6t at
Rme ,Him landed ellate wla fold by his grandlons for fix hundred thou.
mnd flormi. By thia we may torm lome idea of the richer amairfd by the
a'lrnrrli, or commanders of mercenar y Ihands in that age. At the takin
'Rotm, Shbertte wan only a c¢ptai;n. Scckend. lib. ii. 73.

ed,

Boon VIIt. ed, and which is destitute of any power sufficient to

--c-' move and regulate the whole, aed with no consistency,
,s46. vigour or effet.

The Pope's THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by remaining at
troops join Ratibon, he would render it impossible for the Pope's
the Empe- forces to join him, having boldly advanced to Landshut

on the Ifer, the confederates loft ome days in deliberat.
ing whether it was proper to follow him into the territo.
ries of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral prince. When
at last they surmounted that scruple, and began to move
towards his camp, they suddenly abandoned the design,
and haflened to attack Ratisbon, in which town Charles
could leave only a finall garrison. Meanwhile the Papal
troops, amounting fully to that number which Paul had
stipulated to furnish, reached Landshut, and were fol.
lowed by fix thousand Spaniards of the veteran bands fRa
tioned in Naples. The confederates, after Schertel's fpi-
rited but fruitless expedition, seem to have permitted there
forces to advance unmolested to the place of rendezvous,
without any attempt to attack either them or the Em-
peror separately, or to prevent their junction *. The
Imperial army amounted now to thirty-fix thousand men,
and was still more formidable by the discipline and valour
of the troops, than by their number. Avila, commander
of Alcantara, who had been present in all the wars car-
ried on by Charles, and had served in the armies which
gained the memorable viStory at Pavia, which conquered
Tunis, and invaded France, gives this the preference to
any martial force he had ever seen assembled t. Oav io
Farnese, the Pope's grandson, aflified by the ablefi officers
formed in the long wars between Charles and Franci,
commanded the Italian auxiliaries. His brother the Car-
dinal Farnese, accompanied him, as Papal legate; and
in order to give the war the appearance of a religious en-
terprize, he proposed to march at the head of the army,
with a cross carried before him, and to publish indulgen-
ces wherever he came to all who hould give them any
afliflance, as had anciently been the pracice in the Cru-
gades against the Infidels. But this the Emperor ftriatly
prohibited, as inconfifient with all the declarations which
he had made to the Germans of his own party; and the
legate perceiving, to his aftonilhment, that the exercif of

Adrias Iftorib di f(oe tmpi, lib. 4. 34o.

~t~ Avi~h,~~
i~. *the

the Protcfiant religion, the extirpation of which he con- BooK Vir.
i;idete as the sole object of tle war, was publickly per- _
mitred in the Imperial camp, soon returned in disgust to 1546.
Italy *

ti- arrival of these troops enabled the Emperor to

fend luch a reinforcement to the garrison of Ratisbon,
that the confederates relinquilhing all hopes of reducing
tiiat toan, marched towards Ingoldladt on the Danube,
,,ar to which Charles was now cncamped. Meanwhile
ihey exc'aincd loudly againfl the Emperor's notorious
,,.lition of the laws and confitutiun ot-the Empire, in
lia'. in called in foreigners to lay wafe Germany, and to
opprcis its liberties. As in that age, the dominion of the
Roman See was so odious to the rotcflants, that the
n me of the Pope was ufficient to inspire them with hor-
ror at any enterprize which he countenanced, and to raise
i thliir minds the b!ackell ufpicion,, it came to be uni-
verfilly believed among them, that Paul, not fatisf:ed
illh attacking them openly by force of arms, had dif-
I er'ed his emillaries all over Germany to let on fire their
icwns anti magazines, and to poilon the wells and foun-
t:n3s f water. Nor did this rumour spread only among
t!L, vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful enough
to make a deep impression on their credulity; even the
I 2ccrs of the party, blinded by their prejudices, publilh-
ed a declaration, in which they accused the Pope of hav-
in; employed these Ant:clrithan and diabclical arts against
them t. 'Ihefe fentimnts of the confederates were con-
nrmed, in some meaiure, by the bia iour ot the Papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too gorous towards He-
rctics anathematized by the church, were guilty of great
exceflcs in the Lutheran tcrritoris, and aggravated the
calamities ot war, by mingling ,Nith it all the cruelty of
biottcd zeal.

I'Hc firll operations in the field, however, did not cor- The canfe-

rcfpol:d with the violence of thole pailons which ani- derateb d.
nated individuals. The Emperor had prudentli taken v^Ce t*
tle refoluiion o avoiding an act on with an enemy so far Imperial
lulperior in number , elpecially as he iurelaw that nothing armn.
'ould keep a body compoed of Ib many and such dilliini-
I.r members from falling, to pieces, but the prefling to at-
tJ(k it with an icoiiderate precipitalcy. The confede.

*P. Paul, 1ip . tSltid. 39.
I Av.l1, 78. a.
VeL. 1. 0 rates,

BooK vIIi. rates, though it was no less evident to them that every
'>-'m' moment's delay was pernicious, were ill prevented by

'S4<6 the weakness or division of their leaders from exertingthat

vigour, with which their situation, as well as the ardour of
Aug. z2. their soldiers, ought to have inspircd them. On their ar-

rival at Ingoldfladt, they found the Emperor in a camp
not remarkable for firength, and surrounded only by a
flight entrenchment. Before the camp lay a plain of such
extent, as afforded sufficient pace for drawing out their
whole army, and bringing it to at at once. Every con-
fideration flould have determined them to have seized this
opportunity of attacking the Emperor; and their vast fu.
periority in numbers, theeagernefs of their troops, toge-
ther with the flability of the German infantry in pitched
battles, afforded them the modl probable expe&ation of
vi&ory. The Landgrave urged this with great warmth,
declaring, that if the ole command were vefied in him,
he would terminate the war on that occasion, and decide
by one general ation the fate of the two parties. But the
Elecor, reflecting on the valour and discipline of the
enemies forces, animated by the presence of the Emperor,
and conducted by the best officers of the age, would not
venture upon an aion, which he thought to be so doubt-
ful, as the attacking such a body of veterans on ground
which they themselves had chosen, and while covered by
fortifications which, though imperfec, would afford them
no fmi! advantage in the combat. Notwithtanding his
hesitation and remonfirances, it was agreed, to advance
towards the enemies camp in battle array, in order to
make trial whether by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the Imperi-

The Ln*- alifis out of their works. But the Emperor had too much
peror de- sagacity to fall into this fiare. He adhered to his own
t al,. fvyiem with inflexible conltancy; and drawing up his

soldiers behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should venture upon an
afliult, calmly waited their approach, and carefully re-
firained his own men from any excursions or kirmilhes
that ight bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addrefling the troops of the diffe-
rent nations in their own language, encouraged them by
the chearfulnefs of his voice and countenance he exposed
himself in places of the greatest danger, and amidf the
warmet fire of the enemies artillery, the molt numerous
that had hitherto been brought into the field by any rmy.

Rouzcd

Rouzed by his example, not a man quitted his ranks ; it Booi Vlil.
was thought'infamous to discover any symptom of fear '~.'
when the Emperor appeared so intrepid; and the meanest 546
soldier plainly perceived, that their declining the combat
at present was not the effect of timidity in their general,
but the result of a well weighed caution. The confede-
rates, after firing several hours on the Imperialists, with
more noise and terror than execution, feeing no profpe&
of alluring them to fight on equal terms, retired to their
own camp. The Emperor employed the night with such
diligence in firengthening his works, that the confede-
rates, returning the canonade next day, found that,
though they had now been willing to venture upon such a
bold experiment, the opportunity of making an attack
with advantage was loft .

AFT-ER such a discovery from their own feebleness and The rie-
irresolution, and of the prudence as well as firmness ofmfh troopr

.

jin the Em-

the Emperor's condua, the confederates turned their peror
whole attention towards preventing the arrival of a power-
ful reinforcement of ten thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, which the count de Buren was bringing to the
Emperor from the Low-Countries. But though that ge-
neral had to traverse such an extent of country; though
his route lay thro' the territories of several ates warmly
disposed to favour the confederates; though they were ap-
prized of his approach, and by their vast superiority in
nurribers might easily have detached a force sufficient to
overpower him, he advanced with such rapidity, and by
such well-concerted movements, while they opposed him
with such remiflfefs, and so little military kill, that lie
conduced this body to the Imperial camp without any
loss .

AFTER the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he placed Sept. 16.

great confidence, the Emperor altered, in some degree,
his plan of operations, and began to a more upon the
uffenfive, though he fill avoided a battle with the utmost
industry. He made himself master ofNuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen, and fe-
veral other towns, situated on the modl considerable fireams
that fall into that mighty river. By this he got the com-
mand of a great extent of country, though not without
being obliged to engage in several encounters, of which

Sleid. 395, 397. Avill 17.. Lmb. Hortean. p. Leard. i.
t Bl1id. 403.

the
U 2

Loo; VIH.I the fuceefs was various, nor without the most imminent
' ""'"danger oftener than once of being drawn into a battle.
Statebofth In this manner the whole autumn was spent ; neither
armies, party gained any remarkable superiority over the other,

and nothing was yet done towards bringing the war to a
period. The Emperor had often foretold, with conti.
dence, that discord and the want of money would compel
the confederates to disperse that unwieldly body, which
they had neither abilities to guide, nor funds to support
but though he waited with impatience for the accomplish.
ment f his predicion, there was no profpe& of that
event being at hand. Meanwhile, he hin.lelf began to
susser from the want of forage and provisions; even the
Catholic provinces being so much incensed at the intro-
lduaicn of foreigners into the Empire, that they supplied
them with relutance, while the camp of the confederates
abounded with a profusion of all necessaries, which the
zeal of their friends in the adjacent countries furnilhed
with the utmofi liberality and good-will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the climate
or food of Germanny, were become unfit for service
through sickness t. Considerable arrears were now due
to the troops, who had scarce received any money from
the beginning of the campaign; the Emperor, experiencing
on this as well as on former occasions, that his jurildic-
tion was more extensive than his revenues, and that the
former enabled him to assemble a greater number of Ibl.
diers, than the latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all
these accounts, he found it difficult to keep his army in
the field; ome of his ablest generals, and even the duke
of Alva himfclf, persevering and obfiinate as he usually
was in the prosecution of every measure, adoifing him to
disperse his troops into winter-quarters. But as the argu-
ments urged aainit any plan which he had adopted,
rarely made much impreflion upon the Emperor, he paid
no regard to their opinion, and determined to continue
his efforts in order to weary out the confederates; being
well aflured that if he could once oblige them to separate,
there was little probability of their uniting again in a
bIdly . Still, however, it remained a doubtful point,
'^hether his feadinefs was most likely to fail, or their zeal

* 1 ii Small aldici Commentaries Grtco fermone rdciptut a Joach.
.'Amrtlriiu p. Prherun, vol. iii. p. 479.
t Cmrrerr. ep. Frebl. 483. t Thuaa. 83.

to

to be exhausted. It was still uncertain which party, by BooK VIII.
firfl dividing its forces, would give the superiority to the L ,
other; when an unexpected event decided the contest, and 546
occasioned a fatal reverse in the affairs of the confederates.

MAURICE of Saxony having, by tie arts which have The

already been described, insinuated himfclf into the Em- 1Chme S,
peror's confidence, no sooner saw hostilities ready to break si'),,,,,
out between him and the confederates of Smalkalde, than
aft profpeqs of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to him from his
ancestors, was far from satisfying his aspiring mind; and
he perceived with pleasure the approach of civil war, as
amidst the revolutions or convulsions which it occasions,
opportunities which at other times are fought in vain, of
acquiring new power as well as additional dignity, present
themselves to an enterprizing sp.rit. As he was thoroughly
acquainted with the state of the two contending parties,
and the qualities of their leaders, he did not hesitate long
in determining on which fide the greatest advantages were
to be expeaed.-Having revolved all these things in his
own mind, and having taken his final resolution of joining
the Emperor, he prudently determined to declare early in
his favour; that, by the merit of this, he might acquire a
title to a proportional recompense. With this view, he His leage
had repaired to Ratisbon in the month of May, under nith the
pretext of attending the diet; and after many conferences r
with Charles or his minifiers, concluded, though with
the most mysterious secrecy, a treaty in which he engaged
to concur in affifing the Emperor as a faithful subjea;
and Charles, in return, flipulated to bellow on him all the
spoils of the Eledor of Saxony, his dignities as well as territo-
ries . History scarce records any treaty which can be confi-
dered as a more manifest violation of those just principles
whichought toinfluence human actions.Maurice,a professed
ProtcRant, at a time when the belief of religion, as well
as zeal for its intercft, took frong pocflTion of every mind,
binds himself to contribute his afliflance towards carrying
on a war, which had manifectly no other objeat tan the
extirpation of the ProteRant docrines. He engages to
take arms againfi his father-in-law, and to firip his near-
eft relation of his honours and dominions. He joins a
duhious friend againfi a known benefactor, to whom his
obligations were both great and recent. Nor was the
* Hirzc Annll. Bbant, vol. i. 68. Struv;i Crp ic48. 'lluan. 84.

0 3 prince

Boo& vlIi. prince who ventured upon all this, one of those audacious

politicians, who, provided they can accomplilh their ends
1546. and secure their interest, disregard avowedly the most fa-

cred obligaticns, and glory in contemning whatever is
honourable or decent. Maurice's conduct, if the whole
muff be acribed to policy, was more artful and masterly;
he executed his plan in all its parts, and yet endeavoured
to preserve, in every ftep which he took, the appearance
of what was fair, and virtuous, and laudable. It is pro-
bable from his subsequent behaviour, that with regard to
the Proteflant religion at least, his intentions were up-
right, that he fondly trusted to the Emperor's promies for
its security, but that, according to the fate of all who
refine too much in policy, and who tread in dark and
crooked paths, in attempting to deceive others, he him.
self was, in some degree, deceived.

lis artifices His sirs care, however, was to keep there engagements
in orderto with the Emperor closely concealed: and so perfet a
olceCl his malRer was he in the art of diflimulation, that the confe-

derates, notwithstanding his declining all connetions with
them, and his remarkable afliduity in paying court to the
Emperor, seemed to have entertained no suspicion of his
designs. Even the Eleaor of Saxony, when he marched
at the beginning of the campaign to join his aflociates,
committed his dominions to his protecion, which Mau-
rice, with an infiduous appearance of friendship, readily
undertook *. But scarce had the Elecor taken the field,
when Maurice began to consult privately with the King of
the Romans how to invade those very territories, with
the defence of which he was entrusted. Soon after, the
Emperor ent him a copy of the Imperial ban denounced
againfi the elecor and Landgrave. As he was next heir
to the former, and particularly interested in preventing
firangers from getting his dominions into their possession,
Charles required him, not only for his own fake, but up-
on the allegiance and duty which he owed to the head of the
Empir;, instantly to seize and detain in his hands the for-
feited estates of the Eletor; warning him, at the fame
time, that if he negleted to obey there commands, I;e
should be held as accessory to the crimes of his kinsman,
and be liable to the fame punishment t.

truvii Corp. 044. t Sleid. 391. Thua. 4.

Tivs

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice himself BOOK V11-

suggested, was employed by him in order that his con-
dua towards the Eletor might seem a matter of necessity 1546
but not of choice, an as of obedience to his superior,
rather than a voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinf-
man and ally. But in order to give ome more specious
appearance to this thin veil with which he endeavoured to
cover his ambition, he had called together, oon after his
return from Ratilbon, the fRates of his country; and re-
presenting to them that a civil war between the Emperor and
confederates of Smalkalde was now become unavoidable,
desired their advice with regard to the part he should at
in that event. They being prepared, no doubt, and tu-
tored before-hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their
Prince, whom they both eeemed and loved, gave such
council as they knew would be most agreeable advising
him to offer his mediation towards reconciling' the con-
tending parties; but if that were rejeced, and he could
obtain proper security for the Proteflant religion, they de-
livered it as their opinion that he ought, in all other
points, to yield obedience to the Emperor. Upon re-
ceiving the Imperial rescript, together with the ban against
the Ele&or and Landgrave, he summoned the states of
his country a second time; he laid before them the or-
ders which he had received, and the punilhment with
which he was threatened in cafe of disobedience; he ac-
quainted them that the confederates had refused to admit
of his mediation, and that the Emperor had given him
the most fatisfatory declarations with regard to religion ;
he mentioned his own interest in securing pofleflion of the
elecoral dominions, together with the danger of allowing
strangers to obtain an etablifhment in Saxony; and ups
on the whole, as the point under deliberation refpeaed
his fubjets no less than himself, he desired to know their
sentiments how he Ihould seer in that difficult and arduous
conjun&ture. The fates, no lets obsequious and complai.
sant, than formerly, relying on the E.nperor's promises
as a perfet security for their religion, proposed that, be.
fore he had recourse to more violent methods, they would
write to the Eleor, exhorting him, as the bcRf means of
appeasing the Emperor, and of preventing his domini-
ons from being seized by foreign or hostile powers, to
give his content that Maurice hould take possession of
them quietly and without opposition. Maurice himself

0 4 seconded

Boot VIIl. seconded their arguments in a letter to the Landgrave, t:,
*-"--s father-in-law. such an extravagant proposition was re-

1546. jeded with the corn and indignation which it deserved.

The Landgrave, in return to Maurice, taxed him witli
his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinsman to whon
he was so deeply indebted ; ie treated with contempt his
ffedlaticn of executing the imperial ban, wich he could
not but know to be altogether void, by the unconftitutio.
nal and arbitrary manner in which it had been issued; he
besought him not to susser himself to be so far blinded hlI
ambi:ion, as to forget the obligations of honour and
friendship, or to betray the Protestant religion, the extir-
pation of which out of Germany, even by the acknow.
ledgment of the Pope himself, was the great object of
the resent war *.

He invades BUT Maurice had proceeded teo far to be diverted
thc ter to- from pursuing his plan by reproaches or arguments. No-
ris of the
IEleor of thing now remained but to execute with igour, what he
Saxony. had hitherto carried on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor

was his boldncfs in action inferior to his subtilty in con-
November. trivance. Having aflembled about twelve thousand men,

he suddenly invaded one part of the electoral provinces,
while Ferdinand, with an army composed of Bohemians
and Hungarians, over-ran theother. Maurice, in two
flhap encounters, defeated the troops which the Eletor
had left to guard his country ; and improving these ad-
vantages to the utmoll, r.tde himself matter of the
whole ElecQorate, except Wittemberg, Gotha and Eife-
nach, which being places of considerable strength, and
defended by sufficient garrisons, refused to open their gates.
The news of these rapid conquefs oon reached the Im-
perial and confederate camps. In the former, their satis-
tadionl with an event, which it was foreseen would be pro-
dutlive of the moR important consequences, was expressed
by every poflible demonfiration of joy. The latter was
filled with allonilhment and terror. The name of Mau-
rice was mentioned with execration, as an apoltate from
religion, a betrayer of the German liberty, and a contem-
ncr of the mult sacred and natural ties. Every thing
that the rage or invention of the party could uggel}, in
order to blacken and render him odious; inveaives, fa-
tires and lampoons, the furious declamations'of their
preachers, together with the rude wit of their authors,

Sleid. 4S, &c. Thuan. 5. Camerai. 4q4.

VC t r

1re all employed againfl him. While he, trusting to Boot ViI.

tle arts which he had so long pratifed, as if his actions
could 13.e adm tted of any feriousjuftification, publish- 546
l a imanifeflo, containing the fame frivolous rcafons for
his conduct, which he had formerly alledged in the meet-

., of his flates, and in his letter to the Landgrave *.
I'HE Elector, upon the first intell gence of Maurice's The confe-

moi(ns, proposed to return home with his troops for derkver
the defence ot Saxony. But the deputies of the league, tres of ac-
airembled at Ulm, prevailed on him, at that time, to re- commo:;a-
main with the army, and to prefer the success of the tion to t
common cause before the security of his own dominions.
At length the sufferings and complaints of his fubjeas
increared so much, that he discovered the utmoll impati-
ence to set out, in order to rescue them from the oppref-
sion of Maurice, and from the cruelty of the Hungarians,
who having been accuftomedto that licentious and merciless
species of war which was thought lawful against the
'Turks, committed, wherever they came, the wildest aEs
of rapine and violence. This desire of the Elector's was so
natural and so warmly urged, that the deputies at Ulm,
though fully sensible of the unhappy consequences of di-
viding their army, durff not refuse their content, how un-
willing soever to grant it. In this perplexity, they repair-
ed to the camp of the confederates at Giengen on the
Brentz, in order to consult their conltituents. Nor were
they lels at a loss what to determine in this prefling emer-
gence. But, after having confidered seriously the open
desertion of some of their allies; the scandalous luke-
warmness of others who had hitherto contributed nothing
towards the war; the intolerable load which had fallen,
of consequence, upon such members as were most zealous
for the cause, or molt faithful to their engagements; the
ill success of all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid;
the unusual length of the campaign the rigour of the
season; together with the great number of soldiers; and
even officers, who had, on that account, quitted the ser-
vice; they concluded that nothing could lave them, but
either the bringing the contell to the immediate decision
ot a battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an accom-
modation of all their differences with Charles by a treaty.
Such was the despondency and dejecion which now op-
pressed the party, that of tlhele two they chore what was

* S;t;J. 409, 41.

most

Boon VIII. molt feeble and unmanly, empowering a minister of ktt
'wV" ' Eleor of Brandenbourg to propound overtures of peact

1546. in their name to the Emperor.

nlicb he No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty confedera-
rt.jads. cy, which had so lately threatened to drive him out ,f

Germany, condescending to make the firl advances to-
wards an agreement, than concluding their spirit to be
gone, or their union to be broken, he immediately as-
fumed the tone of a conqueror; and as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a negotiation,
but upon condition of the Elecor of Saxony's consenting
previously to give up himself and his dominions absolutely
to his disposal *. As nothing more intolerable or igno-
minious could have been prescribed, even in the worfl situ.
ation of their affairs, it is no wonder this proposition was
rejeced by a party, humbled and disconcerted rather than
subdued. But though they refused to submit tamely to
the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pursue the only
plan which could have preserved their independence; and
forgetting that it was the union of their troops in one bo-
dy which had hitherto rendered the confederacy formida-
ble, and had more than once obliged the Imperialifis to
think of quitting the field; they inconsiderately abandon.
ed that advantage, which, in spite of the diversion in

The troops Saxony, would till have kept the Emperor in awe; and
of the cn- yielding to the Ele&or's intreaties, consented to his pro-
tf te. pofal of dividing the army. Nine thousand men were

left in the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in order to protet
that province, as well as the free cities of Upper Germa-
ny ; a considerable body marched with the eletor towards
Saxony; but the greater part returned with their refpec-
tive leaders into their own countries, and were dispersed
there t.

AlmofR il THE moment the troops separated, the confederacy
the me-h ceased to be the objea of terror; and the members of it,
coofede- who while they composed part of a great body had felt
racy ubmit but little anxiety about their own security, began to trem-
to th Em- ble when they reflected that they now flood exposed singly

to the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance. Charles
did not allow them leisure to recover from their con-
fiemation, or to form any new chemes of union. As
soon as the confederates began to retire, he put his army

* Horgeztiue p. Scard. i. 485.

t Sleid. 41t.

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

in motion, and though it was now the depth of winter, Boor ViIl.
he iefo!ved to keep the field, in order to make the most R "
of that favourable juncture for which he had waited so 146.
long. Some small towns in which the enemy had left
arrifons immediately opened their gates. Norlingen,
Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial cities, submitted soon as-
ter. Though Charles could not prevent the E!ecor
from levying, as he retreated, large contributions upon
the archbishop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclesiastics*, this was more than balanced by the sub-
milfion of Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly
distinguished by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league. As
soon as an example was set of deserting the common
cause, the reft of the members became instantly impatient
to follow it, and seemed afraid left others, by getting
the flart of them in returning to their duty, Ihould, on
that account, obtain more favourable terms. The Elec-
tor Palatine, a weak Prince, who, notwithfianding his
profeflions of neutrality, had, very preposterously, sent
to the confederates four hundred horse, a body so incon-
fiderable as to be scarce any addition to their strength, but
great enough to render him guilty in the eyes of the Em-
peror, made his acknowledgments in the most abjet
manner. The inhabitants of Augiburg, (haken by so
many inflances of apoftacy, expelled the brave Schertel
out of their city, and accepted such conditions as the
the Emperor was pleased to grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the firR
who had offered to submit, was obliged to sue for pardon
on his knees, and even after this mortifying humiliation
obtained it with difficulty t. Memmingen, and other 1547.
free cities in the circle of Suabia, being now abandoned
by all their former aflociates, found it necessary to pro-
vide for their own safety by throwing themselves on the
Emperor's mercy. Straiburg and Frankfort on the Maine,
cities far remote from the feat of danger, discovered no
greater fleddinefs than those which lay more exposed.
rhus a confederacy, lately so powerful as to hake the
Imperial throne, fell to pieces, and was diflolved in the
fpaceof a few weeks; scarce any member of that formidable
combination now remaining in arms, but the Ele&or

* Thuan. 88.
t Mem. tie Ribier, tom. i. 589.

and

Boos vIIl. and Landgrave, whom the Emperor, having from the

Cc-^ beginning marked out as the victims of his vengeance,

Thc4i7o- was at no pains to reconcile. Nor did he grant thole who
ro. cndi- submitted to him a generous and unconditional pardon.
tion in- Conscious of his own superiority, he treated them both
Epoer b the with haughtiness and rigour. All the Princes in person,

and the cities, by their deputies, were compelled to im.
plore mercy in the humble po:lure of supplicants. As the
Emperor laboured under great difficulties from the want of
money, he imposed heavy fines upon them, which he levied
with most rapacious exa&nefs. The Duke of Wurtemberg
paid three hundred thousand crowns; the city of AugC
burg an hundred and fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred
thousand ; Frankfort eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty
thousand; and the ref in proportion to their abilities, or
their different degrees of guilt. They were obliged, be.
fides, to renounce the league of Smalkalde; to furnish
afiftance, if required, towards executing the Imperial
ban against the Eletor and Landgrave; to give up their
artillery and warlike Ilores to the Emperor; to admit gar-
rifons into their principal cities and places of strength;
and in this disarmed and dependent situation, to expet
the final award which the Emperor hould think proper
to pronounce when the war came to an ifiue . But,
amidst the great variety of articles dictated by Charles
on this occasion, he, in conformity to his original plan,
took care that nothing relating to religion should be insert-
ed, and to such a degree were the confederates humbled
or overawed, that, forgetting the zeal which had so long
animated them, they were solicitous only about their safe-
ty, without venturing to infilf on a point, the mention of
which they saw him avoiding with so much industry. The
inhabitants of. Memmingen alone made some feeble es-
forts to procure a promise of protecion in the xercife of
their religion, but were checked .o severely by the Em-
peror's ministers, that they instantly fell from their de-
mand.

THE Ele&or of Cologne, whom, notwithflanding the

sentence of xcommunication issued against him by
the Pope, Charles had hitherto allowed to remain in pol-
feflion of the archiepiscopal fee, being now required by
the Emperor to submit to t;c ccnfuies of the church,

* Sleid. 4Y i, &c. TbuAn. iii'. iv. p. a 15. Mem., dc birr, otn ;.
óo6.

this virtuous and disinterested prelate, unwilling to expose BooK vti.
his fubjets, on his account, to the miseries of war, vo-
luntarily resigned that high dignity. With a moderationJa'5'
becoming his age and chara&er, he chose to enjoy truth
together with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society by engaging
in a doubtful and violent struggle in order to tetain his
office .

MEANWHILE the Eletor of Saxony reached the fron- TheEleIor
tiers of his country. As Maurice could assemble no force returns to

DSxony, aQ

equal to the army which accompanied him, he, in a hort recover
time, not only recovered poffeflion of his own territories, potffrfiJn of
but over-ran Mifnia, and flripped his rival of all that be- '
longed to him except Dresden and Leipfic, which being
towns of some flrength could not be suddenly reduced.
Maurice, obliged to quit the field, and to (hut himself
up in his capital, dispatched courier after courier to the
Emperor, representing his dangerous situation, and soli-
citing him with the most earnedf importunity to march
immediately to his relief. But Charles, busy at that
time in prescribing terms to such members of the
league as were daily returning to their allegiance, thought
it sufficient to detach Albert Marquis of Brandenburg-
Anfpach with three thousand men to his affiflance. Albert,
though an enterprizing and aive officer, allowed him-
self to be furprized by the Elector, who killed ma-
ny of his troops, dispersed the remainder, and took
him prisoner f. Maurice continued as much exposed as
formerly; and if his enemy had known how to improve
the opportunity which presented itself, his ruin must have
been immediate and unavoidable. But the Elector, no
less flow and dilatory when inveted with the sole com-
mand, than he had been formerly when joined in au-
thority with a partner, never gave any proof of military
acivity but in this enterprize against Albert. Inflead of
marching direaly towards Mlaurice, whom the defeat of
his ally had greatly alarmed, he inconsiderately listened
to overtures of accommodation, which his artful antago-
nitt propoed with no other intention than to amuse
him, and to flacken the vigour of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the poflure of the Emperor's af-The Eam

fairs that he could not march inflantly to the relief of hisPPe"r pere
ally. Soon after the reparation of the confederate army,.,ttking

the Elecdor

Sleid. 418. Thuin. lib. iv. its. anl Lmd-
t Avile 99, 6. Mcm. do Klbicr, tm. i. 61o. grlve.

he,

Boot VIII. he, in order to cafe himself of the burden of maintaining

a fuperfiuous number of troops, had difmifled the count
'547- of Buren with his Flemings *, imagining that the Spa.

niards and Germans, together with the papal forces,
would be fully sufficient to crulh any degree of vigour
that yet remained among the members of the league. But
Paul, growing wife too late, began now to discover the
imprudence of that measure, from which the more saga.
cious Venetians had endeavoured in vain to dissuade him.
The rapid progress of the Imperial arms, and the ease
with which they hd broken a combination that appeared
so firm and powerful, opened at length his eyes, made
him forget at once all the advantages which he had ex-
peced from such a compleat triumph over heresy, and
placed, in the firongeRf light, his own impolitic condut,
in having contributed towards acquiring for Charles such
an immense increase of power, as would enable him, as-
ter oppressing the liberties of Germary, to give law with
absolute authority to all the fates of Italy. The moment
he perceived his error, he endeavoured to corret it.

The Pope Without giving the Emptror any warning of his intenti-
rccalls hig on, he ordered Farnese, his grandson, to return instant-
'oop" jly to Italy with all the troops under his command, and

at the fame time recalled the license which he had granted
Charles, of appropriating, to his own use, a large hare
of the church-lands in Spain. He was not destitute of
pretences to justify this abrupt desertion of his ally. The
term of fix months, during which the flipulations in their
treaty were to continue in force, was. now expired; the
league, in opposition to which their alliance had been
framed, seemed to be entirely diflipated; Charles, in all
his negotiations with the Princes and cities which had
Submitted to his will, had neither consulted the Pope, nor
had allotted him any part of the conquests which he had
made, nor had communicated to him any (hare in the
vafi contributions that he had raised. He had not even
made any provision for the fuppreflion of heresy, or the
re-eftablilhment of i catholic religion, which were
Paul's chief inducints to befow the treasures of the
church so liberaly iary ng on the war. These colours,
how fpeciou soever, did not conceal from the Emperor
that fccret jealousy which was the true motive of the

Ail S, 6. )4m0. do Ribler, tor, i. 5e'.

Pope's

pope's conduct. But, as Paul's orders with regard to the Boo Valt.
march of his troops were no less peremptory than unex-
pealed, it was impossible to prevent their retreat. Charles
exclaimed loudly against this treachery, in abandoning
him so unseasonably, while he was prosecuting a war un-
dertaken in compliance with his earned solicitations, and
from which, if successful, so much honour and advan-
tage would redound to the church. To complaints he
added threats and expofulations. But Paul remained in-
flexible; his troops continued their march towards the
ecclesiastical state; and in an elaborate memorial, intended
as an apology for his behaviour, he discovered new and
more manifest symptoms of alienation from the Emperor,
together with a deep-rooted terror of his power *. Charles
weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body from his
army, which was already much diminihed by the num-
ber of garrisons that he had been obliged to throw into
the towns which had capitulated, found it necessary to re-
cruit his forces by new levies, before he could venture to
march in person towards Saxony.

THE fame and splendor of his success could not have A confpi-

failed of attracing such multitudes of soldiers into his ovtun the
service from all the extensive territories now subjea to his govcrcrncat
authority, as must have oon put him in a condition sos feo-'
taking the field against the Elector; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as well as the
great revolutions which that event, extremely mysterious
in its first appearances, seemed to portend, obliged him
to avoid entangling himself in new operations in Germa-
ny, before he had fully discovered its source and tenden-
cy. The form of government which had been eftablithed
in Genoa, at the time when Andrew Doria restored li-
berty to his country, though calculated to obliterate the
memory of former diflentions, and received at first with
eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near twenty
years, give universal fatisfadion to there turbulent and
fatious republicans. As the entire administration of as- Theobjat
fairs was now lodged in a certain number of noble fami- of the con
lies, many, envying them that pre-eminence, wilhed for fpiators.
the reflitution of a popular government, to which they
had been accustomed; and though all reverenced the dif-
ilterefted virtue of Doria, and admired his talents, not a
few were jealousof that ascendant which he had acquired

F. Paul. sos. Palllvic. par. ii. p 5. Thlna. 6.

in

BooK Vll. in all the councils of the commonwealth. His age, how,.

-v-,c'ever, his moderation, and love of liberty, afforded ample
'547 security to his countrymen that he would not abuse lls

power, nor tain the close of his days by attempting to
overturn that fabrick, which it had been the labour and
pride of his life to ered. But that authority and infli.
ence, which in his hands were innocent, they ealily saw
would prove delirudive, if usurped by any citizen of
greater ambition, or less virtue. A citizen of this (!an-
gerous character had aually frmed such pretensions,
and with some profpea of success. Giannetino Loria,
whom his grand uncle Andrew destined to be the heir f
his private fortune, aimed likewise at being his fucceffur
in power. His temper haughty, insolent, and overbear.
ing to such a degree as would scarce have been tolerated ill
one born to reign, was altogether insupportable in the citi-
zen of a free lfate; and the more agacious among the
Genoese already feared and hated him as the enemy of
those liberties for which they were indebted to his uncle,
While Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and undif.
cerning affection which persons in advanced age often con-
traEt for the younger members of their family, set no
bounds to the indulgence with which he treated him;
feeminglefs solicitous to secure and perpetuate the ree-
dom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize that un-
deserving kinsman.

Bur whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or whate-

ver diffatisfacion with the fyflem of adminitraticn in t:c
commonwealth, these circumfiances might have occafioi-
ed, they would have ended, it is probable, in nothing

Fieco count more than murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis
(f Luv,'i.a Fiefco, count of Lavagna, observing this growing dilguit,
the head of had not been encouraged by it to attempt one tf the bold-
,a.. Cefi aions recorded in hiltory. 'That young noble.

man, the richest and most llufrious subject in the re-
public, polleffcd, in an eminent degree, all the qualities
which win upon the human heart, which command ic-
fpeet, or secure attachment. He was gracefu! and n:.l-
jeftic in his person; magnificent to profifio ; of a gene-
rofity that prevented the withes ot his friends, and ex-
ceeded the expecations of ftrangcrs; of an ifinuating ad-
dress, gentle manners and a flowing affability. But un-
der the appearance of these virtues, which seemed to foru
him for enjoying and adorning civil life, he concealed all
the ditpofition which mark nmen out fr taking the lead il

tlle

the most dangerous and dark conspiracies an insatiable Boot VII.
and refllefs ambition, a courage unacquianted with fear, 4.#
and a mind that disdained subordination. Such a temper 547
could ill broolthat Ration of inferiority, wherein he was
placed in the republic; and as he envied the power which
the elder Doria had acquired, he was filled with indigna-
tion at the thoughts of its descending, like an hereditary
possession, to Giannetino. These various paflions, prey-
ing with violence on his turbulent and afpjring mind, de-
termined him to attempt overturning that domination to
which he could not submit.

AT first he thought of an alliance with Francis, and Intrigues

even proposed it to the French ambassador at Rome, and prepa.
as the most effe&ual means of accomplishing this; and the conpi-
after expelling Doria together with the Imperial facion rators.
by his assistance he resolved to put the public once more
under the prote&ion of that Monarch, hoping in return
for that service to be entrusted with the principal hare in
the administration of government. But having commu-
nicated his scheme toa few chosen confidents, from whom
he kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a
man ofdesperate fortune, capable alike of advising and of
executing the most audacious deeds, remonstrated with
earneRtnfs against the folly of exposing himself to the mot
imminent danger, while he allowed another to reap all
the fruits of his success; and exhorted him warmly to aim
himself at that pre-eminence in his country, to which he
was destined by his illustrious birth, was called by the
voice of his fellow citizens, and would be raised by the
zeal of his friends. This discourse opened such vast prof-
peas to Fieflo, and so suitable to his genius, that aban-
doning his own plan, he eagerly adopted tht of Verrina.
The other persons present, though lenfible of the hazar-
dous nature of the undertaking, did not choose to con-
demn what their patron had so warmly approved. It was
infantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to affailinate the two
Dorias as well as the principal persons of their party, to
overturn the eltabli(hed system of government, and to
place Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa. '1 ime, how-
ever, and preparations were requisite to ripen such a de-
sign for execution and while he was employed in carry.
Ing on these, Fiefco made it his chief care to guard againfi
every thing that might betray his secrets or create fufpici-
on. The disguise he aflumed was of all others the most
nmpenetble. He feemd to he abandoned entirely to
VoL. II. P pleafura

BooK VIll.plefure and dissipation. A perpetual gaiety, divefified
'- ~' bby the pursuit of all the amusements becoming his age

547' and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole of his

time and thoughts. But amidst this hurry of diflipation,
he prosecuted his plan with the most cool attention, nei.
ther retarding the design by a timid hesitation, nor preci.
pitating the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French ambaflidor
at Rome, though without communicating to him his real
intentions, that by his means he might secure the protec.
tion of the French arms, if hereafter he should find it ne-
celary to call them to his aid. He entered into a close
confederacy with Farnese Duke of Parma, who being dif.
gutted with the Emperor for refusing to grant him the in.
veftiture of that dutchy, was eager to promote any mea.
sure that tended to diminilh his influence in Italy, or to
ruin a family o implicitly devoted to him as that of Do.
ria. Being sensible that in a maritime state, the acquifi.
tion of naval power was what he ought chiefly to aim at,
he purchased four galleys from the Pope, who probably
was not unacquainted with thedefign which he had form.
ed, and did not disapprove of it. Under colour of fitting
out one of there gallies to fail on a cruise againf the Turks,
he not only assembled a good number of his own vatials,
but engaged in his service many bold adventurers, whom
the truce between the Emperor and Solyman had depriv-
ed of their usual occupation and fubfiftece.

WHILE iicco was taking these important Reps, he

preserved so admirably his usual appearance of being de-
voted intirely to plealure and amusement, and paid court
with such artful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not
only on the generous and unfufpicious mind of Andrew,
but deceived Giannetino, who conscious of his own cri-
minal intentions, was more apt to diftruf the designs of
others. So many inltruments being now prepared, no-
thing remained but to strike the blow. Various confulta-
tions were held by Fiefco with his confidants, in order to
fettle the manner of doing it with the great certainty
and effoe. At sirs, they propored to murder the Dorias
and their chief adherents, during the celbration of high
mass in the principal church but as Andrew was often
abicnt from these religious folemnities, on account of his
great age, that dcGfin was laid ae. It was then con-
certed that Fiefco mould invite the uncle and nephew
with all their friends whom he had marked out as vic-

time,

tims, to his house where it would be easy to cut them Roo tVl1t.
off at once without danger or resistance; but as Gianne- '
tino was obliged to leave the town on the day which they 547
had chosen, t became necessary likewise to alter this plan.
They at last determined to attempt by open force, what
they found difficult to effet by stratagem, and fixed on
the night between the second and third of January, for the
execution of their enterprize. The time was chosen with
great propriety; for as the Doge of the former year was
to quit his office, according to custom, on the firfi of the
month, and his fucceflbr could not be eleaed sooner than
the fourth, the republic remained during that interval in
a fort of anarchy, and Fiefco might with less violence take
poffeiffon of the vacant dignity.

THE morning of that day Fiefco employed in visiting The cotfpi;

his friends, passing some hours among them with a fpirir rators a.
us gay and unembarrafed as at other times. Towards fixcte
evening he paid court to the Dorias with his usual marks their plan.
of refpe&, and surveying their countenance and behavi-
our with the attention natural in his situation, was hap-
py to observe the perse& security in which they remained,
without the least foresight or dread of that form which
had been so long a gathering, and was now ready to burst
over their heads, From their palace he hatened to his
own, which flood by itself in the middle of a large court,
surrounded by a high wall. The gates had been set open
in the morning, and all persons, without diftihtion, were
allowed to enter, but strong guards polled within the
court suffered no one to return. Verrina meanwhile, and
a few persons trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, as-
ter conduting Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews of his
gallies into the palace in small bodies, with as little noise
as pofible, dispersed temfelves through the city, and in
the name of their patron, invited to an entertainment the
principal citizens whom they knew to be disgusted with the
administration of the Donas, and to have bosh inclina-
tion and courage to attempt a change in the government.
Of the vast number of persons who now filled the pa-
lace, a few only knew for what purpose they were aflem-
bled, the re aonilhed at finding intead of the prepaa-
tions for a feast, a court crowded with armed men, and
apartments filled with the inlruments of war, gazed ot
each other with a mixture of impatience, curioity and
terror,

P 2

WHML

Boor VIII. WHILE their minds were in this Rate of fufpenre and

v' -

g agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a look full of alacrity

Fia.z e and confidence he addressed himself to the persons of chief
hortations diftin&ion, telling them, that they were not now called to
to them. partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join

in a deed of valour, which would lead them to liberty and
immortal renown. He set before their eyes the exorbi.
tant as well as intolerable authority of the elder Doria,
which the ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of
the Emperor to a family more devoted to him than totheir
country, was about to enlarge and to render perpetual.
This unrighteous domination, continued he, you have it
now in your power to subvert, and to eflablilh the free-
dom of your country on a firm basis. The tyrants mut
be cut off. I have taken the most effectual measures for
this purpose. My afbociates are numerous. 1 can depend
on allies and protectors if necefflry. Happily the tyrants
are as secure as I have been provident. Their insolent
contempt of their countrymen, has banished the fufpici.
on and timidity which usually render the guilty quick.
fighted to discern, as well as sagacious to guard againf the
vengeance which they deserve. They will now feel the
blow, before they fufpe& any hostile hand to be nigh.
Let us then rally forth, that we may deliver our country
by one generous effort, almost unaccompanied with dan-
ger, and certain of success. These words, uttered with
that irrefiflible fervour which animates the mind when
rouzed by great objeas, made the desired impreflion on
the audience. Fiefco's vaufals, ready to execute whate-
ver their maRer should command, received his difcourfc
with a murmur of applause. To many whose fortunes
were desperate, the license and confusion of an infurrec
tion afforded an agreeable profpe&. Those of higher
rank and more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the
furprize or horror with which they were struck at the
proposal of an enterprize so unexpected and atrocious;
as each imagined the other to be in the secret of the con
fpiracy, and saw himself surrounded by persons who
waited only a signal from their leader to perpetrate the
greatest crime. With one voice then all applauded, or
teigned to applaud, the undertaking.

Hin inter- HAVING thus fixed and encouraged his aflociates, be-
viw wiat fore he gave them his last orders, he hastened for a mo-

ment to the apartment of his wife, a lady of the noble
house of Cibo, whom he loved with tender affetion, and

whose

whole beauty and virtue rendered her worthy of his love. Boor V11
The noise of the armed men who crowded the court and '
palace, having long before this reached her ears, he con- 54
duded some hazardous enterprize to be in hand, and (he
trembled for her husband. He found her in all the an-
guilh of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now impoffi-
ble to keep his design concealed, he informed her of what
he had undertaken. The profpe& of a scene so full of
horror as well as danger, compleated her agony; and
foreboding immediately in her mind the fatal iltue of it,
Ihe endeavoured, by her tears, her entreaties, and her def-
pair to divert him from his purpofo. Fiefco, after trying
in vain to sooth and to inspire her with hope, broke from
a situation into which an excess of tenderness had unwari-
ly seduced him, though it could not (hake his resolution.

Farewell, cried he, as he quitted her apartment, you

(hall either never fee me more, or you hall behold to-
morrow every thing in Genoa subjet to your power."

As oon as he rejoined his companions, he allottedeach They attack

his proper fiation; ome were appointed to aflault and the city.
seize the different gates of the city; some to make them-
selves masters of the different streets or places of strength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the harbour where
Doria's gallies were laid up, as the post of chief impor-
tance, and of greatest danger. It was now midnight,
and the citizens lept in the security of peace, when this
band of conspirators, numerous, desperate and well
armed, ruhed out to execute their plan. They furprized
without reiftance some of the gates. They got pofieffi-
on of others after a (harp conflict with the soldiers on
guard. Verrina, with the galley that had been fitted out
against the Turks, blocked up the mouth of the Darfena
or little harbour where Doria's feet lay. All poflibility
of escape being by this precaution cut off, when Fiefco
attempted to enter the gallies from the shore to which
they were made fast, as they were unrigged and dif-
armed, having no crew on board but the laves chained
to the ear, they were in no condition to make resistance.
Every quarter of the city was now filled with noise and
tumult, all the reets resounding with the cry of Fie/re
and liberty. At that name, so popular and beloved, ma.
ny of the lower rank took arms, and joined the confpira-
tort. The nobles and partizans of the aristocracy, aso.
nilhed or afrighted, hut the gates of their houses, and
thought of nothing but securing them from pillage. At

P last.

oo, vll. last, the noif ecited by this scene of violence and con
L'"" fusion, reached the palace of oria i Giannetino started

'547' immediately from hiL bed, and imagining that it was oc-

cafioned by some mutiny among the sailors, rushed out
with a few attendants, and hurried towards the harbour.
The gate of St. Thomas, through which he had to pass,
was alrcady in the poffclTion of the conspirators, who,
the moment he entered, fell upon him with the utmot
fury, and murdered him upon the spot. The fame must
have been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco
had executed his brother's plan, and had proceeded im-
mediately to attack him in his palace ; but he, from the
fordid consideration of preventing its being plundered
amidst the confusion, having forbid his followers to ad-
vance, Andrew got intelligence of his nephew's death,
as well as of his own danger; and mounting on horse-
back, saved himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few sena-
tors had the courage to aemble in the palace of the re-
public *. At sirs, some of the moll daring among them
attempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to attack a
body of the conspirators; but being repulsed with loss,
all agreed that nothing now remained, but to treat with
the party which seemed to be irrefifiible. Deputies were ac-
cordingly sent to learn of Fiefco what were the concef-
sions with which he would be fatified, or rather to
submit to whatever terms he ihould please to prescribe.

Caure of BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they were em-
the.r mir-
crgm powered to negotiate, w no more. Ju as e was go-

ing to leave the harbour, where every thing had fuccceced
to his with, that he might join his viaorious compani-
ons, he heard some extraordinary uproar on board the
Admiral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing that
the saves might break their chains, and overpower his
aflociates, he ran thither; but the plank which reached
from the hore to the vedel happening to overturn, he
fell into the sea, whilst he hurried forward too precipitate-
ly. Being loaded with heavy armour, he funk to the bot-
tom, and perithed in the very moment when he must have
taken full poleflion of every thing that his ambitious
heart could desire. Verrina was the firt who difcovcred
this fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its confe-
quences, concealed it with the utmoR industry from eve-
ry one but a few leaders of the conspiracy. Nor was it

* I pazau dcll de Sig>orb.

difficult,

difficult, amidst the darkness and confusion of the night, Boot VIlI;
to have kept it secret, until a treaty with the senators ^$4
should have put the city in the power of the conspirators. '547
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the impru-
dence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the deputies of the
senate enquired for his brother, the count of Lavagna,
that they might make their proposals to him, replied with
a childiih vanity, " I am now the only person to whom
that title belongs, and with me you mur treat." These
words discovered both to his friends and enemies what
had happened, and made the impreflion that might have
been expeced upon both. The deputies, encouraged by
this event, the only one which could occasion such a
sudden revolution as might turn to their advantage, aflum-
ed instantly, with admirable presence of mind, a new
tone, suitable to the change in their circumstances, and
made high demands. While they endeavoured to
gain time by protra&ing the negotiation, the reft of the
Senators were busy in assembling their partizans, and
forming a body capable of defending the palace of the
republick. On the other hand the conspirators aRonifh-
ed at the death of a man whom they adored and trusted,
and placing no confidence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt
their courage die away, and their arms fall from their
hands. That profound and amazing secrecy with which
the conspiracy had been concerted, and which had con.
tributed hitherto so much to its success, proved now the
chief cause of its miicarriage. The leader was gone,
the greater part of those who ased under him, knew not
his confidants, and were firangers to the object at which
he aimed. There was no person among them whose au-
thority or abilities entitled him to aume Fiefco's place,
or to finihi his plan; after having loft the spirit which a-
nimated it, life and aivity deserted the whole body.
Many of the conspirators withdrew to their houses, hop-
ing that amidst the darkness of the night they had pailed
unobserved, and might remain unknown. Others fought
for safety by a timely retreat; and before break of day, all
of them fled with precipitation from a city, which, but a
few hours before, was ready to acknowledge them as
makfers.

NIXT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa; not Trnnqillity

an enemy was to be seen; few marks of the violence of .ARblii-
the former night appeared, the conspirators having on- inea'
du&ed their cnterpnze with more oicf than bloodthed,

P 4 and

BoOK vll. and gained all their advantages by furprize, rather than
'-V"^" by force of arms. Towards evening Andrew Doria re-

'547. turned to the city, being met by all the inhabitants, who

received him with acclamations of joy. Though the dif-
grace as well as danger of the preceding night, were fresh
in his mind, and the mangled body of his kinsman fiill
before his eyes, such was his moderation and magnamity,
that the decree issued by the senate against the confpira-
tors, did not exceed that jut measure of severity which
was requisite for the support of government, and was dic-
tated neither by the violence of resentment, no the ran-
cour of revenge t.

TheEmpe- AFTER taking the necessary precautions for preventing
ror alarmed the flame, which was now so happily extinguished, from
at this con- breaking out anew, the firt care of the senate was to fend
fpircy. an ambaflador to the Emperor to give him a particular detail

of what had happened, and to beg his aflifiance towards the
reduaion of Montobbio, a rong fort on the hereditary
estate of the Fiefci, in which Jerome had (hut himself
up. Charles was no less alarmed than aRonithed at an
event so strange and unexpeted. He could not believe
that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever, durst have
attempted such an enterprise, but on foreign suggestion,
and from hope of foreign aid. Being informed that the
Duke of Parma was well acquainted with the plan of the
conspirators, he immediately supposed that the Pope could
not be ignorant of a measure, which his on had coun-
tenanced. Proceeding from this to a farther conje&ure,
which Paul's cautious maxims of policy in other inftanccs
rendered extremely probable, he concluded that the
French King must have known and approved of the dc-
sign; and he began to apprehend that this spark might
again kindle the flame of war which had raged so long in

Surpend his Italy. As he had drained his Italian territories of troops
operations on account of the German war, he was altogether un-
ipGermany. provided for refifing any hostile attack in that country;

and on the first appearanc of danger he must have dc-

Thoui. 93. igonii ita Andrea Doria, 196. L Conjarstio de

Compte de Fie(que per Cardin. de Rets. Adrisni Iftoril. lib. vi. 369.
Soliet Conjuratio o. Lud. Piefci p. Orvw. Thef. al. i. 883.

t It is remarkable, that Crdinal de Rets composed, t the ae of

eighteen, hifory of this confpircy, containing cach discovery of his
admiration of Fieco ad hib enterprise, that it is nor frpriing that mi-
niler, so jealous and discerning ai Richlieu, (hould be led by the pernfal of
it to prediEc the turbulent and dnmwrou spirit of thut youn Eccieficitk.
dcm.r do Rect, toit. Lp. 3.

tachCd

tached thither the greatest part of its forces for its defence. Boot VmII
In this situation of affairs, it would not have been alto- ' --
gether imprudent in the Emperor to have advanced in '547
person against the Ele&or, until he hould learn with
some degree of certainty whether such a scene were not
about to open in Italy, as might put it out of his pow-
er to keep the field with an army sufficient to oppose
him.

THE

# BOOK IX.

HISTORY

OF THE
REI G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.
BooK I. T HE Emperor's dread of the hostile intentions of

the Pope and French King did not proceed from

'547: any imaginary or ill-grounded suspicion. Paul had alrea.

Fr.ncijhe'- dy given the strongest proofs both of his jealousy and en-
Enperor's mity. Charles could not hope, that Francis, after a ri-
power and vallhip of so long continuance, would behold the great
accetfr. advantages which he had gained over-the confederatePro-

teftants, without feeling his ancient emulation revive.
He was not deceived in this conjecture. Francis had ob-
served the rapid progress of his arms with deep concern,
and though prevented hitherto, by circumstances which
have been mentioned, from interposing in order to check
them, he was now convinced that, if he did not make
some extraordinary and timely effort, Charles must ac-
quire such a degree of power as would enable him to give
law to the reft of Europe. This apprehension, which
did not take its rife from the envy of rival/hip alone, but
was entertained by the wiset politicians of the age, fug-
geted various expedients which might fcrve to retard the

course

course of the Emperor's victories, and to form by degrees Boor ix.
such a combination againf him as might put a stop to his '--v -
dangerous career. '547.

WITH this view, Francis inftruaed his emiflaries in Negotiates

Germany to employ all their address in order to revive the , ith the
courage of the confederates, and to prevent them from Protecftts;
iibinitting to the Emperor. He made liberal offers of
his aitfance, and entering into a close correspondence
with the Ele&or and Landgrave, whom he knew to be
the most zealous as well as the most powerful of the
whole body, he used every argument, and proposed every
advantage which could either confirm their dread of the
Emperor's designs, or determine them not to imitate the
inconsiderate credulity of their associates in giving up their
religion and liberties to his disposal. While he took this
flep towards continuing the civil war which raged in Ger-
many, he endeavoured, likewise, to stir up foreign ene-
mies againfl the Emperor. He solicited Solyman to seize .itb s1y
this favourable opportunity of invading Hungary, which
had been drained of all the troops neceflary for its de-
fence, in order to form the army against the confederates
of Smialalde. Heexhorted the Pope to repair, by a vi-
gorous and seasonable effort, the error of which he had
been guilty in contributing to raise the Emperor to such a
formidable height of power. Finding Paul, both from with the
the consciousness of his own mistake, and his dread of its PrPe ta
consequences, abundantly disposed to liften to his exhor t
tations, he availed himself of this favourable disposition
which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argument to
gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to convince them
that nothing could ave Italy, and even Europe from op-
pression andfervitude, but theirjoining the Pope and him
in giving the sirs beginning to a general confederacy in
order to humble that ambitious potentate, whom they
had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING let on foot there negotiations in the outhem with the

courts, he turned his attention next towards thole in the Kings es
north of Europe. As the King of Denmark had parti- d ^Eng
cular reasons to be offended with the Emperor, Francis bad.
imagined that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had projeted; and left confiderati-
pns of caution or prudence should refrain him fromjoin-
ing in it, he attempted to overcome there, by offering him
the young Queen of Scots in marriage to his son . As

* Me de ib. i. 600, 606.

the

;Book IX. the miniflers who governed England in the name of Ed.

vLJ ^ ward VI, had openly declared themselves converts to the
1547' opinions of the Reformers, as soon as it became safe upon

Henry's death to lay aside that disguise which his unforgiv.
ing bigotry had forced them to assume, Francis flattered
himself that their zeal would not allow them to remain
inactive fpeaators of the overthrow and deRtrueion of
those who professed the fame faith with themselves; and
he hoped that notwithitanding the struggles of faion in.
cident to a minority, and the profpe& of an approaching
rupture with the Scots, he might prevail on them likewise
to take part in the common cause *.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of expedients,

and exerted fhimfelf with such extraordinary activity, to
rouze the different flates of Europe against his rival, he
did not neglet what depended on himself alone. He le-
vied troops in all parts of his dominions; he colle&ed mi.
litary stores; he contraced with the Swiss cantons for a
considerable body of men; he put his finances in admira-
ble order; he remitted considerable fums to the Elecor
and Landgrave; and took all the other feps necessary to-
wards commencing hostilities on the (horteft warning, and
with proper vigour t.

TheEmper- OPERATIONS Co complicated, and which required the
or greatly putting so many instruments in motion, did not escape the

umd. Emperor's observation. He was oon informed of Fran-

cis's intrigues in the several courts, as well as of his do-
meftic preparations; and sensible how fatal an interrupti-
on a foreign war would prove to his designs in Germany,
he trembled ath e e profpet of that event. The danger,
however, appeared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and well direaed ambition of So-
lyman, and that he always chore the season for beginning
his military enterprizes with prudence equal to the valour
with which he conduaed them. The Pope, as he had
good reason to believe, wanted not pretexts to justify a
rupture, nor inclinations to begin hostilities. He had al-
ready made Come discovery of his lfntiments, by express-
ing a joy altogether unbecoming the head of the church,
upon receiving an account of the advantage which the
Eletor of Saxony had gained over Albert of Branden-
burg; and as he was now secure of finding in the French
King, an ally of sufficient power to support him, he was
* Mem. de Rib, i. 635. t Mem de Rib. i. 595.

at no pains to conceal the violence and extent of his en- Boot ix.
mity The Venetians, Charles was well assured, had ' "'
long observed the growth of his power with jealousy, which '547
added to the solicitations and promises of France, might
at last quicken their flow counsels, and overcome their
natural caution. The Danes and English, it was evident,
had both peculiar reason to be disgusted, as well as strong
motives to a against him. But above all, he dreaded
the ative emulation of Francis himself, whom he con-
fidered as the foul and mover of any confederacy that
could be formed against him; and as that Monarch had
afforded protetion to Verrina, who failed directly to Mar-
feilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's confederacy, Charles
expe&ted every moment the commencement of those hostile
operations in Italy, of which he conceived the infurre&ion
in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

BUT while he remained in this ate of suspense and Entertains
solicitude, there was one circumltance which afforded him hope trom

the declin-

some profpe& of escaping the danger. The French ing diate ol
King's health began to decline. A disease, the effec of Fannci'
his intemperance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleafure,health.
preyed gradually on his constitution. The preparations
of war, as well as the negotiations in the different courts,
began to languish, together with the Monarch, who
gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during that interval, March.
reduced Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and
putting him together with his chief adherents to death,
extinguished all remains of the conspiracy. Several of
the Imperial cities in Germany, despairing of timely
afliftance from France, submitted to the Emperor. Even
the Landgrave fcemed disposed to abandon the Eleclor, and
to bring matters to a speedy accommodation, on such terms
as he could obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited
with impatience the issue of a distemper, which was to
decide whether he muf relinquish all other schemes, in
order to prepare for refilling a combination of the greater
part of Europe against him, or whether he might proceed
to invade Saxony, without interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious to his

family, that ome historians have called it the Star f
the Houft of Auiria, did not desert him on this occaion.
Francis died at ambouillet, on the lall day ot March, in aci of
the fifty-third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his ra to r

on I.l, cha.
* Mem. d Rib. tom. i. 637. rie aind

reign. 'tivlhip

Charles.

BooK I. rigo. During twenty-eight years of that time, an avowed
_ , _n@ rivalhip subsisted between him and the Emperor, which

'547' involved not only their own dominions, but the greater

part of Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent
animosity, and drawn out to a greater length, than had
been known in any former period. Many circumstances
contributed to both. Their animosity was founded in
opposition of interest, heigthened by personal emulation,
and exasperated not only by mutual injuries, but by reci-
procal insults. At the fame time, whatever advantage
one seemed to poless towards gaining the ascendant, was
wonderfully balanced by ome favourable circumtance,
peculiar to the other. The Emperor's dominions wereof
great extent, the French King's lay more compaa;
Francis governed his kingdom with absolute power; that
of Charles was limited, but he supplied the want of au-
thority by address; the troops of the former were more
impetuous and enterprizing, those of the latter better
dikiplined, and more patient of fatigue. The talents
and abilities of the two Monarchs were as different as the
advantages which they possessed, and contributed no less
to prolong the contest between them. Francis took his
resolutions suddenly, prosecuted them at firt with warmth,
and pushed them into execution with a most adventurous
courage; but being destitute of the perseverance neceflary
to surmount difficulties, he often abandoned his designs,
or relaxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience, and
sometimes fiom levity. Charles deliberated long, and
determined with coolness; but, having once fixed his
plan, he adhered to it with inflexible obltinacy, and neither
danger nor discouragement could turn him aside from the
execution of it. The success of their enterprizes was al-
together as different as their chara&ers, and was uniformly
influenced by them. Francis, by his impetuous ativity,
often disconcerted the Emperor's eft-laid schemes; Char-
les, by a more calm but Ready prosecution of his designs,
checked the rapidity of his rival's career, and baffled ot
repulsed his most vigorous efforts. The former, at the
opening of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon his
enemy with the violence of a torrent, and carried all before
him; the latter, waiting until he saw the force of his rival
begin to abate, recovered in the end not only all that he
had loft, but made new acquisitions. Few of the French
Monarch's attempts towards conquet, whatever promising
asped they might wear at fir, were conducd to an

happy

happy issue; many of the Emperor's enterprizes, even Boot ix.
after they appeared desperate and impracticable, terminated '*-
in the rnoft prosperous manner. Francis was dazzled '547
with the splendour of an undertaking; Charles was allured
by the profpe of its turning to his advantage. The de-
gree, however, of their comparative merit and reputation,
has not been fixed either by a ftri scrutiny into their
abilities for government, or by an impartial consideration
of the greatness and success of their undertakings; and
Francis is one of those Monarchs who occupies a higher
rank in the temple of fame, than either his talents or his
performances intitle him to hold. This pre-eminence he
owed to many different circumflances. The superiority
which Charles acquired by the vitory of Pavia, and which
from that period he preserved through the remainder of
his reign, was so manifest, that Francis's firuggle against
his exorbitant and growing dominion was viewed by moss
of the other powers, not only with the partiality which
naturally anfes for those who gallantly maintain an un-
equal contet, but with the favour due to one who was
refifing a common enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds
to a Monarch equally formidable to them all. The cha-
racters of Princes, too, especially among their contem-
poraries, depend not only upon their talents for govern-
ment, but upon their qualities as men. Francis, not-
withfianding the many errors conspicuous in his foreign
policy and domestic administration, was nevertheless hu-
mane, beneficent, generous. He poffefled dignity with-
out pride; affability free from meanness; and courtesy
exempt from deceit. All who had access to him, and no
man of merit was ever denied that privilege, refpeaed and
loved him. Captivated with his personal qualities, his
fubjees forgot his defecs as a Monarch, and admiring
him as the most accomplihed and amiable gentleman in
his dominions, they never murmured at ats of male-
administration, which in a Prince of less engaging difpo-
fitions, would have been deemed unpardonable. This
admiration, however, must have been temporary only,
and would have died away with the courtiers who bestowed
it. the illusion arising from his private virtues must have
ce:,icd, and potlerity would have judged of his public con-
duct with its ulual impartiality; but another circumstance
P'leented this, and his iame hath been transmittcd to
P'uIteity with increatlin? rcputation. cience and the arts
had, at that time, nmad lttu; :cgilcs in France. IThey

were

BooK IX. were jut beginning to advance beyond the limits of Italy
'--v--' where they had revived, and which had hitherto been

'547. their only feat. Francis took them immediately under

his protection, and vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and
munificence with which he encouraged them. He invited
learned men to his court, he converted with them fami.
liarly, he employed them in business, he raised them to
offices of dignity, and honoured them with his confidence.
That race of men, not more prone to complain when
denied the refpec to which they fancy themselves entitled.
than apt to be pleased when treated with the diflinion
which they confider as their due, thought they could not
exceed in gratitude to such a benefator, and firained their
invention, and employed all their ingenuity in panegyric.
Succeeding authors, warmed with their descriptions of
Francis's bounty, adopted their encomiums, and refined
upon them. The appellation of Father of Letters betowed
upon Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred among
historians, and they seem to have regarded it as a fort of
impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to point out his
defeas. Thus Francis, notwithstanding his inferior abi.
lities, and want of success, hath more than equalled the
fame of Charles. The virtues which he possessed as a
man, have entitled him to greater admiration and praise
than have been bestowed upon the extensive genius and
fortunate arts of a more capable, but less amiable rival.

rffea of BY his death, a considerable change was made in the
Francis's fate of Europe. Charles, grown old in the arts ofgovern-
death. ment and command, had now to contend only with

younger Monarchs, who could not be regarded as an equal
match for him, who had Rood the encounter ith
Henry VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honour in
all there different contests. By this event, he was ealed
of all his disquietude, and was happy to find that he might
begin with safety those operations against the Elecor of
Saxony, which he had hitherto been obliged to suspend.
He knew the abilities of Henry II. who had jufi mounted
the throne of France, to be greatly inferior to those of
his father, and foreaw that he would be so much occu-
pied for some time in displacing the late King's minifirs,
whom he hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands
of his own favourites, that he had nothing to dread,
either from his personal efforts, or from any confederacy
which this unexperienced Prince could form.

BVT

BUT as it was uncertain how lung such an interval of Book IX.

fccurity might continue, Charles determined inflantly to _
improve it; and as soon as he hcaid of Francis's demile, Charles
he began his march from Egra on tle bloders of Bohemia. marches a-
But tile departure of the Papal troops, together with the gain( the
retreat of the Flemings, had so much diminishcd his sxny.
ari)y, that sixteen thousand men were all he could allem- April ^3.
hie. With this inconsiderable body he set out on an
expedition, the event of which was to decide what de-
Erce of authority he should poffcfs from that period in
i;crmany: but as this little army confided chiefly of the
veteian Spanish and Italian bans, he did not, in trusting
to them, commit much to the decision of chance, and
even with so small a force he had reason to entertain the
must sanguine hopes of success. The Eletor, it is true,
had levied an army greatly uperior in number; but nei-
ther the experience and discipline of his troops, nor the
abilities of his officers, were to be compared with those
of the Emperor. The Elector, besides, had already
been guilty of an error, which deprived him of all the
advantage which he might have derived from his fupe-
riority in number, and was alone sufficient to have occa-
sion edhis ruin. Inflead of keeping his forces united, he
detached one great body towards the frontiers of Bohe-
mia, in order to facilitate his jun&ion with the malecon-
tents of that kingdom, and cantoned a considerable part
of what remained in different places of Saxony, where
he expeced the Emperor would make the firll impref-
sien, vainly imagining that these open towns, with Imall
garrisons, might be rendered tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the louthern frontier of Sax-Progref nrf

ony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfder. The folly ofhi" airmic'.
the measure which the Eeldor had taken was imme-
diately seen, the troops polled in that town surrendering
without refinfance; and thole in all the other places be-
t'een that and the Elbe, either imitated their example,
or fled as the Imperialifis alpproached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panic with which they
feenied to be struck, advanced without losing a moment.
1 he EleQor, who had fixed his head quarters at Meiflen,
continued in his wonted state of flucuation and uncertain-
!'. He even became more undetermined, in proportion
as the danger grew near and called .for prompt and de-
cifive resolutions. Sometimes he a&ed, as if he had re-
fo'lvd to defend the banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a

VOL. 11. Q battle

Book IX. battle with the enemy, as soon as the detachments which
--- ~--'C he had called were able to join him. At other times,
'547 he abandoned this as rah and perilous, seeming to adopt

the more prudent counsels of those who adviled him to
endeavour at protrating the war, and for that end to re-
tire under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the
Impesialifts could not attack him without manifefi difad-
vantage, and where he might wait, in safety, for the
succours which he expeded from Mecklenburgh, Pome-
rania, and the Protestant cities on the Baltic. Without
fixing upon either of these plans, he broke down the
bridge at Meissen, and marched along the east bank of the
Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated a new, and
after much hesitation, adopted one of these middle
schemes, which are always acceptable to feeble minds in-
capable of deciding. He left a detachment at Muhlberg
to oppose the Imperialists, if they hould attempt to pals
at that place; and advancing a few miles with his main
body, encamped there in expetation of the event, ac-
cording to which he proposed to regulate his subsequent
motions.

Pases the CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward incessantly,
EIbt. arrived the evening of the twenty-third of April on the

banks of the Elbe opposite to Muhlberg. The river, at
that place, was three hundred paces in breadth, above
four feet in depth, its current rapid, and the bank pof-
sessed by the Saxons was higher than that which he oc-
cupied. Undismayed, however, by all these obitacles,
he called together his general officers, and without ak-
ing their opinions, communicated to them his intention
of attempting next morning to force his passage over the
river, and to attack the enemy wherever he could come
up with them. They all expressed their astonishment at
such a bold resolution, and even the Duke of Alva,.
though naturally daring and impetuous, and Maurice or
Saxony, notwithstanding his impatience to ciufh his rival
the Elecor, remonstrated earnefily againIt it. But the
Emperor, confiding in his own judgment, or good for-
tune, paid no regard to their arguments, and gave thc
orders necessary for executing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanish and Italian

foot marched towards the river, and began an inceftant
fire upon the enemy. The long heavy mulkets used ii
that age, did execution on the opposite bank, and manY

of

of the soldiers, hurried on by a martial ardour in order Book IX.
to get nearer the enemy, ruihed into the fiream, and ad- --
vancing breast high, fired with a more certain aim, and L47.
with greater effect. Under cover of their fire, a bridge
of boats was begun to be laid for the infantry; and a pea-
iant having undertaken to condud the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well acquainted,
they also were put in motion. The Saxons poficd in
Muhlberg endeavoured to obflruE these operations, by a
brilk fire from a battery, which they had erected; but
as a thick fog covered all the low giounds upon the, river,
they could not take aim with any certainty, and the Im-
perialifts suffered very little; at the fame time the Saxons
being much galled by the Spaniards and Italians, they set
on fire some boats which had been colle&ed near the vil-
lage, and prepared to retire. The Imperialitis perceiv-
ingthis, ten Spanish soldiers instantly fiript themselves,
and holding their swords with their teeth, swam across
the river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to
oppose them, saved from the flames as many boats as were
sufficient to complete their own bridge, and by this fpi-
rited and successful action, encouraged their companions
no less than they intimidated the enemy.

By this time, the cavalry, each trooper having a foot

soldier behind him, began to enter the river, the light
horse marching in the front, followed by the men at arms,
iWhom the Emperor led in person, mounted on a Spanish
horse, dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carrying a jave-
lin in his hand. Such a numerous body struggling through
a great river, in which according to the dire&ions of their
guide they were obliged to make several turns, some-
times treading on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions, whom they left behind,
a fpeaacle equally magnificent andinterefting [d]. Their
courage, at lafi, surmounted every obstacle, no man be-
traying any symptom of fear, when the Emperor hared
in the danger no less than the meanest soldier. The
moment that they reached the opposite fide, Charles,
without waiting the arrival of the reft of the infantry,
advanced towaids the Saxons with the troops which had
passed along with him, who flushcd with their good for-
lnce, and despising an enemy who had negleced to op-
Ptse them, when it might have been done with such ad-

[d] Avila, il. i.

Qs vantage,

Bwk IX. vantage, made no account of their fupcrior numbers, and
'-- ~'3 ^ marched on as to a certain viaory.
Ill1 47cn1 DURING all there operations, which necessarily corn
of the Elec- filmed much time, the Eletor remained inaaive in his
atr. canmp; and from an infatuation which appears to be io

amazire, that the befl informed historians impute it to
the treachercus arts of his generals, who deceived him
by alie intelligence, he would not believe that the Em-
peror had pafled the river or could be lo near at hand [e].
Being c nvinctd, at lafi, of his fatal mistake, by the con-
curring teflimc.ny of eye witnesses, he gave orders for re-
ticating towards 'v ittemberg. But a German arm) en-
cumbered, as usual, with baggage and artillery, could
not be put uddenly in motion. They had scarce begun
to march when the light troops of the enemy came in
view, and the Eledor law an engagement to be unavoid-
able. As he was no lets bold in aion than irrefoluti

,ittle of in ccuncil, he made the dilpofition for battle with the
Muihaulcn. greatest pretence of mind, and in the most proper man-

ner, taking advantage of a great forefi to cover his wings,
so as to prevent his being surrounded by the enemies ca-
valry, which were far more numerous than his own. The
Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in order as they came
up, and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with few
but efficacious words to do their duty. It was with a ve-
ry different spirit that the two armies advanced to the
charge. As the day, which had hitherto been dark and
cloudy, happened to clear up at that monent, this acci-
dental circumfiance made an imprefion on the different
parties corresponding to the tone of their minds; the
Saxons, furpri?ed and disheartened, felt pain at being
cxpofed fully to the view of the enemy; the Imperia-
lifts, being now secure that the Protestant forces could
not elcape from them, rejoiced at the return of sunshine
as a certain presage of viaory. The (hock of battle
would not have been long or doubtful, if the perlonal
courage which the lecQor displayed, together with the
activity .which he exerted from the moment that the ap-
proach of the enemy rendered an engagement certain,
and cut off all poflbility of hesitation, had not revived
in fi;me degree the spirit of his trroops. They repulsed
the H-ungarian light horse who began the attack, and re-

[e] Camcrr, rp. Frcbcr. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. 1047,
1049. ccivcd

civcd

ceived with firmnels the men at arms who nxt :dvanccd Book IX.
to the charge; but asthele w ere the flouwr t he Impe- -
rial army, were commanded by expcrienctd cffiixcr, '54'
and fought under the Emperor's eye, the S.xons oon
began to give way, and the lilht toop, rallying at the
fame time and falling on thcir flanks, the tilriht hccame
general. A Imrall body of holen oltldcr, ainonti whom
the EleEor had fought in perlon, ill c-ontinu t t detend
thcmfelves, and endeavoumcd to at their manltc: by re-
tiring into the forest; but heint turroundld on every tide, The F.!c-
the Eledor, wounded in the tacc, exhaultcd with 'tati;u, t". 'lirltatd

av.d taken

and perceiving all resistance to be vain, urrendercd him- pril,,.ne
lelfa prisoner. He was conducted immediately towards
the Emperor, whom he found just returned from the
pursuit, sanding on the field of battle in the full exultati-
on of success, and receiving the congratulations of his
officers, upon this compleat viaory obtained by his valour
and conduc. Even in such an unfortunate and humbling
situation, the Elecor's behaviour was equally magnani-
mous and decent. Sensible of his condition, he approach-
ed his conqueror without any of the sullenness or pride,
which would have been improper in a captive; and con-
fcious of his own dignity, he descended to no mean lub-
mifion, unbeconing the high station which he held a-
mong the German Princes. " The fortune of war, said
he, has made me your prisoner, most gracious Emperor,
and I hope to be treated"- Here, Charles harfit-l in- Hi harth
terrupted him. " And am I then, at last, acknowledged reception
to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent was the only ti le Y the Em-
you lately allowed me. You hall he treated as ou de- peror.
lerve." At these words, he turned from him abruptly,
with an haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King
of the Romans added reproaches in his own name, using
expreflions still more ungenerous and insulting. The
Fleaor made no reply; but, with an unaltered counte-
"ance, which discovered neither afionifhment nor dejec-
titn, accompanied the Spanish oldiers appointed to guard
him [f].

THIS decisive victory cost the Imperialists only fifty

men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons were killed chiefly
in the pursuit, and a great number taken prifoneis.

[f] Sleid. hilt. 416. Thnan, 136. Hortenfius de Bello erman. p.

Scard, vol.. ii. Defcript. pugne Mulberg. ibid. p. o-. P. HenUtr.
Ker. Auftr. lib. xii. c. 13. . 19. B

About
L3

Book IX. About four hundred kept in a body, and escaped to
'-- '~ W'ittemberg, together with the eletoral Prince, who
Chare's7 had likewise been wounded in the aion. After refling
progress as- two days on the field of battle, partly to refresh his army,
ter his vic- ard partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent towns,
tory.

t. which were impatient to secure his protecion by submit.

ting to his will, the Emperor began to move towards
Wittemberg, that he might terminate the war at once,
by the reduction of that city. The unfortunate Elecor
was carried along in a fort of triumph, and exposed every
where, as a captive, to his own lubjeas; a fpeaacle
extremely afflicing to them who both honoured and lov-
ed him; though the insult was so far from subduing his
firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the wonted tran-
quillity and composure of his mind.

Invenflsit- As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age of the
temberg. Elecoral branch of the Saxon family, was one of the

firongefi cities in Germany, and would not be taken, if
properly defended, without great difficulty, the Emperor
marched thither with the utmotf dispatch, hoping that
while the conflernation occasioned by his viaory was still
recent, the inhabitants might imitate the example of
their countrymen, and submit to his power, as soon as he
appeared before their walls. But SybillPof Cleves, the
Eletor's wife, a woman no les diflinguifhed by her abi-
lities than her virtue, instead of abandoning herself to
tears and lamentation upon her husband's misfortune, en-
deavoured, by her example as well as exhortation, to ani-
mate the citizens; and she inspired them with such refolu-
tion, that, when summoned to surrender, they returned
a vigorous anfwcr, warning the Emperor to behave to-
wards their sovereign with the refpe& due to his rank,
as they were determined to treat Albert of Brandenburg,
who was still a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner
that he treated him. The spirit of the inhabitants, no
less than the firength of the city, seemed now to render a
siege in form neccfsary. After such a signal viCory it
would have been disgraceful not to have undertaken it,
though at the fame time the Emperor was destitute of
every thing requisite for carrying it on. But Maurice re-
moved all difficulties, by engaging to furniih provisions,
artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever else Ihould
be needed. Trufing to this, Charles gave orders to
open the trenches before the town. It quickly appeared,
that Maurice's eagerness to reduce the capital of those

dominions*

dominions, which he expeaed as his reward for taking Book IX.
arms against his kinsman, and deserting the Proteltant ' '
cause, had led him to promise what exceeded his power '547
to perform. A battering train was, indeed, carried safe-
Iv down the Elbe from Dresden to Wittemberg; but as
Maurice had no sufficient force to preserve a secure com-
munication between his territories, and the camp of the
besiegers, Count Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of
elecoral troops, defiroyed a convoy of provisions and
military flores, and dispersed a band of pioneers destined
for the service of the Imperialiits. This put a tfop to
the progress of the siege, and convinced the Emperor
that as he could not rely on Maurice's promises, recourse
ought to be had to some more expeditious'as well as
more certain method of getting pofleflion of the town.

THE unfortunate Eletor was in his hands, and he The Empe-

was ungenerous and hard-hearted enough to take advan- ror's ung°
tage of this, in order to make an experiment whether he treatment
might not bring about his design, by working upon the of the Elec-
tenderness of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety tor.
of children towards their parent. With this view he
summoned Sybilla a second time to open the gates, let-
ting her know that if she again refused to comply, the
Elecor should answer with his head for her obitinacy.
To convnice her that this was not an empty threat, he
brought his prisoner to an immediate trial. The proceed-
ings againlt him were as irregular, as the stratagem was
barbarous. Instead of consulting the ates of the Em-
pire, or remitting the cause to any court, which accord-
ing to the German conflitution might have legally taken
cognizance of the Ele&or's crime, he fubje&ed the
greatest prince in the Empire to the jurifdiaion of a
court-martial composed of Spanilh and Italian officers,
and in which the unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit inflru-
ment for any a of violence, presided. This range May to.
tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of the Empire
which had been iffTned against the prisoner, a sentence
pronounced by the ole authority of the Emperor, and
destitute of every legal formality which could render it
valid; but presuming him to be thereby manifestly con-
viged of treason and rebellion, the court-martial con-
demned him to susser death by being beheaded. This
decree was intimated to the Elector while amusing him-
self in playing at Chefs with Ernett of Brunswick his

Qt4 fellow-

Book IX. fellow-prifoner. He paused for a moment, tho' without

any symptom either of furprize or terror; and after tak-

The LSeec ing notice of the irregularity as well as injustice of the
tor'b mag- Emperor's proceedings: " It is easy, continued he, to
nanimity. comprehend his fcheie. I mull die, because Wittem.

berg will not furrendcr; and I shall lay down my lie
with pleasure, if, by that sacrifice, I can prelerve the
dignity of my houic, and tranlmit to my posterity the in.
heritance which belongs to them. Would to God, that
this sentence may not affrc my wife and children more
than it intimidates me! and that they, for the fake of
adding a few days to a life already too long, may not
renounce honours and territories which they were born
to possess [g]." I-le then turned to his antagonist, whom
he challer.gcd to continue the game. He played with
his usual attention and ingenuity, and having beat Earnefd,
expressed all the fatisfation which is commonly felt on
gaining such vicories. After this he withdrew to his
own apartment, that he might employ the refi of his
time in such religious exerciles as were proper in his
situation [h].

The diflrefs IT was not with the fame indifference or composure,
of his f- that the account of the E!ecr's danger was received at
nily. Wittcmberg. Sybilla, who had supported with such un-

daunted fortitude her husband's misfortunes, while she
imagined that they could reach no farther than to dimi-
nifh his power or territories, felt all her resolution fail
the moment his life was threatened. Solicitous to save
that, he despised every other consideration; and was
willing to make any acrifice in order to appease an in-
cenfed conqueror. At the fame time, the De of
Cleves, the Eletor of Brandenburg, and Maurice, to
none of whom Charles had communicated the true mo-
tives of his violent proceedings against the Eleaor, inter-
ceded warmly with him to spare his life. The first was
prompted to do so merely by compafion for his sifter, and
regard for his brother-in-law. The two other dreaded
the universal reproach that they would incur, if, after
having boalsed so often of the ample security which the
Emperor had promised them with refpea to their reli-
gion, the first efftc of their union with him hould be
the public execution of a Prince, who was jufsly held
in reverence as the most zealous proteaor of the Prote-

[h] Stravii corp. oo.
[g] Thun. i. 141.

Rfant cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw that he Book IX.
muii become the objea of detestation to the Saxons, and 'v '
could never hope to govern them with tranquillity, if '547.
he were confidered by them as accessary to the death of
his nearest kinsman, in order that he might obtain pof-
session of his dominions.

WHILE they, from such various motives, solicited His treaty

Charles, with the most earnest importunity, not to exe- thrles
cute the sentence, Sybilla, and the reft of the Eleaor'which he
family, conjured him by letters as well as messengers to furrendera
scruple at no conceflions that would extricate him out of the Ecao'
the present danger, and deliver them from their fears
and anguish on his account. The Emperor, perceiving
that the expedient which he had tried began to produce
the effec he intended, fell by degrees from his former
rigour, and allowed himself to soften into promises of
clemency and forgiveness, if the Elecor would hew him-
self worthy of his favour by submitting to reasonable
terms. The Elecor, on whom the consideration of
what he might susser himself had made no imprefiion,
was melted by the tears of a wife whom he loved, and
could not resist the entreaties of his family. In compli- May r,
ance with their repeated solicitations, he agreed to ar-
ticles of accommodation, which he would otherwile
have rejeced with disdain. The chief of them were,
that he ihould resign the Elecoral dignity, as well for
himself as for his pofierity, into the Emperor's hands,
to be disposed of intirely at his pleasure; that he should
inflantly put the Imperial troops in poffeflion of the cities
of Wittemberg and Gotha; that he hould set Albert of
Brandeiurg at liberty without ransom; that he should
submit to the decrees of the Imperial chamber, and ac-
quiefce in whatever reformation the Emperor should
make in the constitution of that court; that he should
renounce all leagues againift the Emperor or King of the
Romans, and enter into no alliance for the future, in
which they were not comprehended. In return for these
important conceflions, the Emperor promised not only to
fparc his life, but to fettle on him and his posterity the
city of Gotha and its territories, together with an an-
nual pension of fifty thousand florins, payable out of the
revenues of the eleaorate; and likewise to grant him a
lum in ready money to be applied towards the discharge
of his debts. Even these articles of grace were clogged *"dremains
with the mortifying condition of his remaining the m- prl .

peror's

Book IX. peror's prisoner during the refi of his life [i]. To the
Iv'-w whole, Charles had ubjoined, that he should submit to

547' the decrees of the Pope and council with regard to the

controverted points in religion; but the Ele&or, though
he had been persuaded to acrifice all the objects which
men commonly hold to be the dearefi and molt valuable,
was inflexible with regard to this point; and neitler
threats nor intreaties could prevail to make him renounce
what he deemed to be truth, or persuade him to at in
opposition to the dicates of his conscience.

Maurice As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of Wit.
utf In pr- temberg, the Emperor fulfilled his engagements to Mau.
fefflion of
Ihe !ceao- rice; and in reward for his merit in having delerted the
ral domi- Protelfant cause, and having contributed with such fuc.
nions. cess towards the dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he

gave him possession of that city, together with all the
other towns in the electorate. It was not without reluc-
tance, however, that he made such a sacrifice; the ex.
traordinary success of his arms had begun to operate, in
its usual manner, upon his ambitious mind, uggeftirg
new and vail projects for the aggrandizement of his fami-
ly, towards the accomplishment of which the retainingof
Saxony would have been of the utmost consequence. But
as this scheme was not then ripe for execution, he durll
not yet venture to disclose it; nor would it have been ei-
ther safe or prudent to have offended Maurice, at that
jundure, by such a manifest violation of all the promilis,
which had seduced him to abandon his natural allies.

Negotiati- THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was ill
onoswththe in arms; and though now left alone to maintain the Pro-

grave.teflant cause, was neither a feeble nor contemptible ene-

my. His dominions were of considerable extent; his
fubjeds animated with zeal for the Reformation; and
if he could have held the Imperialills at bay for a short
time, he had much to hope from a party whose f1rength
was tlill unbroken, whose union as well as vigour might
return, and which had reason to depend, with certaint)',
on being effeaually lupported by the king of France.
The Landgrave thought not of any thing o bold or ad-
venturous; but being seized with the fame conflernation
which had taken pofleflion of his associates, he was in-
tent, only, how to procure favourable terms from the Em-
peror, whom he viewed as a conqueror, to whose will

[i] Sleid. 417. Thuan. i, 141. D Mont Corps Diplom. iv. P. "

"l'~~~~~~~331. ~there

E;M J1MYJK t A MKL, L V. 25t

there was a necessity of submitting. Maurice encourag- Book IX.
ed this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying, on the `-
one hand, the Emperor's power; by boasting, on the 1547-
other, of his own interest with his vi&orious ally; and by
representing the advantageous conditions which he culd
not fail of obtaining by his intercession for a friend, whom
he was so solicitous to save. Sometimes, the Landgrave
was induced to place such unbounded confidence in his
promises, that he was impatient to bring matters to a si-
nal accommodation. On other occasions, the Emperor's
exorbitant ambition, restrained neither by the scruples of
decency, nor the maxims of jufRice, together with the
recent and lhocking proof which he had given of this in
the cruel and oppressive treatment of the Elector of Sax-
ony, came so full into his thoughts, and made such a
lively impreflion on them, that he broke off abruptly
the negotiations which he had begun; eeming to be con-
vinced that it was more prudent to depend for safety on
his own arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity.
But this bold resolution, which despair had suggested to
an impatient spirit, fretted by disappointments, was not
of long continuance. Upon a more deliberate survey of
the enemy's p.ower, and his own weakness, his doubts
and fears returned upon him, and together with them
the spirit of negotiating, and the desire of accommodation.

MAURICE, and the Ele&or of Brandenburg, aed The condi-
as mediators between him and the Emperor; and after tion p-
all that the former had vaunted of his influence, the con- the Empe-
ditions prescribed to the Landgrave were extremely rigo- ror.
rous. The articles with regard to his renouncing the
league of Smalkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's au-
thority, and submitting to the decrees of the Imperial
chamber, were the fame which had been imposed on
the Ele&or of Saxony. Besides these, he was required
to furrcnder his person and territories to the Emperor; to
implore for pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred and
fifty thousand crowns towards defraying the expences of
the war; to demolish the fortifications of all the towns
in his dominions except one; to oblige the garrison which
he placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the Empe-
ror; to allow a free passage through his territories to the
Imperial troops as often as it hall be demanded; to de-
liver up all his artillery and ammunition to the Empe-
ror; tofet at liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunf-
wick, together with the other prisoners he had taken

during
1

Book IX. during the war; and neither to take arms himself, f,
'^'"- the future, nor ro permit any of his fubjeas to ferv

547.' againfl the Emperor or his allies [].

To which THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though wit
hs submits. the utmost reluEance, as they contained no ltipulation

with regard to the manner in which he was to be treated
and left him intirely at the Emperor's mercy. Neceffit
however, compelled him to give his assent. Charles
who had assumed the haughty and imperious tone of a
conqueror, ever since the redudion of Saxony, infifed
on an unconditional fubmifion, and would permit nothin2
to be added to the terms which he had prescribed, tha!
could in any degree limit the fulness of his power, or
refirain him from behaving as he saw meet towards a
Prince whom he regarded as absolutely at his disposal,
But though he would not vouchsafe to negotiate with the
Landgrave, on such a footing of equality, as to susser
any article to be inserted among those which he had dic-
tated to him, that could be confidered as a formal tipu.
lation for the security and freedom of his person; he, or
his ministers in his name, gave the Eleor of Branden-
burg and Maurice such full fatisfa&ion with regard
to this point, that they assured the Landgrave that
Charles would behave to him in the fame way that he
had done to the Duke of Wurtemberg, and would al-
low him, as soon as he had made his fubmiflion, to re-
turn to his own territories. Upon finding the Landgrave
to be still possessed with his former suspicions of the Em-
peror's intentions, and unwilling to trust verbal or ambi-
guous declarations, in a matter of such essential concern
as his own liberty, they sent him a bond signed by them
both, containing the molt solemn obligations, that if any
violence whatsoever were offered to his person, during
his interview with the Emperor, they would inflantly
surrender themselves to his sons, and remain in their hands
to be treated by them in the fame manner as the Empe-
ror should treat him [b].

He rair THIS, together with the indispensable obligation of
to th Im- performing what was contained in the articles of which
'pri's"u't he had accepted, removed his doubts and scruples, or

made it necessary to get over them. He repaired, for
that purpose, to the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony,

1 Seid. 430. Thuan, . iv. 4S.
[b Du Mont. Corpa Diplom. iv. p. , 335.

where

here a circumstance occurred which revived his fufpici- Book X.
ns and increased his fears. Just as he was about to enter
te chamber of presence, in order to make his public '547
fubmifiion to the Emperor, a copy of the articles which
he had approved of was put into his hands, in order that
he might ratify them anew. Upon perusing them, he
perceived that the Imperial ministers had added two new
articles; one importing, that if any dispute fliould arise
concerning the meaning of the former conditions, the
Emperor hould have the right of putting what interpre-
tation upon them he thought most reasonable; the other,
that the Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly to the
decisions of the council of Trent. This unworthy arti-
fice, calculated to urprize him into an approbation of
articles, to which he had not the moR diflant idea of as-
I enting, by presenting them to him at a time when his
mind was engrossed and disquieted with the thoughts of
that humbling ceremony which he had to perform, filled
the Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly out
into all those violent expreflions of rage to which his tem-
per was prone. With some difficulty, the Elecor of
Brandenburg and Maurice prevailed at length on the
Emperor's ministers to drop the former article as unjust,
and to explain the latter in such a manner, that he could
agree to it, without openly renouncing the ProtefRant
religion.

THIS obtacle being surmounted, the Landgrave was The m-

impatient to finith a ceremony which, how mortifying ncr"'ilbi
soever, had been declared necessary towards his obtaining t, rceiv-
pardon. The Emperor was feated on a magnificent ed him.
throne, with all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded by
a numerous train of the Princes of the Empire, among
whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately the Landgrave's
prisoner, and now, by a sudden reverse of fortune, a
fpeator of his humiliation. The Landgrave was intro-
duced with great solemnity, and advancing towards the
throne, fell upon his knees. His chancellor, who walk-
ed behind him, immediately read, by his mafler's com-
mand, a paper which contained an humble confeflion of
the crime whereof he had been guilty ; an acknowledg-
ment that he had merited on that account the moi fe-
vere punishment; an absolute resignation of himself and
his dominions to be disposed of at the Emperor's plea-
lure; a fubmiflive petition for pardon, his hopes of which
were founded intirely on the Emperor's clemency; and it

oncluded,

Book IX. concluded, with promises of behaving, for the future
-v'- 'like a subjet, whole principles of loyalty and obedienct
1547. would be confirmed, and would even derive new force

from the sentiments of gratitude which muff hereafter fill
and animate his heart. While the chancellor was reading
this abjet declaration, the eyes of all the fpe&ators were
fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could behold
a Prince, so powerful as well as high-fpirited, suing for
mercy in the posture of a suppliant, without being touch.
ed with commieration, and perceiving serious reflecions
arise in their minds upon the instability and emptiness of
human grandeur. The Emperor viewed the whole trani-
adion with an haughty, unfeeling composure; and pre-
serving a profound silence himself, made a sign to one of
his ecretaries to read his answer; the tenor of which was,
That though he might have justly infliced on him the
grievous punishment which his crimes deserved, yet,
prompted by his own generosity, moved by the folicita-
tions of several Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and
influenced by his penitential acknowledgments, he would
not deal with him according to the rigour of justice, and
would fubje& him to no penalty which, was not specified
in the articles that he had already subscribed. The mo-
ment the secretary had finithed, Charles turned away
abruptly without deigning to give the unhappy suppliant
any sign ofcompaffion or reconcilement. He did noteven
desire him to rife from his knees; which the Landgrave
having ventured to do unbidden, advanced towards the
Emperor with an intention to kifs his hand, flattering him-
self, that his guilt being now fully expiated, he might
presume to take that liberty. But the Eledor of Bran-
denburg perceiving that this familiarity would be offen-
five to the Emperor, interposed, and desired the Land-
grave to go along with him aid Maurice to the Duke of
Alva's apartments in the cafle.

HE was received and entertained by that nobleman

with the re(ped and courtesy due to such a guest. But,
after supper, while he was engaged in play, the Duke

He i; de- took the EleQor and Maurice aside, and communicated
tincdapri- to them the Emperor's orders that the Landgrave must
loner. remain a prisoner in that place under the custody of a

Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto entertained the
molt distant suspicion of the Emperor's sincerity and rec-
titude of intention, their furprize was cxcefive, and their

indignation

indignation not inferior to it, on difcovcring how great- Book IX.
ly they had been deceived themselves, and how infa- "
moufly abused in having been made the instruments of '547'
deceiving and ruining their friend. They had recourse
to complaints, to arguments and to intreaties, in order to
save themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate him
out of the wretched situation into which he had been
betrayed by too great confidence in them. But the Duke
of Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded the neceflity of
executing the Emperor's commands. By this time it
grew late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of
what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in which he was
entangled, prepared for departing, when the fatal orders
were intimated to him. He was struck dumb at firfl with
astonishment, but after being silent a few moments, he
broke out into all the violent expreflions which horror at
injustice accompanied with fraud naturally fuggeis. He
complained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed; sometimes
inveighing against the Emperor's artifices as unworthy of
a great and generous Prince; sometimes censuring the
credulity of his friends in trusting to Charles's insidious
promises; sometimes charging them with meanness in
slooping to lend their afiftance towards the execution of
such a perfidious and dishonourable scheme; and in the
end he required them to remember their engagements to
his children, and instantly to fulfil them. They, after
giving way for a little to the torrent of his paflion, solemn-
ly aerted their own innocence and upright intention in
the whole tranfa&ion, and encouraged him to hope, that
as soon as they saw the Emperor, they would obtain
redress of an injury, which affeced their own honour,
no less than it did his liberty. At the fame time, in or-
der to ooth his rage and impatience, Maurice remained
with him during the night, in the apartment where he
was confined [d].

NEXT morning, the EleQor and Maurice appliedTheElieor

jointly to the Emperor, reprelenting the infamy to whlLhbrg ande
they would be exposed throughout Germany, if theMauricero-
Landgrave were detained in custody; that they wouldlicit i v'in
not have advised, nor would he himself have conente. bert, .
to an interview, if they had lulpeaed that the loss of his

liberty

[d] Sleid. 433. Thuan. I. i. 147. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. ii.
los,,

Book IX. liberty was to be the consequence of his fubmifilon; that
'-- "'they were bound to procure his release, having plighted

t547. their faith to that ffect, and engaged their own perolbn

as sureties for his. Charles listened to their earned remon-
firances with the umolt coolnels. He now flood no
longer in need of their services, and they had the mortifi-
cation to find that their former obsequiousness was fr-
gotten, and little regard paid to their interceflion. lie
was ignorant, he told them, of their particular or private
tranfadions with the Landgrave, nor was his conduct to
be regulated by there; though he knew well what he
himself had promised, which was not that the Landgrave
should be exempt from all refiraint, but that he should
not be kept a prifoncr during life [c] Having said this
with a peremptory and decisive tone, he put an end to
the conference; and they feeing no probability, at that
time, of making any impreflion upon the Emperor, who
seemed to have taken his resolution deliberately, and to be
obflinately bent on adhering to it, were obliged to acquaint
the unfortunate prisoner with the ill fuccels of their en-
deavours in his behalf. This disappointment threw him
into a new and more violent transport of rage, so that to
prevent his proceeding to some desperate extremity, the
Elecor and Maurice promised that they would not quit
the Emperor, until, by the frequency and fervour of their
importunity, they had extorted his consent to set him free.
They accordingly renewed their solicitations a few days
afterwards, but found Charles more haughty and intrac-
table than before, and were warned that if they touched
again upon a subjet so disagreeable, and with regard to

[r] According to several hifloriano of great name, the Emperor, in his

treaty with the I.andgrave, flipulated that he would not detain him in
any prison. But in executing the deed, which was written in the Ger-
man tongue, the Imperial miniters fraudulently fubfhituted the word
awitIr inilead of riigrr, and'thus the treaty, in place of a promile that
lhe hould nt be detained in any prison, contained only an engagement
that le (fihu'd not be detained in perpetual imprisonment. But authors
eminent for hiltorical knowledge and critical accuracy have called in
queflion the truth of this common Itory. The silence of Sleiden with
regard to it, uas ell as its not being mentioned in the various memorials
which he has publified concerning the Landgrave's imprisonment, greatly
favour this opinion. But a. several bookb which contain the information
necefTlay tov aid dlifeuf;ing this point, with accuracy, are written in the
German language, which I do not underhfand, I cannot pretend to en-
quire into this matter with the fame accuracy, with which I have ndra-
voured to fettle l me other controverted fadt that have occurred in the
course of this hiltory. Sec Struv. Corp. oi. Mplhcim'h Ecclcrl Hilt.
vol. ii. p. 61, 16z. ngl. Edit.

which

which he had determined to hear nothing farther, he Bo30k IX.
wvould inflantly give orders to convey the prisoner into'.
Spain. Afraid of hurting the Landgrave by an officious 5
or ill-timed zeal to serve him, they not only defifled, but
left the court, and as they did not choose to meet the firti
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning the cause
of their departure, they informed hin of it by a letter,
wherein they exhorted him to fulfil all that he had pro-
mifed to the Emperor, as the most certain means of pro-
curing a speedy release.
WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning hisHis impati-

in manner to ence under

cause in this manner occasioned, his impatience to recoverRFraiat
liberty made him follow their advice. He paid the fum
which had been imposed on him, ordered his fortrefles to
be razed, and renounced all alliances that could give of-
fence. This prompt compliance with the will of the
conqueror produced no effe&. He was dill guarded with
the fame vigilant severity; and being carried about, with
the degraded Ele&or of Saxony, wherever the Emperor
went, their disgrace and his triumph was each day re-
newed. The fortitude and equanimity, with which the
Ele&or bore these repeated insults, were not more re-
markable than the Landgrave's fretfulnefsand impatience.
His aive impetuous mind could ill brook refiraint; and
refle&ion upon the hameful artifices by which he had
been decoyed into that situation, as well as indignation at
the injufRice with which he was fill detained in it, drove
him often to the wildest excefles of paflion.

THE people of the different cities, to whom CharlesThe rigour
thus wantonly exposed these illufirious prisoners as a pub-°s the Em-

.'"~~"uU1 .- "~""'~u~peror's ex

lic fpe&acle, were sensibly touched with such an infultaieon in
offered to the Germanic body, and murmured loudlyCcrmny.
at this indecent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint, and such as
affeced them more nearly. Charles proceeded to add
opprefiion to insult, and arrogating to himself all the
rights of a conqueror, exercised them with the utmofl
rigour. He ordered his troops to seize the artillery and
military flores belonging to such as had been members
of the Smalkaldic league, and having colle&ed upwards
of five hundred pieces of cannon, a great number in that
age, he ent part of them into the Low-Countries, part
into Italy, and part into Spain, in order to pread by
this means the fame of his success, and that they might
lerve as monuments of his having subdued a nation,

VOL. II. R hitherto

Book IX. hitherto deemed invincible. He then levied, by his sole
~'--'-' authority, large fums as well upon those who had served

S'47 him with fidelity during the war, as upon such as had

been in arms againli him; upon the former, as their con-
tingent towards a war, which having been undertaken,
as he pretended, for the common benefit, ought to be
carried on at the common charge; upon the latter, as a
fine by way of puuifhment for their rebellion. By there
cxaaions he amafed above one million fix hundred
thouland crowns, a fum which appeared prodigious in
the sixteenth century. But so general was the conflerna.
tion which had seized the Germans upon his rapid fuc-
cels, and such their dread of his vicorious troops, that
all implicitly obeyed his commands; though, at the fame
time, there extraordinary stretches of power greatly a.
larmed a people, jealous of their privileges, and habitu.
ated during several ages to confider the Imperial authori.
ty as neither extensive nor formidable. This discontent
and resentment, how indufrioufly soever they concealed
them, became universal; and the more these paflions
were refirained and kept down for the present, the more
likely were they to burfi out soon with additional vio-
lence.

rerdinand's WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like a con.
encroach-
mentsoin quered people, Ferdinand treated his fubjeas in Bohe.
the liberties mia with still greater rigour. That kingdom possessed
of his Bohe- privileges and immunities as extensive as those of any
mian sub-

t. nation in which the feudal inflitutions were etabliihed.

The prerogative of their Kings was extremely limited,
and the crown itlelf ele&ive. Ferdinand, when placed
on the throne, had confirmed their liberties with every
folmnity prescribed by their exceflive solicitude for the
security of a confitution of government to which they
were extremely attached. He soon began, however,
to be weary of a jurifdiion so much circumscribed, and
to despise a sceptre which he could not transmit to his
posterity; and notwithstanding all his former engage-
ments, he attempted to overturn the contlitution from
its foundations; that inflead of an eleaive kingdom he
might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians seemed
relolved not to relinquiih, tamely, privileges which
they had long enjoyed. At the fame time, many of
them having embraced the dodrines of the Reformers,
the feeds of which John Hus» and Jerome of Prague had
planted in their country about the beginning of the pre-

cediAig

ceding century, the desire of acquiring religious liberty Book IX.
mingled itself with their zeal for their civil rights; and '-
these two kindred paflions heightening, as usual, each 1547'
other's force, precipitated them immediately into violent
measures. They had not only refused to serve their
sovereign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but hav-
ing entered into a close alliance with the Ele&or of Saxo-
ny, they bound themselves, by a solemn association, to
defend their ancient constitution; and to persist, until
they should obtain such additional grants as they thought
necessary towards perfeting the present model of their
government, or rendering it more permanent. They
chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of diftin&ion, to be
their general; and levied an army of thirty thousand men
to enforce their petitions. But either from the weakness
of their leader, or from the dissensions in a great un-
wieldy body, which having united hastily, was not tho-
roughly compaCed, or from some other unknown cause,
the subsequent operations of the Bohemians bore no pro-
portion to the zeal and ardour with which they took their
firfi resolutions. They suffered themselves to be anused
so long with negotiations and overtures of different kinds,
that before they could enter Saxony, the battle of Muhl-
berg was fought, the Elecor deprived of his dignity and
territories, the Landgrave confined to dose custody, and
the league of Smalkalde entirely dissipated. The fame
dread of the Emperor's power which had seized the reft
of the Germans, reached them.. As soon as their fove-
reign approached with a body of Imperial troops, they
instantly dispersed, thinking of nothing but how to atone
for their pall guilt, and to acquire some hope offorgive-
ness, by a prompt fubmifion. But Ferdinand, who en-
tered his dominions full of that implacable resentment
which inflames Monarchs whose authority has been def-
pifed, was not to be mollified by the late repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious subje&s to their duty.
He even heard, unmoved, the intteaties and tears of the
citizens of Prague, who appeared before him in the pof-
ture of suppliants, and implored for mercy. The fen-
tence which he pronounced against them was rigorous to
extremity; he abolished many of their privileges, he
abridged others, and new modelled the constitution ac-
cording to his plcafure. He punished many of those who

R 2 had

Book IX. had been molf aive in forming the late association a.
---"'gainft him with death, and ill a greater number with
'547. confiscation of their goods, or perpetual banishment. He

obliged all his subjes, of every condition, to give up
their arms to be deposited in forts where he planted gar-
riolns; and after disarming his people, he loaded them
with new and exorbitant taxes. Thus, by an ill con.
duted and unsuccessful effort to extend their privileges,
the Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the royal
prerogative which they intended to have circumscribed,
but they amofi annihilated those liberties which they aim-
ed at eflablifhing on a broader and more secure founda-
tion [].

THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as he ima-

d atgined, subdued the independent and stubborn spirit of the
Augiurg. Germans by the terror of arms and the rigour ofpunith-

ment, held a diet at Augiburg, in order tocompofe finally
the controversies with regard to religion, which had so
long disturbed the Empire. He durR not, however,
trust the determination of a matter so interefling to the
free suffrage of the Germans, broken as their minds now
were to fubje&ion. He entered the city at the head of
his Spanifl troops, and afligned them quarters there.
The reft of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent vil-
lages; so that the members of the diet, while they car-
ried on their deliberations, were surrounded by the fame
army which had overcome their countrymen. Immedi-
ately after his public entry, Charles gave a proof of the
violence with which he intended to proceed. He took
pofleflion by force of the cathedral together with one of
the principal churches; and his priests having, by various
ceremonies, purified them from the pollution with which
they supposed the unhallowed ministrations of the Protef.
tants to have defiled them, they re-ellablilhed with great
pomp the rites of the Romish worlhip []

The Empe- TH E concourse of members to this diet was cxtraor-
er:eoru- dinary; the importance of the affairs concerning which
mit to the it was to deliberate, and the fear of giving offence to the
Cenerli Emperor by an absence which lay open to mifconfrudion,
c scaly brought together almost all the Princes, nobles and re-

[n Seid. 408, 419, 434 . .

T .
1.iv. 9h iSo. truv. Corp. ii.

S[o leid. 435, 437.

presentatives

presentatives of cities who had right to fit in that assembly. Book IX.
The Emperor, in the speech with which he opened the ' -
meeting, called their attention immediately to the point, '547
which seemed chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned
the fatal effe&s of the religious dissensions which had ari-
fen in Germany, and taken notice of his own unwearied
endeavours to procure a general council, which alone
could provide a remedy adequate to these evils, he ex-
horted them to recognize its authority, and to land to
the award of an assembly, to which they had originally
appealed, as having the sole right of judgment in the
cale.

BUT the council, to which Charles wished them to Various re-

refer all their controversies, had, by this time, undergone volutions in
a violent change. The fear and jealousy, with whichthe council
the Emperor's firfi success againif the confederates of
Smalkalde had inspired the Pope, continued to increase.
Not satisfied with attempting to retard the progress of the
Imperial arms, by the sudden recall of his troops, Paul
began to confider the Emperor as an enemy, the weight
of whose power he must soon feel, and against whom he
could not be too hafly in taking precautions. He foresaw
that the immediate effea of the Emperor's acquiring ab-
solute power in Germany, would be to render him en-
tirely matler of all the decisions of the council, if it hould
continue to meet in Trent. It was dangerous to allow a
Monarch, so ambitious, to get the command of this for-
midable engine, which he might employ at pleasure to
limit or overturn the Papal authority. As the only me-
thod of preventing this, he determined to translate the
council to some city more immediately under his own ju-
rifdi&ion, and at a greater distance from the terror of the
Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence. An inci-
dent fortunately occurred which gave this measure the
appearance of being necessary. One or two of the fathers
of the council, together with some of their domestics,
happening to die flddenly, the physicians, deceived by
the symptoms, or luborned by the Pope's legates, pro-
nounced the diflemper to be infecious and pestilential.
Some of the prelates, firuck witha panic, retired; others .
were impatient to be gone; and after a hort consultation, Trnnlated
the council was translated to Bologna, a city subjet to from Trent
the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial interefi,to '1Jlo a
warmly opposed this resolution, as taken without necef-
fity, and founded on false or frivolous pretexts. All the

R 3 Spanift

Book IX. Spaniffi prelates, and mos of the Neapolitan, by the

l--' Emperor's express command, remained at Trent; the
'547* reft, to the number of thirty four, accompanying the

legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced, in that
very assembly, which had been called to heal the divi-
sions of Christendom; the fathers of Bologna inveighing
againfl those who aid at Trent, as contumacious and re-
gardlefs of the Pope's authority; while the others accused
them of being so far intimidated by the fears of imaginary
danger, as to remove to a place where their consultations
could prove of no service towards re-establishing peace
and order in Germany [P].

Symptoms THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed all his
tof diegft interelt to procure the return of the council to Trent.
Pope and But Paul, who highly applauded his own sagacity in hav-
Emperor. ing taken a lep which put it out of Charles's power to

acquire the direaion of that assembly, paid no regard to
a requefR, the obje& of which was so extremely obvious.
The summer was consumed in fruitless negotiations with
refpe& to this point, the importunity of the one and the
obfiinacy of the other daily increasing. At las an event
happened which widened the breach irreparably, and ren-
dered the Pope utterly averse from listening to any propo-
fal that came from the Emperor. Charles, as has been
already observed, had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis
Farnese, the Pope's son, by refuing to grant him the
invefliture of Parma and Placentia, that he had watch-
ed ever since that time with all the vigilance of resent-
ment for an opportunity of revenging that injury. He
had endeavoured to precipitate his father into open holli-
lities against the Emperor, and had earnestly solicited
the King of France to invade Italy. His hatred and re-
fentment extended to all those whom he knew that the
Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gonzaga, governor of
Milan, with ill offices, and had encouraged Fiefco in his
attempt upon the life of Andrew Doria, because both
Gonzaga and Doria possessed a great degree of the Em-
peror's efleem and confidence. His malevolence and
ecret intrigues were not unknown to the Emperor, who
could not be more defirous'to take vengeance on him,
than Gonzaga and Doria were to be employed as his in-

[p] F. Paul, 4t8, bc.

luftr Cent

firuments in infliaing it. Farnese, by the profligacy of Book IX.
his life, and by enormities of every kind, equal to those '' '
committed by the worst tyrants who have disgraced human 54
nature, had rendered himielf so odious, that they thought
any violence whatever might be attempted against him.
They soon found among his own subje&s, persons who
were eager, and even deemed it meritorious to lend their
hands in such a service. As he, animated with the jea-
lousy which usually possesses petty sovereigns, had em-
ployed all the cruelty and fraud, whereby they endea-
vour to supply their defet of power, in order to humble
and extirpate the nobility fubje& to his government,
five noblemen of the greatefi diflintion in Placentia,
combined to avenge the injuries, which they themselves
had suffered, as well as those which he had offered to
their order. They formed their plan in conjuncion
with Gonzaga; but it remains uncertain whether he ori-
ginally suggested the scheme to them, or only approved
of what they proposed, and co-operated in carrying it on.
They concerted all the previous Reps with such foresight,
conducted their intrigues with such secrecy, and displayed
such courage in the execution of theirdefign, that it may
be ranked among the moRt audacious deeds of that nature
mentioned in history. One body of the conspirators fur- Sept. o.
prized, at mid-day, the gates of the citadel of Placentia
where Farnese resided, overpowered his guards, and mur- The aliral;

j ir « \ r nationofthe

dered him. Another party of them made themselves potpe' son.
maiters of the town, and called upon their fellow-citi-
zens to take arms, in order to realTume their liberty.
The multitude ran towards the citadel, from which three
great guns, a signal concerted with Gonzaga, had been
fired; and before they could guess the cause or the au-
thors of the tumult, they saw the lifeless body of the ty-
rant hanging by the heels from one of the windows ofthe
citadel. But so universally detestable had he become,
that not one expressed any sentiment of concetn at such a
fad reverse of fortune, or of indignation at this ignomini-
ous treatment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation at
the success of the conspiracy wasgeneral, and all applaud.
ed the aors in it, as the deliverers of their country.
The body was tumbled into the ditch that surrounded
the citadel, and exposed to the insults of the rabble; the
reft of the citizens returned to their usual occupations, as
if nothing extraordinary had happened.

R 4 BLFOR

Book IX. BEFORE next morning, a body of troops arriving from
-tv ~ the frontiers of the Milanese, where they had been
The ,4pe- polled in expetation of the event, took poffeflion of the
rial troops city in the Emperor's name, and reinflated the inhabitants
take f"s- in the pofefion of their ancient privileges. Parma,
lion ns Pla-
centia. which the Imperialifis attempted likewise to furprize, was

saved by the vigilance and fidelity of the officers whom
Farnese had intruded with the command of the garrison.
The death of a on whom, notwithstanding his infamous
vices, Paul loved with an excess of parental tenderneis,
overwhelmed him with the deepest afflicion; and the
loss f a city, of such consequence as Placentia, greatly
embittered his sorrow. He accused Gonzaga, in open
confifory, of having committed a cruel murder in order
to prepare the way for an unjuit usurpation, and imme-
diately demanded of the Emperor fatisfaaion for both;
for the former, by the punishment of Gonzaga; for the
latter, by the restitution of Placentia to his grandson,
Octavio, its rightfulowner. But Charles, who, rather
than quit a prize of such value, was willing to expose
himself to the imputation of being accessary to the crime
which had given an opportunity of seizing it, and to bear
the infamy of defrauding his own fon-in-law of the inhe-
ritance which belonged to him, eluded all his folicitati-
ons, and determined to keep poffeflion of the city toge-
ther with its territories [q].

The Pope THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so rapaci-
courts the Ous, as to be restrained by no consideration either of
alliance of
the French decency or justice, transported the Pope so far beyond
King and his usual moderation and caution, that he was eager to
the Veneti- take arms against the Emperor in order to be avenged on
An. the murderers of his son, and to recover the inheritance

wrefled from his family. Conscious, however, of his
own inability to contend with such an enemy, he warm-
ly solicited the French King and the republick of Venice
to join in an offensive league against Charles. But Henry
was intent at that time on other objecs. His ancient
allies the Scots, having been defeated by the English in
one of the greatelf battles ever fought between there two
rival nations, he was about to fend a numerous body of
veteran troops into that country, as well to preserve it
from being conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a new
kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying his son

[q] P. Paul. . Pl. llavic. 41, 4s. Thuan. iv. IS6. Mem. de Ribier.

Sg, 67. Ntalii Cniti* HiftOr. lib. iii. p. 64.
264

the Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland. An un- Book IX.
dertaking accompanied with such manifest advantages, the'--
success of which appeared to be so certain, was not to be 1547'
relinquished for the remote profpe& of benefit from an
alliance depending upon the precarious life of a Pope of
fourscore, who had nothing at heart but the gratification
of his own private resentment. Instead, therefore, of
rushing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry a-
mused the Pope with such general professions and pro-
mises, as might keep him from any thoughts of endea-
vouring to accommodate his differences with the Empe-
ror, but at the fame time avoided any such engagement
as might occasion an immediate rupture between Charles
and himself, or precipitate him into a war for which he
was not prepared. The Venetians, though much alarm-
ed at feeing Placentia in the hands of the Imperialiis,
imitated the wary conduc of the French King, which
resembled so nearly the spirit with which they themselves
usually carried on their negotiations [r].

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not in hisThe diet of
power to light up immediately the flames of war, he did Augf"ur

petit ionsfor

not forget the injuries, which he was obliged for the pre-the return
sent to endure; resentment fettled deeper in his mind,of thecoan-
and became more rancorous in proportion as he felt the cil to Trent
difficulty of gratifying it. It was, while these sentiments
of enmity were in full force, and the desire of vengeance
at its height, that the diet of Augsburg, by the emperor's
command, petitioned the P e, in the name of the whole
Germanic body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired
to Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew their
deliberations in that place. Charles had been at great
pains in bringing the members to join in this request.
Having observed a considerable variety of sentiments
among the Protestants with refpea to the fubmiflion which
he had required to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether intracable, while others were
ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdiaion upon certain
conditions,- he employed all his address in order to gain
or to divide them. He threatened and over-awed the
Ele&or Palatine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to ven-
geance on account of the afiftance which he had given to
the confederate of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring

['] Merm. de Ribier. ii. 63, 7 8, 85, 95, Pnrts Ifor. diVenez.
199 103. Thusn. iv, I6o.

liberty

Book Tr. liberty for the Landgrave, together with the formal con.
t-v-' firmation of his own eletoral dignity, overcame Mau-

'547* rice's scruples, or prevented him trom opposing what he

knew would be agreeable to the Emperor. The Elec-
tor of Brandenburgh, less influenced by religious zeal
than any Prince of that age, was easily induced to imitate
their example in assenting to all that the Emperor re-
quired. The deputies of the cities remained still to be
brought over; they were more tenacious of their princi-
ples, and though every thing that could operate either on
their hopes or fears was tried, the utmost that they would
promise was to acknowledge the jurifdicion of the coun-
cil, if effecual provision were made for securing the di-
vines of all parties free access to that assembly, with intire
liberty of debate; and if all points in controversy were de-
cided according to scripture and the usage of the primitive
0o-. 29. church. But when the memorial containing this declara-

tion was presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put
in pracice a very extraordinary artifice. Without read-
ing the paper, or taking any notice of the conditions on
which they had insisted, he seemed to take it for granted
that they had complied with his demand, and gave thanks
to the deputies for their full and unreserved fubmiflion to
the decrees of the council. The deputies, though afto-
nifhed at what they had heard, did not attempt to set him
right, both parties being better pleased that the matter
should remain under this late of ambiguity, than to push
for an explanation, which must have occasioned a dispute,
and would have led, perhaps, to a rupture [1].

The Pope HA VING obtained this seeming submission of the diet
rludes the to the authority of the council, Charles employed that as

de an argument to enforce their petition for its return to

Trent. But the Pope, from the fatisfa&ion of mortify-
ing the Emperor, as well as from his own aversion to
what was demanded, resolved, without hesitation, that
this petition hould be reje&ed; though in order to avoid
the imputation of being influenced wholly by resentment,
he had the address to throw it upon the fathers at Bolog-
na, to put a diret negative. upon the request. He re-
ferred to their consideration the petition of the diet, and
they, ready to confirm by their assent whatever the le-
pcc. 0o. gates were pleased to dicate, declared that the council

(r) F. Paul, 159. Slcid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. 155.

could
*

could not, in consistence with its dignity, return to Trent, ook IX.
unlcfs the prelates who, by remaining there, had disco- -
vered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair to Bologna, '547
and join their brethren; and that, even after their junci-
on, the council could not renew its consultations with any
profpeet of benefit to the church, if the Germans did not
prove their intention of obeying its future decrees to be
sincere, by yielding immediate obedience to those which
it had already passed [t]

THIS answer was communicated to the Emperor byThe Empe-

the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted him to com- arraifP thr
ply with demands that appeared to be so reasonable. But council of
Charles was better acquainted with the duplicity of theBologna.
Pope's characer than to be deceived by such a gross arti-
fice; he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst utter no
sentiment but what Paul inspired; and, therefore, over-
looking them as mere initruments in the hand of another,
he confidered their reply as a full discovery of the Pope's
intentions. As he could no longer hope to acquire such an
ascendant in the council as to render it subservient to his
own plan, he saw it to be necefiary that Paul hould not
have it in his power to turn against him the authority of
so venerable an aembly. In order to prevent this, he :S48.
sent two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the pre-usr'Y 6
fence of the legates, protested, That the translation of
the council to that place had been unnecessary, and found-
ed on false or frivolous pretexts; that while it continued
to meet there, it ought to be deemed an unlawful and
schismatical conventicle; that all its decisions ought of
course to be held as null and invalid; and that as the Pope,
together with the corrupt ecclefiatics who depended on
him, had abandoned the care of the church, the Empe-
ror, as its protecor, would employ all the power which
God had committed to him, in order to preserve it from
those calamities with which it was threatened. A fewJan. is.
days after, the Imperial ambassador at Rome demanded
an audience of the Pope, and in presence of all the Car-
dinals as well as foreign ministers, protested against the
proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally
harh and dilrefpeaful [u].

Pt]P . Pau[l vo .

P- ii . .

49.

5u] Pul, 64. Pailav. t1. Skid. 4, 6. Goldafli Conftit. Impe-
rin . i. 56 .

IT

Book IX. IT was not long before Charles proceeded to carry
' --~ there threats, which greatly alarmed both the Pope and
Tb5E48. council at Bologna, into execution. He let the diet kno..
The Empe-
rorprepares the ill ucces of his endeavours to procure a favourable
a fyflm, to answer to their petitions, and that the Pope, equally re-
re of faith gardlefs of their entreaties, and of his services to the
in Gera- church, had refused to gratify them by allowing the
vy- council to meet again at Trent; that, though all hope

of holding this assembly in a place where they might look
for freedom of debate and judgment, was not to be given
up, the profpee of it was, at present, distant and uncer-
tain: that, in the mean time, Germany was torn in
pieces by religious dilTenfions, the purity of the faith
corrupted, and the minds of the people disquieted with
a multiplicity of new opinions and controversies formerly
unknown among Christians; that, moved by the duty
which he owed to them as their sovereign, and to the
Church as its protecor, he had employed rome divines,
of known abilities and learning, to prepare a system ot
docrine, to which all should conform until a council,
such as they wished for, could be convocated. This f)s-
ter was compiled by Pflug, Helding, and Agricola, es
whom the two former were dignitaries in the Romifl
church, but remarkable for their pacific and healing fpi-
rit; the last was a Protestant divine, ufpeded, not with-
out reason, of having been gained by bribes and promises,
to betray or mislead his party on this occasion. The ar-
ticles presented to the diet of Ratisbon in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-one, in order to recon-
cile the contending parties, served as a model for the pre-
Icnt work. But as the Emperor's situation was much
changed since that time, and he found it no longer necef-
fary to manage the Proteflants with the fame delicacy as
at that juncure, the conceflions in their favour were not
now so numerous, nor did they extend to points of so
much consequence. The treatise contained a compleat
ivftem of theology, conformable in almost every article
to the tenets of the Romish church, though expressed,
for the most part, in the foftelf words, or in scriptural
phrases, or in terms of studied ambiguity. Every doc-
tine, however, peculiar to popery, was retained; and
all the rites, which the Protestants condemned as inven-
tions of men introduced into the worship of God, were
enjoined. Vith regard to two points only, some relax-

ation

ation of their rigour was granted, and some latitude in Book IX.
pracice admitted. Such ecclefiaflics as had married,"-"'
and would not put away their wives, were allowed, '54'
nevertheless, to perform all the funcions of their sacred
office; and those provinces which had been accustomed
to partake of the cup, as well as of the bread in the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, were still indulged the
privilege of receiving both. Even these were declared
to be conceflions for the fake of peace, and granted only
for a season, in compliance with the weakness or preju-
dices of their countrymen [.]

THI.S system of dotrine, known afterwards by theThiswhirh

name of the Interim, because it contained temporary re-'Ms called
gulations which were to continue no longer in force thanhe lay be-
until a free general council could be held, the Emperorforethe di-
presented to the diet with a pompous declaration of hiset. May '5s
sincere intention to re-establish tranquillity and order in
the church, as well as of his hopes that their adopting
there regulations would contribute greatly to bring about
that desirable event. It was read, in presence, accord-
ing to form. As oon as it was finished the archbishop
of Mentz, president of the electoral college, rose up
hastily, and having thanked the Emperor for his un-
wearied and pious endeavours in order to restore peace
to the church, he, in name of the diet, signified their
approbation of the system of docrine which he had pre-
pared, together with their resolution of conforming to it
in every particular. The whole aflembly was amazed at
a declaration so unprecedented and unconstitutional, as
well as at the Eleaor's presumption in pretending to
deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point, which had not
hitherto been the fubje& of consultation or debate. Bulrand etortn
not one member had the courage to contradia what the'th"i' fppr"
Eletor had said; some being overawed by fears, others
remaining silent through complaisance. The Emperor
held the archbishop's declaration to be a full conflitution-
al ratification of the Interim; and prepared to enforce the
observance of it, as a decree of the Empire [y.]

DURING this diet, the wife and children of the Land-New and

grave, warmly seconded by Maurice of Saxony, endea- fr'itlefi°o-
voured to interest the members in behalf of that unhappyrth"

t.anilgrave',

[x] F. Paul, 170. Pallva. ii. 60. Sleid. 453, 47. Stluv. Corp. io54.libe rty.

Goldlt. Confit. Imper. . 518.
[y] SItid. 460. F Paul, 173. Pallay. 63.

Prince,

Book IX. Prince, who fill languished in confinement. But Chailes

"v'-'-ho did not choose to be brought under the neceflity
'54S of rejecting any request that came from such a refpeable

body, in order to prevent their representatives, laid be-
fore the diet an account of his tranfadions with the
Landgrave, together with the motives which had at
firfl induced him to detain that Prince in cuflody, and
which rendered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep him
till under restraint. It was no cafy matter to give any
good reason for an aion, incapable of being jufiified.
But he tlihcuht the most frivolous pretexts might be pro-
duced in an aflembly willing to be deceived, and afraid
of nothing so much as to discover that it saw his condud
in its true colours. His account of his own condua was
accordingly admitted to be fully fatisfaaory, and after
some feeble intreaties that he would extend his clemency
to his unfortunate prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns
were no more mentioned [z.]

IN oder to counterbalance the unfavourable impression

which this inflexible rigour might leave in their minds,
Charles, as a proof that his gratitude was no less perma-
nent and unchangeable than his resentment, invetfed
Maurice, in the elecoral dignity, with all the legal for-
malities. The ceremony was performed, with extraor-
dinary pomp, in an open court, so near the apartment
in which the degraded Elecor was kept a prisoner, that
he could view it from his windows. Even this insult
did not ruffle his usual tranquillity ; and turning his eyes
that way, he beheld a prosperous rival receiving thole
ensigns of dignity of which he had been stripped, with-
out uttering one sentiment unbecoming the fortitude
which he had preserved amidst all his calamities [a.]

The Ine- IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the diet, the
im equ1"11'Emperor ordered the Interim to be published in the Gcr-
¢ ilap[ oveo '
rfhbv Pro- man as well as Latin language. It met with the usual
ttilants andreception of conciliating schemes when proposed to men
Papills. heated with disputation; both parties declaimed againt

it with equal violence. The Protellants condemned it
as a fyflem containing the grossel errors of Popery, dil-
guised with so little art, that it could impoe only on
the most ignorant, or on those who by wilfully shutting

a]) Thuan. Hilt. lib. v. 176. Struv. Corp. 1054. In'efliturs Mlurtil
a Mammeranu I.ucembul Gu deliriplia p. Scardiurn, ii. 508.

tllir l

their eyes favoured the deception. The Papists inveigh- Book IX.
ed againit it, as a work, in which some docrines of the -
church were impiously given up, others meanly conceal- 1548.
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated rather
to deceive the unwary, than to inflrut the ignorant, or
to reclaim those who were enemies to the truth.
While the Lutheran divines fiercely attacked it, on one
hand, the general of the Dominicians with no left vehe-
mence impugned it, on the other. But at Rome, as
soon as the contents of the Interim came to be known,
the indignation of the courtiers and ecclesiastics rfe to
the greatel height. They exclaimed against the Empe-
ror's profane encroachment on the sacerdotal funcion,
in presuming, with the concurrence of an assembly ot
laymen, to define articles of faith, and to regulate modes
of worship. They compared this rash deed to that of
Uzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had touched
the ark of God; or to the bold attempts of those Empe-
rors, who had rendered their memory detestable, by
endeavouring to model the Christian church according
to their pleasure. They even affe&ed to find out a re-
semblance between the Emperor's condu& and that of
Henry VIII. and expressed their fear of his imitating
the example of that Monarch, by usurping the title as
well as jurifdiaion belonging to the head of the church.
All therefore, contended, with one voice, that as the
foundations of ecclesiastical authority were now shaken,
and the whole fabrick ready to be overturned by a new
enemy; fame powerful method of defence mull be pro-
vided, and a vigorous resistance muff be made, at the
beginning, before he grew too formidable to be oppoled.

'rHE Pope, whose judgment was improved by longer The en;-

experience in great tranfadions, as well as by a more ex-mentiofthe
tensive observation of human affairs, viewed the matterPpe 'ai!'
with more acute discernment, and derived comfort fromrezr it
the very circumflance which filled them with apprchen-
sion. He was astonished, that a Prince of such luperior
lagacity as the Emperor hould be o intoxicated with a
single vidory, as to imagine that he might give law to
mankind, and decide even in those matters, with regard
to which they are moll impatient of dominion. He law
that, by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had it in his power to
have oppressed the other, but that the prefimption of
luccefs had now inlpiicd him with the vain thought of

his

Book IX. his being able to domineer over both; he foretold that a
'-v " fyfyt em, which all attacked, and none defended, could

'548. not be of long duration ; and that, for this reason, there

was no need of his interposing in order to haften its fall;
for as oon as the powerful hand which now upheld it
was withdrawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be
forgotten for ever [b].

The Empe- TH- Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered to his
ror cnfirccs resolution of carrying it into full execution. But though
compliance

itlh he the 1 lecStor Palatine, the Eletor of Brandenburg, ard
Interimt. Maurice, influenced by the fame considerations as for-

merly, seemed ready to yield implicit obedience to wha:-
ever he should enjoin, he met not every where with a
like obsequious fubmiflion. John Marquis of Branden-
burg Anfpach, although he had taken part with great

iea! in the war againfi the confederates of Smalkalde, rc-

filsed to renounce doctrines which he held to be sacred,
and reminding the Emperor of the repeated promiles
which he had given his Protestant allies of allowing them
the free exercise of their religion, he claimed, in confe-
quence ofthele, to be exempted from receiving the In-
telim. Some other Princes, also, ventured to mention
the fame scruples, and to plead the fame indulgence.
But on this, as on other trying occasions, the firmness of
the Elecor of Saxony was molf distinguished, and me-
rited the highest praise. Charles, well knowing the au-
thority of his example with all the Protestant party, la-
boured, with the utmost earnestness, to gain his appro-
bation of the Interim, and by employing sometimes pro-
mises of letting him at liberty, sometimes threats of
treating him with greater harThnefs, attempted alternately
to work upon his hopes and fears. But he was, alike,
regardless of both. After having declared his fixed belief
in the docrines of the reformation, " I cannot now, said
he, in my old age, abandon the principles, for which I
early contended; nor, in order to procure freedom dur-
ing a few declining years, will I betray that good caulc
on account of which I have fiuffered so much, and am
lill 'illing to susser. Better for me to enjoy, in this ili-
lude, the efleem of virtuous men, together with the ap-
probation of my own conscience, than to return into the
wo !d, with the imputation and guilt of apoftacy, to dif-

[h] Sliid. 468. . Pul, 271, 177. Pallav. ii. 64.

gracc

grace and imbitter the remainder of my days." By this Book IX.
magnanimous resolution, he set his countrymen a pattern V
of condut, so very different from that which the Empe- 54
ror withed to have exhibited to them, that it drew upon
him frelh marks of his indignation. The rigour of his
confinement was increased; the number of his servants
abridged; the Lutheran clergymen who had hitherto
been permitted to attend him, were difmifted; and even
the books of devotion, which had been his chief conlola-
tion during a tedious imprisonment, were taken from him
[c]. The Landgrave of Hesse, his companion in mif-
fortune, did not maintain the fame constancy. His pati-
ence and fortitude were both so much exhaufled by the
length of his confinement, that willing to purchase free-
dom at any price, he wrote to the Emperor, ffering not
only to approve of the Interim, but to yield an unreferv-
ed lubriffion to his will in every other particular. But
Charles who knew, that what course soever the Land-
grave might hold, neither his example nor authority
would prevail on his children or fubjeas to receive the
Interim, paid no regard to his offers. He was kept con-
fined as firialy as ever; and while he suffered the cruel
mortification of having his condua set in contralf to that
of the Elecor, he derived not the smallest benefit from
the mean siep which exposed him to such deserved cen-
sure [d].

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles met Thefreeci-
with the mofi violent opposition to the Interim. These ties truggle

against re-

small commonwealths, the citizens of which were ac- ceiving the
customed to liberty and independence, had embraced the Interim.
doctrines of the Reformation when sirs published with
remarkable eagerness; the bold spirit of innovation being
peculiarly suited to the genius of free government. Among
them, the Protestant teachers had made the greatest
number of proselytes. The most eminent divines of the
party were fettled there as pators. By having the di-
re&ion of the schools and other seminaries of learning,
they had trained up disciples as well inftruaed in the ar-
ticles of their faith, as ,,ealous to defend them. Such
persons were not to be guided by example, or swayed by
author ity; but having been taught to examine and to de-
cide in matters of controversy, thought that they were both
qualified and entitled to judge for themtelves. As loon

[c] lcid. 461. [n] Ibid. 46z.
VOL. II.

S

Book IX. as the contents of the Interim were known, they, with

one voice, joined in refusing to admit it. Strafburg, Con.
'548' fiance, Bremen, Magdeburgh, together with many other

towns of less note, presented remonfirances to the Empe-
ror, setting forth the irregular and unconflitutional man-
ner in which the Interim had been enacted, and beseech-
ing him not to offer luch violence to their consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of doctrine and wor-
ship, which appeared to them repugnant to the expref
precepts of the divine law. But Charles, having pre-
vailed on so many Princes of the Empire to approve of
his new model, was not much moved by the reprefenta.
tions of thele cities, which how formidable soever they
might have proved if they could have been formed into
one body, lay so remote from each other, that it was
easy to oppress them separately, before it was poflible for
them to unite.

Compelled IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor saw it to be

y)' violence requisite that his measures should be vigorous, and exe-
to submit. cuted with such rapidity as to allow no time for concert-

ing any common plan of opposition. Having laid down
this maxim as the rule of his proceedings, his firll attempt
was upon the city of Augiburg, which, though overawed
by the pretence of the Spanish troops, he knew to be as
much dissatisfied with the Interim as any in the Empire.
He ordered one body of these troops to seize the gates;
he ported the reft in different quarters of the city; and
Aug. 3. assembling all the burgesses in the town, he, by his sole

absolute authority, published a decree abolishing their
present form of government, dissolving all their corpora-
tions and fraternities, and nominating a small number ot
perfons,in whom he velted for the future the right of ad-
miniflration. Each of the persons, thus chosen, took an
oath to obfcrve the Interim. An at of power, so un-
precedented as well as arbitrary, which excluded the bo-
dy of the inhabitants from any share in the government
of their own community, and fubjeded them to men who
had no other merit than their ferviie devotion to the Em-
peror's will, gave general difgult; but as they durfi not
venture upon refiflance, they were obliged to lubmit in
filencc []. From Augburg, in which he left a garri-
son, he proceeded to Ulm, and new modelling its govern-
ment with the fame violent hand, he seized uch of their

[e] Sieid. 469.

pallors

paleors as refused to subscribe the Interim, committed Book IX.
them to prison, and at his departure carried them along '-
with him in chains [f]. By this severity, he not only 1548.
secured the reception of the Interim in two of the most
powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft what such
as continued refracory had to expec. The effect of
the example was as great as he could have wished, and
many towns, in order to save themselves from the like
vengeance, found it necessary to comply with what he
enjoined. This obedience, extorted by the rigour of au-
tlority, produced no change in the sentiments of the
Germans, and extended no farther than to make them con-
form so far to the letter of the law, as was barely sus-
ficient to screen them from puniihment. Their preachers
accompanied those ceremonies, the observation of which
the Interim prescribed, with such an explication of their
tendency, as served rather to confirm than to remove
the cruples of their hearers with regard to them. The
people, many of whom had grown up to mature years
since the establishment of the reformed religion, and had
been accustomed to no other form of publick worship,
beheld the pompous pageantry of the popish service with
contempt or horror; and in molt places the Romish
ecclefiallicks who returned to take poffeflion of their
churches could scarce be proteced from insult, or their
ministrations from interruption. Thus, notwithltanding
the apparent compliance of fomany cities, the inhabitants
being accustomed to freedom, submitted with reluaance
to the power which now oppressed them. Their under-
standing as well as inclination revolted against the doc-
trines and rites imposed on them; and though, for the
present, they concealed their indignation and resentment,
it was evident that these paflions could not always be kept
under restraint, but would break out at last in effets
proportional to their violence [].

CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleated with havingThe Pope

bended the stubborn spirit of the Germans to such gene-difmi'l^t)
ral fubmifion, departed for the Low-Countries, fully de- fembled t
termined to compel the cities, which flill flood out, to olQgna
receive the Interim. He carried his two prisoners, the
Illetor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, along with
him, either becaulc he durst not leave them behind him
in Germany, or becaufl he wifhied to give his country-

;'f' Sleid. 471. [] M rn. de Ribicr. . :i Slcid. 491.

S mens

Book IX. men the Flemings this illustrious proof of the fuccers
^'-v.--' of his arms, and the extent of his power. Before Charles
s,.p,.S4; arrived at Brussels he was informed that the Pope's le.

gates at Bologna had dismissed the council by an indefi.
nite prorogation, and that the prelates assembled there
had returned to their refpedive countries. Neceflity had
driven the Pope into this measure. By the secession of
those who had voted against the translation, together
with the departure of others, who grew weary of con.
tinuing in a place where they were not luffered to proceed
to business, so few and uch inconsiderable members re-
mained, that the pompous appellation of a General Coun-
cil could not, with decency, be beflowed any longer up-
on them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve an assembly
which was become the obje& of contempt, and exhibit-
ed to all Chriltendom a molt glaring proof of the impo-
tence of the Romish fee. But unavoidable as the mea-
sure was, it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted, and
had the appearance of withdrawing the remedy at the
very time when those for whose recovery it was provided,
were prevailed on to acknowledge its virtue, and to make
trial of its effet. Charles did not fail to put this con-
ftruaion on his condut; and by an artful comparison of
his own efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's scandalous
inattention to a point so essential, he endeavoured to ren-
der the Pontiff odious to all zealous Catholicks. At the
fame time, he commanded the Prelates of his fation to
remain at Trent, that the Council might flill appear to
have a being, and might be ready, whenever it was
thought expedient, to resume its deliberations for the
good of the church [h].

The Empe- THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low-Coun-
ror receives tries, besides gratifying his favourite paflion of travelling
his son hi-
lip in the from one part of his dominions to another, was to receive
Low-Coun- Philip his only son, who was now in the twenty-firfl
tries. year of his age, and whom he had called thither, not

only that he might be recognized by the States of the
Netherlands as heir apparent, but in order to facilitate
the execution of a vast cheme, the objea of which, and
the reception it met with, hall be hereafter explained.
Philip, having left the government of Spain to Maximi-
lian, Ferdinand's eldef son, to whom the Emperor had

[h] PIllv. p. ii, 7.

given

given the Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, em- Book IX.
barked for Italy attended by a numerous retinue of Spa- '-
niLh nobles [i]. The squadron which escorted him, was 54
commanded by Andrew Doria, who, notwithstanding
his advanced age, insisted on the honour of performing,
in person, the lame duty to the son, which he had often
dischargcd towards the father. He landed safely at Ge- Nov. s5.
noa; from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in Bruf-
fels. The States of Brabant in the first place, and those 1549.
of the other provinces in their order, acknowledged his April
right of fucceflion in common form, and he took the cuf-
flomary oath to preserve all their privileges inviolate [k].
In all the towns of the Low-Countries through which
Philip passed, he was received with extraordinary pomp.
Nothing that could express the relpeEt of the people, or
contribute to his amusement was neglected; pageants,
tournaments, and public fpeaacles of every kind were
exhibited with that expensive magnificence which com-
mercial nations display, when, on any occasion, they
depart from their usual maxims of frugality. But amidst
these scenes of fefivity and pleasure Philip's natural fe-
verity of temper was discernible. Youth itself could
not render him agreeable, nor his being a candidate for
power form him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty
reserve in his behaviour, and discovered such manifest
partiality towards his Spanish attendants, together with
such an avowed preference to the manners of their coun-
try, as highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave rife to
that antipathy, which afterwards occasioned a revoluti-
on so fatal to him in that part of his dominions [1].

CHARLES was long detained in the Netherlands by a

violent attack of the gout, which returned upon him so
frequently, and with uch increasing violence, that it had
broken to a great degree the vigour of his constitution.
He, nevertheless, did not intermit his endaevours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Stralburg,
after a long firuggle, found it necessary to give obe-
dience; those of Conflancc, who had taken arms in
their own defence, were compelled by force not only to
conform to the Interim, but to renounce their privileges

[i Ocho, Carolcl, 361. k] Harzi. nnal. Brabant. 651.
[lj Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 9. L'Evefilue Mem. dc Card. Granvellc, i. 21.

Ill~ ~ ~S acoCsoe,
ó.

S3

as

Book IX. as a free city, to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke
.--.v'-C~ of Austria, and as his vassals to admit an Aufirian gover-
1549 nor and garrison [m]. Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg,

and Lubeck were the only Imperial cities of note that
frill continued refratory.

[m] Sleid. 474, 491.

THE

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.
W HILE Charles laboured, with such unwearied Book X.

industry, to overcome the obitinacy of the Pro- '

tenants, the effeas of his fleadinefs in the execution of 1549-
his plan were rendered less considerable by his rupture chemes -
with the Pope, which daily increased. The firm refo- gaintithe
lution which the Emperor seemed to have taken against Emperor.
refloring Placentia, together with his repeated encroach-
ments on the ecclesiastical jurifdi&ion, both by the re-
gulations contained in the Interim, and by his attempt to re-
assemble a council at Trent, exasperated Paul to the ut-
most, who with theweaknefs incident to old age grew more
attached to his family, and more jealous of his authority,
as he advanced in years. Pushed on by these paflons, he
made new efforts to draw the French King into an alli-
ance against the Emperor []. But finding that Mo-
narch, notwithfianding his hereditary enmity to Charles,
and dread of his growing power, as unwilling as formerly
to involve himself in immediate hostilities, he was obliged

[J] Mcm. de Ribier, ii. 3.

S 4 to

Book X. to contrac his views, and to think of preventing future
'v-.--' encroachments, since it was not in his power to inflict

'549. vengeance on account of those which were pass. For this

purpose, he determined to recall his grant of Parma and
Placentia, and after declaring them to be re-annexed to
the holy fee, to indemnify Oaavio by a new etablifh-
ment in the ecclefiaflical state. By this expedient, he
hoped to gain two points of no small consequence; the
security of arma, firfl of all, as the Emperor would be
cautious of invading the patrimony of the church, though
he might seize without scruple a town belonging to the
house of Farnese; and in the next place, some chance of
recovering Placcntia, at his solicitations to that effect
might decently be urged with greater importunity, and
would infallibly be attended with more weight, when he
was confidored not as pleading the cause of his family,
hut as an advocate for the interefi of the church. But
while Paul was priding himself in this device, as a happy
refinement in policy, Ocavio an ambitious and high fpi-
rited young man, who could not bear with patience to
be spoilcd of one half of his territories by the repaciouf-
ness of his father-in-law, and to be deprived of the other
by the artifices of his grand-father, took measures in or-
der to prevent the execution of a plan fatal to his interest.
He set out secretly from Rome, and having first endea-
voured to furprize Parma, which attempt was fruitrated
by the fidelity of the governor to whom the Pope
had intruded the defence of the town, he made
overtures to the Emperor of renouncing all conneaion
4 with the Pope, and depending entirely on him for his

future fortune. This unexpected defection of one of
the Pope's own family to an enemy whom he hated,
irritated, almost to madness, a mind peevish with old
age; and there was no degree of severity to which Paul
might not have proceeded against a grandson whom he
reproached as an unnatural apoltate. But happily for
Ocavio, death prevented his carrying into execution the
harsh resolutions which he had taken with refpet to him,
and put an end to his pontificate in the sixteenth year of
his administration, and the eighty second of his age .

As

* Among many inflinces of the credulity or weakness of historians

in attributing the death of illustrious pcrfonages to extraordinary
cufts, this is one. Almost all the hiltorians of the sixteenth century
affirm that the death of Paul III. w occasioned by the violent pal-

sions

As this event had been long expeaced, there was an Book X.

extraordinary concourse of Cardinals at Rome; and the ''-
various competitors having had time to form their par- 55
tics, and to concert their measures, their ambition and
intrigues protraced the conclave to a great length. The
Imperial and French fations firove, with emulation, to
promote one of their own number, and had, by turns,
the profpea of success. But as Paul during a long Pon-
lificate had raised many to the purple, and those chiefly

sions which the behaviour of his grandson excited ; that being inform-
cdwhile he was airing himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of
Oaavio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with the
Emlperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued some hours in
a I'woon, then fevered, and died within three days. This is the account
I.ienofit by Thuanus, lib. vi. tir. Adriani Iftor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii.
450. and by Father Paul, 80. Even Cardinal Pallavicini, better in-
formed than any writer with regard to the events which happened in the
papal court, and when not warped by prejudice or system, more accurate
in relating them, agrees with their narrative in its chief circumstances.
Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta, who wrote his history by command of the e-
nate of Venice, relates it in the fame manner. Histories Venez. vol. iv.
2 I. But there was no occasion to search for any extraordinary cause to
account for the death of an old man of eighty two. There remains an
authentick account of this event, in which we find none of there mar-
vellous circumstances of which the hiforians are so fond. The cardinal
ofFerrara, who was entrusted with the affairs of France at the Court
of Rome, and M. D' Urfe, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote
an account to that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's
death. By these it appears, that Odavio's attempt to furprize Parma
wras made on the twentieth of Otober; that next day in the evening,
and not while he was airing himlelf in the gaidens of Monte-Cavalio,
the Pope received intelligence of what he had done; that he was seizcd
vith such a tranfpor. of passion, and cried so bittely that his voice as
hbard in several apartments (If the palace; that next day, however, he
v as o well as to give an audience to the Cardinal of Ferrara, and to go
through business of different kinds; that O&avio wrote a letter to the
Il'e, not to Cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his refulution of
throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor; that the Pope received
this on the twenty-firft without any new symptoms of emotion, and re-
turned an anlwer to it; that on the twenty-fecond of Otober, the day
on hich the Cardinal of Ferrara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his
usual llate of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 47. By a letter of M.
I)'Urfe, Nov. . it appears that the Pope was in such good health, that
In the third ,f that month he had celebrated the anniverlary of his orona-
tlon v.ill the uual folemnities. Ibidem, as5. By another letter from
the .nlei person, we learn that on the sixth of November a catarrh or d-
fluxin tIll down on the Pope's lungs, with such dangerous I)mlltom
that hin life was immediately despaired of. Ibid. .5z. And by a third
letter, we are informed that he died November the tenth In none of
their lItters is his death imputed to any extraordinary cause. It ap-
pears that more than twenty days clapsed between Ocavio'b attmlt on
l'aTma and the death of his grandfather, and that the dileale was the
natural ffct of old age, not one of those occasioncd by violence of pl-
ion.

pcirfontF

Book X. persons of eminent abilities as well as zealously devoted
_v~~-' to his family, Cardinal Farnese had the command of a
Febr.r 7 powerful and united fquadrot, by whose address and firm-
The eleai- ness he exalted to the Papal throne the Cardinal de Mon-
onof Julius te, whom Paul had employed as his principal legate in

the council of Trent, and trusted with his molt ecret
intentions. He assumed the name of Julius III. and in
order to express his gratitude towards his benefactor, the
sirs a of his administration was to put Oetavio Far-
nefein poTfeflion of Parma. When he was told of,the
injury which he did the Holy ee by alienating a territo-
ry of such value, he briskly replied, " that he would
rather be a poor Pope, with the reputation of a gentleman,
than a rich one, with the infamy of having forgotten the
obligations conferred upon him, and the promises which
he had made [b]." But all the lustre of this candour or
generosity he quickly effaced by an ation mol shock-

His chrac- ingly indecent. According to an ancient and established
terandcon- pradtice, every Pope upon his elecion claims the privi-
du. lege of beltowing, on whom he pleases, the Cardinal's

hat which falls to be disposed of by his being vetied with
the triple crown. Julius, to the astonishment of the fa-
cred college, conferred this mark of difindion, together
with ample ecclefialtical revenues, and the right of bear-
ing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of
sixteen, born of obscure parents, and known by the name
of the Ape, from his having been intrufled with the
care of an animal of that species, in the Cardinal di Mon-
te's family. Such a prostitution of the highest dignity
in the church would have given offence, even in those
dark pericds, when the credulous superstition of the peo-
ple emboldened ecclesiastics to venture on the molf fla-
grant violations of decorum. But in an enlightened age,
when by the progress of knowledge and philosophy the
obligations of duty and decency were better understood,
when a blind veneration for the Pontifical character was
every where abated, and one half of Chriflendom in
open rebellion againfi the Papal See, this ation was
viewed with horror. Rome was immediately filled with
libels and pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's ex-
travagant regard for such an unworthy obje& to the mol
criminal paflions. The Protestants exclaimed against the
absurditics of fppofing that the infallible spirit of divine

[h] Mem. d Ribier.

truth

truth could dwell in a breafi so impure, and called more ook X.
loudly, than ever, and with greater appearance ofjuftice, v
for the immediate and thorough Reformation of a church, '50'
the Head of which was a disgrace to the Chriffian name
c]. The reft of the Pope's condut was of a piece with
this first pecimen of his dispositions. Having now reach-
ed the summit of ecclesiastical ambition, he feenred eager
to indemnify himself, by an unrefirained indulgence of
his desires, for the felf-denial or dissimulation which he
had thought it prudent to pra6cife while in a subordinate
station. He became careless, to so great a degree, of all
serious business, that he could seldom be brought to at-
tend to it, but in cafes of extreme necelfity; and giving
up himself to amusements and dissipation of every kind,
he imitated the luxurious elegance of Leo, rather than
the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of which it was ne-
ceffary to display, in contending with a sea which deriv-
ed great credit from the rigid and austere manners of its
teachers [d].

THE Pope, how ready soever to fulfil his engagements His view.

to the family of Farnese, discovered no inclination to ob- and pro
serve the oath, which each Cardinal had taken when he with'refpe
entered the conclave, that if the choice should fall ontothe gene-
him, he would immediately call the council to re-affume'll couacil.
its deliberations. Julius knew, by experience, how dif-
ficult it was to confine such a body of men within the nar-
row limits which it was the interest of the church of Rome
to prescribe; and how easily the zeal of some members,
the rashness of others, or the suggestions of the Princes on
whom they depended, might precipitate a popular and un-
governable assembly into forbidden inquiries, as well as
dangerous decisions. He wished, for these reasons, to have
eluded the obligation of his oath, and gave an ambiguous
answer to the sirs proposals, which were made to him by
the Emperor, with regard to that matter. But as Charles,
either from his natural obflinacy in adhering to the mea-
fures which he had once adopted, or from the mere pride
of accomplishing what was held to be almoRt impoflible,
perfiited in his resolution of forcing the Protestants to re-
turn into the bosom of the church: As he had persuaded
himself that the authoritative decisions of the council
might be employed with efficacy in combating their pre-

ei3 eld. 491. F. Paul, 18. Pllav, ii. 76. Thuin. lib. vi. p. it5.
15 P. Paul, ibid.

judicesL

Book X. judices; and in consequence of that persuasion, solicited
~'--'- earnestly that a new bull of convocation might be issued,

'550 the Pepe could not, with decency, rejec that requet.

When Julius found that he could not prevent the calling
of a council, he endeavoured to take the merit of having
procured the meeting of an afembly, which was the ob-
jec of such general desire and expeaation. A congrega-
tion of Cardinals, to whom he referred the consideration
of what was necessary for restoring peace to the church,
recommended, by his direcion, the peedy convocation of
a council, as the most effecual expedient for that purpose;
and as the new hereties raged with the greatef violence in
Germany, they proposed Trent as the place of its meet-
ing, that, by a near inipetion of the evil, the remedy
might be applied with greater discernment and certainty
of success. The Pope warmly approved this advice,
which he himself had ditated, and sent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make known his
intentions [e].

A diet at ME A N W H I LE, the Emperor had summoned a new di-
Augsburg to et to meet at Augsburg, in order to enforce the obferva-
enforce' the
Interim. tion of the Interim, and to procure a more authentic ad

of the Empire, acknowledging the jurifdition of the
council, as well as an explicit promise of conforming
June 5. to its decrees. He appeared there in person, together

with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the Elecors
were present, but all sent deputies in their name. Charles
notwithstanding the despotic authority with which he
had given law in the Empire during two years, knew
that the spirit of independence among the Germans was
not intircly subdued, and for that reason took care to
over-awe the diet by a considerable body of Spanish troops
which escorted him thither. The first point, ubmitted
to the confidcration of the diet, was the neceflity of hold-
ing a council. All the Popish members agreed, with-
out difficulty, that the meeting of that aembly should
be renewed at rent, and promised an implicit acquief-
cence in its decrees. The Proteflants, intimidated and
disunitcd, mull have followed their example, and the
rctolution of the diet have proved unanimous, if Maurice
of Saxony had not begun at this time to disclose new in-
tentions, and to a a part very different from that which
he had so long aflumed.

[c] F. Paul, *8I. Plltv. ii. 77.

BY

BY an artful diflimulation of his own sentiments; by Book X.

address in paying court to the Emperor; and by the - '"
seeming zeal with which he forwarded all his ambiti- MtS'5 e-

Maurice be-

ous schemes, Maurice had raised himself to the EleEo- gins to from
ral dignity; and having added the dominions of the elder defigs a-
branch of the Saxon family to his own, was become the Eanth
most powerful Prince in Germany. But his long 'and
intimate union with the Emperor had afforded him
many opportunities of observing narrowly the dangerous
tendency of his schemes. He saw the yoke that was
preparing for his country; and from the rapid as well as
formidable progress of the Imperial power, was convin-
ced that but a ew fleps more remained to be taken,
in order to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in
Germany, as he had become in Spain. The more emi-
nent the condition was to which he himself had been ex-
alted, the more solicitous did he naturally become to
maintain all its rights and privileges, and the more did
he dread the thoughts of descending from the rank of a
Prince almost independent, to that of a vaflal fubje to
the will of a master. At the fame time, he perceived
that Charles, instead of allowing liberty of conscience,
the promise of which had allured several Protestant Prin-
ces to assist him in the war against the confederates of
Smalkalde, was bent on exacing a rigid conformity to
the doorines and rites of the Romish church. As he,
notwithstanding all the compliances which he had made
from motives of interest, or an excess of confidence in the
Emperor, was sincerely attached to the Lutheran tenets,
he determined not to be a tame fpeaator of the ovcr-
throw of a system which he believed to be founded in
truth.

THIS resolution, flowing from the love of liberty, Therplit;-

or z.eal for religion, was strengthened by political and c^flial'nf'al
interefled considerations. In that elevated flation, in cli,, him.
which Maurice was now placed, new and more exten-
five profpeCs opened to his view. His rank and power
entitled him to be the head of the Protestants in the
Empire. His predecessor, the degraded Elecor, with
inferior abilities, and territories lets considerable, had
acquired such an ascendant over the councils of the party;
and Maurice neither wanted difccrnmcnt to fee the ad-
vantage of this pre-eminence, nor ambition to aim at
attaining it. But he found himself in a situation which
rendered the attempt no les\ difficult, than the obic'd of

it

Book IX. it was important. On the one hand, the connection
2-_v- which he had formed with the Emperor was so intimate,

'550' that he could scarce hope to take any ftep which tended

to dissolve it, without alarming his jealousy, and draw-
ing on himself the whole weight of that power, which
had crushed the greatelt confederacy ever formed in Ger-
many. On the other hand, the calamities which he had
brought on the Proteflant party were o recent and so
great, that it feemd almost impofible to regain their
confidence, or to rally and re-animate a body of men,
after himself had been the chief inltrumept in breaking
their union and vigour. These considerations were fuffi-
cient to have discouraged any perfonofa iplrit less adven-
turous than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and
vaftnels of the enterprizes were allurements; and he bold-
ly efolved on measures, of which a genius of an inferior
order could have conceived no idea, or would have trem-
bled at the thoughts of the danger which attended the
execution of them.

Thelamrlon His paflions concurred with his interest in confirming
whih co- this resolution; and the resentment excited by an injury,

tperated which he suddenly felt, added new force to the motives
motives. for opposing the Emperor, which found policy suggested.

Maurice, by his authority, had prevailed on the Land-
grave of Hesse to put his person in the Emperor's power,
and had obtained a promise from the Imperial ministers
that he should not bedetained a prisoner. This had been
violated in the manner already related. The unhappy
Landgrave exclaimed as loudly againlt his oIn-in-law as
against Charles. The Princes of Helle required him in-
cefl.intly to fulfil his engagements to their father, who
had loft his liberty by trusting to him; and all Germany
suspected him of having betrayed, to an implacable ene-
my, the friend whom he was most bound to protea.
Roused by these solicitations and reproaches, as well as
prompted by duty and affeaion to his father-in-law, Mau-
rice had employed not only entreaties but rcmonftrances
in order to procure his release. All these Charles had
dilregarded; and the shame of having been firll deceived
and then flighted by a Prince whom he had served witll
.eal and success, which merited a very different return,
made fich a deep impreflion on Mauricc, that he wail-
ed with impatience for an opportunity of being rc-
venged.

Till

THE utmost caution as well as delicacy were requisite Book. X.

in taking every ftep towards this end; as he had to guard, v
on the one hand, against giving a premature alarm to the s5o.
Emperor; while, on the other, something considerable ad address
and explicit was necessary to be done, in order to regain with which
the confidence of the Proteflant party. Maurice had ac- he carries
cordingly applied all his powers of address and diffimu-rheimes
lation to attain both these points. As he knew Charles
to be inflexible with regard to the submission which he
required to the Interim, he did not hesitate one moment
whether he should establish that form of dotrine and
worship in his dominions. But being sensible how odious
it was to his fubjeds, instead of violently impefing it on
them by the mere terror of authority, as had been done
in other parts of Germany, he endeavoured to render
their obedience a voluntary deed of their own. ForHe enforces
this purpose, he had assembled the clergy of his country the Interim
at Leipfick, and had laid the Interim before them, to- in Saxony.
gether with the reasons which made it necessary to con-
form to it. He had gained some of them by promises,
others he had wrought upon by threats, and all were in-
timidated by the rigour with which obedience to the
Interim was extorted in the neighbouring provinces.
Even Melanahon, whole merit of every kind entitled
him to the firfi place among the Proteflant divines, be-
ing now deprived of the manly counsels of Luther, which
were wont to inspire him with fortitude, and to preserve
him steady amidst the forms and dangers that threatened
the church, was seduced into unwarrantable conceflions,
by the timidity of his temper, his fond desire of peace,
and his excessive complaisance towards persons of high
rank. By his arguments and authority, no less than by
Maurice's arts, the assembly was prevailed on to declare,
that in points which were purely indifferent, obedience
was due to the commands of a lawful superior. Found-
ing upon this maxim, no less uncontrovertible in theory,
than dangerous when carried into practice, especially in
religious matters, they proceeded to class, among the
number of things indifferent, several dotrines, which
Luther had pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in
the Romish creed, as well as many of thole rites which
diflinguifhed the Reformed fiom the Popish worflip, and
by confcquence, they exhorted their people to comply

with

Book IX. with the Emperor's injunctions concerning these par-

'--^- ticulars [t.]

Makes pro- BY this dextrous conduc, the introducion of the
feffons of Interim excited none of thole violent convulsions in Saxo.
zeal for the whi
zeal f e ny, which it occasioned in other provinces. But though
Protefiant
religion. the Saxons submitted, the more zealous Lutherans ex-

claimed against Melan&hon and his afociate , as false
brethren, who were either so wicked as to apostatize from
the truth altogether; or so artful as to betray it by Iubtle
diftin&ions; or so feeble-fpirited as to give it up from
pusillanimity and criminal complaisance to a Prince, ca-
pable of sacrificing to his political interest, that which he
himself regarded as mos sacred. Maurice, being con-
icious what a colour of probability his pall condu& gave
to there accusations, as well as afraid of losing intirely
the confidence of the Protestants, issued a declaration
containing professions of his zealous attachment to the
Reformed religion, and of his resolution to guard against
all the errors or encroachments of the Papal fee [g.]

At the fame HAVING gone so far in order to remove the fears and
tme courts jealousies of the Protetants, he found it neceflary to es-
peror. face the impression which such a declaration might make

on the Emperor. For that purpose, he not only renew-
ed his profeflions of an inviolable adherence to his alliance
with him, but as the city of Magdeburg still perfiflled
in rejeaing the Interim, he undertook to reduce it to
obedience, and instantly set about levying the troops to
be employed in that service. This damped all the hopes
which the Protestants begun to conceive of Maurice, in
consequence of his declaration, and left them more than
ever at a loss to guess at his real intentions. Their for-
mer suspicion and difiruil of him revived, and the di-
vines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings, in
which they represented him as the mofl formidable enemy
of the Protestant religion, who treacherously assumed an
appearance of zeal for its interest, that he might more
effectually execute his schemes for its deftrulion.

ragPiftthe THIs charge, supported by the evidence of recent
mode of faas, as well as by his present dubious condu&, gained
proceeding such universal credit, that Maurice was obliged to take
Scil.oun a vigorous ep in his own vindication. As soon as the

[f] Sleid. 481, 485. J. Laur. MofLemii laftitatioaum ift. Ecle-

filtica, lib. iv. Helmft. 1755. .

4t. p. 748.
[g] Sicid. 485.

re-assembling

rc-affembling of the council at Trent was proposed in the Book X.
diet, his ambassadors protested that their malter would--"
not acknowledge its authority, unless all the points which 1550
had been already decided there were reviewed, and con-
lidered as entire; unlels the Protestant divines had a full
hearing granted them, and were allowed a decisive voice
in tile council; and unless the Pope renounced his preten-
sions to preside in the council, engaged to submit to its
decrees, and absolved the bishops from their oath of obe-
dience, that they might deliver their Ientiments with
greater freedom. These demands, which were higher
than any that the Reformers had ventured to make,
even when the zeal of their party was warmefd, or their
affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced, in some degree,
the effect of Maurice's preparations against Magdeburg,
and kept the Protestants in fulpenfe with regard to his
designs. At the fame time, he had address enough to
represent this part of his condua in such a light to the
Emperor, that it gave him no offence, and occasioned
no interruption of the ftri& confidence which fubifited
between them. What the pretexts were which he em-
ployed in order to give uch a bold declaration an inno-
cent appearance, the contemporary historians have not
explained; that they imposed upon Charles is certain,
for he still continued to prosecute his plan as well con-
cerning the Interim as the council, with the fame ardour;
and to place the fame confidence in Maurice, with re-
gard to the execution of both.

T HE Pope's resolution concerning the council not be- Thedict re-
ing yet known at Augfburgh, the chief business of the rflv to

make war

diet was to enforce the observation of the Interim. As ,, the city
the senate of Magdeburg, notwithllanding various endea- of Magdc-
vours to frighten or to tooth them into compliance, not bilr'.
only persevered obstinately in their opposition to the In-
terim, but began to strengthen the fortifications of their
city, and to levy troops in their own defence, Charles
required of the diet that they would afil him in quelling
this audacious rebellion againd a decree of the Empire.
Had the members of the diet been left to aA agreeably
to their own inclination, this demand would have been
rejeted without he!itation. All the Germans who fa-
voured, in any degree, the new opinions in religion, and
many who were influenced by no other consideration than
jealousy of the Emperoi's growing power, regarded this
effort of the citizens of Magdeburg, as a noble (land ftr

VOL. 11. T the

Book X. the liberties of their country. Even such as had not re-
'--v'-'folution to exert the fame Ipirit, admired the gallantry of

'550 their enterprie, and wiflcd it uccefs. But the pretence

of the Spanish troops, together with the dread of the Em-
peror's displeasure, over-awed thole who were present
in the diet to such a degree, that without venturing to
utter their own sentiments, they tamely ratified, by their
votes, whatever the Emperr was pleated to prescribe.
The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued by his
own authority against the Magdcburgers, were confirm-
ed; a resolution was taken to raile troops in order to be-
siege the city in form; and persons were named to fix
the contingent in men or money to be furnified by each

Appint ifate. At the fame time, the diet petitioned that Mau-
Maurice cneral. rice might be entrufled with the command of that army,

to which Charles gave his conlent with great alacrity, and
with high encomiums upon the wisdom of the choice
which they had made [h.] As Maurice conducted all
his schemes with profound and impenetrable secrecy, it
is probable that he took no ftep avowedly in order to ob-
tain this charge. The recommendation of his country-
men was either purely accidental, or flowed from the
opinion generally entertained of his great abilities; and
neither the diet had any foresight, nor the Emperor any
dread of the confcquences which followed upon this nomi-
nation. Maurice accepted without hesitation the trust
committed to him, instantly discerning the important ad-
vantages which he might derive from it.

Thecouncil MEANWHIIF., Julius, in preparing the bull for the
tummoncd convocation of the council, observed all those tedious
tleTare tm forms which the court of Rome can employ, with lo
Trent. much dexterity, to retard any disagreeable measure. At
Lacember. lafi it was published, and the council summoned to meet

at Trent on the first day of the ensuing month of May.
As he knew that many of the Germans rejeced or dif-
puted the authority and jurifdidtion which the Papal ee
claims with rcfpct to general councils, he took care, in
the preamble ofthe bull, to afert, in the firongefi terms,
his own right, not only to call and preside in that assem-
blv, but to direEt its proceedings; nor would he soften
thefi: expreflions, in any degree, notwithstanding the
repeated solicitations of the Emperor, who foresaw what

[h] Slcid. 503, 52.

offence

offincc they would give, and wihat conitludion might Book. X.
be put on them. They were censured, accordingly, with -
etict fcverity, by !fe:eral members of the diet ; but what- '551'
L\cr diliult or lufpicion they excited, such ablolute di-
iction of all their deliberations had the Emperor acquir-
(d, hat he procured a rcels, in hich the authority of Fcb .
fhc council was recognii.d, and declared to be the prc-
per remcdy for the evils which at that time afflided the
cllurci; all the Princes and itatts of the Empiic, ich
as had made innovations in eligion, as \ell as thule who
adhered to the yflcm of their forefathers, were required
to ftnd their leprelentatives to the council; the Emperor
tniatgrcd to grant a atfe condut to filch as demanded it,
and to Iccure them an impartial hearing in the councili;
he romifed to fix his residence in tome city of the F.m-
1,;ri, in the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might po-
tcd the members of the council by his prtelnce, and take
c.le that, by conducting their deliberations areeable to
firipture and the docrine of the fathers, they might
bring them to a desirable issue. In this recess, the ob-
lervation of the Interim was more firidly enjoined than
t(er, and the Emperor threatertd all who had hither-
to nlected or refused to conform to it, with the fe-
vcreft effecs of his vengeance, if they persisted in their
tillbcbdience [i].

1)DRING the meeting of this diet, a new attempt was Another
made in order to procure liberty to the Landgravc. fruitlels at-

. ,- . tempt to

lihat Prince, no-wile reconciled by time to his ituation, porure the
gew every day more impatient of refiraint. Having of- Landigra,
ten applied to Maurice and the EleCor of Brandenburg, libr't.
Aho took every occasion of soliciting the Emperor in
!li behalf, though without an) effect, he now corr.-
manded his ons to summon them, with legal formality,
to perform what was contained in the bond they had
.';antcd him, hv furrendcrin themflves to be treated with
Itic lame rigour as the Emperor had uicd him. This
iurriied them with a freffh pretext for renewing their
:Pplication to the mperor, together with an additional
argumcnt to enforce it. Charles firmly rlolved not to
'rant their requet ; though at the ame time being x-
Irlmel defircus to get id of their inccfahnt importuni!v,
1"t ndeavoured to prevail on the l andgrave to give up

i] SleJl. 51. 'rhuan. lib. vi. 133. GolJida i Connit. Impciiales,

"
. 11 340.

the

Book X. the obligation which he had received from the twoElec.

tors. But that Prince refusing to part with a security
'55' which he deemed essential to his safety, the Emperol

boldly cut the knot which he could not untie; and by a
publick deed annulled the bond which Maurice and tht
Elector of Brandenburg had granted, ablolving them
from all their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre.
tension to a power lo pernicious to ociety as that ofabro.
gating at plealitre the moil lacred laws of honour, and
moit formal obligations of public faith, had hitherto
been formed by any but the Roman Pontiffs, who, in
consequence of their claim of infallibility, arrogate the
right of dispensing with precepts and duties of every
kind. All Germany was filled with astonishment, when
Charles assumed the fame prerogative. The slate of
fubjedion, to which the Empire was reduced, appear-
ed to be more rigorous as well as intolerable than that
of the moif wretched and enslaved nations, if the Em-
peror by an arbitrary decree might cancel those solemn
contracts, which are the foundation of that mutual con-
fidence whereby men are held together in social union.
The Landgrave himself now gave up all hopes of reco-
vering his liberty by the Emperor's content, and endea-
voured to procure it by his own address. But the plan
which he had formed to deceive his guards being difcovcr-
ed, such of his attendants as he had gained to favour his
escape were put to death, and he was confined in the ci-
tadel of Mechlin more closely than ever [k].

Charles's ANOTHER tranfa&ion was carried on during this diet,
plan of pro- with refpe& to an affair more nearly interesting to the
curing the
Imperial Emperor, and which occasioned likewise a general alarm
crown for among the Princes of the Empire. Charles, though
his son Phi- formed with talents which fitted him for conceiving and

conducing great designs, was not capable, as has been
observed, of bearing extraordinary success. Its operation
on his mind was so violent and intoxicating, that it eleva-
ted him beyond what was moderate or attainable, and
turned his whole attention to the pursuit of vafi but chi-
merical objets. Such had been the effe& of his viaory
over the confederates of Smalkalde. He did not long
reft satisfied with the fubilantial and certain advantages
which were the refilt of that event, but despising thle,,
as poor or inconsiderable fruits of such great success, he

[k] Slcid. 504. Thusn. I. vi. 134, 335.

had

had aimed at bringing all Germany to an uniformity in Book X.
religion, and at rendering the Imperial power despotic. '
Thele were obje&s extremely splendid, it must be ac- 's5'
knowledged, and alluring to an ambitious mind; the pur-
suit (ot tl:cm, however, was attended with manifest dan-
cer, and the attainment of them very precarious. But
the steps which he had already taken towards them being
accompanied with such success, his imagination, warmed
with contemplating this vafi design, overlooked ordefpifed
all difficulties. As he conceived the execution of his plan
to be certain, he began to be solicitous how he might
render the poffeflion of such an important acquisition per-
petual in his family, by tranlmitting the German Em-
pire, as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and his dominions
in Italy and the Low-Countries, to his son. Having long
revolved this flattering idea in his mind, without com-
municating it, even to those ministers whom he mofi
trufed, he had called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that
his pretence would facilitate the carrying forward the
scheme.

GREAT obstacles, however, and such as would have The obta-

deterred any ambition less acculomed to overcome diffi- "le d'hat
culties, were to be urmounted. He had in the year one way.
thousand five hundred and thirty imprudently aflited in
procuring his brother Ferdinand the dignity of King of
the Romans, and there was no probability that this Prince,
who was till in the prime of life, and had a son grown
up to the years of manhood, would relinquish, in favour
of his nephew, the near profpe& of the Imperial throne,
which Charles's infirmities and declining slate of health
opened to him This did not deter the Emperor from
venturing to make the proposition; and when Ferdinand,
notwith anding his profound reverence for his brother,
and obsequious fubmilion to his will in other instances,
rejeced it in a peremptory tone, he was not discouraged
by one repulse. He renewed his applications to him by
his fifler, Mary Queen of Hungary and Bohemia, and
who, by her great abilities, tempered with extreme gen-
tlenefs of disposition, had acquired an extraordinary in-
fluence over both the brothers. She entered warmly into
a measure, which tended so manifestly to aggrandi.e the
house of Aufilia; and flattering herself that ihe could
tempt Ferdinand to renounce the reversionary po(Teflion
of the Imperial dignity for an immediate cltablifhment,

r 3 fil

Book X. (he assurcd him that the Emperor, by way of compenfa.
t-- o~ tion for- hi; giving up his chance of uccclion, would in-
'I5'' fiantly bellow upon him territories of very confidcra.

hie altuc, ard pinted out in particular thole of the )iuke
of \V'urtemlcig, x lllch might be contiicated tIpon: (lif
ferent prctcx:s. Bui Ferdinand was more ambitiou- than
to be pcriluaded, by heraddrefs or intreaties, to appil;oe
of a plan, hich would ha\e degraded him from ithe
high-l lank am(,;ng the Monarchs of Europe to that ot
a ubordin:te and dependent Prince. He was at the fame
time, more attached to his children ti'.ia to fruflratc, by
a ralh conceflion, all the high hopes in prolpeLt of xhich
they had been educated.

H" rndea- NOT WITHSTANDING the immoveablefirmnefswhiclI
v", t'"o lur- Ferdinand dilcovered, the Emperor did not abandon his

*l'icc. fchcme. He flattertd himfilf that he might attain the

objca in view b- another channel, and that it was not im-
possible to revcail on the Elecors to cancel their former
choice of Feldinand, or at leait to elec Philip a econd
King of the Romans, fubflituting him as next in fuccci-
sion to his uncle. W'ith this view he took Philip along
with him to the diet, that the Germans might have an
opportunity to observe and become acquainted with the
P} ince, in behalf of whom he courted their interell; and
he himflelf employed all the arts of address or insinuation
to gain the letors, and to prepare them for lending a
favourable car to the propolal. But no sooner did he
venture upon mentioning it to them, than they, at once,
saw and trembled at the consequences with which it would
be attend d. l'hey had long felt all the inconveniences ns
having placed at the head of the Empire, a Prince whole
power and dominions were so extensive; if they should
now repeat the folly, and continue the Imperial crown,
like an hereditary dignity, in the fame family, they fore-
fiaw that they would give the son an opportunity of car-
rying on that fyflem of oppreflion, which the father had
begun; and would put it in his power to overturn what-
ever was yet left entire in the ancient and vcne able fa-
bric of the German conflitution.

Philip' THE characer of the Prince, in whose favour this
rilagreer extraordinair proposition was made, rendered it fill lel
ahle to the agreeable. Philip, though polTeffed with an insatiable
P;(rman6. desire of power, was a firanger to all the arts ofconcilial-

ing good-will. Haughty, referecd and severe, he, in-
flead of gaining new fiiends, difguflcd the ancient and

molt

most devoted partizans of the Aullrian interest. He Book X.
icorned to take the trouble of acquiring the language of '
the country, to the government of which he aspired; 55
nor would he condescend to pay the Germans the com-
pliment of accommodating himlcil, during his rcfidence
among them, to their manners and customs. He allowed
the .ieAoli and mofi iliufirious Princes in Germany to
remain in his pretence uncovered, affc&ing a latel) and
ditanEl demeanour, which the greatest of the German
Emperors, and even Charles him:lf, amidt the pride of
power and viaory, had never assumcd [I]. On the other
hand, Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Ger-
many, had ltudied to render himlelf acceptable to the
people, by a conformity to their manners, which seemed
to flow from choice; and his son Maximilian, who was
born in Germany, possessed in an eminent decree, such
amiable qualities, as rendered him the darling of his
countrymen, and induced them to look forward to his
election as a mofi desirable event. Their esteem and
affetion for him fortified the resolution which found po-
licy had suggested; and determined the Germans to pre-
ser the popular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to the
stubborn auflerity of Philip, which interest could not
[often, nor ambition teach him to disguise. All the Charle o-
Ele Cors, the ecclesiastical as well as ecular, concurred linuil tha
in exprefing uch tlrong disapprobation of the measure, scheme.
that Charles, notwithftaiding the reluctance with which
he gave up any point, was obliged to drop the lcheme as
impracicable. By his unseasonable perseverance in push-
ing it, he not only filled the Germans with new jealousy
of his ambitious dcfigns, but laid the foundation ofrival-
ship and discord in the Austrian family, and forced his
brother Ferdinand, in felf-defence, to court the eleors,
particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to form such con-
netions with them, as cut off all profped of renewing
the proposal with success. Philip, foured by his difap-
pointment, was sent back to Spain, to be called thence
when any new scheme of ambition hould render his pre-
fence necessary [m].

[I] Fredimln Andrea Zulich Differtmtio politico- Hifloric die Narvis

politici CIroli V. Lips. 1706. to. p. 1.

[m) Sleid. oy. Thuan. 18o, z38. Memoir. de Ribicr, ii. 219, 81,
314. Adriani Iftor. lib. viii. 507, 50.

HAVING
T 4

Book X. HAVING relinquished this plan of domeflic ambition
'-v'which had long occupied and engrossed him, Charles
Thet'ore imagined that he would now have leisure to turn all his
and rmpe- attention towards his grand tcheme of eflablilling unifor-
ror f,rm a mity of religion in the Fmpire, by forcing all the con-
deyfign to r
c'er are tending parties to acquit fee in the decisions of the coun-
ma andPla- cil of Trent. But such was the extent of his dominions,
·tt.ti. the variety of connections in which this entangled him,

and the multiplicity of events to which thee gave rite,
as fcldcm allowed him to apply his whole force to any
one objec. The machine which he had to conduct was
so great and complicated, that an unforeseen irregularity
or obfiruaion in one of the inferior wheels, often difcon-
certed the motion of the whole, and disappointed him
of the most considerable effects which he expeced.
Such an unlooked-for occurrence happened at this junc-
ture, and created new obstacles to the execution of his
schemes with regard to religion. Julius III. though he
had confirmed Oaavio Farnese in the poffeflion of the
dutchy of Parma, during the first effusions of joy and
gratitude on his promotion to the Papal throne, soon be-
gan to repent of his own generosity, and to be apprehen-
five of consequences which either he did not foresee, or
had disregarded while the sense of his obligations to the
family of Farnese was recent. The Emperor still re-
tained Placentia in his hand, and had not relinquished his
pretensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire. Gonzaga,
the governor of Milan, having, by the part which he
took in the murder of the late Duke Peter Ludovico,
offered an insult to the family of Farnese, which he knew
could never be forgiven, had for that reason vowed its
defiruaion; and employed all the influence, which his
grcat abilities as well as long ervices gave him with the
Emperor, in persuading him to seize Parma by force of
arms. Charles, in compliance with his solicitations, and
that he might gratify his own desire of annexing Parma
to the Milanese, listened to the proposal: and Gonzaga,
ready to take encouragement from the slightest appear-
ance of approbation, began to aemble troops, and to
make other preparations for the execution of his scheme.

oe..,o OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, found it
Ftrnfcth necessary for his own safety to increase the garrison of his
fi»rnne of capital, and to levy soldiers for defending the reft of the
Franct. country. But as the expence of such an effort far exceed-

4d his scanty revenues, he represented his situation to the

Pope,

pope, and implored that protection and afliftance which Book X.
was due to him as a vassal of the church. The Imperial - '
minister, however, had already preoccupied the Pope's '55'
ear; and by discoursing continually concerning the dan-
ger of giving offence to the Emperor, as well as the
imprudence of supporting OEtavio in an usurpation so
detrimental to the Holy See, had totally alienated him
from the family of Farnese. Oavio's remonstrance and
petition met, of confequencc, with a cold reception;
and he, despairing of any assistance from Julius, began to
look round tor protection from fcme other quarter. Henry
II. of France was the only Prince powerful enough to as-
ford him this protection, and fortunately he was now in
a situation which allowed him to undertake it. He had
brought his tranifafions with the two British kingdoms,
which had hitherto diverted his attention from the affairs
of the continent, to such an issue as he desired. This he
had effeaed partly by the vigour of his arms, partly by
his dexterity in taking advantage of the political factions
which raged in both kingdoms, and rendered the counsels
of the Scots violent and precipitate, and the operations
of the English feeble and unsteady. He had procured
from the English favourable conditions of peace for his
allies the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of Scot-
land not only to affiance their young Queen to his son
the Dauphin, but even to fend her into France that she
might be educated under his eye; and had recovered
Boulogne together with its dependancies which had been
conquered by Henry VIII.

HAVING gained points of so much confeqnence to his H;s ICaur.

crown, and disengaged himself with such honour fiom with H,-r
the burden of supporting the Scots, and maintaining al
war aainfl England, Henry was now at full leisure to
pursue the measures which his hereditary jealousy of the
Emperor's power naturally suggested, He listened, ac-
cordingly, to the first overtures which OQavio Farncfe
made him; and embracing eagerly an opportunity of re-
covering footing in Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty,
in which he promised to espouse his cause, and to furnilh
him with all the affiflancc which he desired. This tranf-
aftion could not be long kept secret from the Pope, who
foreseeing the calamities which mufl follow if war were
rekindled so near the ecclefiaflical (late, immediately
issued monitory letters, requiring Oaavio to rclinquifh

lhis

Book X. his new alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with the
- if'"'i'quifition, he oon after pronounced his fief to be for-

551' feited, and declared war againfl him as a disobedient and

rebellious vaflal. But as lie could not hope, with his
own forces alone, to subdue Oaavlo while supported b,
fich a powerful ally as the King of France, he had r-
courrl to the Emperor, who being extremely olicitous
to prevent the cftablifhment of the French in Parma,
ordered Gon.aga to econd Julius vith all his t(cp,.
Occasion, Thus the French took the field as the allies of O) avio;

.h(th riiCthe Impcrialills as the protecors of the Holy See; and

tltwen hostilities commenced between them, while Charles and
Charles and Henrv themfelvcs itill affeEted to give out that tlle-
Htnry. would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. Th;

war of Parma was not distinguished by any memorabic
event. Many fiall rencounters happened with alternate
success; the French ravaged part of the ecclefiaflical ter-
ritories; the Imperialiis laid waste the Parmesan; and
the latter after having begun to besiege Parma in form,
were obliged to abandon the enterpriz.e with disgrace [].

Retards the BUT the motions, and alarm which this war, or the
nUetinU "f preparation for it, occasioned in Italy, prevented moll
ti:e coucil. *' , , .. '
_

of the Italian prelates from repairing to Trent on the
first of May, the dav appointed for re-assembling the
council; and though the Papal legate and nuncios resort-
ed thither, they were obliged to adjourn to the sirs of
September, hoping such a number might then assemble,
that they might with decency begin their deliberation.
At that time, about sixty prelates, molly from the ec-

Henry pro- clefiaftical slate or from Spain, together with a few
teI.lihintt Germans, convened []. The fcfilon was opened with
the coucil. the accuflomed formalities, and the fathers were about

to proceed to business, when the abbot of Bellozane ap-
peared, and presenting letters of credence as ambassador
from the French King, demanded audience. Having
obtained it, he protested in Henry's name against an al-
fembly called at fich an improper juncture, when a war,
wantonly kindled by the Pope, made it impoflible for the
deputies from the Gallican church to resort to Trent in
fifety, or to deliberate concerning articles of faith and
discipline with the requisite tranquillity; he declared that

[n] Adriani Iflor. lib. viii. 505 51 4, 14. Sleid. 53. Paruta, P
1io. Lette del Co fcrittc l nome dl Card. Farncfe, tom. ii. '
I, arc.
[o] F. Paul. 6B.

hi;

his masser did not acknowledge this to be a general oecu- Book X.
rnenick council, but mult confider and would treat it as a -~'
particular and partial convention [p]. The legate affcted '
to delpile this protest; and the prelates proceeded, notwit h-
farnding, to examine and decide the great points in ccn-
trovcrfy concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
penance, and extreme unction. This measure of the
French Monarch, however, gave a deep wound to the
credit of the council, at the very commencement of its
deliberations. The Germans could not pay much re-
gard to an assembly, whose authority the econd Prince
in Christendom had formally disclaimed, or feel any
great reverence for the decisions of a few men, who ar-
rogated to themselves all the rights belonging to the re-
preJentatives of the church universal, a title to which
they had such poor pretensions.

THE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining his autho-

rity to the utmost, in order to eftablilh the reputation
and jurifdicion of the council. He had prevailed on the
three ccclefiaflical Elecorts, the prelates ofgreatefc power
and dignity in the church next to the Pope, to repair thi-
ther in person. He had obliged several German bilhops
of inferior rank to go to Trent themselves, or to fend
their proxies. He granted an Imperial safe condu to
the ambassadors nominated by the Elecor of Branden-
burg, the duke of Wurtemberg, and other Protestant
fates, to attend the council; and exhorted them to fend
their divines thither, in order to propound, explain and
defend their dotrine. At the fame time, his zeal anti- Violence of
cipated the decrees of the council; and as if the Protclte- l',e ne-
tant doctrines had already been condemned, he took large rc.,r;nt. a-
fleps towards exterminating them. With this intention, gainIt ti
he called together the miniflers of Augiburg; and after rt''llta"li.
interrogating them concerning several controverted points,
enjoined them to teach nothing with relpece to thele,
contrary to the tenets of the Romish church. Upon
their declining to comply with a requisition lo contrary
to the dicates of their consciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without revealing to any
person the cause of their banishment; he prohibited them
to preach for the future in any of the countries flubje to
the Imperial jurifdiion; and obliged them to take an
oath that they would punctually obey these injuntlion<.

[p] Sleid. ,18. Thuan. 8L. F. Paul. 31.

They

Book X. They were not the only vicims to his zeal. The Pro-
e'-3 ' tellant clergy, in molt of the cities in the circle of Swabia,

5 were ejeced with the fame violence; and in many places,

such magifirates as had diflinguilhed themselves by their
attachment to the new opinions, were dismissed with the
most abrupt irregularity, and their offices filled, in con-
lequence of the Emperor's arbitrary appointment, with
the most bigotted of their adversaries. The Reform-
ed worship was almost entirely fuprefSed throughout that
extensive province. The ancient and fundamental pri-
vileges of the free cities were violated. The people
were compelled to attend the ministration of priefis,
whom they regarded with horror as idolaters; and to
submit to the jurifdiaion of magistrates, whom they de-
tested as usurpers [q].

His ndle- THE Emperor, after this discovery, which was more
fur, t°he explicit than any that he had hitherto made, of his inten-
council. tion to subvert the German constitution, as well as to ex-

tirpate the Protestant religion, set out for Infpruck in the
November. Tyrol. He fixed his residence in that city, as by its si-

tuation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on the con-
fines of Italy, it appeared a commodious flation, whence
he might infpe&t the operations of the council, and ob-
serve the progress of the war in the Parmesan, without
losing fight of the occurrences that might happen in Ger-
many [r].

Thefiegeof DURING these tranfa&ions, the siege of Magdeburg
Mgdie- was carried on with various success. At the time when

Charles proscribed the citizens of Magdeburg, and put
them under the ban of the Empire, he had exhorted
and even enjoined all the neighbouring flates to take
arms against them, as rebels and common enemies. En-
couraged by his exhortations as well as promises, George
of Mecklenburg, a younger brother of the reigning Duke,
an ative and ambitious Prince, colleced a considerable
number of those soldiers of fortune who had accompanied
Henry of Brunswick in all his wild enterprizes; and
though a zealous Lutheran himself, invaded the territo-
ries of the Magdeburgers, hoping that, by the merit of
this lervice, he might procure some part of their domains
to be allotted to him as an eftablilhment, The citiz.ens,
unaccustomed as yet to endure patiently the calamities of

[q] Slcid. 516, 5i8. Thuan. 276. [r] Sleid. 319.

war,

war, could not be restrained from sallying out in order Book X.
to save their lands from being laid waste. They attacked -
the duke of Mecklenburg with more courage than con-
duet, and were repulsed with great laughter. But as
they were animated with that unconquerable pirit, which
flows from zeal for religion co-operating with the love
of civil liberty, far from being disheartened by their mil-
fortune, they prepared to defend themselves with vigour.
Many of the veteran soldiers who had lerved in the long
wars between the Emperor and King of France, crowd-
ing to their standards under able and experienced officers,
they acquired military kill by degrees, and added all the
advantages of that to the efforts of undaunted courage.
lThe duke of Mecklenburg, notwithstanding the severe
blow which he had given the Magdeburgers, not daring
to invest a town strongly fortified, and defended by
such a garrison, continued to ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers to his

camp, Maurice of Saxony began to be jealous of the Maurice
power which he pofeffed by being at the head of such takes the

i commandos

a numerous body, and marching towards Magdeburg he army
with his own troops, assumed the supreme command ofwhichcarri-
the whole army, an honour to which his high rank and ed o, the
great abilities, as well as the nomination of the diet, f.ge
gave him an indisputable title. With this united force he
inveRted the town, and began the siege in form; claim-
ing great merit with the Emperor on that account, as,
from his zeal to execute the Imperial decree, he was
exposing himself once more to the censures and maledic-
tions of the party with which he agreed in religious fen-
timents. But the approaches to the town went on flow-
ly; the garrison interrupted the besiegers by frequent
sallies, in one of which the duke of Mecklenburg wa:,
taken prisoner, levelled part of their works, and cut off
the soldiers in their advanced pofis. While the citi.ens
of Magdeburg, animated by the discourses of their pal-
tors, and the Ioldiers encouraged by the example of their
officers, endured all the hardships of a siege without mur-
muring, and detended themselves with the fame ardour
which they had at firit discovered; the troops of the be-
fiegers acted with extreme remiffiiefs, repining at every
thing they suffered in a service which they disliked.
'Jhey broke out, more than once, into open mutiny, d-

mandil.g

Book X. manding the arrears of their pay, which, as the Germans
'--v ' contributed with great reluCance towards defraying the

1'51' cxlpcnces of this war, amounted to a considerable rum [].

Maurice, too, had particular motives, though such as he
durst not avow at that juncaure, which induced him not
to ipuli the ficteC with igour, and made him choose ra-
thei to continue at the head of an army exposed to all the
imputations which his dilatory proceedings drew upon him,
than to precipitate a conqucft which might have brougt
him lome accession of reputation, but would have render-
ed it ncccffary to disband his forces.

The city Ar last, the inhabitants of the town beginning to susser
tr Ma'irces dilircls ftom want of provisions, and Maurice, finding it

iinpoffible to protrat matters any longer without filling
the E'mperor with such suspicions as might have dilcon-
No-cmb. 3. rted all his measures, he concluded a treaty of capitula-

tion with the city upon the following conditions; that the
I\la(deburgers should humbly implore pardon of the Em-
pcro l; that thev should not for the future take arms, or
tntcr into any alliance againfl the house of Austria; that
they should tubmit to the authority of the Imperial cham-
her; that they should conform to the decree of the diet
at Augsburg with respect to religion; that the new fortifi-
cations added to the town ihould be demoliflied; that they
flould pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns, deliver up
twelve pieces of ordnance to the Emperor, and set the
Duke of Mecklenburg together with their other prison-
crs at liberty without ransom. Next day their garrison
marched out, and Maurice took possession of the town
with great military pomp.

M4aurice's B i. i o R F. the terms of capitulation were fettled,
iu ttihis Maurice had held many conferences with Albert count
)uiuc. Mllanfteldt, who had the chief command in Magdeburg,

and with count Heideck, an officer who had served with
great reputation in the army of the league of Smalkald,
whom the Emperor had proscribed on account of his zeal
for that cause, and whom Maurice had, notwithflanding,
f(crttlv engaged in his service, and admitted into the molt
intimate confidence. To them he communicated a scheme,
uhith he had lorg revolved in his mind, for procuring
liberty to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vindicat-
ing the privileges of the Germanic body, and tltting

[] Thuan. 77. Skid. 514.

bounds

bounds to the dangerous encroachments of the Imperial Book X.
power. Having consulted with them about the meafures'"-r'
which might be necessary for securing the luccefs of such 55
an arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt tecret affu-
ranccs that the fortifications of Magdeburg should not be
dltroved, and that the inhabitants hould neither be
dilturbed in the exc.cife of their religion, nor be de-
prived of any of their ancient immunities. In order
ut engage Maurice more thoroughly from confiderati-
(o,s of interest to fulfill these engagements, the lenate of
\}agldcburg ele&ed him their Burgr;ave, a dignity which
had formerly belonged to the electoral house of Saxony,
and which entitled him to a very ample jurifdiaion not
only in the city but in its dependencies [].

'' H u s the citi7ecns of Magdeburg, after enduring aThe adat,-

siege of twelve months, and struggling for their liberties. igedfro'
religious and civil with an invincible fortitude worthy ofhi- negota-
the cause in which it was exerted, had at last the goodtions vith
fortune to conclude a treaty which left them in a better theMagd
condition than the reft of their countrymen, whom their
timidity or want of publick spirit had betrayed into such
mean ubmiffions to the Emperor. But while a great
part of Germany applauded the gallant conduct of the
Magdeburgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped the
deltrucion with which they had been threatened, all ad-
mired Maurice's address in the conduac of his negotiation
with them, as well as the dexterity with which he con-
verted every event to his own advantage. They saw,
with amazement, that after having afflicted the Magdc-
burgers during many months with all the calamities of
war, he was at last, by their voluntary election, veiled
with supreme authority in that city which he had lo late-
I befitged; that after having been so long the object of
their invecives and satire as an apoflate, and anenemy to
thle religion which he professed; they leemed no t place
unbounded confidence in his eal and good will [u.] At
tile fame time, the publick articles in the treaty of
capilulation were so perfectly conformable to tiole which
tli. Ilmperor had granted to the other Protelatnt citics,
arid Maurice took such care to magnify ith melit in halv-

[t] Sleid. 58. Thuan. 276. Obfilionis M4Igdcburgiti dllfriptio rer
lua ll. Bell'lmeierum . apd. Scard. ii. iS.
Lu] Arnoldi vita Maurit. ul Mnkcn, ii. i:z-.

Look X. ing reduced a place which had defended itself with 0f
'--v- much obltinacv, that Charles, far from fufpeting any

1 thing traudulent or collusive in the terms of accommoda.

tion, ratified them without hesitation, and absolved the
Magdeburgers from the sentence of ban which had been
denounced against them.

i;- epvncd- TH E only point that now remained to embarrass Mau-
entforkeep-rice was how to keep together the veteran troops which
i""arln"r hald served under him, as well as thole which had been
on foot.

employed in the defence of the town. For this, too, he
found an expedient with singular art and felicitv. His
schemes againfl the Emperor were not t et f ly ripen
ed, that he durst venture to disclose them, and proceed
openly to carry them into execution. The winter was
approaching, which made it impoflible to take the field
immediately. lEe was afraid that it would give a prema-
ture alarm to the Emperor, if he should retain such a con-
fiderable body in his pay until the season of aion re-
turned in the spring. As soon then as Magdeburg open.
ed its gates, he ent home his Saxon subje&s, whom he
could command to take arms and re-assemble on the hort-
ell warning, to their own habitations; and, at the fame
time, paying part of the arrears due to the mercenary
troops, who had followed his standard, as well as to the
loldiers who had served in the garrison, he absolved them
from their refpe&ive oaths of fidelity, and disbanded them.
But the moment he gave them their discharge, George
Duke of Mecklenburg, who was now set at liberty, of-
sered to take them into his fcrvice, and to become surety
for the payment of what was still owing to them. As
luch adventurers were accustomed often to change maf-
ters, they infiantly accepted the offer. Thus, these troops
were kept united, and ready to march wherever Maurice
flould call them, while the Emperor, deceived by thi
artifice, and imagining that the Duke of Mecklenburg
lhad hired them with an intention to aert, by force ot
arms, his claim to a part of his brother's territories, us-
Irtcld it to palis without observation, as if it had been a
matitlc of no confcquence [x].

[x] 'Thuin. 78. Struv. corp. hlil. (;crm. o64. Arnoldi vita Miu-
rit.i apud Mcnken, ii. 11z7.

HAVIN

HAVING ventured to take these steps which were of so Book X.

much consequence towards the execution of his schemes,
Maurice, that he might divert the Emperor from ob- His ddrefs
serving their tendency too narrowly, and prevent the sus- in conceal-
picions which that mull have excited, saw the neceffitv ing his in-

~.

/

* r*'tentions

of employing some new artifice in order to engage his at- fro the
tention, and to confirm him in his prefcnt security. As Emperur.
he knew that the chief objed of the Emperor's lolicitude
at this junaure, was how he might prevail with the Pro-
teftant States of Germany to recognize the authority of
the council of Trent, and to fend thither ambassadors in
their own name, as well as deputies from their refpetive
churches, he took hold of this predominating pafiion in
order to amuse and to deceive him. He affected a won-
derful ,eal to gratify Charles in what he desired with re-
gard to this matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom he
impowered to attend the council; he made choice of Me-
landhon and some of the most eminent among his bre-
thren to prepare a confession of faith, and to lay it before
that assembly. After his example, and probably in con-
sequence of his solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg,
the city of Strafburg, and other Protestant States appoint-
ed ambassadors and divines to attend the council. They
all applied to the Emperor for his safe conduO, which
they obtained in the most ample form. This was deemed
sufficient for the security of the ambassadors, and they
proceeded accordingly on their journey; but a separate
ahfc-condu& from the council itself, was demanded for
the Protestant divines. The fate of John Huss and Je-
rome of Prague, whom the council of Constance, in the
preceding century, had condemned to the flames without
regarding the Imperial fafe-condua which had been grant-
ed them, rendered this precaution prudent and neccflary.
But as the Pope was no les unwilling that the Protestants
should be admitted to an hearing in the council, than the
Emperor had been eager in bringing them to demand it,
tile legate by promises and threats prevailed on the fathers
of the council to decline issuing a fafe-condud in the fame
form with that which the council of Basil had granted to
the followers of lHus. The Proteflants, on their part,
infified upon the counil's copying the precifc words of
'hat inrtrument. Tht Imperial ambalhadors interpok)ed
in order to obtain what would satisfy them. Alterations
in the form of the writ were popolfcd; expedlients w(re

V',ol. 11. U lggelltd

Book X. fuggefled; protefis and counter protests were taken; the
'-v-- legate together with his associates laboured to gain their
'551' point by artifice and chicane; the Proteflants adhered to

theirs with firmness and obftinacv. An account of ever)
thing that passed in Trent was tranfmilted to the Empe-
ror at Infpruck, who, attempting from an excess of 'zeal,
or of confidence in his own address, to reconcile the con-
tending parties, was involved in a labyrinth of inexti icable
negotiations. By means of this, however, Maurice gain-
ed all that he had in view; the Emperor's time was
wholly engrossed, and his attention diverted; while he
had leiure to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues,
and to finish his preparations before he threw off themafk,
and struck the blow which he had so long meditated [z].

The affairs BUT previous to the history of Maurice's operations,
ofHungary. ome account mull be given of a new revolution in

Hungary, which contributed not a little towards theii
producing such extraordinary effecs. When Solyman,
in the year 1541, by a firatagem, which suited the bale
and insidious policy of a petty usurper, rather than the
magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived the young
King of Hungary of the dominions which his father
had left him, he had granted that unfortunate Prince
the country of Transylvania, a province of his paternal
kingdom. The government of this, together with the
care of educating the young King, for he ill allowed
him to retain that title, though he had rendered it on-
ly an empty name, he committed to the Qeen and
Martinuzzi bishop of Waradin, whom the late King
had appointed his son's guardians and regents of his domi-
nions, at a time when those offices were of greater im-
portance. This co-ordinate jurifdiaion occasioned the
fame dissensions in a small principality as it would have
excited in a great kingdom; an ambitious young Queen,
conscious of her capacity for governing, and an high
spirited prelate, contending who hould engross the great-
efl (hare in the administration. Each had their parti-
zans among the nobles, but as Martinuzzi, by his great ta-
lents, began to acquire the alcendant, Isabella turned his
own arts againfi him, and courted the proteaion of the
Turks.

[z] Scid. 526, 59. F. Pul. 33, 338. Thuan. 86.

l'Hr

THE neighbouring bafhas, jealous of the blfhop's pow- Book X.

er as well as abilities, readily pronitled her the aid -v
,hich he demanded, and would loon have obliged M.ar-Matinuzzi
tinuz./.i to have given up to her the sole direcaion of af-fvuoursFer-
.f.r, if his ambition, tertile in expedients, had not lfu- di"nand's

l

. . .

i i i i pretcnfions

gcitLd to him a new measure, and one that tended notrtiatking-
only to preserve but to enlarge his authority. 1laving din.
concluded an agreement with the Queen, by the me-
diation of ome of the nobles who were lolicitous to
save their country from the calamities of a civil war,
hie cretly dispatched one of his confidents to Vienna,
and entered into a negotiation with Ferdinand. As it
va, no difficult matter to persuade Ferdinand that the
fame man whose enmity and intrigues had driven him
out of a great part of his Hungarian dominions, might,
upon a reconciliation, become equally instrumental in
recovering therm, he litlened eagerly to the first overtures
of an union with that prelate. Martinu. i.i allured him
by such profpeas of advantage, and engaged, with o
much confidence, that he would prevail on the most pow-
erful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms in his favour,
that Ferdinand, notwithfianding his truce with Solyman,
agreed to invade Transylvania. The command of the
tioops defiined for that service, confifling of veteran Spa-
nifh and German soldiers, was given to Caftaldo Marquis
de Piadena, an officer formed by the famous Marquis de
Pcfcara, whom he firongly relembled both in his enter-
prizing genius for civil bufinels, and in his great know
ldge in the art of war. This army, more formidabie by
the discipline of the soldiers, and the abilities of the ge-
ncral, than by its number, was powerfully econded by
Martinuzzi and his faaion among the Hungarians. As
the Turkish Barhas, the Sultan himlfel being at the
head of his army on the frontiers of Persia, could not as-
ford the Queen such immediate or effectual ailillance as
hie exigency of her affairs required, she quickly loll all
hopes of being able to retain any longer the authority
which she polle:cd as regent, and even began to despair
of her ion's atctv.

MART NU z7. did not susser his favourable oppoltuni- Tie uccei

tv of accomplilhing his own designs to pals unimproved, f h"' m'*-
and ventured, while she was in this fate of dejedcion, to
lay before her a proposal, which, at any other time, fle
Would have rejeted with disdain. He reprelenled how
nipofible it as for her to rcfift Ferdinand's victioii

l1 a a n> ;

Book X. arms; that even if the Turks should enable her to make
'v.- head against them, she would be far from changing her

'551' condition to the better, and could not confider them as de.

liverers but as mafiers to whose commands he must Tub.
mit; he conjured her, therefore, as he regarded her own
dignity, the afety of her ton, or the security of Christen.
dom, rather to give up Transylvania to Ferdinand, and
to make over to him her on's title to the crown of Hun-
gary, than to allow both to be usurped by the inveterate
enemy of the Chriflian faith. At the fame time, he pro.
mifed her, in Ferdinand's name, a compensation for her-
self, as well as for her son, suitable to their rank, and
proportional to the value of what they were to sacrifice.
Isabella, deserted by some of her adherents, difiruftine
others, destitute of friends, and urrounded by Caftaldo,
and Martinuzz.i's troops, subscribed, though with a reluc.
tant hand, these hard conditions. Upon this, he furren-
dered such places of strength as were still in her possession,
ihe gave up all the ensigns of royalty, particularly a crown
of gold, which, as the Hungarians believed, had defcerd.
ed from heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an
undoubted right to the throne. As she could not bear to
remain a private person, in a country where he once en-
joyed sovereign power, she instantly set out with her son
for Silesia, in order to take poffeflion of the principalities
of Oppelen and Ratibor, the inveltiture of which Ferdi-
nand had engaged to grant her on, and likewise to bestow
one of his daughters upon him in marriage.

Appointed UIPON the resignation of the young King, Martinuz7i,
governor of and after his example the refl of the Transylvanian gran-
that pat ofi
Hungary dees, wore allegiance to Ferdinand; who, in order to
which v.as teflify his grateful sense of the zeal as well as success with
fut'jea t which that prelate had served him, affeced to diflinguifi

him by every poflible mark of favour and confidence. He
appointed him governor of Transylvania, with almost un.
limited authority; he ordered Cafialdo to pay the greatell
deference to his opinion and commands; he increased his
revenues, which were already very great, by new al'
pointments; he nominated him archbishop of Gran, ard
prevailed on the Pope to raise him to the dignity of a Car-
dinal. All this oientation of good-will, however, a
void of fincctity, and calculated to conceal sentiments th(
mofl perfectly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinul
.i's abilities; dillrufted his fidelity; and foresaw, that a
his extensive authority cnabled him to check any atlemp

toward

towards circumscribing or abolishing the extensive privi- Book X.
leges which the Hungarian nobles possessed, he would --
ftanid forth, on every occasion, the guardian of the li- '55-
berties o his country, rather than a the part of a vice-
roy devoted to the will of his sovereign.

FoR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge to Caf- Ferdinand

taldo, to watch his motions, to guard against his designs, begins to
and to thwart his measures. But Martinuzzi, either be-againt him.
caule he did not perceive that Caftaldo was placed as a
tpy on his aions, ( r becau e he dclpifed Ferdinand's in-
fidious arts, assumed the direcion of the war againit the
Turks with his usual tone of authority, and conducted it
with great magnanimity, and no less success. He reco-
vered lome places of which the Infidels had taken posses-
sion; he rendered their attempts to reduce others abor-
tive; and established Ferdinand's authority not only in
Transylvania, but in the Bannat of Temefwaer, and fe-
vcral of the countries adjacent. In carrying on there
operations, he often differed in sentiments from Caftaldo
and his officers, and treated the Turkiih prisoners with a
degree of humanity, and even of generosity, which Caf-
taldo loudly condemned. This was represented at Vi-
enna as an artful method of courting the friendship of the
Infidels, that, by securing their protetion, he might
Ihake off all dependance upon the sovereign whom he now
acknowledged. Though Martinuzzi, in justification of
his own condua, contended that it was impolitic to exaf-
perate, by unnecessary severities, an enemy prone to re-
venge, Caitaldo's accusations gained credit with Ferdi-
nand, prepoleffed already againit Martinuzi.i, and jea-
lous of every thing that could endanger his authority in
Hungary, in proportion as he knew it to be precarious
and ill established. These suspicions, Caftaldo confirmed
and strengthened, by the intelligence which he tranf-
mitted continually to his confidents at Vienna. By mif-
representing what was innocent, and putting the worit
confiru&ion on what seemed dubious in Martinuzi's con-
duc; by imputing to him dcfigns which he never form-
ed, and charging him with ations of which he was not
guilty; he at las convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to
preserve his Hungarian crown, he muff cut off that am-
bitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would
be dangerous to proceed in the regular course of law
againit a fubje of fuchexorbitant power, as enabled him

U 3 to

Book X. to set his fovereirn at defiance, determined to employ
'~V"" ~ violence in order to obtain that atisfacion, which the

s551' laws were too lcehce to afford him.

14e i a.s- i:. iffud his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, who wil
his cnr- linglv undcrtlok that int-nmous service. Having conmmu.
rnand. nicatld the delen to some Italian and Spanith officers

whom he could tufl, and concerted with them the plan
Dec. is. of cxecuting it; they entered artinu.zi's apartment,

early one morning, under pretence of presenting to him
some dilpalchcs vl'ich were to be sent off immediately to
Vienna and while he perused a paper with attention,
one of their number itruck him with his poniard in the
throat. The blow was not mortal; Martinuzzi itarted
up with the intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the
assassin, threw him to the ground ; but the other conpira.
tors rushing in, an old man, unarmed, and alone, could
not long lullain such an unequal conflit, but funk under
the wounds which he received from so many hands. The
dread of the foreign troops restrained the Transylvanians
from riling in arms in order to take vengeance on the mur-
derers of a prelate who had long been the obje of

The tea their love as well as veneration. They spoke of the
'It that vio-
lent arni. deed, however, with horror and execration; and ex-

claimed against Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for
recent and important services, nor reverence for a cha-
racter confidered as acred and inviolable among Chril-
tians, could restrain from shedding the blood of a man,
whlol only crime was attachment to his native coun-
try. The nobles, detefling the jealous as well as cru-
el policy of a court, which, upon uncertain and im-
probable urmifes, had given up a person no less con-
fpicuous for his merit than his rank, to be butchered by
affaflins, either retired to their own ellates, or if they
continued with the Aufirian army, grew cold to the ser-
vice. The Turks, encouraged by the death of an ene-
my whole abilities they knew and dreaded, prepared
to renew hostilities early in the spring; and inflead ot
the ecurity which Ferdinand had cxpeced from the
removal of Martinuzzi, it was evident that his terri-
tories in Hungary were about to be attacked with greater
vigour, and defended with less zeal than ever [].

[a] Sleid. 535. Thuan. lib. i. 309, &c. Ilfuanhlffi Hi. Reg.

Hungerici, lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 871. Natali Comi-
tim Hifora, lib. iv. 84, &c.

MEANWHILE,

MEANWHILE, Maurice having almost finished his Book X.
intrigues and preparations, was on the point of declaring""'"
his iltentions openly, and of taking the field againit the Maurice
Emperor. His first care, after he came to this refolu- courts the
tion, was to disclaim that narrow and bigotted maxim of proteaio

of the

the confederates of Smalkalde, which had led them to French
fiun all connection with foreigners. He had oferved King.
how fatal this had been to their cause ; and inftruted by
tier error, he was as eager to court the protecion of
Herry II. as they had been solicitous to prevent the inter-
pcfition of Francis I. Happily for him he found Henry
in a disposition to liften to the first overture on his part,
and in a situation which enabled him to bring the whole
force of the French monarchy into action. Henry had
long observed the progress of the Emperor's arms with
jealouly, and wished to distinguish himlelf by trying his
strength againfl the fame enemy, whom it had been the
glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had laid hold
on the first opportunity in his power of thwarting the Em-
peror's design, by taking the Duke of Parma under his
protetion; and hostilities were already begun, not only
in that dutchy, but in Piedmont. Having terminated the
war with England by a peace, no less advantageous to
himself than honourable for his allies the Scots, the reft-
less and enterprising courage of his nobles was impatient
to display itself on some theatre of ation more conlpicu-
ous than the petty operations in Parma or Piedmont as-
forded them.

JOHN DE FiESSE, bishop of Bayonne, whom Henry His treaty

had sent into Germany, under pretence of hiring troops with him.
to be employed in Italy, was empowered to conclude a
treaty in form with Maurice and his associates. As it
would have been very indecent in a King of France to
ha-e undertaken the defence of the Proteflant church,
the interests of religion, how much soever they might be
affeced by the treaty, were not once mentioned in any
of the articles. Religious concerns they pretended to
commit entirely to the difpofi ion of divine providence;
the only motives aigned for their present confederacy
against Charles were to procure the Landgrave liberty,
and to prevent the subversion of the ancient constitution
and laws of the German Empire. In order to accom-
Plilh there ends, it was agreed, that all the contracting
parties should, at the fame time, declare war againfl the

U 4 Emperor;

Book X. Emperor; that neither peace nor truce should be made
.----- b-it by common content nor without including each of

'5'* the confederates; that, in order to guard againIt the in-

conveniencies of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint corn.
mand, Maurice should be acknowledged as head of the
German confederates, with absolute authority in all mi-
litary affairs; that Maurice and his aflociates should bring
into the field seven thousand horle, with a proportionable
number of infantry; that towards the fubfiflence of this
army, during the three firit months of the war, Henry
should conti ibute two hundred and forty thousand crowns,
and afterwards sixty thousand crowns, a month, as long
as they continued in arms; that Henry hould attack
the Emperor on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful
army; that if it were found requisite to elec a new
Emperor, such a perbon should be nominated as hall
be agreeable to the king of France [b]. This treaty
was concluded on the fifth of Otober, ome time before
Magdeburg surrendered, and the preparatory negotiations
were conducted with such profound secrecy, that of all
the Princes who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice com-
municated what he was carrying on to two only, John
Albert, the reigning duke of Mecklenburg, and William
of Hesse, the Landgrave's eldest son. The league itself
was no less anxiously concealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumour concerning it reached the ears of
the Emperor or his ministers, nor do they seem to
have conceived the molt diflant suspicion of such a
tranfa&ion.

Solicite the AT the fame time Maurice, with a solicitude which
id of Ed- was careful to draw Ibme accession of strength from
Wgd^nd. f every quarter, applied to Edward VI. of England, and

requefled a subsidy of four hundred thousand crowns
for the support of a confederacy formed in defence of
the Protellant religion. But the facions which pre-
vailed in the English court during the minority of that
Prince, and which deprived both the councils and arms
of the nation of their wonted vigour, left the Englilh
ministers neither time or inclination to attend to so-
reign affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that
aid, which their zeal for the Reformation would have
prompted them to grant him [c].

[b Recueil de Tritez, tnm. ii. 5;8. Thuan. lib. viii. 79.
[c Buract' Hin. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

MAU vICE,

MIAURICE, however, having secured the protction Book X.
of fich a powerful Monarch as Henry 1I. proceeded with `'`
ercat confidence, but with equal caution, to execute his Demands
plan. As he judged it necessary to make one effort more, once more
i, order to obtain the Emperor's conient that the Land- that the
crave (hould be set at liberty, he lent a solemn embassy, ould be ft
;n his own name, and in that of the Elector of Branden- at liberty.
burg, to lnfpruck. After reiuming, at great length, all Dec"m'er.
the fats and arguments upon which they founded their
claim, and representing, in the strongest terms, the pecu-
liar engagements which bound them to be so assiduous in
their solicitations, they renewed the request in behalf of
the unfortunate prisOner, which they had so often pre-
ferred in vain. The Eleor Palatine, the Duke of Wur-
tcmberg, the Dukes of Mecklenburg, the Duke of Deux-
ponts, the Marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and the
Marquis of Baden, by their ambassadors, concurred with
them in their suit. Letters were likewise delivered to
the fame effe& from the King of Denmark, the Duke
of Bavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the
King of the Romans, moved with compaflion towards
the Landgrave in his wretched situation, or influenced,
peihaps, by a secret jealousy of his brother's power and
designs, which since his attempt to alter the order of
fucceflion in the Empire, he had come to view with other
eyes, and dreaded to a great degree, joined in this ap-
plication.

BUT Charles, constant to his own fyltem, with re-

gard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand urged by fuich
powerful intercessors; and having declared that he would
communicate his resolution concerning the matter to Mau-
rice as soon as he arrived at Infpruck, where he was every
day expeced, he did not deign to descend into any more
particular explication of his intentions [d]. This applica-
tion, though of no benefit to the Landgrave, was of great
a'!vaniace to Maurice. It served to justify his subsequent
I'loccdings, and to demonfirate the necessity of employ-
ine arms in order to extort that equitable conceflion,
w'ihch his mediation or entreaty could not'obtain. It was
If use, too, to confirm the Emperor in his security, as
both the solemnity of the application, and the Iolicitude

[d] S1cid. 531. Thuan. lib. viii. A2o.

with

Book X. with which so many Princes were drawn in to enforce it
'-v '"led him to conclude, that Mlaurice plac d all his hopes

'5S' refloring the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining his conlcir

to dilmils him.

1552. MAtURICE employed artifices fill more refined t,

Maurice conceal his machinations, to amuse the Emperor and to
continue to
mnufe the gain time. He asseted to be more solicitous than ever
Emi.troi. to find out rome expedient for removing the difficulti;

with regard to the fate conduct for the Proteflant dix;n,
appointed to attend the council, o that they might r;,r
thither with fafcty. His ambassadors at Trent had fre.
quent conferences concerning this matter, with the mn-
perial ambassadors in that city, and laid open their senti.
ments to them with the appearance of the most unre!erv
ed confidence. He was willing, at last, to have it be-
licved, that he thought all differences with refpe to
this preliminary article were on the point of being adjust-
cd; and in order to give credit to this opinion, he com-
manded Melancthon together with his brethren to set out
on their journey to Trent. At the fame time, he held
a close correlpondence with the Imperial court at In-
fpruck, and renewed on every occasion his professions f
fidelity and attachment to the Emperor. He talked con-
tinually of his intention of going to Infpruck in perlbn;
he ordered a house to be hired for him in that city, and
to be fitted up with the greatefl dispatch for his recepti-
on [].

Trie t:rir- BuT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was in the arts
i'r 'ln- of deceit, and impenetrable as he thought the veil to be
fuli,'i,;on under which he concealed his designs, there were several
conccrnin, things in his conduct which alarmed the Emperor amidll
hi' intenli- his ecuritv, and tempted him frequently to fufpea that

he was meditating something extraordinary. As there
lufpicions took their rife from circumllances inconfidera-
ble in themnlflves, or of an ambiguous as well as uncertain
nature, they were more than counterbalanced by Mau-
rice's address; and the Emperor would not, lightly, give
up his confidence in a man, whom he had once trulled
and loaded with favours. One particular alone teemed
to be of flich conlcquence, that he thought it necessary
to demand an explanation with regard to it. The troops,
which George of Mecklenburg had taken into pay after
the capitulation of Magdeburgh, having fixed their quar-

[c] Arnoldi vita Maurit. p. Menken, ii. 1129.

ters

ters in Thuringia, lived at discretion on the lands of the Book X.
rich ecclesiastics in their neighbourhood. Their license L'
and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as felt or 55
dreaded their exacions, complained loudly to the Em-
peror, and represented them as a body of men kept in
radlilefs for ome desperate enterprize. But Maurice,
paitle by extenuating the enormities of which they had
been uilty, partly by representing the impossibility of
disbanding these troops, or of keeping them to regular
difciplinc, unldes the arrears still due to them by the
Emperor were paid, either removed the apprehensions
which this l:ad occasioned, or as Charles was not in a
condition to satisfy the demands of these soldiers, obliged
him to be silent with regard to the matter [f].

THE time of action was now approaching. Maurice Maurice

had privately dispatched Albert of Brandenburg to Paris, so reaire
in order to confirm his league with Henry, and to haflen
the march of the French army. He had taken meafires
to bring his own subje&s together on the first summons;
he had provided for the ecurity of Saxony while he
should be absent with the army; and he held the troops
in Thuringia, on which he chiefly depended, ready to ad-
vance on a moment's warning. All these complicated
operations were carried on without being discovered by
the court at Infpruck, and the Emperor remained there
in perfea tranquillity, busied entirely in counteracting
the intrigues of the Pope's legate at Trent, and in lettling
:he conditions on which the Proteflant divines should be
admitted into the council, as if there had not been any
trantfaion of greater moment in agitation.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, whose fagaciry

in observing the conduc of all around him, commonly
led him to an excess ofdifirufi, may seem unaccountable,
and has been imputed to infatuation. But beides the Circum-
exquisite address with which Maurice concealed his in- wtlcone

which con-

tcntions, two circumitances contributed to the delusion. tributed t,
fTie eout returned upon Charles soon after his arrival at deceive the
Ih:l.rlck, with an increase of violence; and his confli- Emp'r'o
tution being broken by such frequent attacks, he was fel-
dorm able to exert his natural vigour of mind, or to con-
fider affairs with his usual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bishop of Arras, his prime minifltcr, though

[f Slcid. 549. Thuan. 339.

one

Bok X. one of the most lubtle statesmen of that, or perhaps of

any ae, was on this occasion the dupe of his own craft.
' 2 Hle entertained nlch an high opinion of his own abilities,

and held the political talents of the Germans in such cot.
tempt, that he dclilfed all the intimations given him cop-
cerning Maurice's secret machinations, cr the dangerous

and hi: dcfigns hich he was carrying on. 'When the Duke ot
niilucrs. Alv ., hole dai k suspicious mind harboured many doubts

concerninr the l'le&tor's finccity, propoled calling him
immediatelv to court to antwcr for his conduct, he re-
plied with great icorn, that there apprehensions were
grcundlels, and that a drunken German head was tco
grolf to form any scheme which he could not easily pnc.
trate and hassle. Nor did he assume this peremptory tone
merely from confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's minitlers, and received from
them frequent and minute information concerningall their
mafler's motions. But through this very channel, by
which he expected to gain acccfs to all Maurice's con-
fels, and even to his thoughts, such intelligence was con-
veyed to him as compleated his deception. Maurice for-
tunately discovered the correlpondence of the two trai-
tors with Granvelle, and inflead of punishing them for
their crime, he dexterously availed himself of their fraud,
and turned his own arts against the bishop. He affeced
to treat these ministers with greatcr confidence than ever;
he admitted them to liis conultations, and seemed to lay
open his heart to them; and taking care all the while to
let them he acquainted with nothing but what it was his
interclt should he known, they transmitted to Infpruck
such accounts as pofTeffed Granvelle with a firm belief
of his sincerity and good intentions [g]. The Emperor
himself, in the fulness of lecurity, was so little moved
by a memorial, in name of the ecclefiaflical Elcaor,
admonishing him to be on his guard againfi Maurice,
that he made light of this intelligence ; and his anfwe to
them abounds with declarations of his entire and confi-
dent reliance on the fidelity as well as attachment of that
Prince [h].

Mninr;r AT lafi Maurice's preparations were compleated, and
i^k the n he had the fatisfacion to find that his intrigues andi de-
firld aafinnl
tht :.lr- signs were Itill unknown. But, though now ready to
'o. take the field, he did not lay aside the arts which he had

[C] Mttvil. Memuir , so I. rdit. p. i.

[h] Slel i;t.

hitherto

hitherto employed; and by one piece of craft more, he Book X.
deceived his enemies a tew days longer. He gave out, -
that he was about to begin that journey to Inlpruck of '551'
which he had lo often talked, and he took one of the
miniiters whom Granvelle had bribed to attend him thi-
ther. After travelling poll a few ftagcs, he pretended
wo be indisposed by the fatigue of the journey, and dif-
patching the fufpeced minister to make his apology to
tlie Emperor tor this delay, and to assure him that he
would be at Intpruck within a few days; as loon as this
ipv on his ations was gone, he mounted on horseback,
rode full fpced towards Thuringia, joined is army
which amounted to twenty thousand foot and five thou-
sand horse, and put it immediately in motion [iJ.

AT the fame time he published a maniclllo containing Publiae,

his reasons for taking arms. Thele were three in num a m'3"ifrt
ber; That he might secure the Protestant religion, which i,.ndu.
was threatened with immediate destruction; That he
might maintain the contfitution and laws of the Empire,
and save Germany from being fbjccted to the domina-
tion of an ablolute monarch; That he might deliver the
Landgrave of Hesse from the mileries of a long and un-
jufi imprisonment. By the firfi, he rouzed all the fa-
vourers of the Reformation, a party formidable by their
zeal as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by op-
pression. By the second, he intereled all the friends of
liberty, Catholicks as well as Proteitants, and made it
their interefl to unite with him in asserting the rights and
privileges common to both. The third, besides the
glory which he acquircd by his .eal to fulfil his engage-
ments to the unhappy priloner, was become a caul of
general concern, not only from the compafliun which the

andgrave's luflerings excited, but from indignation at
the injulticc and rigour of the Emperor's proccedinsls
aainll him. Together with Maurice's manifetno, ano-
tiler appealed in the name of Albert, Marquis of Bran-
denburg Culmbach, who had joined hin with a body of
adventurers whom he had drawn together. The ame
grievances which Maurice had pointed out are mentioned
in it, but with an excels of vilulence and animosity, uit-

ri] Mclv. Mcm. p. 13. There circumflances, conrrning the Son

minilltc whum (;rnTvrllc hadl hribed, ar-e ot incntioned I) the (lmall
hilturianh; bu, u Sir lame Melvil rccivd hti. Inljtin-'tiun i frm the
I.iet r lPalatiin, and h tly arc lftI-r. ely zarcr hlr t. I , rell f M.tu-
iltt ' ondJut, itey ni) c cn'liJcr u
e . autii ntnlk.

able

Book X. able to the charaaer of the prince in whose name it was

- 'v published.

He is';5 THL king of France added to these a manifefio in his
potifI llvy own name; in which, after taking notice of the ancient
fur!rortid alliance between the French and German nations, both
Front h deicended fiom the fame anccetors; and after n'cntioning
K,,. the applications, hich, in confequcnce of this, some

of the mo: illuflrious among the German Princes had
made to him for his protection; he declared that he no\'
took arms to rc-eflablifh the ancient conflitution of lhe
]:mpiie, to deliver some of its princes from capti\it.y,
and to fIceure the privileges and independence of all
the rmemners of the Gcrmanick body. In this maniefRo,
Henrv aflm-d the extraordinary title of Prot-ctor o Ihe
Liberties f Germany, and of its captive Princes; and there
was engraved on it a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom,
placed between to daggers, in order to intimate to the
Germans, that this lessing was to be acquired and e-
cured by force of arms [k].

Maur;ce' MAURICE had now a very different part to a, but
,peratiins his flexible enius was capable of accommodating itself to
in the field. ,

everv situation. The moment he took arms, he was as
bold and enterprizing in the field, as he had been cajti-
ous and crafty in the cabinet. He advanced by rapid
marches towards the Upper Germany. All the towns
in his way opened their gates to him. He reinflated
the magifirates whom the Emperor had dcpofcd,and gave
possession of the churches to the Proteltant minilters
whom he had ejeaed. He directed his march to Augl-
burg, and as the Imperial garrison which was too incon-
fiderable to think of defending it, retired immediately,
April . he took pofleflion of that great city, and made the fame

changes there as in the towns through which he had pas-
fed.

The Empe- No words can express the Empcror's altonifhment and
ror's ano- conflernation at events so unexpected. He law a great
nihllment
and diltrefs. nmber of the German Princes in arms againfl him, a,,d

the refi either ready to join them, or wifling flucccfs to
their enterpri.c. Hle beheld a powerful Monarch united
with them in close league, ficonding their operations in
pTlon at the head of a formidable army, while he,
through negligence and credulity, which exposed him no

[k] Sleid. 549. Thun. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 371.

)lk to scorn than to danger, had neither made, nor was nook X.
i, condition to make, any effectual proxilion either tor'v--'"
,,uihing his rebellious fubjeas, or refitling the invaion '
ti tle toreign enemy [l]. Part of his Spaniih troops had
been ordered into Hungary against the Tuiks; the reft
had iarched back to Italy upon occasion of the war in
thedutchy of Parma. The bands of vetcran Germans
had been dilmiffed, becaufc he was not able to pay them;
or ad entered into Maurice's service after the siege of
lMadeburg; and he remained at ntpruck with a body of
ioldiers scarce strong enough to guard his own person.
Hl, treasury was much exhausted, as his army was re-
deed. He had received no remittances for ome time
from the new world. He had forfeited ll.credit with the
merchants of Genoa and Venice,who refuted to lend him
money, tho' tempted by the offer of exorbitant intere.
Tlhus, Charles, though undoubtedly the most considerable
potentate in Christendom, and capable of exerting the
grcateft flrength, (as his power, though violently attack-
ed, was frill unimpaired,) found himlelf in a situation
uhich rendered him unable to make such a sudden and
xigorous effort as the juncture required, and was ne-
cefsary to have saved him from the piefent danger.
IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on negotiat-Endeanurr

ing; the only relburce of those who are conscious of their t sGai
o n weaknels. But thinking it inconsistent with his di- tim""nl>
nit) to make the first advances to lubjeas who were in
arms against him, he avoided that indecorum by employ-
ing the mediation of his brother Ferdinand. Maurice,
(cnfiding in his own talents to conduc any negotiation
In such a manner as to derive advantage from it, and
hping that by the appearance of facility in hearkening
to the first overture of accommodation, he mihlit amule
ihe ['mperor and tempt him to flacken the acivity with
ulrich he was now preparing to defend himself, readily
agreed to an interview with Ferdinand in the towln of
lrintv in Aufiria: and having left his army to proceed
on its march under the command of the Duke of Meck-
Iileurg, he repaired thither.

1'H L King of France punaually fulfilled his engae- Prngref I,:

ment to his allies. He took the field early with a nume- t! I',"tt
ous ;and well appointed army, and marching dliicilv in- A

[I3 Sleid. 555. 'huan. 31.

to

Book X. to Lorrain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at 1is
'--v---'aplproach. His forces appeared next before Met,, ad

'5S2 that city, by a fraudulent stratagem of the Constable

Montmorency, who having obtained permission to als
through it with a fm:ll guard, introduced as many tr(,(,,
as were ftifficient to oxerpower the garrison, was likewue
seized without bloodlhed. Henry made his entry into all
these towns with great pomp; lie obliged the inhabitanti
to swear allegiance to him, and annexed there important
conqiiefts to the French Monarchy. He left a strong
garrio n in et/.. From thence he advanced towards
Alsace, in order to attempt new conquests, to which
the lUccels that had hitherto attended his arms invited
him [m].

The ne- THE conference at Lintz did not produce any accom-
potiations modation. Mlaurice, when he contented to it, seems to
between
he Empe- have had nothing in view but to amue the Emperor; for
ror and he made such demands both in behalf of his confederate,
Maurice, of and their ally the French King, as he knew would not
no ete. be accepted by a prince, too haughty to submit, at once,

to conditions ditated by an enemy. But, how firm-
ly soever Maurice adhered, during the negotiation, to
the interests of his associates, or how steadily soever he
kept in view the objeas which had induced him to take
arms, he often professed a trong inclination to terminate
the differences with the Emperor in an amicable manner.
Encouraged by this appearance of a pacifick disposition,
Ferdinand proposed a econd interview at Paffau, on the
tventy-fixth of May, and that a truce should commence
on that day, and continue to the tenth of June, in order
to give them lcifure for adjuting all the points in dil-
rute.

Maurice UPON this, Mauiic rejoined his army on the ninth
advances of May, which had now advanced to Gundelfingen.
tward He put his troops in motion next morning; and as fix-

rlp uc. teen days yet remained for aaion before the commence-

ment of the truce, he resolvcd, during that period, to
venture upon an enterpri.c, the fuccels of which would
be lo decisive, as would render the negotiations at Pallau
extremelv short, and entitle him to treat upon his own
terms. Hle foresaw that the pofpea of a ceflation of
arms, which was to take place lo loon, together with the
opinion of his carneflncls to rc-elablilh peace, with

[in] Thuan. 349.

which he had artfully amused Ferdinand, could not Fail Book X.
of infiring the emperor with such falle hopes, that he *
vouid naturally become remiss, and relapic into some '
degree of that ecurity, which had already been so fatal
to him. Relying on this conjecure, he marched direEt-
Iv towards Infpruck, and advanced with the mofl rapid
motion that could be given to so great a body of troops.
On the eighteenth he arrived at Ficifen, a pod of great
conlcquence, at the entrance into the Tyrolefe. There
he found a body of eight hundred men, whom the Em-
peror had assembled, firongly entrenched, in order to
oppole his progrcfs. He attacked them inflantly with
iuch violence and impetuosity, that they abandoned
their lines precipitately, and falling back on a econd bo-
dy pofled near Ruten, communicated to those troops,
the pannick terror with which they themselves had been
seized, so that they likewise took to flight after a feeble
resistance.

ELATED with this success, which exceeded his mod Takes the
sanguine hopes, Maurice passed on to Ehrenbergh, a atte of
castle situated on an high and steep precipice, which berg.
commanded the only pass through the mountains. As
this fort had been surrendered to the Protestants, at the
beginning of the Smalkaldic war, because the garrison
was then too weak to defend it, the Emporor, sensible
of its importance, had taken care, at this junaure, to
throw into it a body of troops sufficient to maintain it a-
gainft the greatest army. But a shepherd, in pursuing a
goat which had Itrayed from his flock, having discovered
an unknown path, by which it was poflible to ascend to
the top of the rock, came with his seasonable piece of in-
telligence to Maurice. A small band of chosen soldiers,
under the command of George of Mecklenburg, was
instantly ordered to follow this guide. They set out in
the evening, and clambering up the rugged track with in-
finite fatigue as well as danger, they reached the ummit
unperceived; and at an hour which had been concerted,
when Maurice began the aflault on the one fide of the
cafle, they appeared on the other, ready to scale the
walls, which were feeble in that place, because it had
been hitherto deemed inacceflible. The garrison, firuck
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter where
they had thought themselves perfealy secure, immedi-

VOL. II. X ately

Book X. ately threw down their arms. Maurice, almost without
'--' bloodshed, and, which was of greater coniequence to
'552' him, ithout loss of time, took possession of a place, tht

redution of which might have retarded him long, and
have required the utmost efforts of his valour and
skill [n].

A mutiny MAURICE was now only two days march from In-
of his fpruck, and without losing a moment he ordered his in.
troops r.-
tards his fantry to advance thither, having left his cavalry, which
march. was unserviceable in that mountainous country, at Fief-

fen, to guard the mouth of the pass. He proposed to
advance with such rapidity as to anticipate any accounts
of the loss of Ehrenberg, and to filrprize the Emperor
together with his attendants in an open town incapable of
defence. But just as his troops began to move, a batta-
lion of mercenaries mutinied, declaring that they would
not ir until they had received the gratuity, which, ac-
cording to the cuflom of that age, they claimed as the
recompense due to them for having taken a place by al;
fault. It was with great difficulty, as well as danger,
and not without rome considerable loss of time, that Mau-
rice quieted this infurreaion, and prevailed on the fol-
diers to follow him to a place where he promised them
such rich boot) as would be an ample reward for all their
services.

The F.mpe- To the delay occasioned by this unforeseen accident,
ror flies in the Emperor owed his safety. He was informed of the
conrfufion
froml ,- approaching danger late in the evening, and knowing
pruck. that nothing could save him but a speedy flight, he in-

ftantly left Infpruck, without regarding the darkness of
the night, or the violence of the rain which happened to
fall at that time; and, notwithstanding his beng so much
debilitated by the gout, that he could bear no motion
but that of a litter, he travelled by the light of torches,
taking his way over the Alps, by roads almofl impaflibl.
His courtiers and attendants followed him with equal pre-
cipitation, some of them on iich horles as they could
hallily procure, many of them on foot, and all in the
utnof confusion. In this miserable plight, very unlike
the pomp with which Charles had appeared during the
five preceding years as the conqueror of Germany, he
arrived at length with his dejeaed train at Villach in
Carinthia, and scarce thought himself secure even in
that remote inacccflible corner.

[n] Arnoldi vita Msurit. 123.

MAURICE

M.AURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after the Em- Book X.

peror and his attendants had left it; and, enraged that '.
tlie prey fliould elcape out of his hands when he was just Ma:C:
read) to size it, he purlued them bome miles; but finding enters that
it !mpoflible to overtake persons, to whom their fear save town.
Ipced, e returncd to the town, and abandoned all the
I'nlpcror's baggage and that of his ministers to be plun-
dlred by the foldicrs; while he preserved untouched every
iliiir. belonging to the King of the Romans, either be-
ciule he had formed some friendly connecion with that
J'rincc, or becaufc he wished to have it believed that such
a connecqion subsisted between them. As theie now rc-
niained only three days to the commencement of the
truce, (with ftuch nicety had Maurice calculated his ope-
rations) he set out for Paffau, that he might meet Ser-
dinand on the day appointed.

BIi.FORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew the The Empe-
tgilrrd, placed on the degraded Eleaor of Saxony, whom, Ior let te

Elcaor of

during five years, he had carried about with him as a Saxony at
priloner; and set him entirely at liberty, either with an liberty.
intention to embarrass Maurice by letting loose a rival,
\wo might dispute his title to his dominions and dignity,
or from a sense of the indecency of detaining him a pri-
loner, while he himself run the rifque of being deprived
of his own liberty. But that Prince, feeing no way of
clcaping, but that which the Emperor took, and abhor-
ring the thoughts of falling into the hands of a kinsman,
v.liom he jutly confidered as the author of all his mif-
fo(tuncs, chore rather to accompany Charles in his flight,
and to expect the final decision of his fate from the treaty
which was now approaching.

THIS was not the only effe& which Maurice's opera- The

lions prot(lced. It was no sooner known at Trent that council of
he had taken arms, than a general cnflternation had brtlAk up
si7,cd the fathers of the council. The German prelates in grat
inmtdiatcel returned home, that they might provide onltcrni-
lor the fafctv of their territories. The rclt were x-
tremely impaticnt to he !rone; and the legate, who had
hil!erto dilappointed all the endeavours of the Imperial
anhafladors to procure for the Protellant divine, an au-
dience in the council, laid hold with joy on such a plau-
ib!c pretext fr difmifilTn an aembly, which he had
'ound it so difltcuilt to govcern. In a congregation held
(1" the tent.y .ighth of April, a decree was iued for

X 2 prolguilng

Book X. proroguing the council during two years, and appoining
'v -i it to meet at the expiration of that time, if peace were
'552' then re-established in Europe [o]. Thi, prorogation,

however, continued no less than ten years; and its pro.
ccedings, wkhen re-assembled in the year one thouland
five hundred and fixty-two, fall not within the period
prescribcd to this hitlory.

The efieft TH convocation of this assembly had been so pafflo.
of its de-
rltes nately desired by all the fIates and Princes in Christendom,

who, from the wildom and piety of prelates reprelent.
ing the whole body of the faithful, expected some cha.
ritabol and efficacious endeavours towards composing the
ditlcnfions which unhappily had arisen in the church. But
the fevcral popes, by whose authority it was called, had
other objects in view; and, exerting all their power or
policy to attain these, acquired, by the abilities as well
as address of their legates, by the ignorance of many of
the prelates, and by the servility of the indigent Italian
bishops, luch influence in the council, that they diaated
all its decrees, and framed them, not with an intention to
reflore unity and concord to the church, but to eablifh
their own dominion, or to confirm these tenets, upon
which they imagined that dominion to be founded.
Do&rines, which had hitherto been admitted upon the
credit of tradition alone, and received with some latitude
of interpretation, were defined with a scrupulous nicety,
and confirmed by the fanaion of authority. Rites, which
had formerly been observed only in deference to custom
ltppofed to be ancient, were established by the decrees
of the church, and declared to be essential parts of its
worfhil. 1 lhe breach, inflead of being closed, was wi-
dened, and made irreparable. In place of any attempt
to reconcile the contending parties, a line was drawn
with such fludied accuracy, as ascertained and marked
out the difiin&ion between them. This fill serves to
keep them at a diltance; and muff, without some signal
intcrpofition of divine Providence, render the separation
perpetual.

Char2aer Ou' R knowledge of the proceedings of this assembly is
of the hint- derived from three different authors. Father Paul of Ve-
tiounoil nice wrote his history of the Council of Trent, while the

memory of what had passed there was recent, and fomc
who haid been members of it were still alive. He has ex-

t] . Paul. 353.

posed the intrigues and artifices by which it was conduat- Book X.
ed, with a freedom and leverity which have given a deep ^'
wound to the credit and reputation of the council. -le IS5
has decLribed its deliberations, and explained its decrees,
with such perspicuity and depth of thought, with such
va.rious erudition and such force of realon, as have juffly
en:i;!d his work to be placed among the moss admired
hifftrical compositions. About halfa century thereafter,
the Jcfuit Pallavicini published his hifftory of the council,
in opposition to that of Father Paul, and, by employing
all the force of an acute and refining genius to invalidate
the credit, t to confute the reasonings, of his antagonist,
h. labours to prove, by artful apologies for the proceed-
ings of the council, and subtile interpretations of its de-
crees, that it deliberated with impartiality, and decided
with judgment as well as candour. Vargas, a Spanish
docor of laws, who wvas appointed to attend the Impe-
rial ambassadors at Trent, sent the bishop of Arras a re-
gular account of the tranfaEtions there, explaining all the
arts which the Legate employed to influence, or over-
awe the council. His letters have been published, in
which he inveighs againfi the Papal court with that alpe-
rity ofcenfure, which was natural to a man whose fitua-
tion enabled him to observe its arts thoroughly, and who
was obliged to exert all his attention and talents in order
to disappoint them. But, whichfocver of thee authors
an intelligent person takes for his guide, in forming a
judgment concerning the spirit of the council, he muff
discover so much ambition as well as artifice among some
of the members, so much ignorance and corruption a-
mong others; he muff observe such a large infusion of
human policy and passions, but such a scanty portion of
that simplicity of heart, fanaity of manners, and love
of truth, which alone qualify men to determine what
docrines are worthy of God, and what worship is ac-
ceptable to him; that he will find it no easy matter to
believe, that any extraordinary influence of the Holy
Ghofl hovered over this assembly, and dictated its de-
crees.

WHII.E Maurice was employed in negotiating with The

the King of the Romans at Lintz, or in making war on French en-
the Emperor in the Tyrol, the French King had advanced fv"urr i
into Alsace as far as Strafburgh; and having demanded Strafburgh.
leave of the Senate to march through the city, he hoped

X 3 that

Bonk X. that by repeating the fame fraud which he had pradifed
"- "'at Metz., he might render himself mailer of the place,

1552' and by that means fecurea passage over the Rhine into !ie

heart of Germany. But the Strafburghers, infllic;Ecd
and put on their guard by the credulity and misf.tiu-ae
of their neighbours, shut their gates; and having alT-ra-
bled a garitbn of five thousand soldiers, prepared their for-
tifications, razed tlhe houses in their suburbs, and deter-
mined to defend themselves to the utmost. At the fame
time they sent a deputation of their most respectable citi-
zens to the King, in order to divert him from making any
hotlile attempt upon them. The Electors of Treves and
Cologn, the Duke of Cleves, and other Princes in the
neighbourhood, interposed in their behalf; beseeching
Henry that he would not forget so loon the title which
he had gencroufy afTumed; and, intfead of being the
Diliverer of Germany, become its Oppressor. The
Swils cantons leconded them with zeal, soliciting Henry
to Ipare a city which had long been conneced with their
community in friendship and alliance.

But mwilh- POWERFUL as this united interceflion was, it would
out ruccels not have prevailed on Henry to forego a prize of lo much

value, if he had been in a condition to have seized it.
But, in that age, the method of fubfiiling numerous ar-
mies at a distance from the frontiers of their own country,
was imperfectly underflood, and neither the revenues ot
Princes, nor their experience in the art of war, were
equal to the great and complicated efforts which uch an
undertaking required. The French, though not far re-
moved from their own country, began already to susser
for want of provisions, and had no sufficient magazincs
collected to lupport them during a siege, which must ne-
ceffarily have been of great length [r]. At the fame
time, the Queen of Hungary, governels of the Low-
Countries, had assembled a considerable body of troops,
which, under the command of Martin de Rof'em, laid
watle Champagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces
of France. These concurring circumstances obliged the
King, though with rclucance, to abandon the enterpri/e.
But being willing to acquire some merit with his allies,
by this retreat which he could not avoid, he pretended to
the Swiss that he had taken the resolution merely in com-
pliance with their requcft []; and then, after giving

orders
[p] Thuan. 3i, 351. [q] Slcid. 557. Brantome, tom. vii, 3.

orders that all the horses in his army should be led to Book X.
drink in the Riine, as a proof of his having pushed his '~
conqueffs 'b far, he marched back towards Champagne. 1552'

W1!1LIL tile French King and the main army of the The ope-
coniderates were thus employed; Albert of Brandcn- rations of

Albert of

burgh was intrufded with the command of a separate body branden-
of eight thousand men, consisting chiefly of mercenaries iurgh.
who had resorted to his standard, rather from the hope of
plundei, than the expectation of regular pay. That
Prince, feeing himlelf at the head of such a number of
desperate adventureis ready to follow wherever he fhculd
lead them, soon began to disdain a state of subordination,
and to form such vast schemes of aggrandizing himself,
as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war or violent fations rouze them to bold exertions,
by alluring them with immediate hopes of success. Full
of thele apiring thoughts, Albert made war in a manner
very different from the other confederates. He endea-
voured to spread the terror of his arms by the rapidity of
his motions, as well as the extent and rigour of his devaf-
tations; he exaced contributions wherever he came, in
order to amass such a fum of money, as would put it in
his power to keep his army together; he laboured to get
poffeflion of Nurembergh, Ulm, or ome other of the free
cities in Upper Germany, in which, as a capital, he might
fix the feat of his power. But, finding these cities on
their guard, and in a condition to refill his attacks, he
turned all his rage against the popish ecclefiafticks, whose
tertitories he plundered with such wanton and merciless
barbarity, as gave them a very unfavourable impreflion
of the spirit of that reformation in religion, with zeal for
which he pretended to be animated. The bishops of
Bambergh and Wurtzburg, by their situation, lay parti-
cularly exposed to his ravages; he obliged the former to
transfer to him, in property, almost one half of his ex-
tensive diocese; and compelled the latter to advance an
immense fum, in order to lave his country from ruin and
desolation. During all these wild sallies, Albert paid no
regard either to Maurice's orders, whose commands, as
Generaliflimo of the league, he had engaged to obey, or
to the rcmonfirances of the other confederates; and ma-
"ifeftly discovered that he attended only to his own pri-
'ate emolument, without any folicitudc about the com-

X 4 mon

Book X. mon cause, or the general objecs which had induced
~'-""them to lake arms [q].
Ths1552n MEAN'WHILE, Aaurice having ordered his arm) to
The negoti-
ationr of march back into Bavaria, and having published a proca-
rpece at mation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and infiru:cors of
Pralau. youth, to relume the cxercife of their fun&ions in all the

cities, schools, and universities, from which they had
been ejeced, met Ferdinand at Paffau on the twenty.
sixth day of May. As matters of the greatest conle-
qicnce to the future peace and independance of the Em.
pire were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes of all
Germany were fixed upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the
Imperial ambassadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the bishops
of Saltzburgh, and Aichftadt, the ministers of all the
ElEtors, together with deputies from most of the confi-
derable Princes and free cities, retorted to Paffau. Mau.
rice, in name of his associates, and the King of the Ro-
mans, as the Emperor's representative, opened the nego-
tiation. The Princes who were present, together with
the deputies of such as were absent, aed as intercessors
or mediators between them.

Theterms M AURICE, in a long discourse, explained the motives
ricerpof- of his own condut. After having enumerated all the un-
ed. conflitutional and oppreflive ats of the Emperor's admi-

niftration, he, agreeably to the manifeflo which he had
rublifled when he took arms against him, limited his de-
mands to three articles. That the Landgrave of Hesse
should be immediately set at liberty; That the grievances
in the civil government of the Empire should be redressed;
and that the Protestants should be allowed the publick
exercise of their religion without moleflation. Ferdi-
nand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering their un-
willingness to gratify him with regard to all these points,
the mediators wrote a joint letter to the Emperor, be-
feeching him to deliver Germany from the calamities of
a civil war, by giving such fatisfaaion to Maurice and
his party as might induce them to lay down their arms;
and at the fame time they prevailed upon Maurice to
grant a prolongation of the truce for a short time, during
which they undertook to procure the Emperor's final an-
fwer to his demands.

,Powr- THIS request was presented to the Emperor in the
fully ur- name of all the princes of the Empire, Popish as well as
ported ty Proteflant, in the name of such as had lent a hand to tbr-
the Prinme war
es the m- ar
sirs. [1] Sicid. 561. Thuln. 357.

ward his ambitious schemes, as well as of those who had Book X.
viewed the progress of his power with jealousy and dread.-- '
The uncommon and cordial unanimity with which they 552'
concurred at this juncture, in enforcing Maurice'sde-
mands, and in recommending peace, flowed from diffe-
rent causes. Such as were molt attached to the Roman
catholick church could not help observing that the Protcf-
tant confederates were at the head of a numerous army,
while the Emperor was but just beginning to provide for
his own defence. They forelaw that great efforts would
be required of them, and would be necessary on their
part, in order to cope with enemies, who had been al-
lowed to get the ltart so far, and to attain such formida-
ble power. Experience had taught them, that the fruit
of all these efforts would be reaped by the Emperor alone,
and the more compleat any vi&ory proved which they
(hould gain, the faster would they bind their own fetters
and render them the more intolerable. These confidera-
tions made them cautious how they contributed a second
time, by their indiscreet zeal, to put the Emperor in pof-
feilion of power which would be fatal to the liberties of
their country. Notwithstanding the implacable fierceness
of the spirit of bigotry in that age, they chore rather that
the Protestants should acquire that security for their reli-
gion which they demanded, than, by affilling Charles to
oppress them, to give such additional force to the Impe-
rial prerogative, as would overturn the constitution of the
Empire. To all these considerations, the dread of feeing
Germany laid wate by a civil war added new force.
Many flates of the Empire already felt the delrualive
rage of Albert's arms, others dreaded it, and all wished
for an accommodation between the Emperor and Mau-
rice, which they hoped would save them from that cruel
scourge.

SUCH were the reasons that induced so many Princes, The mo-

notwithflanding the variety of their political interells, and t"e whi, 1
the optfition in their religious sentiments, to unite in re- the Ernc-
(ommendii-gto the emperor an acommodation with Mau-ror at ti,,i
icc, not only as a salutary, but as a neccefary meafurc.Jun""ure
The motives which prompted Charles to desire it were
not fewer or of less weight. He was perfedly fcnfible
of the advantage which the confederates had acquired
through his own negligence; and he now felt the iniuffi-
clency of his own rcfources to oppose them. His Spa-
"ilh fubjeCs, disgusted at his long ablclce, and weary

of

Book X. of endless wars, which were of no benefit to their coun-
--'''try, refuted to furnish him any considerable supply either

Liz=' of men or money; and although he might hope by his

addrcfs or importunity to draw from them at last more
cffcatual aid; that, he knew, was too diflant to be of
any fenice in the present extgency of his affairs-. Iis
treasury was drained; his veteran torces were di:perfed,
or disbanded, and he could not depend much either on
the fidelity or courage of the new levied soldiers whom
he was collcating. There was no hope of repeating with
fucces the iame artifices which had weakened and ruined
the Smalkaldic league. As the end at which he aimed
was now known, he could no longer employ the specious
pretexts, which had formerly concealed his ambitious de-
signs. Every Prince in Germany was alarmed and on his
guard; and it was vain to think of blinding them a fe-
cond time to such a degree, as to make one part of them
instruments to enslave the other. The spirit of a confe-
deracy, whereof Maurice was the head, experience had
taught him to be very different from that of the league of
Smalkalde; and from what he had already felt, he had
no reason to flatter himself that its counsels would be as
irresolute, or its efforts as timid and feeble. If he hould
resolve on continuing the war, he might lay his account
that the motl considerable flates in Germany would take
part in it againfi him; and a dubious neutrality was the
titmof he could expeEt from the reft. While the confe-
derates found full employment for his arms in one quarter,
the King of France would fei,.e the favourable opportu-
nity, and push on his operations in another, with almost
certain success. That Monarch had already made con-
quefis in the Empire, which he was no lels eager to re-
cover, than impatient to be revenged on him for aiding
his malecontent fubjeCs. Tho' Henry had now retired
from the banks of the Rhine, he had only varied the
fccne of hofili'ies, having invaded the Low-Countries
with all his forces. The 'Turks, roused by the folicita-
tions of the French King, as well as flimulated by resent-
ment against Ferdinand for having violated the truce in
Hlunary, had prepared a powerful fleet to ravage the
confl of Naples and Sicily, which he had left almost de-
ftrcelts, by calling thence the greatest part of the regu-
l.i troops to join the army which he was now assembling.

FERDINAND,

FERDINAND, who went in perlontoXVillach, inorder Book X.
to lay before the Emperor the result of the conferences at t'~
paifau, had likewise reasons peculiar to himfelffor deiring Ferdit nd
an accommodation. These prompted him to second, with zealous ,t
the greatest earnefinefs, the arguments which the Princes, promote an
afferbled there, had employed in recommending it. He datcrnmo-
had observed, not without feerct fatisfation, the fatal
blow which had been given to the despotic power, which
his brother had usurped in the Empire. He was extreme-
ly solicitous to prevent Charles from recovering what he
had loft, as he foresaw that he would immediately resume
with fresh eagerness, and a better chance of success, his
favourite scheme of transmitting that power to his son by
excluding him from the right of succession to the Impe-
rial throne. On this account, he was willing to contri-
bute towards circumscribing the Imperial authority, in
order to render his own poffefiion of it certain. Besides,
Solyman, exasperated at the lots of Transylvania, and
still more at the fraudulent arts by which it had been
seized, had ordered into the field an army of an hundred
thousand men, which having defeated a great body of
Ferdinand's troops, and taken several places of importance,
threatened not only to complete the conquet of the pro-
vince, but to drive him out of that part of Hungary which
was fiill subjed to his jurifdiaion. He was unable to
resist such a mighty enemy; his brother, while engaged
in a domestic war, could afford him no aid ; and he could
not even hope to draw from Germany the contingent ci-
ther of troops or money, usually furnithed to repel the in-

rafions of the Infidels. Maurice, having obtfrved Ser-
dinand's perplexity, with regard to this last point, had
offered, if peace were re-established on a fecuie founda-
t;on, that he would march in person with his troops into
Hlungary to his afliltance. Such was the effet of this
'elltimed proposal, that Ferdinand, dtitute of every
eIher profped of relief, became the molt zealous advo-

itc the confederates could have chosen to urge their
ldallm, and there was scarce any thing that they could
lia ve demanded which he would not have cholen to grant,

htlaer than to have retarded a pacification, to which he
'iulcd as the only means of saving hiii Hungarian crown.
WHEN so many caules confpiied in rendeling an ac-circmn.
commodation elegible, it might have been expeced that (lltia'e

which re-

It would have immediately taken place. But the inflcxi- taW it.
bility of the Emperor's temper, together with his unwil-

lingnefs

Book X. lingnefs to relinquish, at once, objecs which he had long
"-'.~-- pursued with such earneftnels and assiduity, counterba.

1';55 lanced, for some time, the force of all the motives which

difpolcd him to peace, and not only put that event at a
distance, but eemed to render it uncertain. When
Maurice's demands, together with the letterof the media-
tors at Paffau, were presented to him, he peremptorlly
refuiled to rcdrefs the grievances which were pointed our,
nor would he agree to any stipulation for the immediate
security of the Proteflant religion, but propoled referring
both these to the determination of a future diet. On his
part, he required that inflant reparation flould be made
to all who, during the prelent war, had suffered either
by the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or the aEti-
ons of their leaders.

Maurice's MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the Em-

ev'rratnson peror's arts, immediately concluded that he had nothing
fLtilitate it. in view in there overtures but to amuse and deceive; and

therefore, without listening to Ferdinand's entreaties, he
left Paffau abruptly, and joining his troops, which were
encamped at Mergentheim, a city in Franconia, belong-
ing to the knights of the Teutonic order, he put them in
motion, and renewed hostilities. As three thousand men
in the Emperor's pay had thrown themselves into Frank-
fort on the Maine, and might from thence infest the
July 17. neighbouring country of Hesse, he marched towards that

city, and laid siege to it in form. The briskness of this
enterprize, and the vigour with which Maurice carried
on his approaches against the town, gave such an alarm to
the Emperor, as disposed him to lend a more favourable
ear to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of an accommoda-
tion. Firm and haughty as his nature was, he found it
necefTary to bend, and significd his willingness to make
conceflions on his part, if Maurice, in return, would
abate omewhat of the rigour of his demands. Ferdinand,
as soon as he perceived that he began to yield, did not
dcfift from his importunities, until he prevailed on him
to declare hat was the utmofi that he would grant for
the security of the confederates. Having gained this diffi-
cult point, he inflantly dispatched a messenger to Mau-
rice's camp, and imparting to him the Emperor's final
resolution, conjured him not to frustrate his endeavours
for the re-establishment of peace; or, by an unseasonable
ohflinacy on his fide, to disappoint the wishes of all Ger-
many for that salutary event.

MAURIC E

MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous situation of Book X.

his affairs, was iRrongly inclined to liften to his advice. 1'-5'
The Emperor, though over-reached and furprized, had Mauricede-
now begun to assemble troops, and how flow soever his firous of an
motions might be, while the sirs effets of his confterna- commo-
tion remained, he was sensible that Charles must at last datiJn.
ad with vigour proportional to the extent of his power
and territories, and lead into Germany an army formida-
ble by its numbers, and still more by the terror of his
name, as well as the remembrance of his past vitorics.
He could scarce hope that a confederacy, composed of
so many members, would continue to operate with fuffi-
cient union and perseverance to resist the confillent and
well directed efforts of an army, at the absolute dilpolal
of a leader accustomed to command and to conquer. He
felt already, although he had not hitherto experienced the
shock of any adverse event, that he was the head of a
disjointed body. He saw from the example of Albert of
Brandenburgh, how difficult it would be, with all his
address and credit, to prevent any particular member
from detaching himfelffrom the whole, and how impofli-
ble to recall him to his proper rank and subordination.
This filled him with apprehensions for the common caufc.
Another consideration gave him no less disquiet with re-
gard to his own particular interefls. By etting at liberty
the degraded Elector, and by repealing the at depriving
him of his hereditary honours and dominions, the Empe-
ror had it in his power to wound him in the molt sensible
part. The efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient lub-
jeas, and revered by all the Protestant party, in order to
recover what had been unjustly taken from him, could
scarce have failed of exciting commotions in Saxon',
which would endanger all that he had acquired at the
expence of so much dissimulation and artifice. It was
no less in the Emperor's power to render vain all the so-
licitations of the confederates in behalf of the Landgrave.
He had only to add one at of violence more to the in-
jullice and rigour with which he had already treattd
him; and he had accordingly threatened the ons of that
unfortunate Prince, that if they persisld in their present
enterpri7e, inflead of lecing their father reftoicd to li-
berty, they hould hear of his having suffered the punif-
Ilent which his rebellion had merited [r].

[r] Sleid. 5;.

HAVI NG

Book X. HAVING deliberated upon all there points with his as.
-v--' fociates, Maurice thought it more prudent to accept of
Th5 pace the conditions offered, though less advantageous than
of Religion those he had proposed, than again to commit all to the
concludidat doubtful issue of war ["]. He repaired forthwith to Pas.

I aut, and signed the treaty of peace ; of which the chief

articles were, That before the twelfth day of Auguit,
the confederates hall lav down their arms, and dilband
their forces; That on or before that day the Landgrave
shall be ft at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his cai'le
of Rheinfls; That a diet shall be held within fix months,
in order to deliberate concerning the most proper and etf
fetual method of preventing for the future all disputes
and dissentions about religion; That, in the mean time,
neither the Emperor nor any other Prince, shall, upon
any pretext whatever, offer any injury or violence to
fiuch as adhered to the confeflion of Augiburg, but allow
them to enjoy the free and undilturbed exercise of their
religion; That the Protcflants, in return, hall not mo-
left the Catholicks either in the exercise of their ecclefi-
aflicaljurifdilion, or in performing their religious cere-
monies; That the Imperial chamber {hall adminifierjuf-
tice impartially to persons of both parties, and Protef-
tants be admitted indiscriminately with the Catholicks to
fit judges in that court; That if the next diet should not
be able to terminate the disputes with regard to religion,
the stipulations in the present treaty in behalf of the Pro-
tcelants, hall continue for ever in full force and vigour;
That none of the confederates shall be liable to any ai-
on on account of what had happened during the course
of the war; That the consideration of those encroach-
ments which had been made, as Maurice pretended, up-
on the conflitution and liberties of the Empire, shall be
remitted to the approaching diet; That Albert of Bran-
dvnlhnirh ihall be comprehended in the treaty, provided
he lhall accede to it, and disband his forces before the
twelfth of August [].

pcflnsi; n, St c was the memorable treaty of Paffau, that over-
....l, turned the vafR fabric, in creEing which Charles had em-
ipon th.r plo) cd lo many years, and had exerted the utmost of his

h'hacl i .
'

['] Sleid. Hilt. ;63. &c. Thuan. lib. x. 359, &c.
[ti Rccutil des TraiLtz, ii. 261.

power

power and policy; which annulled all his regulations with Book X.
regard to religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the - -
Imperial authority absolute and hereditary in his family; ;5'
and elablifhed the Protestant church, which had hitherto
subsisted precariously in Germany, through connivance,
or by expedients, upon a firm and ecure basis. Mau-
rice reaped all the glory of having concerted and com-
pleated this unexpected revolution. It is a singular cir-
cumfiance, that the Reformation hould be indebted or
its security and full establishment in Germany, to the
fame hard which had formerly brought it to the brink of
deftluclon, and that both events should have been accom-
plithcd by the fame arts of dissimulation. The ends,
however, which Maurice had in view, at there different
junctures, seem to have been more attended to than the
means by which the' attained them; and he was now as
universally extolled for his .eal and publick pirit, as he
had lately been condemned for his indifference and inte-
refted policy. It is no less worthy of observation, that
the French King, a monarch zealous for the Catholick
faith, hould, at the very time he was persecuting his
own Protestant subjects with all the fiercenes of bigotry,
employ his power in order to protect and maintain the
Reformation in the Empire; and that the league for this
purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romifl church,
should be negotiated and signed by a Roman catholick
bishop. So wonderfully doth the witdom of God fulpcr-
intend and regulate the caprice of human paflions, and
render them subservient towards the accomplifhmcnt of
his own purposes!

LIrTLE attention was paid to the interests of the l.itleatten-

French King during the negotiations at Paffau. Maurice t,''"n I:1,
and his associates, having gained what they had in view, Kin," iill'.,
discovered no great solicitude about an all), whom, per- t1',y.
haps, they reckoned to be over-paid, by hi. acquilitions
inl,orrain, for the aillance which he had given them.
A ihort clause, which they procured to be i ferted in the
treaty, importing that the King of France might commu-
nicate to there confederates his particular pre:enfions or
causes of hostility, which they would lay before the Erm-
peror, was the only sign that they gave of their renemln-
bering how much thev had been indebted to hini for their
filccet;. Henry experienced the fame treatment, which
every Prince who lend hlis aid to the authors of a cil

war

'v'-'"to subside, and any profpeet of accommodation began tc
'552' open, his services were forgotten, ad his associates made

a merit with their sovereign, of the ingratitude ith
which they abandoned their protector. But how much
soever Henry might be enraged at the perfidy or his allies,
or at the impatience with which they hastened to make
their peace with the Emperor at his expence, he was
perfectly sensible that it was more his interest to keep
well with the Germanick body, than to resent the indig.
nities offered him by any particular members of it. For
that reason he dismissed the hostages which he had re.
ceived from Maurice and his associates, and affected to
talk in the fame strain, as formerly, concerning his zeal
for maintaining the ancient conffitution and liberties of
the Empire.

THE

THE REIG N, &c.
336

# BOOK XI.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XI.
A S oon as the treaty of Paflau was signed, Maurice, Book X.

in consequence of his engagements with Ferdinand, --v"

marched into Hungary at the head of twenty thousand A.55
men. But the vast superiority of the Turkish armies, Murice
the frequent mutinies, both of the Spanish and German rches in-
soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay, together with'° Hungary

againR tbo

the dissentions between Maurice and Caflaldo, who wasTurks.
piqued at being obliged to resign the chief command to
him, prevented his performing any thing in that country
worthy of his former fame, or of great benefit to the King
of the Romans [It.

WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the Prince ofTheLand-

Hesse parted from him with the forces under his com- gave of
mand, and maiched back into his own country, that he covert his
might be ready to receive his father upon his return, and liberty.
give up to him the reins of government which be had held
during his abfcnce. But tortune was not yet weary ot
persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of mercenary

[i] Ifuanhaffi Hill. Hungar. 1.8. Thnan. lib, . 371.
Vol.. 11. Y troops,

Rook Xl. troops, which had been in the pay of Hesse, being fe-
'--~ 1duced by Reifenberg their colonel, a soldier of fortune,

55t' and ready to engage in any enterprize, secretly withdrew

from the young Prince as he was marching homewards,
and joined Albert of Brandenburgh, who flill continued
in arms against the Emperor, refusing to be included in
the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily for the Landgrave, an
account of this reached the Netherlands, just as he was
dismisscd from the citadel of Mechlin where he had been
confined, but before he had got beyond the frontiers of
that country. The Queen of Hungary, who governed
there in her brother's name, incensed at such an open
violation of the treaty to which he owed his liberty,
commanded him to be arrefled, and committed him again
to the custody of the fame Spanish captain who had
guarded him for five years with such severe vigilance.
Philip beheld all the horrors of his imprisonment renew-
ed, and his spirits subsiding in the fame proportion as
they had risen during the hort interval in which he
had enjoyed liberty, he funk into despair, and believed
himfelt to be doomed to perpetual captivity. But the
matter being explained to the Emperor's full fatisfacion,
that the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries could be im-
puted neither to the Landgrave nor to his son, he gave
orders for his release; and Philip at lafi obtained the li-
belty for which he so longlanguifhed ["]. But though he
recovered his freedom, and was reinstated in his domini-
ons, his sufferings seem to have broken the vigour, and
to have extinguished the activity of his mind: From be-
ing the boldest as well as most enterprizing Prince in the
Empire, he became the most timid and cautious, and
passed the remainder of his days in a pacific indolence.
Iikewicf THE degraded Elefor of Saxony likewise procured

sthEltor' his liberty in consequence of the treaty of PalTau. 'JIhe

Emperor having been obliged to relinquish all his fchemcs
for extirpating the Ptoteltant Religion, had no longer any
motive for detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely
solicitous, at that juncure, to recover the confidence and
good will of the Germans, whose afliflancc was essential
to the success of the entcrprise which he meditated against
the King of France, he, among other expedients for that

[u] Sleid. 573. Blcarii Comment. 834.

purpoft,

purpose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a Prince Book XI.
whole merit entitled him no lets to esteem, than his sus-
ferings rendered him the object of compaflion. John 5s
Frederick took pofleflon accordingly of that part of his
territories which had been relerved for him, when Mau-
rice was invested with the Elecoral dignity. As he con-
tinued to display in this situation, the lame virtuous mag-
nanimity, for which he had been conspicuous in a more
prosperous and plendid fiate, and which he had retained
amidst all his sufferings, he lived several years in that high
reputation to which he had fojut a title.

THE loss of Metz, Toul and Verdun, had made aThe Empe-

deep impreflion onthe Emperor. Accuflomed to terminate r eoves
all his operations against France with advantage to him- war upon
self, he thought that it nearly concerned his honour not France.
to allow Henry the superiority in this war, or to uffer
his own administration to be stained with the infamy of
having permitted territories of such consequence to be
dismembered from the Empire. This was no less a point
of interest than of honour. As the frontier of Champagne
was more naked, and lay more exposed than that of any
province in France, he had frequently, during his wars
with that kingdom, made inroads upon it with great fuc-
cess and effea; but if Henry were allowed to retain his
late conquests, France would gain such a formidable bar-
rier on that fide, as to be altogether secure, where for-
merly she had been the weakest. On the other hand, the
Emperor had now loft as much, in point of security, as
France had acquired, and being ltripped of the defence
which those cities afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a
quarter, where all the towns having been hitherto con-
fidered as interior, and remote fiom any enemy, were
but slightly fortified. These considerations determined
Charles to attempt recovering the three towns of which
Henry had made himself malter; and the preparatiors
Which he made againlt Maurice and his associates en-
abled him to carry his relolution into immediate execu-
tion.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at Paffau, His preps-

he left his inglorious retreat at Villach, and advanced tothi"purpo" ,
Augsburg at the head of a confiderablc body of Germans
which he had levied, together with all the troops which
he had drawn out of Italy and Spain. 'othefe he added
fcve:al battalions, hich having been in the pay of the

Y z colnfcdciatcs,

Book XI. confederates, entered into his fcrvice when dismissed by
^"v~- them; and he prevailed likewile on some of the Princes

5ss5' of the Empire to join him with their vassals. In order to

conceal the deflination of this formidable army, and to
guard aainft alarming the French lo as to put them on
preparing for their defence, he gave out that he was to
maich forthwith into Hungary, in order to second Mau.
rice in his operations against the Infidels. When he be.
gan to advance towards the Rhine, and could no longer
employ that pretext, he tried a new artifice, and spread
a itport that he was marching in order to chastise Albert
of Brandenburgh, whose cruel xations in that part of
the Empire called loudly for his interposition to check
them.

The pre- BUT the French having grown acquainted, at last,
the' Frnch with arts by which they had been so often deceived, vieu-
for the de- ed all Charles's motions with difirufl. Henry immedi-
felnce of atelv gucffed the true objcA of his vast preparations, anl
Me:2. refol ed to defend the important conquests which he had

gained with vigour equal to that with which they were
about to be attacked. As he foresaw that the whole
weilght of the war would be turned againfi Mctz, the fate
of which would decide that of Toul and Verdun, he no-

The Duke miniated Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take the
of Guile
appointed command in that city during the fiegc, the iiTue of which
Governor of would equally affeet the honour and interest of his coun-
tht town. try. His choice could not have fallen upon any perlon

more worthy ofthat trust. The Duke of Guie possessed,
in a high degree, all the qualities of courage, sagacity,
and presence of mind, which render men eminent in mi-
litary command. He was largely endowed ith that mag-
nanimity of foul which delights in bold enterprizes, and
aspires to fame by splendid and extraordinary aions. He
repaired with joy to the dangerous tfation assigned him,
as to a theatre on which he might display his great qua-
litics under the immediate eye of his countrymen, all
ready to applaud him. The martial genius of the French
nobility in that age, which confidered it as the greatefl
reproach to remain inaaive, when there was any oppor-
tunit) of fignali'.ing their courage, prompted great num-
bcrs to follow a leader who was the darling as well as the
pattern of all that courted military fame. Several Princes
of the blood, many noblemen of the highefl rank, and all

the

the young officers who could obtain the King's pcrmifion, Book Xl.
entered Mletz as volunteers. By their presence they '
added pirit to the garrison, and enabled the Duke of 'S
Gui(le to emplov on every emergency persons eager to
diiinguifh themselves, and fit to conduEl any iervice.

BLu T with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise un- Prepares for

dertook the defence of Metz, he found every thing, upon dftnce.
his arrival there, in such a situation, as might have in-
duced any person of less intrepid courage to dfpair of
defending it with success. The city was of great extent,
with large suburbs; the walls were in many places teehle
and without ramparts; the ditch narrow; and the old
towers, which projected inflead of bastions, were at too
ereat diflance from each other to defend the space be-
tmeen them. For all these defetas he endeavoured to
provide the best remedy, which the time would permit.
He ordered the suburbs, without paring the monafltries
or churches, not even that of St. Arnulph, in which Ie-
veral Kings of France had been buried, tobe levelled with
the ground; but in order to guard against the imputation
of impiety, to which such a violation of so many sacred
edifices, as well as of the ashes of the dead might expose
hirr, he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy veflments and utensils, toge-
ther with the bones of the Kings, and other persons de-
polited in these churches to be removed, they were car-
ried in solemn proceflion to a church within the walls,
le himself walking before them uncovered, with a torch
in his hand. He then pulled down lich houses as flood
near the walls, cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired
ihe ruinous fortifications, and erected new ones. As it
was necelTary that all these works should be finished with
the utmofl expedition, he laboured at them with his own
hands: the officers and volunteers imitated his example,
and the soldiers submitted with chearfilnefs to the most
evecre fatigues, when they saw that their fuleriors did
not decline to bear a part in thc!e together with them.
At the fame time he compelled all utlel; perloens to leave
the place; he filled the maga.iine with provisions and
military flores; burnt the mills; and destroycd the corn
and forage for several miles round the town. Such were
his popular talents, as well as his arts of acquirin an
ascendant over the mind.s of men, that the citi?.ens fe-
conded him with no less ardour than the oldiers; and
every other paiflon being swallowed up in the 'zeal to

Y 3 rcpulle

Eoak XI. repulse e tenemy, with which he inspired them, they
-.-.- beheld the ruin of lheir ellates, together, with the ha-

^'!5 vock, which he made among their publick and private

builtings, without any emotion of relcntment [x].

Ch='r r2d- Ml1 ANT:rIM:E, the iniperor, having collected all his
warods forces, continued his mi.lth towalds rMetr.. As he passed
Mctz. through the cities on the Rhine, he law the dilmal es-

fecls of that licentiui:. and watkleftl war which Albeit had
carried on In the:e parts. Upon his approach, that Prince,
though at the had of twenty ticuland men, withdrew
into Lorain, as if e hl:d i:-tcnded to join the French
King, whole arms lie had quartered with his own in all
his fiandards and ensigns. Albert was not in a condition
to cope with the Imperial troops, hich amounted atleafi
to fixtv thouland men, forming one of the mofi numerous
and hell appointed armies that had been brought into the
field, during that age, in any of the wars among the
Chriflian Princes [].

nveRs the THE chief command under the Emperor, was com-
town. mittcd to the Duke of Alva, affifled by the Marquis de

Marignano, together with the molt experienced of the
Italian and Spanish generals. As it was towards the end
of Oaober, these intelligent officers represented the great
danger of beginning, at fich an advanced season, a siege
which could not fil to prove very tedious. But Charles
adhered to his own opinion with his usual oftinacy, and
being confident that he had made iuch preparations, and
taken such precautions, as would ensure ucccfs, he or-
pa. 19. dered the city to he invefled. As soon as the Duke of

Alva appeared, a large body of the French sallied out
and attacked his van guard with great vigour, put it in
confiufon, and killed or took priloners a considerable num-
ber of men. By this early Ifpecimen, which they gave
of the condua of their officers, as well as the valour ot
their troops, they shewed the Imperialifis what an enemy
they had to encounter, and how dear every advantage
muff coil them. The place, however, was compleatly
invested, the trenches were opened, and the other works
begun.

Boihpartie' TIlE attention both of the bcfiegers and besieged was
,ndtavour turned for some time towards Albert of Brandenburgh,
to gin Al-
'rt ons Rrn-
denburSh, 1 Thuxn. 3i. 38.

[y] Ntal. Comit. Hist. 117.

gnd

and they 1trove with emulation which hould gain that Book XI.
prince, who ill hovered in the neighbourhood, fluau- " -
ating in all the uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a 5
man, who being swayed by no principle, was allured dif-
ferent ways by contrary views of interefl. The French
tempted him with offers extremely beneficial; the Impe-
rialifis scrupled at no promise which they thought would
make an impression upon him. After much hesitation,
he was gained by the Emperor, from whom he expected
to receive advantages, which were both more immediate
and more permanent. As the French King, who began
to ufpea his intentions, had appointed a body of troops
under the Duke of Aumale, biotherto the Duke of Guise,
to watch his motions, Albert fell upon them unexpeted- Nov.4.
ly, with such vigour, that he routed them entirely, kill-
ed many of the officers, wounded Aurnale himself, and
took him prisoner. Immediately after this vi&ory, he
marched in triumph to Metz, and joined his army to
that of the Emperor. Charles, in reward for this ser-
vice, and the great accession of strength which he brought
him, granted Albert a pardon, in form, of palt offences,
and confirmed him in the poffeflion of the territories
which he had violently usurped during the war [z].

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affeced withThe gllint

his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in any degree, behavlour
the vigour with which he defended the town. He har-of cDufe
ralted the besiegers by frequent allies, in which hisandhis gr.
officers were so eager to distinguish themselves, thatrion.
his authority, being scarce sufficient to refirain the im-
pctuofity of their courage, he was obliged at different
times to shut the gates and to conceal the keys, in or-
der to prevent the Princes of the blood, and noble-
men of the first rank, from exposing themselves todan-
ger in every ally. He repaired in the night what the
enemy's artillery had beat down during the day, or
creted behind the ruined works, new fortifications of
almofi equal flrength. The Imperialilts, on theirpart,
pushed on the attack with great pirit, and carried for.
ward, at once, approaches against different parts of the
town. But the art of attacking fortified places was
not then arrived at that degree of perfecion, to which

[z) Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, 392.

Y 4

Book XI. it was carried towards the close of the sixteenth cn.

v tury, during the long war in the Netherlands. The
'65' besiegers, after the unwearied labour of many weeks,

found that they had made but little progress; and al-
though their batteries had made breaches in different
places, they saw, to their altonilhment, works suddenly
appear, in demolishing which their fatigues and dangers
would be renewed. The Emperor, enraged at the ob-
ftmtnte refitance which his army met with, left Thion-
ville, where he had been confined by a violent fit of the
gout, and though tfill lo infirm that he was obliged to l)e
Nov. 6. carried in a litter, he repaired to the camp, that by his

pretence he might animate the soldiers, and urge on the
attack with greater pirit. Upon his arrival, new batte-
ries were erecEed, and new efforts made with redoubled
ardour.

The iflrefs BUT, by this time, the winter had set in with great
Ps thelmt- rigour; the camp was alternately deluged with rain, or
rial amy. g '
*

covered with now; at the fame time, provisions were
become extremely Icarce, as the body of French cavalry
which hovered in the neighbourhood, often interrupted
the convoys, or rendered their arrival difficult and uncer-
tain. Dileafes began to pread among the soldiers, efpe-
cially among the Italians and Spaniards, unaccufiomed to
such inclement weather; great numbers were disabled
from serving, and many died. At length, such breaches
were made as eemed practicable, and the Emperor re-
solved to hazard a general assault, in Ipite of all the re-
monstrances of his generals concerning the imprudence of
attacking a numerous garrilon, conducted and animated
by the mod gallant of the French nobility, with an army
weakened by dileafes, and disheartened with ill uccels.
The Duke of Guile, fufpeting his intentions, from the
extraordinary hurry which he obteived in the enemy's
camp, ordered all his troops to their refpetive poits.
They appeared immediately on the wall, and behind the
breaches, with Iuch a determined countenance, so eager
tor the combat, and 1o well prepared to give the aflail-
ants a warm reception, that the Imperialists, instead of
advancing to the charge, when the word of command
was given, flood motionless, in a timid deje&ed filcncc.
The Emperor, perceiving that he could not trufi troops
whole flpirits were so much broken, retired abruptly to

his

his quarters, complaining that he was now delerted by Book XI.
his loldiers, who deservcd no longer the name of men [j.
V .

DEEPLY as this behaviour ot his troops mortified and Th 'ISmpe

affect-d him, Charles would not hear ot abandoning the ror change-
siege, though he saw the ncefity of changirg the rme- the meihod

of attack.

thod of attack. He ufpended the fury of his batteries,
and proposed to proceed by the more secure but tedious
method of lapping. But as it still continued to rain or to
snow almost incessantly, tuch as were employed in this
service endured incredible hardflips; and the duke of
Guise, whose industry was not inferior to his valour, dil-
covering all their mines, counter-worked them, and pre-
vented their effec. At last, Charles, finding it impoili-
ble to contend any longer wsith the rigour ot the leafn,
and with enemies, whom he could neither overpower by
force, nor subdue bv art, while at the lame time a conta-
eious distemper raged among his troops, and cut off daily
ereat numbers of his officers as well as soldiers, yielded
to the solicitations of his generals, who conjured him to
lave the remains of his army by a timely retreat; "For-
tune," fays he," I now perceive, resembles other fe-
males, and choofes to confer her favours on young men,
while she forsakes those who are advanced in years."

UPON this, he gave orders immediately to raise the Dec. 6.

siege, and submitted to the difsrace of abandoning the ohiiged to

o *, r

, * * i

. rb raile the

enterprize, after having continued ifttv-fix days before i,,ge.
the town, during which time he had lot upwards ot
thirty thousand men, who died of dilcafes, or were killed
b) the enemy. The duke of Guile, a soon as he per-
ceived the intention of the Imperialills, took mealuires to
1'revent their retiring unmolefied, ard fer.t out leveral
bodies, both of cavalry and infantry, to infetl their rear,
to pick up stragglers, and to fei.e every opportunity of
attacking them with advantage. Such was the confusion
with which they made their retreat, that the Fiench
might have annoyed them in the most cruel manner.
l'nt when they allied out, a pedacle preklnted itclf to I''in 'f th

. Iiii, ' i.d

thtir view, which extinguilhed at once all hofile l age, al,', =,l
atd melted them into tendernels and conl)asliho. The ium.nty 'f
Imperial camp was filled with the ick and wounded, with t'l F' liEh.
the dead and the dying. In all the diflcrent roads by
'hich the army retired, numbers were found, l ho,
having made an effort beyond itiir' iliicnlh to cfcape,

[w] Thuan. 397.

were

Book XI. were left, when they could go no farther, to perish with.

" out afliflance. This they received from their enemies,
C ;' and were indebted to them for all the kind offices which

their friends had not the power to perform. The duke
of Guile immediately ordered proper refreshments for
luch as were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons to
attend the lick and wounded: he removed such as could
bear it into the adjacent villages; and thole who would
1ave suffered by being carried lo far, he admitted into
the hospitals which he had fitted up in the city for his
own oldicrs. As soon as they recovered, he sent them
home, under an escort of oldiers, and with money to
bear their charges. By thcfe as of humanity, which
*were uncommon in that age, when war was carried on
With greater rancour and ferocity than at present, the
duke of Guise compleated the fame which he had ac-
quired by his gallant and uccefsful defence of Metz, and
engaged thole whom he had vanquished to vie with his
own countrymen in extolling his name [X].

iai it:it;- To thele calamities in Germany, were added such
. of the, unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered this the mofi dif-
aiTair in aitrous year in the Emperor's life. During his residence
I tlY. at Villach, Charles had applied to Cosmo di Medici for

tile loan of two hundred thousand crowns. But his cre-
dit, at that time was so low, that, in order to obtain this
inconfiderablc urnm, he was obliged to put him in pofcf-
sion of the principality of Piombino, and, by giving up
that, he loft the footinfr which he had hitherto main-
tained in Tulcany, and enabled Cosmo to aume, for
the future, the tone and deportment of a Prince altoge-
ther independant. Much about the time that his indi-
gence conllrained him to part with this valuable terri-
tory, he loit Siena, which was of till greater confe-
quence, through the ill conduct of Don Diego de Men-
do,.a [Y].

'!e re.olt SIS N A, like molt of the great cities in Italy, had long
of Slea. enjoyed a republican government, under the protecion

of the Empire; hut being torn in pieces by the diffenti-
ons between the nobles and the people, which divided

[x] Sleid. 575 Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel, Hil. de

Fr Iane, tom. ii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of this ficge ii taken from
the journal of the Sicur de Saligrac, who was prefcnt. Natal. Comit
lillor. 129.
[y] Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

all

all the commonwealths, the faction of the people, which Book Xl.
gained the ascendant, besought the Emperor to become -
the guardian of the administration which they had efta- 55
blifhed, and admitted into their city a mall body of Spa-
nifh soldiers, whom he had sent to countenance tht exe-
cution of the laws, and to preserve tranquillity among
them. The diretion of thele troops was given to Mcn-
doza, at that time ambassador for the Emperor at Rome,
who persuaded the credulous multitude, that it was ne-
ceffary, for their fecurily against any future attempt of
the nobles, to allow him to build a citadel in Siena; and
as he flattered himself that by means of this fortress he
might render the Emperor master of the city, he pushed
on the works with all possible dispatch. But he threw
off the mark too soon. Before the fortifications were
compleated, he began to indulge his natural haughtiness
and severity of temper, and to treat the citi/.ens with
great insolence. At the fame time, the soldiers in garri-
Ion being paid as irregularly as the Emperor's troops ufu-
ally were, lived almoit at discretion upon the inhabi-
tants, and were guilty of many as of license and op-
pression.

THESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a sense ofThcS;enere

their danger. As they saw the neceflity of exerting curt the
themselves, while the unfinished fortifications of the ci- ^iane of
tadel left them any hopes of fuccets, they applied to the
French ambassador at Rome, who readily promiled them
his master's protetion and affiflance. At the fame time,
forgetting their domestic animofities when such a mortal
blow was aimed at the liberty and exiltence of the repub-
lick, they sent agents to the exiled nobles, and invited
them to concur with them in saving their country from
the servitude with which it was threatened. As there
was not a moment to lote, measures were concerted
speedily, but with great prudence; and were executed
with equal vigour. The citizens rose fiddenly in aim;;
the exiles flocked into the town from different parts with
all their partizans, and what troops they could draw to-
gether; and fevcral bodies of mercenaries in the pay of
France appeared to upport them. The Spaniards, tho'
furprized, and nuch inferior in number, defended them-
selves with great courage; but feeing no profpe of re-
lief, and having no hopes of maintaining their fnation
long in a half-finifhed fortress, they soon gave it up.
The Sienefe, with the utmofi alacrity, levelled it with

the

Book XI, the ground, that no monument might remain of that n_

- dious tlructure, which had ben railed in order to e-
'552 slave them. At the lame tiie renouncing all connecin

with the Emperor, they lent ambafladors to the Kin of
France as the reltorer of their liberty, and to intrtat
that he would lecure o them the perpetual enjoyment i(
that hlefling by contitilrin hi, proteclion to their repub.
lick ['].

percent of '1'o these misfortunes, one fill more fatal had almcll
the '1rkIr fi.ceedecd. T'he lc\ve r adinilrtlalion o(f Don 'cdro de
in the king-
,tlm f , Toledo, vicero of Naplce, having filled that kingdnm
Nap!es. with murmuring and dilaffedtion, the Prince f Salernn,

the head of the malcontents, had fled to the court or
France, where all ho bore ill-will to the Emperor nr
his miniflers, were fiure of finding protection and ail.
tance. That neblcman, in the utf'al stile of exiles, boafl-
ing much of his larti.ans, and of his great influence with
them, prevailed en flenry to think of invading Naples,
frcm expeation of beinr joined by all those with whom
the Prince cf Salerno held correspondence, or who were
diflatisfied with Toledo's government. But though the
firfl hint of this enterpri7.c was fuggecfed by the 'rince
of Salerno, 1Henry diid ne(t e-hofe that its success houl!
entirely depend upon liis being able to fulfil the promiles
which he had made. He applied for aid to Solyman,
whom he courted, ;i'ier his ather's example, as his moll
vi!Rorous auxilial againt the Emperor, and solicited
lim to second his opcralions by lending a powerful fleet
into the Mediterranean. It was not difficult to obtain
w hat he requeled of the ,cultan, who, at this time, was
highly incensed againfi the houte of Aufiria, on accouni
tf thcir prcccdiL-. in Hungary. He ordered an hundred
an(d fit\v hips to be eqiuipped, that they might ail to-
wards the coast of Naiplts, at whatever time Ilenry
flould name, and might co-operate with the French
troops in their attemlps upon that kingdom. The corm-
mand of this fleet was given to the corsair Dragit, an
ofFcr trained up under Barbarossa, and carcc inf(lcor
to his mafler in courag, in talents, or in good fortune.
lie appeared on he calt of Calabria at the time which
had been agreed on, landed at fevcral places, plundered

[v] Pti Mernorir (it Siena, voll. ii p. 130, 61. ThuTn. ?7;, 377'
&L. Piuta. Hillt. Venet. 67. Mcin. dc. Ribier. 414, &c.

and

and burnt several villages; and at lall casting anchor in Book XI.
the bay of Naples, filled that city with confernation. '-
But as the French fleet, detained by some accident, '5s"
which the contemporary historians have not explained,
did not join the Turks according to concert, they, after
waiting twenty day, without hearilg any thing of it,
lt fai for Constantinople, and thus delivered the vice-
roy cf Naples frorn the terror of an ivafion, which he
uas in no condition to have resiftcd [a].

As the French had never given lo evere a check to ii;s.

the Emperor in any former campaign, they expieffed The Lmrie-
immoderate joy at the luccefs of their arms. Charles a~° 1''l"
himielf, accullomed to a long clrits o piofperity, felt xl th h
tht blow most sensibly, and retired from Metz. into the lu e o his
Low-Countries, much dejetctd with the cruel reverle of afl"is.
fortune which affeced him in his declining age, when
the violence of the gout had incicaled to luch a pitch,
as entirely broke the vigour of his conltitution, and ren-
dered him peevish, difficult of accels, and often incapa-
ble of applying to business. But whenever he enjoyed
any interval of ease, all hs thoughts were bent upon re-
\enge; and he deliberated, with the urtmoll Ijlcitude,
concerning the most proper means of annoying Fiance,
and of effacing the t(ain which had oblcured the repu-
tation and glory of his arms. All the chemes concurn-
ing Germany, which had engrossed him so lch;, being
disconcerted by the peace of P'aftau, the affairs of tihe
Empire became only secondary objects of att ention; and
eriity to France was the prcd(minant p;aiion which
chiefly occupied his mind.

T'HE turbulent ambition of Albert of randenburgh The vine!nt

excited violent commotions, u hilh diflubed the Empire p';".'.dirg
during this year. That P'ince's trool s ha.ving hbared j,i,,en-
in the calamities of the siege of Mel/., we;c greatly re- burlgh.
duced in number. But the l'mpcrtr, ptrilipted by gra-
titude for his dillinguihed Ileivices on that occasion, cr
perhaps with a ecrct view of ft,mcntinri divifiois among
the Princes of the Empire, having paid up all the money
due to him, he was enabled, by that um, to hire o mai,v
(if the lildiers, diifmiffed from the imnpeli:i: ;:rmy, that lie
was loon at the head t a bod) of' menl aI numerous :ls
tver. The bilopls of Bamberg and \Vurt/,buir haiti
f(licited the Imperial canber to ainnul, by its authorii,

[;l] Tltuan. 35, o,. M1rm. de Rblert-. i: 4,. Gianenc.

the

Book XI. the iniquitous conditions which Albert had compelled
--v.--~ them to sign, that court unanimously finding all their en-

'553. gagements with him to be void in their own nature, be-

cause they had been extorted by force, enjoined Albert
to renounce all claim to the performance of them; and
exhorted all the Princes of the Empire, if he hould per-
fit in Inch an unjuit demand, to take arms againfl him,
as a diflurber of the publick tranquillity. To this deci-
sion, Albert oppoled the confirmation of his tranlacfions
with the two prelates, which the Emperor had granted
him as the reward of his having joined the Imperial ar-
my at Metz; and in order to intimidate his antagonists,
and to convince them of his resolution not to relinquish
his pretensions, he put his troops in motion, that he
might secure the territory in question. Various endea-
vours were employed, and many expedients proposed, in
order to prevent the kindling a new war in Germany.
But the fame warmth of temper which rendered Albert
turbulent and enterpriLing, inlpiring him with the most
sanguine hopes of luccefs, even in his wildest undertak-
ings, lie dildainfully rejeted all reasonable overtures of
accommodation.

He i; con- UPON this, the Imperial chamber issued its decree
the Imery against him, and required the Elector of Saxony, toge-
al chamber ther with several other Princes mentioned by name, to

take arms in order to carry it into execution. Maurice
and thole af)ciated with him were not unwilling to un-
dertake this fervicc. They were extremely solicitous to
maintain publick order, by supporting the authority of
the Imperial chamber, and saw the neceflity of giving a
timely check to the usurpations of an ambitious Prince
who had no principle of action but regard to his own in-
terest, and no motive to dirc& him but the impulle of
ungovernable pallions. They had good reason to fufpcd
that the Emperor encouraged Albert in his extravagant
;rnd irregular proceedings, and secretly afforded him as-
fiflalncc, that, by raising him up to rival Maurice in
power, he might, in any future broil, make ule of his
aliflance to countebalance and control the authority
whlili the otler hd acquired in the Empire [b].

[I1, Siil. c85. Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 4 . Arnoldi. vita Maurit. p.
Mc;,cln. ii. 142.

TH ESE

THESE considerations united the mofi powerful Prin- Book Xt.
ces in Germany in a league against Albert, of which '-
Maurice was declared generalissimo. This formidable A',53'

h chang inAlberApri .

confederacy, however, wrought no change in Albert's A co.fede.
fcntiments; but as he knew that he could not resist so racy frmed
many Princes, if he should allow them time to assemble aa'iuhhim
their forces, he endeavoured, by his aivity, to deprive Maurice
them of all the advantage which they might deiive from vwa hd.
their united power and numbers; and, for that reason,
marched direcly againt Maurice, the enemy whom he
dreaded most. It was happy for the allies, that the
condut of their affairs was committed to a Prince of such
abilities. He, by his authority and example, had in-
spired them with vigour, and having carried on their
preparations with a degree of rapidity, of which confe-
derate bodies are seldom capable, he was in condition to
face Albert before he could make any considerable pro-
grefs.

THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in number, He attack.

each consisting of twenty-four thousand men, met at Altcit,
Sieverhauien in the dutchy of Lunenburgh; and the
violent animosity against each other, which poifefted the
two leaders, did not susser them to continue long inac-
tive. The troops inflamed with the fame holli:e rage, July 9.
marched fiercely to the combat; they fought with the
greatest obstinacy; and as both generals were capable of
availing themselves of every favourable occurrence, the
battle remained long doubtful, each gaining ground up-
on the other alternately. At last viaory declared for an dr'e
Maurice, who was superior in cavalry, and Albert's ar- hi at"'*
my fled in confusion, leaving four thousand dead in the
field, and their camp, baggage and artillery, in the hands
ofthe conquerors. The allies bought their viAtoy dear,
their best troops suffercd greatly, two sons of the Duke
of Brunswick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many other
persons of dillin&ion, were among the number of the
slain [c]. But all these were soon forgotten, for Maurice but i' t..'",
himself, as he led up to a second charge a body of horle i'the 1.'i-
which had been broken, received a wound with a piflol
bullet in the belly, of which he died two days after the

[c] Hiftor;i rugni infelicis inter Mairit. Allrrt. Thm. Wintze-

ro aqore apud Srd. ii. 559. Slcid. 8t3. Rutccll piltreu ux Printrb,
154. Arntlli vita Maurit. 1145.

battle,

Book XI. battle, in the thirty-fecond year of his age, and in the
' --v ifixth after his attaining the cletoral dignity.
His 5a3' c- OrI all the pcrlonages who have appeared inthe history
Itr. of this ativc age, when great occurrences, and luddcn

revolutions, calitd forth extraordinary talents to view,
arid afforded thm full opportunity to display themlelvcs,
Maurice ma\ justly be confidered as the molt remarkable.
11 his exoll)itant ambition, his protound dissimulation,
and ],is uinwarrantable ulurpation of his kinsman's honours
and tioiniri n exclude him fiom being praised as a vir-
tuous man; his prudence in concerting his measures, his
vigour in executing them, and the uniform fuccels with
which they wre attended, entitled him to the appella-
ticn of a great Prince. At an age, when impetuosity of
lpi, t commcnly predominates over political wisdom,
w hcn the higl.cft efforts even of a genius of the first or-
der is to fix on a bold scheme, and to execute it with
r( nmptiludc and courage, he frmed and conduced an
intricate plan of policy, which deceived the molt artful
Tionarch in L.uope. At the very juncure when the
Elmperor had attained anioft unlimited despotism, Mau-
rice, with power icemingly inadequate to such an un-
dertaking, compelled him to relinquish all his usurpations,
ard itf:ibliiled, not only the religious, but civil, liber-
ties of Germany on such foundations, as have hitherto
remained unlhaken. Although at one period of his life,
his conduct excited the jealousy of the Protestants, and
at another diew on him the reclntment of the Roman
Cathiolickl, such was his maftcrly address, that he was
tlhe onl) i'ince of the age, who in any degree possesed
the confidence of both, and whom both lamented as the
molt able as well as faithful guardian of the constitution
ard laws of his country.

'ITHE conUIlci.eation which Maurice's death occasioned

among hiis troops, prevented them from making the pro-
it' improvement f the vicory which they had gained.

Aihrrit -- Albert, wlhle alive couliage, and profuse liberality,
t'i'c lie rendered in the darling of ucl military adventurers as

e. cre little lfliciltous ab;ut the jullice ot his cause, oIon
re-assembled his broken forces, and made freflh levie,

i h licli fucefs, that he was quicklv at the head t

si'teen thouland men, and renewed his depredations wi'l
addiional fury. But Hlenry of Bi lnfwick, having taken
S't. 1. the cormmand of the allied troops, defeated him in a Ic-

cond battle, fcalce lecs bloody than the fomer. IEven

tl:ch

then his courage did not fink, nor were his resources ex- Book XI.
ha;ufted. He made everal effoits, and ome of them "v''
very vigorous, to retrieve his affairs: but, being laid un- Ht:e
der the ban of the Empire by the Imperial chamber; out of C;:-
being driven by degrees ur of all his hereditary territo- many.
rics, as well a thole which he had ulurped; being 'or-
laken by many of his cfficers, and overpowered b the
r:umbcr of his tncmies, he fled for refuge into France.
Attli having been, for a conif:derable time, the terrcr
and scourge t Germany, he lingeied out a few years in
;n indigent and dependant (late of exile, the mi!eries of
v.which his reftiels and arrogant pi-it endured .ith the
moit indignant impatience. UL'pn his death w::hout J.n. .
ifTue, his territories, which hatd been seized by the 'l '
Princes who took arms a;nlt lim, were restored, by a
decree of the Empero:, o his collatcial heirs of the
houle of Brandenburli J.

MAURICE, havii: left only one daughter, who was Mauricc's

afterwards married to Willram, lrince of Orange, by tlthr Au-
whem she had a on, who bore his grandfather's nanm, eUl . .himin
and inherited the great talents for iich he was confpi-thrlcaoral
cuous, a violent dilpute aroie eo::cc;'iir g the lucceffin d'19i;..
to his honour, and territories. Jchn Frederick, the de-
graded Eleor, claimed the cledtoial dignitv, and that
part of his patrimonial ellate, of wliil he had been vio-
lently firipped after the Smalkaldic war. Auitufits, Mau-
:,(e's only brother, pleaded his right not only to the
hereditary possessions of their family, but to the eleut.ral
dignity and to the trritorie= which l:iurice had acquired.
As Augultus was a Prince of confidtrahle abilitiec, a.
well as of great candour and gentlenlef ot marnners, the
trates of Saxonv, torglcting the merits and ftuferlinr.i of
tieir former maillr, dtclarcd twarmly in his tavoiur. 11i;
'r(tcntions were poweitullv lip! ricd by the King of
Denmark whole daurghter he Ihad mar it d, and / .tloufy
tfpoufed by the King of tie lonmasi., (lit (;f rgtrad to
Mlaurice's mem rv. 'lhe fit rit dcd 'li :'tr, tl.,(iti le-
(ietly favoured b) Ili anciemn tnlin. tlhe Fc.l C, wa;
at las obliged ol relin(llh li. tlaii, upn obta irt.ir' L
fin.all addition to tlhe territurics wich 1had ben allot;id
to him, togctlher with a liiulartic., I rcurin lto 1.1 ita-
'nily the eventual licceftl'un, ll','I a l:I!hut ( i nm;l( I, ;Is
in tile Albertine lrne. 'hali u: lulltliimte L't mI r.ar. -

[dt Sleid. c)L, 59.1., r9. t. Corp hil.( crm. ";;.
\ o. 11. , mll.u

Book Xl. mous Prince died next year, soon after ratifying this
"'-'treaty of agleemcnt; and the eleLoral dignity is still

1563 pofleffed by the delcendarts of Augustus [e].

Hofilities DuRING thele tranlaaaions in Germany, war was
in the Low- carried on in the Low-Countiies with corifiderablevigour.

C . The Empeior, impatient to efface the tfain which his
ignominious repulle at Metz left upon his military repu-
tation, had an army early in the field, and laid siege to
Tcrouanc. Though the town was of such importance
that Franci ued to call it one of the two pillows on
which a King of France might sleep with security, the
fortifications were in disrepair: Henry, trufling to what
had happened at Metz, thought nothing more was e-
ceflary to render all the efforts of the enemy abortive,
than to reinflrce the garrison with a considerable number
of the young nobility. But d'Effe, a veteran officer who
commanded them, being killed, and the Imperialists push-
lune ,. ing the ficge with great vigour and perseverance, the place

was taken by alliult. That it might not fall again into
the hands of the French, Charles ordered not only the
ft.itificaticns but the town to be rated, and the inhabi-
tants to be dispersed in the adjacent cities. Elated with
thio luccels, the Impcrialifis immediately invested Hefdin,
uhich, though deftnded with great bravery, was like-

ilcfe taken by affau!t, and lfch of the garrison as escaped

the flord were made prifoncrs. The Emperor intrulted
the con;duct ot this siege to Enanuel Philibert of Savoy
Prince of Picdmcrit, ho, on that occasion, gave the
sil(t display of his great talents for military command,
u-hich sion entitled him to be ranked among the firit
generals of that age, ard facilitated his re-efiablifhment
in hi hreditary dominions, the greater part of which
having been over-run by Francis in his expeditions into
Italy, wre still cccupid by Henry [f].

The pro- T'i- .. loss of these towns, together with so many per-
t:n f the sons of diflintion, either killed or taken by the enemy,

r i was no inconsiderable calamity to France, and Henry

'il;.t lic frlt it cry lenfibly ; but he was fill more mortified at
tlr ch ^the l:nm.rl.or's liaing afifmed his wonted lperiority
Kitn. in tiht field lo soon after the blow at Metz., which the

Frenclh Iad irprelrnted as fatal to his power. He was

fr * ,;,. is7. Tun. r9g. Struv. Corp. hist. Qerm.
[i, j' .u.iz. 41i Hlari A.ialct, Brabant, 669.

athamed,

alhamed, too, of his own remiffneis and exceflive fe- Book Xf.
curity at the opening of the campaign; and, inorder to' ""
repair that error, he assembled a numeroub army, and L'3
led it into the Low-Countries.

ROUZED at the approach of filch a formidable ene-

my, Charles left Brulls, whrie lie had been hut up
so c!otlly during c(ven monthb, that it came to be be-
lieved in ma;;y parts t Europe thai lie was dead; and
though he wa, fIo m.ici. Cebitaicd by the cut tiat lie
could carce bear the r: ,; o a hter, he hastened to
join his army. '1 he eyes of ali Europe were turned
with expectation towards the!e mighry and exaiperated
rivals, between whom decilive bait'e was now thcucht
unavoidable. But Carles havirg p:uden;lv declined to
hazard a general engagemert, and the violence of tl,e
autumnal rains rendering it impofiible for the French to
undertake any ficge, they retired ithout having per-
formed any thing iuitable to the gieat preparations which
they had made [r].

THE Imperial arms did not make the fame progrefsThe Impe.

in Italy. ile narrownels of te ELnperol's finanicesrialts u.;-
feldum allowed hini o ad with vigour in two different fucILifuli
places at the fame time; and having exerted himsel to
the utmost in order to make a great efl;,rt in the Low-
Countries, his operations on the other ide of the Alps
were proportionally feeble. The viceroy of Napl,
in conjuntion with Cofiro di Medici, who as greatly
alarmed at the introdution of French troops into iena,
endeavoured to become malier of that citv. But instead
of reducing the Sienefe, the Impelialilis were obliged to
retire abruptly in order to defend their own countr),
upon the appearance of the Turkifil fleet, which thrieat-
ned the coaf of Naples; and the French not olv eta-
blithed themlelves more firmly in Tulcany, but, by
the afltance of the Tuiks, conquered a great part of
the ifi,i:d of Corsica, subjet at that tinc, to the Ge-
noefe [h].

THE affairs of tire liuote of x llria delintd no nle.til n

in HunraDr during I h;e couirfL ol lis year. A, the tr'ccpa H":' y'
which Feldinand kept i 'Transylvania received tiheir
pay very irnteularly, the lived iluioll at di:lcrti(iu upon
the inhaliitants; ad their int(.lcrn, ;ind rapaicir'lt.
gceatly diigufed all ranks of minl, and alienated them

[E2 HarIur 671. Tbugn. 414. [L] Tuan. 47.

Z f.lLl

Book X.from their new sovereign, who, inflead of proteaing,
l- ""plundercd hi. fubjets. Their indignation at this, added

'53. to their desire of revenging Martinuzzi's death, wrought

so much upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of injury,
and upon a fierce people, prone to change, that they were
ripe for a revolt. At that very jun&ure, their late
Quieen Iiabella, together with her son, appeared in
Traniylvania. Her ambitious mind could not bear the
solitude ad inactivity of a private life, and repenting
quickly ot the cession which he had made of the crown,
in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, she
left the place of her retreat, hoping that the diffatisfa&ion
of the Hungarians with the Auttrian government, would
prompt them to recognize once more her son's right to
the crown. Some noblemen of great eminence declared
immediately in his favour. The Bashaw of Belgrade,
by Solyman's order, espoused his cause in opposition to
Ferdinand; the Spanish and German soldiers, intlead of
advancing against the enemy, mutinied for want of pay,

Ferdinand declaring that they would march back to Vienna; o
obligtd to that Caftaldo, their general, was obliged to abandon
ahandona Trinf)lv Transylvania to Isabella and the Turks, and to place him-
'Di. self at the head of the mutineers, that by his authority he

might refirain them from plundering the Austrian terri-
tories, through which they pafled [i].

Silyman's FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entirely to-
d,~efck wards the affairs of Germany, and his treasures so much

cxhaufted by his late efforts in Hungary, that he made
no attempt to recover this valuable province, although a
favourable opportunity for that purpose presented itlelf,
as Solyman was then engaged in a war with Persia, and
involved betides in domeflick calamities which engrossed
and difiurbed his mind. Solyman, though diflinguihed,
bv many accomplishments, from the other Ottoman
lirinces, had all the paflions peculiar to that violent and
haughty race. lHe was jealous of his authority, sudden
and furious in his anger, and lufceptible of all that rage ot
love, which reigns in the East, and often produces the

Tl.tr ;- wilded and most tragical effects. His favourite miirefs
cal hiPoly .vac a Circassian slave, of exquisite beauty, who bore him

i, a eIn called Mulapha, whom, both on account of his

bilitli-rigilt and merit, he deflined to be the heir of his

[i] Thiau . 43.

crown.

crown. Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, loon supplanted Book Xl.
the Circafian, and gained the Sultan's heart. Having v
the addrels to retain the conquest which he had made, '553
she kept poffeflion of his love without any rival for many
years, during which he brought him several sons and one
daughter. All the happiness, however, which he de-
rived from the unbounded sway that the had acquired over
a monarch, whom one half of the world revered or dread-
ed, was embittered by perpetual reflections on Mufta-
pha's accession to the throne, and the certain de:trh of her
ions, who he foresaw would be immediately facriiced,
according to the barbarous jealousy of Turkilh policy, to
the safety of the new Emperor. By del!!;;g ci.'inually
rn this melancholy idea, she came gradually to view
Muftapha as the enemy of her children, and to hate him
with more than a step-mother's ill-wil. This prompted
her to wish his deftrution, in order to secure for one of
her own ons the throne which was destined for him.
Nor did she want either ambition to attempt such a high
enterprize, or the arts requisite for carrying it into execu-
tion. Having prevailed on the Sultan to give her only
daughter in marriage to Ruflan the Grand Vifier, hc
disclosed her scheme to that crafty minister, who, per-
ceiving that it was his own interest to co-operate with
her, readily promised his afliftance towards aggrandizing
that branch of the royal line, to which he was now ;o
nearly allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her measures with

this able confident, he began to asset a wonderful -zeal
for the Mahometan religion, to which Solyman was fu-
perftitioufly attached, and proposed to found and ndow
a royal Mosque, a work of great expence, ut demind
by the Turks meritorious in the highell degree. IThe
Mufti whom (he consulted approved much of her pious
intention; but, having been gained and inflruded bv
Ruftan, told her that he being a slave could derive no
benefit herself from that holy deed, for all the merit of
it wvould accrue to Solyman, the matier whole propetrv
she was. Upon this he leeined to he overwhelmed iiii
lorrow, and to fink into the deepelt melancholy, as iflhce
had been difgufled with life and all its enjoyments. Sol -
man, who was absent with the alnmy, being informed of
this dejeaion of mind, and of the cause f om wlich it
proceeded, discovered all the olicitudc of lover to ce-

Z 3 move

,,, Xt. mve it, and h a - -i inz under his hand declared her
C'-r" tree woman. R x;iiann ra. nT gained this point, pro-
'553 cceded to build tie >, ..:
i e, and re-aiTumed her usual

chearfii!ncs and z:lety o (f Iirit. But when Solyman, on
his return to Ccr.ft.tntin.pic, si:nt an euruch, according
to the cuitoin ot te lir tlo, to bring her to partake of
his bed, ihe, if ..p; aly .:;i, deep Icegret, but in the
rmof pernitorv n: n!fl.' c'cc^td to follow the eunuch,
declar:.=t la; t ?a' !;,d bee,- , hennir to her while a
flaxc, v eC are a crimc, a tile was now a tree woman,
ar.d tnat siTe .oiiontd ot invol:e ei''cr :hc Sultan or hel-
irii ir; the eiilit t.at nu';t ie cntiacied by luch an optn
violation (-1 the law'. of their prophet. Solviman, whole
passion thl c(itrrcultv, as well a the affeiAed delicacy
which ave lie to it, heightened and inflamed, had re-
course Immediately to the Mufti for his direacion. He
replied, agreeably to the Koran, that Roxalana's fcru-
pies werc well tfoindd, but added, artfully, in words
which Rufan had taught him to uel, that it was in the
Sultan's power to remove these difficulties, by espousing
her as hi.; lawful wife. I'The amorous monarch closed ea-
gerly with the proposal, and solemnly married her ac-
cording to the form (f the Mahometan ritual; though,
by doing so, he dilregarded a maxim of policy which the
pride of the Ottoman blood had taught all the Sultans
since Ia}aina7t I. to conifider as inviolable. From his
time, none (f tile T'Irkfl mor.archs had married, bc-
cause, when h was vanquilhed and taken prisoner b,
T'amerl:ane, hi'i wife had Icen abed lwith ba.barous inlo-
lence bv the T'arar-. 'I'hat ino imilar calamitv might
fitijea the Ottonman family to the like dilgrace, he Sul-
tans admittd none to their bed hut fliais, whose dif-
honoiii could not bring a such slain upon their hutic.

BVT the moie uncommon the flep was, the more it

convinced Roxalana ot hc unbounded influence which fhc
had acquiied over he Sultan's heart; and emboldened
her to proicu'e, with g:cater hope of Iuccefs, the fchemc
that iic had f'-rmcd in ordcl to de:' ov Mullapha. This
yotung Prince having been intrulted y his father, accor-
ding to the pra-tice ofthe Sultans in that age, with the
governmcnt of everal different provinces, was at that
time invefled with ihe adminillration in Diarbequir, the
ancienr Mcfopotnmia, which So!yman had wreficd from
the Persians, and added to his empire. In all these dif-

fercnt

ferent commands, Muftapha had conducted himfllf with Book Xt.
lfch cautious prudence as could give no offence to his fa- "
ther, though, at the fame time, he governed \with 1o 553
much moderation as well as justice, and difplaved iich
ialour and gcnerofity as rendered him equally the favou-
rite of the people and the darling of the soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any olly or vice to his

Iharge, that could impair the high opinion which his fa-
ther entertained of him. Roxalana's malevolence was
more refined; she turned his virtues against him, and
made use of these as engines or h-i defiruotion. Shc of-
ten mentioned, in Solyman's reience, tlhe fplcndid qllali-
ties of his son; he celebrated his cclr.irl, his lib'rality,
his popular arts, with malicious ani cexaTgerattd praile.
As soon as she perceived that the Sultan heard thc!e en-
comiums, which were often rpvated, with ueafinel.,;
that lufpicion of his Ion began to mingle itself with his for-
mer esteem of him ; and that b. degrees he came to view
him with jealousy and fear, she introduced, as by acci-
dent, some difcourle concerning the rebellion of his father
Selim against Baja7.et his grandfather; the took notice of
the bravery of the veteran troops under lMutapha's com-
mand, and of the ncighbourlhood of Diarbequir to the ter-
ritories of the Pcrfian Sophi, Solyman's mnrtal enemy.
By there arts, whatever remained of paternal tendern'ls
was entirely extinguished, and such passions were kindled
in his breast, as g.ive all Roxalana's malignant iiggeftionP
tie colour not only of probability but truth. A deep-
rooted hatred iticceeded, now, to his suspicions and fti.
cff Miftapha. lie appointed spies to ob:(rve and rciri
all his words and aions; he watched and flood on is
'iiard against him as his mofR dar.cronus cnremn.

H A V\ N c, thus alienated thc Sultan's heart from \ Mu;-
^n'ha, Roxalana ventured upon another sic:,, atnl n-
treated Solyman to allow her own sons ie litiertr ot :I--
pearing at court, hcninr that, bI. gaining acccis to their
tather, they mi!i, b lcir fgld ;u:.li'es caci

,'!"!:!ui

deportment, infiniatc them elvc-. into thnt nul : i;i lis
affelions, which Muflapha lhd ti'Lllv a. '.!: .i:.!,
though what she demanded was cltli:arb t il I : .il, ti
of tc Ottoman family inthat n'e, the c'i-, ni .: I, !i
sranted her requc . To all hc lce t inile l i ( , ;,
added an artifice f11ll more lultic , v. h; i i, on i.l. dT lit:
Sultan's dclpfion, and height I:L li:. jaloul; ;. t'.

7 .i ~ lie

Book X. He wrote to the Balhaws of the provinces adjacent to
'--"--' IDiarbequir, inltructing them to fnd hin regular intelli-

'S3 gence of Muftaph.i's proce(dir.g in his government, a,d

to each of them 1ie taxe . ,rivate hint, flowing, in ap-
pearance, from hib ze.l ,or :1.eir inteleft, that nothing
w-ould be more acct.p;ablt to the Sultan, than to receive
favourable ccoiints o a ton, hom ie dcfined to fuflain
the glory of the Ottoman name. The Bashaws, ino-
rant ds his frauduicnt irCtenion, and eager to pay court
to their overeign at uch an eaiv p ice, filled their Iet-
tcrs with studied but fatal paneg ricks of Muftapha, re-
presenting him as a Pril,ce orthy to succeed fisch an il-
luftrious ather, and as endowed with talents which miilit
enable him to emu'ate, perhaps to equal his fame. Thele
letters were indutrioifily shewn to Solyman, at the sea-
sons when it was known that they would make the deepe
impression. Fverv expreflion in recommendation of his
son wounded him to the heart; he fufpceed his princi-
pal officers of being ready to favour the molt desperate at-
tempts of a Prince whom they were so fond to praifc; and
fancying that he law them already assaulting his throne
withrebellious arms, he determined, while it was yet in
his power, to anticip.:te the blow, and to fccure his onr
safety by lhis son's death.

FOR this purpose, though under pretence ofreneiilg

the war againll Persia, h ordelred Rula.n to march to-
wards Liarbequir at the head cf a nunmerousarmy, and to
rid him of a son whiofe life he deemed incorfiftent v.ith
his own fafetv. But that crafty miniftlr did not choolc
to be loaded with the odium of having executed this cruel
order. As Joon as he arrived in Sria he wrote to Soly-
man, that the danger was o imminent as called for his
immediate pelence; that the camp was full of Mufla-
pha's emiffaris; that many ot the soldiers were c-
rupted, that the affeEti(,ns of all leaned towards him; th.t
he difcovtred a negotiation which had been carried or.
with the Suphi of I'erfia, in older to marry Muflapli:
with one of Its daughters; that lie already felt both Iis
taltit ad hiN authority to he inadequate to the exigen-
cies of such an arduu, ( orjunnttre, that the Sultan alone
had agacitv to diicer l what resolution should be taken in
thof( clrcumfiance,, and power to carly that resolution
into execution.

T t Is

THIS charge of coirting the friendihip of the Sophi, Book Y'

Roxalana and Ruftan had reserved as the last and moit " '
envenomed of all their calumnies. It operated with the tss3
violence which they expeLted from Solyman's inveterate
abhorrence of the IPerfians, and threw him into the wildest
trantports of rage. He let out instantly for Syria, and
hastened thither with all the precipitation and impatience
of fear and revenge. As oon as he joined his army near
Aleppo, and had concerted measures with Ruflan, he
sent a Chiaus or messenger of the court to his son, equir-
ing him to repair immediately to his presence. Multa-
pha, tho' no stranger to his ficp-mothcr's machinations,
or to Ruftan's malice, or to his f.ther's violent temper,
yet relying on his innocence, and hoping to discredit the
accusations of his enemies by the promptitude of his obedi-
ence, followed the mefenger without delay to Aleppo.
The moment he arrived in the camp, he was introduced
into the Sultan'stent. As he entered it, he observed no-
thing that could give him any alarm; no additional crowd
of attendants, no body of armed guards, but the fame or-
der and silence which always reign in the Sultan's apart-
ments. In a few minutes, however, fevcral mutes ap-
peared, at the fight of whom Muflapha, knowing what
was his doom, cried with a loud voice, " Lo,mv death!"
and attempted to fly. The mutes rushed forward to
seize him, he refifed and firuggled, demanding with the
unmoai earncfinefs to fee the Sultan; and del)pair, toge-
ther with the hope of finding protceion from the ol-
diers, if he could escape out of the tent, animated him
with such extraordinary flrength, that, for ofme time, he
baffled all the efforts of the executioners. Solyman was
within hearing of his son's cries, as well as of the noile
which the ftruggleoccafioned. Impatient of this delay of
his revenge, and lruck with terror at the thought of MIul-
tapha's ecaping, he drew aside the curtain which divided
the tent, and thrufling in his head, darted a fierce look
towards the mutes, and with wild and threatening gcl-
tures seemed to chide them for sloth and timidity. At
fight of his father's furious and unrelenting countenance,
Muflapha's firength failed, and his courage forlook him;
the mutes fastened the bow-string about his neck, and in
a moment put an end to his life.

THE dead body was cxpofcd before the Sultan's t't.

The soldiers gathered round it, and contemplating in..
mournful obje& with astonishment, and sorrow, :im i..

d : . :,

Book XI. dignation, were ready, if a leader had not been wanting,

to have broke into the wildelt excesses of rage. After
's53. giving vent to the firfi exprcflions of their griet, they re-

tired each man to his tent, and hutting themselves up,
bewailed in secret the cruel fate of their favourite; nr
was there one of them who tailed food or even water
during the remainder of that day. Next morning, the
lame olitude and silence reigned in the camp; and Soly-
man, being afraid that fame dreadful florm would follow
this fullen calm, in oder to appease the enraged soldiers,
deprived Ruftan of the eals, ordered him to leave the
camp, and railtd Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved
in the army, to the dignity of Vifier. This change,
however, was made in concert with Rtuffan himself; that
crafty minitler uiggeiting it as the only expedient which
could save himself or his mailer. But within a few
months, when the resentment of the soldiers began to
subside, and the name of Muflapha to be forgotten,
Achmet was Rrangled by the Sultan's command, and Rul-
tan re-inflated in the office of Vifier. Together with his
former power, he reaffumed the plan for exterminating
the race of Muftapha which he had concerted with
Roxalana ; and, as they were afraid that an only son
whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to avenge his
death, they redoubled their adivity, and, by employing
the fame arts aainft him which they had praCtiled
against his father, thev inspired Solyman with the fame
fears, and prevailed on him to issue orders for putting to
death that young innocent Prince. These orders were
executed, with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch, who was
diipatched to Bursa, the place were the Prince resided;
and no rival was left to dispute the Ottoman throne with
the sons of Roxalana [k].

Clhrles SUCH a tragical scene, productive of so deep dillref.,
rnrr.a,' r seldom occurs hut in the hiforv of the great monarchies
tl enrw., his of the Eal, where the force of the climate works up and
fo:ind Ma- lublimes all lthe pafiioll of the human mind into the
'y lI'n-" greatest fury, and the ablolute power of sovereign~ ena-

bles them t ad with uncontrolled violence; but while
it pafle( in the court of Solyman and engaged his whole
attention, Charles was purluing with the utmoil ardour a

new

[k] Augeri Gifllnii Bufbequii ,egationi. Turcick Epinfllr iv. Pranc

1615 p. 37. Thuan. ib. i. p. 431. Mem. deRibicr. ii. 457. Mauro-
ceni hiRlor. Vcncts, lib. vii. p, 6y.

new scheme for aggrandizing his family. About this Book Xt.
time, Edward the sixth of England, after a hort reign, ' '
in which he difplaved such virtues as filled his fubjedts 55
with sanguine hopes of being happy under his govern-
ment, and made them bear with patience all that they
suffered from the weakness, the dissentions, and the am-
bition of the ministers who assumed the administration
during his minority, was seized with a lingering diftem-
per which threatened his life. The Emperor no sooner
received an account of this, than his ambition, always at-
tentive to seize every opportunity of acquiring an increase
of power or of territories to his son, suggested the thought
of adding England to his other kingdoms, by the mar-
riage of Philip with the Princess Mary, the heir of Ed-
ward's crown. Being apprehensive, however, that his
son, who was then in Spain, might decline a match with
a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven years
older than himself [I] ; Charles determined, notwith-
flanding his own age and infirmities, to make offer of
himself as a husband to his cousin.

BUT though Mary was so far advanced in years, and To which

destitute of every charm, either of person or of manners, hitip gives
that could win affecion, or command eteem, Philip, feat.
without hesitation, gave his consent to the match pro-
posed by his father, and was willing, according to the
usual maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his inclination to his
his ambition. In order to insure success, the Emperor,
even before Edward's death, began to take such steps as
as might facilitate it. Upon Edward's demise, Mary
mounted the throne of England; the pretensions of the
lady Jane Gray proving as unfortunate, as they were ill
founded [m]. Charles sent immediately a pompous em-
baffy to London, to congratulate Mary on her accession
to the throne, and to propose the alliance with his son.
The Queen, dazzled with the profpe& of marrying the The enti-
h:ir of tie greatcft Monarch in Europe; fond of uniting mn"'" of
more clofevl with her mother's family, to which she had ot thce .np-
been aiwavs warmly attached; and eager to secure the Ii:h th hrc-
powerful aid which the knew would be necessary towards grd to it.
carrying on her favourite scheme of re-eltablifhing the

[I1 Pallay. hiR. Concil. Trid. v. ii. c 13.. r. Io
m] Carte' bhilt. of England, ill. 7.

Romish

Book Xl. Rmifh religion in England, listened in the mofi favour.
K--~-- able manner to the propoial. Among her subje&s, it met

'553. with a very different reception. Philip, it was well

known, contended for all the tenets of the church of
Rome with a sanguinary eal, which exceeded the mea-
sure even of Spanlfh bigotry: this alarmed all the nume-
rous partizans of the Reformation. The Castilian haugh-
tiness and reterve were far from being acceptable to the
English, who, having several times seen their throne oc-
cupied by thole who were born subje&s, had become ac-
cultomed to an unceremonious and familiar intercourse
with their sovereigns. They could not think, without
the utroft uneasiness, of admitting a foreign Prince to
that influence in their councils, which the husband of
their Queen would naturally possess. They dreaded,
both from Philip's over-bearing temper, and from the
maxims of the Spanish monarchy which he had imbibed,
that he would intufe ideas into the Oueen's mind, dange-
rous to the liberties of the nation, and would introduce
foreign troops and money into the kingdom to assist her in
any attempt against them.

The lioure FULL of these apprehensions, the house of Commons,
of Corn- tholgh in that age extremely obsequious to the will of
rMons re-
monsrate their Monarchs, prelsnted a warm address againit the
a·ainit it. Spanish match; many pamphlets were published, repre-

senting the dangerous conlequences of the alliance with
Spain, and defciibing Philip's bigotry and arrogance in
the moll odious colours. But Mary, inflexible in all her
resolutions, paid no regard to the remonstrances of her
Commons, or to the sentiments of the people. The Em-
peror, having ecured, by various arts,. the ministers
whom she trufled moll, they approved warmly of the
match, and large lilms were remitted by him in order to
gain the reft of the council. Cardinal Pole, whom the
Pope, immediately upon Mary's accession, had dilpatch-
ed as his legate into England, in order to reconcile his na-
tive country to the fee of Rome, was detained by the
Emperor's command at Dillinghen, in Germany, left
by his presence he should thwart Philip's pretensions, and
employ his interest in favour of his kinsman Courtnav
Earl of evonfhirc, whom the Fnglifh ardently willhed
lheir f ).ttL.ign to hlooe for a hulband [n].

1, C jt i;i. a68,

MJEASN WHILEt

MEANWHILE, the negotiation was carried forward Book XI.

with the greatest rapidity, the Emperor agreeing, v\ith- -v--
out hesitation, to every article in favour of England which Thl 5mr
MIry's ministers either represented as necessary to soothe riage treaty
the people and reconcile them to the match, or that was ,ui"idcd.
fuggelled by their own fears and jealouly of a foreign
malter. The chief articles were, that Philip, during his 15c4.
marriage with the Queen, should bear the title o King Ji"' l'
of England, but the entire adninitration of' -.airs, as
well as the sole disposal of all revenues, offices, and b.nc-
sices hould remain with the Queen; that the heis us tlie
marriage should, together with the crown of Lil;,land,
inherit the dutchy of Burgundy and the Low-Countries;
that if Prince Charles, Philip's only on by a former mar-
riage, should die without issue, his children by the Queen,
whether male or female, should succeed to the crown of
Spain and all the Emperor's hereditary dominions; that
before the consummation of the marriage, Philip hould
swear solemnly that he would retain no domeftick who
was not afubje& of the Queen, and would bring no so-
reigners into the kingdom that might give umbrage to
the Engliff; that he would make no alteration in the con-
flitution or laws of England; that he would not carry the
Queen, or any of the children born of this marriage, out
of the kingdom; that if the Queen should die before
him without issue, he fliould leave the crown to the law-
ful heir, without claiming any right ot atminillation
whatever; that England hould not, in conltqucnce of
this marriage, be engaged in any ar fubtitiling between
France and Spain; and that the alliance bctutcn France
and England should remain in full force [o]

BUT this treaty, though both the Empt.ior and Mary's Dl>'In.tnt

ministers employed their utm(,ll addiels in framing it loI"da,'p.-
as to please the English, as far from quieting their fears tii Lnel;I.
and jealousies. They saw that words and prou.tes wcle
a feeble ecurity againlt the encroachments of an anibi-
tious Prince, who, as oon as he got olffetoTi oft tLe
power and advantages which the Queen's hulband mtifl
necessarily enjoy, could easily evade any of the articles
that either limited his authority, orobfirudcd his lciieme,,.
They were convinced that, the more favourable the con-
diions of the prcfent treaty were to England, the iouie

r[] Ryrmer' F4. vol. xv. 377, 393. blem. de Ribier. ii. 48.

Philip

Book XI. Philip would be tempted to violate them; and they
-v-^' dreaded that England, like Naples, Milan, and the other

5S54' countries annexed to the Spanish crown, would soon feel

the intolerable weight of its oppressive domination, and
be conitrained, as these had been, to waste its wealth
and vigour in wars wherein it had no interefl, and from
which it could derive no advantage. These sentiments
prevailed so generally, that every part of the kingdom
was filled with discontent at the match, and with indig-

Wyat's in- nation againit the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyat, a
rreion. gentleman of some note, and of good intentions towards

tlhe publick, took advantage of this, and routed the inha-
bitants of Kent to arms, in order to save their country
from a foreign yoke. Such numbers resorted in a hort
time to his flandard; he marched to London with such
rapidity; and the Queen was so utterly unprovided for de-
fence, that the aspet of affairs was extremely threaten-
ing, and if any nobleman of diftinaion had joined the
malcontents, or had Wvat possessed talents equal, in
any degree, to the boldness of his enterprize, the infur-
redion must have proved fatal to Mary's power. But
all his measures were concerted with so little prudence,
and executed with such irresolution, that many of his
followers forsook him; the reft were dispersed by an
handful of men; and he himself was taken prisoner, with-
out having made any effort worthy of the cause that he
had undertaken, or suitable to the ardour with which he
engaged in it. He suffered the punishment due to his
ralhnefs and rebellion. The Quecn's authority was con-
firmed and increased by her success in defeating this in-
considerate attempt to abridge it. The lady Jane Gray,
whose title the ambition of her relations had set up in op-
position to the Queen's, as, notwithstanding her youth
and innocence, brought to the scaffold. The lady Eli-
7.abeth, the Queen's filler, was observed with the moll
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was ratified
by the parliament.

The mar- PHII.IP landed in England, with a magnificent reti-
rat ce- nue, celebrated his nuptials with great solemnity, and

though he could not lay aside his natural leverity and
pride, or affumc gracious and popular manners, he en-
deavoured to conciliate the favour of the English nobility
vb his extraordinary liberality. In cafe that flhould fail
of acquiring him such influcr:c in the government of the

kingd)m,

kingdom, as he aimed at obtaining, the Emperor kept a Book XI.
body of twelve thousand men on the coast of Slanders, in '-v-
readiness to embark for England, and to upport him in ';5'
all his enterprizes.

EMBOLDENED by all these favourable circumflances, Mary's
Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating the Proteflant meaiures to

overturn the

religion out of her dominions, with the molt pfecipitanlt IroIc't.?It
zeal. The laws of Edward the sixth in favour' of the reigion in
Reformation were repealed; the Protestant clergy ejec- Eu;land.
ed; all the forms and rites of the Popith wrhip were
eI-eftablifhed; the nation was folenmly abiolved from the
guilt which it had contracted during the p'lirud of its
apoftacy, and was publickly reconci!ed-to' the church of
Rome, by cardinal Pole, who, immediately w-ter the
Queen's marriage, was permitted to continue l journey
to England, and to exercise his legantine iunctis with
the most ample power. Not satisfied with havirg-'ver-
turned the Protetant church, and having c-ftabli4hed her
own fyflem on its ruins, 1\lay infiftd that-all'her lub-
jeEts should conform to the fame mode of worship which
she preferred ; should profess their faith in the lame
creed which she had approved; and abjure every pradlice
or opinion that was deemed repugnant to either of them.
Powers, altogether unknown in the English conttitution,
were vetled in certain persons appointed to take cogni-
zance of heresy, and they proceeded to exercise them
with more than inquisitorial severity. The prolpe-t of
danger, however, did not intimidate the teachers of the
Protestant doctrines, who believed that they were con-
tending for truths of the utmost consequence to the hap-
piness of mankind. They boldly avowed their fecntimcnts,
and were condemned to that cruel death which the
church of Rome reserves for its enemies. This fRocking
punishment was inflicted with that barbarity which the
rancour of falle zeal alone can inspire. The iEnlifi, who
are inferior in humanity to. no people in Europe, and re-
markable for the mildness of their publick executions, be-
held, with aflonifhment and horror, perons who had
filled the most refpecable fiations in their church, and
who were venerable on account of their age, their piety
and their literature, condemned to enduie torments, to
uwlich even the mofi atrocious criminals were not lub-
jectcd.

'1HIs

Book XI. THIS extreme rigour did not accomplifli the end at
'-v- which Mary aimed. The patience and fortitude with

1Th54. which tiefe martyrs for the Reformation lubmitted to

ftac Is their itfferig, the heroick contempt of death expressed
which rIe by ptrlons ct every rank, and age, and sex, confirmed
had to iur- man, more in the Protestant faith, than the threats of

Io. their enraged perfccutors could frighten into aotacy.

Tl;e buii.cs of such as were intrufed with trying of he-
reticks grew upon them, and appeared to be as endless as
it uas cdic;us. The Queen's ablefl ministers became
fenfibc how impolitick as well as dangerous it was to irri-
tate the people, by the frequent fpedacle of public ex-
ecutions, which they detested both as unjust and cruel.
Even Philip was so thoroughly convinced of her having
run to an excels of rigour, that, on this occasion, he as-
fumed a part to which he was little accuflomed, becoming
an advocate for moderation and lenity [p].

The Fnglifh BUT, notwithflanding this attempt to ingratiate him-
i,'"'l ot self with the English, they discovered a conltant jealousy

'hil. and difiruft of all his intentions; and when some mem-

bers, who had been gained by the court, ventured to
move in the House as Commons that the nation ought to
affill the Emperor, the Queen's father-in-law, in his
war againfl France, the proposal was rejeaed with gene-
ral difatisfaaion. A motion which was made, that te
parliament should give its consent that Philip might be
publickly crowned as the Queen's husband, met with
such a cold reception, that it was inflantly withdrawn [].

The French MEANWHILE, the King of France had observed the
Kingalarm- progress of the Emperor's negotiation in England with
ed at the
hnitch b- much uneasiness. The great acceflion of territories as
tween Phi- well as reputation which his enemy would acquire by the
lipnalidM- marrinee cf his son with the Queen of such a powerful
ry' kirnelom was obvicus arid formidable. lHe easily fortfaw

that the English, ntwiths.anding all their fears and pre-
caru:ion, would be soon drawn in to take part in the quar-
rels on the continent, and he compelled to a in subser-
vincy to the E.mperor's ambitious schemes. For this
realcn, enry had given it in charge to his ambaffado

ip! (;odlwin' Anrls of Q_ Mary ap. Kcnnett. v. ii. p. 319. Burnelt'

s.h ns Rcfor. 11 it, 30<.
[q] Carti'i his. ot Enc1and, iii, 314.

at

at the court of London, to employ all his addrets in order Bk XI.
to defeat or retard the treaty of marriage; and as there "-- --
was not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in France, ' 54'
whom he could propose to the Queen as a husband, he
inftruded him to co-operate with luch of the English
as wished their sovereign to marry one of her own sub-
jeds. But the Queen's ardour and precipitation, in
closing with the firlt overtures in favour of Philip, having
rendered all his endeavours ineffetual, Henry was so far
from thinking it prudent to give any aid to the Eniilh
malecontents, though earneftls fblicited by Wvat and
their other leaders, who tempted him to take them uniJer
his protecion, by offers of great advantage to France,
that he commanded his ambassador to congratulate the
Queen in the warmest terms upon the fuppreflion of the
infurre.tion.

BUT, notwithltanding these external professions, heHi:Prepals-

dreaded so much the contequence of this alliance, which tions t)r ·
more than compensated for all that the Emperor had loft cmpaian.
in Germany, that he determined to carry on his military
operations both in the Low-Countries, and in Italy, with
extraordinary vigour, in order that he might compel
Charles toaccept of an equitable peace, before his daugh-
ter-in-law could surmount the aversion of her fdbjei-s to
a war on the continent, and prevail on them to altl the
Emperor either with money or troops. For this purpose,
he exerted himself to the utmost in order to have a nume-
rous army early assembled on the frontiers of the Nethei-
lands, and while one part of it laid waste the open coun-
try of Artois, the main body, under the Confable Mont-
morency, advanced toward the provinces of Liege and
Hainaut by the forest of Ardennes.

THI campaign was opened with the siege of Maricm-'the pro-

burgh, a town which the QCueen of Hungary, the gover-re O bit
nets of he Loc-Countries, had so, tified at great expence;
hut, being dtflitute of a sufficient garriton, it lurtendered
in fix days. Henry, elated with this success, put himfetf
at the head of his army, and invefling Bouvines, took it Jane 1s.
by affauh, alter a hort refiflance. W'lih equal facility
he became mafler of Dinant; and then, turning to the
left, bent his march towards the province of Aitui. The The Ymp-
e'ast fums which the Emperor had remitted into England, or little

L . . . . }rbie to oh-

had lb exhaufled his treafilry, as to render his prepara- Ito nO
tions, at this junclure, flower and more dilator than

Vo.. II. A a ual.

r.ook XI. uftlal. He had no body of troops to make head against
' " ~the French at their first entrance into his territories; and
'5"4. tho' he drew together all the forces in the country, in

the utmotl hurry, and gave the command of them to
Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, they were in no condition
to face an enemy to far superior in number. The Prince
of Savoy, however, by his aivity and good condu&,
made up for his want of troops. By watching all the
motions of the French at a distance, and by choofing his
owan poits with such skill as put it out of their power ei-
ther to form any siege of consequence or to attack him,
lie bligcd them to fall back for want of subsistence to.
wards their own frontiers, after having burnt all the open
towns, and having plundered the country through which
they marched with a cuelty and license more becoming
a body of light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.

The French BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his army, with-
i.c:!l Ren- out attempting onme conquest adequate to the vast pre-

parations, as well as sanguine hopes with which he had
opened the campaign, invested Renti, a place deemed in
that age of gleat importance, as, by its ituation on the
confines of Artois and Boulonnais, it covered the former
province, and proteed the parties which had made in-
curfions into the latter. The town, which was ftrongl)
.ortified and provided with a numerous garrison, made a
gallant defence; but being warmly pressed by a powerful
army, it must oon have yielded. The Emperor, who
at that time enjoyed a short interval of ease from the
eout, was so solicitous to save it, that, although he could
bear no other motion but that of a litter, he instantly put
himself at the head of his army, which having received
fveral reinforcements was now strong enough to approach
the enemy. The French were eager to decide by a bat-
tle, what should be the fate of Renti, and expeted it
from the Emperor's arrival in the camp; but Charles
avoided it with great industry, and as he had nothing in
\iew but to lave the town, he hoped to accomplish that,
without cxpofing himself to the conlequences of such a
dangerous and doubtful event.

An afion NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a dif-
brtw.trnl h pultc, about a poli which both armies endeavoured to
A^. I l ti/.c, brought on an engagement which proved almot

ginicial. The Duke of Guise, who commanded the lei

i .

wing of the French which tlood the brunt of the corn Book XI.
bat, displayed valour and conduct worthy of the defender ,-^ -'
of Metz; the Imperialists, after an obstinate struggle, '5S4'
were repulled; the French remained maters of the post
in dispute; and if the Conltable, either from his natural
caution and slowness, or from unwillingness to support a
rival whom he hated, had not delayed bringing up the
main body to econd the impreflion which Giftc had
made, the rout of the enemy must have been complete.
The Emperor, notwithstanding the loss which he had
fuflained, continued in the fame camp; and the French,
being straitened for provisions, and finding it impoflible to
carry on the siege in the face of an hoflile army, quitted
their intrenchments. They retired openly, courting the
enemy to approach, rather than hunning an engagement.

BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered themThe Impe-
to march off unmoleted. As soon as his troops entered ri'ft in-

V e Pi-

their own country, Henry threw garrisons into the fron- cardy.
tier towns, and dilmiffed the reft of the army. This en-
couraged the Imperialists to push forward with a confider-
able body of troops into Picardy, and by laying waste the
country with fire and sword, they endeavoured to re-
venge themselves for the ravages which the French had
committed in Hainault and Artois [m]. But as they were
not able to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more than the enemy had done by this cruel and
inglorious method of carrying on the war.

MEANWHILE, the arms of France were still more Affairs of

unsuccessful in Italy. The footing which the French had Itlly.
acquired in Siena occasioned much uneasiness to Cosmo di
Medici, the molt sagacious and enterprizing of all the
Italian Princes. He dreaded the neighbourhood of a
powerful people, to whom all who favoured the ancient
republican government in Florence would have recourse,
as to their natural protecor, against that absolute authori-
ty which the Emperorhad enabled him to usurp; he knew Como di
how odious he was to the French, on account of his at- fcheime
tachment to the Imperial party; and he foresaw that if ith regard
they were permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tufca-to Siena.
ry would oon feel the effects of their resentment. For
thele reasons, he wished with the utmost solicitude for

[mnl Tluan 460, &c. Harwi Ann. Drab, 64.

a 2

ihe

Book Xl. the epulfion of the French out of the Sienefe, before
'---' they had time to efiablifh themselves thoroughly in the

1554- country, or to receive such reinforcements from France

as would render it dangerous to attack them. As this,
huwever, was properly the Emperor's business, who was
calltd by his interest as well as honour to dislodge there
formidable intruders into the heart of his dominions, Cos-
mo labcured to throw the whole burden of the enterprize
en him; and on that account had given no assistance,
during the former campaign, but by advancing some small
lums of money towards payment of the Imperial troops.

- ,rcgi;- IUT as the defence of the Netherlands engrossed all
t .. wEh the Emperor's attention, and his remittances into Eng-

' land had drained his treasury, it was obvious that his ope-

rations in Italy would be extremely feeble; and Cosmo
plainly perceived that, if he himself did not take part
openly in the war, and ad with vigour, the French would
scarce meet any annoyance. As his situation rendered
this resolution necessary and unavoidable, his next care
was to execute it in such a manner, that he might derive
from it some other advantage, betide that of driving the
French out of his neighbourhood. With this view, he
dispatched an envoy to Charles, and offered to declare
war against France, and to reduce Siena at his own
charges, on condition that he should be repaid whatever
he (hould expend in the enterprize, and be permitted to
rctain all hi:. conquefis until his demands were fully ratif-
fled. Charles, to whom, at this jun&ure, the war
againf Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had
neither expedient nor resource that could enable him to
carry it on with proper vigour, closed gladly with this
overture; and Cosmo, well acquainted with the low
slate of the Imperial finances, flattered himself that the
"Imperor, finding it impoflible to reimburse him, would
fufier him tokeep quiet poffeflion of whatever places he
lh)ould conquer [n].

Intery into 1't il, of these hopes, he made great preparations for
war th1 w var, and as the French King had turned the frength of

his arms against the Netherlands, he did not despair of
assembling such a body of men, as would prove more than
a sufficient match for any force which he could bring in-

[n] Adriani ltloria de fuoi tempi, vol. i. p. 66t.

to

to the field in Italy. He endeavoured to obtain affiflance oik xi.
from the Pope, or at least to secure his remaining neu- '
tral, by giving one of his daughters to that ontiff's e-
phew. He attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini,
whose family had been long attached to the French par-
ty, from his ancient confederates, by bestowing on him
another of his daughters; and, what was of gceater con-
sequence than either of these, he engaged john lamnc'sc' e the
Medicino, Marquis of Marignano, to take the command h.'lmv to
of his army [°]. This officer, from a very low cldition Mi.;ino.
in life, had raised himself, through all the ranks of er-
vice, to high command, and had displayed talents and
acquired reputation in war, which entitled him to be
placed on a level with the greatest generals of that maiti-
al age. Having attained a station of eminence so dilpro-
portionate to his birth, he laboured with a fond solicitude
to conceal his original obscurity, by giving out that he
was descended of the family of Medici, to which honour
the casual resemblance of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such an ealy
rate, flattered his vanity in this point, acknowledged him
as a relation, and permitted him to aume the arms of
his family: Medicino, eager to fer-e the head of that
family, of which he now confidered himself as a branrh,
applied with wonderful 'Leal and aliduity to raile troops;
and as, during his long service, he had acquired g eat
credit with the leaders of thole mercenary bands, which
formed the strength of Italian armies, he engaged tile
mofi eminent of them to follow Cosmo's flandard.

To oppose this able general, apd the formidable arm), PeerStro:.

which he had assembled, the King of France made choice intrulted
of Peter Stro.zi, a Florentine nobleman, who had long e,.nin :,of
resided in France, as an exile, and who had rifin by his t FenLIt
merit to high reputation and command in the army. e ','y i"
was the son of Philip Stroz?.i, who, in the year one thou- I
land five hundred and thirty-feven, had concurred with
iuch ardour in the attempt to expel the family of Medici
out of Florence, and to re-efltali/h the ancient republi-
can formof government; and who had peifhed in the
undertaking. The 'on inherited the implacable averiion
to the Medici, as well as the fame enthulialtick zeal for

[o] Adrirni Iftorii vol. i. p. 663.

A a 3

the

Book XI. the liberty of Florcnce, which had animated his father,
---' whole death he was impatient to revenge. Henry flat-

'554. teled himself that his army would make rapid progrels

under a general, whole zeal to promote his interest was
rouled and Ieconded by iuch powerful passions; especially
as he had allotid !him, for the scene of a&ion, his na-
tive country, in which he had many powerful partlzans
ready to facilitate all his opciations.

The impr.u BUT how specious soever the motives might appear
aenceofthis which induced Henry to make this choice, it proved fa-

he. tal to the interests of France in Italy. Cosmo, as soon as

he heard that the mortal enemy of his family was appoint-
ed to take the command in ucany, concluded that the
King of France aimed at something more than the pro-
tection of the Sianefe, and saw the necessity of making
extraordinary efforts, not merely to reduce Siena, but to
save himself from defirumion [p]. At the fame time, the
Cardinal of Ferrara, who had the entire direcion of the
French affairs in Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formidable
rival in power, and, in order to prevent him from acquir-
ing any increase of authority from success, he was ex-
tremely remiss in supplying him either with money to pay
his troops, or with prt)vifions to support them. Strozzi
himself, blinded by his resentment against the Medici,
puflcd on his operations with the impetuosity of revenge,
rather than with the caution and prudence becoming a
great general.

The battle AT first, however, he attacked several towns in the
f Mlarci- territories of Florence, with such vigour, as obliged le-

dicino, in order to check his progrels, to withdraw the
greater part of his army from Siena, which he had invefl-
ed before Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained
the whole burden of military operations, the expence of
which mufl have exhaulted his revenues, neither the
viceroy of Naples nor governor of Milan were in condi-
ticn to afford him ::rv aid; and as the troops which Me-
dicinohad left in the camp before Siena could attempt
nothing .-gainfl i. during its abfcnce; it was Strozzi's bu-
finess to have pro'raQ cd the war, and to have transferred
the ftit of it into th: territories of Florence; but the
her.- of ruining the eneijy with one decisive blow, prc-

[p] Pecci Memoric di Sipnl, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.

cipitatcd

cipitated him into a general engagement not far from Book Xl.
Marciano. The armies were nearly equal in number ; -v
but a body of Italian cavalry, in which Strozzi placed Au'5g.
great confidence, having fled, either thro' the treachery In which
or cowardice of the officers who commanded it, without the French

are defeat-

making any resistance, the infantry remained expoled to ed.tt
the attacks of all Medicino's troops. Encouraged, how-
ever, by Strozzi's presence and example, who, after re-
ceiving a dangerous wound in endeavouring to rail, the
cavalry, placed himself at the head of the infantry, and
manifested an admirable presence of mind, as well as ex-
traordinary valour, they flood their ground with great
firmness, and repulsed such of the enemy as ventured to
approach them. But these gallant troops, being lur-
rounded at last on every fide, and torn in pieces by a bat-
tery of cannon which Medicino brought to bear upon
them, the Florentine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and
a general rout ensued. Strozzi, faint with the loss of
blood, and deeply affe&ed with the fatal consequences of
his own raihnels, found the utmost difficulty in making
his escape with a handful of men [q].

MEDICINO returned immediately to the siege of tMdi.ina

Siena with his vicorious troops, and as Strozzi could not, teiieges
after the utmost efforts of activity, collea as many men Siens,
as to form the appearance of a regular army, he had lei-
sure to carry on his approaches againfi the town without
molestation. But the Sienefe, inflead of finking into which i
despair upon this cruel disappointment of their only hope gallantly
of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves to the tdfenditieb
utmoRt extremity, with that undaunted fortitude, which andMunluc
the love of liberty alone can inspire. This generous re-
solution was warmly seconded by Monluc, who com-
manded the French garrison in the town. The aive
and enterprizing courage which he had displayed on many
occasions had procured him this command; and as he
had ambition which aspired at the highest military digni-
ties, without any pretensions to attain them but what lie
could derive from merit, he determined to distinguish his
defence of Siena by extraordinary efforts of valour .,nd
perseverance. For this purpose, he, with unwearied in-
duftry, repaired and strengthened the fortifications; he
trained the citizens to the use of arms, and accuitomed

[q] Pecci Memoric dellt gien, vol. iv. p. 57.

Aa4

them

Book XI. them to go thro' the fatigues and dangers of service in

common with the soldiers; and as the enemy were ex-
'554 tremely firid in guarding all the avenues to the city, he

hufbandd the provisions in the magazincs with the most
parfim' t ious acconcmy, and prevailed on the foldicrs, as
weli as i lie citi/.ens, to reffrit themlelves to a ery mo-
derate daily allowance for their fubfiflencc. Medicino,
though his army' was not numerous enough to florm the
town by open force, ventured twice to assault it by lur-
1'i /.l, 1ult 1 x a\ ric(ived each time m ith so much Ipirit,
:ind rcl-i uld \ i'h such lufs, a dlc(luraged him fi-om re-
pLating the attempt, and left hini no hopes of reducing
tihe to n but by famine.

i"''r;° \WIT. H this ic w, he fortified his own camp with great
, iTint a care, occupied all the pofls of Irength round the place,
tcckade. and having entirely cut off the efieged from any commu-

nication with the adj.cent country, he waited patiently
until neceffitv should cornpel them to open their gates.
But the cnihufiaflick 7.eal of the citizens for liberty,
made themn depifc the inconveniencies occasioned by
Icarcity of provisions, and even supported them long un-
der all the mircries of famine; MAonluc, by his example
and exhortations, taught his soldiers to vie with them
in patience and abstinence; and it was not untilthey had
withstood a siege of ten months, until they had eaten up
all the horses, dogs, and other animals in the place, and
ss5- were reduced almofi to their last morsel of bread, that

they propokcd a capitulation. Even then, they demanded
honourable terms; and as Cosmo, though no firanger to
the extremity of their condition, was afraid that dcfpair
might prompt them to venture upon some wild enterprize,
he immediately granted tem conditions more favourable
than they could have expeced.

April 221 TiiE capitulation was made in the Emperor's name,
obliged by who engaged to take the republick of Siena under the
famine to protcaion of tle Empire ; he promised to maintain the
l'itulaic. ancient liberties of the city, to allow the magifiratcs the

full exercile of their former authority, to secure the citi-
zens in the undiflurbed politflion of their privileges and
propert)'; he ranted an ample and unlimited pardon to
all who had born arms againfl him; he refervej ., laim-
seif the right of placing a garrilon in the town, but en-
gaged not to rebuild the citadel without the consent of the
citizens. Mlonluc and his French garrilsn were allowed
to march out with all the honours of war.

MFDIC I NO

MEDICINO observed the articles of capitulation, so Book XI.
far as depended on him with great exaEnefs. No vio- '- -'
lence or insult whatever was offered to the inhabitant.,
and the French garrison was received with all the refpea
due to its spirit and bravery. But many of the citizens Many ,f he
juipe&ing from the extraordinary facility with which they sitclc rc-
hud obtained such favourable conditions, that the Ermpe- Mntlt-Al-
ror, as well as Cosmo, would take the firfl opportunity clau,
of violating them, and disdaining to poffcis a precarious
liberty, which depended on the will of another, aban-
doned the place of their nativity, and accompanied the
French to Monte-Alcino, Porto Ercole, and other Imall
towns in the territory of the republic. They eflablifhed and ni-
in Mon. e-Alcino the fame model of government to which bli(h a free

goe .ncrnment

the, had been accufomed at Siena, and appointing ma- titerc.
giftrates with the fame titles and jurifdidion, solaced
thenmfelves with this image of their ancient liberty.

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate of their Hardihip, to

country were not imaginary, or their suspicion of the Em- which the
peror and Cosmo ill-founded; for no sooner had the Im- `i',zens
perial troops taken possession of the town, than Cosmo, fubjaeo.
without regarding the articlesof capitulation, not only dif-
placed the magistrates who were in office, and nominat-
ed new ones devoted to his interest, but commanded all
the citizens to deliver up their arms to perlons whom he
appointed to receive them. They submitted to the for-
mer from neceflity, though with all the relucance and
regret which men accustomed to liberty feel in obeying
the firAt commands of a master. They did not yield the
fame tame obedience to the latter; and many persons of
diftinaion, rather than degrade themselves, by surrender-
ing their arms, from the rank of freemen to the condition
of slaves, fled to their countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and
chose to endure all the hardfhipc, and encounter all the
dangers which they had reason to exped in that new fla-
lion, where they had fixed the feat of their republick.

CosMo, not reckoning himself secure while such Corm at-
humbers of implacable and desperate enemies were fettled tatk, thIfe

who had rl-

in his neighbourhood, and retained any degree of power, tirrd.
lilicited Medicino to attack them in their different places
of retreat, before they had time to recruit their firength
and spirits, after the many calamities which they had us-
sered. He prevailed on him, though his army was much
weakened by hard duty during the liege of Siena, to in-

vcll

Book XI. veRf Porto Ercole; and the fortifications being both flight
-rv--- and incompleat, the besieged were soon compelled to

'ss55 open their gates. An unexpeEted order which Medicino
Joe '3 received from the Emperor to detach the greater part of

his troops into Piedmont, prevented farther operations,
and permitted he Sienefe exiles to reside for some time
undiflurbed in Monte-Alcino. But their unhappy coun-
trymen who remained at Siena, were not yet at the end
of their ufferings; for the Emperor, instead of adhering
to the articles of capitulation, granted his son Philip the
investiture of that city and all its dependencies; and
Francis de Toledo, in the name of their new mafRcr,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military government,
treated them like a conquered people, and fubje&ed them
to the Spanish yoke, without paying any regard whatever
to their privileges or eablifihed forms of policy [r].

Operid-"S THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been lo feeble,
mnot. for some time, and its commanders so ina&ive that the

emperor, in order to give vigour to his operations in that
quarter, found it necessary not only to call off Medicino's
troops from Tuscany, while in the career of conquest,
but to employ in Piedmont a general of such reputation
and abilities, as might counterbalance the great military
talents of the Marechal Briffac, who was at the head ot
the French forces in that country.

Charles p- HE pitched on the duke of Alva for that purpose; but
pontthbe it was as much the effet of a court intrigue, as of his
v general- opinion of the Duke's merit, which led him to this choice.
ifimotberc. Alva had long attended Philip with the utmost assiduity,

and had endeavoured to work himself into his confidence
by all the insinuating arts of which his haughty and i-
flexible nature was capable. As he nearly resembled that
Prince in many features of his chara&er, he began to
gain much of his good-will. Ruy Gomez de Silva,
Philip's favourite, who dreaded the progress which this
formidable rival made in his matler's affecions, had the
address to prevail with the Emperor to name Alva to this
command. The duke, though sensible that he owed this
diftinifon to the malicious arts of an enemy, who had no
other aim than to remove him at a distance from court,

fr] Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 5X6, 37. Joan. Camerarii nnot. rer.

preciprnrum b nnn 1550o ad 1;6, p. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pecci
Mlnor.c dell Siena, iv. 164, &c.

was of such puncilious honour, that he would not decline Bojo. xl.
a command that appeared dangerous and difficult, but, -
at the fame time, so haughty, that he would not accept of '5SS-
it but on his own terms, insisting on being appointed the
Emperor's Vicar General in Italy, with the upreme mi-
litary command in all the Imperial and Spanilh territories
in that country. Charles granted all his demands; and
he took poffeflion of his new dignity with almost unlimited
authority.

His firfi operations, however, were neither proporti- Hi opert-

ions there

oned to his former reputation and the extensive powers inconfitder
with which he was invefied, nor did they come up to the able.
Emperor's expetations. Briflac had under his command
an army which, though inferior in number to the Impe-
rialifts, was composed of chosen troops, which having
grown old in service in that country, where every town
was fortified, and every castle capable of being defended,
were perfealy acquainted with the manner of carrying on
war there. By their valour, and his own good condut,
Briffac not only defeated all the attempts of the Imperia-
lifts, but added new conquests to the territories of which
he was formerly matter. Alva, after having boafled,
with his usual arrogance, that he would drive the French
out of Piedmont in a few weeks, was obliged to retire into
winter quarters, with the ignominy of being unable to
preserve entire that part of the country of which the Em-
peror had hitherto kept polTeffion [s].

As the operations of this campaign in Piedmont were

indecisive, those in the Netherlands were inconsiderable,
neither the Emperor nor King of France being able to
bring into the field an army firong enough to undertake
any enterptiic of moment. But what Charles wanted in A confprn-
force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold fSratagem, the cy to betrar
success of which would have been equal to that of the Me' to th
mofl vigorous campaign. During the siege of Metz, iift,.
Leonard Father Guardian of a convent of Franciscans in
that city had, by his attachment to the French interell,
insinuated himself far into the esteem and favour of the
duke of Guile. Being a man of an aaive and intriguing
spirit, he had been extremely useful both in animating the
inhabitants to fufrain with patience all the hardships of the
[Is Thua. lib. xv. 519. Cuicbenon Hist. de Savoyr, t.m. i. 6,o.

sie-e,

Book Xl. siege, and in procuring intelligence of the enemies designs
t-"'~and motions. The merit of these important services, to-

'555 gether with the warm recommendations of the Duke of

Guise, secured him such high confidence with Vielleville,
who was appointed governor of Metz, when Guile left
the town, that he was permitted to converse or correspond
with whatever persons he chole, and nothing that he did
created any fulpicion. This monk, from the levity natu-
ral to bold and projeting adventurers; or from resent-
mcnt against the French, who had not bestowed on him
such rewards as he thought due to his own rerit; or
tempted, by the unlimited confidence which was placed
in him, to imagine that he might carry on and accomplilh
any cheme with perfect security; formed a design of
betraying Metz. to the Imperialists.
The plan of HE communicated his intentions to the Queen-dowa.

ger of Hungary, who governed the Low-Countries in
name of her brother. She approving, without any fcru-
pie, an a of treachery, from which the Emperor might
derive such signal advantage, assisted the Father Guardian
in concerting the most proper plan for ensuring its success.
They agreed that the Father Guardian hould endeavour
to gain the monks of his convent to concur in promoting
the design; that he should introduce into the convent a
certain number of cholen soldiers, disguised in the habit
of friars; that when every thing was ripe for execution,
the governor of Thionville should march towards Met in
the night with a considerable body of troops, and attempt
to scale the ramparts; that while the garrison was em-
ployed in resisting the assailants, the monks should set fire
to the town in different places; that the soldiers who lay
concealed hould sally out of the convent, and attack
thole who defended the ramparts in the rear. Amidi
the universal terror and confusion, which events so un-
txpected would occasion, it was not doubted but that the
Impcrialifltsmight become malers of the town. As a re-
compenle for this service the Father Guardian flipulated
that he fiould be appointed bishop of Metz., and ample
rewards were promiled to such of his monks as hould be
molt aive in co-operating with him.
IIt pi'g6r,. THE Father Guardian accomplilhed what he had un-

dertaken to perform with great fecrccy and dispatch. By
his authority and arguments, as well asby the profpe of
wcalth or honours which he fct before his monks, he pre-

vaiked

vailed on all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He Book XI.
introduced into the convent, as many soldiers as were---v
thought sufficient, without being fufpeEted. The go- 'S5-
vernor of Thionville, apprised in due time of the design,
had assembled a proper number of troops for executing it;
and the moment approached, which probably would have
wrested from Henry the most important of all his con-
quefs.

BUT happily for France, on the very day that wasDifcovere.

fixed for striking the blow, Vielleville, an able and vigi-
lant officer, received information from a spy whom he
entertained at Thionville, that certain Franciscan friars
resorted frequently thither, and were admitted to many
private conferences with the governor, who was carrying
un preparations for ome military enterprize with great
dispatch, but with a most myflerious secrecy. This was
sufficient to awaken Vielleville's suspicions. Without
communicating thele to any person, he infantly visited
the convent of Franciscans; deteced the soldiers who
were concealed there; and forced them to dilcover as
much as they knew concerning the nature of the enter-
prile. The Father Guardian, who had gone to Thion-
ville that he might put the last hand to his machinations,
was seized at the gate as he returned; and he, in order
to save himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVILLE not atisfied with havingfeized the trai- A body or

tors, and having frustrated their schemes, was solicitous sperttdils
to take advantage of the discoveries which he had
made, so as to be revenged on the Imperialists. For
this purpose he marched out with the belf troops in his
garrison, and placing these in ambuh near the road, hy
which the Father Guardian had informed him that the
governor of Thionville would approach Metz, he fell
upon the Imperialifis with great fury, as they advanced
in perfec security, without suspecting any danger to
be near. Confounded at this sudden attack, by an ene-
my whom they expeted to furprize, they made little
refinance; and a great part of the troops employed in
this lervice, among which were many persons of dif-
tinion, was killed or taken prisoners. Before next
morning, Viclleville returned to Nletz in triumph.

No

Book Xt. No resolution was taken for some time concerning the

f-v-a-Jfate of the Father Guardian and his monks, the fra-

Thbe coDpi- mers and conducors of this dangerous conspiracy. Re-
ators pu- gard for the honour of body so numerous and refpecable
niscd. as the Franciscans, and unwillingness to afford a subjeC

of triumph to the enemies of the Romish church by
their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this delay. But
at length, the neceflity of inflicing exemplary punish-
ment upor them, in order to deter others from ventur-
ing to commit the fame crime, became so evident,
that orders were issued to proceed to their trial. Their
guilt was made apparent by the clearefd evidence; and
sentence of death was passed upon the Father Guardian
together with twenty monks. On the evening previous
to the day fixed for their execution, the jailor took them
out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto been
confined separately, and shut them all up in one great
room, that they might confess their fins one to another,
and join together in preparing for a future slate. But
as soon as they were left alone, inflead of employing
themselves in the religious exercises suitable to their
condition, they began to reproach the Father Guardian,
and four of the senior monks who had been moi aive
in educingthem, for their inordinate ambition, which
had brought such misery on them, and such disgrace
upon their order. From reproaches they proceeded to
curses and execrations, and at last, in a frenzy of rage
and despair, they fell upon them with such violence,
that they murdered the Father Guardian on the spot,
and so disabled the other four, that it became necessary
to carry them next morning in a cart, together with the
dead body of the Father Guardian, to the place of exe-
cution. Six of the youngef were pardoned, the reft
suffered the punishment which their crime merited [t].

A fruitless THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length of
inct'.te1ato the war, carried it on in this languishing manner, neither
itjsijh of them hewed any disposition to liften to overtures of
pHcac. peace. Cardinal Pole indeed laboured with all the zeal

becoming his piety and humanity, to re-eflablifh con-
cord among the Princes of Christendom. He had not
only persuaded his mifrefs, the Queen of England, to

[t] Thuan. lib. xv. p. 5s1. Belcar. Corn. Rcr. Cal. 866. Memoirrs

du Ma-ech. Vicllcville, par M. Charloix, tum. iii. p. 49, &c. . 347
FPr. 757.

enter

enter warmly into his sentiments and to offer her media- Book Xt.
tion to the contending powers, but had prevailed both'--v'
on the Emperor and King of France to fend their pleni- t55s-
potentiaries to a village between Gravelines and Ardres.
He himself, together with G ardiner bishop of Winchester,
repaired thither in order to preside as mediators in the
conferences, which were to be held for adjufling all the
points in difference. But though both the monarchs
committed this negotiation to those ministers, in whom
they placed the greatefi confidence, it was loon evident
that they came together with no sincere desire of ac-
commodation. Each proposed articles so extravagantMay is.
that they could have no hopes of their being accepted.
Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his zeal, address and
invention, in order to persuade them to relinquish such
extravagant demands, and to consent to the ubilitution
of more equal conditions, became sensible of the tolly of
wafting time, in attempting to reconcile those, whom
their obstinacy rendered irreconcilable, broke off the
conference, and returned into England [u].

DURING these tranfacions in other parts of Europe, Affirs of

Germany enjoyed such profound tranquillity, as affordedCaer"'my
the diet full leisure to deliberate, and to etablifh proper
regulations concerning a point of the greatest consequence
to the internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty of
Paffau in one thousand five hundred and fifty-two, it had
been referred to the next diet of the Empire to confirm
and perfet the plan of religious pacification, which was
there agreed upon. The terror and confusion with which
the violent commotions excited by Albert of Branden-
burgh had filled the Empire, as well as the constant at-
tention which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the affairs
of Hungary, had hitherto prevented the holding a diet,
though it had been summoned soon after the conclusion
of the treaty, to meet at Augsburg.

BUT as a diet was now necessary on many ac-Dt eheld at

counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this year had A^ugburg,
repaired to Augsburg. Though few of the Princes were nd',
present either in person or by their deputies, he openedfpcech in it
the assembly by a peech, in which he proposed the
termination of the dissentions, to which the new te-
nets and controversies with regard to religion had given
rife, not only as the first and great bufinels of the diet,
but as the point which both the Emperor and he had

[u) Thuln. lib. v. p. 513. M rm. de Ribicr, torn. ii. p. 613.

molt

Book X. moll at heart. He represented the innumerable obilacle;
v^J - which the Fniperor had to surmount before he couln

55 procure the convocation of a general council, as well al

the fatal accidents which had for some time retarded,
and had at last ufpended the consultations of that asem-
bly. He observed that experience had already taught
them how vain it was to expect any remedy for evils,
which demanded immediate redrels, from a general
council, the assembling of which would either be pre-
vented, or its deliberations be interrupted by the diften-
tions and hostilities of the Princes of Christendom;
That a national council in Germany, which, as some
imagined, might be called with greater cafe, and delibe-
rate with more perfect security, was an assembly of an
unprecedented nature, the jurildiaion of which was un-
certain in its extent, and the form of its proceedings un-
defined; That in his opinion there remained but one
method for composing their unhappy differences, which
though it had been often tried without success, might
vet prove effectual if it were attempted with a better
and more pacific spirit than had appeared on former oc-
calions, and that was to choose a few men of learning,
abilities and moderation, who, by dilcufling the disputed
articles in an amicable conference, might explain them
in such a manner as to bring the contending parties either
to unite in sentiment, or to differ with charity.

S'..friions THIS speech being printed in common form, and dif-
and rCals of
., 'rotelF perfed over the Empire, revived the fears and jealousies
tac. of the Proteitants; Ferdinand, they observed with much

furprize, had not once mentioned, in his address to the
diet, the treaty of Paffau, the stipulations in which they
ccnfidered as the great security of their religious liberty.
l'he Iufpicions to which this gave rife were confirmed
by the accounts which they daily received ofthe extreme
igour wi!h hich Ferdinand treated their ProteRfant bre-
thren in his hereditary dominions, and as it was natural
to confider his actions as the furefl indication of his in-
tentions, this diminished their confidence in those pom-
pous profeficns of moderation or of zeal for the re-efta-
blilhment of concoid, to which his practice was so utter-
ly repugnant.

'.1C I;n'" 'li-i: arrival of the Ca: linal NMorone, whom the

It,'. ,,i,.a Pope had appointed to attend the diet as his nuncio,
,t ni:rio complcatcd their onvilion, and left them no room to
.,or ithr doubt that fime dangerous machination was forming
', c.. 'aagainft

against the peace or safety of the Protestant church. Ju- Book XI.
lius elated with the unexpeced return of the Englihff'"v"
nation from apoftacy, began to flatter himself that the '555
spirit of mutiny and revolt having now spent its force, the
happy period was come when the church might resume
its ancient authority, and he obeyed by the people with
the fame tame fubmiflion as formerly. Full of these
hopes, he had sent Morone to Augsburg with inftruli-
ons to employ his eloquence in order to excite the Ger-
mans to imitate the laudable example of the English, and
his political address in order to prevent any decree of the
diet to the detriment of the catholick faith. As Morone
inherited from his father, the chancellor of Milan, un-
common talents for negotiation and intrigue, he could
scarce have failed of embarrafiing the measures of the
Protestants in the diet, or of defeating whatever they aim-
ed at obtaining in it for their farther security.

BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from all the The deatt

danger which they had reason to apprehend from Mo-"s Julus
rone's presence. Julius, by abandoning himself to plea-'
fures and amusements no less unbecoming his age than his
charater, having contraced such habits of difipation,
that any serious occupation, especially if attended with
difficulty, became an intolerable burden to him, had
long refited the solicitations of his nephew to hold a con-
filtory, because he expeaed there a violent opposition
to his schemes in favour of that young man. But when
all the pretexts which he could invent for eluding his re-
quest were exhausted, and at the fame time his indolent
aversion to business continued to grow upon him, he
feigned indisposition rather than yield to his nephew's
importunity; and that he might give the deceit a greater
colour of probability, he not only confined himself to his
apartment, but changed his usual diet and manner of life.
By persisting too long in aing this ridiculous part, he
contra&ed a real dilcalc, of which he died in a few days,March 3.
leaving his infamous minion the Cardinal de Monte to
bear his name, and to disgrace the dignity which he had
conferred upon him []. As oon as Morone heard of his The nuncio
death, he set out abruptly from Augsburg, where he "its f°'
had resided only a few days, that he might be present
at the eletion of a new Pontiff.

[v] Onuphr. Pnviuiusde viti Pontificur, p. 310. Thuo. lib. a..
P. 517.

VOL. II.

B b

ONE

Bok XI. ON'E cause of their fufpicicns and fears being thus re-
--V mnCmoved, the Protestants foun became sensible that their

ls,' cojctrS crjc oncerning Ferdinand's intentions, how plau-

r...... for i;blc foexer, were ill-founded, and that he had no
v. .1·' ttcuht: of violating the articles favourable to them in
Pl t .',, te teca.y' flP'afiTu. Charles, from the time that Mau-

i.c- liad defLated all his fihemes in the Empire, and
ovcrtur.ntd the great system of religious and civil defpo.
ti:-i, x\ hich he had almost eflablihed there, gave little
;;ttctni:;; to the internal government of Germany, and
i:crmittcd' hib brother to pursue whatever mealures he
jidgtd nmct salutary and expedient. Ferdinand, less
.nitt, us and enterprizing than the Emperor, inilead of
re u: i!i a plan, which he, with power and resources so
i; r tul;c icr, had failed of accomplishing, endeavoured to
att.c.li tLe Princes of the Empire to his family by an ad-
i:.iri:fIaticn uniformly moderate and equitable. To this
lc a\c, at present, particular attention, because his si-
tuai.n: at this junlure rendered it necessary to court
t:;cir avour and upport with more than usual assiduity.

cl,,.'. had CHlARLES had again resumed his favourite projec of

:r; i,: !..

! quiing the Imperial crown for his son Philip, which

:';' !;: ihc ill It ception it had met with when first proposed had

..r..ii obligd him to intermit, but had not persuaded him to
' rcll.qu ifl. This led him warmly to renew his requefl

to 1 bolo.her that he would accept of some compenla-
t.cn fol. hib prior right of iucctffon, and sacrifice that to
the g:andeur of the house of Austria. Ferdinard whlo
\.ias liitle dilpofed, as formerly, to give such an ex-
tiatrdirary proof of elf-dlenial, being sensible that, in
(trdcl 1t d:feat this fchcme, not only the molf inflexible
si inrief oen his part, but a vigorous declaration from the
l'ri::ccs of the mpire in behalf of his title, were rc-
tiifit ; was willing to puichafe their favour by gratify-
ing them in every point that they deemed interefling or
t iici.tial.

T'.Ti ,l C('N the other hait4, the Tuiks, after having wlefcd
v..c I.i) froim im great pait of his Hungarian territolies, were
Hungaiy. re.ldy to attack the pr-o inces (till libjea to his authority

wil, a formidable army, againrt which he could bring no
equal tuice into the field, unlfs the diet flould grant
lii: innlldiate and cxtraordinary aid. For this he could
in lpc if the inttri.al peace of the Empire were not
.t.:hll.lhttd on a fcundation solid in itself, and which
ll:utd ;uil, ;r, Cven to the Proteltants, so Icci're and so

permanent,

permanent, as might not only allow them to engage in Book XI.
a distant war with safety, but encourage them to a v ~-
with vigour. 555

A STEP taken by the Protestants themselves, a short He isa-

time after the opening of the diet, rendered him still larmed at
more cautious of giving them any new cause of offence. aKmen bye
As soon as the publication of Ferdinand's speech created the Potcf-
the fears and suspicions which have been mentioned, the tant-
Eletors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, together with the
Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and renewing
the ancient treaty of confraternity which had long united
their families, they added to it a new article, by which
the contracting parties bound themfeles to adhere to the
confession of Augiburg, and to maintain the docrine which
it contained in ther refpe&ive dominions [w].

FERDINAND, influenced by all these considerations, Ferdinand
employed his utmost address in condu&ing the delibera- zealou to

promote an

tions of the diet so as not to excite the jealousy of a party accornmo-
on whose friendlhip he depended, and whose enmity, as dtion.
they had not only taken the alarm, but had begun to pre-
pare for their defence, he had so much reason to dread.
The members of the diet readily agreed to Ferdinand's
proposal of taking the state of religion into consideration,
previous to any other business. But, as soon as they en-
tered upon it, both parties discovered all the zeal and
animosity which a subjet so interfling naturally engen-
ders, and which the rancour of controversy, together
with the violence of civil war, had inflamed to the high-
eft pitch.

THE Proteflants contended that the security which The preten-

they claimed in consequence of the treaty of Paffau ions of the
Ihould extend, without limitation, to all who had hither- cnd Protr-
to embraced the doEtrine of Luther, or who should here- tants.
after embrace it. The Catholics, having first of all as-
lerted the Pope's right as the supreme and final judge
with refpea to all articles of faith, insisted that the to-
leration granted, by the treaty of Palfau, to such as had
adopted the new opinions; which, o account of the pre-
lent situation of the Empire, and for the fake of peace,
they were willing to confirm; should not be extended
either to those cities which had conformed to the Interim,
m° to such ecclefiatlics as should for the future apostatize

[w] Chytrzi Sxonia, 480.

B 2 from

Book XI. from the church Rome. It was no easy matter to re-

-

" 'concile such opposite pretensions, which were supported,
1555' on each fide, by the mofi elaborate arguments, and the

greatest acrimony of expression, that the abilities or zeal
of theologians long exercised in disputation could fugget.
Ferdinand, however, by his address and perseverance;
by softening ome things on each fide; by putting a fa-
vourable meaning upon others; by representing incef-
fantly the necessity as well as the advantages of concord;
and by threatening on some occasions, when all other
considerations were disregarded, to dissolve the diet,
brought them at length to a conclusion in which they all
agreed.

Sept. 15. CONFORMABLY to this a recess was framed, approv-
The peace ed of, and published with the usual formalities. The
of relig;oa
ontablihed. following are the chief articles which it contained. That

such Princes and cities as have declared their approbation
of the Confeflion of Augsburg, shall be permitted to pro-
fess the doctrine and exercise the worship which it autho-
nses without interruption or molestation from the Empe-
ror, the King of the Romans, or any power or person
whatsoever; That the Protestants on their part, hall
give no disquiet to the Princes and States who adhere
to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome; That, for
the future, no attempt hall be made towards terminating
religious differences, but by the gentle and pacific me-
thods of persuasion and conference; That the Popish
ecclesiastics shall claim no spiritual jurifdiaion in such
states as receive the confession of Augiburg; That such
as had seized the benefices or revenues of the church,
previous to the treaty of PafDu, shall retain poffleflon
of them, and be liable to no prosecution in the imperial
(lamber on that account; That the supreme civil power
in every itate hall have right to establish what form of
do&rine and worship it hall deem proper, and if any of
its fbjets refute to conform to these, shall permit them
to remove with all their effe&s wherever they please;
That if any prelate or ecclefialtic shall hereafter abandon
the Romish religion, he hall instantly relinquish his
diocese or benefice, and it shall be lawful for those in
whom the right of nomination is vested, to proceed im-
mediately to an eletion, as if the office were vacant by
death or translation, and to appoint a fucceflor of undoubt-
ed attachment to the ancient system [x].

[)] Slcid. 6o. F. Paul, ;68. Pallv. lib. . p. 6i.

SucH

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Recess, Book Xt.

,which is the basis of religious peace in Germany, and -r
the bond of union among its various states, the sentiments Ref^eSSSio
of which are so extremely different with refpe& to points on the pro-
the most intererting and important. In our age and na- grfs of the
tion, to which the idea of Toleration is familiar, and its oleration.
beneficial effects well known, it may seem frange that a
method of terminating their dissentions, so suitable to the
mild and charitable spirit of the Christian religion, did
not sooner occur to the contending parties. But an ex-
pedient, which, how salutary soever it might be, was
repugnant to the sentiments and pracice of Christians
during many ages, did not lie obvious to discovery.
Among the ancient heathens, all whose deities were lo-
cal and tutelary, diversity of sentiment concerning the
object or rights of religious worship seems to have been
no source of animosity, because the acknowledging vene-
ration to be due to any one God, did not apply denial of
the existence or the power of any other God; nor were
the modes and rites ofworfhip established in one country
incompatible with those which other nations approved of
and observed. Thus the errors in their system of theo-
logy were of such a nature as to be productive of con-
cord, and notwithstanding the amazing number of their
deities, as well as the infinite variety of their ceremonies,
a sociable and tolerating spirit subsisted almost universally
in the pagan world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared one Su-

preme Being to be the sole obje& of religious veneration,
prescribed the form of worship most acceptable to him,
whoever admitted the truth it held, of consequence, every
other mode of religion to be absurd and impious. ..ince
the zeal of the first converts to the Christian faitn in pro-
pagating its dotrines, and the ardour with which they
laboured to overturn every other form of worihip. They
employed, however, for this purpole no methods but
such as suited the nature of religion. By the force of
powerful arguments, they convinced the understandings
of men; by the charms of superior virtue, they allured
and captivated their hearts. At length the civil power
declared in favour of Christianity, and though numbers,
imitating the example of their superiors, crowded into
the Church, many fill adhered to their ancient super-
ftitions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the ministers of re-

B b 3 ligion,

Book XI. ligion, whose zeal was still unabated, though their fanLi-

ty and virtue were much diminished, forgot so far the
'555' nature of their own million, and of the arguments which

they ought to have employed, that they armed the Im-
perial power againfi there unhappy men, and as they
could nut perluade, they tried to compel them to bc-
lieve.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning articles of

faith multiplied, from various causes, among christians
themselves, and the fame unhallowed weapons which had
first been ued against the enemies of their religion, were
turned against each other. Every zealous disputant en-
dcavcurcd tointereft the civil magifirate in his cause, and
each in his turn employed the secular arm to crush or to
exterminate his opponents. Not long after, the bishops
of Rome put in their claim to infallibility in explaining
articles of faith, and deciding points in controversy, and
bold as the pretension was, they by their artifices and
perseverance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and
brought them to recognize it. To doubt or to deny any
doErine to which these unerring initrudors had given the
sanction of their approbation, was held to be not only a
resisting of truth, but an act of rebellion agninit their fa-
cred authority; and the secular power, of which by va-
rious arts they had acquired the absolute direscion, was
inflantly employed to avenge both.

THU s Europe had been accustomed, during many cen-

turies, to fee speculative opinions propagated or defended
by force; the charity and mutual forbearance which
Chrifianity recommends with so much warmth, were
forgotten, the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the idea of tole-
lation, but even the word itself, in the sense now affixed
to it, was unknown. A right to extirpate error by force
was universally allowed to be the prerogative of those who
possessed the knowledge of truth, and as each party of
Christians believed that they had got poffeflion of this
invaluable attainment, they all claimed and exercised, as
far as they were able, the rights which it was supposed to
convey. The Roman catholics, as their fyfiem refled on
the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted that
truth was on their fide, and openly called on the civil
power to repel the impious and heretical innovators who
had risen up againfi it. The Protestants, no less confi-

dent

(dent that their dotrine was well foundcd, required, *i:li B oI: I.
equal ardour, the Princes of their parry to check uch as -'~
presumed to impugn or to oppose it. Luther, Calx\;n, i ;'
Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the reformed ch.i:'cli
n their refpeive countries, inflited, as tar a', they hl'.d
nower and opportunity, the finme punilhmnnts v'h. ic ;- ere
denounced against their own dilciples by the churci ot
Rome, on such as called in qucflion any artici. in their
creeds. To their followers, and pcrhaps to thei oppo-
nents, it would have appeared a symptom ofdiffidcnc in
the goodness of their caufc, or anacknowledgment tlat it
was not well founded, if they had net cmplo'ed in its c-
fence all those means which it wab luppoed truth had a
right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the fevntentcent cen;ur-,

before Toleration, under its present form, was admi;:cd
sirs into the republic of the United Provinces, and Irom
thence introduced into England. Longr experience cftle
calamities of mutual persecution, the influence of free
government, the light and humanity acquired by te pro-
grefs of science, together with the prudence and authority
of the civil magistrate, were all requisite in order to elli-
blifh a regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all the
different seas had adopted from mistaken conceptions co:-
cerning the nature of religion and the rights of truth, or
which all of them had derived from the erroneous max-
ims etlablifhed by the church of Rome.

Tn r recess of Augsburg, it is ev;dcnt, was founded on Advantages

no such liberal and enlarged entiimcnts conccrning freediom "f th' l ""
of religious inquiry or the nature of toleration. It avs t',0 Ih Lu-
nothing more than a scheme of pacification, which politi-thcians,
cal coniderations alone had fuggcfted to the contending
parties, and regard for their mutual tranquillity ar:d fafe!y
had rendered neceilary. Of this there can be n irong.r
proof than an article in the reccf. itfclf, b)y which tlih be-
refits of the pacification are declared to cxtcnd on! t(, the
C.itholics on tlhe one fide, and to hich as adhered' to the
Confeflion of Augburg on the other. The followers of
Zuinclius and Calvin remained, in confeqtuencc of tl.a
exclusion, without any protction fomn the rigour of te
laws denounced againfi herctics. Nor did they obtain any
legal security until the treaty of \Wellphalia, near a cei'-
tury after this period, provided that they flould be ad-
mitted to cnjoy, in ai ample manner as the Lutheran.,

1 4 all

Book Xl. all the advantages and proteaion which the recess of Augf-
'- -'J burg affords.
nd to the BUT if the followers of Luther were highly pleased
Catholicks. with the security which they acquired by this recess, such

as adhered to the ancient system had no lefa reason to be
satisfied with that article in it, which preserved entire to
the Roman catholick church the benefices of such eccle-
fiafticks as hould hereafter renounce its doctrines. This
article, known in Germany by the name of the Eccles-
aflical Refervaticn, was manifefily so conformable to the
idea and to the rights of an established church; and it
appeared so equitable to prevent revenues, which had
been originally appropriated for the maintenance of per-
sons attached to a certain system, from being alienated to
any other purpose, that the protestants, though they
foresaw its consequences, were obliged to relinquish their
opposition to it. As the Roman catholic Princes of the
Empire have taken care to fee this article exacly obferv-
ed in every cafe where there was an opportunity of put-
ting it in execution, it has proved the great barrier of the
Romish church in Germany againfi the Reformation; and
as from this period the fame temptation of interest did not
allure ecclefiafticks to relinquilh the established fyflem,
there have been few of that order, who have loved truth
with such disinterested and ardent affecion, as to aban-
don for its fake the rich benefices which they had in pof-
fefion.

Mlrcells DURING the fitting of the diet, Mareellus Cervino,
1. eleaed Cardinal of Santa Croce, was eleaed Pope in room of
Pope, April Julius. He, in imitation of Adrian, did not change his
His chsrac- name on being exalted to the Papal Chair. As he equal-
ter. led that pontiff in purity of intention, and excelled him

much in the arts of government, and still more in know-
ledge of the state and genius of the papal court; as he
had capacity to discern what reformation it needed, as
well as what it could bear, such regulations were expe&-
ed from his virtue and wisdom, as would have removed
many of its grofeft and mofi flagrant corruptions, and
have contributed towards reconciling to the church, such
as from indignation at these enormities had abandoned its
communion. But this excellent Pontiff was only hewn
to the church and immediately snatched away. The con-
finement in the conclave had impaired his health, and
the fatigue of tedious ceremonies upon his acceflion,

together

together with too intense and anxious application of mind Book XI.
to the schemes of improvement which he meditated, ex-
haufted so entirely the vigour of his teeble constitution, S5ss
that he sickened on the twelfth, and died on the twentieth His death.
day after his election [y].

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, peculiar The eleti-

to conclaves, were displayed in that which was held for of PaU
elecing a successor to Marcellus; the Cardinals of tihe
Imperial and French facions labouring, with equal ar-
dour, to gain the necelIary number of luffrages for one
of their own party. But, after a ifruggle of no long du-
ration, though conduded with all the warmth and cager-
ness natural to men contending for so great an objec, they Ahy 13.
united in choofing John Peter Caraffa the eldeit member
of the sacred college and the son of Count Montorio, a
nobleman of an illultrious family in the kingdom of Na-
ples. The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese who
favoured his pretensions, Caraffa's own merit, and per-
haps his great age, which soothed all the disappointed
candidates with the nearer profpca of a new vacancy, con-
curred in bringing about this speedy union of suffrages.
In order to testify his refpea for the memory of Paul II1.
by whom he had been created Cardinal, and his grati-
tude to the family of Farnese, he assumed the name of
Paul IV.

THE choice of a prelate of such a singular character, Hi, rife nd

and who had long held a course extremely different from char'era
that which usually led to the dignity now conferred upon
him, filled the Italians, who had nearef access to observe
his manners and deportment, with aftonifhmcnt, and kept
them in suspense and solicitude with regard to his future
condut. Paul, though born in a rank of life which,
without any other merit, might have secured to him the
highest ecclefiartical preferments, had from his early
years applied to fludy with all the assiduity of a man,
who had nothing but his personal accomplishments to ren-
der him conspicuous. By means of this he not only ac-
quired profound (kill in fcholalticktheology, but added to
that a considerable knowledge of the learned languages
and of poilte literature, the fudy of which had been
lately revived in Italy, and was pursued at this time with

[y] Thusn. 5:o. F. Pul, 36g. Onuph. Pnvin. 311, &c.

great

Book XI. great ardour. His mind, however, naturally gloomy and

- severe, was more formed to imbibe the four pirit of the
'ss former, than to receive any degree of elegance or libera-

lity of sentiment from the latter; so that he acquired ra-
ther the qualities and paflions of a recluse ecclcfiaftick,
than the talents necessary for the conduc of great affair.
Accordingly, when he entered into orders, although si-
veral rich benefices were beltowed on him, and he wa,
early employed as nuncio in different courts, he soon be-
came dilgufted with that course of life, and languished to
be in a situation more suited to histalte and temper. With
this view he resigned at once all his ecclesiastical prefer.
ments, and having inflituted an order of regular priests,
whom he denominated Theatines, from the name of the
archbilhoprick which he had held, he associated himself
as a member of their fraternity, conformed to all the ri-
gorous rules to which he had fubjeaed them, and pre-
terred the solitude of a monaflick life, with the honour of
being the founder of a new order, to all the vast objets
which the court of Rome presented to his ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul

1II. induced by the fame of his fandity and knowledge
called him to Rome, in order to consult with him con-
cerning the meafurcs which might be moil proper and es-
fecual for the fupprefling of hcrefy, and re-cftablifhing
the ancient authority of tle church. Having thus allured
him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his intreaties,
and partly by his authority, prevailed on him to accept
of a Cardinal's hat, to re-affume the benefices which he
had resigned, and to return again into the usual path of
ecclefiaflical ambition which he seemed to have rclin-
quifhcd. But, during two fuccelfive Pontificates, under
the first of which the court of Rome was the mofl artful
and interefled, and under the second the most dissolute of
any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monastic auflerity.
Hle was an avowed and bitter enemy not only of all inno-
vation in opinion, but of every irregularity in practice;
he was the chief infirument in eflablifhing the formidable
and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal territo-
ries; he appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for
the jurifdi&ion and discipline of the church, and a e-
vere censurer of every measure which leemed to flow
from motives of policy or interest, rather than from zeal
for the honour of the ecclefiaflical order, and the dignity

of

us the Holy See. Under a prelate of such a characer, Book Xl.
the Roman courtiers expected a severe and violent Ponti- -
ficate, during which the principles of found policy would '5
be sacrificed to the narrow prejudices of priestly zeal;
while the people of Rome were apprehensive of feeing
the fordid and forbidding rigour of mol;aftick manners
fubflituted in place of the gaiety or magnificence to which
they had long been accufltomed in the papal court. Thcle
apprehensions Paul was extremely fo!icitous to remove.
At his firfl entrance on the adminiltration he laid aside The sirs
that austerity which had hitherto distinguished his person ftps of his
and family, and when the mailer of his houfliold inquired tion.
in what manner he would choose to live, he haughtily re-
plied, " as becomes a great Prince." lie ordered the
ceremony of his coronation to be conduced with more
than usual magnificence; and endeavoured to render
himself popular by several as of liberality and indul-
gence towards the inhabitants of Rome [z].

His natural severity of temper, however, would have The excefr

soon returned upon him, and would have justified the of his t-
conjecures of the courtiers, and the fears of the people, hinephews.
if he had not, immediately after his cletion, called to
Rome two of his nephews, sons of his brother the Count
of Montorio. The eldest he promoted to be governor of
Rome, the youngest who had hitherto served as a soldier
of fortune in the armies of Spain or France, and whose
disposition as well as manners were ill more foreign from
the clerical characer than his profeflion, he created a
Cardinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the fc-
cond office in power and dignity which a 'ope can bellow.
'hcfe marks of favour, no less sudden than extravagant,
he accompanied with the most unbounded confidence
and attachment, and forgetting all his former severe max-
ims, he seemed to have no other objec than the aggran-
dizing of his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately Their m-
for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any mode- hiti"us "".-
rate acquisition. They had seen the family of Medici Jc'"
raised by the interest of the Popes of that house to fu-
preme power in Tuscany; Paul ll. had by his abilities
and address secured the dutchics of Parma and Placentia
to the family of Farnese. They aimed at some establish-
[z] PltlioCa, p. 317. CnflUo Vita dl Pr.ln IV. Rom. 1615 s o.

mcnt

Book Xl. ment for themselves, no less considerable and indepen-
-v-' dent; and as they could not expe& that the Pope would
'555. carry his indulgence towards them so far as to secularize

any part of the patrimony of the church, they had no
profpea of attaining what they wished, but by difmem.
bering the Imperial dominions in Italy, in hopes of feiz.
ing ome portion of them. This alone would have been
to them a sufficient reason for sowing the feeds of discord
between their uncle and the Emperor.

Reafns of BUT Cardinal Caraffa, had, besides, private reasons
their disgust which filled him with hatred and enmity to the Emperor.
Empthor, While he served in the Spanish troops he had not re-

ceived such marks of honour and diftincion as he thought
due to his birth and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage,
he had abruptly quitted the Imperial service, and enter-
ing into that of France, he not only met with such
a reception as soothed his vanity, and attached him to
the French interest, but by contraaing an intimate friend-
ship with Strozzi, who commanded the French army in
Tuscany, hehad imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Em-
peror as the great enemy to the liberty and independence
of the Italian states. Nor was the Pope himself indif-
posed to receive impreflions unfavourable to the Empe-
ror. The opposition given to his elecion by the Cardi-
nals of the Imperial facion left in his mind deep resent-
ment, which was heightened by the remembrance of an-
cient injuries from Charles or his ministers.

They en- OF this his nephews took advantage, and employed
deavour to various devices, in order to exasperate him beyond a pof-
lienafe thefibility of reconciliation. They aggravated every cir-
Pope f M o
the Empe- cumflance which could be deemed any indication of the
ror. Emperor's diffatisfaaion with hie promotion; they read

to him an intercepted letter in which Charles taxed the
Cardinals of his party with negligence or incapacity in not
having defeated Paul's elecion: They pretended, at one
time, to have discovered a conspiracy formed by the Im-
perial minister and Cosmo di Medici againfi the Pope's
life; they alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a
plot for affaflinating themselves. By these artifices, they
kept his mind, which was naturally violent and become
suspicious from old age, in such perpetual agitation, as
precipitated him into measures, which otherwise he
would have been the first person to condemn [a]. He

([] Ripamontii Hilt. Patrit, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grav. Thef. vol. ii
Mem. de Ribier. ii. 61. Adriani IRor. i. 906.

seized

seized some of the Cardinals who were most attached to Book Xl.
the Emperor, and confined them in the castle of St. An- -c'
gelo; he persecuted the Colonnas and other Roman ba- '555s
rons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial fation, with
the utmost severity; and discovering on all occasions his
distrust, fear, or hatred of the Emperor, he began at last
to court the friendship of the French king, and seemed
willing to throw himself absolutely upon him for support
and prote&ion.

THIS was the very point to which his nephews wished Induce him

to bring him as most favourable to their ambitious schemes; to court
and as the accomplishment of these depended on their of France.
uncle's life, whose advanced age did not admit of losing
a moment unnecessarily in negotiations, initead of treat-
ing at second hand with the French ambassador at Rome,
they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a person of confi-
dence direcly to the court of France with such overtures
on his part as they hoped would not be rejeced. He
proposed an alliance offensive and dtfenfive between
Henry and the Pope; that they should attack the dutchy
of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with their united
forces; and if their arms should prove successful, that
the ancient republican form of government should be re-
eflablifhed in te former, and the investiture of the lat-
ter should be granted to one of the French King's sons,
after reserving a certain territory which should be annexed
to the patrimony of the church, together with an inde-
pendent and princely eabliihment for each of the Pope's
nephews.

THE King, allured by these specious projecs, gave a Conflable

most favourable audience to the envoy. But when the Mnmo"p-
matter was proposed in council, the contiable Montmo- fes the Ili-
rency, whose natural caution and aversion to daring en- nce with
terprizes increased with age and experience, remon- the Pope.
lrated with great vehemence against the alliance. He
put Henry in mind how fatal every expedition into
taly had been to France during three fucceflive reigns,
and if fitch an enterprize had proved too great for the na-
tion even when its strength and finances were entire,.
there was no reason to hope for success, if it hold
be attempted now when both were exhaufled by ex-
traordinary efforts during wars, which had lasted, with
little interruption, almoRf half a century. He repre-
sented the manifest imprudence of entering into engage-

ments

hook XI. ments with a Pope of fourscore, as any system which
-v---' reled on no better foundation than his life must be ex-
'555 tremely precarious, and upon the event of his death,

which could not be distant, the face of things together
with the inclination of the Italian States mutl instant-
ly change, and the whole weight of the war be left
upon the King alone. To there considerations he ad-
ded the near profped which they now had of a final
accommodation with the Emperor, who having taken the
resolution of retiring from the world, wished to tranf-
mit his kingdoms in peace to his son; and he conclud-
ed with representing the absolute certainty of drawing
the arms of England upon France, if it should appear
that the re-eflablifhment of tranquillity in Europe was
prevented by the ambition of its Monarch.

The Duke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and urg-
f Guiffle - ed by a minister of great authority, would probably

have determined the King to decline any connecion
with the Pope. But the Duke of Guise and his bro-
ther the Cardinal of Lorrain, who delighted no less in
bold and dangerous undertakings than Montmorency flun-
ned them, declared warmly for an alliance with the
Pope. The cardinal expeced to be entrusted with the
condua of the negotiations in the court of Rome to
which this alliance would give rife; the duke laid his
account with obtaining the command of the army which
would be appointed to invade Naples; and confidering
themselves as already in these flations, vail projets
opened to their aspiring and unbounded ambition. Their
credit, together with the influence of the King's mif-
trefs, the famous Diana of Poitiers, who was, at that
time, entirely devoted to the interest of the family of
Guise, more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's
prudent remonstrances, and prevailed on an inconfidcrate
Prince to lifen to the overtures of the Pope's envoy.

Cardinal of THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expeced, was
Lurrain sect immediately sent to Rome with full powers to conclude
to negotiate
with the the treaty, and to concert measures for carrying it into
Pope. execution. Meanwhile, the Pope, either from reflc-

ing on the danger and uncertain issue of all military ope-
rations, or through the address of the Imperial ambassador
who had been at great pains to sooth him, had not only
begun to lole much of the ardour with which he had set
on foot the negotiation with France, but even discovered

great

great unwillingness to continue it. In order to rouse him Book Xl.
from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle his former "
rage, his nephews had recourse to the arts which they 555'
hadalreadypra&ifed with so much success. They alarm-
ed him with new representations of the Emperor's hostile
intentions, with fresh accounts which they had received
of threats uttered againfi him by the Imperial minillers,
and with new discoveries which they pretended to have
made of conspiracies formed, and just ready to take es-
sec against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, would Paul en-

not have opexated a second time with the fame force, nor ragedeatthe
have made the impression which they wished, if Paul had of the diet
not been excited by an offence of that kind which he was of Augi-
least able to bear. He received advice of the recess ofburg;
the diet of Augsburg, and of the toleration which was
thereby granted to the Protestants, and this threw him at
once into such transports of passion againfi the Emperor
and King of the Romans, as carried him headlong into
all the violent measures of his nephews. Full of high
ideas with refpeC to the papal prerogative, and animated
with the fiercest zeal against herely, he confidered the
liberty of deciding concerning religious matters, which
had been assumed by an assembly composed partly of
laymen, as a presumptuous and unpardonable encroach-
ment on that jurifdi&ion which belonged to him alone;
and regarded the indulgence which had been given to the
Proteflants as an impious a of that power which the
diet had usurped. He complained loudly of both to the
Imperial ambassador. He insisted that the recess of the
diet should immediately be declared illegal and void. He
threatened the Emperor and King of the Romans, in cafe
they hould either refuse or delay to gratify him in this
particular, with the feveref effeas of his vengeance. He
talked in a tone of authority and command which might
have suited a pontiff of the twelfth century, when a pa-
pal decree was sufficient to have shaken or to have over-
turned the throne of the greatelt Monarch, but which
was altogether improper in that age, especially when ad-
dressed to the mintfter of a Prince who had so often made
Pontiffs more formidable feel the weight of his power.
The ambassador, however, heard all his extravagant
propositions and menaces, with much pticnce, and en-
deavoured to sooth him by putting him in mind of the ex-

treme

Book Xl. treme difrefs to which the Emperor was reduced at In-

- fpruck, of the engagements which he had come under to
'555· the Protestants in order to extricate himlelf, of the ne-

ceffity of fulfilling thelc, and of accommodating his con-
du& to the situation of his affairs. But weighty as thele
considerations were, they made no impreflion on the mind
of the haughty and bigotted pontiff, who inflantly replied,
that he would absolve him by his apoftolick authority
from the obligation of thele engagements, and even com-
mand him not to perform them; that in carrying on the
cafe of God and of the church, no regard ought to be
had to the maxims of worldly prudence and policy, and
that the ill success of the Emperor's schemes in Germany
might jufily be deemed a mark of the divine difplealure
againfl him, on account of his having paid little attention
to the former, while he regulated his condu& entirely bv
the latter. Having said this, he turned from the ambai-
fador abruptly without waiting for a reply.

ainexarpe- His nephews took care to applaud and cherish theic
rphwtedb hs sentiments, and easily wrought up his arrogant mind,

fraught with all the monkish ideas concerning the extent
of the papal supremacy, to such a pitch of resentment
againfi the house of Austria, and to such an high opinion
of his own power, that he talked continually of his being
the successor of those who had deposed Kings and Empe-
rors; that he was exalted as head over them all, and

pecem 15. would trample such as opposed him under his feet. In
:onclude" a this disposition, the cardinal of Lorrain found the Pope,
treaty ith and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty, which had for

its objec, the ruin of a Prince againfi whom ho was so
highly exasperated. The flipulations in the treaty were
much the fame as had been propofedby the Pope's envoy
at Paris; and it was agreed to keep the whole tranfa&ion
- secret until their united forces hould be ready to take the

field [b].

TheEmpe- DURING the negotiation of this treaty at Rome and
rr resoles Paris, an event happened which seemed to render the
o resign h: -
Erdt;iry fears which had given rife to it vain, and the operations
donllil Jr. which were to follow upon it unnecessary. This was the

Emperor's resignation of his hereditary dominions to his

[b] Plliv. lib. 13. p. 16. . Paul, 365. Thuan, lib. xv. S15. lib.
xvi 40 Mem dc Ribicr, i, 609o &c.

ion

son Philip; together with his resolution to withdraw en- Book XI.
tirely from any concern in bufinecs or the affairs of this' ~
world, in order that he might Ipcnd the remainder of 55
hi. days in retirement and solitude. Though it requires
neither deep ltinedion nor extraordinary dil:ernment to
difeover that the slate of royalty is not exempt from cares
and disappointment; though most of tholc who are exalt-
ed to a throne find solicitude, and latietv, and difgut to
be their perpetual attendants in that envied pre-emi-
nence; yet, to descend voluntalily from the supreme to a
filbordinate fation, and to relinquish the puifellion of
power in order to attain the enjoyment of happiness,
seems to be an effort too great for the human mind. Se-
veral inflances, indeed, occur in hitfory of Monarclhs
who have quitted a throne, and have ended their days in
retirement. But they were either weak Princes who
took this resolution rashly, ad repented of it as oon as it
wastaken; or unfortunate Princes from whole hands some
trong rival had reled their fccptre, and compelled
them to descend with relucance into a private station.
Diocletian is perhaps the only Prince capable of holding
the reins of government, who ever resigned them from
deliberate choice, and who continued during many years
to enjoy the tranquillity of retirement without fetching
one penitent sigh, or carling hack one look of desire, to-
wards the power or dignity which he had abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation fhouldTbemo-

fill all Europe with aonilhment, and give rife, bothti'.'vofthiG
among his contemporaries, and among the hiflotians ofrc'ti"g"'
that period, to various conjceures concerning the mo-
tives, which determined a Prince, whole ruling passion
lhad been uniformly the love of power, at the age of
fifty-fix, when objects of ambition operate \, ith fill torce
on the mind, and are purlued with the greatcll ardour,
to take a resolution so singular and unexpected. But
while many authors have imputed it to nmoivcs to fiivo-
lous and fantafltical, as can hardly be fiippofcd to in-
fluence any reasonable mind; while others have imagined
it to be the result of ome profound Ichemc of policy;
hiflorians more intelligent, and better informed, neither
alcribe it to caprice, nor learch for m) f.ious ttcrets tf
late, where simple and obvious cauiles will fully account
for the Emperor's condud. Charles had been attacked

VOL. II. C c c:ily

Book Xl. early in life with the gout, and notwithftandng all the
< ---y-4 precautions of the most skilful physicians in his time, the

'555s violence of the distemper increa&ed as he advanced in

age, and the fits became every year more frequent, as
well as more intolerable. Not only was the vigour of his
conltitution broken, but the faculties of his mind: were
impaired by the excruciating torments which he endured.
During the continuance of the fits, he was altogether in-
capable of applying to business, and even when they began
to abate, as it was only at intervals that he could attend
to what was serious, he gave up the greatet part of his
time to trifling and even childih occupations, which
served to relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeobled and
worn out with excess of pain. Under these circum-
ft.ces, the condut of such affairs as occurred, of course,
in gc erning lo many kingdoms was a burden more than
sufficient; but to push forward and compleat the vast
schemes, which the ambition of his more aiveyears had
formed, or to keep in view and carry on the fame great
system of policy, extending to every nation in Europe,
and conneaed with the operations of every different
court, were talks, which far eceeded. his trength, and
oppressid and overwhelmed his mind. As he had been
long accustomed to view the business of every department,
whether civil, or military, or ecclefialfical, with his own
eyes, and to decide concerning it according to his own
ideas; it gave him the utmost pain, when he felt his in-
firmities increase so farl upon him, that he was obliged
to commit the condu& of all affairs to his miniflers. He
imputed every misfortune which besel him, and every
milcarriage that happened, even when the former was
unavoidable, and the latter accidental, to his inability to
take the inlpedion of business himsel. He complained
of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in his declining
years, to a rival, who was in the full vigour of life, and
that while letrry could take and execute all his rfoluti-
ons in prfon, he fhuuld now be reduced, both in council
and in aftion, to rely on the abilities of other mew. Hav-
ing thus grown old before his time, he wifely judged it
more decent to conceal his infirmities in some solitude,
than to expose them any longer to the publick eye; nd
prudently determined not to forfeit the feme, or loe the
acquisitions of his better years, by Rruggling, with a vain
ebRinacy, to retain the reins of governmentv when he

was

was no longer able to hold them with steadiness, or to Book Xl.
guide them with address [].

BuT though Charles had revolved this scheme incircums5

his mind for everal years, and had communicated it (ances
to his ifters the dow::aer Queens of France and Hunga- which had
ry, who not only approved of his intention, but offered'
to accompany him to whatever place of retreat he
should choose; !everal thing-s had hitherto prevented his
carrying it into execution. He could not think of loading
his son with tra government of lo many kingdoms, until
he should attain such maturity of age, and of abilities, as
would enable him to sustain that weighty burden; but as
Philip had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and had
been early accustomed to business, for which he disco-
vered both inclination and capacity, it can hardly be
imputed to the partiality of paternal affecion, that his
scruples with regard to this point, were entirely remov-
ed; and that he thought he might, without further hefi-
tation or delay, place him on the throne which he was
about to abandon. His mother's situation had been ano-
ther obfiruaion in his way. For although he had conti-
nfued amolt fifty years in confinement, and under the
fame disorder of mind which cncern for her husband's
death had brought upon her, yet the government of

[c] Dom Devefque in his memoirs of cardinal Oranvelle gives a reafor

for the Emperor's resignation, which, as I recille&, i not mentioned by
any other hiltorian. He fays, that the Emperor having ceded the govern-
ment of te kingdom of Naples and the dotchy of Milan to his Ion, upon
his marriage with the Qeen of England; Philip, notwithstanding the
advice and entreaties of his father, removed all the ministers and officcrr
in those countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill the places
which they held. That he afpired-openly, and with little delicacy, to ob-
tain a (hare in the adminiltration of affairs in the Low- ountries. That
he endeavoured to thwart the Emperor's meafuies, and to limit his au-
thority. behaving toward' him sometimes with inattention, and sometime
with hughtinefs. That Charler finding that he mull either yield to his
fin, or openly contend v.ith him, in order t avoid thele, which were
hoth difagrecahle and mlrti tying to a father, he took the resolution of re-
igninng hla crowns, and of re iriol from the world, vol. i. p. 4b, &t-.
Dom Levefque derived his information cncerning thefe'curiou ftu,
which he relates very briefly, from the original pperc of cardinal (ran-
velle. BRt al that va(t celrltion us papers, one of the molt valuable
historical monumrent of the ixtenth century, and which could not fail'
of throwini mrch liht on the tranf6ations of Charles V. though ,,re-
lerved and a ranged by M. L' Abbl B;oiist of Befancon, i not publilhril,
I canoot determine what degree of cieAit rfhuld be given to thit accoumnt
us Charle' resignation. I have therefote taken no notice ut it i rlat-
ng thbi eveat.

Cc n

403
Spain,

Book X'. Spain, was flill velted in her jointly with the Emperori

- ' her name as inserted together with his, in all the public
555- writs itlucid in that kingdom; and such was the fond at.

tachment of the Spaniards to her, that they would proba-
bly have cru.lcd to reccgnize Philip as their sovereign,
unle;s she had conlcnted to assume him as her partner n
the throne. Her uttcr incapacity for bufinels rendered
it impeofible to obtain this. But her death, which hap-
cpned this year, removed this difficulty ; and as Charles,
Ipcn that event, became iole Monarch of Spain, it left
the 'uccefficn open to his on. The war with France had
likewile been a reason for retaining the administration of
affairs in his ownl hand, as he was extremely solicitous to
h.lve ttminatd it, that he might have given up his king-
tlons to his ion in peace with all the world. But as Hen-
ry ihd discovered no disposition to cloe: with any of his
overtures, and had even rejeced propolals of peace,
which ivere equal and moderate, in a tone, that eemcd
to indicate a fixed purpole of continuing hoililities, he law
that it was vain to wait lontffr in expecation of an event,
which, how dcfiriable lover, was altogether uncertain.

The sola- As this, then, appeared to be the proper jun&ure for
itsch he executing the cheme which he had long meditated,
cicuted it. Charles refolvtt to rfien his kingdoms to his son, with a

folemnty, fuitahle to the importance of the tranfadion,
and to perform this las act of lovereignty, with tIch for-
mal tpoip, as might lc:ivc a latling impression on the
minds not only of his fubjeas but of his successor. W\ith
this view he called Philip out of England, where the pee-
vifh ten-per of his Queen, which increaled with her de-
fpair f having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy,
ard the jearouly of the '. ngliih left him no hopes of ,b1
taini c te diredion of their affairs. Having assembled
the aflate of the Low-Countries at Bruifels, on the twen-
ty fifth of Octcber, he teated himself, for the last time,
in the chair of Itate, on one fide of which was placed his
ion, and on the oilier his fitler the Queen of Hungary
regert of the Netherlands, with a Iplendid retinue of the
grandee.s f pain and princes of the Empire flanding bc-
hind him. The pefident of the council of Slanders, by
his command, explained in a few words his intention in
caliing this extraordinary meeting of the States. He then
read the infitument of resignation by which Charles fur-
rendered to his Ion Philip all his territories, jurildiion.

and

nrd authority in the Low-Countries, absolving his fib- ook xl.
jeas there from their oath of allegiance to him, which ~~
lie required them to transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and 'i
to serve him with the fame loyalty and ,cal that they had
manifefied, during so long a couric of years, in upport
of his government.

CHARLES then role from his feat, and leaning on the

shoulder of the Prince of Orange, because he was unable
to tland without support, he addiefled himself to the au-
dience, and from a paper which he held in his hand, in
order to assist his memory, he recounted, with dignity,
but without ostentation, all the great things vitich he
had undertaken and performed since tc commencement
of his adminiflration. He observed, that from the !even-
ceenth year of his age, he had dedicated all his thoughts
and attention to publick objecs, relerving no portion of
his time for the indulgence of his ease, and very lile for
tile enjoyment of private plealure; that either in a aci-
tick or hotlile manner, he had visited Germa.ny nilie
times, Spain fix times, France four times, Italy seven
times, the Low-Countries ten times, England tv. ce,
Africa as often, and had made eleven voyages bv ea;
that while his health permitted him to difcliarge his du-
tv, and the vigour of his conflitution was equ.l, in ary
degree, to the arduous office of governir. such extensive
dominions, he had never flienned labour, nor repined
under fatigue; that now when his health wa, broken,
and his vigour exhausted by the rage of an incuralble ds-
temper, hisgrowing infirmities admnonfllcd him to retire,
nor was he lo fond of reigning, as to retain the iceptre in
an impotent hand, which was no longer able to prote£t
his lubjeas, or to render them happy; that inflead of a
Iovereign worn out ith diseases, and scarce half alive,
he gave them one in the prime of life, accuiomed alrea-
dy to govern, and who added to the vigour 'f youth ,ll
the Atention and faeacity of matueryears; that, if dur-
ing the course of a !.hng adminillratijn, he had (comnmitted
any material error in goveinment, or it under the prcl-
lure and amidst the attention which he had been biiged
to give to o nmanv and great affaits, he had tither nc-
gleQed er injured any of his lubjete, le now implored
their forgiveness; that, for his part, he filould cvce re-
tain a gratetil sense of their fidelity and attachment, and
'ould carry the remembrance of it along wth him to the

C c 3 l.ace

·Pnnk XI. place of his retreat, as his sweetest ¢onfolation, as well as
"-" the best reward for all his services, and in his last prayers
'555' to Almighty God would pour forth his ardent wishes for

their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his knees

and kissed his father's hand, " If, fays he, I had left
you by my death this rich' inheritance, to which I have
made such large additions, some regard would have been
jirfly due to my memory on that account; but now
'when I voluntarily resign to you what ' might have
4;11 retained, 1 may well expeat the warmef exprefflons
of thanks on your part. With these, however, I dif-
-penfe, and hall confider your concern for the welfare
of your fubjecs, and your love of them, as the best
end mofi acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me.
It is in your power, by a wife and virtuous admini-
1tration, to justify the extraordinary .proof which I give
.this day of my paternal affetion, and to demonfirate
that you are worthy of the confidence which I repose
in you. Preserve an inviolable regard for religion; main-
tain the Catholick faith in its purity; let the laws of
your country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not on
the rights and privileges of your people; and if the
time (hall ever come, when you (hall wiih to enjoy
the tranquillity of private life, may you have a son en-
dowed with such qualities, that you can resign your
Sceptre to him, with as much fatisfaaion, as I give up
mine to you."

As soon as Charles had 6nihed this long address to his

fiubjeas and to their new overeign, 'he funk into the
chair, exhausted and ready to faint with the fatigue ot
filch an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the
wrhole audience melted into tears, some from admiration
of his magnanimity, others softened by the eKpreflons of
tenderness towards 'his son, and of love to his people;
and 'all were affected with the deepell formw t losing a
sovereign, who had distinguished the Netherlands, his
,ative country, with particular marks of his regard and
attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knses, andafter returning

thanks to his'father, with a low .and fubmiffiv voice, for
the royal gift which his unexampled bounty 'had beltowed
upon him, he adreffed the aembly of the ftaies, and
egretting his inability to speak the Flemilh language

with

with such facility as to eprefs what he felt on this in- Book XI.
teiefiing occasion, as well as what he owed to his good -~ ,..
ftbje&s in the Netherlands, he begged that they would 'iss5
allow Granvelle bishop of Arras, to deliver what he had
given him in charge to speak in his name. Gratvelle,
in a long difoourfe, epatiated on the zeal with which
Pllilip was animated for the good of his fubjeas, on his
resolution to devote all his time and talents to the pro-
moting of their happiness, and on his intention to imitate
his father's example in diitinguilhing the Netherlands
with peculiar marks of his regard. Macs, a lawyer of
great eloquence, replied, in name of the States, with
large proefefions of their fidelity and affe&ion to their
new sovereign.

T ENs Mary. Queen dowager of Hungary, resigned

the regency, with which ihe had been intru4led by her '5ss
brother during the space of twenty-five years. Next day Janual 6.
Philip, in presence of the States, took the usual oaths to
maintain the rights and privileges of his subje&s; and all
the maem ers, in their own name, and in that of their
constituents, swore allegiance to him [d].

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assembly no

less Fpleadid, and with a ceremonial equally pompous,
resigned to his son the crowns of Spain, with all their ter-
ritories depending on them, both in the od and in the
new world. Of all these vast pofffions, he reserved
nothing for himself but an annual pension of an hundred
thousand crowns, to defray the charges of his family, and
to afford him a fmatl fum for aas of beneficence and
charity [e].

Cc4 As

[d] CGdleveus Relutio Abdictioni Car. V. p. Goldet. Polit. Imper.
377. Srada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.
[c] The Emperor'a refigantinn is an event not only of such importnce,

but of such nature, that the precise date of it, one ould xpect,
should .have een acertaied by hifteriis with the geteft ccuracy.
There i, howter. an amazing and unaccountable diversity among themn
with regard to this point. All agree that the deed by which Charles
transferred to his fDn hit dominieon in the Netherlands, bears date at
Bruffelh the l th f fOober. Sandoval .6ies on the a8th of OkEobtr a,
the day m which the ceremoy of rafignation happencd, ond he was prc-
Itot at the trnif·aion, vol. ii. p. ;pa. odleceus who publilhed a r*aile
de Abdicatiem Carei V. files the pablick ceremony a well the dotr
of th irmwet f reflation oa the a.th. Pere Ba. , I knpw not on
whet athority, fuea it on the l4th of November. Hitt D'Alemr viii.
W;6. rrera irqesa with Codleveus in fentimcnt tm. i. as. ·alike-
wife does Palltvicini, whose authority with rfpe t date, and evel y
thing where a minute accuracy i reiuifite, i of great weight. Hid. lib.

»vi.

Book XI. As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hopin[
'-- -' that the dynels of the air and warmth of the climate
Ref'ves to that country might mitigate the violence of his dileaic
fix hs refi- which had been much increaed by the moiflure of tl,e
dence in air and the rigour of the winers in tlhe Netherlands, he
Spain. was extremely impatient to embark tor that kingdom,

and to disengage himlelf entirely frem business, which he
found to be impofiible while he remained in Brussels.

Obliged to But his phvficians remonfirated so ftrorgly against hi,
remain for
ftme time venturing to ea at that cold and boisterous ft alon of the
in the Ne- year, that he conlented, thcugh with reludtance, to put
therland:. off his vovage for tome months.
Promotes BY yielding to their intieaties, he had the fatisfalion,
thioe netr- before he left the Low-Countries, of taking a confidera-
peace. ble ftep towards a peace with France, which he ardently

wifbed for, not only on his son's account, but that he
migh. have the merit, when quitting the world, of re-
efiabiifhing that tranquillity in Europe, which he had ba-
nifhed nut of it almnof from the time that he assumed the
adminifiration of affairs. Some time previous to his re-
fignation, commifficners had been appointed by him and
by the French King, in older to treat of an exchange ot
priorners. In their conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles,
near Cambrav, an expedient was accidentally proposed
for terminating hoflilities betwixt the contending mo-
narchs, by a Iorg tuce, during the fubfifience of which,

:'i. p. 168. HifoRrians differ nn less with regard to the day on which
Charles rgefiged the c,o,'n ,f Sain to his lnm. Aclrding to M. e
Thou, it a mrpnlth after hic hlvinp refi;ned hiS dominions in tte Ne-
therland,, i. e. bsout the 2zth of N"embnher, Thuan. Wib 6. . i.

7

\.ccrdil)g to Sallits. l it V.b on the 16th f January t5;6, Sand. ii. 603.
Antonio di VWa agrers with him, Epit, ime del Vida r(l Car. V. p. i o.
According to Pallavicini it was on the 17th. Pal lil. x,l. p. 68. and with
timr Herrera agrees Vida del D Fe'ilr, tomn. i. pI. 33. But Ferrerra
fixes it on hr firll day of anuary, Hilt. (iener. tom ix. p. 371. I. t
l.reaucre (u!'|nfre the refrgnation of the crln n of Srain io hve been
executed a few dlay after the refiRgntion f the Netherlands, Corn. ae
Reb. Gll. r. F79. It isremai kal'e that in the treaty of truce, at Vau-
telles, thouph Charles had made ovr all his dominion to hii son f i
weeks rrevious to the ronclufion ns it, all the flipulations are in the rnm-
reror' nri, and Philip is only drfined King ot Fng:and and Napler.
It i certain Philip was not proltimed Kiig ofCalil, &c. at Vall(lolil
Inoner then the 4th f Mirit. Sandiv. ii. p. 606; and previlus to that
crremuny, he did not ihool'e, it would seem, to nflume the title ,f, King
of any of h; Spanifli Kingdoms, or to perfrm any a*l of royal jurildit-
tion. In a deed ainexed to tile tleity of truce, dated April a9th, he *I-
fumes the title of Kirg of Castile, &c. in the usual ile of the Spanilh
nioorlrD in that age. Corps Dipl. ton. iv. Append. 1 85.

and

and without discussing their refpe&cive claims, each should r.,.,k XI.
eitain what was in his poffefion. Charles, lenlible how V-
much his kingdoms were exhausted by the experfivc i6
and almost continual wars in which his ambition had en-
gaged him, and eager to gain for his on a Ihort interval
of peace, that he migt efablifh himleif firmly on iis'
throne, declared wvlirm'y for closing with the overture,
though maniteflly dishonourable as well as diladvantagc-
ous; and such was the rcfped due to his wildom and ex-
perience, that Philip, notwithlanding his unwillingnels to
purchase peace by such concelions, did not presume to
urge his opinion in opposition to that of his father.

HENRY could not have hesitated one moment about Atruce

giving his conftnt to a truce on such conditions, as would cncluded.
leave him in quiet poffefiion of the greater part of tlre
Duke of Savoy's dominions, together with the important
conquest which he had made on the German frontier.
But it was no easy matter to reconcile such a fep with
the engagements that he had come under to the Pope, in
his late treaty with him. The Confiable Montmorency,
however, reprelented in such a firiking light, the impru-
dence of acrificing the true intereis of his kingdom to
thefc rash obligations, and took such advantage of the
absence of the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had teduced
the King into his alliance with the Caraffas, that Henry,
naturally fluctuating and unfleady, and apt to be inflacn-
ced by the advice lat given him, authori/.ed his ambailt. 5th Feb.
dors to sign a treaty of truce with the IEmperor for five
years, on the terms which ad been proposed. But that
lie might not seem to have altogether forgotten his ally
the Pope, who he foresaw would be highly exafper:itcd,
he, in order to sooth him, took care that he fhoild be
exprefly included in the truce ['].

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and the Ad- Rat;ficiby

miral Coligny to Brussels, the former to he prefcnt when i,,m
the King of France, and the latter when the lmpieror
and his Ion, ratified the treaty and bnd themselves by
oath to observe it []. When an account of the cunte- Tl.l'"p¢'

mi.' .i.

If] Mrm. d Rillier. ii. si6. Corp. Dipllom. tom Iv. App. 81. d,ttl.J.
[g] One of Admiral Colig'ny'u ttenidants, ho rout to thr inu t oi
rsnce an cc tnt of what hprrnrd x hilr thc( refidlj at ruil'ri. , ak(.
notice, as an innlane .f Philip'i ilnpolitenrf., (hat hr rec ril ilh Fl t '
anmbaffr(t r in n ipartmcea hunig with taptry, whih rtrprr'rtcd thr
tlattle cf Pvia, thr manner ii hich Franci. I wia ketr -i, iric r, his
''y/'r to Spaii, with itl thic cihcum ltai c- ,.; h . k

i A. I,t) * 1, u I upil in
".int it Mladrid. Mrm. de RLKt.r i * ;4

pok xi. fences at Vaucelles, and of the conditions of truce which
*----- b had been propoed there, were first carried to Rome, i

.'S56 gave the Pope no manner of dilquiet. He trusted o

much to the honour of the French monarch, that he
would not alcw himself to think that Henry could forget
so oon, or violate bo {hamefully, all the ttipulations In
his league with him. He had uch an high opinion of the
Emperor's u ih3otl, that he made no doubt of his rcftuing
his consent to a truce on uch unequal terms and on both
thee accounts he confidently pronounced that this, like
many preceding negotiations, would terminate in nothing,
But later and more certain intelligence ~en convinced
him that in political affairs no reaining is more faUaciou;,
than, because an event is improbable, to conclude that it
will not happen. The fdden and unexpeted condufion
.of the truce filled Paul with ftoniihment and terror.
The Cardinal of Lorrain dursl not encounter that ftorn
of indignation, to which be knew he hould e expoled
from the haughty Pontiff, who had so good reason to be
incensed; but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to
the Cardinal Tournon the difficult talk of attempting to
tooth Paul and his nephews. They werefully feifble of
the perilous situation in which they now flood. By their
engagements with France, which were rn longer ecret,
they had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the vio-
lence of his implacable temper. Te'Duke of Alva, a
minister, fitted as well by his abilities as by the severity of
his nattre, for executing all Philip's rigorous schemes,
had advanced from Milan to Naples, and began to assem-
ble troops on the frontiers of the EFcdieffticai State.
While they, if deserted by France, mulf not only relin-
quifh all the hopes of dominion .ad sovereignty to which
their ambition apired, but remain eposed to the resent
merit of the Spanih monarch, without one ally to proted
them againt an enemy with whom they were so little able
to contend.

He at- UNDR thee circumfiances, Paul had recourse to the
tcmnrt t arts of negotiation and intrigue, of which the Papal court
rrkidtle the knows well how to avail itself in order to ward off any

calamity threatened by an enemy superior in power. He
affeoed to approve highly of the truce, as an happy e-
pedient for putting a flop to the effusion of Chluiftian
blood. He expressed his warmed wilhes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He exhortrd

the

the rival Prj.ces to embrace this.favourable opportunity .3ok XI.
of letting on foot a negotiation for that purpole, and ot- -v
tered, as their common father, to be mediator between 5ss6*
them. Under this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba
his nuncio to the court of Bruflels, and his nephew Cat-
dinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The publick nftrutiorn
given to both were the fame; that they fhQuld ule their
utnoft endeavours to prevail with the two ronaschs to
accept of the Pope's mediation, that by means of it,
peace might he re-eftahlifhed, and measures might be
taken for aflnmhling a general council. But under this
specious appearance of zeal for attaining objecs io defira-
ble in themselves, and so becoming his sacred chai atter
to pursue, Paul concealed very different intentions.
Caraffa, besides his publick infrudtions, received a pri-
vate comrnmilion to f4licit the French King to renounce
the treaty of truce, .and to renew his engagements with
the Holy See, alnd ,e was inpowered to pare neither
entreaties, nor pomi.es, nor bribes, n order to.gain that
point. Thi,, both the uncle and the nephew confixered
as the real end of the ebaffy; while the other fej'ved
to amuse the vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his
son. The Cardinal, accordigly, set out instantly for lh May.
Paris, and travelled with the greatest expedition, while
Rebibf was detained some weeks at Rcqme; and wjhen it
became necessary for him to begin.his journey, he receiv-
ed ecret orders to protraf it as much as poflible, that
he iffle .of Caraffa's negotition might be knows before
he .honld reach Bruitela, and acording to that, proper
dire~ions might :be give to him with egard to the tone
which he hould afiune, in treating with the Emperor
and his ,on [h].

C.ARAFA made hisentry into Paris with extfaordi~ry His negoti-

pomp; and having prreented a confeqated sword to t'o tr
Henry as the protc&or, o whose aid trh Pope relied in pAle.
the pre.cnt .exigency, he befolght him not to difrcgard
the inueteties of a parent in difiaefs, but to employ that
weapon which he gave him in his detence. This he re-
prekted not only as a duty f filial piety, but as an a&
of jrtc¢. As the ope, fom confidence in the atiance
and uppost wich his lte treaty with France entitltd
him to ~ c, had taken such flep as had irritated the
Ih3 PWlv. lib. iii. p. 169. 1Baraet l1fl 'f f.r. ii. App 30.9.

King

Book X. Kin( of Spain, he conjure.! HItnry not to susser Paul and
--,-' his family to he crushed under the weight of that resent-
l 6-s ment which they had drawn on thenmelves merely by

their attachment to France. Together with this argn-
mt.nt addrct-itd to his generosity, he employed another
which he hped would woik on his ambition. IHe at-
firnied that now was the time, when, with the mofl cer-
tain profpec t luccels, he might attack Philip 's domi-
nions in Ital ; that the flower of the veteran Spanish
band* had periit-d in the wars of Hungary, Germ:iny,
and the Low-Couritrie ; that the nmperor had left his
son an exhauled trealury, and kingdoms drained of men;
that he hald no longer to contend with the abilities, the
experience, and ood fortune of Charles, but with a
monarch scarce feated on his throne, unpradi'ed in com-
mand, odious to many of the Italian flates, and dreaded
hy all; that the Pope, who had alreadv levied oldiers,
would bring a confidcrable army into the field, whici
m hen joined b\ a luficient rumber of French troops,
mitght by ore britk and sudden effort, drive the Spani-
ards out of Naples, and add to the crown of France a
kirirdnm, the cenquell of thich had been the great o-
jec of all hi, ,c'td(ctffors during half acentury, and the
chief motive or all their expeditions into Italy.

Tleir cf- EV.ERY word Caraffa fpoko made a deep impression on
i'"'1 Henry; conicious, on the one hind, that the Pope had
.j)" 3 ;,lfl cause to reproach him with not having consulted the

Ilws either of enerofitv or of decency, when he re-
reurccd huis league with him, and had agreed to the truce
of Vancclles ; and eager, on the other hand, not only to
cliltin,,uifh liii rign by a corquefi, which three former
nionarchs h d attempted with(,ut fucceis, but likewise to
acquiie n cltali(fhnient of futch dinitv and value for one
of his son,. Reverence, however, for the oath, by
whi h lie had o lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles;
the extreme cld are cf the Pope, whole death might oc-
cafion ni ent!t ie\ clution in the political fvllem of Italy;
together wirth tlhe reprelcntations of NiKntmorencv, who

lepeated all the arguments tlat he had uled againfit te

lirft leagie wilh Paul, and pointed out the great and im,
mcdiatc ad1v:inl ages which France derived fiom the truce;
kept tterrv fr fimetiime in lufpenle, and might poflibly

otae ouweithed all CaiatYa's arguments. But the Car-

dinal was not filch a novice in tle arts of intrigue and nc-
g ,iaiti(i, as, :;in to l.av e tpcdiclts ready fur removing

or urmounting all these obstacles. To obviate the ki'ss B. ok XI.
cruple with regard to his oath, he produced powers tioh -
the Pope to ablolve him from the obligation of it. By 15s6'
way of feculity against any danger which he might ap-
piehend from the lope's death, he engiged that his un-
tie would make luch a nomination ot Caidinais, as should
give Henry the absolute command of the next lcetion,
and enable him to place in the Papal char a perion en-
tirely devoted to his interefl.

IN order to counterbalance the cffc& of the Confla-

blc's opinion and influence, he employed not only the
active talents of the Duke of Guise, and the eloquence of
his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain, but the addrel of
the Queen, aided by the more powerful arts of Diana of
Poitiers, who, unfortunately for Fiance, co-operated
with Catharine in this point, though rfe took plealuc,
on almost every other occasion, to thwart and mortify
her. They, by their united solicitations, ealily fwaved
the King, who leaned of his own accord to that fide, to-
wards which they wished him to incline. All Montino-
rency's prudent remonfirances were dilregarded; the nun-
cio absolved Henry from his oath; and he signed a new July 3.
league with the Pope, which rekindled the lamnes of ar
both in Italy and in the Low-Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew that there The Ppe-

was a fair profped of his ucceding in this negotiation, ""'' .r"-
he dispatched a meflenger after the nur.cio Rebiba, wiith ,1 nj
orders to return to Rome, without proceeding to Biullels. 'hilip.
As it was now no longer neceffarv to prelerve that tone of
moderation, which luited the charaaer o a mediator,
and which he had affeaed to assume, or to put any far-
ther reitraint upon his resentment againll Philip, h ba.ld-
ly threw off the matk, and took luch i olent lieps as ren-
dered a rupture unavoidable. lie lei.i and ipriioihed
the Spanish envoy at his court. He excommunicatcd the
('olonna's; and having deprived Mark Antonio, tile
head ,f that family, of the dukedom of Paliana, ihe
ganted that dignity, together with the territory annexed
tu it, to his nephew the Count of Montuiio. He ol dcled
a legal information to be presented in the confillory of
Cardilnals againIt Philip, etting forth that hie, notwitlh-
flandig the fidelity and allegiance due by him to the
Holy See, of which he held the crown of Naples, lad
not only afforded a retreat in his domini(nns to thel

Coluoina's,

Book XI. Colonna's, whom the Pope had excbrllmunicated and
-v"-'declared rebels, but had furnished them with arms, and

'556. was ready, in conjuncion with them, to invade the Ec-

clefialtlcal.State in an hostile manner; that such condut
in a vaiil was to be deemed treason against his liege
lord, the punilliment of which was the forfeiture of his
siet. Upon this the consistorial advocate requested the
Plope to take cogniv.ance of the cauf, and to appoint a
day for hearing of it, when he would. make good every
article of the charge, and;expe& from his justice that
tentence which the heinousness of Philip's crimes merited.
Paul, whose pride was highly flattered with the idea of
tl):ing and palling judgment on so great a King, assentod
to his requelt; and as if it had been no lets easy to ex-
July 27. ecute than to pronounce sentence, declaredthat he would

coniult with the Cardinals concerning the formalities re-
quifite in condctuing the trial [i].

Philip's ru- BUT while Paul allowed his.prde and resentment to
:eii'itiuus drive him on with Juch headlong impeuofity;. Philip
fruls !. diicovered an amazing moderation on his part. He had

been taught by the Spanish ecclefiafticks who had the
charge of his education, a profound. veneration, fr the
Holy See. This fentinent,. which had been.early in-
fused, grew up with him as he advanced in years,. and
took full poiieflion of his mind,. witich was naturallv
thouglltful, serious, and prone to fupeftition;. When
he foresaw a rupture with the Pope approaching,. he had
such violent scruples with refpit to the lawfulness of
taking arms against the Vicegerent of Christ, and the
cammon father of all Christians, that he consulted some
Spanish divines upon that point; Though they, with
tie usual dexterity of cafufis in accommodating their
ie!ponfes to the circumfianees of those who apply to
them for dire&ion, assured him thtr, after employing
pra ers and remonftiances in order to bring the Pope to
reaion, he had full right, bothl by the laws of nature and
ot Chriflianity, not only to defend himself when attack-
ed, but to begin hofilities, if that. were judged the
mort proper expedient, for preventing the effe of
Paul's vioknce and injustice: Yet Philip hill deliberated
and delayed, confidcring it as a. most cruel misfortune,

[i] Pilliv. lib, xiii. 171.

that

that his administration should open with an attack on a Book Xl.
person, whose sacred function and characer he lo high- C--
ly refpeded [k]. *j

AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compliance with The Duke

his master's scruples, had continued to negotiate long as- of Ahlv
ter he hould have begun to a&, finding Paul inexorable, 'ki;s the
and that every overture of peace, and every appearance the Pope.
ofhefitation on his part increased the Pntiff's natural
arrogance, took the field and entered the ecclefiaical Sep. 5-
territories. His army did not exceed twelve thouand
men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers, and com-
manded chiefly by those Roman barons, whom Paul s
violence had; driven into exile. The valour ofthe troops,
and the animosity of their leaders who fought in their
own quarrel, and to recover their own estates, fiipplicd
the want of numbers. As none of the French forces were
yet arrived, Alva oon became master of the Campagna
Romana; some cities being surrendered through the
cowardice of the garrisons, which consisted of raw fol-
diers, ill disciplined, and worse commanded; the gates
of others being opened by the inhabitants, who were
eager to receive back their ancient masters. Aiva, that
he might not be taxed with impiety in seizing the patri-
mony of the church, took poffeflion of the towns which
capitulated, in the name of the college of cardinals, to
which, or to the Pope that hould be chosen to ucceed
Paul, he declared that he would immediately restore
them.

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose light A truce he-

troops made inroads to the gates of Rome, filled that city tween the
with consternation; and Paul, though inflexible and un-Philip
daunted himself, was obliged to give way lo far to the
fears-and solicitations of the Cardinals, as to fend depu-
ties to Alva in order to propose a cessation of arms. The
Pope yielded the more readily, as he was sensible of a
double advantage which might be derived from obtaining
that point. It would deliver the inhabitants of Rome
from their present terror, and would afford time for the
arrival of the succours which he expeted from France.
Nor was Alva unwilling to close with the overture, both
as he knew how delirous his mailer was to terminate a
war, which he had undertaken with reludance, and a;.

[k] Ferrer. Hist. dc lfprtic ix. 373. Hcrrera, i. 38.

his

Boo. XI. his armnv was so much weakened by garrisoning the great
^---nu ' umber of towns which he had reduced, that it was

,,ó l'carce in a cordition to keep the field without freh re-
. . c;i.its. A truce was accordingly concluded firfi for ten,

a"d afterwards for fort. days, during which, various
schem-es of peace was propoifd, and perpetual negotiati-
r' v cre carried on, but with no sincerity on the part of
: e l'opc. The return of his nephew the cardinal to
T r: , i he receipt of a ccnfiderable fum remitted by the
i- .. ol Prnce, the arrival of one body of French troops,
1,. · er with the expecation of others which had begun
': r march, rndered him more arrogant than ever, and
lit, ;.red all thoughts from his mind, but those of ar
,I:d rc»cnge [I].

[1] Palliv. ib,. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xii. 88. Mer. de R:b:c:,
ii 664.

T 1 L:

# BOOK XII.

THE
H I S T R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XII.
W RHILE these operations or intrigues kept the Book XI.

Pope and Philip busy and attentive, the Empe- v--r.

ror disentangled himself finally from all the affairs of this '56.
world, and set out for the place of his retreat. He had nChe t-
hitherto retained the Imperial dignity not from any un-tempt to
willingness to relinquish it, for after having resigned the ltr the

1 . . . . . fuccedion of
real and extensive authority that he enjoyed in his heredi- the mpie.
tary dominions, to part with the limited and often ideal
jurifdi&ion, which belongs to an elecive crown, was no
great sacrifice. His sole motive for delay was to gain a
few months, for making one trial more, in order to ac-
complifh his favourite scheme in behalf of his on. At
the very time Charles seemed to be mofl sensible of the
vanity of worldly grandeur, and when he appeared to be
quitting it not only with indifference, but with contempt,
the val schemes of ambition, which had so long occupied
and engrossed his mind, ill kept pol'efTion of it. He
could not think of leaving his ion, among the Princes of
EIurope, in a rank inferior to that which he himself had
held. As he had, some years before, made a fruitlels at-

VOL. II. D d tempt

Book XII. tempt to secure the Imperial 'crown to Philip, that by
'-v"" uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions

'55' of the house of Burgundy, he might put it in his power

to prosecute, with a better profpea of success, those great
plans, which his own infirmities had obliged him to aban-
don, he was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering
projec as chimerical or unattainable.

Which NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had for-
rroves un- merly met with from his brother Ferdinand, he renewed
fuCCcff1u. his solicitations with fresh importunity, and during the

summer, had tried every art, and employed every argu-
ment, which he thought could induce him to quit the Im-
perial throne to Philip, and to accept of the investiture of
some province, either in Italy, or in the Low-Countries,
as an equivalent [a]. But Ferdinand, who was so firm
and inflexible with regard to this point, that he had paid
no regard to the solicitations of the Emperor, even when
they were enforced with all the weight of authority,
which accompanies supreme power, received the over-
ture, that now came from him in the situation to which
he had descended, with greater indifference, and would
not deign to liften to it. Charles, ashamed of his own
credulity in having imagined that he might accomplish
that now, which he had attempted formerly without fuc-
cess, defiled finally from his scheme. He then resigned
the government of the Empire, and having transferred
all his claims of obedience and allegiance from the Ger-
manic body, to his brother the King of the Romans, he
Aoguft 7. executed a deed to that effed, with all the formalities,

requisite in such an important tranfa&ion. The infiru-
ment of resignation he committed to William Prince of
Orange, ard impowered him to lay it before the college
of elcCors [b]

Charles NOTHING now remained to detain Charles from that
sets out retreat for which he languished. Every thing having been

prepared some time for his voyage, he set out for Zuit-
burg in Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rende/-
vous. In his way thither he passed through Ghent, and
after flopping there a few days, to indulge that tender
and pleasant melancholy, which arises in the mind of

A[] Ambrf(lres dec Nosilles, tom. v. 35ó.
[bC Goldfi. Conflit. Imper. parr i. 576.

ever}

every man in the decline of life, on visiting the place of Book XII.
his nativity, and viewing the scenes and objects familiar *~
to him in his early youth, he pursued his journey accom- 5
panted by his son Philip, his daughter the archdutches,
his sifters the dowager Quecns ot France and Hungary,
Maximilian his fon-in-law, and a numerous retinue of the
Flcmifh nobility. Before he went on board, he dismissed
them, with marks of his attention or regard, and taking
leave of Philip with all the tenderness of a father who
embraced his son for the last time, he set fail on the fe-
venteenth of September under convoy of a large fleet of
Spanish, Flemish, and English hips. He declined a
pressing invitation, from the Queen of England, to land
in tome part of her dominions, in order to refresh himself,
and that she might have the comfort of feeing him once
more. It cannot surely, said he, be agreeable to a Quecn
to receive a visit from a father-in law, who is now nothing
more than a private gentleman.

His voyage was prosperous and agreeable, and he ar- His arrival

rived at Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he atio there
left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell prostrate on
the ground; and confidering himself now as dead to the
world, he kilfed the earth, and said, " Naked came 1
out of my mother's womb, and naked I now return to
thee, thou common mother of mankind." From Laredo
he pursued his jburney to Burgos, carried by his atten-
dants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a horle lit-
ter, fufferingexquifite pain at every flep, and advancing
with the greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish nobility
repaired to Burgos in order to pay court to him, but they
were so few in number, and their attendance was so ne-
gligent, that Charles oblerved it, and felt, for the first
time, that he was no longer a Monarch. AccuRomed
from his early youth to the dutiful and officious respect
with which those who poffels overcirn power are at-
tended, he had received it with the credulity common to
Princes, and was weak enough to be mortified, when he
now discovered, that he had been indebted to his fortune,
for much of that oblequious regard, which lie had fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But though
he might have soon learned to forget the levity of his sub-
Jeas, or to have dfpifed their neglect, lie was more
deeply afflicted with his son's ingrat itude, who, forgetting
already how much he owed to hii father's bouiit, cbll'-

) da ed

Book XI1. ed him to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he paid
'**'1 him the firfR moiety of that small pension, which was all

S' that he had reserved of so many kingdoms. As without

this fum, Charles could not dismiss his domelticks with
such rewards as their services merited, or his generosity
had destined for them, he could not help expressing both
surprise and diffatisfa&ion [b]. At last the money was
paid, and Charles having dismissed a great number of his
domeflics, whose attendance he thought would be super-
fluous or cumbersome in his retirement, he proceeded to
Valladolid. There he took a last and tender leave of his
two sifters, whom he would not permit to accompany him
to his solitude, though they entreated it with tears, not
only that they might have the consolation of contributing
by their attendance and care to mitigate or to sooth his
sufferings, but that they might reap introt&ion and bene-
fit by joining with him in those pious exercises, to which
he had consecrated the remainder of his days.

The place FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to Plazen-
of hi re cia in Estremadura. He had passed through that city a

great many years before, and having been firuck at that
* time with the delightful situation of the monastery of St.

Juftus belonging to the order of St. Jerome, not many
miles ditfant from that place, he had then observed to
some of his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dio-
clefian might have retired with pleasure. The impression
had remained so ftrongon his mind, that he pitched on it
as the place of his retreat. It was feated in a vale of no
great extent, watered by a small brook, and surrounded
by rising grounds, covered with lofty trees; both from
the nature of the foil, and temperature of the cli-
mate, it was efeemred the most healthful and delicious
situation in Spain. Some months before his resignation,
he had sent an architec thither, to add a new apartment
to the monaRery, for his accommodation; but he gave
ftri& orders that the file of the building Should be such
as suited his present fRation, rather than his former dig-
nity. It confidfed only of fix rooms, four of them in the
form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the other two,
each twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth,
and furnished in the most simple manner. They were all

[b] Atrada de Bello Belg. lib. i. .
420

level with the ground; with a door on one fide into a Book Xll.
garden, of which Charles himself hadgiven the plan, and 'v'
had filled it with various plants, which he proposed to sS56
cultivate with his own hands. On the other fide it
communicated with the chapel of the monastery, in which
he was to perform his devotions. Into this humble re- s5;'
treat, scarce iufficient for the comfortable accommoda- Feb. 4.
tion of a private gentleman, did Charles enter, with
twelve domefticks only. He buried there, in solitude
and silence, his grandeur, his ambition, together with all
those vail projets, which, during half a century, had
alarmed and agitated Europe, filling every kingdom in
it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and the dread
of being fubje&ed to his power [c].

THE contrast between Charles's condua, and that of Contrft be-

the Pope at this juncure, was so obvious, that it itruck tbwehie the
even the most careless observers; nor was the comparison Charles and
which they made much to Paul's advantage. The for- the Pope.
mer, a conqueror, born to reign, long accustomed to the
splendor which accompanies supreme power, and to those
busy and interesting scenes in which an aive ambition
had engaged him, quitted the world, at an early period
of life, that he might close the evening of his days
in tranquillity, and secure some interval for fober thought,
and serious recolleaion. The latter, a priel, who had
patsed the early part of his life in the hade of the schools,
and in the ltudy of the speculative sciences, who was
seemingly so detached from the world, that he had hut
himself up for many years in the solitude of a cloiter,
and who was not raised to the Papal throne until he had
reached the extremity of old age, discovered at once all
the impetuosity of youthful ambition, and engaged in vast
Ichemes, in order to accomplih which, he scrupled not
to scatter the feeds of discord and to kindle the flames..
of war in every corner of Europe. But Paul, regard-
less of the opinion and censures of mankind, held on his
own course with his wonted arrogance and violence.
These, although they seemed already to have exceed-
ed all bounds, rose to a still greater height, upon the ar-
rival of the duke of Guise in Italy.

THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain foresaw and Thedukeof

Guile leads
desired, had happened. The duke of Guise wasentruft- th French

army into
[c] Sodov. ii. 607. & Zunig*. o. Thuan. lib. xviii. 69. Italy.

D d 3

cd

Book XII. ed with the command of the army appointed to march to

-'""-'the Pope's affiflance. It confifed of twenty thousand
'55 7 men, ot the best troops in the service of Fiance. So high

was the Duke's reputation, and tuch the general expeca-
tion of beholding ome extraordinary exertion of his cou-
rage and abilities in a war, into which he had precipitated
his country, chiefly with the design of gaining a field
where he might display his own talents, that many of the
French nobility, who had nc command in the troops em-
ploycd, accompanied him as volunteers. This army pas-
fed the Alps in a rigorous ealon, and advanced towards
Rome, without any opposition from the Spaniards, who,
as they were not strong enough to at in different parts,
had clleated all their frces in one body on the frontiers
of Naples, for the defence of that kingdom.

le ope EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, the
rene%, hof- Pope let loose all the fury of his relentment aganft Phi-
ainlr Phi-lip, which, notwithfianding the natural violence of his
lip. temper, prudential considerations had hitherto obliged
February him to keep under sone refiraint. He named commiqi-
in. oners, whom he impowerd to pass judgment in the filrt,

which the consistorial advocate had commenced againit
Philip, in order to prove that he had forfeited the crown
of Naples, by taking arms againfi the Holy See, of
April 9. which he was a vassal. He recalled all the nuncios re-

sident in the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of
their allies. This was levelled chiefly againfl Cardinal
Pole, the Papal legate in the court of England, whose
great merit, in having contributed so successfully to re-
concile that kingdom to the church of Rome, together
with the expe&ation of farther services that he might
perform, was not lufficient to screen him from therefent-
ment which he had incurred by his zealous endeavours to
re-eflablifh peace between the house of Aufiria and
France. He commanded an addition to be made to the
anathemas annually denounced againfl the enemies of the
church on Maunday-Thurfday, whereby he infliced the
censure of excommunication on the authors of the late
invafiol of the ecclefiaflical territories, whatever their
rank or dignity might be; and, in consequence of this,
the usual prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day
in the Pope's chapel [d].

[d] Pal. lib. iii. 1g0. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 678.

BUT

BuT while the Pope indulged himself in these wild and Book Xll.

childish sallies of rage, he either neglected, or it exceed- -- -'
ed his power, to take such measures as would have ren- 557
dered his resentment really formidable, and fatal to his
enemies. For, when the Duke of Guise entered Rome,
where he was received with a triumphal pomp, which
would have been more suitable if he had been returning
from having terminated the war with glory, than when
he was going to begin it with a doubtful chance of fuc-
cess, he found none of the preparations for war in such
forwardness as Caraffa had promised, or he had cxpeCted.
The Papal troops were far inferior in number to the quo- Hismilitary
ta ltipulated; no magazines sufficient for their subsistence preparati-
were formed; nor was money for paying them provided. ons ad
The Venetians, agreeably to that cautious maxim which eq
the misfortunes of their state had firfi led them to adopt,
and which was now become a fundamental principle in
their policy, declared their resolution to preserve an ex-
at neutrality, without taking any part in the quarrels of
Princes so far their superiors in power. The other Italian
states were either openly united in league with Philip, or
secretly wished success to his arms againit a Pontiff, whose
inconsiderate ambition had rendered Italy once more the
feat of war.

THE Duke of Guise perceived that the whole weight Duke of

of the war would devolve on him; and became sensible, r'tions.
though too late, how imprudent it is to rely, in the ex-
ecution of great enterprizes, on the aid of feeble allies.
Pushed on, however, by the Pope's impatience for aAi-
on, as well as by his own desire of performing something
of what he had so confidently undertaken, he marched April 13.
towards Naples, and began his operations. But the fuc-
cess of these fell far short of his former reputation, of what
the world expeted, and of what he himself had promised.
He opened the campaign with the siege of Civetella, a
town of ome importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But
the obstinacy with which the Spanish governor defended
it, baffled all the impetuous efforts of the French valour,
and obliged Guise, after a siege of three weeks, to retire
from the town with disgrace. He endeavoured to wipe
off that slain, by advancing boldly towards the Duke of
Alva's camp, and offering him battle. But that prudent
commander, sensible of all the advantages of hlanding on
the defenfivc before an invading enemy, declined an en-

D d 4 g.igement,

Book XlI. gagement, and kept within his entrenchments; and ad.
' ---' hering to his plan with the fleadinefs of a Castilian, elud-
'557' ed with great address all Guise's fratagems, to draw

him into action [e]. Meanwhile, sickness wafted the
French army; violent dissensions had arisen between
Guise and the commander of the Pope's forces; the Spa-
niards renewed their incursions into the ecclesiastical
slate; the Pope, when he found, instead of the conquests
and triumphs which he had fondly expected, that he
could not secure his own territories from depredation,
murmured, complained, and began to talk of peace. The
duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree with having
aaed such an inglorious part, not only olicited his court
either to reinforce his army, or to recall him, but urged
Paul to fulfil his engagements; and called on Cardinal
Caraffa, sometimes with reproaches, and sometimes with
threats, to make good these magnificent promises, from a
rash confidence in which he had advised his master to re-
nounce the truce of Vaucelles, and to join in league with
the Pope [].

Hof;ilities BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in this
in the Lnw- wretched situation, an unexpeted event happened in the
Coutries. Low-Cbuntries, which called the duke of Guise from a

flation wherein he could acquire no honour, to the most
dignified and important charge which could be committed
to a subjet. As soon as the French had discovered their
purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles, not only by
fending an army into Italy, but by attempting to furpri.e
some of the frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though
willing to have avoided a rupture, determined to pro-
fecute the war with such spirit, as should make his ene-
mies sensible, that his father had not erred, when he
judged him to be so capable of government, that he had
given up the reins into his hands. As he knew that Hen-
ry had been at great expence in fitting out the army un-
der the duke of Guise, and that his treasury was hardly
able to answer the exorbitant and endless demands of a
diflant war, he foresaw that all his operations in the Low-
Countries mull, of consequence, be feeble, and be con-
fidered only as secondary to those in Italy. For that rea-

[e] Herrera vid, de Felipe, ilB. [f] Thunn. lib. xxviii. 64.
!jllav. lib. xiii. aSJ. Burn. ii. »pp. 317.

son,

son, he prudently resolved to make his principal effort in Book Xl1.
that place where he expeced the French to be weakest, "
and to bend his chief force against that quarter where they '57
would feel a blow most sensibly. With this view, he as-
fembled in the Low-Countries an army of about fifty
thousand men, the Flemings serving him on this occasion
with that a&ive zeal, which fubjeds are wont to exert
in obeying the commands of a new sovereign. But Phi-
lip, cautious and provident, even at that early period of
life, did not reft all his hopes of success on that formida-
ble force alone.

HE had been labouring for some time to engage the Philip en-

English to espouse his quarrel; and though it was mani- dea"our to
feftly the interest of that kingdom to maintain a stria Englind in
neutrality, and the people themselves were sensible of the the wr.
advantages which they derived from it; though he knew
how odious his name was to the Engliih, and how averse
they would be to co-operate with him in any measure, he
nevertheless did not despair of accomplishing his point.
He relied on the affecion wherewith the Queen doated
on him, which was so violent, that even his coldnels and
neglec had not extinguished it, he knew her implicit
reverence for his opinion, and her fond desire of gratify-
ing him in every particular. That he might work on
these with greater facility, and more certain success, he
set out for England. The Queen who, during her hus-
band's absence, had languished in perpetual dejection,
resumed fresh spirits on his arrival; and without paying
the leaf attention either to the intereil or to the inclina-
tions of her people, entered warmly into all his schemes.
In vain did her privy-council remonstrate against the
imprudence as well as danger of involving the nation
in an unnecessary war; in vain did they put her in
mind of the solemn treaties of peace subsisting be-
tween England and France, which the condu& of that
nation had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary,
soothed by Philip's careses, or intimidated by the threats
which his acendant over her emboldened him at ome
times to throw out, was deaf to every thing that could be
urged in opposition to his sentiments, and insisted with
the greatest vehemence on an immediate declaration of
war against France. The council, though all Philip's ad-
dress and Mary's authority were employed to gain or over-
awe them, firuggled long, and yielded at las, not from

conviction,

Book XII. convi&ion, but merely from deference to the will of their

L?''^~ sovereign. War was declared againf France, the only
Ju eS57 one perhaps against that kingdom into which the English

ever entered with reluctance. As Mary knew the averfi-
on of the nation to this measure, he durst not call a par,
liament in order to raise money for carrying on the war.
She supplied this want, however, by a strain of preroga-
tive; and levied large ums on her fubjeas by her own
authority. This enabled her to assemble a sufficient bo-
dy of troops, and to fend eight thousand men under the
condu of the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army [].

Operations PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military glory,
of Philip' gave the command of his army to Emanuel Philibert,
army in the
Low-Con- duke of Savoy, and fixed his own residence at Cambray,
tries. that he might be at hand to receive the earliest intelli-

gence of his motions, and to aid him with his counsels.
The duke opened the campaign with a masterly stroke
of address, which justified Philip's choice, and discover-
ed such a superiority of genius over the French generals,
as almost enlured success in his subsequent operations. He
appointed the general rendezvous of his troops at a place
considerably distant from the couutry which he destined
to be the scene of a&ion; and having kept the enemy in
suspense for a good time with regard to his intentions, he
at last deceived them so effetually by the variety of his
marches and counter-marches, that they concluded that
he meant to bend all his force against the province of
Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into the
kingdom on that fide. In consequence of this opinion,
they drew all their fRrength towards that quarter, and
reinforcing the garrisons there, left the towns on other
parts of the frontier deititute of troops sufficient to defend
them.

Iarnf St. EMANU.EL, as oon as he perceived that this feint had
Q4uinlin its full effe&, turned suddenly to the right, advanced by

rapid marches into Picardy, and fending his cavalry, in
which he was extremely strong, before him, invested St.
Quintin. This was a town deemed in that age of confi-
derable firength, and of great importance, as there were
few fortified cities between it and Paris. The fortificati-
ons, however, had been much negle&ted, the garrison

[tl Carte lii. 337.

weakened

weakened by draughts sent towards Champagne, did not Book Xll.
amount to a fifth part of the number requisite for its de- ~v'
fence; and the governor, though a brave officer, was 57
neither of rank, nor authority, equal to the command in
a place of so much consequence, besieged by such a for-
midable army. A few days must have put the Duke of
Savoy in poffeflion of the town, if the admiral de Colig-
ny, who thought it concerned his honour to attempt sav-
ing a place of such importance to his country, and which
lay within his jurifdi&ion as governor of Picardy, had
not taken the gallant resolution of throwing himself into
it, with such a body of men as he could colle& of a fud-
den. This resolution he executed with great intrepidity,
and confidering the nature of the enterprize, with no
contemptible success; for though one half of his small
body was cut off, he, with the other, broke through the
enemy, and entered the town. The unexpeced arrival
of an officer of such high rank and reputation, and who
had exposed himself to. Ouch danger in order to join them,
inspired the desponding garrison with courage. Every
thing that the admiral's great skill and experience in the
art of war could fuggef, for annoying the enemy, or de-
fending the town, was attempted; and the citizens as
well as the garrison seconding his zeal with equal ardour,
seemed to be determined that they would hold out to the
last, and acrifice themselves in order to save their coun-
try [h].

THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English under the The French

Earl of Pembroke, joined about this time, pushed on the cndvour
siege with the greaterf vigour. An army so numerous, the town.
and o well supplied with every thing requisite, carried on
its approaches with great advantage against a garrison
which was flill so feeble that it durst seldom venture to
disturb or retard the enemies operations by allies. The
admiral, sensible of the approaching danger and unable
to avert it, acqulainted his uncle the confiable Montmo-
rency, who had the command of the French army, with
his situation, and pointed out to him a method by which
he might throw relief into the town. The conltable,
solicitous to save a town, the lots of which would open a
passage for the enemy into the heart of France; and ea-
ger to extricate his nephew out of that perilous fittiation,

[hb Thuai. lib. xix. 647.

in

Book XIl. in which zeal for the publick had engaged him; resolved,
s-v'-' though aware of the danger, to attempt what he desired.

'*557 With this view he marched from La Fere towards St.

Quintin at the head of his army, which was not by one
halt so numerous as that of the enemy, and having given
the command of a body of chosen men to Coligny's bro-
ther Dandelot who was colonel general of the French in-
fantry, he odered him to force his way into the town by
that avenue which the admiral had represented as mofi
practicable, while he himself with the mean army would
give the alarm to the enemies camp on the opposite fide,
and endeavour to draw all their attention towards that
Augufl o. quarter. Dandelot executed his orders with greater in-

trepidity than condut. His soldiers rushed on with such
headlong impetuosity, that though it broke the first body
of the enemy which flood in their way, it threw them-
selves into the utmost confusion; and being attacked by
frelh troops which closed in upon them on every fide,
the greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dandelot,
with about five hundred of the most adventrous, and
mofi fortunate, making good his entrance into the town.

The battle MEAN WHILE the Constable, in executing his part of
f St. Qui- the plan, advanced so near the camp of the besiegers, as

rendered it impoflible to retreat with safety in the face of
an enemy so much luperior in number. The Duke of Savoy
intlantly perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared,
with the pretence of mind and abilities of a great general,
to avail himfelfof it. He drew up his army in order of
battle, with the greatest expedition, and watching the
moment when the French began to file off towards La
Fere, he detached all his cavalry under the command of
the count of Egmont to fall on their rear, while he, at
the head of his infantry, advanced to support him. The
French retired at first in perfea order, and with a good
countenance; but when they saw Egmont draw near with
his formidable body of cavalry, the hock of which they
were conscious that they could not withstand, the profpe&
of imminent danger, added to distrust of their general,
vxhofe imprudence every soldier now perceived, struck
them with general consternation. They began insensibly
to quicken their pace, and those in the rear began to
press lo violently on such as were before them, that in a
short time their march resembled a flight rather than a
retreat. Egmont, observing their confifion, charged
them with the greatest fury, and in a moment all their

Genfdarnerie,

Genfdarmerie, the pride and strength of the French ar- Book Xll.
mies in that age, gave way and fled with precipitation. - -
The infantry, however, whom the constable, by his Tt'.aldl
presence and authority, kept to their colours, ill conti- of the
nued their retreat, until the enemy brought ome pieces French.
of cannon to bear upon their centre, which threw them
into such disorder, that the cavalry renewing their at-
tack, broke in, and the rout became univerial. About
four thousand of the French fell in the field, and among
those the Duke of Anguyen a Prince of the blood, toge-
ther with fix hundred gentlemen. The Constable, as
soon as he perceived the fortune of the day to be irre-
trievable, rushed into the thickest of the enemy, with a
resolution not to survive the calamity, which his ill-con-
duct had brought upon his country; but having received
a dangerous wound, and being wafted with the loss of
blood, he was surrounded by some Flemilh officers, to
whom he was known, who proteced him from the vio-
lence of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Bc-
fides the constable, the Dukes of Montpenfier and Lon-
gueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many officers of dif-
tindion, three hundred gentlemen, and near four thou-
sand private soldiers were taken prisoners. All the co-
lours belonging to the infantry, all the ammunition, and
all the cannon, two pieces excepted, fell into the enemies
hands. The vicorious army did not lose above fourscore
men [i].

THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the ancient The sirs e-

vi&ories of Crefy and Agincourt, gained by the English fees of it.
on the fame frontier, bore a more near resemblance to
these, in the suddenness of the rout; in the rashness of
the commander in chief; in the number of persons of
note slain or taken; and in the small loss sustained bv the
enemy. It filled France with equal consternation. Many
inhabitants of Paris with the fame precipitancy and trepi-
dation, as if the enemy had been already at their gates,
quitted the city, and retired into the interior provinces.
The King, by his presence and exhortations, endeavour-
ed to console and to animate such as remained, and ap-
plying himself with the greatest diligence to repair the
ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to defend it

[i] Thuan, 6o. Harzi Annal. Brabant. i. 6% Herrera, 29!.

Book Xll. againit the attack which he inltantly expected. But hap.

v- pily for France, Philip's caution, together with the intre-
557- pid firmness of the Admiral de Coligny not only saved

the cap.ital fiom the danger to which it was expoied, but
gained the nation a short interval, during which the peo-
ple recovered from the terror and dejecion occasioned by
a blo\a no less severe than unexpe&ed, and Henry had lei-
sure to take measures for the publick security with the
spirit which became the sovereign of a powerful and mar-
tial people.

rhilip re- PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited the camp
rFirs to his at St. Quintin, where he was received with all the exul-
"' my. tation of military triumph; and such were his transports

of joy on account of an event, which threw so much luf-
tre on the beginning of his reign, that they loftened his
severe and haughty temper, into an unusual flow of cour-
tely. When the Duke of Savoy approached, and was
kneeling to kifs his hands, he caught him in his arms,
and embracing him with warmth, " It becomes me, fays
he, rather to kifs your hands, which have gained me such
a glorious and almolt bloodless vi&ory."

Hi.s delibe- As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations on Phi-
ratioschn-lip's arrival were over, a council of war was held in
cerning the
prosecution order to determine how they might improve their vic-
of the war. tory to the belt advantage. The Duke of Savoy, fe-

conded by several of the ablefl officers formed under
Charles V. infifled that they hould immediately relin-
quifh the siege of St. Quintin, the reducion of which
was now an objet below their attention, and advance
directly towards Paris; that as there were neither troops
to oppose, nor any town of strength to retard their
march, they might reach that capital while under the
full impreflion of the altonifhment and terror occasion-
ed by the rout of the army, and take pofeffion of it
without refiflance. But Philip, less adventrous or more
prudent than his generals, preferred a moderate but
certain advantage, to an enterprize of greater fplen-
dour, but of more doubtful success. He represented to
the council the infinite resources of a kingdom so pow-
erful as France; the great number as well as martial
spirit of its nobles; their attachment to their overeign;
the vail advantages with which they could carry on
war in their own territories; and the unavoidable de-
ftruicion, which mul be the consequence of their pe-

nctrating

netrating too raihly into the enemy's country, before Book Xll.
they had secured such a communication with their own,
as might render a retreat safe, if upon any difafterous 557'
event that should become necessary. On all there ac-
counts, he advised the continuance of the siege, and
his generals acquiesced the more readily in his opinion,
as they made no doubt of being maiters of the town in a
few days, a loss of time of so little consequence in the ex-
ecution of their plan, that they might easily repair it by
their subsequent acivity [ll.

THE weakness of the fortifications, and the small num- St. Quintin
ber of the garrison, which could no longer hope either defended by

Admiral

for reinforcement, or relief, seemed to authorise this cal- Coligny,
culation of Philip's generals. But, in making it, they
did not attend sufficiently to the character of Admiral de
Coligny, who commanded in the town. A courage un-
dismayed and undifconcerted amidst the greatest dangers,
an invention fruitful in resources, a genius which rouzed
and eemed to acquire new force upon every disaster, a
talent of governing the minds of men, together with a
capacity of maintaining his ascendant over them even un-
der circumstances the molt adverse and distressful, were
qualities which Coligny possessed in a degree superior to
any general of that age. These qualities were peculiarly
adapted to the fRation in which he was now placed; and
as he knew the infinite importance to his country of every
hour which he could gain at this juncure, he exerted
himself to the utmost in contriving how to protrac the
siege, and to detain the enemy from attempting any en-
terprize more dangerous to France. Such were the per-
severance and kill with which he conduaed the defence, which i ra-
and such the fortitude and patience with which he ani- ken by *
mated the garrison, that though the Spaniards, the Fle-
mings, and the Englifl, carried on the attack with all
the ardour which national emulation infpircs, he held
out the town seventeen days. He was taken prisoner, at Auguf 17.
las, on the breach, overpowered by the superior number
of the enemy.

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost ativity, of Henry's

the interval which the Admiral's well-timed obfinacy had m"l'ures
afforded him. He appointed officers to collea the' scat- nce or hi,
ecred remains of the constable's army; he issued orders kingdom.

[I] Belcar. Conmeotar. di Reb. Gallic. 9ol.

for

Book XlI. for levying soldiers in every part of the kingdom; he corn.
'-v-' manded the ban and arriere ban of the frontier provinces
'557· instantly to take the field, and to join the Duke of Ne.

vers at Laon in Picardy; he recalled the greater part of
the veteran troops which served under the Marechal
Briffac at Piedmont; he lent courier after courier to the
Duke of Guise, requiring him, together with all his ar-
my, to return inflantly for the defence of their country;
he dilpatched one envoy to the Grand Seignior, to solicit
the afiftance of his fleet, and the loan of a fum of mo-
ney; he sent another into Scotland, to incite the Scots to
invade the north of England, that by drawing Mary's at-
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her from rein-
forcing her troops which served under Philip. These es-
forts of the King were warmly seconded by the zeal of his
subjects, The city of Paris granted him a free gift of
three hundred thousand livres. The other great towns
imitated the liberality of the capital, and contributed
in proportion. Several noblemen of diftinaion engaged
to garrison and to defend at their own expence the towns
which lay most exposed to be attacked by the enemy.
Nor was this general concern for the publick confined to
communities alone, or to those in the higher sphere of
life, but diffusing itself among persons of every rank, each
individual seemed disposed to a& with as much vigour as
if the honour of the King, and the safety of the Fate had
depended on his personal efforts [m].

The vitory PHILIP, who was no stranger either to the prudent
f st. Quin- measures taken by the French monarch for the security of
tin pruduc-
tie of few his dominions, or to the spirit with which his subjects
beneficial prepared to defend themselves, perceived, when it was
Cn'qucu- too late, that he had loft an opportunity which could ne-

ver be recalled, and that it was now vain to think of pe-
netrating into the heart of France, He abandoned, there-
fore, without much relutance, a scheme which was too
bold and hazardous to be perfealy agreeable to his cau-
tious temper; and employed his army, during the re-
mainder of the campaign, in the sieges of Ham and Cate-
let. Of these, he oon became master; and the reduc-
tion of there two petty towns, together with the acquifi-
tion of St. Quintin, were all the advantages which he de-
rived from one of the most decisive victories gained in

(m] Mew. de Ribier, ii. l1, 03.

that century. Philip himself, however, continued in Book Xfl.
high exultation, on account of his success; and as all his ' -'
paflons were tinged with luperftition, he, in memory of L5s'
the battle of St. Quintin, which had been fought on the
dav consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a
clhiuch, a monatfery, and a palace sacred to that laint
and martyr. Before the expiration of the year, he laid
tle foundation of an edifice, in which all these were
united, at the Escurial in the neighbourhood of Madrid;
and the fame principle, which dicaated the vow, direted
tl;c building. But the plan of the work was so formed as
to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the legendary
tale, had been the instrument of St. Laurence's martyr-
dom. Notwithfianding the vai and cxpenfive lchemes,
in which his restless ambition involved him, Philip con-
tinued the building with such perseverance for twenty-
two years, and reserved such vast fums for this monument
of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs of Spain are
indebted to him for a royal residence, which though not
the most elegant, is certainly the most sumptuous and
magnificent of any in Europe [n].

THE firi account of that fatal blow which the French The French

had received at St. Quintin was carried to Rome by the mut l'
courier whom Henry had sent to recall the Duke of tal).
Guise. As Paul, even with the affifiance of his French
auxiliaries, had scarce been able to check the progress of
the Spanish arms, he foresaw that as soon as he was de-
prived of their protecion, his territories must be over-
run in a moment. He remonflrated therefore with the
greatest violence againfl the departure of the French
army, reproaching the Duke of Guise for his ill condut,
which had brought him into such an unhappy situation;
and complaining of the King for delerting him so unrene-
roufly under such circumflances. Guise's orders, how-
ever, were peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he was,
found it necessary to accommodate his conduc to the cxi-
trency of his affairs, and to employ the mediation of the
Venetians, and of Col'mo di Medii, in order to obtain
peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillinlv to a
rupture with the Pope, and who, even while iuccels
crowned his arms, doubted so much the jullice of his

[n] Colmentr Annoles d'Ei'iagnc, tom. ii. p. 136.
VOL. II.

rE e

own

Book Xll. own cause, that he had made frequent overtures of paci-
--\v~-' fication, listened eagerly to the firfl proposals of this na-

'557. ture from Paul, and discovered such moderation in his de.

mands as could carce have been expeced from a Prince
elated with victory.

A treaty of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the
peace be- Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met at Cavi,
rween he
Pore and and both being equally dil'poed to peace, they, after a
Philip. short conference, terminated the war by a treaty on the

following terms: That Paul should renounce his league
with Fiance, and maintain for thc future luch a neutrality
as became the common father of Chriflendom; That
Philip should inflantly restore all the towns of the eccle-
fiaftical territory of which he had taken poffeflion; That
the claims of the Caraffa's, to the dutchy of Paliano, and
other demesnes of the Colonnas should be referred to the
decision of the republick of Venice; That the Duke of
Alva should repair in person to Rome, and after aking
pardon of Paul in his own name, and in that of his maf-
ter, for having invaded the patrimony of the church,
should receive the Pope's absolution from that crime.
Thus Paul, through Philip's scrupulous timidity, finished
an unprofperous war without any detriment to the Papal
See. The conqueror appeared humble, and acknow-
ledged his error; while he who had been vanquished re-
tained his usual haughtiness, and was treated with every
mark of superiority [n]. The Duke of Alva, in terms of
the treaty, repaired to Rome, and in the poflure of a
supplicant, klffed the feet, and implored the forgiveness
of that very peroln, whom his arms had reduced to the
las extremity. Such was the superstitious veneration of
the Spaniards for the Papal characer, that Alva, though
perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed from
his infancy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, a-
knowledged that when he approached the Pope, he was
so much overawed, that his voice failed, and his prelcnce
of mind forsook him [].

rhilipre- But though this war, which at its commencement
ftorc Pi'- threatened mighty revolutions, was brought to an end
centia to
oasvio without occasioning any alteration in thole States, whitl
Furnef.

nt Palltv. lib. xiii. 183. F. Paul. 380. Herrerr, vol. i. 310.

Pallav. lib xii. 185. ummonte lforia di Napoli, iv. 86.

wer e

were its immediate object, it produced effeas of confider- Book Xll.
able consequence in other parts of Italy. As Philip was -
extremely solicitous to terminate his quarrel with Paul as 5
fpceltly as pofible, he was willing to make any sacrifice
in order to gain those Princes, who, by joining their
troop, to the papal and French army, might have pro-
lonr.id the war. With this view, he entered into a ne-
gotiation with Ocavio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in
(ricr to reduce him from his alliance with France, he re-
flored to him the city of Placentia with the territory de-
pending on it, which Charles V. having eized in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-feven, had
kept from that time in his possession, and had tranlmitted
to.et her with his other dominions to Philip.

'lHIS ftep made such a dilcovery of Philip's character cr-no di

and views to Cosmo di Medici, the motd agacious and Metci' s
provident of all the Italian Princes, that he conceived for ,btain
hopes of accomplishing his favourite scheme of adding ing Siena.
Siena and its territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As
hi. success in this attempt depended entirely on the deli-
cacy of address with which it was conduced, he employ-
ed all the refinements of policy in the negotiation which
lie fct on foot for this purpose. He began with soliciting
Philip, whose treasury he knew to be entirely drained by
the expence of the war, to repay the great umrs which
he had advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Sie-
na. When Philip endeavoured to elude a demand which
he was unable to satisfy, he affected to be extremely
di'quieted, and making no secret of his disgust, inflruced
his ambassador at Rome to open a negotiation with the
Pope, which seemed to be the effea of it. The amhat-
l;:dor executed his commifion with fluch dexterity, that
lau, imagining Cofmno to be entirely alienated fiom the
Spanish interest, propoled to him an alliance with France,
which hould be cemented by the marriage of his eldest
frn to one of Henry's daughters, Colmo reccived the
overture with such apparent latisflalion, and with so ma-
nv profeflions of gratitude for the high honour of which
he had the profpea, that not only the Pope's minicir.,
liu! the French envoy at Rome talked confidently, and
wi!h little reserve, of the acceflion of that important ally,
,is a matter certain and decided. The account of this
was quickly carried to Philip ; and Coino, ho fo;re\i a
hnw much it would alarm him, had ditpatchetd his n-
phew Ludovico de Toledo into the Nttherlaind,, that he

E1 c a inilht

Book XII. might be at hand to observe and take advantage of his
-'"^ cionIiernation, before the first imprelfion which it made
'i57 fihould in any degree abate. Cofnio was extremely for-

tunate in the choice of the instrument whom he employed.
Toledo waited, w\ith patience, until he discovered with
certainty, that Philip had received such intelligence of his
uncle's negotiations at Rome, as must have filled his sus-
picious mind with fear and jealousy; and then craving an
audience, he required payment of the money which had
been borrowed by the Emperor, in the molt earnest and
peremptory terms. In urging that point, he artfully
threw out several daik hints and ambiguous declarations,
concerning the extremities to which Co!mo might be
driven b a lefulal of this just demand, as well as by
other grievances of which he had- good reason to com-
plain.

Their fuc- PHILIP, atonifhed at anaddrefs in such a firain, from
Cl. a Prince so far his inferior as the Duke of Tuscany, and

comparing what he now heard with the information which
he had received from Italy, immediately concluded that
Colmo had ventured to aflume this bold and unusual tone
on the profpet of his union with France. In order to
prevent the Pope and Henry from acquiring an ally, who
by his abilities and the situation of his dominions would
have added both reputation and tlrength to their confede-
racy, he offtred to grant Cosmo the investiture of Siena,
if he would content to accept of this, as an equivalent for
the fums due to him, and engage to furnish a body of
troops towards the defence of Philip's territories in Italy,
aair.fl any powecr who fliould attack them. As soon as
Colino had brought 'hilip to this, which was the objecd
of all his artifices and intrigues, he did not protrat the
negotiation by any unnecessary delay, or any excess of re-
fincment, but closed eagerly with the proposal, and Phi-
lip, in pite of the remonfliances of his ablcft counsellors,
signed a treaty with hlimto that effe [].

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his rights than

Philip, or less willing to relinquifli any territory which he
poflfed, by what tenure soever he held it, thelc unulual
concessions to tl'. Dukes of Palma and Tuscany, by which
hc wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defending

[p) Thuan. lib. xviii. 614. Herrert, i. 63, 175. PAllv. lib. xiii.
8o.

which,

which, his father had employed many years, and wafted Book Xll.
much blood and trealure, cannot be accounted for from'-'"-
any motive, but his superstitious defie of extricating him- '557.
self out of the war which he had been forced to wage
against the Pope. By these treaties, however, the ba-
lance of power among the Italian states was poized with
greater equality, and rendered less variable than it had
been since it received the first violent shock from the
invasion of Charles VIII. of France. From this period
Italy ceased to be the great theatre, on which the mo-
narchs of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for
power or for fame. Their dissentions and hostilities
were nevertheless as frequent and as violent as ever; but
being excited by new obje&s, they stained other regions
of Europe with blood, and rendered them, in their turn,
milerable by the devastations of war.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame day that Sept. 19.
his adversary the Duke of Alva made his ignominious ub- The Duke

of Guii:'s

millions to the Pope. He was received in France as the reception in
guardian angel of the kingdom. His late ill success in Fralnc.
Italy seemed to be forgotten, while his former ervices,
particularly his defence of Metz, were recounted with
exaggerated praise; and he was welcomed in every city
through which he passed, as the restorer of publick fecu-
rity, who, after having let bounds by his conduEt and va-
lour to the vicorious arms of Charles V. returned now
at the call of his country, to check the formidable pro-
grefs of Philip's power. The reception which he met
with from Henry was no lots cordial and honourable.
New titles were invented, and new dignities created in
order to diflinguifh him. He was appointed lieutenant-
general in chief both within and without the kingdom,
with a jurildiaion almost unlimited, and hardly inferior
to that which was possessed by the king himielf. Thus,
through the singular felicity which attended the Princes
of Lorrain, the mi carriiigtg of their own schemes contri-
buted to aggrandizc them. he calamities of his country,
and the ill condut o his rival the Constable, exalted the
Duke of Guise to a height of dignity and power, which
lie could not have expected to attain by the moll fortu-
nate and mod compleat fuccels of his own ambitious pro-
jels.

THE Dukc of Guise, cager to perform something fit -Tkei the
able to the high expecations of his countrymen, andcmminti,

E e 3 that' '""'

Book XII. that he might juflify the extraordinary confidence which

L'^~' the King had repoled in him, ordered all the trcops,
'S57' which could be got together, to assemble at Campiegie.

'Though the winter was well advanced, and had let in
with extreme rigour, he placed himself at their head, and
took the field. By Henry's ativity and the zeal of his
fubjeds, so many Ioldiers had been raised in the king-
dom, and uch considerable reinforcements had been
drawn from Germany and Swifferland, as formed an
army relpetable even in the eyes of a vicorious enemy.
Philip, alarmed at eeing it put in motion at such an un-
common season, began to tremble for his new conquells,
particularly St. Quintin, the fortifications of which
were hitherto but imperfedly repaired.

He inrefts BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more important
Calai. enterprize; and after amusing the enemy with threaten-
Januaryit. ing successively different towns on the frontiers of Flan-

ders, he turned suddenly to the left and invested Calais
with his whole army. Calais had been taken by the
English under Edward III. and was the fruit of that mo-
narch's glorious vicory at CrelTy. Being the only place
that they retained of their ancient and extensive territories
in France, and which opened to them, at all times, an
easy and secure paifage into the heart of that kingdom,
their keeping poffeflion of it soothed the pride of the one
nai ion as much as it mortified the vanity of the other. Its
situation was naturally so strong, and its fortifications
deemed so impregnable, that no monarch of France, how
adventurous ocevcr, had been bold enough to attack it.
Ilvcn hen the domeflick strength of England was bro-
ken and exhausted by the bloody wars between the houses
of York and Lancafler, and its attention entirely diverted
from foreign objecs, Calais had remained undiflurbed
and unthreatened. Mary and her council, compoed
chiefly of Ecclcfiaflicks, unacquainted with military as-
fairs, and whose whole attention was turned towards ex-
tirpating hercfy out of the kingdom, had not only ne-
gle&ed to take any precautions for the safety of this im-
portant place, but seemed to think that the eputation of
its firength alone was sufficient for its security. Full of
this opinion, they ventured, even after the declaration of
war, to continue a praice which the low state of the
Queen's finances had introduced in times of peace. As
the country adjacent to Calais was overflowed during the

winter,

winter, and the marshes around it became impassable, Book XII.
except by one avenue, which the forts of St. Agatha and
Newnhambridge commanded, it had been the cullom of
the English to dismiss the greater part of the garri'on to-
wards the end of autumn, and to replace it in the spring.
In vain did Lord Wentworth, the governor of Calais, Its defence-
remonfirate against this ill-timed parsimony, and represent leis *ate.
the possibility of his being attacked suddenly, while he
had not troops sufficient to man the works. The privy
council treated these remonstrances with scorn, as if they
had flowed from the timidity or the rapacioufnetl of the
governor; and some of them, with that confidence which
is the companion of ignorance, boarded that they would
defend Calais with their white rods againfi any enemy
who should approach it during winter [d]. In vain did
Philip, who had passed through Calais as he returned
from England to the Netherlands, warn the Queen of
the danger to which it was exposed; and acquainting her
with what was necessary for its security, offer to reinforce
the garrison during winter with a detachment of his own
troops. Mary's counsellors, though obsequious to her in
all points wherein religion was concerned, diflrufed, as
much as the reft of their countrymen, every proposition
that came from her husband; and fufpe&ing this to be an
artifice of Philip's, in order to gain the command of the
town, they negleced his intelligence, declined his offer,
and left Calais with less than a fourth of the men requisite
for its defence.

IT was his knowledge of this, which encouraged the Guie pus1.

Duke of Guise to venture on an enterprize, that fur- wethveigo.
prized his own countrymen no less than his enemies. As
he knew that its success depended on conduaing his ope-
rations with such rapidity, as would afford the Engliih no
time for throwing relief into the town by sea, and prevent
Philip from giving him any interruption by land, he
pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little known in
carrying on sieges, dur ing t hat agse. He drove the English
from Fort St. Agatha at the firi assault; obliged them to
abandon the fort of Newnhambridge, after defending it
three days; took the catlfe which commanded the har-
bour by storm; and on the eighth day after he appeared
before Calais compelled the governor, whose feeble gar-

[J] Carte, iii. 345.

E e 4

rifon,

Book XII. rifon, which did not exceed five hundred men, was worn

out with the fatigue of sustaining so many attacks, and

Ta'ss58 defending luch extensive works, to sign a capitulation.
Take& the
town. 'THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the Englilh

time to recover from the conflernation occasioned by this
blow, immediately invefled Guilnes, the garrison of
which, though more numerous, defended itself with less
vigour, and after fianding one brisk alfault, surrendered
the town. The cale of Hames was abandoned by the
troops polled there, without waiting the approach of the
enemy.

The f,',n- THL'S, in a few days, during the depth of winter,
e'a of theic and at a time when the fatal battle of St. Quintin had !o
conquerts. depressed the sanguine spirit of the French, that their ut-

moll aim was to protect their own country, without
dreaming of making conquests on the enemy; the enter-
prlzing valour of one man drove the English out of Calais,
after they had held it two hundred and ten years, and de-
prived them of every foot of land in a kingdom, where
their dominions had been once so extensive. This ex-
ploit, at the fame time that it gave an high idea of the
power and recources of France to all Europe, let the
Duke of Guise, in the opinion of his countrymen, far
above all the generals of the age. They celebrated his
conquefls with immoderate transports of joy; while the
English gave vent to all the paflions, which animate a
high-fpirited people, when any great national calamity is
manifetily owing to the ill condut of their rulers. Mary
and her ministers, formerly odious, were now contemp-
tible in their eyes. All the terrors of her severe and arbi-
trary administration could not restrain them from uttering
execrations and threats against those who, having wan-
tonly involved the nation in a quarrel wherein it was
no wife interested, had, by their negligence or incapacity,
brought irreparable disgrace on their country, and loft the
modl valuable pofeflion belonging to the English crown.

THE French King imitated the condua of its former

conqueror, Edward III. with regard to Calais. He com-
manded all the English inhabitants to quit the town, and,
giving their houses to his own subje&s, whom he allured
to fettle there by granting them various immunities, he
left a numerous garrison, under an experienced governor,
for their defence. After this, his vicorious army went
into quarters of refrehment, and the usual inaaion of
winter returned.

MEAi WHILE

MEANWHILE Ferdinand assembled the college of Book XII.

F.le&ors at Frankfort, in order to lay before them the '-- -
deed whereby Charles V. had resigned the Imperial Feb.4.
crown, and transferred it to him. This he had hitherto Charles's
delayed, on account of some difficulties which had oc- refigntiGn
curred concerning the formalities requisite in supplying ps h Im-
a vacancy occasioned by an event, to which there was no crown.
parallel in the annals of the Empire. These being at
length adjusted, the Prince of Orange executed the com-
mifion with which he had been intrudted by Charles;
the Elecors accepted of his resignation; declared Ferdi-
nand his lawful successor; and put him in possession of
all the ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

BuT when the new Emperor sent Gufman, his chan- The Pope

cellor, to acquaint the Pope with this tranlacion, to tef- refaues to
tify his reverence towards the Holy See, and to signify ledgeFkrdi-
that, according to form, he would soon dispatch an am- nandasEm-
baffador extraordinary to treat with his holiness concern- peror.
ing his coronation; Paul, whom neither experience nor
dilappointments could teach to bring down his lofty ideas
of the papal prerogative to such a moderate standard as
suited the genius of the times, refused to admit the en-
voy into his presence, and declared all the proceedings at
Frankfort irregular and invalid. He contended that the
Pope, as the vicegerent of Christ, was intruded with the
keys both of celestial and terrestrial government; that
from him the Imperial jurifdi&ion was derived; that
though his predecessors had authorized the Ele&ors to
choose an Emperor, whom the Holy See confirmed, this
privilege was confined to those cafes when a vacancy was
ocafioned by death; that the instrument of Charles's re-
fignation had been presented in an improper court, as it
belonged to the Pope alone to rejec or to accept of it,
and to nominate a person to supply his place; that, set-
ting aside all thele objections, Ferdinand's elecion la-
houred nder two defects, which alone were lufficient to
render it void, for the Protestant Eletors had been ad-
mitted to vote, tho', by their apoltacy from the catho-
lick faith, they had forfeited that and every other privi-
lege of the electoral office ; that Ferdinand, by ratify-
ing the conceflions of everal Diets in favour of hereticks,
had rendered himlclf unworthy of the Imperial dignity,
which was inflituted for the protecion, not for the del-
trution of the church. But, after thundering out these

extravagant

Bock XII. extravagant maxims, he added, with an appearance of
^-v- condescension, that it Ferdinand would renounce all title

55s8' to the Imperial crown, founded on the election at Frank-

fort, make profeflions of repentance for his pall condut,
and supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm
Charles's rfignation, as well as his assumption to the
Empire, he might expeEt every mark of favour from his
paternal clemency and goodness. Gufman, though he
had laid his account with considerable difficulties in his
negotiation with the Pope, little expeced that he would
have revived there antiquated and wild pretensions, which
aflonifhed him o much that he scarce knew in what tone
he ought to reply. He prudently declined entering into
any controversy concerning the nature or extent of the
papal jurifdiLion, and, confining himself to the political
considerations, which should determine the Pope to re-
cognize an Emperor already in poffeflion, he endeavoured
to place these in such a light, as he imagined could scarce
fail to firike Paul, if he were not altogether blind to his
own interest. Philip seconded Gufman's arguments with
great earnestness, by an ambassador whom he sent to
Rome of purpose, and besought the Pope to defifi from
claims so unseasonable, as might not only irritate and
alarm Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but fur-
nifh the enemies of the Holy See with a new reason for
representing its jurifdi&ion as incompatible with the
rights of Princes, and subversive of all civil authority.
But Paul, who deemed it a crime to attend any confide-
ration suggested by human prudence or policy, when he
thought himself called to assert the prerogatives of the
Papal See, remained inflexible; and, during his pontifi-
cate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged as Emperor by
the court of Rome [].

hcenry en- WHILE Henry was preparing forthe approaching cam-
dravour to paign, he received accounts of the ifue of his negotia-
excite the
S'ots tions in Scotland. Long experience having at laR taught
gainft the Scots the imprudence of involving their country in
Encluad. every quarrel between France and England, neither the

felicitations of his ambafTador, nor the address and au-
thority of the Queen-regent, could prevail on them to

[z] Godleveo de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp. 391. Paili.
lib. iii. lig. Ribicr. ii. 746, 759.

take arms against a kingdom, with which they were at Book XII.
peace. On this occasion, the ardor of a martial nobility -v--
and of a turbulent people, was restrained by regard for '558
the publick interest and tranquillity, which, in former
deliberations of this kind, had been seldom attended to,
by a nation always prone to rush into every new war.
But though the Scots adhered with fleadinefs to their
pacific system, they were extremely ready to gratify the
French King in another particular, which he had given
in charge to his ambassador.

THE young Queen of Scots had been affianced to theMarriage of

the Dau-

Dauphin, in the year one thousand five hundred and phin with
forty-eight, and having been educated since that time in the Queea
the court of France, he had grown up to be the moftiofsc°t-
amiable, and one of the most accomplished Princesses in
that age. Henry demanded the consent of her fubjeds to
the celebration of the marriage, and a parliament which
was held for that purpose, appointed eight commitlioners
to represent the whole body of the nation at that folem-
nity, with power to sign such deeds as might be requisite
before it was concluded. In fettling the articles of theApril 4.
marriage, the Scots took all the precautions, that pru-
dence could diaate, in order to preserve the liberty and
independence of their country; while the French used
every art to secure to the Dauphin the conduc of affairs
during the Queen's life, and the succession of the crown
on the event of her demise. The marriage was celebrat-
ed with pomp, suitable to the dignity of the parties, and
the magnificence of a court, at that time, the moit fplen-
did in Europe []. Thus Henry, in the course of a few
months, had the glory of recovering an important pof-
session which anciently belonged to the crown of France,
and of adding to it the acquisition of a new kingdom. By
this event, too, the Duke of Guise acquired new confi-
deration and importance; themarriage of his niece to the
apparent heir of the crown, raising him so far beyond the
condition of other fubjeds, as seemed to render the credit
he had gained by his great aions, no lets permanent
than it was extensive.

WH}.N the campaign opened, soon after the Dau-The cam-
phin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was placed at the Pion open.

ed.

[p] Kcith'; history of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps Diplom.
V. 1i.

head

Book xil. head of the army with the fame unlimited powers as for-
.---' merly. Henry had received luch liberal supplies from his

"558. fubjeas, that the troops under his command were both

numerous and well appointed; while Philip, exhausted
by the extraordinary efforts of the preceding year, had
been obliged to dilmtifs lo many of his forces during the
winter, that he could not brinz an army into the field
capable of making head againit him. The Duke (if
Guise did not lose the favourable opportunity which his
lucioriority afforded him. He in elted Thionville in te
dutchv of Luxemburg, one of the fIrongeft towns on the
frilnticr of the Netherlands, and of great importance to
June 21. Fiance by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-

flanding the obftlinate valour with which it was defended,
he forced it to capitulate after a siege of three weeks [a].

The French BUT the success of this enterprize, which it was ex-

'eiydt- e eed would lead to other conquests, was more than
Gravelines. counterbalanced by an event that happened in another

part of the Low-Countries, The Marechal de Termes,
governor of Calais, having penetrated into Slanders
without opposition, invelted Dunkirk with an army of
fourteen thousand men, and took it by storm on the fifth
day of the ficge. From that he advanced towards Nieu-
port, which mull ha e oon fallen into his hands, if the
approach of the Count of Egmont with a superior army
had not made it prudent to retreat. The French troops
were so much encumbered with the booty which they
had got at Dunkilk, or by ravaging the open country,
that they moved slowly; and Egmont, who had left his
heavy baggage and atillery behind him, marched with
Iuch rapidity, that he came up with them near Grave-
lines, and attacked them with the utmost impetuosity.
De Termes, who had the choice of the ground, having
posted his troops to advantage in the angle formed by the
mouth of the river Aa and the lea, received him with
great firmnels. V\i&ory remained for some time in sus-
penfe, the desperate valour of the French, who forcfaw
the unavoidable deftrudion that muf follow upon a rout
in an enemy's country, counterbalancing the superior
number of the Flemings, when one of those accidents, to
which human prudence does not extend, decided the
contll in favour of the latter. A squadron of English

[.b] Thuan. lib. x. 690.

flips

ships of war, which was cruizing on the coast, being Book xn.
drawn by the noise of the firing towards the place of en- v
gagement, entered the river Aa, and turned its great '5ss
guns against the right wing of the French, with such es-
tea as immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through their whole army. The Flem-
ings, to whom assistance, so unexpected and so fealona-
ble, gave fresh spirit, redoubling their efforts, that thcy
might not lose the advantage which fortune had present-
ed them, or give the enemy time to recover from their
consternation, the rout of the French soon became uni-
versal. Near two thousand were killed on the spot; a
greater number fell by the hands of the pealants, who,
in revenge for the cruelty with which their country had
been plundered, pursued the fugitives and massacred them
without mercy; the reft were taken pritoners, together
with de Termes their general, and many officers of dif-
tin&iOn [q].

THIS signal vicory, for which the Count of Egmont The Duke
was afterwards so ill requited by Philip, obliged the Duke oft;ai;c o-

pored to the

of Guise to relinquish all other schemes, and to haften to- iacrou
wards the frontier of Picardy, that he might oppose the army.
progress of the enemy there. This difalter refleed new
lustre on his reputation, and once more turned the eyes of
his countrymen towards him, as the only general on whose
arms vicory always attended, and in whole conduct as
well as good fortune, they could confide in every danger.
Henry reinforced Guise's army with so many troops,
drawn from the adjacent garrilbns, that it soon amounted
to forty thousand men. That of the enemy, after the
junion of Egmont with the Duke of Savoy, was not in-
ferior in number. They encampd at the distance of a
few leagues from one another; and each monarch having
joined his refpecive army, it was expected that, after
the vicissitudes of good and bad ficeefs during this and the
former campaign, a decisive battle would at las dtc i-
mine which of the rivals should take the afcndant for
the future, and give law to Europe. But though both
had it in their power, neither of them discovered any in.
clination to bring the decision of a point of Iuch impor-
tance to depend upon the uncertain and fortuitous ifluc of
single battle. The fatal engagements at St. Quintin and
Gravelines were too recent to be so:n forgotten, and the

[q) Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

proflpe&

Book XIl. profpea of encountering the fame troops, commanded by

v --» the fame generals, who had twice triumphed over his
1558. arms, inspired Henry with a degree of caution which was

not common to him. Philip, of a genius averse to bold
operations in war, naturally leaned to cautious measures,
and would hazard nothing against a general, so fortunate
and fucefsful as the Duke of Guise. Both monarchs, as
if by agreement, stood on the defensive, and fortifying
their camps carefully, avoided every kirmifh or ren-
counter that might bring on a general engagement.

WHII.E the armies continued in this ination, peace

began to be mentioned in each camp, and both Henry
and Philip discovered an inclination to liften to any over-
ture that tended to retfablifh it. The kingdoms of France
and Spain had been engaged during half a century in al-
molt continual wars, carried on at a great expence and
produaive of no considerable advantage to either. Ex-
haufted by extraordinary and unceasing efforts, which
far exceeded those to which the nations of Europe had
been accustomed before the rivalfhip between Charles V.
and Francis I. both nations longed so much for an inter-
val of repose, in order to recruit their strength, that
their sovereigns drew from them with difficulty the sup-
plies necessary for carrying on hostilities. The private
inclinations of both the Kings concurred with those of
their people. Philip was prompted to with for peace by
his fond dcfire of returning to Spain. Accufomed from
his infancy to the climate and manners of that country,
he was attached to it with such extreme predilecion, that
he was unhappy in any other part of his dominions. But
as he could not either with decency or safety quit the
Low-Countries, and venture on a voyage to Spain, dur-
ing the continuance of war, the profpea of a pacification
which would put it in his power to execute this favourite
scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry was no less de-
filous of being delivered from the burden and avocations
of war, that he might have leisure to turn all his atten-
tion, and bend the whole force of his government towards
fupprefling the opinions of the Reformers, which were
spreading with filch rapidity in Paris and other great towns
of France, that they began to grow formidable to the
eflabliflcd church.

An;ntiigle BESIDES these publick and avowed considerations,
in the our alifing from the slate of the two hoflile kingdoms, or
*(i,,ltst, from the wiflles of their refpc&ivc monarchs, there was
it. a Iccret
446

a secret intrigue carried on in the court of France, which Bok Xll.
contributed as much as either of the other, to haien and --
to facilitate the negotiation of a peace. The Conltable 'Iss
Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld the rapid
success and growing favour of the Duke of Guile, with
the envious olicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained
by him, he confidered as a fresh wound to his own repu-
tation, and he knew with what malevolent addreis it
would be improved, to diminish his credit with the King,
and to augment that of the Duke of Guise. Thele arts,
he was afraid, might, by degrees, work on the eaty and
ductile mind of Henry, so as to efface all emains of his
ancient affecion towards him. But he could not discover
any remedy for this, unless he were allowed to return
home, that he might try whether, by his pretence, he
could defeat the artifices of his enemies, and revive those
warm and tender sentiments which had long attached
Henry to him, with a confidence so entire, as resembled
rather the cordiality of private friendhip, than the cold
and selfish connedion between a monarch and one of his
courtiers. While Montmorency was forming fchcmes
and wishes for his return to France with much anxiety
of mind, but with little hope of success, an unexpeced
incident prepared the way for it. The Cardinal of Lor-
rain, who had shared with his brother in the King's fa-
vour, and participated of the power which thaWonferred,
did not bear prosperity with the fame discretion as the
Duke of Guise. Intoxicated with their good fortune, he
forgot how much they had been indebted for their pre-
sent elevation to their connexions with the Dutchels of
Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to the extraordinary
merit of their family. This led him not only to negle&
his benefa&refs, but to thwart her schemes, and to talk
with a farcaftick liberty of her characer and person.
That singular woman, who, if we may believe contem-
porary writers, retained the beauty and charms of youth
at the age of three-score, and on whom it is certain that
Henry still doated with all the fondnets of love, felt this
injury with sensibility, and set herself with cazernefs to
revenge it. As there was no method of ftpplanting the
Princes of lorrain so effecually, as by a coalition of in-
terests with the Conftahle, he proposed the marriage of
her grand-daughter with one of his lolls, as the bond of

their

Book XII. their future union, and Montmorency readily gave ii

-v--' consent to the match. Having thus cemented their alli-
SS8. ance, the dutchess employed all her influence with the

King in order to confirm his inclinations towards peace,
and to induce him to take the steps necessary for attain-
ing it. She insinuated that any overture of that kind
uould come with great propriety from the Conflable,
and if committed to the condut of his prudence, could
hardly fail of success.

Henry cor-n HEN RY, long accufiomcd to devolve all affairs of im-
mits the ne-
gotiation to portance on the Conflable, and needing only this encon-
Monimo- ragement to return to his ancient habits, wrote to him
rency. immediately with his usual familiarity and affetion, im-

powering him, at the fame time, to take the firfl oppor-
tunity of founding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Mpntmorenc, made his application to Philip by
the most proper channel. He opened himself to the
Duke of Savoy, who, notwithstanding the height of
preferment to which he had been raised, and the mili-
tary glory which he had acquired in the Spanilh ervice,
was weary of remaining in exile, and languished to re-
turn into his dominions. As there was no profpec of his
recovering poffeflion ofthefe by force of arms, he confi-
dercd a definitive treaty of peace between France and
Spain, as the only event by which he could hope to ob-
tain reltittion. Being no firanger to Philip's private

ifhes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed on him

not only to discover a disposition on his part towards ac-
commodation, but to permit Montmorency to return, on
his parole, to France, that he might confirm his own
fovcrcign in his pacifickfentiments. Henry received the
Conflable with the most flattering marks of regaid; ab-
ferce, instead of having abated or extinguished his friend-
ship, seemed to have given it new ardour; and he a-
fumed, fom the moment of his appearance in court, a
higher place, if possible, in his affeaion, and a more per-
fe& ascendant over his mind, than ever. The Cardinal
.of Lorrain and Duke of Guise, prudently gave way to a
tide of favour too firong for them to oppdtc, ad con-
fining themselves to their proper departments, permitted,
without any firuggle, the Conflable and dutchels of
Valentinois to dired pblick affairs at their pleaftre.
They oon prevailed on the King to nominate plenipo-
tentialies to treat of peace. Philip did the fame. 'she

abbey

abbey of Cercamp was fixed on as the place of congress; Book Xll.
and all military operations were immediately terminated *
by a ufpenfion of arms.

WHILE these preliminary fleps were taking towards a

treaty which restored tranquillity to Europe, Charles V.
whose ambition had so long diflurbed it, ended his days
in the monaitery of St. Juflts. When Charles entered
this retreat, he formed uch a plan of life for himlelf, as
would have uited the condition of a private gentleman of
a moderate fortune. His table was neat but plain; his do-
mcefics few; his intercourse with them familiar; all the
cumbersome and ceremonious forms of attendance on his
perlon were entirely abolilhed, as destructive of that lo-
cial ease and tranquillity which he courted in order to
sooth the rerrainder of his days. As the mildness of the
climate, together with his deliverance from the burdens
and cares of government procured him, at first, a confi-
derable remiflion from the acute pains with which he had
been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps, more com-
plete fatisfa&ion in this humble solitude, than all his
grandeur had ever yielded him. The ambitious thoughts
and projecs which had so long engrossed and disquieted
him, were quite effaced from his mind: Far from taking
any part in the political tranfa&ions of the Princes of Eu-
rope, he restrained his curiosity even from any inquiry
concerning them; and he seemed to view the busy scene
which he had abandoned with all the contempt and indif-
ference arising from his thorough experience of its vanity,
as well as from the pleasing reflecion of having difentan-
gled himself from its cares.

OTHER amusements, and other obje&cs now occupied His imufe-

him. Sometimes he cultivated the plants in his garden "entsin hi
with his own hands; fometimcs he rode out to the neigh-
bouring wood on a little horse, the only one that he kept,
attended by a tingle servant on foot. When his infirmi-
ties confined him to his apartment, which often happen-
ed, and deprived him of there more ative recreations,
he either admitted a few gentlemen who resided near the
monaflery to visit him, and entertained them familiarly at
his table; or he employed himself in fludying the princi-
ples and in forming curious works of mechanism, of
which he had always been remarkably fond, and to which
his genius was peculiarly turned. With this view he had
engaged Turriano, one of the mofl ingenious artifis of
that age, to accompany him in his retreat. He laboured

VOL. II. F f together

Book XlI. together with him in framing models of the molt useful
--VY--' machines, as well as in making experiments with regard

55 to their respective powers, and it was not seldom that the

ideas of the monarch assisted or perfeced the inventions
of the artist. He relieved his mind, at intervals, with
flighier and more fantaftick works of mechanism, in fa-
fhioning puppets, which by the ftrucure of internal
springs, mimicked the gestures and aions of men, to
the no small astonishment of the ignorant monks, who be-
holding movements, which they could not comprehend,
lometimes distrusted their own enses, and sometimes sus-
peCed Charles and Turriano of being in compat with
invisible powers. He was particularly curious with re-
gard to the conftru&ion of clocks and watches, and hav-
ing found, after repeated trials, that he could not bring
any two of them to go exaacly alike, he refleced, it
is said, with a mixture of furprize and regret on his own
folly, in having bestowed so much time and labour on the
more vain attempt of bringing mankind to a precise
uniformity of sentiment concerning the intricate and
mysterious docrines of religion.

His more BUT in what manner oever Charles disposed of the
reupios. reft of his time, he contlantly reserved a considerable

portion of it for religious exercises. He regularly at-
tended divine service in the chapel of the monastery,
every morning and evening; he took great pleasure in
reading books of devotion, particularly the works ot
St. Augustine and St. Bernard; and conversed much
with his confessor, and the prior of the monastery on
pious fubjeas. Thus did Charles pass the firt year of
his retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a man per-
fecly disengaged from the affairs of the present life,
and Itanding on the confines of a future world either
in innocent amusements, which soothed his pains, and
relieved a mind worn out with exceflive application to
business; or in devout occupations, which he deemed
necessary in preparing for another Rlate.

The cufes BUT about fix months before his death, the gout, as-
et tlildeth. ter a longer intermiflionthan usual, returned with a pro-

portional increase of violence. His hbattered conftitu-
tion had scarce vigour enough remaining to withstand Iuch
a hock. It enfeebled his mind as much as his body, and
from that period we scarce dilcern any traces of that
found and masculine understanding, which difiinguithed
Charles among his contemporaries. An illiberal and ti-

mid

mid superstition depressed his spirit. He had no relish Book XI1.
for amusements of any kind. He endeavoured to con- --v
form, in his manner of living, to all the rigour of monai- Iss'
tick austerity. He desired no other 1ociety than that of
monks, and was almott continually employed with them
in chanting the hymns in the Missal. AB an expiation for
his fins, he gave himself the discipline in secret with such
severity, that the whip of cords which he employed as
the infrument of his punishment, was found after his de-
cease tinged with his blood. Nor was he satisfied with
these as of mortification, which, however severe, were
not unexampled. The timorous and dittruftful fo!icitude
which always accompanies fuperfltition f1ill continued to
disquiet him, and depreciating all that he had done,
prompted him to aim at something extraordinary, at some
new and singular a& of piety that would display his zeal,
and merit the favour of heaven. The a on which he
fixed was as wild and uncommon, as any that fuperi liion
ever suggested to a weak and disordered fancy. He re-
solved to celebrate his own obsequies before his death.
He ordered his tomb to be ere&ed in the chapel of the
monastery. His domefticks marched thither in funeral
procefion, with black tapers in their hands. He himself
followed in his hroud. He was laid in his coffin, with
much solemnity. The service for the dead was chanted,
and Charles joined in the prayers which were offered up
for the ref of his foul, mingling his tears with those which
his attendants shed, as if they had been celebrating a real
funeral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling holy water
on the coffin in the usual form, and all the afliftants retir-
ing, the doors of the chapel were shut. Then Charles
arose out of the coffin and withdrew to his apartment, full
of these awful sentiments, which such a singular folemni-
ty was calculated to inspire. But either the fatiguing
length of the ceremony, or the impreflion which this
image of death left on his mind, asseted him so much,
that the next day he was seized with a fever. His feeble
frame could not long refifl its violence, and he expired on
the twenty-firlt of September, after a life of fifty-eight
years, fix months, and twenty-five days [d].

[d] Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. p. i1. Thuan. 713. Sndov. ii.

609 &c. Miniin Contin. Mariain, vol. iv. 16. Vcray Zuniga vida
de Carlos, p. .

F f2

As

Book XII. As Charles was the first prince of the age in rank and
'' - dignity, the part which he ated, whether we confider
His'cha- the greatnes, the variety, or the success of his undertak-
rater. ings, was the most conspicuous. It is from an attentive

observation of his conduc, not from the exaggerated
praises of the Spanish historians, or the undiftinguilhing
censure of the French, that a just idea of Charles's geni-
us and abilities is to be colle&ed. He possessed qualities
so peculiar, as strongly mark his character, and not only
distinguish him from the Princes who were his contempo-
raries, but account for that superiority over them which
he so long maintained. in forming his schemes, he was,
by nature, as well as by habit, cautious and considerate.
Born with talents, which unfolded themselves slowly, and
were late in attaining maturity, he was accustomed to
ponder every ubjed that demanded his consideration
with a careful and deliberate attention. He bent the whole
force of hismind towards it, and dwelling upon it with
a serious application, undiverted by pleaiure, and hard-
ly relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in silence,
in his own breast. He then communicated the matter to
lis ministers, and after hearing their opinions, took his
resolution with a decisive firmness, which seldom follows
such flow consultations. In consequence of this, Charles's
measures, inltead of resembling the desultory and irregu-
lar allies of Henry VII1. or FrancisI. had the appear-
ance of a consistent system, in which all parts were
arranged, the effecs were foreseen, and the accidents
were provided for. His promptitude in execution was
no lels remarkable than his patience in deliberation. He
conlulted with phlegm, but he aed with vigour; and
did not discover greater sagacity in his choice of the
mca.ures which it was proper to pursue, than fertility
of genius in finding out the means for rendering his
pursuit of them successful. Though he had naturally
lo little of the martial turn, that during the motl ar-
dent and bustling period of life, he remained in the
cabinet inacive, yet when he chose at length to ap-
pear at the head of his armies, his mind was so form-
ed for vigorous exertions in every dire&ion, that he
acquired such knowledge in the art of war, and such
talents for command, as rendered him equal in repu-
tation and success to the moll able generals of the age.
But Charles pofTefed, in the molt eminent degree, the

science

science which is of the greatest importance to a mo- Book XI.
narch, that of knowing men, and of adapting their ta- ~-
lents to the various departments which he allotted to S558'
them. From the death of Chievres to the end of his
reign, he employed no general in the field, no minister
in the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court, no go-
vernor of a province, whose abilities were inadequate to
the trust which he reposed in them. Though destitute
of that bewitching affability of manners, which gained
Francis the hearts of all who approached his person, he
was no stranger to the virtues which secure fidelity and
attachment. He placed unbounded confidence in his ge-
nerals; he rewarded their services with munificence; he
neither envied their fame, nor discovered any jealousy
of their power. Almofi all the generals who conducted
his armies may be placed on a level with those illustrious
personages, who have attained the highest eminence of
military glory; and his advantages over his rivals are to
be ascribed so manifestly to the superior abilities of the
commanders whom he set in opposition to them, that this
might seem to detraa in some degree, from his own me-
rit, if the talent of discovering and employing such inflru-
ments were not the mofi undoubted proof of a capacity
for government.

THERE were, nevertheless, defeas in his political

characer which must considerably abate the admiration
due to his extraordinary talents. Charles's ambition was
insatiable; and though there seems to be no foundation for
an opinion prevalent in his own age, that he had formed
the chimerical projea of eflablifhing an universal monar-
chy in Europe, it is certain that his desire of being
distinguished as a conqueror involved him in continual
wars, which exhausted and oppressed his fubjeas, and
left him little leisure for giving attention to the interior po-
lice and improvement of his kingdoms, the great objeas
of every Prince who makes the happiness of his people
the end of his government. Charles, at a very early pe-
riod of life, having added the Imperial crown to the king-
doms of Spain, and to the hereditary dominions of the
houses of Austria and Burgundy, this opened to him such
a vast field of enterprize, and engaged him in schemes
so complicated as well as arduous, that feeling his power
to be unequal to the execution of these, he had often re-
course tolow artifices unbecoming his superior talents,
and sometimes ventured on such deviations from integrity

F f3 as

Book XII. as were dishonourable in a great Prince. His insidious
'C''
J and fraudulent policy appeared more conspicuous, and
3558. was rendered more odious, by a comparison with the open

and undesigning character of ihis contemporaries Francis
1. and Henry V111. This difference, though occasioned
chiefly by the diversity of their tempers, must be acnlb-
ed, in rome degree, to such an opposition in the princilcs
of their political condua as affords some excuse for this
defed in Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve
as a juflification of it. Francis and Henry seldom ated
but from the impulse of their paflions, and rushed head-
long towards the objet in view. Charles's measures be-
ing the result of cool refletion, were disposed into a re-
gular fytfem, and carried on upon a concerted plan. Per-
ions who ad in the former manner naturally pursue the
end in view without assuming any disguise, or displaying
much address. Such as hold the latter course are apt, in
forming as well as in executing their designs, to employ
such refinements, as always lead to artifice in conduc and
often degenerate into deceit.

THE circumfiances transmitted to us, with refpe to

Charles's private depbrtment and characer, are fewer
and less interesting, than might have been expeced, from
the great number of authors who have undertaken to
write an account of his life. These are not the obje of
this history, which aims at representing the tranlactions
of the reign of Charles V. not at delineating his private
virtues or defecs.

Conference MEANWHILE the plenipotentiaries of France, Spain
in order to and England continued their conferences at Cercamp;

and though each of them, with the usual art of negoti-
ators, made at firit very high demands in name of their
refpedive courts, yet as they were all equally desirous of
peace, they would have consented reciprocally to luch
abatements and rellriions of their claims as mull have
removed every obstacle to an accommodation. The
death of Charles V. was a new motive with Philip to
hallen the conclusion of a treaty, as it increased his im-
patience for returning into Spain, where there was now
no person greater or more illuflrious than himself. But
in spite of the concurring wishes of all the parties interest-
ed, an event hppened which occasioned an unavoidable

Nov. 7. delay in their negotiations. About a month after the
Death of opening of the conferences at Cercamp, Mary of Eng-
nrlYnd. land ended her hort and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth

her

her sifter was immediately proclaimed Queen by the Eng- Book XII.
lifh with universal joy. As the powers of the English 7
plenipotentiaries expired on the death of their mistress, 55
they could not proceed until they received a commission
and infiruaions from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation to the Henry nd
throne with equal olicitude. As during Mary's jealous Philip.cohurt

Elizabeth

administration, under the most difficult circumstances, her fuccef-
aid in a situation extremely delicate, he had conduced for.
herself with prudence and address far exceeding her
years, they had conceived an high idea of her abilities,
and already formed expecations of a reign very different
from that of her sifter. Equally sensible of the impor-
tance of gaining her favour, both monarchs set them-
selves with emulation to court it, and employed every
art in order to insinuate themselves into her confidence.
Each of them had something meritorious, with regard to
Elizabeth, to plead in his own behalf. Henry had offer-
ed her a retreat in his dominions, if the dread of her
fifler's violence should force her to fly for safety out of
England. Philip had, by his powerful interceflion, pre-
vented Mary from proceeding to the most fatal extremi-
ties against her. Each of them endeavoured now, to
avail himself of the circumntances in his favour. Henry
wrote to Elizabeth soon after her acceflion with the warm-
eft expressions of regard and friendlhip. He represented
the war which had unhappily been kindled between their
kingdoms, not as a national quarrel, but as the effe of
Mary's blind partiality to her husband and fond compli-
ance with all his wishes. He intreated her to disengage
herself from an alliance which had proved bl unfortunate
to England, and to consent to a separate peace with him,
without mingling her interests with those of Spain, from
which they ought now to be altogether disjoined. Phi-
lip, on the other hand, unwilling to lose his connetion
with England, the importance of which during a rupture
with France he had lb recently experienced, not only vied
with Henry in declarations of esteem for Elizabeth, and
in profeflions of his resolution to cultivate the 'ftric&e
amity with her, but in order to confirm and perpetuate
their union, he offered himself to her in marriage, and
undertook to procure a dispensation from the Pope to
that effed.

Fs4

ELIZABETH

Book XIl. ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two Mo,
"--V -' narchs attentively, and with that provident discernment of
Eliz1bS, . her true interells which was conspicuous in all her deli-
delibelati- berations. She gave some encouragement to Henry's
pnsc°ncern-overture of a separate negotiation, becauie it opened a
uIther 'n channel of correspondence with France, which she might

find to be of great advantage, if Philip hould not disco-
ver sufficient zeal and folicltude for securing to her pro-
per terms in the joint treaty. But she ventured on' this
with the utmost reserve and caution, that ihe might not
alarm Philip's lufpicious temper, and lose an ally in at.
tempting to gain an enemy [e]. Henry himself, by an
unpardonable aa of indilcretion, prevented her from car-
rying her intercourse with him to luch a length as might
have offended or alienated Philip. At the very time he
was courting Elizabeth's friendship with the greatelt affi.
duity, he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the so-
licitations of the Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his
daughter-in-law the Queen of Scots to assume the title
and arms of England. This ill-timed pretension, the
source of many calamities to the unfortunate Queen of
Scots, ext.nguifhed at once all the confidence that might
have grown between Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its
place distrust, resentment and antipathy. Elizabeth found
that Ihe mufl unite her interests closely with Philip's, and
exped peace only from negotiations carried on in con-
juntion with him [f].

She im- As (he had granted a commiflion, immediately after
Pm"b'wr, heher acceflion, to the fame plenipotentiries whom her sis-
amballiadors s. J

·

to treat of ter had employed, she now infiruaed them to a in eve-
peace. ry point in concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain,

and to take no llep until they had previously consulted
with them []. But though he deemed it prudent to
assume this appearance of confidence in the Spanish Mo-
narch, she knew precilely how far to carry it; and dif-
covcied no inclination to accept of that extraordinary pro-
pofal of marriage which Philip had made to her. The
English had expresscd io openly the deteltation of her sis-
ter's choice of him, that it would have been highly im-
prudent to have exasperated them by renewing that odi-
ous alliance. She was too well acquainted with Philip's

[c] Porbea i. P. 4:
[f Sitrypt's Annals of the Reformation, i. , Carte', Hil. of Eng.
vol. iii. . 375. 6g] Forbear' full view, i. i, 37. 40.

harlh

harsh imperious temper, to think of him for a husband. Book Xll.
Nor could he admit a dispensation from the Pope to be --
sufficient to authorize her marrying him, without con- '5
demning her father's divorce from Catherine of Arragon,
and acknowledging of consequence that her mother's
marriage was null, and her own birth illegitimate. But
though mhe determined not to yield to Philip's addresses,
the situation of her affairs rendered it dangerous to reje&
them; he returned' her answer, therefore, in terms
which were evasive, but so tempered with relpea, that,
though they gave him no reason to be secure of success,
they did not altogether extinguish his hopes.

BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence with which Negotiati.
she concealed her sentiments and intentions concerning re ons at ha-

teau-Cam-

ligion, for ome time after her accession, he so far gain- brefs.
ed upon Philip, that he warmly espoused her interefl in
the conferences which were renewed at Cercamp, and 's559
afterwards removed to Chateau-Cambrefis. A definitive February 6.
treaty, which was to adjufi the claims and pretensions of
so many Princes, required the examination of such a va-
riety of intricate points, and led to such infinite and mi-
nute details, as drew out the negotiations to a great
length. But the Conflable Montmorency exerted him-
self with such indefatigable zeal and industry, repairing
alternately to the courts of Paris and Brussels, in order to
obviate or remove every difficulty, that all points in dif-
pute were adjusted, at length, in such a manner, as to
give entire fatisfaAion, in every particular, to Henry and
Philip; and the last hand was ready to be put to the treaty
between them.

THE claims of England remained as the only obstacle Difficulties
to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the reRitution of Ca- with regrd

to the

lais, in the mos peremptory tone, as an essential condi- claims of
tion of her consenting to peace; Henry refused to give up Eogland.
that important conquest; and both seemed to have taken
their resolution with unalterable firmness. Philip warm-
ly supported Elizabeth's pretensions to Calais, not mere-
ly from a principle of equity towards the English nation,
that he might appear to have contributed to their reco-
vering what they had loft by espousing his cause; nor
solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this manifef-
tation of zeal for her interest; but in order to render
France less formidable, by securing to her ancient enemy
this easy access into the heart of the kingdom. The ear-
neflnefs, however, with which he seconded the argu-

ments

Book XII. ments of the English plenipotentiaries, soon began to re-
'-~-v lax. During the course of the negotiation, Elizabeth,
'55. who now felt herself firmly feated on her throne, began

to take such open and vigorous measures not only for over-
turning all that her filler had done in favour ot popery,
but for eflablifhlng the protestant church on a firm foun-
dation, as convinced Philip that his hopes of an union
with her had been from the beginning vain, and were
now desperate. Frcm that period, his interpositions in
her favour became more cold and formal, flowing mere-
ly from regard to decorum, or fiom the consideration of
remote political interests. Elizabeth, having realon to
exped such an alteration in his condua, quickly perceiv-
ed it. But as nothing would have been of greater detri-
ment to her people, or more inconsistent with her schemes
of domeftick administration, than the continuance of a
war with France, he saw the necessity of submitting to
such conditions as the situation of her affairs imposed, and
that she mufd lay her account with being deserted by an
ally who was now united to her by a very feeble tie, if
the did not speedily reduce her demands to what was mo-
derate and attainable. She accordingly gave new in-
firu&ions to her ambalfadors; and Philip's plenipoten-
tiaries aing as mediators between the French and
them [h], an expedient was fallen on, which justified, in
some degree, Elizabeth's departing from the rigour of
her first demand with regard to Calais. All lesser ar-
ticles were rettled without hmuch difcuflion or delay.
Philip, that he might not appear to have abandoned the
Englflh, insisted that the treaty between Henry and
Elizabeth hould be concluded in form, before that be-
tween the French monarch and him. The one was
signed on the second day of April, the other on the
day following.

Articles of THE treaty of peace between France and England
peace be- contained no articles of real importance, but that which
France d refpe&ed Calais. It was ipulated that the King of
EoglanJ. France hotuld retain possession of that town, with all

its dependencies, during eight years; that, at the expi-
ration of that term, he should restore it to England;
that in cafe of non-performance, he should forfeit five
hundred thousand crowns, for the payment of which

[h] Porbe, i. 59.

fum,

fum, seven or eight wealthy merchants, who were not Book XII.
his fubjeas, should grant lecurity; that five persons of '--'
diftin&ion should be given as hostages till that security '559
were provided; that, although the forfeit of five hun-
dred thouland crowns should be paid, the right of Eng-
land to Calais should fill remain entire, in the fame
manner as if the term of eight years were expired;
that the King and Queen of Scotland should be in-
cluded in the treaty; that if they, or the French King,
should violate the peace by any hostile aion, Henry
should be obliged instantly to restore Calais; that on the
other hand, if any breach of the treaty proceeded from
Elizabeth, then Henry and the King and Queen of Scots
were absolved from all the engagements which they had
come under by this treaty.

NOTWITHSTANDING the studied attention withThe vews

which so many precautions were taken, it is evident tifbwth cp
that Henry did not intend the restitution of Calais, nor is fpet to
it probable that Elizabeth expected it. It was hardly there.
poflible that the could maintain, during the course of
eight years, such perfec concord both with France and
Scotland, as not to afford Henry some pretext for alledg-
ing that she had violated the treaty. But even if that
term hould elapse without any ground for complaint,
Henry might then choose to pay the fum stipulated, and
Elizabeth had no method of aerting her right but by
force of arms. However, by throwing the articles in'the
treaty with regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth fa-
tisfied her subje&s of every denomination; she gave men
of discernment a Rriking proof of her address, in palliat-
ing what he could not prevent; and amused the multi-
tude, to whom the final surrender of a place of such im-
portante would have appeared altogether infamous, with
the profpea of recovering in a short time that favourite
poffeflion.

THE expedient which Montmorency employed, in or- Anexpedi-
der to facilitate the conclusion of peace between France ent which

promotes

and Spain, was the negotiating two treaties of marriage, peace be-
one between Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and tween
Philip, who supplanted his son, the unfortunate Don France d
Carlos, to whom that Princess had been promised in the Spain.
former conferences at Cercamp, the other between Mar-
garet, Henry's only sifter, and the duke of Savoy. For
feeble as the ties of blood often are among Princes, or
how little soever they may regard them when pushed

on

Book XII. on to a by motives of ambition, they assume on other
'v'~-' occasions the appearance of being so far influenced by these
'559' domeftick affedions, as to employ them to justify mea-

fures and concessions which they find to be necessary, but
know to be impolitic or dishonourable. Such was the
ule Henry made of the two marriages to which he gave his
content. Having secured an honourable establishment for
his sifter and his daughter, he, in consideration of these,
granted terms both to Philip and the duke of Savoy, of
which he would not, on any other account, have ventur-
ed to approve.

The terms THE principal articles in the treaty between France
of pacifica- and Spain were, That a sincere and perpetual amity

should be established between the two crowns and their
refpeaive allies; that the two monarchs hould labour in
concert to procure the convocation of a general council,
in order to check the progress of heresy, and restore unity
and concord to the Chrilian Jiurch that all co iquefs
made by either party, on this fide of the Alps, since the
commencement of the war in one thousand five hundred
and fifty-one, should be mutually restored; thlt the dutchy
of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont, the country of
Breffe, and all the other territories formerly fubje to
the dukes of Savoy, should be restored to Emanuel Phi-
libert, immediately after the celebration of his marriage
with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin, Quiers,
Pignerol, Chivaz and Villanova excepted, of which
Henry should keep poffeflion until his claims on that
Prince, in right of his grand-mother, hould be heard and
decided in course of law; that as long as Henry retained
these places in his hands, Philip mhould be at liberty to
keep garrisons in the towns of Vercelli and Ai; that
the French King should immediately evacuate all the
places which he held in Tuscany and the Sianefe, and
renounce all future pretensions to them; that he hould
restore the Marquisate of Montserrat to the duke of Man-
tua; that he fiould receive the Genoese into favour, and
give up to them the towns which he had conquered in the
island of Corsica; that none of the Princes or states, to
whom these ccflions were made, should call their sub-
je&s to account 'for any part of their condu& while
under the dominion of their enemies, but should bury
all pas tranfa&ions in oblivion. The Pope, the Em-
peror, the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Por-

tugal,

tugal, the King and Queen of Scots, and almost every Book Xll.
Prince and slate in Christendom, were comprehended '
in this pacification as the allies either of Henry or of '559
Philip [].

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re-efta-whicb
blifhed in Europe. All the causes of discord which had etablifhe

tranquillity

so long embroiled the powerful monarchs of France and in Europe.
Spain, which had transmitted hereditary quarrels and
wars from Charles to Philip, and from Francis to Hen-
ry, seemed to be wholly removed, or finally terminated:
The French alone complained of the unequal conditions
of a treaty, into which an ambitious minister, in order to
recover his liberty, and an artful mistress, that she might
gratify her resentment, had seduced their too easy mo-
narch. They exclaimed loudly against the folly of giv-
ing up to the enemies of France, an hundred and eighty-
nine fortified places, in the Low-Countries or in Italy,
in return for the three insignificant towns of St. Quintin,
Ham and Catelet. They confidered it as an indelible
Rain upon the glory of the nation, to renounce in one
day territories so extensive, and so capable of being de-
fended, that the enemy could not have hoped to wrest
them out of their hands, after many years of vi&ory and
success.

BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments of hisThe peace

people, or being moved by the remontrances of his coun- France and
cil, ratified the treaty, and executed with great fidelity Spuin.
whatever he had ltipulated to perform. The duke of Sa-
voy repaired with a numerous retinue to Paris, in order to
celebrate his marriage with Henry's filter. The duke of
Alva was sent to the fame capital, at the head of a fplen-
did embassy, to espouse Elizabeth in name of his mafler.
They were received with extraordinary magnificence by
the French court. Amidlt the rejoicings and festivities Deith of
on that occasion, Henry's days were cut hort by a fingu- Henry.
lar and tragical accident. His son, Francis II. a Prince July 'o
under age, of a feeble conflitution, and of a mind fdill
weaker, succeeded him. Soon after, Paul ended his Augunt i.
violent and imperious Pontificate, at enmity with all the
world, and difgufRedeven with his own nephews. They,
perlecuted by Philip, and deserted by the succeeding
Pope, whom they had raised by their influence to the
Papal throne, were condemned to the punishment which

[i] Rcueil de Traite, I. ii. aS7.

their

Book XII. their crimes and ambition had merited, and their death

was as infamous, as their lives had been criminal. Thus
'55?9 all the personages, who had long fullained the principal

charaters on the great theatre of Europe, disappeared
about the fame time. A more known period of history
opens at this ara; other aors appear on the stage, with
different views and different passions; new conteits arose,
and new schemes of ambition occupied and disquieted
mankind.

A general UPON reviewing the tranfaaions of any ative period,

'reiew of in the history of civilized nations, the changes which are
the whole
period. accomplished appear wonderfully disproportioned to the

efforts which have been exerted. Conquests are never
very extensive or rapid, but among nations, whose pro-
grefs in improvement is extremely unequal. When
Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant people, of
simple manners, and formed to war by admirable mili-
tary institutions, invaded a slate funk in luxury, and en-
ervated by excessive refinement; when Genchizcan and
Tamerlane, with their armies of hardy barbarians, pour-
ed in upon nations, enfeebled by the climate in which
they lived, or by the arts and commerce which they cul-
tivated, they, like a torrent, swept every thing before
them, subduing kingdoms and provinces in as hort space
of time, as was requisite to march through them. But
when nations are in a similar slate, and keep pace with
each other in their advances towards refinement, they are
not exposed to the calamity of sudden conquest. Their
acquisitions of knowledge, their progress in the art of war,
their political sagacity and address, are nearly equal. The
fate of Rates in this situation, depends not on a ingle bat-
tle. Their internal resources are many and various. Nor
are they themselves alone interefled in their own safety,
or acive in their own defence. Other flates interpole,
and balance any temporary advantage which either party
may have acquired. After the fiercest and mot lengthen-
ed contci, all the rival nations are exhauRed, none are
conquered. At length a peace is concluded, which re-
inflates each in poffeflion of almofl the fame power, and
the fame territories.

The nations SUCH was the slate of Europe during the reign of
of Europe Charles V. No Prince was so much superior to the reft
in a fimiltr.
late during in power, as to render his efforts irrefiltible, and his con-
thefixtcenih quefis easy. No nation had made progress in improve-
century. mcnt so far beyond its neighbours, as to have acquired a

very

very manifest pre-eminence. Each state derived some Book XII.
advantage, or was fubje& to some inconvenience, from'"~
its situation or its climate; each was distinguished by
something peculiar in the genius of its people, or the con-
flitution of its government. But the advantages possessed
by one, were counterbalanced by circumstances favour-
able to others; and this prevented any from attaining such
superiority as might have been fatal to all. The nations
of Europe in that age, as in the present, were like one
great family; there were some features common to all,
which fixed a resemblance; there were certain peculi-
arities conspicuous in each, which marked a diftin&ion.
But there was not among them that wide diversity of
characer and of genius which, in almost every period
of history, hath exalted the Europeans above the in-
habitants of the other quarters of the globe, and seems
to have destined the one to rule, and the other to obey.

B, T though the near resemblance and equality in im- A remark-
provement among the different nations of Europe, pre-able change

J - * s r ..I

. [
r in the !ltte

vented the reign of Charles V. from being diftinguihedof Europe,
by such sudden and extensive conquests, as occur in fomeduring the
other periods of history, yet, during the course of his".'cgeig
adminifiration, all the considerable ates in Europe fuf-ares
sered a remarkable change in their political situation, and
felt the influence of events, which have not hitherto spent
their force, but ill continue to operate in a greater or
in a less degree. It was during his reign, and in conle-
quence of the perpetual efforts to which his enterprizing
ambition rouzed them, that the different kingdoms of
Europe acquired internal vigour, that they discerned the
resources of which they were pofleffed, that they came
both to feel their own rength, and to know how to ren-
der it formidable to others. It was during his reign, too,
that the different kingdoms of Europe, formerly single and
disjoined, became so thoroughly acquainted, and so in-
timately conneced with each other, as to form one great
political system, in which each took a ation, wherein it
has remained since that time with less variation, than could
have been expeced after the events of two active cen-
turies.

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of the houfeThe pr.

of Austria, were not only greater than those of any other et of the
power, but more discernible and conlpicuous. I have al- Aulria.
ready enumerated the vast territories which descended to

Challes

Book XII. Charles from his Aufirian, Burgundian, and Spanish an-

--' ""ceftors [k]. To thele he himfilf added the Imperial

dignity; and, as if all this had been too little, the bounds
of the univcrle were extended, and a new world lubjcct-
ed to his command. Upon his resignation, the Burgun-
dian provinces, and the Spanish kingdoms with their de-
pendencies, both in the old and new worlds, devolved to
Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions to his son,
in a condition very different from that in which he had re-
ceived them. They were augmented by the acceflion of
new provinces; they weie habituated to obey an admini-
firation which was no lets vigorous than fleady; they
were accustomed to expensive and perlevering efforts,
which, though necelfary in the contefs between civilli.-
ed nations, had been little known in Europe before the
sixteenth century. The provinces of Friesland, Utrecht
and Overyffel, which he acquired by purchase from their
former proprietors, and the dutchy of Gelders, of which
he made himself mailer, partly by force of arms, and
partly by the arts of negotiation, were additions of great
value to his Burgundian dominions. Ferdinand and Isa-
bella had tranlmitted to him all the provinces of Spain,
from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portu-
gal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace with that
kingdom, amidst the various efforts of his enterprizing
ambition, he made no acquisition of territory in that
quarter.

Particularly CHARLES had gained, however, a vast acceflion of
in Spin. power in this part of his dominions. By this fuccels

in the war with the commons of Castile, he exalted
the regal prerogative on the ruins of the privileges of
the people. Though he allowed the name of the Cortes
to remain, and the formality of holding it to be continued,
he reduced its authority and jurifdiaion to nothing, and
modelled it in such a manner, that it became rather a
junto of the servants of the crown, than an assembly of
the representatives of the people. One member of the
conflitution being thus lopped off, it was impoflible but
that the other mufl feel the firoke, and fufler by it. The
fuppreflion of the popular power rendered the ariftocra-
tical lets formidable. The grandees, prompted by the
warlike spirit of the age, or allured by the honours which
they enjoyed in a court, exhaufled their fortunes in mi-

[k] Vol. i. p. 307.

litary

litary service, or in attending on the peroln of their Book XII.
1-rince. They did not dread, perhaps did not oblerve, - '
the dangerous progress of the royal authorit a, which leav-
ing them the vain ditlinction of being covered in presence
of their sovereign, flripped them by degrees of that real
power which they possesed while they formed one body,
and ated in concert with the people. Charles's success
in abolishing the privileges of the commons, and in break-
ing the power of the nobles of Caftilc, encouraged Philip
to invade the liberties of Aragun, which were till mole
extensive. The Caflilians, accuitomed to fibjecion
themselves, assisted in impoting the yoke on their more
happy and indcpendant neighbours. The will of the
sovereign became the supreme law in all the kingdoms of
Spain; and Princes who were not checked in their plans
by the jealousy of the people, nor controled in the exe-
cuting them by the power of the nobles, could both aim
at great objects and call forth the whole trength of the
monarchy in order to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal prerogative, ren- Also in o-

dered the monarchs of Spain matlers at home, he added therpartsof
new dignity and power to their crown by his foreign ac- Europe.
quifitions. He secured to Spain the quiet polTetlion of the
kingdom of Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by
fraud, and held with difficulty. He united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the molf fertile and populous provinces
in Italy, to the Spanilh crown; and left his successors,
even without taking their other territories into the ac-
count, the moR considerable Princes in that country,
which had been long the theatre of contention to the
great powers of Europe, and in which they had fIruggled
with emulation to obtain the luperiority. When the
French, in consequence of the trcatv of Chateau-Cam-
brefis, withdrew teir forces out of Italy, and finally re-
linquifled all their Ichemes of conqufit on that fide of
the Alps, the Spanifli dominions tlese rose in importance,
and enabled thilr Kings, as long as the monarchy re-
tained any degree of vigour, to lr<frvtIe the chief swy in
all the tranfations of that country. But whatever ac-
ceflion either of interior authoity or of foreign dominion
Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain in Europe, it
was inconsiderable when coinpald ith his acquifitioll
in the new world. 1-1 added, there, not provinces, ut
empires to his clown. lie conqurl- J territories of il ch

Vol. . II. G 1 illllll Thil.

465

Book Xlt. immense extent; he discovered such inexhaustible veins
-'-Ov--'of wealh, and opened uch boundless profpets of every

kind, as must have rouzed and called forth to aion his
successor, tho' his ambition had been much less ardent
than Philip's, and must have rendered him not only en-
terprizing but formidable.

Progrefl of WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian family rose
theGermantO such pre-eminence in Spain, the younger, of which
branch of Ferdinand was the head, grew to be considerable in Ger-
the house of
tAuheri. many. The ancient hereditary dominions of the house

of Aufh-ia in Germany, united to the kingdoms of Hun-
gary and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had acquired by
marriage, formed a refpeaable power, and when the Im-
perial dignity was added to thele, Ferdinand poflefled
territories more extensive than had belonged to any Prince,
Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head of the
Empire during leveral ages. Fortunately for Europe,
the disgust which Philip conceived, on account of Ser-
dinand's refuing to relinqnifh the Imperial crown in his
favour, not only prevented for ome time the separate
members of the house of Austria from a&ing in concert,
but occasioned a visible alienation and rivalfhip. By de-
grees, however, regard to the interest of their family ex-
tirguifhed this impolitic animosity. The confidence
which was natural returned; the aggrandizing of the
hioufe of Aufiria became the common objec of all their
schemes; they gave and received aliftance alternately
towards the execution of them; and each derived confi-
deration and importance from the other's success. A fa-
mily so great and so aspiring became the general obje ot
jealousy and terror. All the power as well as policy of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order to check
and humble it. Nothing can give a more striking idea of
the ascendant which it had acquired, and of the terror
which it had inspired, than that after its vigour was spent
with extraordinary exertions of its firength, after Spain
was become only the shadow of a great name, and its
monarchs were funk into debility and dotage, the house
of Austria ill continued to be formidable. The nations
of Europe had so often felt its fiperiour power, and had
been so confantly employed in guarding againfi it, that
the dread of it became a kind of political habit, the
influence of which remained when the causes, which had
formed it, cealed to exist.

WHILE the house of Aufiria went on with such fuc- Book XII.

cess in enlarging its dominions, France made no confi- '"
derable acquisition of new territory. All its schemes of Acquifitio

of the King§

conquest in Italy had proved abortive; it had hitherto of France
obtained no eiablifihment of consequence in the new during the
world; and after the continued and vigorous efforts of regn of
four uccefiive reigns, the confines of the kingdom were
much the fame as Louis XI. had left them. But though
France made not such large firides towards dominion as
the house of Austria, it continued to advance by flep.
which were more secure, because they were gradual and
less observed. The conquest of Calais put it out of the
power of the English to invade France but at their utmcil
peril, and delivered the French from the dread of their
ancient enemies, who, previous to that event, could at
any time penetrate into the kingdom by that avenue, and
thereby retard or defeat the execution of their belt con-
certed enterprizes against any foreign power. The im-
portant acquisition of Metz. covered that part of their
frontier which formerly was moit feeble, and lay most
exposed to insult. France, from the time of its obtain-
ing these additional securities againlt external invasion,
must be deemed the moll powerful kingdom in Europe,
and is more fortunately situated than any on the continent
either for conquefis or defence. From the confines of
Artois to the bottom of the Pyrenees, and from the Bri-
tifh channel to the frontiers of Savoy and the coast of the
Mediterranean, its territories lay compaCt and unmingled
with those of any other power. Several of the confide-
rable provinces, which, by their having been long subjec
to the great vassals of the crown, who were often at vari-
ance or at war with their malter, had contraced a spirit
of independence, were now accullomed to recognize
and to obey one sovereign. As they became members of
the fame monarchy, they assumed the lentiments of that
body into which they were incorporated, and co-operated
with zeal towards promoting its interest and honour.
The power and influence refled from the nobles weie
seized by the crown. The people were not admitted to
share in these spoils; they gained no new privilege; they
acquired no additional weight in the legislature. It was
not for the fake of the people, but in order to extend their
own prerogative, that the monarchs of France had la-
toured to humble their great vaffah. Satisfied with hav-

G g 2 itg

Book XII. ing brought them under entire fubjeaion to the crown,

' they discovered no solicitude to free the people from their
ancient dependance on the nobles of whom they held.

Enables A MON ARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus united
them to f- at home and secure from abroad, was entitled to form
fume an higtlernati-great dcfigns, because he felt himself in a condition to
Con among execute them. The foreign wars which had continued
the powers with little interruption from the acceflion of Charles VIII.

urope. had not only cherished and augmented the martial genius

of the nation, but by inuring the troops during the course
of long service to the fatigues of war, and accustoming
them to obedience, had added the force of discipline to
their natural c;rdcr. A gallant and aive body of nobles
who confidertd themselves as idle and useless, unlels when
they were in the field; who were scarce acquainted with
any pastime or exercise but what was military; and who
knew no road to power, or fame, or wealth, but war,
would not have suffered their sovereign to remain long in
ination. The people, little acquainted with the arts of
peace, and always ready to take arms at the command of
their tiiperiours, were accustomed by the vast expence of
long wars, carried on in diflant countries, to bear impo-
fitions, which, how iconfiderable soever they may seem
if efcimated by the exorbitant rate of modern a&ions, ap-
pear immense when compared with the fums levied in
France, or in any other country of Europe, previous to
the reign of Louis XI. As all the members of which the
flatc was cornpofed were thus impatient for a&ion, and
capable of great efforts, the schemes and operations of
France mutt have been no les formidable to Europe than
those of Spain. The superior advantages of its situation,
the contiguity and compatnefs of its territories, together
with the peculiar fiate of its political conftitmtion at that
juncture muf have rendered its enterpriles flill more
alarming and more decisive. The King possesed such a
degree of power as gave him the entire command of his
fubjeAs; the people were firangers to those occupations
and habits of'life which render men averse to war, or un-
fit for it; and the nobles, tho' reduced to subordination
necessary in a regulargovernment, ill retained the high
undaunted spirit which was the effet of their ancient in-
dependence. The vigour of the Feudal times remained,
their anarchy was at an end; and the Kings of France
could avail thcmfclvcs of the martial ardour which that

fingulai

,singular institution had kindled or kept alive, without be- Book Xl.
ingexpofed to any of the dangers or incon ciencies w hich -v
are inleparable from it when in entire force.

A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps, capable of Circum-

greater military efforts, than at any other period in its Ilances
progress. But how formidable oever or fatal to the which pre-

vented the

other nations of Europe, the power of luch a monarchy immediate
might have been, the civil wars which br;oe out in eflectsof
France, saved them at that junture from feeling its cf- theirpwcr.
feets. These wars, of which religion was the pretext
and ambition the cause; wherein great abilities were dil-
played by the leaders of the different fadions, and little
condut or firmness were manitefted by the crown under
a succession of weak Princes, kept France occupied and
embroiled for half a century. During thele commotions,
the internal firength of the kingdom was much wailed,
and uch a spirit of anarchy was spread among the nobles,
to whom rebellion was familiar, and the restraint of laws
unknown, that a considerable interval became requisite,
not only for recruiting the internal vigour of the nation,
but for re-establishing the authority of the Prince; so that
it was long before France could turn her whole attention
towards foreign tranfadions, or act with her proper force
in foreign wars. It was long before she rose to that as-
cendant in Europe, which he has maintained since the
adminiliration of Cardinal Richlieu, and which the fitua-
tion as well as extent of the kingdom, the nature of her
government, and the characer of her people, entitle
her to maintain.

WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew intoProgrersof
power and consequence, England likewise made confi- England

with rcfpeCt

derable progress towards regular government and interior t, its intt-
strength. Henry VIII. probably without intentioni, and rior Rtte.
certainly without any confilent plan, of which his nature
was incapable, pursued the scheme of deprefling the nobi-
lity, which the policy of his father lHenry VII. had bc-
gun. The pride and caprice of his temper Led him to
employ chiefly new men in the adminilfration of affairs,
becaule he found them most obfcquious, or leafc Icrupu-
lous; and he not only conferred on these luch plenitude
of power, but exalted them to such pre-eminence in dig-
nity, as mortified and degraded the ancient nobility. By
the alienation or sale of the church lands, which were
dissipated with a profusion not inferior to the rapaciou-
nel, with which they had been fcized, as well as by the

G g 3 privilege

Book Xll. pivilegc granted by the ancient landholders of felling

v - their etlates, or dilpofing of them by will, an immense

property, formerly locked up, being brought into cir.
culation, put the pirit of indufiry and commerce in mo-
tion, and gave it obme considerable dree of vigour.
The road to power and to opulence bec alie open to per-
sons of every condition. A sudden and cxceffive flow of
wealth from the Weft Indies provcd fatal to ind.ftry in
Spain; a moderate accefion in England to the fum in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakenedthe ingenuity
of the nation, and excited it to useful enterprize. In
France, what the nobles Inft the crown gained. In Eng-
land, the commons were gainers as well as the King.
Power and influence accompanied of course the property
which they acquired. They rose to consideration among
their fellow fubjeds; they began to feel their ewn im-
portance; and extending their influence in the legislative
body gradually, and often when neither they themselves
nor others foresaw all the effec of their claims and pre-
tenilons, they at lalt attained that high authority, to
which the British conflitution is indebted for the existence,
and must owe the preservation of its liberty. At the fame
time that the Englihf constitution advanced towards per-
fetion, several inflances brought on a change in the an-
cient system with refpea to foreign powers, and intro-
duced another more beneficial to the nation. By dif-
claiming the supremacy andjurifdidion of the Papal See,
considerable fums were aved to the nation, of which it
had been annually drained, by remittances to Rome for
ditpenlations and indulgences, or in order to defray the
expence of pilgrimages into foreign countries [], or by
payment of annates, firfl fruits, and a thousand other
taxes which that artful and rapacious court levied on the
credulity of mankind. The idea of ajurifdi&ion different
from the civil power, and claiming not only to be inde-
pendent but superior to it, a wild Iblecifm in government,
apt not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds, but

[g] The IofT which the nation fuflained by molf of these articles is ob-

vioUb, and mufl have been great. Even that by pilgrimages was not in-
confiderablc. In the year 1418, license was obtained by no fewer than

16 perlons to visit the shrine of St. James of compoftella in Spain.
Rymer, vol. x. In 1434, the number of pilgrim% to the fame place
was 1460. Ibid. In 1445, they were loo. vol. xi.

tending

tending dire&ly to disturb society, was finally abolished. Book XIl.
Government became more simple as well as more ref- - '
pedable, when no rank or character exempted any per-
Ion from being amenable to the fame courts, from being
tried by the fame judges, and from being acquitted or
condemned by the fame laws.

BY the loss of Calais the English were excluded from With ref-
the continent. All schemes for invading France became pea to the

affairs of

of course as chimerical as they had formerly been pcrni- air cnoi-
cious. The views of the English were confined, first cent.
by necessity, and afterwards from choice, within their
own iland. That rage for conquest which had possescd
the nation during many centuries, and wafted its flrength
in perpetual and fruitless wars, at length ceased. Those
active spirits which had known and followed no profefion
but war, fought for occupation in the arts of peace, and
their country benefited as much by the one as it had sus-
sered by the other. The nation, exhausted by frequent
expeditions to thecontinent, recruited, and acquired new
strength; and when rouzed by any extraordinary exi-
gency to take part in foreign operations, the vigour of
its efforts were proportionally great, because they were
only occasional and of a short continuance.

THE fame principle which had led England to adopt With ref-

this new system with regard to the powers on the conti- Pea tcot-
nent, occasioned a change in its plan of conduct with ref- l
pes to Scotland, the only foreign (late, with which, on
account of its situation in the fame island, the English had
such a close conneaion as demanded their perpetual at-
tention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient scheme of
conquering that kingdom, which the nature of the coun-
try, defended by a brave and hardy people, rendered dan-
gerous if not impracicable; it appeared more eligible to
endeavour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as
might exempt England from any danger or disquiet from
that quarter. The national poverty of the Scots, toge-
ther with the violence and animosity of their fations,
rendered the execution of this plan easy to a people far
superior to them in wealth. Their popular leaders were
gained; the minifers and favourites of the crown were
corrupted; and such absolute direction of their councils
acquired, as rendered the operations of the one kingdom
dependant in a great meatlrc on the sovereign of the
other. Such perfea external security added t the in-

G g 4 terior

Book XII. terjor advantages which England now pffeffed, muff

L'v---' soon have railed it to new colfidcration and importance;

the long reign of liz.aheth, equally conspicuous for wiS-
dom, ior fteadir:cfs, and for vigour, accelerated its pro-
grefs, ai.d carried it with greater rapidity towards that
clevatcd tfation which it hath since held among the
powers of Eurtope.

Changes in DURING the period in which the political state of the
'fthepiti'algreat kingdoms underwent luich changes, revolutions of
state of the t 0
secondary considerable importance happened in that of the secondary
powers in or inferior powers. Those in the Papal court are molt
Europe. obvious, and of more extensive consequence.
The moA IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned the rife of
cn"fiderable that fpiritualjurifdiCtion which the Popes claim as Vicars
r-,o'uto, of Jelus Chrifi, and have traced the progress of that au-
of the fix-
t.enth cn- thority which they possess as temporal Princes [a].
tur) in the There was nothing previous to the reign of Charles V.
Coe1 jtf that tended to circumscribe or to moderate their authority,

but Ifience and philosophy, which began to revive and to
be cultivated. The progress ofthce, however, was still
inconliderable ; they always operate slowly, and it is long
before their influence reaches the people, or can produce
any sensible effeO ucpn them. They may perhaps gra-
dually, and in a long course of years, undermine and
shake an cftahlifhld lyftem of false religion, but there is
no infance of their having overturned one. The battery
is too feeble to demclifh those fabricks which superstition
raises on deep foundations, and can strengthen with the
most consummate art.

Thegeneral LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy with other
rcrolt weapons, and with an impetuosity more formidable.
agin' e the The time and manner of his attack concurred with a
do&Tines of
the church multitude of circumflances, which have been explained,
of Rome, in giving him immediate success. The charm which had
nd thef bound mankind for so many ages was broken at once.
the Pope. The human mind, which had continued long as tame

and pafiive, as if it had been formed to believe whatever
was taught, and to bear whatever was imposed, routed
of a sudden and became inquisitive, mutinous, and dif-
dainfull of the yoke to which it had hitherto submittcd.
That wondeful ferment and agitation of mind, which, at
this diflancc of time, appears unaccountable or is con-

[a] Vol. 1. p. 104.

dcmned

demned as extravagant, was so general, that it mufd have Book Xll.
been excited by causes which were natural and of power-
ful efficacy. The Kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden,
England and Scotland, and almost one half of Germany
threw off their allegiance to the Pope, abolished his ju-
rifdition within their territories, and gave the fanEion
of law to modes of discipline and systems of doEtrine
which were not only independent of his power, hut hof-
tile to it. Nor was this spirit of innovation confined to
those countries which openly revolted from the Pope; it
spread Lhrough all Europe, and broke out in every part of
it with various degrees of violence. It penetrated early
into France and made progrets apace. The number of
corverts to the opinions of the Reformers was to great,
their zeal so enterprizing, and the abilities of their lea-
ders to diftinguiihed, that they oon ventured to contend
for superiority with the efablihed church, and ere
sometimes on the point of obtaining it. In all the pro-
vinces of Germany, which continued to acknowledge the
Papal supremacy, as well as in the Low-Countries, the
Protestant dotrines were secretly taught, and had gained
1o many proselytes, that they were ripe for revolt, and
were restrained merely by the dread of their rulers from
imitating the example of their neighbours, and alTerting
their independence. Even in Spain and in Italy, fymp-
toms of the fame disposition to shake off the yoke ap-
peared. The pretensions of the Pope to infallible knoxw-
ledge and supreme power were treated by many pertons
of eminent learning and abilities with such scorn, or im-
pugned with such vehemence, that the molt vigilant at-
tention of the civil magiflrate, the highest sirains of pon-
tifical authority, and all the rigour of the inquisitorial
jurifdicion were requisite to check and cxtinguish it.

THE defetion of so many opulent and powerful king- This hrid-

doms from the Papal See, was a fatal blow to its gran- ecd thf te-
deur and power. It abridged the dominions of the Popes Pnpc's do-
in extent, it diminished their revenues, and left them m'inin,
fewer rewards to bellow on the ecclefiaflicks of various
denominations, attached to them by vows of obedience
as well as by ties ofintereft, and whom they employed as
instruments to establish or fuipport their usurpations in
every part of Europe. The countries too which now
dilclaimed their authority, were thole which formerly
had been most devoted to it. The emplie of fiperflition

difitrs

*

Book XII. differs from every other species of dominion; its power is
^'-3v.-' often greatest, and most implicitly obeyed in th. ,',ov"!-

ces mofd remote from the eat ofgoverni.ent; while luch
as are ituated nearer to that are more apt Lo dilc'-. i 'e
artifices by which it is upheld, or the impftrures on
which it is founded. The personal frailties or vices of
the Popes, the errors as well as corruption of tieir ad-
minifiration, the ambition, venality and deceit u-ilch
reigned in their court, fell immediately under the obier-
vation of the Italians, and could not fail of diminishing
that refpe which begets submission. But in Germany,
England, and the more remote countries, thele weie ei-
ther altogether unknown, or being only known by report,
made a flighter impreflion. Their veneration for the
Papal dignity increased with their distance from Rome;
and that, added to their gross ignorance, rendered them
equally credulous and pallive. In tracing the progress of
the Papal domination, the boldest and moif fuccelsful in-
4tances of encroachment are to be found in Germany and
other countries distant from Italy. In thele its impofi-
tions were heaviest, and its exacions the molt rapacious;
so that in eltimating the diminution of power which the
court of Rome ufifered in consequence of the Reforma-
tion, not only the number but the character of the peo-
ple who revolted, not only the great extent of territory,
hut the extraordinary obsequiousness of the subje&s which
it loft, must be taken into the account,

end obliged NOR was it only by this defection of so many king-
them to doms and flates which it occasioned, that the Reforma-
change the
1, iiit of tion contributed to diminish the power of the Roman
their go- Pontiffs. It obliged them to adopt a different fyfiem of
vtrrnact. conduc towards the nations which continued to recognize

their jurifdiaion, and to govern them by new maxims
and with a milder spirit. The Reformation taught them,
by a fatal example, what they seem not before to have
apprehended, that the credulity and patience of mankind
might be overburdened and exhaulted. They became
afraid of venturing on any such exertion of their authority
as might alarm or exalperate their subje&s, and excite
them to a new revolt. They saw a rival church ea-
blifhed in many countries of Europe, the members of
which were on the watch to observe any errors in their
adminiflration, and eager to expose them. They were
finfible th4t the opinions adverse to their power and

usurpations

usurpations were not confined to their enemies alone, but Bonk Xll.
had spread even among the people who still adhered to '-
them. Upon all these accounts, it was no longer poflible
to lead and to govern their flock in the lame manner as in
those dark and quiet ages, when faith was implicit, when
submission was unreserved, and all tamely followed and
obeyed the voice of their hepherd. From the era of
the Reformation, the Popes have ruled rather by address
and management than by authority. The stile of their
decrees is the fame, but the effet of them is very diffe-
rent. Those Bulls and Interdics which, before the Re-
formation, made the greatest Princes tremble, have since
that period been disregarded or despised by the most in-
considerable. Those bold decisions and ats of jurifdic-
tion which, during many ages, not only palTed uen-
fured, but were revered as the awards ofa acred tribunal,
would, since Luther's appearance, be treated by one part
of Europe as the effect of iLily or arrogance, and he de-
tested by the other as impious and unjust. The opes,
in their administration, have been obliged not only to ac-
commodate themselves to the noticr of their adherents,
but to pay ome regard to the prejudices otheir enemies.
They seldom venture to claim new powers, or even to
insist obstinately on their ancient prerogatives, It ft they
should irritate the former; they carefully avoid every
measure that may either excite the indignation or draw on
them the derision of the latter. The policy of the court
of Rome hasbecomt a cautious, circumlpect, and timid,
as it was once adventurous and violent; and though their
pretensions to infallibility, on which all their authority is
founded, does not allow them to renounce any jurifdic-
tion which they have at any time claimed or exercised,
they find it expedient to susser many of their prerogatives
to lie dormant, and not toexpofe themselves by ill-timed
attempts towards reviving thele, to the rifque of losing
that remainder of power which they still enjoy. Betoie
the fixtcenth century, the Popes were the movers and
directors in every considerable enterprize ; they were at
the head of every great alliance; and being coniidleed as
arbiters of the affairs of Chriflendom, the court of Rome
was the centre of political negotiation and intrigue.
From that time, the greatef operations in Europe have
been can ied on independent of them; they have funk al-
nmof to a level with the other petty Princes of Italy; they

continue

Book XII. continue to claim, though they dare not exercise, the

vz-->~ lame spiritual jurildidion, but scarce retain any lladow

of the temporal power which they anciently possessed.

The Refor- BUT how fatal oever the Reformation may have been
Inatiolcon- to the power of the Popes, it contributed to improve the

ribute the church of Rome both in Icience and in morals. The de-
church both fire of equalling the reformers in those talents which had
in c ence procured them relpedt; the necessity of acquiring the

ad raknowledge requisite for defending their own tenets, or re-

futing the arguments of their opponents; together with
the emulation natural between two rival churches, en-
gaged the Roman Catholic clergy to apply themselves to
the fludy of useful science, which they cultivated with
luch assiduity and fucce's, that they have gradually be-
come as eminent in literature, as they were in ome pe-
riods infamous for ignorance. The fame principle occa-
sioned a change no lefsconfiderable in the manners of the
clergy of the Romish church. Various causes which
have formerly been enumerated, had concurred in intro-
ducing great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners
among the Popilh clergy. Luther and his adherents be-
gan their attack on the church with such vehement invec-
tives against these, that in order to remove the scandal,
and silence their declamations, greater decency of con-
dud became neceflary. The Reformers themselves were
so eminent not only for the purity but even autRerity of
their manners, and had acquired such reputation among
the people cn that account, that the Roman Catholick
Clergy rmuf have fu, I., all credit, if they had not en-
deavoured to conform in rome measure to their ftaridard.
They knew that all their aaions fell under the severe
infpedion of the Protestants, whom enmity and emula-
tion prompted to oblerve every vice, or even impropri-
ety in their condua; to censure them without indul-
gence, and to expose them without mercy. This ren-
deredthem, of course, not only cautious to avoid such
enormities as might give offence, but fludious to acquire
the virtues that might merit praise. In Spain and Portu-
gal, where the tyrannical jurildidion of the Inquisition
crulhed the Protclant faith as soon as it appeared, the
spirit of Popery continues invariable; science has made
small progress, and the characer of ecclesiastics has un-
dergone little change. But in those countries where the
members of the two churches have mingled freely with
each other, or have carried on any considerable inter-

couric,

course, either commercial or literary, an extraordinary Book XII.
alteration in the ideas as well as in the morals of the Po- v
pith ecclesiastics, is manifest. In France, the manners of
the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become decent
and exemplary in an high degree. Many of them have
been distinguished for all the accomplishments and vir-
tues which can adorn their profession; and differ greatly
from their predecessors before the Reformation, both in
their maxims and in their condua.

NOR has the influence of the Reformation been felt The effe-.
only by the inferior members of the Roman Catholick of ite"nd

to the cha-

Church; it has extended to the See of Rome, to the raaerorthe
sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Violations of decorum, Popes
and even trespasses against morality, which passed with- theilvcS.
out censure in those ages, when neither the power of the
Popes, nor the veneration of the people for their charac-
ter, had any bounds; when there was no holtile eye to
observe the errors in their conduct, and no adversarics
zealous to inveigh against them; would be liable now to
the severest animadversion, and excite general indigna-
tion or horror. Instead of rivalling the courts of tempo-
ral Princes in gaiety, and furpafling them in licentious-
ness, the Popes have fludied to assume manners more e-
vere and more suitable to their ecclefiatical characer.
The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted, during two
centuries, by any Pontiff that resembled Alexander VI.
or several of his predecefTors, who were a disgrace to re-
ligion and to human nature. Throughout this long fuc-
ceflion of Popes, a wonderful decorum of condu&, com-
pared with that of preceding ages, is observable. Many
of them have been conspicuous for the virtues becoming
their high station; and by their humanity, their love of
literature, and their moderation, have made some atone-
ment to mankind for the crimes of their predecessors.
Thus the beneficial influences of the Reformation have
been more extensive than they appear on a superficial
view; and thisgreat division in the Chriltian church hath
contributed, in some measure, to increase purity of man-
ners, to diffuse science, and to inspire humanity. Hiflo-
ry recites such a number of hocking events, occasioned
by religious dissensions, that it must afford particular fa-
tisfa&ion to trace any one salutary or beneficial effect to
that source, from which so many fatal calamities have
flowed.

Ttr.

Book XII. THE republick of Venice which, at the beginning of
'~-- the sixteenth century, had appeared so formidable, that
State of the almost all the potentates of Europe united in a confedera.
republick of
Veniie. cy for its deftru&ion, declined gradually from its ancient

power and plendour. The Venetians not only loll a
great part of their territory in the war excited by the
league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as vigour
of the slate were cxhaufted by their extraordinary and
long continued efforts in their own defence; and that
commerce b which they had acquired their wealth and
power began to decay, without any hopes of its reviving.
All the fatal consequences to their republick, which the
sagacity of the Venetian senate foresaw on the firfl dif-
covery of a pafaage to the Eafi-Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope, took place. Their endeavours to prevent
the Portuguese from eablifhing themselves in the East-
Indies, not only by exciting the Soldans of Egypt and the
Ottoman monarchs to turn their arms against such dan-
gerous intruders, but by affording secret aid to the infi-
dels in order to insure their fuccels [z], proved ineffe&u-
al. The ativity and valour of the Portuguese surmount.
ed every obstacle, and obtained such firm footing in that
fertile country, as secured to them large poffeflions, to-
gether with influence still more extensive. Lisbon, in-
flead of Venice, became the staple for the precious com-
modities of the Eafl. The Venetians, after having pof-
sessed for many years the monopoly of that beneficial
commerce, had the mortification to be excluded from al-
mofi any hare in it. The discoveries of the Spaniards
in the wellern world, proved no less fatal to inferior
branches of their commerce. The original defe&s which
were formerly pointed out in the conflitution of the Ve-
netian republick continued, and the disadvantages with
which it undertook any great enterprise, increased rather
than diminishcd. The lources from which it derived its
extraordinary riches and power being dried up, the inte-
rior vigour of the Rlate declined, and of course, rendered
its external operations less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased to be one
of the principal powers in Europe, and became a fecon-
dary and lubaltern slate. But as the senate had the ad-
dress to conceal its diminution of power, under the veil

[i) Preher. Script. Rer. German. ol. ii. 5,.

of

of moderation and caution; as it made no raih effort that Book Xll.
could difcoverits impotence; as the symptoms of political ''
decay in states are not soon observed, and are seldom so
apparent to their neighbours as to occasion any sudden al-
teration in their conduc towards them, Venice continu-
ed long to be confidered and refpeCed. She was treated
n t according to her present condition, but according to
the rank which she had formerly held. Charles, as well
as i;:C monarchs of France his rivals, courted her affil-
ta:;ce with emulation and olicitude in all their enter-
prizes. Even down to the close of the century, Venice
remained not only an objec of attention, but a confider-
able feat of political negotiation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the firfl Colmo di Medici, Of Trcany.

and Lawrence, his grandson, had acquired in the repub-
lick of Florence by their beneficence and abilities, in-
spired their descendants with the ambition of usurping the
sovereignty in their country, and paved their way to-
wards it. Charles placed Alexander di Medici at the A. D. 530.
head of the republick, and to the natural interest and
power of the family added the weight and credit of the
Imperial protetion. Of these, his successor Cosmo,
firnamed the Great, availed himself; and establishing his
supreme authority on the ruins of the ancient republican
conflitution, he transmitted that, together with the title
of Grand Duke of Tuscany, to his descendants. Their
dominions were composed of the territories which had be-
longed to the three commonwealths of Florence, Piia,
and Siena, and forrted one of the molt refpeEtable of tlw
Italian fiates.

THE dukes of Savoy, during the former part of the Of the

sixteenth century, possessed territories which were not duks'o
considerable either for extent or value; and the French,
having seized the greater part of them, obliged the reign-
ing duke to retire for safety to the ifrong fortress of Nice,
where he shut himself up for several years ; while his son,
the Prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to better his for-
tune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies of Spain.
The peace of Chateau Cambrefis restored to him his pa-
ternal dominions. As thee are environed on every hand
by powerful neighbours, all whose motions the dukes of
Savoy mull oblerve with the geatell attention, in order
not only to guard againfl the danger of being h(rpriced
and overpowered, but that they may choose their fide
with discernment in those quarrels wherein it i impoil,-

hle

Book Xtl. ble for them to avoid taking part, this peculiarity in their
'-- -'situation seems to have had no inconsiderable influence

on their characer. By rouzing them to perpetual atten-
tion, by keeping their ingenuity always on the firetch,
and engaging them in almost continual aion, it hath
formed a race of Princes more sagacious in discovering
their true interelt, more decisive in their resolutions, and
more dextrous in availing themselves of every occurrence
which prelented itielt, than any perhaps that can be tin-
gled out in the history of mankind. By gradual acqui-
fitions the Dukes of Savoy have added to their territories
as well as to their own importance; and aspiring at length
to regal dignity, which they obtained about half a cen-
tury ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank among the
monarchs of Europe.

Of the THE territories which now form the republick of the
United united Netherlands, were loft during the firfi part of the

sixteenth century, among the numerous provinces fubje&
to the house of Auflria; and were then so inconsiderable,
that hardly one opportunity of mentioning them hath oc-
curred in all the busy period of this history. But loon as-
ter the peace of Chateau Cambrefis, the violent and bi-
gotted maxims of Philip's government, carried into exe-
cution with unrelenting vigour by the duke of Alva, ex-
afperated the free people of the Low-Countries to such
a degree, that they threw off the Spanish yoke, and as-
ferted their ancient liberties and laws. Thek they de-
fended with a persevering valour, which occupied the
arms of Spain during half a century, exhausted the vi-
gour, ruined the reputation of that monarchy, and at ladt
conlfrained their ancient masters to recognize and to
treat with them as a free independent slate. This ate
founded on liberty, and reared by industry and economy,
had grown into reputation, even while struggling for its
cxiflcnce. But when peace and security allowed it to en-
large its views, and to extend its commerce, it tofe to be
one of the most refpeaable as well as enterpriLing powers
in Europe.

T'H E tranfaaions of the kingdoms in the North of Eu-

rope, have been seldom attended to in the course of this
hillory.
Of RuiA. RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism and obfcu-

ritv, from which it was called about the beginning of the
prcltt century, by the creative genius of Peter the

Great,

Great, who made his country known and formidable to Book Xll.
the reft of Europe. 1--

IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of Charles Of )n-

mark and

V. great revolutions happened in their constitutions, ci- weden.
vil as well as ecclesiastical. In the former kingdom, a
tyrant being degraded from the throne and expelled the
country, a new Prince was called by the voice of the
people to assume the reins of government. In the latter,
a fierce people, rouzed to arms by injuries and oppression,
shook off the Danih yoke, and conferred the regal dignity
on itsdeliverer, Gustavus Ericson, who had all the virtues of
a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhaufled by foreign
wars, or weakened by the dissentions between the King
and the nobles, became incapable of such efforts as were
requisite in order to recover the ascendant which it had
long possessed in the North of Europe. Sweden, as soon
as it was freed from the dominion of trangers, began to
recruit its strength, and acquired in a flort time uch in-
terior vigour, that it became the first kingdom in the
North. Early in the subsequent century, it role to such
a high rank among the powers of Europe, that it had the
chief merit both in forming and conduaing that powerful
league, which prote&ed not only the Protestant religion,
but the liberties of Germany against the bigotry and am-
bition of the house of Austria.

INDEX
VOL. II,

Hh

# INDEX TO THE VIEW of the STATE of EUROPE, AND THE PROOFS and ILLUSTRATIONS.

I N

D

E

X

TO THE
VIEW of the STATE of EUROPE,

AND THE
PROOFS and ILLUSTRATIONS.

A
AFRICA, the (hocking devastations

made there by the Vandals, 16o.

Alawas, his chara&er of the clergy in

his time, 186.

Afred the Great, his complaint of the

ignorance of the clergy, 186.

Atlldial possession of land, explained,

171. How such poleffion became
subjet to military service, ib. Dif-
tingui(hed from beneficiary tenures,
173. How converted into feudal te-
nures, 178.
!llodi.n, the etymology of that word,

180.
Ammiaal, his characer of the Hans,

161, s65.

Amuratb, Sultan, the body of Janiza-

riel formed by him, 154.

Amathema, form of that denounced a-

gains robbers during the middle ages,
160.

,draia, the ancient Greek philosophy

cultivated there, while loR in Europe,
cit, NIte xxviii. The progress of
plilofophy from thence to lurope,
154.

dras.r, rife of the kingdom of, isl.
Ita union with Castile, i. The con-

ftitution and form of its government,
114. The privileges of its Cortes,
ib. Office and jurifdiaion of the
Jufiiza, 115. The regal power very
confined, 16. Form of the alle-
giance Iwore to the Kings of, i. The
power of the nobility to control the
regal power, 170. Their privilege of
union taken away by Peter IV. b.
The efctblithment of the inquisition
opposed there, 73.

Armirt, (loading, the rife of, traced, 79.

By what merns they became more
general in Europe, 95.
Arms, the profeflion of, the molt ho-

nourn( , :n uncivilized nations, 60.

AJi, an account of the ancient Romith

sea of, 189, Note xii.

Aemblires, legislative, how formed, 36.
Ajmblit, general, of France, their

power under the first rauc of Kings,
136. Under the second and third,
4I. At what period they loR thei1
cginfative authority, 137.
Attila, King of the Hun, account ol

his reception of the Roman arhballa-
dora, 158, Note iii. Some account of
his conquelts, 161.

A.vila, an assembly of Castilian nobles

there, solemnly try and depose Henry
IV. their King, 113.

H h a .Anri,

.ufiria, the house of, by whom found-
ed, 145.

B

Baillis, in the old French law, their of-

fice explained, 244.

Balance of power, the firr rife of, in

Europe, b. The prog ess of, 94.
Raltcr, the first oulce of wealth, to the

towns situated on that sea, 164.

Barce/ina, its trade, riches, and privi-

leges at the clole of the fifteenth cen-
tuly, 275.

Barcns, their independence, and mutual

hoftil;tit , under the feudal fyflem, o,
2 . How affected by the franchifement
of cities, 35. Acquire a participation
in legislative government, /b. Their
private wars for redrels of personal in-
juries, 4. Methods employed to abo-
lifh these contentions, 43. Origin of
their supreme and independent jurif-
didion, 5z. The bad effets resulting
from thele privileges, 53. The ftep
taken by Princes to reduce their courts,
54. How obliged to relinquish their
judicial prerogatives, 61. Of Italy,
fubjered to municipal laws, 97, Note
xv. Their right of territorial jurifdic-
diiion explained, 240. Their emolu-
ments from causes decided in their
courts, ib.

Benefirei, under the feudal fyflem, ahif-

tory of, 174. When they became he-
reditary, 176.

BooAk, an inquiry into the materials of

the ancient ones, 186. The loss of
old manuscripts accounted for, 187.
The great prices they fold for in anci-
ent times., t.

BoroalgEl, repiefentatives of, how intro-

duced into national councils, 37.

Bricni, ancient, their distress and dejec-

tion when deserted by the Roman., and
haralfed by the Picts and Calcdonians,
157, Note i.

Brat erhasd f God, an account of that

afiociation for xtinguilhing private
warr, 124.

Brage,, how it became the chief mart

for Italian commodities during the mid-
dle ages, 63.

Bargiwldy, Mary heilefa of, the import-

aice ith which her choice in a hus-
band was confidered by all Europe,
88 The treacherous viewa of wis
XI. of France toward her, 90. Is
married to the Archduke Maximilian,
i. The infuence of thlia match on
the iate of Europc, L,.

Ctfar, his account of the ancient Ger.

mans, compared with that of Tacitus,
165.

Cambray, treaty of, itsobjec, 99. The

confederacy dissolved, oo.

Canon Law, an inquiry into, 6. Pro-

grefs ofecclefiaftical usurpations, 57.
The maxims of, more equitable than
the civil courts of the middle ages, 8.
Cajle, rifeofthe kingdomof, I2. Its

union with Aragon, ib. Its King
Henry IV. solemnly tried and deposed
in an assembly of the nobles, 113. The
constitution and government of that
kingdom, 127. A history of the Cortes
of, and its privileges, ib. The king-
dom originally elecive, 73, Note
xxxii.

Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the

people thete in defence of their rights,
against their King John II. of Aragon,
113.
Cenfales, a pecies of te Oblati, or vo-

luntary slaves, the obligations they en-
tered into described, 216.

Cenlmarii, or inferior judges in the mid-

dle ages, the extraordinary oath requi-
red from them, 160.

Champs Je Mars, and rd Mai, account

of those assemblies of the ancient
Gauls, 80.

Charlemagre, his law to prevent private

wars for redress of personal injuries,
43, 2il. State of Germany underhis
descendants, 141.
Charler IV. Emperor, diflipates the Im-

perial domains, 95.

Charlei V. Emperor, an emulator of the

heroic conduc of his rival, Franci I
63. His future grandeur founded on
the marriage of the Archduke Maxi-
milian with the heiress of Burgundy,
91'

Charle, VII. of France, the first who in-

troduced landing armies in Europe,
80. His fuccefful extension of the re-
gal prerogative, 81.

Chailri VIII. of France, his chara·er,

91. How induced to invade Italy, ib.
His lefource and preparations for this
enterprize, 9. His rapid fuccels,
93. A combination of the Italian
Ilates formed against him, 94. Is
forced to return back to France, ib.
The distressed (late us his revenues by
this expedition, 98.
Charlrwrax, hil account of the North
American Indiani, made ue of in a

comparifun
C

comparison between them and the an-
cient Germans, 168.

Charters, of immunity or franchise, an

inquiry into the nature of thole grant-
ed by the barons of France to the
towns under their jurifdiaionb, 200,
Note xvi. Of communities, granted
by the Kings of France, how they
tended to establish regular government,
34, 200.

Chivalry, the origin of, 61. Its benefi-

cial effcts on human manners, 6.
The enthufiafrt of, distinguished from
it, lalutary consequences, 63.

CbriJiianity, corrupted when firl brought

into Europe, 6 . Its influence in siee-
ing mankind from the bondage of the
feudal policy, 13, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occasion of their

being formed, 146.

Cities, the ancient slate of, under the feu-

dal policy, 3. The freedom of,
where sirs efablithed, 33. Charters
of community, why granted in France
by Louis le Gross, 34. Obtain the like
all over Europe, ib. Acquire politi-
cal consideration, 36.

Clergy, the progress of their usurpations,

57. Their plan ofj.rifprudence more
perfea than that of the civil courts in
the middle ages, 58. The greatigno-
rance of, in the early feudal time of
Europe, 186.

Cleriza, lave to Willa, widow of Duke

Hugo, extraa from the charter of ma-
numiflion, granted to her, 14.
Clermont, council of, resolves on the ho-

ly war, t.. See Peter the Hermit, and
Crsfades.

Cltaire I. inflanceofthe small authority

he had over his army, 179.

Clrtharis II1. his account of the popular

aflemblic among the ancient Gauls,
iso.

Civis, the founder of the French monar-

chy, unable to retain a sacred vase ta-
ken by his army, from being diftribut-
ed by lot among the reft of the plun-
der, 170, Note vii.

(.eltli, the firt eftabliliment of, in lu-

rope, 15.

Ceomat, judicial, the prohibition of, an

improvement in the adminiltration of
jullice, 45. The foundation and uni-
verfality of this mode of trial, 48.
The pernicious effeC.t of, so. Variaus
expedientb for abolilhing this pracice,
i. The ancient Swedild law of, for
words of reproach, 31. P'litive evi-
dence, or point of proof, rendered in-
effeaual by it, 134. This mode of tri-

al authorized by the ecclesiastics, 13.
The last instances of, in the histories of
France and England, 136.

Commerce, the spirit ofcrufading h-w far

favourable to, at that early period, 31.
The 'rft establishment of free corport-
tions, 33. Charters of community why
grant d by Loui, Ile Gross, 34. The
like practice obtains all over Europe,
ib. The salutary effecs of these in-
Ititutions, ib. The low liate of, du-
ring the middle ages, 67. Caules
contributing to its revival, 68. Pro-
moted by the Hanseatic league, 69. Is
cultivated in the Netherlands, 70. Ia
introduced into England by Edward IlI.
ib. The beneficial consequences re-
fulting from the revival of, 71. The
early cultivation of, in Italy, 60.

Comon larW, the firIt compilation of,

made in England by Lord Chief Julice
Glanville, lso.
Cosmmunitiest ee Charter, Citite, Cim

nmrce, and Corperaties.

Comsena, Anne, her character of the

Cruladers, 195.

Compa/r, mariner's, when invented, and

its influence on the extension of com-
merce, 68.

Campf/tlion, for personal ijuries, themo-

tives for eflablifling, 211. The cuf-
tom of, deduced from the pracice of
the ancient Germans, 136.

Cmpargatars, introduced as evidence in

the jurisprudence of the middle ages,
46.

Condortitri, in the Italian policy, what,

Corad,, count of Franconia. how he ob-

tained eletion to the empire, 141.

Couradm, the lad lightful heir t,, the

crown of Naples of the houte of Swa-
bis, his unhappy fate, 5.

Coi/lance, treaty of, between the Em-

peror Frederic Barbarofla, and the tree
cities of Italy, 199.

Cclqfantinople, its lourilhing Itate at the

time of the Crusades, aS. When firit
taken by the Turks, 15. The Cru-
faders how looked upon thele, 195.
The account given of this city by the
Latin Writers, ib.

Cosujltatins, popular, how formed, 36.
Cot dova, Gonlalvo de, sec u es the crown

of Naples to Ferdinand of Aragon,
116.
Corporatious, and bodies politic, the ea-

blifhmcnts of, how far avourable to
the improvement of manners, 31.
'IThe privileges of, where firt claimed,
33. Charter of cumma.unity, why

granted

grant-d by Louis le Gross in France,
34. The inltitution of, obtains all
over Europe, ib. Their effres, ib.
Cortel of Aragon, its constitution and

privileges, 14, 271.
Crres of Catile, hiltory of, and an ac-

count of its constitution and privileges,
117. The vigilance with which it
guarded its privileges against the en-
croachments o the regal power, ta8.
Crusades, the firll motives ofundertaking,

25. The enthusiastic zeal with which
they were undertaken, 6. FirRt pro-
moted by Peter the hermit, 17. The
success of them, ib. The confequen-
ces resulting from them, 28. Their es-
seas on manners, ib. On property,
19. How advantageousto the enlarge-
ment of the regal power of the Europe-
an princes, 30. The commercial es-
sets of, 31, 68. The universal frenzy
for engaging in these expeditions ac-
counted for, 19o, Note xiii. The pri-
vileges granted to those who engaged
in them, 191. Stephen earl of Char-
tres and Blois, his account of them,
193. The expences ofcondu&ting them,
how.railed, ib. Chara&er givenof the
Crusaders by the Greek writers, 195.

D

Debt, the firfl hint of attaching move-

ables for the recovery of, derived from
the canon law, 149.

Debtorl, how confidered in the rude and

simple ate of society, o22.

Diets of Germany, some account of, 199.
Doadri, in the different faculties, dispute
precedence with knights, 1SS.

E

Ecelefiafical jurisprudence, more perfet

in its plan than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 58.

EccleJiaflicr, when, and by what degrees

they claimed exemption from civil ju-
rildiaion, 146. Military talents cul-
tivated and exercised by thole of the
middle ages, 51.

EdJlrd I11. of England, his endeavours

to introduce commerce into his king-
dom, 70.

Elterri of Germany, the rife of their pri- *

vileges, 149.
tli, St. his definition or description of a

good christian, S8, Note xi.

Emperer of Germany, an inquiry into

their power, jurifdiaion, and revenue,
194, Note xli. The ancient mode of

TO THE

eleing them, 196.

England, a summary view of the contelt

between, and France, 76. The confe-
quences of its losing its continental pof-
feflions, 78. The power of the crown
how extended, 86. See Henry VII.
Why lo many marks of Saxon u ages
and languages, incomparfon withthofe
of the Normans, to be found in, 158,
Note iv. When corporations began to
be eltablilhed in, aio. Inflances of the
long continuance of personal servitude
there, 117. Inquiry into the Saxon
laws for putting an end to private wars,
216. The causes of the speedy decline
of private wars there, proposed to the
researches of Antiquarians, 217. The
laR instances of judicial combat re-
corded in the history of, 136. The ter-
ritorial jurisdiction of the barons now
abolihed, 145. Cause of the flow
progress of commerce there, 165. The
firtt commercial treaty entered into by,
l66.

Evidence, the imperfec nature of that

admitted in law proceedings during the
middle ages, 45. Rendered ineffeetual
by the judicial combat, 134.

Europe, the alterations in, by the con-

quests of the Romans, to. The im-
provements the nations of, received in
exchange for their liberties, ib. Its
disadvantages under this change of cir-
cumftances, ib. Inquiry into the sup-
posed populousness of the ancient north-
ern nations, i. The savage desolation
exercised by the Goths Vandals, and
Huns, 5. The universal change occa-
sioned by their irruptions and conquests,
16. The firfi rudiments of the present
policy of, to be deduced from this pe-
riod, 17. Origin of the feudal system,
18. See Feudal sysea. The general
barbarism introduced with this policy,
Ia. At what time government and
manners began to improve, 14. The
causes and events which contributed to
this improvement, . See Crs/adel,
Corporatioin, People. The miseries oc-
cafioned by private wars in, 43. Me-
thods taken to suppress them, ib. Ju-
dicial combats prohibited, 45. The d-
seas ofjudicial proceedings in the mid-
dle ages, Jh. The influence of super-
flition in these proceedings, 47. The
origin of the independent territorial ju-
rifdictions of the barons, St. The bad
consequences of their judicial power,
3. The eps taken by princes to a-
bolilh their courts, 54. An inquiry in-
to the canon law, 56. Reviv of the

Roman

Roman law, 59. Effets of the spirit
of chivalry, 61. How improved by the
progrelsoffcience andcultivation of li-
terature, 64. ChriRianity corrupted
when first received in, 65. Scholaflic
theology the first object of learning in,
ib. Low Rtate of commerce in, during
the middle ages, 67. Commerce re-
vives in Italy, 69. Is promoted by the
Hanseatic league, ib. Is cultivated in
the Netherlands, 70. The effets of
theprogrefsof commerce, on the polish-
ing of manners, 71. The effects of
the marriage of the heirels of Burgundy
with the archduke Maximilian, on the
fate of, go. By what means fRand-
ing forces became general in, 95.
Consequences of the league of Cam-
bray to, 98. A view of the political
constitution of the several dares of, at
the commencement of the sixteenth
century, lot. Italy, o03. The pa-
pacy, o14. Venice, i in. Florence, 113.
Naples, i. Milan, 16. Spain, 9.
France, 135. Germany, 141. Turkey,
151. Inftancesof the frall intercourse
among nations in the middle age,
56.

F

retda m, the etymology of that word,

18o.

Fiefs, under the feudal fyfiem, a hillory

of, 174. When they became heredi-
tary, 176.

Ferdinand, King of Aragon, unites the

Spanilh monarchy, by hismarriage with
IfabellaofCaftile, all. His schemes
to exalt the regal power, 131. Re-
fumes former grants of land from his
barons, 131. Unites to the crown the
grand malerlhips of the threemilitary
orders, ib. Why he patronised the al-
fociation called the Holy brotherhood,
againlt the barons, 134.
teudal fyfiem, the origin of, deduced,
i 8. Thr primary objea of this policy,
19. Itsdclicirnciefor interior govern-
ment, o0. Trnure of land, how ella-
blilhed under, ib. The rife of intefline
discords among the barons under, l.
The servile Rate of the people, ib.
The weak authority of the King, ib.
It. influence on the external operations
of war, i. The general extinction of
all arts and sciences effeced by, !a.
Its operation on religion, 13. Its in-
fluence on the charater of the human
mind, 14. At what time government
nd manners began to be improved, lb.

The caufesand events which contribu-
ted to this improvement, zc. See Cu-
fades. The ancient Rate of cities un-
der, 31. The frameof national coun-
cils under this policy, 36. How altered
by the rogrefs of civil liberty, 37. An
inquiry into the administration ofjullice
under, 40. Private war, 41. Judicial
combat, 45. The independent jurif-
diflions of the barons, 5z. The dil.
tintion between free men and vassals
under, 173. How flraneers were con-
fidered and treated under, z58.

Firszlephens, observations on his account

of the Rate of London, at the time of
Henry II. zlo.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, a view of the conflitution of,

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 13. The influence acquired
by Col'mo di Medici, b.

France, by what means the towns in,

sirs obtained charters of community,
34. Ordinances of Louis X. and his
brother Philip in favour of civil liber-
ty, 39. Methods employed to suppress
private wars, 43. St. Louis attempts
to discountenance judicial combat, 5 ,
A view of the contests between, and
England, 76. The consequences of
its recovering its provinces from Eng-
land, 78. The monarchy of, how
strengthened by this event, 79. The
rife of flanding forces in, 80. The re-
gal prerogative strengthened by this
measure, 81. The extension of the
regal prerogativevigoroufly pursued b)
Louis XI. 83. See Louis Xl. The
effects of the invasion of Italy by
Charles VIII. 91. See Charles VIII.
National infantry eflablifled in, 97.
League of Cambray formed again f the
Venetian, 99. Battle of Ghiarra-
dadda, ib. An inquiry into its ancient
government and laws, 135. The
power of the general assemblies under
the firR race of Kings, 136. Under the
second and third, b. The regal
power confined to the King's own do-
mains, 137. When the general altem-
bly or lates general, loll their legiRa-
tive authority, ib. When the Kings
began to afer;t their legitlstive power,
138. When the government of, be-
came purely monarchical, 6b. The
regal power neverthelef retrained by
the privileges of the nobility, 139. An
inquiry into the jurifdiAioii of its par-
liaments, particularly that of Paris,
140. How the allodial property of
land there was altered into Icudal 17 8.

Teh

The progrefsof liberty in that kingdorr
traced, 211, Note xix. The at-
tempts t,) eflablifh liberty there unfuc-
tefsful, izl. The lafl inftanceofju-
dicial combat recorded in the history of,
136. The present government of,
compared with tat of ancient Gaul,
179, Note xxxvii. The States-gene-
ral, when first a*fembled, 289

Fraris 1. of France, his character influ-

enced by the pirit of chivalry, 63. Is
emulated by the Emperor Charles V.
ib.

Fredericl Rarbarofa, Emperor, the free

cities of Italy unite against him, 199.
Treaty of ConRance with them, i.
Was the first who granted privileges to
the cities in Germany, o08.

Frdainm, in the ancient German usages,

explained, 37.

Freemen, how dillingui(hed from vassals,

under the feudal policy, 173, 184.
Why often induced to surrender their
freedom and become saves, 185.

Fulrberias Carnotenfis, his characer of
the city of Constantinople, 95.

G

CGal, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal, there, 178. The
government of, compared with that of
modern France, 79, Note xxxvii.
The small authority the kings of, en-
joyed over their armies, illuttrated in
an anecdote of Clotaire I. ib. Ac-
count of the popular nffemblies of,
go. The salic laws how enaded,
t81. Were not subjea to taxation,

ta. See Frarce.

Geoffrey i Villehardrain, his account of

the magnificence of Contantinople, at
the time when taken by the Crufadcrs
195.

German, ancient, an account of their

usages and way of life, 165. Their
method of engaging in war, 166. A
comparison between them and the
North American Indians, 168. Why
they had no cities, 107, Note xvii.
The pracice of compounding fur per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from
their ulage, 37.

Germany, little interefled in foreign con-

cernb at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, 77. National infantry ea-
blilhed in, 96. State of, under Char-
lemagne and his descendants, 141.
Conrad, count of Franconia, cholen
Fmperor, 142. His successors in the
Imperial dignity, ib. How the nobili-

ty of, acquired independent fovereiga
authority, ib. The fatal effec&s of
aggrandizing the clergy in, 143. The
contests between the Emperor Henry
IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 144 Rife
of the factions of Guelf< and Ghibe-
lines, 145. Decline of the Imperial
authority, ib. The House of Auft ia,
by whom founded, ib. A total change
in the political cinntfitution of the Em-
pire, hb. The tate of anarchv in
which it continued to the time ot
Maximilian the immediate predceffor
of Charles V. 146. Divided into cir-
cles, ib. The Imperial chamber infti-
tuted, 147. The Aulic counclt re-
formed, ib. A view of its p,,;itical
conltitution at the commencement of
the enfaing hiltory, i. Its defects
pointed out, 148. The imperial dig-
nity and power compared, tb. Elec-
tion of the emperors, 149. The re-
pugnant forms of civil policy in ihe fe-
veral States of, 5o. The oppoition
between the secular and eccleiaftical
members of, ib. The united body
hence incapable of acting with vigour,
1 i. When cities first began to be
built in, 107, Note xvii. When the
cities of, first acquired municipal pri-
vileges, ib. The artizans of, when
infranchifed, o09. Immediate citie in
the German jurisprudence, what, i.
The great calamities occasioned there
by private wars, 118. Origin of the
league of the Rhine, z19. When pri-
vate wats were finally abolilhed there,
ib. Inquiry into the power, jurif-
diction and revenue of its Emperors,
194, Note xli. The ancient mode of
cle&ing the Emperors, a96. Account
of the diets, 198.

Ghibelines. See Gatlf.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the

Venetian., 99.

G.'anville, Lord Chief Jutice, the firl

who compiled a body of common law,
in all Europe, 0o.

Gorhs, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the

Roman empire, and precipitate its
downfall, I . The Rate of the coun-
tries from whence they iftued, i. The
motives of their sirs excurlion, i.a
How they came to fettle in the coun-
tries they conquered, 13. A compari-
fun drawn between them and the Ro-
mana, at the period of their irruptions,
14. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, i . The desolations they occa-
sioned in Europe, i. The universal
change made by them in the Rate of

Burope,

Europe, 16. The principles on which
they made their settlements, 17. 0-
rigin of the feudal fytlem, 18. See
Feudal Syfiem. An inquiry into the
adminifiration of juflice among, 41.
Their private wars, 4. Destroy the
monuments of the Roman arts, 64.
Their contempt of the Romans, and
hatred of their arts, 157 Note ii.
Their aversion to literature, 158. No
authentic account of their origin, or
ancient history exifling, ib.

Gowernment, how limited by the feudal

policy, i. The effets of the Cru-
fades on, 30. How affeced by the in-
franchifement of cities, 3. Legifla-
tive assemblies how formed, 36. Pri-
vate wars deftrucive to the authority
of, 43. Methods employed to abolish
this hostile mode of redrefling injuries,
ib. How affec&ed by the upreme in-
dependant juriCfliions of the barons,
53. The steps toward abolishing them,
54. The origin and growth of royal
courtsofjufice, 55. How influenced
by the revival of lcience and literature,
67. A view of, at the beginning of
the fifteenth century, 73. The pow-
er of Monarchs then very limited, rb.
Their revenues small, 74. Their ar-
mies unfit for conquefl, ib. The
Princes hence incapable of extensive
plans ot operation, 75. The kingdoms
very little conne&ed with each other,
76. How the efforts of, from this pe-
riod became more powerful and exten-
fire, 77. The consequences of Eng-
land losing its provinces in France, 78.
The schemes of Louis XI. of France
to extend the regal power, 83. See
Losui XI. The power of the Englilh
crown enlarged, 87. See Ilenry VII.
As also that of Spain, ib. How the
use of fRanding armies became general,
95. A view of the political conlti-
tution of the several flates of Fur pc,
at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 103. In what refpecas the
charters of communities granted by
the Kings of France, tended to intro-
duce a regular form of, oi.

Greece, the breeding of lilk worms, when

introduced there, 61.

Gretk Emperors, their magnificence at

Conilantinoplr, 94.

Cregory of Tours, remarks on the slate

of Europe during the period of which
he wrote the hitlory, a4.
Gregory the Great, Pupe, his reason for

ranting liberty to his flaveh, 14.

Grgory VII. P pce, the foundation of
his contefls with HeIiy IV. Emperor

Vol.. II.

of Germany, 144. The mean fubmif-
sion he extorted from Henry, b. His
own account of this affair, 375.

Guelts, and Ghibelines, rile of those

factions inGermany, 145.

Guicctardlii, the hiltorian, instance of

his fuperlfitious reverence for Pope
Clement VII. Ito. Note.

Gunrterue, a Monk, his character of

Constantinople, at the time whentaken
by the Crusaders, 196.

H

Hanreatic league, when formed, and its

influence on the extension of com-
merce. 69, 65.

Henry IV. of Castile solemnly tried and

deposed by an assembly of Castilian
nobles, 123.

Henry IV. Emperor of Germany, the hu-

miliating (late to which he was reduced
by Pope Gregory VII. 144, 293.
Note xl.

Henry VII. of England, his situation at

his acceflion to the crown, 87. Ena.
bles his barons to break their entails
and fell their estates, i. Prohibits his
barons keeping retainers, ib. Encou-
rages agriculture and commerce, ib.

Herebannum, the nature of this fine under

the feudal policy, explained, 173.

Hermandad, Santa, account of that infi-

tution, 78.
Hijfsr, the mos calamitous period of,

pointed out. 16.

llJy Brotherhood, an association in Spain

under that name, on what occasion
formed, 134.

Holy Land, the original inducements of

the Chrifians to rescue it from the
hands of the Infidels, 15. See Crujades,
and Peter the Hermit.
Honour, points of, the ancient Swedih

law for determining, 131.

Hospitality, enforced by Itatutes during

the middle ages, 57.

Hu, inlRance of their enthufiftic paflios

for war, 1;8. Note ii. Some account
of their policy and manners, 16i, 66.
See Gotht.

I

Ynriaariet, origin, and formidable nature

of those troops, 54.

Imperial chamber of Germany, infli-

tuted, 147. The occasion of its infti-
tution, 34,

Jndiauj, North American, a comparison

drawn between them and the ancient
Germans, 168.

Imdqtrry, the spirit of, how excited by
the nfranchilement of cities, 35.

I i 1injantry,

Infantry, the advantages of, beyond ca-

valry, taught to the reft of Europe by
the Swift, 96. National bodies of,
eflablilbed in Germany, ib. In France
and Spain, 97.

Inbertance, and right of representation

between orphan grandsons and their
uncles, hw decided in the tenth cen-
tury, 231.

Interef/, of money, the necessity of ad-

mitting in a commercial view, 262.
Prepoflroufly condemned bv the
churchmen .f the middle ages, ib.
The cause hence, of te exorbitant
exacions of the Lombard bankers, ib.

Italy, hen the Cities f them began to

form themselves int, bodies politic, 33.
Commerce firl impr ved there, and
the lealons of it, 69. The rev. lutinns
in Europe occafir.ed by the invasion
of, by Charles VlII of France, 91.
The Rate of, at the time of this inva-
sion, 93. The rapid fuccers of Charle,
ib. A combination of the States
of, drives Charles out of, nd gives
birth to the balance of power in
Europe, 94. The political fitua-
tion of, at the commencement of
the sixteenth century, 103. The
papacy, 104 Venice, Ilo. Florence,
113. Naple-, ib. Milan, 6. Evi-
dences of the desolation made there
by the northern invaders of theRoman
Empire, 163. How the cities of,
obtained their municipal privileges,
397. Note xv. State f, under Fre-
deriek I. 198. Treaty of Constance
between the free cities of, and the
Emperor Frederick Barbaroffi, 199.
Judgment of God, modes of acquittal

by, in the law proceedings during the
middle age', 47, 30. Note xxii.
# dicism Crucil, method of trial by, 130.
/liju II. Pope, forms a confederacy,
against the Venetians at Cambray,
99. Seizes part of the Venetian ter-
ritories,ib. The confederacy dissolved,
too. Turns his schemes againfi Prance,
and England, ib.

7urifiprrgr ,c ecclesias ical, more perse&

in its plan, than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 44. See Law.

7,flicr, an inquiry into the adminifiration

of, under the feudal policy, 40. The
Ikeps towards the improvement of, as
civil liberty advanced, 41. Redrels
chiefly purlued by private wars, 41.
Methods taken to fupprefa private
wars, 43. Judicial combats prohibited,
45. The defets of judicial proceed-
ings in the middle ages, 6b. Compur-
citors, the nature of that kind of evi-

dence, 46. Methods of trial by ordeal,
or acquittal by Judgment of God, 47.
Origin of the oupreme independantju-
rifdilions of the feudal barons, 52.
The extent and bad effects of their
privileges, 53. The steps taken by
monarchs to reduce the barons courts,
54. The growth of royal courts of
jullice, 55. Inquiry into the canon
law, 56. How improved by the revi-
val of the Roman law, 9. When the
adminiitration of, became a diftint
profession, 61.

yuJhia, or supreme judge of Aragon,

his office and privileges, 125. An in-
quiry by whom this fficer was eleed,
266. Who was eigible to this office,
z68. Nature ,f the tribunal appointed
to controul his adminifiration, ib.
Instance of his extensive power, 169.

K

King, hi, power how circumscribed

by the barons, under the feudal
system, 21. By what means the Cru-
fades tended to enlarge the regal au-
thority, 30.

Ktran, its influence in checking the Sul-
tans of the Ottoman empire, 54.

L

Land, how held at the eftablilhment of

the feudal system, 2o. See Fdal
Syflesm.

Land, the property of, how confidered by

the ancient barbarous nations, 171.
Note viii. Allodial poffeflion of, ex-
plained, 171. The proprietors how
subjected to military service, ib.
Allodial and beneficiary poflTeffion di-
finguilhed, ib. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal,
173.

Law, when the study of it, became a

diltin& employment, 61.

Law, Canon, an inquiry into, 56. The

maxims of, more equitable than the
civil courts of the middle ages, 57.
When firR compiled, 149.
Law, Roman, how it funk intooblivion,

59. Circumfiances which favoured
the revival of it, #b. Its effeats in im-
proving the adminifiration of justice,
I. Itb rapid spread over Europe, ago.
Note xxv.

Lowburrocvs, in the Scottilh law, ex-

plained, lot.

Lilrrty, civil, the rife and progref of,

traced, 33. How favoured by the or-
dinances of Louis X. of France, and
his brother Philip, 39. The spirit of,
bow excited inl France, 211. Note xil.

The

The particulars included in the char-
ters of, granted to husbandmen, 213.
Note xx. The influence of the Ch, if-
tian religion in extending, ib. The
several opportunities of obtaining, 212.

Lim'es, cuncil of, its endeavours to

extinguih private wars, 222.

Literature, the cultivation of, greatly

instrumental in civilizing the nations of
Europe, 64. Why the first efforts of,
ill directed, 65. The good effeats ne-
verthelels of the spirit of inquiry ex-
erted, 66. How checked in its pro-
grefs, ib. Its influence on manners
and government, 67.

Liturgy, the preference between the

Mularabic, and Romilh, how afcer-
tained in Spain, 33.

Lombards, the first bankers ;n Europe,

z62. The motive of their exating
exorbitant interest, ib.

London, its flourishing Itate at the time

of Henry 11. a2o.

Louis le Gross, of France, his induce-

ments to grant privileges to towns
within his own dominions, 34. See
Charters.

Loui, St. the great attention he paid to

the adminillration of jultice, in a-
peals which came before him, 44.

Louis X. of France, his ordinances in fa-

vour of civil liberty, 39.

Louis XI. of France, his character, 83.

His schemes for deprefling the nobility,
ib. Sows divisions among them, 84.
Increafesthe anding forces, ib. En-
large* the revenues of the crown, 8;.
His addrels in over-ruling the assembly
of ates, ib. Extends the bounds of
the French monarchy, 86. The acti-
vity of his external operations, ib.
His treacherous bafeneis toward the
heiress of Burgundy, 89. The es-
secs of his conduc, 90.

Lsnis XII. his hesitation in carrying on

war again{l the Pope, to. Nte.
Allerts his right to the dutchy of Mi-
lan, and retains LodoviLo Sorza in
prifun, 118.

M

Manfreid, his Rruggles for the crown of

Naples, 115.

Ma4nknd, the modt calamitous period in

the history of, pointed out, 16.
fasutri, the barba ity o, under the
feudal eltablilhmenta after the over-
throw of the Roman empire, 2z.
When they began to improve, 4.
Effess of theCrufadeson, a8. How
improved by the infiancbifement of
Citie% 36. How improved by the

ere&ion of royal courts of juflice, in
oprofition to the barons courts, 55.
Effets of the revival of the Roman
law on, 59. The beneficial tendency
of the pii it of chivalry on, 6i. How
influenced by the progress of science,
64, 67 How polilhed by the revival
of commerce, 7 .

Manumijis, particulars included in the

charters of, granted to husbandmen
or aves, 213. Note xx. The form
of, 214.

Maximilian, archduke of Austria, mar-

ried to Mary heirers of Burgundy, 90.
The influence of this match on the
slate of Europe, 91.

Maximilian, Emperor, inftitoes the Im-

perial chamber, 147. Reforms the
Aulic council, i.
Medici, Cosmo di, the first of the name,

the influence he acquired in Florence,

1"3

Milan, the slate of the dutchy of, at

the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 116. Rile and progress of
the disputes concerning the fucceflion
to, 17.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the

first eftablilhment of the feudal policy
in Europe, 4. The cra of its ulti-
mate depreflion, and commencement
of its improvement, 25. The progrels
of its operations, before the full exer-
tion of it, 64.

Mimifteria/le, a class of the Oblati, or

voluntary laves, the pious motives of
the obligations they entered into, t6.

Meors, make a conquest of Spain, 119.

By what means weakened during their
ellablilhment there, to0. Remarks on
their conduct in Spain, la .
Mum:cipal privileges, how obtained by

the cities of Italy, 197. Note xv. Se-
tured to them by the treaty of Con-
Iltnce, 99. The favourite lIate of,
under the Roman government, 1o6.

N

Napll, a view of the constitution of

that kingdom, at the commencement
of the lixteenth century, 113. The
turbulent unsettled Ilate of that king-
dom, 14. State of the difputeu con-
cerning the fucceflion to the crown of,
ib. The pretenfionc of the French
and Spanih monarchs to the crown of,

15. Varbonst, community of, preamble to
the writ of summons of Philip the
Long, to, a . Note six.

Naviitii, proof of the impel set Rlate

of, during the middle ages, a6j
I i a NetbhrlUdiI

Netherland, a vigorous prorecution of

the manufataures of hemp and flax
there, on the revival of commerce in
Europe, 70.

Normans, why so few traces of their

usages and language, to be found in
England, in comparison with those of
the Saxons, 158. Note iv.

0
Oblati, or voluntary laves, the classes of,

Ipecified, 16.

Ordeal, methods ol trial by, during the

middle ages, 47. The influence of
fuperltition in ditating these means, ib.

Otto Frifingeifis, his account of the Rate

of Italy under Frederic 1. 197.

Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic

nature of, 151. Becomes formidable
to the Christian powers, 156.

p P

Papacy. See Popedcm.
£aper, when sirs made of the present

materials, 188.

Parit, an inquiry into the pre-eminent

jurifdiaion of its parliament over the
other parliaments of France, 140.
Its origin traced, 190. Note xxxi».
The royal edits regiflered by, before
admitted to the laws, 192.

sarliamentl:, or legifative aemblies,

how formed under the feudal policy,
36. How altered by the progrels of
civil liberty, 37.

Treple, their wretched servile late under

the feudal system, , 39. Released
from their fnavih flare by the infran-
chilement ofcities, 34. How they ob-
tained reprlecntation in national
councils, 36. Thole who lived in the
country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the
feudal policy, 18a. Note ix.
Persia, murder, how punilhed there,

30z.

Peter the Hermit, excites the European

Princes to undertake the Holy War,
I7.

Peter IV. King of Aragon, ldfeats the

leaders of the Aragonefe union, and
defroys the pivilege of these afTl'i-
ation, 170.

Pbrlp the Long, preamble to his writ of

lumurins to the community of Nar.
bonne, al . Note xix.

Pbilfpby, cultivated by the Arabian,

when loft in Europe, 153. Note xvii.
Ita progrefi from them into Europe,

r54. Pilrumagr t the Holy Land, when first
undertaken, iS. See Crjdrt, and
tJier tib Hrmit,

Placentia, council of, the Holy war re-

solved on by, 7. See Peter the Her-
mit, and Crusades.

Plunder, how divided among the ancient

northern nations, 18. Illufrated in an
anecdote of Clovis, 170 Note vii.

pcpedom, the highell dignity in Europe

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 104. Origin and progress of
the papal power, ib. The terr itories
of the Popes unequal to the support of
their spiritual jurifdition, tb. Their
authoiity in their own territories ex-
tremely limited, 105. The check they
received from the Roman barons, ib.
Nicolas Rienzo attempts to ellablifh a
democratical government inRome, and
to deRroy the papal jurifdicion, 107.
The papal authority considerably
firengthened by the Popes Alexander
VI. and Julius II. ib. See 7ulius II.
The per manent nature of ecclefiatical
dominion, to8. The civil adminiftrati-
on of, not uniform or confifent, ib.
Rome the school of political intrigue
during the sixteenth century, ib. The
advantages derived from the union of
spiritual and temporal authority, sog.
A view of the contets between the
Popes and the Empe ors of Germany,
144.

Populoufntef of the ancient northern na-

tionb, aninquiry into, I.

Prifaus, extr-a& from his account of the

Roman embassy to Attilla King of the
Huns, 58 Note iii.

Procopins, his account of the cruel deva-

flations made by the irruption of the
northern nations, 59. Note v. 161,
16a.

Propertj, the poTfeffion of, how secured

by the French charters of communi.
tier, 201.

Proveditrt, in the Venetian policy,
their offile, 1 .

R

ReliZion, how corrupted by the northern

nations ellsbliihed in Europe under the
feudal policy, 13. Its influence in
freeing mankind from the feudal tervi-
tu le, 13.

Repiediun, the right of, in the law of

Scutland, explained, 41.
Rtpreach, words of, the ancient Swedi(h

law of fatisfation for, 31.
RrKeiasel, royal, very Imall under the

feudal policy, 74. By what means in-

creased, .7.

RhKta, origin and intention of the league
of, 1a9.

Pira~l

Rien.o, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue

Rom. fiom the papal authority, and
eltablifh ademocratical formofgovern-
ment there, 107.

Robber', the anathema, pronounced

againfl them during the middle ages,
260.

Rodulph of Halfburgh; how he attained

electon to the Empire of Germany,
145

Romans, an inquiry into those advantages

which enabled them to conquer the reft
of Europe, 9. The improvements
they communicated in return fr their
conquelts, o. Theliladvantages he
provinces laboured udei, t.m tl,clr
dominion.. sh. 't bri. Emplre over-
turned by the irrul-ton ot the barbarous
nations, ii. The concurrent raules of
theii ruin, 13. A comparison diawn
between them and the northern nations,
14. All the cis il arts ettablilhed by them
obliterated, zi. The monument of
their arts induftrioufiy deltroyed by
their barbarous invaders, 64.

Rome, papal. See opedom.
Royal truce, an account of, 214.

S

alic laws, the manner in which they
were enaced, 81.

Saxons, why so many traces of their

laws, language and cuftomsto be found
in England, 158. Note iv. Inquiry into
their laws for putting an end to private
wars, a26.
Sirnce, the revival and progress of, how

far infirumental incivilizing the nations
of Europe, 64. A furmmary view of
therevival and progrels of, in Europe,
153. Note xxviii.

sftr;.a, FianciF, the foundation of his

pretensions, to the dutchy of Milan,
117. Is murdered by hib uncle Ludo-
vico, 118.

--- Ludovico, his private views in

engaging Charles VIII. of France to
invade Italy, 91. See Charle VIII.
Muilldelr his nephew Francis,andfeics
Milla, 117. Is fiipped of his domi-
nioni hy l.ouic XII. of France, and
dieb in prifln 118.

8hnpvureck , the right, lords of manor

claim to, whence derived, 258.

SilA, the rarity of, and the high p ice it

bore in ancient Rome, lemarked, 16i.
The breeding of silK wormb, when in-
troduced into Greece, ib.

SluaiN, letters of, in the law of Scotland,

what, 38.

4laves under the feudal policy, their
wretched flatc, i. Oblati, or vu-

luntary slaves, the several c.affes of,
1i6.

Society, civil, the rude fttate of, under the

feudal eltabliments after the downfall
of t:c Roman Empire, az. Ti e in-
fluence of the Crusades on, a8. How
improved by the ellablilhhent of mu-
nicipal communities, 32. The effeits
the infranchilement, of the people had
on, 40. Private nars how deflrutive
to, 43. Thele iteftine hostilities,
how suppressed, 44. The admrinifiration
of juflice improved by the prohibition
of )Jdicial combats, 45. The growth
ot ro?., .ourtC es justice, in opposition
to the barons courts, 55. How ad-
vanced by the revival of the Roman
law, 59. The effeeAs ofthe spirit of
chivalry in imlrving, 61. The revival
of commerce and its influences, 68.

Solyma,, Sultan, his charater, 19i.
Spain, a summary view of its situation,

at the commencement of the fifteenth
century, 76. The power of the crown
of, how extended by Ferdinand, 87.
National infantry eltablifhed in, 97.
Is conquered by the Vandals, 19. and
after by the Moors, ab. The empire
of the Moors in, how weakened, lao.
Rife of the kingdms of Callile and
Aragon, . Their union into the
Spanifih monarchy, lb. The ancient
cuiloms Itill retained amidll all its re-
volutions, ib. Peculiarities in its con-
flitution and lawi rema ked, 1i . See
Aragon and Caflile. Various caulea
which contributed to limit the regal
power in, 1i8. The cities of, how
they attained their consideration and
power, 119. The schemes of Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, to exalt the regal
power, 131. The grand ma!erfhips,
of the three olders, annexed to the
crown, 132. The association of the
Holy Botkerhood, on what occasion
formed, 134. The tenden y of this
aftliiati n to abridge the territorial
jurldiclions of the ibaonb, b. The
cruc! dcvaltationsmade by the Vandals,
in the invafi.n of that province, 6o.
Whcn the cttieh ul, aciuii ed municipal
privileges, og. Nte xviii. The long
continuaice of the pl atie of l ivate
wars there, taB. The total annual
revenue 1o the nobility, in the timle of
Charles V. 75. An inquiry int, the
origin of communities or Iree cities
in, tb.

St. Jage, the military order of, when and

on uhat uccalion inllitutcd, 176. NuLt
xxxv.
Sitandina armies. Sec Armitr.

&Sst

St;ter general of France, canfe6 which

rendered their authority imperfet,
537. When they lft their legifative
authority, ,b. When firll assembled,
289. The furm of proceeding in them,
iA.

S&epten earl of Chartr.s and Bliis, his

aicount of the progrcfs of the Cru-
Ltadr-, 193.

&rtrkook, his account of the ancient

Svedilh law of fatiafacion for words
of reproach, 31.

&tragers, in what light confidered, and

how treated during the middle ages,
and under the feudal policy, 258.

Sgar canes, when firltbrought from Asia

into Europe, and thence carried to
America, 6 i.
S&tans, Turkilh, their despotic power,

15;. How nevertheless limited, 154.

Sapeer'ti, its influence in the legal

proceedings during the middle ages,
47.

S&,/i, the superior discipline (if their

troops, in the fifteenth century, 95.
T. ach other nations the advantages of
infantry over cavalry, 96.

T

Tacitas, his account of the ancient Cer-

nian compared with that of Ciar,
165.

t'Ienres, feudal, the origin of, o. See

seiudal Sy/iem, and Land.

'Ikeig.y, cholaltic, the firlt lite ary pur-

luitb at the revival of learning in Eu-
rope, 65.

True rs God, an account of, 123.
It Aey, origin of, its government, 152.
The dlpotic genius of this govern-
ment, tb. No hereditary nobi!ity in,
153. The authority of the Sultans,
huw cleLked, 154. Oiiginofthe Ja-
nizaries, b. becomes lormidable to
the Cli illian P inces, 16.

V

'andahl, their cruel devaflations in the

invasion of Spain, 160. The havoLk
made by them in Africa, ib. See
Gothb.

I'ajlal under the feudal fylem, aview

of their flavifin condition, l, 39.
How they obtained infranchifemclt,
39. How anciently lillinguifiLed fom
tee.nen, 173. Their wretched ate
vnuer their feudal mallesl, *1i.
Note ix.

Venice, the long duration of its civil con-

flitution, and its Hourifhing late at the
time of the league of Cambray, 98.
Its possessions difinembered by the con-
federates, 99. Dissolves the confe-
deracy, too. Its rife and rogref,
lo. Defets in its conltitution, ll.
The excellency of its naval institutions,
112. Its extensive commerce, ib.
Vljconti, rife of the family of, in Milan,

117.

Union of the Aragonefe nobles to con-

troul the undue exercise of regal pow-
er, explained, 70. This privilege
abrogated by Peter IV. ib.

Universities, the first etablifhment of, in
Europe, 55.

W

WVar, a comparison between the manner

of carrying on, by barbarous and by
civilized nations, 15. How rendered
feeble in its operations by the feudal
policy, 1s. The piofeflion of arms,
the mos honourable, in uncivilized na-
tions, 60. The rife of landing armies
traced, 79. By what means Randing
forces became general, 95. The fu-
periority of infantry in, how taught, ib.

Warn, private, for redrefling personal in-

juries, under the feudai policy, an in-
quiry into, 4. Methods taken to
aboli(h this holtile pracice, 43. Judicial
combat prohibited, 4. Inquiry into
the sources of these cultoms, 118.
Note xxi. Who intitled to the privi-
leges of execifing, ib. On what occa-
sion ri dertaken, t9. Who included,
or bound to engage in these disputes,
ib. Who excluded from undertaking,
azo. The cruel manner of prolecuting
them, ib. A chronological account
of the expedients made use of, to sup-
press them, l . ruce of Ged, an
account of, 113. Braherhod of God,
an account of, 114. Royal truce, what,
ib. Saxon laws of England, or put-
ting an end to them, a16. The b-
ftinate attachment of the Spaniards to
this practice, ta8. The calamities
occasioned in Germany by, b.
Welch, ancient, trangers killed with im-

punity by them, 159.

WHila, widow of duke Hugo, extract

from her charter of manumifIion,
granted to Cleriza, one of her laves,
114. WillIru, archbilhop of Tyre, hi ac-

count of Conllantinople, g6.
.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE REIGN of the Emperor CHARLES V.

I N

D

E

X

TO THE

REIGN of the Emperor CHARLES V.
N. B. The Roman numerals direa to the volume, and the

figures to the page.

A
A BSOLUT7ION, the form of that

used by father Tetzel in Germa-

ny, I. 368.

Adori, the faction of, afrfts the Impe-

rial general Colonna in the reduction
of Genoa, I. 411.

Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to

Charles V. under William de Croy,
lord of Chievres, I. 33. His cha-
ra&er, ib. Sent by Charles with
power to assume the regency of Caf-
tile on the death of his gandfather,
326. His claim admitted by Cardi-
nal Ximenes, and executed in con-
juntion, 317. Autho'red by Charles
to hold the Cortes of Valencia, which
refuses to aflemble before him, 354.
Made viceroy of Castile on the de-
parture of Charles for Germany, 357.
His election remonstrated againIt by
the Cafilians, ib. Is cholen Pope,
418. Retrofpet of his condu in
Spain during the absence of Charles,
417. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
regovians, who repulse him, li. Sends
Fonseca to beliege the city, who
is repulsed by the inhabitants of Me-
dina del Campo, 418. Apologizes
for Fonfeca'b cndut to the peo-
ple, ib. Recallb onfeca and dli-
mises his troopr, ib. His autho-
rity disclaimed by the Holy Junta,
430. Deprived of power by them,
431. His ill reception on his arrival
at Rome, on being cholen to the Pa-
pacy, 450. Rellorec the territories
acquired by his predeteffor, b. La-
bours to unite the contending pow-
ers of Europe, 451. Publilles a
bull or tlhce years tiuce araung

them, ib. Accedes to the league
against the French King, b. His
death, 457. Ihe fenltiments and
behaviour of the people on that oc-
cafion, b. A retrofpeA of his con-
duat towards the Reformers, 464-
His brief to the iet at Nuremburgh.
ib. Receives a lif of grievances
from the diet, 466. Hi; condu to
the Reformers, how etieemed at
Rome, 467.

Africa, the Spanifi troops sent by Car-

dinal Ximenes againlt Barbarola, d-
feated there, 1. 334

Aiguei-Mortes, interview between the

Emperor Charles and Francis, there,
11. 93.

Aix la Claelle, the Emperor Charles

crowned there, 1. 366. Ferdinand his
brother crowned King of the Komans
there, II. 34.
Alarcos, Don Ferdinand ; Francis I. of

France, taken irllilitr at the battle
of Pavia, comminttd to his cultoy),
1. 481. ConduSt. Francis it Spain,
488. Deliveis up Fiancis in purlu-
anec of the treay of M^lilidi, oo0.
lb lent amlialTdit,r to Francis to re-
quire the tulfitmet of lis tealy,
5o. Pope Cilment VII. taken .ri-
loner ly the imlrrialidr, i cum-
mitted to his cullody, 514.

Albany, John Stuart duke f, corn-

manid the French army lent by Fran-
c i I. 'o invade N plie, 1. 477.

Allber, of !Brauidenbugil], grnd mailer

ol the Teutni,. O0 ie, becomes a
conveit to tlhe d criirs f luluthr,
1. 507. Ubtaib (f Siglliuntl l.ing;
of P'olani the in erliture of PIruf.n,
erected into a lutdty, ib. I put

tileac

under the ban of the empire, ió.
His family fixed in the inheritance of
Prufla, ib. Commands a body of
troops in behalf of Maurice of Sax-
ony, but endeavours to aftert an in-
dependency. 11 327. Defeats and
takes the De d'Aumale prisoner,
and joins thr Emperor t Metz, 343.
Is condemned by the Imer:a; cham-
ber fr his demands on the bithop., of
BamDerg and Wrtlfb g, 350. A
lesaut f,,rmed againit him, 351. I1
defeated by Maurice, i6. Is again
defeated by Henry of Brunswick,
3<2. Is driven out f Germany and
dies in exile, 353. H; territories re-
Itored to his collateral heirls, b.

dlbert, Ele&or o Metz, the publica-

tion of indulgences in Germany, com-
mirted to him, 1. 368.
Alexander \ I. Pope, remarks on the

pontificate of, 1, 385.

Alexander di Medici. See MEDI C.
Alrieri, how it was seized by Barba-

roffa, 11. 57. Is seized by the bro-
ther of the fame name, on the death
of the former, ib. Is taken under
the protection of the Porte, 58. Is
governed by Hafcen Aga in the ab-
fence of Barbarossa, 134. Is befieg-
ed by the Emperor Charles V. 136.
Charles forced to re-imbark by bad
weather, 139.

Alrafchid, brother of Muley Hafcen

Kingof Tunis, solicits the protction
of Barbarofla against him, II. 58.
His treacherous treatment by Bar-
baroffa, 59.

Aiva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand

of Aragon, in his dilpute with the
Archduke Philip concerning the re-
gency of Catlile, I. z.13 Force: the
Dauphin to abandon the siege of Per-
pignan, 11. 146. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the
Elecor of Saxony to death, 147.
Detains the Landgrave priloner by
the Emperor's order, 55i. Com-
mands under the Emperor, the army
defined againfi France, 341. is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 378. Enters the Ecclcliafi-
cal territories and seize the Cam-
pagna Romana, 415. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, ib. Negotiates
a peace between Philip and the Pope,
with Cardinal Caraffa, 434. Goes
to Rome to all; pardon of the Iope
for his houlilitics, ib. Is sent to Paris
in the name of Philip to espouse the
Princecf Elizabetlh, 461.

Amerjlorf, a nobleman of Holland, as-

fociated by Charles V. with Cardi-
nal Ximenes, in the regency of Caf-
tile, . 331.

AIabatjtr, the origin of that feet de-

duced, II. 44. Their principal te-
nets, 45. Their settlement at Mun-
fler, 46. Charaoter of their princi-
pal leaders, ib. They seize the city
of Munfler, ib. The) flablifh a new
fo:m of , vernmentthere, 47. Choose
Bocold ing, 49. Thir liccntil'is
pra.tices, ib. A confederacy of tne
German Princes formed agaiaft them,
so. Are blockaded in Munster by the
bi(hop, ib. Te ty takei and geat
flaugntcr made of them, 51. Their
King put to dea'h, 52. Charater
of the fetd ince that period, i. See
Matias and Bcsld.

Angleria, his authority cited in proof

of the extortions of the Flemith mi-
nifters of Charles V. . 340.

Anhall, Prince of, avows the opinions

of Martin Luther, 1. 464.

Analtr to the court of Rome, what, I.

394.

Aragon, how Ferdinand became pof-

selfed of that kingdom, . 308. The
cortes of, acknowledges the Archduke
Philip's title to the crown, 309. An-
cient enmity between this kingdom
and Castile, 31 . Navarre added to
this crown by the arts of Ferdinand,
31o. Arrival of Charles V. 34 . The
cortes not allowed to aemble in his
name, ib. The refra&ory behavioar
of the Aragonians, ib. They refute
restitution of the kingdom of Navarre,
341. Don John Lanuza appointed
regent, on the departure of Charles
for Germany, 357. Who composes
the diflurbances there, 448. The
moderation of Charles towards the in-
furgents on his arrival in Spain, 449.
See Spain.
Ardres, an interview there between

Francis I. and Henry VIII. us Eng-
land, I. 36g.

Afftlrio, Chailes son of Philip and Jo-

anna, acknowledged Prince of, by
the Cortes of Cafile, I. 37.

JlrJbarrg, a diet called there by Charles

V. II. 30. His public entry into that
city, ib. The confefcion of faith
named from this city, drawn up by
Melanahon, i. Relolute behaviour
of the rotellant Princes at, 31. The
diet afembled there, 60o. Is inti-
midated by being surrounded with
the mperor' SpaniOl troops, ib.

Tle

The Emperor re-establishes the Ro-
milh worlhip, in the churches of, ib.
The diet, by the Emperor's order, pe-
titions the Pope for the return of the
council to Trent, 165. A system of
theology laid before the diet by the
Emperor, 69. The archbishop of
Mentz, declares, without authority,
the diet's acceptance of it, ib. Its
form of government violently alter-
ed, and rendered fubmiflive to the
Emperor, 174. The diet assembled
there, 184. Takes part with the
Emperor against the city of Magde-
burg, 89. Is seized by Maurice of
Saxony, 318. Another diet at, open-
ed by Ferdinand, 383. Cardinal Mo-
rone attends the diet as the Pope's
nuncio, 384. Morone departs on the
Pope's death, 385. Recels of the
diet on the subjea of religion, 388.
Remarks on this recess, 391.

Aoila, a convention of the malecon-

tents in Spain held there, I. 430. A
confederacy termed the Holy Junta,
formed there, ib. Which disclaims
the authority of Adrian, ib. The
Holy Junta removed to Tordefillas,
43. See 7unta.
A3ria, by what means the house of,
became so formidable in Germany,
1. 5z6. The extraordinary acqui-
fitions of the house of, in the person
of the Emperor Charles V. 11. 463,
466.

B

BarbarFa, Horuc, his rife to the king-

doms of Algiers and Tunis, 1. 334.
Defeats the Spanilh troops sent a-
gainfl him by Cardinal Ximenes, b.
His parentage, 11. 56. Commences
pirate with his brother Hayradin, ib.
How he acquired poffelion of Al-
gier, 57. Infefls the coafs of
Spain, i. Is reduced and killed
by Comares the Spanilh governor of
Oran, ib.

Barbarsja, Ha)radin, brother to the

former of the fame name, takes pol-
fefflion of Algiers on his brother's
death, 11. 57. Puts his dominions
under the protection of the Grand
Signior, 58. Obtaini the command
of the Turkish fleet, ib. His treache-
rous treatment of Alrafchid, brother
to the King of Tunis, 9. Seizes
Tunis, iJ. Extends his depredations
by sea, 6o. Prepares to refilt the
Emperor's armament against him, 61.
Goletta and his fleet taken, 61. Is
defeated by Charlc, 63. Tunis
VoL. II.

taken, ib. Makes a descent on Italy*
153. Burns Reggio, ib. Besieges
Nice in conjuntion with the French,
but is forced to retire, ib. Is dif-
miffed by Francis, 161.
Barbary, a summary view of the revo-

lutions of, II. 55. Its division into
independent kingdoms, ib. Rife of the
piratical States, 56. See Barbarossa.

Barcelosa, the publick entry of the Em-

peror Charles V. into that city as its
count, 11. 24.

Bayard, chevalier, his characer, I.

411. His gallant defence of Mezi-
eres, besieged by the Imperialists, ib.
Obliges them to raise the siege, ib.
His noble behaviour at his death,
461. His refpeaful funeral, ib.

Bllay, M. his erroneous account of the

education of Charles V. corrected,
I. 31. Note. His account of the
disastrous retreat of the Emperor
Charles V. from his invasion of Pro-
vence, 11. 85.

Bible, a translation of, undertaken by

Martin Luther, and its effeas in
opening the eyes of the people, I.
463.
Bicorca, battle of, betweeen Colonna

and Marechal Lautrec, . 410.

Bscrld or Beukels, John, a journeyman

taylor, becomes a leader of the Ana-
baptitRs at MunRter, II. 46. Suc-
ceeds Matthias in the direction of
their affairs, 48 His enthufiafRick
extravagances, ib. Is chosen King,
ik. Marries fourteen wives, 49. Be-
heads one of them, 51. Is put to a
cruel death at the taking of MunRer,
a5. See A4abaptiptr.
Bohemia, the Archduke Ferdinand cho-

fen King of, 1. 5z6. Ferdinand en-
croaches on the liberties of the Bo-
hemians, II. 58. The Reformation
introduced by John Huss and Jerome
of Prague, i. Raise an army to no
purpose, 59.
Bologia, an interview between the Em-

peror Charles V. and Pope Clement
VII. there, II. 4. Another meet-
ing between them there, 37.

Bonstel, admiral of France, appointed

to command the invasion of Milan,
I. 456. His charatcer, ib. Enables
Colonna to defend the city of Milan
by his imprudent delay, i. Forced
to abandon the Milanese, 461. Il
wounded and his army defeated by the
Imperialist, t. Simulates Francis
to an invasion of the Mlianefe, 474.
Adviles rrancis to besiege Pavia, 475.
K.k

Adviles

Advises him to give battle to Bour-
bon, who advanced to the relief of
Pavia, 479. Is killed at the battle
of Pavia, 480.

Bouffier, lent by Francis I. King of

France, to negotiate a peace with
Charles V. I. 335.

Bouillos, Robert de la Marck, lord of,

declares war against the Emperor
Charles, at the infligation of Francis,
1. 410. Is ordered by Francis to
dilband histroopF, i. His territories
reduced by the Emperor, ib.

Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of

England, 11. 166. Taken, 171.

Bcurbon, Charles Duke of, his charac-

ter, 1. 451. The caufesof hisdifcon-
tent with FranciS, 1. 453. His dutch-
ess diet, ib. Rejets the advances
of Louise the King's mother, ib. His
estate fequefiered by her intrigues,
454. Negotiates secretly with the
Emperor, sb. Is included in a treaty
between the Emperor and Hen y
VIlI. of England, ib. Is taxed by
the King ith betraying him, which
he denies, 455. Escapes to It!y,
ib. Direcs the measures of the Im-
perial army under Lannoy, 460. De-
feats the French on the Banks of the
Seffia, 461. Intigates Charles to an
invasion of France, 471. Advances
to the relief of Pavia, 478. Defeats
Francis and takes him prisoner, 480.
Haflens to Madrid to secure his own
interests on the interview between
Charles and Francis, 490. His kind
reception by Charles, 494. Obtains
a grant of the dutchy of Milan, and
is made general of the Imperial army,
495. Obliges Sforza to surrender Mi-
lan, 513. Is forced to oppress the
JMilanefe to latisfy his troops mutiny-
ing for pay, 516. Sets Morone at
liberty, and makes him his confident,
ib. Appoints Leyva governor of Mi-
lan, and advances to invade the Pope's
territories, 517. His disappointed
troops mutiny, 518. He determines
to plunder Rome, 511. Arrives at
Rome and aaults it, 511. 1s killed,
ib.

BrarJdbsargb, Elecor of, avows the
opinionsof Luther, 1. 464.

Albert of. See AlAbrt.

Brugis, a league concluded there, be-

tween the Emperor and Henry VIII.
of England, against France, I. 411.
rujvirick, Duke of, avows the opinions
of Luther, 1. 464.

Branfwick, Henry, Duke of, driven from

his dominions by the ProteRant Prin-
ces of the league of Smalkalde, II.
157. Raises Men for Francis, but
employs them to recover his own do-
minions, 18e. Is taken prisoner, ib.

Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand King of the

Romans, II. 131. Is treacherously
seized by Sultan Solyman, 133.

C

Cajeta, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in

Germany, appointed to examine the
do&rines of Martin Luther, I. 375.
Requires Luther peremptorily to re-
traa his errors, ib. Requires the
Eletor of Saxony to surrender or ba-
ni(h Luther, 376. His condua juti-
fled, 377.

Calais, an ineffe&ual congress there be-

tween the Emperor and Francis, un-
der the Mediation of Henry VIII. I.
412. The careless manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary
Queen of England, 1I. 438. Ineffec-
tual remonltrances of Philip, and
Lord Wentworth the governor, con-
cerning its defenceless late, 439. Is
invefed and taken by the Duke of
Guise, ib. The Englilh inhabitants
turned out, 440. Stipulations con-
cerning, in the treaty of Chateau
Cambrefis, 458.

Cambray, articles of the peace conclud-

ed there, between the Emperor
Charles, and Francis of France, II.
o0. Remarks on this treaty, ib.

Camt, peace of, between Henry VIII.

and Francib I. 11. aol.

Caomggio, Cardinal, made legate from

Pope Clement VII. to the econd di-
et at Nuremberg, 1. 468. Publilhes
articles for reforming the inferior
clergy, 469. Advises Charlestorigo-
rous mealures against the Proteftlts,
!". 31.

Capitaatio of the Germanick body,

ligned by Charles V. and prescribed
to all his successors, 1. 351.

Caraat, Cardinal, his precipitate elec-

tion, 11. 395. Is appointed legate
to Bologna, ib. Resaons of his dif-
gus with the Emperor, 396. Per-
fuades the Pope to solicit an alliance
with France againf the Emperor,
397, 398, 400. His infiduoul com-
mfflion to the court of France, 411.
His public entry into Paris, iA. Ex-
horts Henry to break his truce with
the Emperor, 411. Absolves Henry

from

from his oath, 413. Negotiates a
peace between the Pope and Philip,
with the Duke d'Alva, 434. The
fate of him and his brother on the
death of Pope Paul, 461.

Carioax, besieged by the count d'En-

guien, and defended by the marquis
de Guato, 11. 16a. Guafto defeated
in a pitched battle, 163. The town
taken, 164.

Carloladias, imbibes the opinions of

Martin Luther, at Wittemburg, . 381.
His intemperate zeal, 462. Awed by
the reproofs of Luther, 463.
Caflalo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Pia-

dea'.

CaJole, how Isabella became pofTefled

of that kingdom, 1. 308. The Arch-
duke Philip's title acknowledged by
the Cortes of that kingdom, 309. Ifa-
bella dies and leaves her husband
Ferdinand of Aragon, regent. 311.
Ferdinand resigns the crown of, ib.
Ferdinand acknowledged regent by
the Cortes, ib. Enmity between this
kingdom and Aragon, ib. The par-
ticular dislike of the Castilians to
Ferdinand, 312. The regency of,
jointly velfed in Ferdinand, Philip and
Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
315. Declares againit Ferdinand, ib.
The regency of, resigned by Philip
to Ferdinand, 316. Philip and Joanna
acknowledged King and Queen by
the Cortes, 317. Death of Philip, ib.
The perplexity of the Cafilians on
Joanna's incapacity for government,
ib. Ferdinand gains the regency and
the good will of the Caftiliana by his
prudent adminifration, 319. Oran
and other places in Barbary annexed
to this kingdom by Ximenes, 310.
Ximenes appointed regent by Serai-
nand's will, until the arrival of
Charles V. 315. Charles safumes the
regal title, 317. Ximenem procures
its acknowledgment, 318. The nobi-
lity depressed by Ximencs, 39. The
grandees mutiny againfl Ximenes, 330.

he mutiny upprefTed, . Ximnenes
refunes the grants made by Ferdi-
nand to the noblea, i6. The bold re-
ply of Ximenes to the discontented
noble, 331. Other alfociates in the
regency appointed with Ximenes at
the inltigation of the Flemilh cour.
tiers, i. Ximenesdies, 339. Charles,
acknowledged King by the Cortes, on
his arrival, with a reservation in fa-
vour of his mother Joanna, i. The
Cllilins receive unfavourable im-

preflions of him, 340. DifguRfed by
his partiality to his Flemilh miniliers,
ib. Sauvage made chancellor, ib.
William de Croy, appointed arch-
bishop of Toledo, 341. The principal
cities confederate and complain of
their grievances, 342. The Clergy of,
refufeto levy the tenth of benefices
granted by the Pope to Charles V.
353 Interdiced, but the interdict ta-
ken off, by Charles's application, 354-
An infurreffion there, 355. Increase
of dilaffection, 356. Cardinal Adri-
an appointed regent, on the depar-
ture of Charles for Germany, 357.
The views and pretensions of the
commons, in their insurrections, 49.
The confederacy called the Holy Jun-
ta formed, b. The proceedings of
which are carried on in the name
of Queen Joanna, 431. Receivescir-
culatory letters from Charles for the
insurgents to lay down their arms,
with romifes of pardon, 431. The
nobles undertake to fuppreis the in-
furgents, 436. Raifean army against
them under the Conde de Haro, 437.
Haro gets polleflion of Joanna, 438.
Expedients by which they raise mo-
ney fr their troops, 439. Unwil-
ling to proceed to extremities with
the Junta, ib. The army of the Jun-
ta routed and Padilla executed, 442.
Dillolution of the .Junta, 444. The
moderation of Charles toward the in-
furgents on his arrival in Spain, 449.
He acquires the love of the Caflli-
an, ib. See Spain.

Catherine of Aragon, is divorced from

Henry VIII. of England, 11. 41. Dies,

Caterise a Boric, a nun, flies from

her cloister, and marries Martin Lu-
ther, 1. 506.

Catberist Medici. See Malct.
Cavi, peace concluded there between

Pope Paul IV. and Philip II. of Spain,
11. 434.
Cercamp, negotiations for peace entered

into there between Philip II. of Spain,
and Henry II. of Prance, 11. 449,
454. The negotiations removed to
Chateau Cambrefis, 457. See Cha.
teda CamnirJ.

Charaser of men, rules for forming

a proper estimate of them, 11. 189.
Applied to the cafe of Luther, ib.

Ck'rl l IV. Emperor of Germany, his

ohfervations on the manners of the
clergy, in his letter to the Archbi(hop
f Mentz, I. 387. Note.
K k Cbarle

Charles V. Emperor, his dercent and

birth, I. 307. How he came to in-
herit such extensive dominions, ib.
Acknowledged Prince of Aflurias,
by the Cortes of Castile, 317. His
father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy and
hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand
toward him, 310. Left heir to his do-
minions, 322. Death of Ferdinand,
ib. His education committed to Wil-
liam de Croy, lord of Chievres, ib.
Adrian of Utrecht appointed to be
his preceptor, 33. The firit opening
of his ch aer, b. Assumes the go-
vernment of Slanders and attends to
business, ib. Sends Cardinal Adrian
to be regent of Castile, who exe-
cutes it jointly with Ximenes, 36.
Assumes the regal title, 37. His ti-
tle admitted with difficulty by the
CaRilian nobility, 318. Persuaded to
add aftociate regents to Ximenes, 331.
His Flemish court corrupted by the
avarice of Chievres, 334. Persuaded
by Ximenes to visit Spain, but how
that journey is retarded, 335. The
present Rate of his affairs, ib. Con-
cludesa peace atNoyen withFrancis 1.
of France, and the conditions of the
treaty, 335. Arrives in Spain, 337.
His ungratefultreatment of Ximenes,
338. His public entry into Vallado-
lid, 339. Is acknowledged King by
the Cortes, who vote him a free gift,
ib. The Castilians receive unfavour-
able impressions of him, 341. Dif-
guss them by his partiality to his Fle-
milh minilters, ib. Sets out for Ara-
gon, ib. Sends his brother Ferdinand
to visit their grandfather Maximilian,
ib. Cannot afTemble the Cortes of
Aragon in his own name, b. The
opposition made by that assembly to
his desires, i. Refuses the appli-
cation of Francis I. for restitution of
the kingdom of Navarie, 341. Ne-
letqs the remontirances of the Cafti-
rian, ib. Death of the Emperor
Maximilian, 343. View of the pre-
sent (tate of Europe, i. How Maxi-
milian was obflruaed in ecuring the
Empire to him, ib. Francis I. as-
pires to the Imperial crown, 344.
Circumtances favourable to the pre-
tensions of Charles, i. The Bwifs
cantons efpoule his cause, 347. Ap-
prehensions and conduct of Pope LeoX.
on the occaflon, db. ATembling of
the diet at Frankfort, 349. Frederick
Puke of Saxony refuses the ofiar of

the Empire and votes for him, i.
And refuses the presents offered by
his ambassadors, 350. Concurring cir-
cumflances which favoured his eleai-
on, 351. Hiselection, ib. Signs and
confirms the capitulation of the Ger-
manick body,- 351. The eletion noti-
sied to him, ib. Assumes the title of
Majesty, ib. Accepts the imperial
dignity offered by the count Palatine
ambaTfador from the Electors, 353.
The clergy of Castile refuse the tenth
of benefices granted him by the Pope,
ib. Procures the interdict the king.
dom is laid under for refusal, to be
taken off, 354. Empowers cardinal
Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia,
ib. The nobles refute to assemble
without his presence, 355. Autho-
rites the insurgents there to continue
in arms, ib. Summons the Cortes of
CaRile to meet in Galicia, ib. Nar-
rowly escapes with his Flemilh mini-
flers from an infurreLion on that ac-
count, 356. Obtains a donative from
the Cortes, ib. Prepares to leave
Spain, and appoints regents, 357. Em-
barks, ib. Motives of this journey,
358. Rife of the rivallhip between
him and Francis I. ib. Courts the
favour of Henry VIII. of England and
his minister cardinal Wolfey, 363. Vi-
fits Henry at Dover, 364. Promises
Wolfey his interest for the papacy, ib.
Has a second interview with Henry at
Gravelines, 365. Offers to submit his
differences with Francis to Henry's
arbitration, i. His magnificent co-
ronation at Aix-la Chapell, 366. Calls
a diet at Worms, to check the refor-
mers, ib. Causes which hindered his
espousing the part of Martin Luther,
400. Grants Luther a safe condut
to the diet of Worms, ib. An edict
published against him, 401. Hisem-
barraffment at this time, 404. Con-
cludeb an alliance with the Pope, 407.
The conditions of the treaty, id.
Death of his minister Chievrea, and its
advantages to him, ib. Invafun of
Navarre by Francis, 408. The French
driven out, and their general L'EI-
parre taken prisoner, 409. War de-
clared against him by Robert de a
Marck, lord of Bouillon, who rava-
ges Luxemburg, 410. Reduces Bou-
illon, and invades France, . His
demands at the congrefa at Calahi,
41. Has an interview with cardinal
Wolfey at Bruges, and concludes

league

league with Henry VIII. against
France, ib. Pope Leo declares for
him against France, 415. The French
driven out of Milan, 417,420. Visits
England in his passage to Spain, 412.
Cultivates the good will of cardinal
Wolfey, and creates the Earl of Sur-
rey his high admiral, ib. Grants the
ifand of Malta to the Knights of St.
John, expelled from Rhodes by So-
lyman the magnificent, 44. Arrives
in Spain, 45. A retrofpea of his
proceedings in relation to the infur-
reaions in Spain, 432. ffTues circula-
tory letters for the Insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promises of
pardon, ib. His prudent moderation
toward the insurgents, on his arrival
in Spain, 449. Acquires the love of
the Caflilians, ib. Enters into a
league with Charles Duke of Bour-
bon, 454. Why he did not endea-
vour to get Wolfey eleced Pope,
458. Invade Guienne and Burgundy,
but without success, 459. His troops
in Milan mutiny for want of pay, but
are pacified by Morone, 461. Un-
dertakes an invasion of Provence, 47 .
Orders Pescara to besiege Marseilles,
471. Pescara obliged to retire, ib.
Disconcerted by the French over-
running the Milanese again, 474.
The revenues of Naples mortgaged
to raise money, 475. His troops de-
feat Francis, and take him prisoner
at the battle of Pavia, 480. His as-
seaed moderation at receiving the
news, 481. Avails himself of a trea-
ty concluded between Lannoy and
Pope Clement, but refuses to ratify
it, 485. His army in Pavia mutiny,
and are obliged to be dilbanded, 486.
His deliberations on the proper im-
provement of his disadvantages, ib.
His propositions to Francis, 487. As-
ter many delays, grants Sforna the in-
vefliture of Milan, 489. Morone's
intrigues betrayed to him by Pescara,
491. Orders Pescara to continue his
negotiations with Morone, 491. His
rigorous treatment of Francis, 493.
Visits Francis, 494. His kind re-
ception of the Duke of Bourbon,
ib. Grants Bourbon the dutchy of
Milan, and appoints him general in
chief of the imperial army there,
49. Fruitless negotiations for the
delivery of Francis, ib. Treaty of
Madrid, with Francis, 497. Deli-
vers up Francis, oo. Marries Ifa-
bella of Portugal, ib. An alliance

formed against him at Cognac, 509.
Sends ambassadors to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of the treaty of
Madrid, 51t. Prepares for war againRt
Francis, 511. The Pope reduced to
an accommodation with him, 514.
The exhaued state of his finances,
515. His troops under Bourbon dif-
trefted and mutinous for want of pay,
ib. Bourbon assaults Rome, and is
slain, but the city taken, 522. The
Prince of Orange general on Bour-
bon's death, takes the cattle of St.
Angelo, and the Pope prisoner, 514.
The Emperor's condut on that oc-
cafion, 5S5. His dissensions with the
Pope, how far favourable to the re-
formation, 516. His inftru&ions to
the Diet at Spires, 57. His manifesto
against the Pope, and letter to the
cardinals, b. France and England
leagueagainft him, 1I. 4. Is refused
supplies by the Cortes of Castile, 8.
Delivers the Pope for a ransom, ib.
His overtures to Henry and Francis,
9. Their declaration of war against
him, n. Is challenged by Francis
to single combat, ib. Andrew Do-
ria revolts from Francis to him, 15.
His forces defeat the French in Ita-
ly, 16, z8. His motives for desiring
an accommodation, 18. Concludes
a separate treaty with the Pope, 19.
Terms of the peace of Cambray con-
cluded with Francis, by the media-
tion of Margaret of Aultria and
Louise of France, 20. Remarks on
the advantages gained by him in
this treaty, and on his condut of the
war, ib. Visits Italy, 24. His po-
licy on his publick entry into Bar-
celona, i. Has an interview with
the Pope at Bologna, ib. Motives
for his moderation in Italy, 15. His
treaties with the ates of, b. Is
crowned King of Lombardy and Em-
peror of the Romans, 6. Sum-
mons a diet at Spires to confider the
late of religion, 28. His delibera-
tions with the Pope, refpecing the
expediency of calling a general coun-
cil, 19. Appoints a diet at Augf-
burg, 30. Makes a publick entry
into that city, ib. His endeavour*
to check the reformation, ib. Refo-
lute behaviour of the Protelant Prin-
ces toward him, 3. His severe de-
cree againlt the Protestants, i. Pro-
posed his brother Ferdinand to be
eleaed King of the Romans, 33.
Is opposed by the Protellants .

Obtains

Obtains his elecion, 34. Is desirous
of an accommodation with the Pote-
sants, 35. Concludes a treaty with
them at Nurembergh, 36. Raies
an army to oppose the Turks under
Solyman, and obliges him to retire,
37. Has another interview with
the Pope, and presses him to call a
general council, ib. Procures a league
of the Italian ates to secure the
peace of Italy, 39. Arrives at Bar-
celona, ib. His endeavours to pre-
vent the negotiations and meeting be-
tween the Pope and Francis, 41. Un-
dertakes to expel BarbarofRa from
Tunis, and restore Muley Halcen,
60. Lands in Africa, and besieges
Goletta, 61. Takes Goletta, and
seizes Barbarossa's fleet, 6. Defeats
Barbarossa and takes Tunis, 63. Re-
flores Muley Hafcen, and the treaty
between them, 64. The glory ac-
quired by this enterprize, and the
delivery of the Christian captives, 65.
Seizes the dutchy of Milan on the
death of Francis Sforza, 74. His
policy with regard to it, ib. Pre-
pares for war with Fraucis, 75. His
invective against Francis at Rome
before the Pope in council, 76. Re-
marks on this tranlation, 78. In-
vades France, 79. Enters Provence
and finds it desolated, 82. Besieges
MarfeiUes and Aries, 83. His miser-
able retreat from Provence, 84. His
invasion of Picardy defeated, 85. Is
accused of poitoning the dauphin, 86.
Improbability of its truth, ib. His
conjecture concerning the dauphin's
death, 87. Flanderb invaded by Fran-
cis, 88. A suspension of aims in
Slanders how negotiated, b. A truce
in Piedmont, 89. Motives to thel'e
truces, b. Negotiation for peace
with Francis, 91. Concludes a truce
for ten years at Nice, 9. Remarks
on the war, ib. His interview with
Francis, 93. Courts the friendlhip
of Henry VIII. of England, 97. In-
dulges the Proteltant Princes, 98.
Q.iets the apprehensions of the Ca-
tholick league, oJ. His troops mu-
tiny, oz. Alfembles the Cortes of
Callile, 103. Dertroys the ancient
conotitution of the Cortes, 104. In-
liance of the haughty spirit of the
ipanilh grandees, 6b. Desires per-
mirTon of Francis to pals through
France to the Netheilandt, no. His
crception in France, i l. His rigo-

'0 THIE
roes treatment of Ghent, 113. Re-
sues to fulfil his engagement to
Francis, ib. Appoints a friendly
conference between a deputation of
Catholick and Proteflant divine& be-
fore the diet at Ratifoon, 17. Re-
fultof this conference, z19. Grants
a private exemption from oppreflions
to the Protetants, 130. Undertakes
to reduce Algiers, 35. Is near be-
ing calt away by a violent form, 136.
Lands near Algiers, ib. His soldiers
exposed to a violent tempef and rain,
137. His fleet hattered, 138. His
fortitude under these difafiers, 139.
Leaves his enterprize and embarks
again, ib. Is difreffed with another
Itorm at sea, ib. 'lkes advantage
of the French invasion of Spain, to
obtain subsidies from the Cortes, 147.
His treaty with Portugal, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Henry VIII.
148. Particulars of the treaty, 49.
Over-runs Cleves, and his barbareus
treatment of the town of Duren, 51.
His behaviour to the Duke of Cleves,
;12. Bfieges Landrecy, ib. Is join-
ed by an English detachment, ib.
Is forced to retire, i. Courts the
favour of the Protellants, 157. His
negotiations with the Protestants at
the diet of Spires, 158. Procuresthe
concurrence of the diet in a war
againf Francis 160. Negotiates a fe-
parate peace with the King of Den-
mark, ib. Invades Champagne, and
invades St. Difiere, 165. Want of
concert between his operations and
thole of Henry, who now invades
France, ib. Obtains St. Difiere by ar-
tifice, 166. His distresses and happy
movements, 167. Conclude* a fepa-
rate peace with Franci, 16a His
motives to this peace, 169. His ad-
vantages by this treaty, 171. Obliges
himself by a private article toexter-
minate the Protelant berely, ib. Is
cruelly affiiaed with the gout, 173.
Diet at Worms, 174. Arrives at
Worms and alters his conduct towards
the Proteftlb 176. His conduct on
the death of/he Duke of Orlean, 178.
His diflimulation to the Landgrave of
Hele, 191. Concludes a truce with
S&lyman, 193. Holds a diet at Ra-
tifbn, 194 His declaration to the
Protellant deputies, 196. His treaty
with the Pope, concluded by the car-
dinal of Trent, 97. His circular let-
ter to the Proteltant members of the

cermaiik

Germtnick body, 198. The Protef-
tints levy an army againR him, 03.
Is unprepared againt them, ib. Puts
them under the ban of the Empire,
205. The ProteRants declare war
againt him, 1o6. Marches to join
the troops sent by the Pope, zo8.
Farnrfe the Pope's legate returns in
difgut, o09. His prudent declension of
an aion with the Protestants, 21o.
Is joined by his Flemish troops,
211. Proposals of peace made by the
Protestants, z18. Their army dif-
perse, i. Hisrigorous treatment ofthe
Protestant Princes, 220. Dismisses
part of his army, 2I2. The Pope re-
calls his troops, ib. His refle&ion on
Fiefco's infurtjeion at Genoa, ib. Is
alarmed at the hostile preparations of
Francis, 236. Deathof Francis, 37.
A parallel drawn between him and
Franci, 38. Consequences of Fran-
cis's death to him, 140. Marches
againR the Eleor of Saxony, 241.
Pales the Elbe, 141. Defeats the
Saxon army, 245. Takes the Elec-
tor prisoner, i. His harlh reception
of him, ib. InveRs Wittemberg, 46.
Condemns the EleOor to death, by a
court-martial, 147. The Eleaor by
treaty surrenders the eleCorate, 249.
The harsh terms imposed by him on
the Landgrave of Hesse, S21. His
haughty reception of the Landgrave,
253. Detains him priloner, 154.
Seizes the warlike tores of the league,
157. His cruel exa&ions, 258. As-
fembles a diet at Auglburg, 60. In-
timidates the diet by his Spanilh troops,
ib. Re-establishes the Romilh worship
in the churches of Augsburg, i. Sei-
zes Placenti, 164. Orders the diet
to petition the Pope for the return of
the council to Trent, 265. ProteRs
agairft the council of Bologna, 67.
Causes a system of faith to be prepar-
ed for Germany, 68. I.ays it before
the diet, 69. The Interim opposed,
t7a. And rejeaed by the Imperial
cities, 173. Reduces the city of
Auglburg to fubmifflon, 274. Re-
peat, the fame violence at Ulm, ib.
Carries the Elector and Landgrave
with him into the Low-Countries,
tyS. Procures his son Philip to be
recogeaied by the States of the Ne-
therlands, 177. Eablilhes the I/-
trim there, tb. Reassembles the diet
at Agiburg, under the influence of
his Spanifi troops, 184. The city of
Magdeburg refuses to admit the I/-
lrrom and prepares for rclilliucc, a1I9.

Appoints Maurice Elector of Saxony
to reduce it, z9o. Promises to pro-
tea the Protetants at the council of
Trent, 191. Arbitrarily releafte
Maurice and the Eleaor of Branden-
burg, from their engagements to the
Landgrave for the recovery of his li-
berty, 91. Endeavours to secure the
Empire for his son Philip, 93. His
brother Ferdinand refuses to sign his
pretensions, ib. Besieges Parma but
is repulsed, 98. Proceeds rigorously
against the Protestants, 99. Endea-
vours to fuppart the council of Trent,
300. Puts Magdeburg under the baa
of the Empire, b. Ablfolves the city,
304. Is involved in disputes between
the council and the Protestant depu-
ties, concerning their safe condut,
305. Begins to fulpea Maurice of
Saxony, 314. Circumfances which
contributed to deceive him with re-
gard to Maurice, 315. Maurice takes
the field against him, 316. Maurice
seconded by Henry 11. of France, 318.
His distress and confernation, ib. An
ineffetual negotiation with Maurice,
319. Flies from Infpruck, 31. Re-
leales the Eletor of Saxony, 323.
Is solicited to atisfy the demands of
Maurice, 318. His present difficul-
ties, 319. Refuses any direa compli-
ance with the demands of Maurice,
331. Is diipofed to yield by the pro-
grefs of Maurice's opelations, 331.
Makes a peace with Maurice at P-
fau, 334. Reflections on this treaty,
ib. Turns his arms againf France
339. Lays siege to Metz, 341. is
joined by Albert of Brandcnburgh, 343.
Hi, army diltreffed by the vigilance
of the Duke of Guile, 344. Railea
the siege and retires in a hattered con-
dition, 34;. Cosmo di Medici aflerta
his independency againi him, 346.
Siena revolts against him, i. Is de-
jeced at hib bad uccels, 349. Takes
Terrouane and demolishes it, 354.
Takes Heldin, ib. Proposes his lon
Philip as a husband to Mary Queen of
England, 363. The article of the
marriage, 35. Marches to oppole
the French operation, 369. Is de-
feated by Henry, 371. Invades Pi-
cardy, i6. Grant Siena, lubdued by
Colmo di Medici, to his on Philip,
378. A diet at Augibuig opened by
Ferdinand, 383. Leaves the interior
*dminiltration of Germany to Ferdi-
nand, 386. Applies again to Ferdi-
nand to resign his pretenfiona of fuce
ccfliuo to Philil, but i refused, ib.

Rccels

Recess of the diet of Augsburg on the
subjea of religion, 388. A treaty
concluded between Pope Paul IV. and
Henry II. of France againfI him, 400.
Resigns his hereditary dominions to
his Ion Philip, b. His motives for
retirement. 401. Had longmeditated
this refignstion, 403. The ceremony
of this deed, 404. His speech on the
occasion, 405. Resigns also the do-
minions f Spain, 407. His intended
retirement into Spain retarded, 408.
A truce for five years concluded with
France, 409. Endeavouri in vain to
secure the Imperial crown for Philip,
417. Resigns the Imperial crown to
Ferdinand, 418. Sets out for Spain,
ib. His arrival and reception in Spain,
419. Is diftrefed by his son's ungrate-
ful neglect in paying his pension, 410.
Fixes his retieat in the monastery of
St. Juflus in Plazencia, ib. The
situation of this monastery, and his
apartments, described, ib. Contrast
between the condut of Charles and
the Pope, 411. His manner of life
in his retreat, 449. His death preci-
pitated by his monaftick severities,
450. Celebrates his own funeral,
451. Dies, tb. His chara&er, 451.
A review of the slate of Europe during
his reign, 461. His requisitions to
the crown of Spain, 465.

Chateau Cambrefi, the conferences for

peace between Philip 1I. of Spain,
and Henry 11. of France, removed thi-
ther from Cercamp, 11. 457. The
peace retarded by the demand of Eli-
zabeth of England for restitution of Ca-
lais, lb. Particulars of the treaty figo-
ed there between England and France,
458. Terms of the pacification be-
tween Philip and Henry, 460.

Ceregate, nuncio from the Pope to the

diet st Nuremburgh, his inftruaions,
1. 464. Opposes the alfembling a ge-
neral council, 466.

Ctierer, William de Croy, lord of, ap-

pointed by Maximilian to superintend
the education of his grandlon Charles,
I. 311. Adrian of Utrecht made pre-
ceptor under him, 323. His diretion
of the RudiesofCharles,i. His ava-
rice corrupts the Flemilh court of
Charles, 334. Negotiates a peace
with France, 335. Endeavours to
prevent an interview between Charles
and Ximenes, 336. Attends Charles
to Spain, 337. His ascendancy over
Charles 340. His extortion, ib.
Hi death, and the fuplpoled causes of
it, 407.

TO THE
Cbriftiasr, primitive, why averse to the

principles of toleration, II. 389.

Clement VII. pope, his eleaion, I. 457.

His character, ib. Grants Cardinal
Wolfey a legantine commission inEng-
land for life, 458. Refuses to accede
to the league against Francis, 460.
Labours to accommodate the diffe-
rences between the contending parties,
ib. His proceedings with regard to
the Reformers, 468. Concludes a
treaty of neutrality with Francis, 477.
Enters into a separate treaty with
Charles after the battle of Pavia, and
the consequences of it, 485. Joins in
an alliance with Francis Sforza, and
the Venetians, against the Emperor,
509. Absolves Francis from his oath
to observe the treaty of Madrid, ib.
Cardinal Colonna seizes Rome, and in-
vests him in the castle of St. Angelo,
514. Is forced to an accommodation
withthe Imperialifts,i. His revenge
againR the Colonna family, 517. In-
vades Naples, ib. His territories in-
vaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity
on the occasion, 518. Concludes a
treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Naples,
59. His conflernation on Bourbon's
motions towards Rome, 2a Rome
taken, and himself besieged in the
caRle of St. Angelo, 513. Sur-
renders himself prisoner, 514. The
Florentines revolt against him, II. 5.
Pays Charles a ransom for his liberty,
with other Rfipulationt, 8. Makes
his escape from confinement, 9.
Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec,
ib. Is jealous of the intentions of
Francis, and negotiates with Charles,
13. His motives and Reps towards
an accommodation, 19. Concludes
a separate treaty with Charles, ib.
His interview with the Emperor at
Bolegna, 4. Crowns Charles King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Ro-
mans, 6. His reprefentationa to
the Emperor agsinst calling a general
council, %9. Has another interview
with Charles at Bologna, and the dif-
ficulties railed by him to the calling a
general council, 37. Agrees to a
league of the Italian States for the
peace of Italy, 39. His interview
and treaty with Francis, 41. Mar-
ries Catharine di Medici to the Duke
of Orlean, 41. His protraction of
the affair of the divorce olicited hy
Henry VIII. i Reverses Cranmer's
sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunicatiei, 43. Henry re-

zouIces

nounces his supremacy, i. Hit death,
ib. Refleaions on his Pontificate, ib.

Clergj, Romish, remarks on the immo-

ral lives of, and how they contributed
to the progrets of the Reformation, I.
386. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, 387. Their uur-
pations in Germany, during the dif-

utes concerning inveetitures, 388.
heir other opportunities of aggran.

dizing tihemfelves there, 389 Their
perfonil immanities, 390. Their en-
croachments on the laity, ib. The
dreadful effets of spiritual censures,
39'. Their devices to secure their
ufarpations, ib. The united effec
of all thele circumstance,, 394. Op.
pose the advancement of learning in
Germany, 397.

CkvbJ, invaded and over-run by the Em-

peror Charles V. II. '5. Cruel
treatment of Duren, i. Humiliat-
ing flbmifion of the Duke, ib.

Cisipprdodi, a* leader of the Anabap-

tifts at Muster, an account of, II.
46, 48. See Afabptifls.

Cgar, an alliance formed there agaioft

Charles V. by the Pope, the Vene-
tians, the Duke of Milan, and Fran-
cis I. 1. 509.

C/ligri, admiral, governor of Picardy,

defends St. Quintin against the Spanish
generl Emanuel Phillibert Duke of
voy, II. 47. His brother D'An-
detot defeated in an endeavour to join
the garrison, 48. But D'Andelot
enters the town, ib Hie character,
43t. The town taken by afsolt, and
himself taken prisoner, i.

Csolgn, Ferdinand King of Hungary and

Bohemia, brother to the Emperor
Cbrles V. elected King of the to-
mann by the college ofEleo(rs there,
It. 34

- Herman, count de Wied, arch-
bishop and eleaor of, incliner to the
Reformation, and is oppoftd, by his
canon, who appeal to the Emperor
ad Pope, 11. 117. Is deprived and
excommunicated, sg9. Refigo, zat.
'ilnau, Cardinal Pompeo, his charater,

nd rivalhip with Pope Clement VII.
1 t4. Seizes Rome, and invert
the Pope in the calile of St. Angelo,
f. si degradkd, and the reft of the
Ifmllt excommunicated by the Pope,
IT. Is prevailed on by the Pope
len priloner with the mperialits,
tbhbnclt his delivery, II. 99.

---- PRfper, the Italian general, his

chuacer, 1. 415. Appointed to
Cmaod the troul>, in the invafiGo of

VoL. 1I.

Milan, i. Drives the French out of
Milan, 417. His army how wsleken
ed t the death of Pope Leo X. 418.
Defeats Marechel de Ltrec t Bi-
cocca, 410. Reduces Genoa, 411.
The bad late of his troops when the
French invade Milan, 456. Is e-
abled to defend the city by the ill con-
dua of Bonnivet the Frenel con-
mander, i. Dies, and is fiuceed
by l.annoy, 460.

Coachille, an Aragonian gentleman, em-

ployed by Ferdinnd of Aragon, to
obtain Joanna's consent to his regency
of Cftile, I. 313. Thrown into
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, i.

Cmffefi of Augsburg, drawn up by

Melnoahon, 11. 30.

Cotawree, the privileges of that city

taken away by the mperor Chartle
V. for disobedience to the Ibterimn
11. 77.

Crfair t

of Barbary, n account of the

nfe of, 11. 56. See JAlgirs, Barbarsfa.

Cartes of Aragon, acknowledges the

Archduke Philip's title to the crows,
I. 309. Not allowed to ffemble in
thenameofChrles V. 341. Theirop-
position to his desires, ib. Is pre-
vailed on by the Emperor to recognize
his son Philip *a fuccefror to that king-
dom, IL 147. See pai.

Cert: of Cafile, c knowledgesthe Arch-

duke Philip's title to the crown, I.
309. Is prevailed on to acknowledge
Ferdinand regent, according to lii-
bella' will, 311. AcknowledgesPhilip
and Joanna King and Queen of Cal-
tile, and their on Charlet, Prince of
Afturis, 31 7. Declares Charles King,
and votes him a free gift, 339. Sum-
moned by Charles to meet at Con-
poftella in Galicia, 35;; Tumultuary
proceedings thereupon, 356. A dona
tive voted, i. Loses all its influ-
ence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 446. Its backwardness to
grant rupplies for the Emperor's wars
In Italy, iSt. Refoes his prefiag
foticitationsfortfupply, II. 8. Asem-
bled at Toledo to grant fuppliel to the
Emperor, 103. The remonftrarce
of, i. The ancient costitution o,
subverted by Charles, 04. See Se is.

-- of Valencia, prevailed on by the

Emperor Charles V. to acknowledge
his Con Philip uccelTor to that king.
dem, t II . 7 8eein.

CrtUa, Cardinal di, governor of Plo-

rence for the Pope, expelled by the
Florentine, on the Pope's captivity,
II.

L I Ce/i.

Cifms di Medici. See Medici.
Crasmer, archbilhop of Canterbury, an-

nul the marriage of Henry VII. with
Catharine of Aragon, which was re-
fused to Henry by the Pope, II. 4.
His sentence reversed by the Pope, 43.
Crefpy, peace of, between the Emperor

and Franci, 11. 168.

Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres,

made archbishop of Toledo, by Charles
V. 1. 341. Dies 445.

D
D'Alb:rt, John, expelled from his king-

dom of Navarre by Ferdinand of Ara-
gon, 1. 30. Invades Navarre, but is
defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 333.

D'Alembert, M. his observations on the

orderofJeluits, II. z13. Note.

D'Addelt, brother to Coligni, is de-

feated by the Duke of Saxony, in an
endeavour to succour St. Quintin, II.
418. But enters the town with the
fugitives, ib. The town taken by
atTault, 431.

Dapbix of France, eldest son of Francis

I. is delivered up with the Duke of
Orleans, to the Emperor Charles V.
in exchange for his father, as holage
tor te performance of the treaty of
Madrid, 1. 500oo. His death imputed to
poifun, 11. 86. The moR probable
cause of it, 87.
·--- late Duke of Orleans, second
Ton of Francis I. commands an army
and invades Spain, II. 145. Is forced
to abandon the fiegeofPerpignan, 146.
Is dissatisfied at the peace of Crelpy,
171. Makes a ecret protestation a-
gainit it, tb.

of France, on of Henry II. con-

traed to Mary the young Queen of
Scotland, II. 64. Is married to
her, 443.
Dremark, a summary view of the revo-

lutions in, during the fixtenth cen-
tury, 11. 456.

--- King of, joins the Piotetant

league at Smalkilde, II. oo.

D Rets, Cardinal, writes a hillory of

Ficfco's conspiracy, while a youth, II.
131. Ntr.
liaoa us Pitierr, miftrefr to Henry II.
of France, affil the Guises in per-
fuading Henry to an alliance with
Pope Paul IV. againR the Emperor,
11. 398. Induces Henry to break
the treaty of Vaucelles, 413. Mar.
ries her grandaughter to one ofMont-
morency's onr, 447. Joins Munt.
morecy againit the ;uiie, 448.

Doria, Andrew, afliil Lautrec in sub-

duing Genoa, 11. 6. Conquers and
kills Moncada in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naples, 13.
His chara&er, 14. Is disgusted with
the behaviour of the French, ib. Re-
volts to the Emperor, 15. Opens
to Naples a communication by sea, ib.
Rescues Genoa from the French, 16.
Restores the government of, to the
citizens, 17. The refpea paid to
his memory, ib. Attends the Em-
peror Charles in his disastrous expedi-
tion againlt Algiers, 136. His partial
fondnei for his kinsman Giannetino,
II. 114. His narrow escape in La-
vagno's infurrettion,l30. Returnson
Lavagno's death, and the dilperfion of
his party, 131. See Genoa and Lawagt.
---Giannetino, hischarater, II. 114.

Is murdered by Lavagno's confpira-
tors, 230.
Dover, an interview there between Henry

VIII. and the Emperor Charles V.
1. 364.

Dragut a corsair, commands the Turkish

fleet which ravages the coata of Na-
ples, II. 148.

DY Prat, chancellor of France, his cha.

ra&er, 1. 454. Commences a law-
suit against Charles Duke of Bourbon,
for his ellate, at the instigation of
Louise the King's mother, Jb.

Dualig, the custom of, how rendered

general, II. it. Its influence on
manners, ib.

Durea in Cleves, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. the inhabitants put to the
sword, and the town burnt, 11. a5s.

E

Ecrcin, an adversary of Luther's, holds

publick disputation with him at Leip-
sic, on the validity of the Papal autho-
rity, I. 379.

Ec iSq/ical censures of the Romilh
church, the dreadful effcas of, . 391.

- Reservation, in the recess of

the diet of Augiburg, remarks on, II.

E2anlrg, plundered and burnt by the

earl of Hertford, II. 161.
Ediward V. of England, is character,

II. 363.

E&usnt, count of, commands the cavalry

at the battle of St. Qintin, and puts
Montmorency's troops to light, II.
418. Engages Marechal de Termc,
and defeats him by the casual anival
of an Englilh fquadreo, 444.

tte,

Zgypt, how and by whom added to the

Ottoman Empire, . 345.

Ebreuhurg, the caltle of, taken byMau-

rice of Saxony, II. 331.

Eignatr, a fation in Geneva so termed,

an account of, II. 71.

Elizabeth filler of Mary, her acceflion to

the crown of England, II. 454. Her
characer, ib. Is addressed by Philip
of Spain, and Henry of France, for
marriage, ib. Her prudent condu&
between them, 456. How determined
against Henry, i. Her motives for
rejecing Philip, ib. Returns Philip
an evasive answer, 457 Demands re-
ftitution of Calais at the conferences
at ChateauCambrefi, ib. Eablihes
the ProteRant religion in England,
458. Treaty between her and Henry
signed at Chateau Cambrefis, ib.

Emmawuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy.

See Savoy.

Eglaad, by what means that kingdom

was freed from the papal supremacy,
and received the doctri ns of the Refor-
mation, 11. 43. Mary Queen of,
married to Prince Philip, Ion of the
Emperor Charles V. contrary to the
sense of the nation, 36;. The
marriage ratified by parliament, 366.
Is reluctantly engaged by Phiiip, now
King of Spain, in the war against
France, 416. Mary levies money by
her prerogative to carry on the war,
il. Calais taken y the Duke of
Guise, 439. Guiifnes and Hames
taken, 440. Death of Mary and ac-
ceflion of Elizabeth, 454. The Pro-
telant religion eftablilhed by Elizabeth
458. Teaty with France signed at
Chateau Cambrefi, 458. Its interior
strength how increased by the condu
of Henry VIII. 469. Its power no
longer fruitlefily waded on the conti-
nent, 471. Alteration of its condua
toward Scotland, ib.

Enguin, the count de, besieges Carig-

nan, II. 16z. Desires of Francis, per-
miflon to engage Guallo, i. De-
feats Guafto in a pitched battle, 163.

Erardde IaMark, ambassador of Charles

V. to the diet of Frankfort, his pri-
vate motives for thwarting the preten-
sions of Francis I. of France, to the
Imperial crown, 1. 35 1. Signi the ca-
pitulation of the Germanick body, on
behalf of Chnrles, 3a.

Eroaf/u, lome account of, I. 398.

Preceded Luther in his cenfureaagasift
the Romilh church, i. Concurs with
him in his intentions of reformation,

ib. Motives which checked him in
this, i.

Efrurial, palace of, built by Philip 11. in

memory of the battle of St. Quintin,
11. 433.

Europe, a hort view of the fate of, at

the death of the Emperor Malimilian,
1. 343 The contemporary monarchs
of, all illultrious, at thetimeof Charles
V. 366. The method of carrying on
war in, how improved beyond the prac-
tice of earlier ages, 458. The fen-
timents of, on Charle's treatment of
the Pope, 1I. 3. A review of the (ate
of, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles V. 461. The remarkable
change in, at this period, 463. How
affected by the revolt of Luther againf
the church of Rome, 473.
Eutemi, King of Algiers, engages Bar-

baroffa in his service, and is murdered
by him, 11. 57.

Excammuicarion in the Romi(h church

the original inflitution of, and the
use made of it, 1. 391.

P

Farefe, 'Alexander, his unanimous

election to the Papacy, II. 43. See
Paul 111.

- Cardinal, accompanies the troops

sent by the Pope to the Emperor,
against the army of the Pr,,teflant
league, 11. o8. Returns difguited,
0o9. Leads the troops home again
by the Pope's order, iza. Contri-
butes to the elecion of Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, 28a.

-- Ot&avio, grandson of Pope Paul

Ill. endeavours to lurprize Parma,
and enters into treaty with the Em-
peror, II. 80. Is confirmed in
Parma, by Julius III. 96. Pro-
cures an alliance with France, 197.
Is attacked by the Imperialills, but
successfully protected by the French,
a98. Placentia restored to him by
Philip II. of Spain, 435.

----- Peter Lewia, natural Ton of

Pope Paul 11I. obtains of his father
the dutchies of Parma and Placentia,
11. 179. His character, 6a. Is
alTaflinated, a63.

Fordiuxad, King of Aragnn, how he

acquired his kingdom, I. 308. In-
vites his daughter Joanna, and her
hulband, Philip Archduke of Auflria,
to Spain, ib. Iecomes jealous of
Philip, 309. Carlie on his war with
France vigorously, nntwithlanding
Philip's treaty with Lewi% 30o. His

L Qi Qeer

Qyeen Ifibeli die, and leaves him
regent of Castile, under reftritions,
311. Refigm the kingdom of Caftie,
and is acknowledged regent y the
Cortes, i. His charater ib. His
nuanin of government odious to the
CaRfilian, 311. Required by Philip
to reign hia regency, i. Joanna'
letter of conent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and bereif eon-
fined 31 3 Is deserted by tbeCafti-
liao nobility, iA. Determines to ex-
clude his daughter from the fucceflion
by marrying, ib. Marries Germaine
de Poix niece toLewis XII. ofFrance,
314. A treaty between him and Phi-
lip at Samanca by which the re-
gency of Cafile is jointly vefied in
them, and Joanna, 315. Prevails en
Henry VII. of England to detain
Philip for three montbhs when driven
on that coast, i. The Catilians
declare against him, i. Reigns the
Tegency of Catile by treaty, 316.
Interview between him and Philip,
ih. Is absent, t Napler, when Phi-
lip died, 319 Returns and gains,
with the regencX of Castile, the good
will of the natuve by his prudent
administration, i. Acqnires by dif-
honourable means the kingdom of
Navarre, 310. How he destroyed his
conRitutioa, 31 . Endeavurs to ex-
clude his grandon Charles frem his
Ipanifl fuon~en, i. Alters his
will in favour of Charles, 311. Dies,
i&. Review of his adminiflration, 314.
Ximenes appointed by his will, re-
gent of Catil, attil the arrival of
Charles V. 3yS.

FeraaiJ, ecd han of Philip Arch-

duke of Autrio born, I. 31o. Left
regent of Aragona by his graodfater
sdinand, j3t. This, revoked by a
tubfequent will, by wbid he obtains
eony penfino, 3t1. Difcotented
with his diapointment, he is taken
to Madrid under the eye of Cardinal
Ximene 17. Sent by Charles V.
to visit ther grandfather Maximilian,
341. Is aleted King of Hungary and
Bohemia, a6. Signa deed called
the Rrevrrf, iS. The Em;ror *n-
deavours to get him elirted ling of
the Roman, II 33. He is oppiad by
the Proteftaots, i. Is crowned King
if the Rea, 34. Forms a con-
fedaracy 0agllt the Anabapti at

ualler, o. Oppose the reftora-

tion of UlrK Duke of Wurtemberg,
S3. Riegnsai his title and eon-
lbdes a treaty with im tb. His

TO THE

kindom of Hungary wreed fre
him by John Zapol Scaepiu, 130.
Beiege the young King Stephea sad
his mother in Buda, but is defeated
by the Turks, 131. His men of-
sers of ubmiflion to the Porte, i.
which are rejected, 13 Courtsthe
favour of the Protetants, t57. Opens
the diet at Worms, 174. Requires
it to submit to the decisions of the
counci! of Trent, 17s. Agrees topay
a tribute to Solyman for Hungary,
193. Encroaches on the libertie of
Bobemia, 58. His rigorous treat-
ment es Prague, 59. Diarms the
Bohemians, 60. Obtains the so-
vereignty of the city of ConRtlace,
178. Invades Transylvania by invi-
tation of MartinDuzi, 307. Obtains
the reigontion of ranfylvani from
Queen Ifbr1ell, 308. Orders Marti-
nuzzi to be affilfinated, 31o. En-
ters into negotiation with Maurice ao
behalf of the Emperor, 3& His
motives for promoting the Emperor's
agreeing with Maurice, 331. irabel-
la and her fen Stephen, recover pof-
fefion of Transylvania, 35. Opens
a diet at Augsurg, and excites fe'-
picions in the Protestants, 383. The
Emperor leaves the internal adnini-
flration of German afairs to hin,
36. Is again applied to by the Em-
peror to reign his preteaioni of Ioc-
celon to Philip, but refutes, ib. En-
dervours therefore to gain the friend-
Ohip of the diet, 387. Again refuses
the Emperor's olicitation, 4 8.
Charles refigs the Imperial crown to
him, i. Aembles the college of
Elicors at Frankfort, which acknow-
ledge him Emperor of Germany,
441. The Pope refuses to acknow-
ledge hi, .

Frrgf, the Fend ambaffdor h Ve-

nice, murdered by the Mrquis del
Guafo, the Imperial governor of the
MiloneS, II. 4.

Fodal government, a view of, it

exilled in fpain, 1. 49.
Ftffr, Count of Lavagna. See Lwqua.

- - Jerome, engages in his bro-
ther's colpiracy, and fails in securing
Andrew Dora, 11. a. His impru-
dent vaity on his brother's death, 3 1.
hute himflf up in fort ea his l
tate, 31. Is redueed nd wt to
death, 37.

f 4i:r. Ve Nt.ffiii .
Fhkrene, the inhabitts of, reek a-

gains Pope Cemeat VIL n the news
of his captivity, amd rcover their li-

brty,

berty, II. Are rediced to sub-
jeioan to Aexander di Medici, by he
Emperor, t6. Alexander di Medici,
Duke of, fflafinated by his kiniman
Loreazo, 94. Cosmo di Medici, ad-
vanced to the fovreignty, 95, Cos-
no, fupportd by the Emperor, de-
feats the partizea of Lorenaeo 96.
Como eAfert his independency on the
Bmperor, 346.

Fnowfca, Antonio de, commender in

chief of the forces i pain, ordered by
Cardinal Adrian to besiege the infur-
gentc in egovia, I. 47. Is denied
liberty of taking rilitary stores, by
the inhabitntr of Medina del Campo,
it. Attacks and ainoft burns the
whole towa, 418. Is repulsed, 4t.
His bouse at Valdolid burnt, ib.

Furaner, the cquifition of that kingdom,

during the reign of the Emperor
Charle V. Ii. 47. The charater
of the people of, ib. The good
conequences of the civil wars in that
kingdom to the reft of Enrope, 469.

framci I. King of France, conclude a

peace with Charles V. and the condi-
tion of the treaty, I. 335 Sends a
fruitlef embafly to Charles for the
retitntion of Navarre to the yonng
King, 341. Aspires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Mauimilian,
344. Retfons by which he fIpported
is pretenfins, 345. Remark* on the
qulpagec of his ambaflaldo~ to the
German States, 346. His pretendons
adted bythe Venetianr, 347. Ltfes
theeletinn, 351. Rife of the rival-
(hip between him nd Charles. 358.
Courts the favour of Cardinal Wolfey,
36a. Promises Wolfey hii interest
for the Papacy, 364. H an inter-
view with Henry VIII. of England,
365. Wrefileswith Henry andthrows
hin, in. N. His advantage* over
Charles, at the commencement of
hofilities between them, 404. Con-
eludes an alliance with the Pope, 406.
Invades and reduce Nvaerre, in the
name of Henry d'Albert, Ion of John,
the former King, 408. The French
driven out by the imprudence of L'EI-

rre their general, who is taken pri-
lner by the Spaniards, 409. Retakel
Moefo from the Imperaliftr, 411.
Invadee the Low-Countries, but loles
the opportunities of frccefi by impru-
dene, ib. Re)eas the demands of
Charles at the congrefr at Calais, 41a.
A leaIge oaiclded between Charles

and Henry VIII. againfi him, ib. ;it
imprudent appoiteent of the Mare-
chal de Foix to the government of Mi-
lan, 44. De Foix attacks Reggi,
but is repuled by the governor GCic-
ciardini the historian, i. The Ptpe
declares aginft him, 41j. His em-
barraffments on the invalon of Milar,
ib. His mother seise the money
appointed for pyment of the Milanese
troops, 46. Milan taken, and the
French driven o, 4 7. Levies a bo-
dy of Swift, 419. Who iit o0 giv-
ing a precipitate battle to the lmperi-
alis, which is lo1t, 410. War de-
clared againf him by Henry VIII. 411.
His expedients to supply his trealury,
i. The plan pursued by him to refilt
the incurions of the Englifti 413. Pi-
cardy invaded by Henry, rb. The
Venetians league with the Emperor
ngainlt him, 451. To which Pope
Adrian accedcs, ib. His expeditious
movement againt the Milanele, 451.
Difcoacerted by the Duke of Bour-
bon's conipiracy, b. Taxes him with
betraying his cause, which Bourbon
denies, 455. Borboo elcapes to Ita-
ly and PFancis returns, b. Appoints
the admiral Bonnivet to command a-
gainlt the Milanese, 456. Picardy
invaded by the Duke of buffolk, who
is driven back, 459. Repalles the
invafioa of Guieene and Burgundy by
Charles ib. His fuccefaful cloe of
the campaign, 46o. His prudent care
todifappoint the Imperialilts in their
invafioa of Povence, 471. Aem-
bles an army, which caulb the Impe-
rialifta to retire fom Marleilles, t6.
Determines to invade the Mlanoee,
ib. Appoints his mother Louile re-
gent during his ablence, 474 Bn-
ters Milan, and takes poteffion of the
city, ib. Advised by Bonnivet to be-
fiegePavia, 475. His vigorous attacks
Ca Pavia, 476. Concludes a treaty
of neutrality with Pope Clement, 477.
His imprudent invfion of Naples, Ab.
Lefolve by Bonnivet's advice to ttack
Bourbon's army, dvnced to the relief
of Pavia, 479. Is routed at the battle
of Pavia, 40. Is taken priloner, ib.
Is lent to the ceRle of Piezitchitone
under the custody of Don Ferdinand
Alarcon, 481. Refuses the propoliti-
one made to him by Charles, 487.
Is carried to Spain on his desire of
parlonl interview with Charles, 48.
Is riprouly treated i Spain, 493.

r114

Falls dangerously ill, i. Is visited by
Charles, 494. Resolve to resign his
kingdom, 496. Is delivered from his
captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 497.
His secret proteftrtions against the va-
lidity of this treaty, 498. Marries
the Queen of Portugal, 499. Recovers
his liberty, and the Dauphin and the
Duke of Orleans delivered up hostages
to Charles for the performance of the
treaty of Madrid, 5oo. Writes a let-
ter of acknowledgment to Henry VIII.
of England, so8. His reply to the Im-
perial ambassadors, ib. Enters into
a league with the Pope, the Venetians
and Sforza, againf Charles, 509. 1s
absolved from his oath to observe the
treaty of Madrid, i. His behaviour
to the Emperor's second ambsafy, 5 1.
Is dispirited by his former ill success,
512. Enters into a treaty with Henry
VIII. of England against the Emperor,
11. 4. Successes of his general Lau-
trec in Italy, 6. His reply to the
Emperor's overtures, to. Declares
war againd him, and challenges him
to single combat, ib. Treats Andrew
Doria ill, who revolts from him to the
Emperor, S. His army, under Sa-
luces, driven out of Italy, 16. His
troops in Milan routed, 18. His en-
deavours toward an accommodation,
19. Terms of the peace of Cambray,
concluded by the mediation of his mo-
ther Louise and Margaret of Austria,
to. Remarks on the scrifices made
by him in this treaty, and on his con-
duEa of the war, i. Leagues secret-
ly with the Protestant Princes, 35.
His measures to elude the treaty of
Cembray, 40. His negotiations with
the Pope, i. His interview and
treaty with the Pope, 41. Gives the
Duke of Orleans in marriage to Catha-
rine di Medici, 4. Negotiates a
treaty with Francis Sforaa, Duke of
Milan, 66. His envoy Merveille exe-
cuted at Milan for murder, 67. Is
disappointed in his endeavours to nego-
tiate alliances againit the Emperor, ib.
Invites Melanthon to Paris, 68. Evi-
dences his zeal for the Romilh religion,
69. Caues of his quarrel with the
Duke of Savoy, 71. Seizes the
Duke's territories, i. His preten-
sions to the dutchy of Milan, on the
death of Francis Sfora, 74. The
Emperor's invective againfi him before
the Pope in counsel, 76. Is invaded
by Charles, 79. His prudent plan of
defence, 81. Joins the army under

Montmorency, 84. Death of the
Dauphin, 86. Obtains a decree of
the psrliament of Paris against the Em-
peror, 87. Invades the Iow-Coun-
tries, 88. A suspension of arms in
Flnders, and how negotiated, i.
A truce in Piedmont, 89. Motives
to these truces, i. Concludes an al-
liance with Solyman the Magnificent,
90. Negotiations for a peace with
the Emperor, 91. Concludes a truce
for ten years at Nice, 91. Refleions
on the war, b. His interview with
Charles, 93. Marries Mary of Guise
to James V. of Scotland, 97. Re-
suoes the offers of the deputies of
Ghent, Io9. Informs Charles of
the offer made by them, i. Grants
the Emperor leave to pafi through
France to thNet etherlands, o. His
reception of the Emperor, Ils. Is
deceived by the Emperor in refpe to
Milan, 3. His ambafador to the
Porte, Rincon, murdered by the Im-
perial governor of the Milanese, 41.
Prepares to resent the injury, 143.
Attacks the Emperor with five armies,
145. His first attempts rendered abor-
tive, by the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleans, 146. Renews his negoti-
ations with Sultan Solyman, 50o. In-
vades the Low Countries, 15 i. Forces
the Emperor to raise the siege of Lan-
drecy, 15t. Dismisses Brbaroffa,
16 . Gives the count d'Enguien per-
mifion to engage Guafto, 63. Re-
lieves Paris, in danger of being fur-
prized by the Emperor, 168. Agrees
to a feparste peace with Charles, i.
Henry's haughty return to his over-
tures of peace, 171. Death of the
Duke of Orleans, 178. Peace of
Campe, 2ol. Perceives a necessity
of checking the Emperor's ambitious
design, 134. Forms a general league
againf him, 135. Dies, 37. His
life and charater funmrily compar-
ed with those of Charles, a8l. Con-
sequences of his death, 140.

Fraci II. his acceflion to the crown of

France, and charater, 11. 461.

Frankjirt, the diet of, afTembled for the

choice of an Emperor at the death of
Maximilian, 1. 349. Names and
views of the Electors, id. Th Em-
pire offered to Frederick of Saxony,
it. Who reject it, with his reasons,
iJ. Choose, Charles V. Emperor,
3SI. His confirmation of theGerma-
nicr privileges required nd a*reed to,
3Sa. City of, embraces the reformed

religion,

religion, 464. The college of Elec-
tors aembled there by Ferdinand,
who is acknowledged Emperor of
Germany, 11. 441.

FredericA Duke of Saxony, afTembles

with the other Eletors at the diet of
Frankfort, to choose an Emperor, I.
349. The Empire offered to him, ib.
Rejects it, and votes for Charles V. ib.
Refutes the presents of the Spanihf
ambaifadors, 350. This difinterefled
behaviour confirmed by the testimony
of iftorians, ib. Note. ChoofesMar-
tin Luther philosophical professor at
his university of Wittemberg, 370.
Encourages Luther in his opposition to
indulgences, 371. Proteas him a-
gainft Cajetan, 376. Caules Luther
to be seized at his return rem the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at
Wartburg, 401. Dies, 11. 187.

Frelfprg, George, a German noble.

man, some account of, he joins the
army of Charles V. I. 515.

G

Grtrrol of the Jesuit, an inquiry into

his office and defpotick authority, II.
'"7.

Gnvrw, an account of its revolt againt

the Duke of Savoy, II. 71.

GCae, reduced by Lautrec, the French

general, 11. 6. The French endea-
our to prejodice its trade in favour
of Svona, 14. Is rescued from the
French by Andrew Dori, 16. The
government of, fettled by the difinte-
reftednefe of Doria, 7. The honour
paid to Doria's memory, i. Is vi-
fited by the Emperor, 4. A cheme
formed to overturn the conRoitution of,
b Fiefco, count of Lavagno, 215.

a embles his adherents, 16. The

conspirators ally forth from Lavagno's
palace, t9g. Deputies sent to know
Lavago's terms, 130. Lavagno
drowned, i. The inlurredion ruined
by the imprudence of his brother Je-
rome Fiefco, 131. The conspirators
disperse, i. Jerome reduced and
put todeath, 37.

Cmrrmaud, an aloclation in Valencia,

so termed, on what occaGon formed,
1. 446. Refute to lay down their
arm, i. Their resentment levelled
at the nobiity, whoraile an army a-
gains them, i. Defeat the nobles
an several actions, 447. But are rout-
ed nd dispersed by them, ib.
Cirsinra, ftite of, at the death of the

imperor Maximilian, 1. 43. Charles

V. of Spain, and Francis I. of France,
form pretensions to the Imperial crown,
344. Their refped:ive reafonsofered
in favour of their claims, 344. 345.
Views and interelts of the other Eu-
ropean States in relation to the com-
petitors, 346. Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, advances a claim, 347. But ic
discouraged from prosecuting it, ib.
How the Papacy was likely to be as-
feled in the choice of an Emperor,
ib. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
German Princes, 348. Opening of
the diet at Frankfort, 349. In whom
the elecion of an Emperor is vefied,
ib. Views of the Eletor, ib. The
Empire offered to Frederick of Sax-
ony, ib. Who rejets it, and bis rea-
sons, ib. Charles V. choen, 35i.
The capitulation of the Germtnmck
privileges confirmed by him, 35%.
Charles ets out for the Low-Coun-
tries, 357. Charles crowned at Aix
Ia Chapelle, 366. Commencement
of the Reformation there, by Martin
Luther, i. Treatment of the bull of
excommunication publified againtI
Luther, 381. The ufurptiom of the
clergy there, during the disputes con-
cerning investitures, 388. The cler-
gy of, moltly foreigners, 392. The
benefices of, nominated by the Pope
ib. The expedient of the Emperors
for restraining this power of the Pope,
inefFeaual, 393. The great progrela
of Luther's doctrines in, 464. Grie-
vances of the peafanta, S. Iafur-
rection in Suabia, So. The memo-
rial of their grievances, i. The in-
furretion quelled, 503. Another
infurredion in Thuringia, ib. How
the house of Aultria became so formi-
dable in, S16. Proceedings relating
to the Reformation there, s. Great
progrefi of the Reformation there, II.
26. Ferdinand King of Hungary and
Bohemia, brother to Charles V. clet-
ed King of the Romans, 34. The
Protestant religion eftablilhed in Sax-
ony, ot. The Protestant religion
etlablifhed in the Palatinate, 180.
The league of Smalkalde raise an ar-
my against the Emperor, 103. Are
put under the ban of the Empire, o05.
The Protestant army difperled, 1a8.
The lrim enforced by the Empe-
ror, 74. Maurice of Saxony rmifes
an army, and declares in favour of
the Protefants, 316. Maurice fa-
voured even by the Catholick Princes,
and why, 318. Treaty of Patfau, be-

tween

twe tile Emperor and Maurice
SExony, 334. Trace between th
Emperor and Henry of Prince, 405
Chrles resigns the Imperitl crown t
his brother Perdinand, 418.

G t, an insurrection tlere, n. ro5

The pretensions of the citizens, o6
Form a confederacy againif the Queen
dowager of Hungary, their governess
ib. Their deputies to the Emperor
how treated by him, 07. Offer tc
submit to France, ib. Is reduced b)
Chatles, 3.
Gbibeli stion, in Italy, view of, I.

513.
Wiror, Don Pedro de, appointed to the

eommand of the rmny of the Holy
unta, . 437. Resign his cmmnl-
ion, and Padilla replaced, 438.

OGtefrt in Africa, ten by the Emperor

Chrrles V. I. 62.
GDmaga, the mperil governor of Mi-

ahr, procures Cardlnal Farnese to be
afffrrted, and takes poffelon of
Plicenti for the Emperor, t24. Pe-
paree to seize Parmni, 296. re-
pulsed by the French, 298.

Grarsda, rTahbifhop of, preldent of the

council of Cafile, hi imprudentr ad
vice to Crdinal Adrian, relating to
the infrrre.iHob in Segovia, . 417.

Growwit, Cardinal, hib artince to pre-

vail on the count d Sncerre to iar-
render St. Dfiere to the Emperor, 11.
:66. Endeavoerato oll the Protefante
into fc~rify with regard to the Em-
peror's cund~t toward them, IBS. Is
cormirfioned by Philip to addre the
tffembly; at the Emperor' resignation
of hi hereditary dbtnirion 407.

Grao liau, ae interview there between

the Emperor Charlea V. iad Henry
YVn. of ngland, I. 365.
Orliper, canon of Colbgue, I app( inted

manager of the rotefant. and a-
tholick conferences before the diet at
Irtilbon, . 7,. Writ hn trettife
to compoe the differencm between
them, i. The fIntimenn of both
pIrtis on this work, 8.
iAFrl, the Mnrquis del, appolotedgo-
vernor of Milan, by the Elmperor, II.
*5. Procoret Ricon the tech· am-
iffidor to the Pbrte, to be mulatred
en his jpurney tither, f14. Dnda
Cirignan agdnft the rench, i6a.
Mfented'by d'tngieu in pitched
battle; iE3.

Oicciardmi; his accoin of the publicr-
don 6t lthllgons cotrdla~d, I.

f 573. Defedt Reggt n*gti* the
e French, 4. Reptl n kck

upon Pma, by te Prenchb 418.
o His fentimenta of the Pbpe'e treaty

with Larnoy viceroy of hpIles, 9.

GaiffJ, Prsacis of Lorrnin, bake of, i

made governor of Metz by Henry II.
of Prance, If. 34o. hi chr~ter,
i. Prepares to defend it epinfl the
mperor, 341. Hit brother d'Au.
mae taken prisoner by the Imperi-
*litf, 343. The Emperor raties the
iege, 345. H humnue tretment
of the diref~d rad sick OGerman left
behind, 346. Perfudes Henry to an
e alliance with Pope Pn IV. 398.

MKrches with troop into naly, 411.
Is unide to eflft ty thing, i. Is
recaTed from Itly after the defeat of
St. Qintin , 4. fl receptioe in
Frace, 437. Tke the Bm tiginfi
Philip, 438. Lve41 md ~t Cith
from the Rntlifh, 439. T'Fhe tlfo
Guifone am4 lIhed , 44. Tkes
Thionville in Luxembourg, 44

Gi/, Mary of, married to Jmet V. of

Scbitlkd, . f:. ProeIrae# t e i-
teaded murrtle betwee her'dugter
..ry, and prince Edward of Ei4and,

Gark, C~ lde, wlty e f rdthe

deeaiofCnte. V. to te aiis t
cirw, . 3 't. ignip te eCptW~ion
of the OCl~na ict bIdy o bWdf of
Chrfes; 3b.
?msr chsietllo r to' the mlper.r Per-
dE nd, i .

set te rpe Wd rI. to

notiy tl e _ctid,

e _ r~ h to fee
hbm, 44.

H

amrtw, hty of, embrces (t re
formredtEgie lg. 464.
f^;s te cade dt~, tppditWd Ii eaIn-
maul t heirmy of the Cffili adolec
tgri te ly J -nm . f. At-
ttrck nl ll., *nd . dlw pdllon
ofr QO Joutm, 439. out the
a*n of te Jut, d. tiM Pllia
priloner, wo is esecutd, 44.
Hose d , deputy fvetMr of AfIOr

ilr prtiev dit^m ~ CMion
Ritte, n. r14 h lb iel i Al-
glr by tbIhe m r C rler . r6.
IlMa te fitNeft fatll, t. T he

8Empera orrfr

be d reather to

tera~l b pe srng.

onrce. psra to fS. sl Ja -
rpa.

Heathens, ancient, why the principles of

mutual toleration were generally ad-
mitted among them, 11. 389.

Held, vice chancellor to Charles V. at-

tends the Pope's nuncio to Smakalde,
11. 99. Forms a Catholick league in
opposition to the Protelalnt one, oo.
fHry II. King of France, his motives for
declining an alliance with Pope Paul
ll. against the Emperor, II. 65.
Procures for Scotland a peaee with
England, 97. The young Queen
Mary, contlraaed to the Dauphin, and
sent to France for education, ib. En-
ters into an alliance with Odavio Far-
nefe Duke of Parma, ib. Protests
against the council of Trent, 298.
Makes alliance with Maurice Elector
of Saxony, 3.11. Seconds the opera-
tions of Maurice, 318. His army
marches and feizesMetz, 319. At-
tempts to furprize Strafburgh, 35.
Is strongly solicited to pare it, 3z6.
Returns, 37. The Emperor prepares
for war against him, 340. Inltigates
the Turks to invade Naples, 348.
Terrouane taken and demnli(hed by
Charles, 354. Refden taken, ib. Leads
an army into the Low-Countrie a gainft
Charles, 355. Endeavonrs topobftru&
the marriage of Mary of England with
Philip of Spain, 369. The progress of
his arms againit the Emperor, ib.
Engages Charles, 371. Retires, ib.
Cosmo di Medici, Duke of Florence,
makes war against him, 371. Ap-
points Peter Strozzi commander of his
army in Italy, 373. Strozzi defeated,
375. Siena taken, 376. Pope Paul
IV. makes overtures to an alliance
with him againfi the Emperor, 397.
Montmorency's arguments against this
alliance, i. Is persuaded by the
Guises to accept it, 398. Sends tlhe
Cardinal of Lorrain with powers to
conclude it, i. The Pope signs the
treaty, 400. A truce for live years
concluded with the Emperor, 409. Is
exhorted by Cardinal Caraffa, to break
the truce, 411. Is ablulved from his
oath, and concludes a new treaty with
the Pope, 413. Sendsl the Duke of
Guise into Italy, 421. The Constable
Montmorency defeated and taken pri-
loner at St. Q intin, 418. Henry pre-
pares for the defence of Paris, 429.
81. Quintin taken by alfault, 431.
Collecs his troops and negotiates for
afiftance, ib. His kind reception of
the Duke of Guise, 437. Calais ta-
ken by Cuife, 43Y. Iminowere Mont-
VOL. Jl.

morency to negotiate a peace with
Philip, 448. Honours him highly on
his return to France, ib. Writesto
Qreen Elizabeth, with propoials of
marriage, 455. How he failed in his
suit, 456. His daughter married to
Philip, and his sifter to the Duke of
Savoy, 459. Terms of the treaty of
Chateau Cambrefis, 460. The mar-
riage of his filter and daughter cele-
brated with great pomp, 461. His
death, ib.

Henry VH. of England, detains the arch-

duke Philip and his dutchess, when dri-
ven on his coalt, three months, at the
infligation of Ferdinand, I. 31 c.
Henry VIII. of England, fends an ambal-

fador to Germany to propose hisclaims
to the Imperial crown, I. 347. I
dilcouraged from his pretensions, and
takes no part with the other competi-
tors, ib. His personal character and
political influence in Europe, 360. En-
tirely guided by Cardinal Wolley, 361.
Receives a visit from the Emperor
Charles V. 364. Goes over to France
to visit Francis, 365. Wrestles with
Francis, and is thrown by him, ib.
Note. Has another interview with
Charles at Gravelines, 365. Charles
offers to submit his differences with
Francis to his arbitration, ib. Pub-
lisles a treatise on the Seven Sacra-
ments, againt Martin Luther, 403.
Obtains of the Pope the title of De-
Jfnder of the Faith, i. Takes part
with Charles against Francis, 405.
Sends Wolfey to negotiate an accom-
modation between the Emperor and
Francis, 411. Concludes a league
with Charles againit Francis, 412. His
avowed relons for this treaty, i.
His private motives, 413. Declals
war againll Francis, 41. I visited
by Charles, 41. Makes descents up-
on the coalt of France, ib. Advancea
with an army into Picaidy, 423 0-
bliged to 'retire by the Duke de Ven-
dome, ib. Entelr into a treaty with
the Emperor and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 454. How he raised sup-
plies lar his wars beyond the grantsof
his parliament, 459. bends tbe Duke
of Suffolk to invade Picardy, who pe-
nctratcs almolt to Paris, but is driven
back, b. Engages to aflilt Charlea
in an invalion of Provence, 471.
CauliC of his not upporting the Impe-
rialils, 47Z. Effels of the battle of
Pavia, and captivity fFrancis on him,
483. Particulars us his inmbiTy to
M m Charles,

Charles, 484. Concludes a defensive
alliance with France, 49. Is declar-
ed proteCtor of the league of Cognac
against the Emperor, o09. His mo-
tives for affilling the Pope againfl the
Empernr, II. 4. Enters into a league
with Francis, and renounces the Eng-
lifh claim to the crown of France, b.
Declares war againf the Emperor,
1o. Concludes a truce with the go-
vernefs of the Loss-Countries, 13.
J'rojects his divorce from Catharine of
Aragon, 21. Motiaes wh:ch with-
held the Pupe from granting it, 23.
Acquiesces in the peace of Cambray,
ib. Sends a lupply of money to the
Proteflant league in Gmany, 35.
Procures his matriage to be annulled
by Cranmer, arLhbifhop of Canter-
bury, 42. The divorce reversed by the
Pope under penalty of excommunica-
tion, 43. Renounces the Papal fupre-
macy, ib. Refufcs to acknowledge
any ccouncil called by the Pope, 54.
Oppotes James V. of Scotland marry-
ing Mary of Guise, 97. Hisdilgults
with Fiaincis and intercourse with the
Emperor, ib. Concludes a league
with Chaile, 148. Makes war with
Scotland, 149. Paiticulars of his
treaty 'ith Charles, ii. Invades
France and inveilb Boulogne, 165.
Refules the Empcror's plan of ope-
rationE, 168. Is desertvd by the Em-
reror, 171. Takes Boulogrie, 171.
His haughty propufals to Francis, ii.
Peace of Carm;e, 2o0. Is lucceeded
by his son rEilwad VI. 136. A re-
view of his policy, 469.

lertqord, earl of, plunders and burils

Edinburgh, II. 165. Joins Henry as-
ter, in his invafionb of France, ib.
Hrt, the Landgrave of, procures the re-

Itoration of hib kinImal, Ulric Duke
of Wurtemeig, II. 53. His views
compared with thole of the Elec2or of
Saxony, 185. 1 he EImperor's de-
citful prof flions to him, 191. Quiets
the alprehenfions ,f the Protellant
leaguc with regard t, the Emperor, ti.
It appointed joi.lt commander of the
army of the le.gue with the Elec-
tor of Saxony, 207. Their characters
compared, ib. Urges an attack of the
Emperor, but i oppoled by the Elec-
tr, 10o, His lettei to Mauiice Duke
of Saxony, a16. The army of the
league dilperle, z18. Is reouced to
accept harsh lerms from Charles, 51.
His hubiliating rts.cption by the lim-

peror, 253. Is detained in confine-
ment, 154. His offers of submission
(lighted by the Emperor, 73. Is
carried by the Emperor with him into
the Netherlands, 75. Renews his
endeavours for liberty, 91. Charles
releases arbitrarily the Eletor of Bran-
denburgh, and Maurice, from their en-
gagements to him, z91. Is closely
confined in the citadel of Mechlin, ib.
Obtains his liberty by the treaty of
PafTau, 334. Is arrested by theQueen
of Hungary, but freed by the Empe-
ror, 338. The effeCts of his confine-
ment on him, b.
Hlcserus, his account of Lewis XII.

Ihewn to contradiA the relations given
by Bellay and other French hilforians
of the education of Charles V. I. 312.
Notre.

Holy unta. See Junta.
Holy League, againl the Emperor Charles

V. formed at Cognac, under the pro-
tecion of Henry VIII. of England, I.
509.

Horuc, a potter's son of Lesbos, com-

mences pirate, with his brother Hay-
radin, II. 364. See Barbaro"Fa.

Hungary, is divided by Solyman the

Magnificent, and its King Lewis II.
killed, I. 55. His successes, andthe
number of prisoners carried away, i.
The archduke Ferdinand elected King
of, together with Bohemia, 526. John
Zapol Scaepius wrests it from Ferdi-
nand, 11. 130. Stephen succeeds on
the death of his father John, 131. Is
treacheroufy seized by Solyman, 133.
See I/abe/la, and Martialur;.
Jamri V. of Scotland, levies troops to

affilt Francis in Provence, but his in-
tention frultrated, 1I. 96. His ne-
gotiations for marriage with Francis's
daughter, 97. MarriebMaryofGuife,
ib. Dies, and leaves Mary his infant
daughter to succeed him, 149. See
Mary.

7Jeuit, the order of, by whom founded,

1. 409. Character of that order, ib.
Characer of Ignatio Loyola their
founder, II. 1 5. The order con-
firmed by the Pope, 16. An exami-
nation into the confiitution of the or-
der, ib. Office and power of their
general, 117. The rapid progreli of
the ordeo, 119. Engage in trade, and
eflablilh an empi e in South America,
iao. Bad tendency of the order, a .

Are

Are responsible for mo of the perni-
cious effects of Popery, since their in-
ftitution, 1a1. Advantages resulting
from their inllitution, ib. Civilize
the nativesof Paraguay, 123. Their
precautions for the independency of
their empire there, 114. How the
particulars of their government and
institution came to be disclosed, z15.
Summary of their charater, 116.

ladulgencesl in the Romilh Church, the

doctrine of, explained, I. 368. By
whom first invented, ib. Martin
Luther preaches againfl them, 370.
Writes againfl them to Albert Elec-
torof Mentz, 371. A bull issued in
favour of, 378. The sale of, opposed
in Switzerland by Zuingliui, 379.

Infantado, Duke of, his haughty resent-

ment of a casual blow on his horse, II.
105. Is proteced by the constable of
Caltile, ib.

Innocent, a young domelic of cardinal

di Monte, obtains his Cardinal's hat,
on his election to the papacy, 11. 82.

Interim, a system of theology so called,

prepared by order of the Emperor
Charles V. for the use of Germany,
11. 68. Is disapproved of, both by
Protestants and Papists, 70.

InefRitures, ufurpatiuns of the Romish

clergy in Germany, during the dil-
putes between the Emperors and
Popes, concerning, I. 389.

Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mo-

ther of Charles V visits Spain with
her hulband Philip Archduke of Aul-
tria, I. 308. Is lighted by her bult
band, 309. Her characer, ib. Is
abruptly left in Spain by her hulband,
ib. Sinks into melancholy on the oc-
cafion, and is delivered of her lecond
son Ferdinand, 31o. Her letter of
content to her father's regency of
Caflile intercepted, and herself con-
fined, 313. Made joint regent of
Castile with Ferdinand and Philip by
the treaty ,,f Salamanca, 315. Sets
out for Spain with Philip, are driven
on the coall of England and detained
three months by Henry VII. ib. Ac-
knowledged Qeen by the Cortes,
317. Her tendernelf to her hulband
in his ficknefa, and extraordinary at-
tachment to his body when dead, th.
Is incapable of government, ). Her
son Charles allumes the crown, 317.
The Cortes acknowledge her on King,
with a reservation in her favour, 339.
Her reception of Padilla the chief of
the Spanilh malecontent% 430. The

Holy Junta removed to Tordefillag the
place of her residence, 431. Relapres
into her former melancholy, ib. The
proceedings of the Holy Junta car-
ried on in her name, ib. IF seized by
the Conde de Haro, 438. Dies, after
near fifty year. confinement, 111. 353.

John Zapl Scaepius, by the afliftance of

Sultan Solyman, eflablilhes himself in
the kingdom of Hungary, II. 130.
Leaves the kingdom to his Ion Stephen,
131. See Hungary, IJabella, and Mar-
tlnuzr.i

Isabella, daughter of John II. of Calile,

and wife of Ferdinand King ot Ara-
gon, her hiltory, I. 30R. Her con-
cern at the archduke Philip's treat-
ment of her daugh'er Joanna, 309.
Her death and chararer, 310. Ap-
points Ferdinand regent of Catlile un-
der relRiiitions, 31 .

*- - daughter to Sigi mund King of

Poland. married to John King of Hun-
gary, I. 131. Her characer, h. Is
treacheroully carried with her infant
son into Transylvania by Sultan Soly-
man, 133. The government of this
province and the education of her fin
committed to her jointly with Marti-
nuzzi, 306. Is jealous of Martinuz-
zi's influence, and courts the Turks,
ib. Is prevailed on to resign Tran-
fylvania to Ferdinand, 308. Retire,
to Silesia, ib. Recovers poffeflion of
Tranlylvania, 6.
--- of Portugal, married to the Em-

peror Charles V. 1. 5oo.

Italy, consequences of the league be-

tween Pope Leo X. and the Emperor
Charles V. to, 1. 43. The cha-
racers of the Italians, Spaniards and
French, contralled, ib. State of, at
the accession of Clement VII. to
the Papacy, 460. Views of the Ita-
lian States with respect to the Empe-
ror and Francis on the expulsion of
the French from Genoa and the Mi-
lancfe, 470. Their aprchenliona on
the battle f Pavia and captivity of
Francis, 485. The principal States,
join in the Holy league against the
Emperor, 09. Arc dilgufted at the
tardinef of Francis, 513. A view of
the Ghibeline faction, ib Sentiments
of the State, of, on the peace of Cam-
bray, 11. 2i. I vililed by the Emperor
Charles 14. lhec mutives of his mo-
deration toward the tatel of, al.
A league among the ate& of, formed
by Charles, 39. Placentis granted to
Oaavio Parnele by Philip 11. of Spain,
M m I 435.

435. Tbe invefiture of Siena giv-
en by Philip toCofmo di Medici, 436.
The consequence of thele grants, ib.

Junta, Holy, a view of the confedera-

cy in Spain, fotermed, 1. 49. The
authority of Adriandifclaimed by, 430.
Removed to Tordefillas where Queen
Joanna resided, 431. Their proceed-
ings carried on in the name of Joan-
na, ii. Receives letters from Charles
to lay down their arms, with pro-
mies of pardon, 431. Remonstrance
of grievances drawn up by, 433. The
particulars of this remonltrance, tb.
Remarks on the fpiritof it, 43;. Are
intimidated from presenting it to
Charles, 436. Propose to deprive
Charles of his royalty during the life
of Joanna, b. Take the field, 437.
Charsaer of their army, ib. The
Queen seized by the Conde de Haro,
438. How they obtained money to
support their army, 439. Lose time
in negotiating with the nobles, ib.
Propose to make their peace with
Charles at the expence of the nobles,
441. Their irresolute condua, ib.
Their army defeated by Haro, and
Padilla taken prisoner, 441. Padilla
executed, ib. His letters to his wife,
and the city of Toledo, 443. The
ruin of the confederacy, 444.
Yuiis 11. Pope, observations on the pon-

tificate of, 1. 385.

- 11I. Pope, his characer, 11. 22.

Beflows his Cardinal's hat infamously,
rb. Is avere to the calling a council,
184. Summons one at Trent, i.
AIterth his supreme authority pcremp-
torily in the bull for it, 9go. Re-
pents confirming Otavio Farnele in
Parma, 196. Requires Oavio to re-
linquifh his alliance with France, 197.
The manner of his death, 385.

L

La Ckaa, a Flemilh gentleman, aflci-

ated by Charles V. with Cardinal Xi-
menes in the regency of Castile, I.

331. L.cadrty, siege of, by the Emperor
Charles V. 11. i5a. Is abandoned by
him, ib.
o.amry, mortgages the revenues of Na-

p les to upply the exigences of the
E.mperor, I. 475. Francis surrenders
himself prisoner to him at the battle
of Pavia, 480. His cautious difpo-
fal of him, 481. Delivers him up in
pursuance of the treaty of Madrid,
and rceives the Duke of Orleans and
the Dauphin, as holtages i exchange,

500. Is ent mbaffador to Francis
to require his fulfilment of the treaty
of, 5o0. Concludes a treaty with the
Pope, 519. Marches to join the Im-
peri2ilts at Rome, where the troops
refuse to obey him, 11. 5.

Lanuza, don John de, made Viceroy of

Aragon. on the departure of Charles
V. for Germany, 1. 357. Composes
the dlturbances there, 448.

Lanagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of,

hi charatier, 11. 214. Meditates sub-
verting the government of Genoa,
225. His preparations, 26. His
artful method of assembling his adhe-
rents, 227. His exhortation to them,
228. His interview with his wife,
ib. Sallies forth, 29. Andrew Do-
ria escapes, 230. Deputies sent to
know his terms, ib. Is drowned, ib.
His brother's vanity ruins their deign,
231. See Fiefc.
Laxtrec, Odet de Foix, marechal de,

the French governor of Milan, his
character, I. 414. Alienates the as-
fe'tions of the Milanese from the
Fiench, ib. Invests Reggio, but is
repulsed by Guicciardini the historian,
then governor, ib. Is excommuni-
cated by the Pope, ib. The money for
paying his troops, seized by Lonife of
Savoy, 416. I left by hisSwifs troops,
ió. Is driven out of the Milanese
territories, 417. A new body of Swifa
under him insist on giving battle to the
Imperialifis, who defeat him, 420.
The Swiss leave him, 411. Retires
into France with the residue of his
troops, ib. Delivers up the Dauphin
and Duke of Orleans, in exchange
for Francis I. as hoflages for the per-
formance of the treaty of Madrid,
5eo. Is appointed generaliflimo of
the league againf the Emperor, 11. 6.
His fuccefes in Italy, ib. Motives
which withheld him from subduing
the Milanese, 7. Obliges the Prince
of Olange to retire to Naples, .
Blockades Naples, ib. His army
wafted, and himself killed by the peli-
lence, 6.

Liaring, the revival of, favourable to

the reformation of religion, I. 396.

ti.til, a public disputation held there by

Martin Luther, and Eccius, on the
validity of the Papal authority, 1. 379.

Lit X. Pope of Rome, his characer, I.

347. His apprehensions on the Eleci-
on of an Emperor of Germany, at the
death of Maximilian, 348. His coun-
cil to the German Princes i.
GrantsCharles V. a tenth of all eccle-

fnftical

fialfical benefices in Calile, 353. Lays
Catile under an interdict but takes it
off, at the instance ofCharles, 354. His
conduc on the profpet of war be-
tween CharlesandFrancis, 360. Situ-
ation of the Papacy at his acccflion,
and his views of policy, 367. His in-
attention to Martin Luther's contro-
verfy with the Dominicans, concerning
indulgences, 374. Is inltigated against
him, and summons him to Rome, b.
Desires the Eleaor of Saxony not to
protet him, ib. Is prevailed on to
permit Luther's dotrines to beexami-
ned in Germany, b. Cardinal Caje-
tan appointed to try him, 375. Ifrues
a bull in favour of indulgences, 378. A
suspension of proceedings againfl Lu-
ther, and why, 379. Publishes a bull
of excommunication againt him, 380.
The political views of his conduct be-
tween Charles and Francis, 405.
Concludes a treaty with Francis, 406.
Concludes a treaty also with Charles,
ib. The conditions of the treaty
with Charles, 407. Its consequences
to Italy, 413. Is disappointed in a
scheme formed by Morone, chancellor
of Milan, for attacking that dutchy,
414. Excommunicates Marechal de
Foiz for his attack of Reggio, and
declaresagainft France, 415. Takes a
body of Swiss into pay, ib. The
French driven out of the Milanese,
417. He dies, 418. The spirit ofthe
confederacy broken by his death, ib.

L'~fparre, Foix de, commands the

French troops in Navarre for Henry
D'Albert, I. 408. Reduces that
kingdom, ib. His imprudent progress
into Cattile, 409. Is taken priloner
by the Spaniards, and the French
driven out of Navarre, ib.

Leoward, father, forms a scheme to be-

tray Metz to the Imperialifs,ll. 380.
Introduces soldiers clad like friars,
381. Is deteaed, ib. Is murdered
by his monks, 38z.

Levefrui, Don, his account of the mo-

tives which induced the Emperor,
Charles V. to rfign his hereditary do-
minions, II. 403. lete.

Lrwi II. King of Hungary and Bohe-

mia, his charater, 1. 5i. Is in-
vaded and killed by Solyman the Mag-
nificent, ib.

- XII. King of France, receives ho-

mageof the Archduke Philip, for the
earldom of Slanders, 1. 308. Con-
clude a treaty with him, while at
war with Ferdinand of Aragon, 310.
.Below. his niece Germaiac dic Fuix,

on Ferdinand, and concludes a peace
with him, 3 14. Loles the confidence of
Philip on that occasion, 3. Note.
Bellows his eldest daughter, already
betrothed to Charles V. to the count
of Angouleme, ib.

Ley.va, Antonio de, defends Pavia for

the Emperor against Francis, I. 475.
His vigorous defence, 476. Sallies out
at the battle of Pavia, and contributes
to the defeat of Francis, 480. Is left
governor of Milan by the Duke of
Bourbon, 17. Defeats the forces
there, II. 18. Is appointed gneralifi-
mo of the Italian League, 39. Direts
the operations of the invasion of France,
under the Emperor, 79. Dies, 84.

Literature, its obligations to the order

of Jesuits, 1. 122.

Lorereo di Medici. See Medici.
Loaife of Savoy, mother of Francis I.

of France, her character, I. 416. Her
motives for leizing the money appoint-
ed for payment of marechal Lautrec's
troops, ib. Cause of her averlion to the
house of Bourbon, 453. Her advan-
ces towards a marriage with Charles
Duke of Bourbon, rejected by him,
jb. Determines to ruin him, 454.
Infligates a law-suit againll him, for
his eltates, ib. Goes to dilTuade Fran-
cis from his intended invasion of the
Milanese, who will not wait for her,
473. 1s appointed regent di ing his
abicnce, 474. Her prudent conduc
on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity
of her son Francis, 4. Concludes a
defensive alliance with Henry VIII.
488. Ratifies the treaty of Madrid
for the recovery of her ion's liberty,
499. Undertakes, with Margaret of
Savoy, to accommodate the differences
between the Emperor and Francis,
1. 19. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, 10.

Loyda, Igaatio, commands the catlle of

Pampeluna in Navarre, and is wounded
in its defence, I. 408. H:s enthufi-
allick turn of mind, 409. The
founder of the tociety of Jelit,, lb.
I'levsilb on the Pope to eltabhlh the
order, II. 5. An exarmination into the
clnllitulion of the ordei, 16. Othi e
and power of the general, 117. The
rapid progress of the order, 119. S.e
Lorar", Cardinal of, perfuildes Henry

II of France, to acccpt the ofllferd
alliance with Pope Paul IV. and is
sent to Rome to negotiate it, II. 398.
His imprudent behaviour toward the
Dutchcrf of Vlentitui., 447.

Lsstnburgb,

Loeteoargh, Duke of, avows the opini-

ons of Luther, . 464.

Larber, Martin, the happy consequences

of the opinions propagated by him, I.
366. Attacks Indulgences, 369. His
birth and education, 370. Chosen phi-
lolbphical professor at the University of
Wittemberg, ib. Inveighs against
the publifhersof ndulgences, i. Writes
to Albert Elecor of Mentz, against
them, 371. Composes theses againf
Indulgences, ib. Is supported by the
Augultirliasi and encouraged by Fre-
derick Elecor of Saxony, 371. Isfum-
moned toRome by Pope Leo, 374. Ob-
tains of the Pope leave to have his
dotrines examined in Germany, ib.
Appears before Cardinal Cajetan at
Augiburg, 375. His resolute reply to
the peremptory order of Cajetan, to
retral his principles, ib. Withdraws
from Auglburg, and appeals from the
Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed concerning him, 376.
Appeals toageneral council, 377. The
death of Maximilan, how of service to
him, 378. Quefions the Papal autho-
rity in a public disputation, 379. His
opinions condemned by the univerfitiea
es Cologne and Louvain, ib. A bull
of excommunication publifled againf
him, 380. Pronounces the Pope to be
Antithrift, and burnt the bull, 381.
Refletions on the conduat of the
court of Rome toward him, 381. Re-
fleclions on his condua, 383. Causes
which contributed to favour his oppofi-
tion to the church of Rome, 384. Par-
ticularly to the art of Printing, 39.
And the revival of learning, 396. He
is summoned to appear at the diet of
Worms, 400. A safe condua granted
him thither, ib. His reception there,
40r. Refuses to retrac his opinions,
ib. Departs 401. An edii publilh-
ed againnf him, ib. He is seized and
concealed at Wartburg, b. Progreft
of his doltrines, tb. The university
of Paris publilhes a decree againit him,
403. Wrote against by Henry VIII.
of England, i. An'wers both, b.
Withdraws from his retreat to check
the inconsiderate eal of Carloftadius,
463. Undertake a translation of the bi-
blr, ib. Hisdocrines avowedby several
of the German P ince, 464. His mode-
rate and prudent conduac, o6. Marries
Calthrine a Boria, a nun, ib. The
great progrefa of his dottrines among
the Germanick Stater, II. 6. En-
courages the Protellants dispirited by
the Emperor's decree again him,

32. His concern at the praices of
the Anabaptifls at Munfler, 5o. I
invited to Leipfick, by Henry Duke
of Saxony, loz. His opinion of Grop-
per's treatise to unite the Poteftanta
and Catholicks, iz8. Dies, 187.
Summary of his character, 88. Ex-
trat from his last will, 19o. Note.
See Preleftaslr . A view of the ex-
traordinary effecth of his revolt from
the church of Rome, on that court,
and on Europe in general, 472.

Luxemburg, invaded oy Robert de la

Marck, lord of Bouillon, 1. 410.
Invaded and over-run by the Duke of
Orleans, II. 146. Is again invaded by
Francis, '51.

M

Madrid, trety of, between the Em-

peror Charles V. nd his prisoner
Francis I. King of France, 11. 497.
Sentiments of the publick with regard
to this treaty, 498.

Magdborg, the city of, refuses to admit

the Interim enforced by Charles V.
and prepares for defence, 11. 89.
Maurice Elector of Saxony appointed
to reduce it, 290. Is put under the
ban of the Empire, 300. The ter-
ritories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. The inhabitants
defeated in a sally, 301. Maurice of
Saxony arrives and besieges the city,
ib. Surrenders, 301. The senate
elels Maurice their burgrave, 303.

Mahmed, King of Tunis, history of his

sons, 11. 367.

Majorca, an infurreaion there, 1. 448.

Which is quelled with difficulty, iA.
The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
449.

Majity, the appellation of, alTumed by

Charles V. on his elecion to the Im-
perial crown, and taken by all the
other monarchs of Europe, I. 351.
Maliais, council of, an account of, II.

107.
Malst the ifand of, granted by the

Emperor Charles V. to the knights of
St. John, expelled from Rhodea by
the Turks, 1. 414.
Madmaoie, extirpated by ultan Selim

II. I. 344.

Mamaelaie, f aion in Geneva, so

termed, some account of, 11. 7t.

Maadl, Don John, Ferdinand'a ambaf-

fador at the Imperial court, pays hia
court to the Archduke Philip on
Queen llabella's death, I. 31. Inter-
cepta Joanna's letter of consent to

Ferdinand'a

Ferdinand's regency of Caltile, 313.
Negotiates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, 314. Declares for
Maximilian's regency on Philip's
death, 318. Is made Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and concludes an
alliance between Charles V. and Leo
X. 406. The conditions of the treaty,
ib. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to
be ele&ed Pope, 419.

Sarctllu II1. Pope, his character, II.

392. Dies, 393.

Marciano, battle of, between Peter

Strozzi, and the marquis de Marig-
nano, II. 375

Margaret of Aufiria, and Dowager of

Savoy, aunt to Charles V. undertakes
with Louise, mother of Francis I. of
France, to accommodate the differ-
ences between those two monarchs, II.
19. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, o0.

Marignano, marquis of, appointed com-

mander of the Florentine army, acting
against the French, II. 373. De-
feats the French army under Peter
Strozzi, 375. Lays siege to Siena,
ib. Converts the iege into a block-
ade, 376. Siena surrenders, i. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, 377. His troops
ordered into Piedmont by the Empe-
ror, 378.
larcl, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon,
declares war against the Emperor
Charles V. I. 410. Ravages Lux-
emburg with French troops, ib. Is
commanded to dilband his troops by
Francis, ib. His territories reduced
by the Emperor, ib.

Marftilrtt, besieged by the Imperialifis,

1. 471. Relcued by Francis, 472.
Interview and treaty there between
the Pope and Francis, II. 41.

MAartinaai, bishop of Waradin, is ap-

pointed guardian to Stephen, King of
Hungary, 11. 31. His charater, ib.
Solicits the aflillance of Sultan Soly-
man againlX Ferdinand, 131. Solyman
seizes the kingdom, 133 Is appoint-
ed to the government ofTranfylvania
and the education of the young King,
jointly with the Queen, II. 306. Nego-
tiates with Ferdinand, 307. Prevails
on the Queen to resign Tranfilvania
to Ferdinand, 308. Is appointed
governor of Transylvania, and made
a Cardinal, d. Is allinated by
Ferdinand's order, 3so.
MAfrtyr, Peter, is authority cited in

proof of the extortions of the Flcmilt
amniRftra of Chailes V. I. 40.

Mary of Burgundy, contracted to Lewis

XII. of France, but married to the
Emperor Maximilian, 1. 307.
Mary of England, her acceflion, II.

363. Receives proposals from the
Emperor Charles V. of marrying his
Ion Philip, ib. The Englilh averse
to this union, 364. The houle of com-
mons remonstrates againit the match,
ib. The articles of marriage, 365.
The marriage ratified by parliament
and compleated, 366. Re-efabliflhe
the Romish religion, 367. Perfecutea
the Reformers, ib. Invites Charles
to England on his resignation and pas-
sage to Spain, which he declines, 419.
Is engaged by Philip to affilt him in
his war against France, 425. Leviea
money by her Prerogative to carry on
the war, 46. Her neglec in the
lecurity of Calais, 438. Caais in-
vefled and taken by the Duke of Guise,
439. Dies, 455.

- daughter of James V. of Scot.

land, ucceeds to the crown an infant,
11. 149. Iscontrated to the Dauphin
of France, 264. Is educated at the
court of Fiance, 297, 447. The
marriage compleated, 447. Affumea
the title and arms of England on the
death of Mary, 456.

Maittlas, John, a baker, becomes a

leader of the Anabaptills, at Munfler,
II. 46. Seizes the city and eftabliidhe
a new form of government there, i.
Repulses the bilhop of Munfler, 48.
Is killed, ib. See Bocld and A/a-
baptjis.

Maurice, duke of Saxony, his motives

for not acceding to the Protellant
league ofSmalkalde, II. 55. Marches
to the afliltance of Ferdinand in Hun-
gary, ib. 'Hib difference with his
uncle the elector, b. His condua at
the diet of Worms, 176. Joins the
Emperor againlt the Protellants, 103.
His motives, 213. His inlidious con-
duc toward the Elecor, 214. Seizes
the elecorate ofSaxony,l 16. Saxony
recovered by the EleCor, 2at. Hit
ineffecual endeavours to reduce Wit-
temberg for the Emperor, 47. Ob-
tains pofellion of the Electorate, aSo.
Is formally invelred at the diet of
Augiburg, 270. Becomes dissatisfied
with the Emperor, az5. His motives
to dilcontent explained, ib. His
addrel and caution in his condut,
287. Enforces the lIteri in his ter-
sitories, 6b. Makes, neverthelels,
profeflious of his attachment to the

Rcformation,

Reformation, 188. Undertakes t(
reduce MaLdeburg to submit to the
Interim, b Protclts againit the
council of Trent, tb. Is commiffi-
oned by the Emperor to reduce Mag-
deburg, 9go. Joins Geosgeof Meck-
lenbuig bcit,rc Magdeburg, 301. The
city capitulates, 3o0. Begin. to in-
trigue with ount Mansfeldt, b. Is
elcdcd Burgravc of Magdlebuig, 303.
Dilmitfes his troops, 304. His ad-
drcis in amufiig the Emperor, 305.
Makes an alliance with Henry II. of
Fianle, to make war on the Empe-
ror, 31 . Makes a formal requisition
of the l.an!grave's liberty, 313. Joins
his trools. nild publilhes a manilerfo,
317. Take. polleflion of Auplburg
and other cities, 318. An ineffetual
negotiationi with Charles, 319. Dc-
feat a bod) of the Emperor's troop,,
321. Takes the caltle of Ehrenburg,
rb. Is retarded by a mutiny in his
troops, 322. Enters Infpruck, and
narlowly mile, taking Charles, 33.
A negotiation between him and Ser-
dinand, 38. Belieges Frankfort on
tht Maine, 331. His inducements to
an acuninmdation, 333. Signs a
tiealy with the Emperor at Palrau,
334. Reficionsonhi, c.ndua in this
sar, it. Malthes into Hungary to
oppose the Tuil., 337. Is placed at
the head of the league againlt Albeit
of Brandenburg, 351. Defeats Al-
bert, but is killed in the battle, i.
Hib charaaer, 351. Is luteedcd by
his brother AuguftuE, 353.

Maximiltai, Emperor of Germany,

claims the regency of Castile on his
Ion Plilip's death, I. 318. L ful,-
ported in hibs laim by Don John
Manuel, b. Loles it, 319. Obtains
the government ot the Low-Countries
by the death of Philip, 3. Ap-
points William de Croy, lord of
Chievies, to luperintend the education
of his giandlon Charles, rb. Con-
cludes a peace with France and Venice,
336. Diew, 343. State of Europe at
this peiri(o, ib. His endeavours to
Iccut e the Imperial crown to his grand-
son Charles, b. How obllruaed,
344.

XMcIk/albrgl , George of, invades the

tcrritories l Magdeburg for the Em-
peror, II. 300. Defeats the Mag-
deburghcrs, who filly out on him,
301. Ik j.lilcl by Maurice of Sax-
ony, who alluancs the 'upicmc comn
maaud, .

TO THE
Medicio, John James. See Mrarignar.
e Medici, Alexander, restored to the do-

minions of Florence, by the Empe-
ror Charles, I1. 6. Is affaflinated,
94.

MIledici, Cardinal di, elected Pope, and

assumes the title of Clement VIl. I.
457. See Clement VII.

Medici, Catharine di, is married to

the duke of Orleans, II. 42. Is con-
jectured, by the Emperor Charles V.
to have poiloned the Dauphin, 87.

Medici, Colmo di, made duks of Flo-

rence, 1. 95. Is supported by the
Emperor, and defeats the partizan&
of Lorenzo, 96. Asserts his indepen-
dency againlt the Emperor, II. 346.
Offers to reduce Siena for the Empe-
ror, 37a. Enters into a war with
France, ib. See Marignane. Hisad-
dress in procuring the invefliture of
Siena from Philip II. of Spain, 435.
It is granted to him, 436.

Medici, Lorenzo di, assassinates his

kinlman Alexander, 11. 94. Flies, 95.
Attempts to oppose Cosmo, but is te-
feated, ib.

Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of,

refuse to let Fonleca take the mili-
tary flores there, for the siege of the
insurgents in Segovia, I. 417. The
town almost burnt by Fonseca, 48.
The inhabitants repulle him, ib. Sur-
renders after the battle of Villalar,
and diflolution of the Holy Junta,
444.

Melianclhes, imbibes the opinion of

Martin Luther, I. 38. Is employ-
ed to draw up confeflion of faith
by the Protestant Princes at the diet
of Augsburg, 11. 30 Is dejeced by
the Emperor's decree againit the
Prtellants, but comforted by Lu-
ther, 32. Is invited to Paris by Fran-
ch, 68. His conference with Ecki-
us, 127. Is prevailed on to favour
the Interin enforced by the Emperor,
187.

Meltli, Conde de, made viceroy of

Valencia, on the departure of Charlec
V. for Germany, 1. 357. Appoint-
ed to command the troops of the
nObles againlt the Germanada, 447.
Deceated by them in several aclious,
rb. Defroys the association, tb.

Mrtas, archbilhcp of, artfully declares

before the Emperor, the diet of
Augsburg's acceptance of the late-
rim, without being authorized by it,
11. "69.

Merwili,

Meroeille, a Milanese gentleman, em-

ployed as envoy from Francis I. to
Francis Sforza, duke of Milan, his
fate, 11. 67.

AMet, seized by Montmorency the

French general, 11. 310. The duke
of Guise made governor of, 340.
Is besieged by the Emperor, 34z.
The Emperor defillt, and retires in
a diflreffed condition, 345. A Icheme
formed by father Leonard to betray
the city to the Imperialists, 380.
The conipiracy deteaed by the go-
vernor, 381. Leonard murdered by
his monks, and his associates exe-
cuted, 382.

Mezserel, in France, besieged by the

Imperialists, 1. 410. Gallant de-
fence of, by the chevalier Bayard,
411. The siege raised, b.

Milan, marechal d Foix appointed to

be the French governor of, 1. 414.
His character, b. The Milanese
alienated from the French by his op-
preflions, ib. Invaded by the eccle-
fiaftical troops under Prosper Colon-
na, 415. The French driven out,
417. Oppressed by the Imperial
troops, 451. Invaded by the French,
456. Who are driven out by Co-
lonna, 457. The Imperial troops
there mutiny for pay, but are ap-
peased by Morone, 461. Abandoned
by the French, ib. Over-run again
by Francis, who ieizes the city, 474.
The French retire on news of the
battle of Pavia, 481. The invelli-
ture of, granted to Sforza, 489.
Taken from him and granted to the
duke of Burbon, 495. Disorders
committed by the Imperial troops
there, 508. Oppreflive melures of
Bourbon to supply hib mul nous troops,
l6. The French forces there de-
reated by Antonio de IAyva, 11. 18.
Is again granted by the Emperor to
Sforia, 25. Death of Sforza, 74.
The pretensions of Francis to that
dutchy, .ib Is seized by he Empe-
ror, i. The marquis dl Guallo ap-
pointed governou, 85

Mbhars, battle of, between olyman

the Magnificent, and the HungarianL,
I. 515.

Maenfl, orders, enquiry into the fun-

damental principles of, II. 116. Pe-
culiar conltitution of the order of Je-
fult, it
Mre.,/a., Don nogo di, the Imperial

aml..,.idur at lt(.<-, hIm intrigues
with-t.aidinal Culuna ainilllt Pope
Vi.. 11.

Clement, I. 514. Reduces the Pope
to an accommodation, 515. Is de-
feated and killed by Andrew Doria
in a naval engagement before the
harbour of Naples, II. 13.
Msnluc, is ent by the count d'Enguien

to Francis for permiflion to give battle
to the Marquis de Guafto, 11. 162.
Obtains his luit by his pirited argu-
ments, 163. Commands in Siena,
when besieged by the Marquis de
Marignano, 375. His vigorous de-
fence, 376. Is reduced by famine,
and capitulates, ib.

Mcnte Alcino, numbers of the citizens

of Siena retire thither after the re-
duaion of that city by the Floren-
tines, and etabliil a free govern-
ment there, II. 377-
fMsnrecuculi, count of, accused and tor-
tured for poisoning the Dauphin,
charges the Emperor with instigating
it, II. 86.

Montmorency, Marechal, his charater,

11. 81. Francis adopts his plan for
resitting the Emperor, and commits
the execution to him, ib. His pre-
cautions, i. His troops despise his
conduct, 83. Observations on his
operations, 85. Is disgraced, 144-
Condu6s the army of Henry II. to
join Maurice of Saxony, and leizes
Metz, 30. Difruades Henry from
accepting the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. 397. Commands the
French army against the Duke of
Savoy, 427. Detaches D'Andelot to
relieve St. Quintin, 418. Expofle
himielf imprudently to an action,
and i defeated, ib. Is taken pri-
soner, 49. Negotiates a peace be-
tween Philip and Henry, 448. Re-
turns to France, and is highly ho-
noured by Henry, ib. His afiduity in
forwarding the negotiations, 457 His
expedient for promoting the treaty of
Chateau Cambrefis, 459.

Moanprlier, a fruitless conference hell

theic or the reflitution of the king-
dlom of Navarre, I. 342.

MoPoIn, Jrom, chancellor of Milan,

his character, I. 414. Retires from
the French exactions in Milan to
Francis Sforza, b. His intrigues
how rendered abortive, b. Quieta
the mutiny of the Imperial troops in
Milan, 461. Is dilgulled with the
behaviour of Charles, 489. Intriguea
againn the Emperor with Pcflara,
490. Is betrayed to the Emperor by
l'clcara, 491. Ii arrclted at hi viit
N to

to Pescara, ib. Is et at liberty by
the Duke of Bourbon, and becomes
his confident, 516.
Mloufon, in France, taken by the mperi-

alills, I. 411. Retaken by Francib,
ib.
Mulhanfen, battle of, betvween the Em-

peror Charles V. and the Eleor of
Saxony, II. 244.
JMuley Hafcen, king of Tunis, his in-

human treatment of his father and
brothers, 1I. 58. Is expelled by Bar-
barofTa, 59. Engages the Emperor
Charles V. to restore him, 60. Is
eftabiilied again by the surrender of
Tunis, 64. His treaty with Charles,
ib.

Ajuncer, Thomas, a diifciple of Luther,

oppoles him vith fanatical notions, I.
r03. Heals the ifurrecion of the
peasants i Thuringia, 504. H ex-
travagant fchemet, b. Is defeated
and put to death, 5o5.

Munster, the firrt ecttlement of the

Anabaptilts in that city, 11. 46. The
city eized by them, b. They elta-
blilh a new form of government there,
ib. Is called Mount Sion, ib. The
bishop of, repulsed by them, 48. Is
blockaded' by the biliol, 50 The
city taken, 5i. See Aabapt;jti.

Aturder, the plices of compolition for,

by the Romish clergy, I. 388.

AM/lapha, the declarea heir to Sultan

Solyman the Magnificent, is ivefted
with the adniillration ot Din, be-
quil, II. 38. Hib father rendered
jealous o bib populal ity, by the arts
of Roxalana, 359. Is firangled by
his father's order, 361. His only
fou murdered, 361.

N

oapleJ, the revenues of, mrtgaged by
Lannoy to supply the lEmpelor in his
exigencis, 1. 475. Invadedi by the
French under the Duke of Albany,
477. Invaded by Pope Clement
VII. 517. Treaty between the l'olbe
and L.annny viceroy of, 519. The
Prince of Orange ictreath thither
before Lautie, 11. I1. Is blockaded
by Lautec, b. Sta engagement in
the habuur of, between Andrew Do-
ria nd Moucada, 3. Causfe which
dlifappointed the French operations
ugailt, ib. Doiil revelt, and opens
the communication by ser again, iS. C
OpleflIed by the Sipnifl viceroy Don
Padro d Toledu, bcomes dilaficed

TO THE

to the Emperor Charles V. 348. I1
harassed by a Turkish fleet, b.

NVafau, count of, invades Bouillon at

the head of the Imperialists, 1. 410.
Invades France, takes Moufon, and
besieges Mezieres, but is repulsed,
ib.

Na'varre, the kingdom of, unjufily ac-

quired by Ferdinand of Aragon, I.
30o. D'Albert's invasion of, defeated
by Cardinal Ximenes, 333. Its castle
difrnantled, except Pampeluna, which
Ximeneb firengthens, ib. Invaded by
Francis I in the name of Henry
D'Albert, 408. Reduced by L'Es-
parre, the French general, 409. The
French drisen out by the Spaniards,
and 'Efparre taken prisoner, ib.

Netberlands, the government of, first

assumed by Charles V. 1. 33. The
Flemings averle to Charles's going
to Spain, 336. Invaded by Francis I.
king of France, 411. A truce con-
cluded with the governess of, by
Henry VIII of England, II. 13. In-
vaded by Francis again, 88. A sus-
pension of arms there, b. An in-
furretion at Ghent, ioS. See Ghent.
Is once more invaded by Francis, 1 5
Resigned by the Emperor to his son
Philip, 404. A review of the altera-
tions in, during the sixteenth century,
480.

Nice, a truce for ten years concluded

there between the Emperor and Fran-
cis, II. 9. Beficged by the French
and Turks, 53.
'tyen, treaty of, between Charles V.
and Francit I. of France, 1. 335
The terms of, neglected by Charles,

359. lucrembargh, the city of, embraces the
reformed religion, 1. 464. Diet of,
particulars of Pope Adrian's brief to,
reflecting the reformers, ib. The
reply to, 465. Prolpoes a general
council, ib. Presents a lift of grie-
vances to the Pope, 466. The recess,
or edit, of, 467. This diet of great
advantage to the reformers ib. Pro-
ceedings of a lecood diet there, 468.
Recess of the diet, 460. An accom-
modation agreed to there, between
the Emperor Charles V. and the Pro-
tenants, 11. 36.

0

3ran, and other lacea in Barbary, rn-

nexed to the crown of Cltile b Xi-
eCucs, 1. 39.

Orange, Philibert de Chalons, prince

of, general of the Imperial army on
the death of the duke of Bourbon,
takes the castle of St. Angelo, and
Pope Clement VII. prisoner, 1. 514.
Retires to Naples on the approach of
Lautrec, II. 12. Takes his fuccelfor,
the marquis de Saluces, priloner t
Averfa, 16.

Orleans, duke of, delivered up to the

Emperor Charles V. with the Dau-
phin, as holtages for the performance
of the treaty of Madrid, I. 5oo.
Is married to Catharine di Medici,
11. 41. Becomes Dauphin by the
death of his brother, 87. Sec Dau-

-- Duke of, brother to the for-

mer, commands the army appointed
by Francis I for the invasion of Lux-
embourg, II. 145. Is prompted by
envy to abandon his conquests, and
join his brother the Dauphin in Rou-
fillon, 146. Dies, 178.

p P

Pachero, Donna Maria, wife to Don

John de Padilla, her artful cheme
to raise money to supply the army of
the Holy Junta, I. 439. Her hul-
band taken prisoner and executed,
441. His letter to her, 443. Raises
forces to revenge his death, 444. s
reduced and retires to Portugal, 446.

Fadilla, Don John de, his family and

chara&er, 1. 416. Heads the infur-
re&ion at Toledo, b. Routs the
troops under Ronquillo, 417. Calls
a convention of the malecontents at
Avila, 430. Forms the confeleracy
called the Holy Junta. #b. Dil-
claims Adrian's authority, ib. Gets
polTeflion of Queen Joanna, ib. Re-
moves the Hly .Junta to Tordefillas,
the place of her residence, 431. Sent
with troops to Valladolid, and de-
pi ives Adrian of all power of govern-
ment, lb. I fuperleded in the com-
rnand f the army of the Junta, by
Don Pedro de (Giron, 437. Is ap-
pointed commander at the refignatiin
of Giron, 439. His army lulplied
with money by an expedient of his
wife, ib. Besieges Torrelobaton, 441.
Takes and plunders it, >b. Con-
cludes a truce with the noblec, $b.
Is wounded and taken priloner in an
acion with the conde de Harr, 441.
Is put to death, ib. His letter to his
wife, 443. Hi letter to the city of
Toledo, lb.

Palatinate, the Reformation eftablifled

there by the Elecor Frederick, II.
180

Palatine, count, ambassador from the

diet at Franckfort, brings Charles V.
the offer of the Imperial crown, which
he accepts, I. 353.

Pampeluna, cafile of, in Navarre, its

fortifications strengthened by Cardi-
nal Ximenes, 1. 333. Taken by
L'Efparres the French general for
Henry D'A!hert, 409. Retaken by
the Spaniards, ib.

Papacy. how liable to be afte&ed by

the disposal of the Imperial crown,
I. 348.
'aragsay, a fovcreignty cflahllihed there,

by the order of Jeluits, 11. ti7. The
inhabitants of, civilized by them, 113.
Precautions uled by the Jesuits to pre-
lerve the independency of their em-
pire there, 124.

Paris, a decree published by the uni-

verfity of, again;i Martin Luther the
Reformer, 1. 403. A decree of the
parliament of, pblifled against the
Emperor CharlesV. 11. 87.

Parma, the dutchy o, confirmed to

Octavio Farncle, by Pope Julius III.
11. 196. Is attacked by the Imperi-
alil!f, and fuccelsfully protected by
the Fiench, 98.

Paffau, a treaty concluded there be-

tween the Emperor Charles V. and
Maurice of Sax,,ny, I. 34. Re-
flecuions on this pace, and the con-
duel of Maurice, tb.

Pavra, belieged ly Francis I. of France,

1 475 Vigooufly dlefendled by An-
toniu de Leyva, 476. Battle of, be-
tween Francis and the Duke of B,,ur-
bon, 479. The Imperial troops in
that city mutiny, 485.

Panl Ill. Pope, eleacrl, II. 43, Hia

characer, 44. P. opofe a genclal
council to be held at Mantua, 54-
Negotiates perlonally between the
''mlperor and Francis, 91. Ilfues a
bull fr a council at Mantus, 98.
Prorogues and trantifrs it to Vicenta,
99. A paitial reformitiin ojf abules
by, oo. Summons the council of
Trent, 156. Prorogues it, 157.
Suiinmonh it again, 174. Grants the
dutthtes of ainia and Placentia to
his illegitimate ion, 179. Deprives
and excommunicates the lctairsl hi.
fnlp ot Cologne, 191. Preifes the
Elmperor to declare ag.inll the Pro.
tctants, 193. Concludes an alliance
N n with

with him againfl the Protestants, 197.
Indiscreetly publishes this treaty, 199.
His troops join the Emperor, 208.
Recalls them, 222. Removes the
council from Trent to Bologna, a61.
Refuses the Emperor's request to
carry the council back to Trent, 61.
His resentment gainft the Emperor
for the murder of his fun Cardinal
Farnese, 64. Is petitioned by the
diet of Augsburg for the return of
the conncil to Trent, 65. Eludte
the complying with this requefl, 266.
His sentiments of the Interim pub-
lifhed by Charle,, 71. Dismisses
the council of Bologna, 275. An-
nexes Parma and Placentia, to the
Holy See, 80. Dies, ib. The
manner of his death inquired into, ib.
Note.

Paul IV. Pope, eleted, II. 393. His

charaaer and hiflory, ib. Founds
the order of Theatincs, 394. Is the
principal occasion of ellabliihing the
inquisition in the Papal territories,
ib. Lays aside his austerity on his
fleaion, 395. His partiality to his
nephews, ib. Is alienated from the
Emperor by his nephews, 396. Makes
overtures to an alliance with France,
397. Is enraged by the recef of
the diet of Auglburg, 399. Signs
a treaty with France, 400. Is
included in the truce for five years,
concluded between the Emperor and
Henry, 409. His insidious artifices
to defeat this truce, 410. Absolves
Henry from his oath, and concludes
a new treaty with him, 415. His
violent proceedings againl Philip,
now King ofSpain,ib. TheCampag-
ra Romana seized by the Duke d'Al-
va, ib. Concludes a truce with Alva,
416. Contralt between his condut
and that ofCharles, 411. Renews his
hoRlilities againA Philip, 4211 Is un-
provided for military operations, 423.
Is reduced to make peace with Philip,
by the recall of the Duke of (;uile as-
ter the defeat of St. Quintin, 434.
Receives an ambafrador from the Em-
peror Ferdinand to notify his election,
but refulia to fee him or to acknow-
ledge the Emperor, 441. Dies,
461.

fPisli, a French officer, sent ambaffa-

dor from Francis I. to Sultan Sol)-
man, 11. '1o. His fucciclul nego-
tiatinns at the Porte, ib.

Pembroke, earl of, sent by Queen Mary
of England with a body of men to

join the Spanish army in the Low.
Countries, 11. 46.

Prrpignan, the capital of Roussillon,

besieged by the Dauphin of France,
II. 145. The siege raised, 146.

Pfrcara, marquis de, takes Milan by

aftault, 1.417. Drives Bonnivet back
to France, 461. His generous car
of the chevalier Bayard, 461. Com-
mands in the invasion ot Provence,
471. Besieges Marleilles, ib. His
army retires towards Italy, on the
appearance of the F ench troops,
47. Resigns Milan to the French,
474. Prevails on his Spanish troops
not to murmur at present for their
pay, 475. Contributes to the d feat
of Fiancis at thc battle of Pavia, 480.
Is disgusted at Francis being taken to
Spain, wirhout his concurrence, 490.
His resentment inflamed by Morone,
ib. Betrays Morone'. designs to the
Emperor, 492. Arrest Morone, ib.
Dies, 495

Philtp, Archduke of Autiria, and fa-

ther of Charles V. visits Spain, with
his wife Joanna, 1. 308. Does ho-
mage by the way to Lewis Xll. of
France for the earldom of Slanders,
ib. His title to the crown acknow-
ledged by the Cortes, 309. Is dif-
gusted with the formality of the Spa-
nifh court, ib. Ferdinand becomes
jealous of his power, ib. Slights his
wife, ib. His abrupt departure from
Spain, 310. Passes through France,
and enters into a treaty with Lewis,
ib. Hib entiments on Ferdinand's ob-
taining the regency of Calile, 312.
Requirer Ferdinand toretire to Ara-
gon, and resign his regency of Caf-
tile, ib. The regency of Castile
veiled jointly in him, Ferdinand and
Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
315. Sets out for Spain, and is dri-
ven on the coaf of England, where
he is detained three months by Henry
VII. b. Arrives atCorunna, b. The
Caflilian nobility declare openly for
him, b. Ferdinand resigns the re-
gency of Calile to him, 316. Inter-
view between them, b. Acknow-
ledged King of Carile by the Cortes,
317. Dies, ib. Joanna's extraor-
dinary conduo in regard to his body,
>b. See Yaooioa.

Phli:p, P ince, Ion to the Emperor

Charles V. his right of succession
recognized by the Cortes of Aragon
and Valencia, 11. 147. Is acknow-
ledged by the States of the Nether-

landrs

lands, 177. His deportment dif-
guats the Flemings, ib. His charac-
ter, 94. Is married to Mary Queen
of England, 365, 366. The Englilh
parliament jealous of him, 368. His
father resigns his hereditary dmini-
onsto him, 400. Is called by his fa-
ther out of England, 404. The cere-
mony of invefling him, ib. His fa-
ther's address to him, 406. Commis-
sions cardl al Granville to address the
afembly in his name, 407. Mary
Queen-dowager of Hungary resigns her
regency, b. The dominionsof Spain
resigned to him, ib. His unpolitenels
to the French ambassador Coligni,
409. Note. The Pope's violent pro-
ceedings against him, 413. His
scruples concerning commencing hol-
tilities against the Pope, 414. His
ungrateful neglea in payiag his fa-
ther's pension, 420. The Pope re-
news hoflilities againit him, 412.
Assembles an army in the Low-Coun-
tries against France, 425. Goes -
ver to England to engage that king-
dom in the war, ib. Visits the
camp at St. Quintin, after the vic-
tory, 430. Opposes the f.heme of
penetrating to Paris, and orders the
siege of St. Quintin to be profecut-
ed, ib. St. Quintin taken by as-
fault, 431. The small advantages
he reaped by these successs, 432.
Builds the Escurial in memory of
the battle of St. Q intin, 433.
Concludes a peace with the Pope,
434. Restores Placentia to Oaavio
Farnese, 435. Grants the inveRti-
ture of Siena to Cosmo di Medici,
436. Enters into negotiations fur
peace with his prisoner Montmoren-
cy, 448. Death of Queen Mary,
454. Aldrelles her fuccelfor Eliza-
beth for marriage, 455. Elizabeth's
motiveh for rejeting him, 456. Her
evasive answer to him, 457. Sup-
plants his Ion Don Carlos, nad rmal-
ries Henry'b daughter Eliiza',th,
459. Articles of the treaty of Cha-
teuu Camhrefis, 460.

Phullibert, Emmauuci, Duke of Sa-

voy. Sre Savoy.

Philpino, nephew to Andre Doria,

dctecat Moncada in a sea tirgagr-
ment before the harbour of Naplcs,
II. i3.

Piadena, marquis de, invades Tran-

fylvania fur FLrdinand, II. 3c7.
Milreprelents Cardinal Martiinuzi
to Feriinald, and oibtinb a uinelil-

sion to afaffrnate him, 309. Is for-
ced to abandon Tranlylvania, 36.

Picardy, invaded by Henry VI. I.

423. Henry forced by the Duke de
Vendone to retire, ib. Invaded
again under the Duke of Sufloik,
459. Who penetrates almolt to Pa-
ris, but i d ven back, ib. Ineffecu-
al invalinn b) the Impc ialills, II. 85.

Placentia, the dlutchy ot, granted tge-

ther with that f Parma by Pope Paul
11. to his natural fun, Cardinal Far-
nefe, II. 179. Farnese afraflinated
there, 263. I taken poffefi.on of by
the Imperial troops, 264. Rellored to
Ocavio Farnele, by Philip II. of Spain,
435-

Ple, Cardinal, arrives in England with a

legantine commiflion, II 37. En-
deavours to mediate a prae betweeq
the Emperor and the King of France,
without luccels, 381. I1 recalled from
the court of England, by Pope Paul
IV. 41.

Printing, its effe&s on the progress of the

Reformation, 1. 395.

Pague, its privileges abridged by Ferdi-

nand King of Bohmria, 11. .59.

Protiefants, the derivation of the name,

11. 9. Of whom they originally con-
fillcd, b. A severe decree publilhed
againll them by the Emperor, 31.
The) elter nto a league, 3. See
Smnalalde. Renew their league, and
apply to Francis King of France, and
Helmy V11. of England, tor roteci-
on, 34. Are frcrell) ectraged by
Francis, b. Receive a lulpply ofmo-
ncy frim Henry, 35. Terms of the
pacification ageced to bet cen them
and the Eimpeclr at Nulmburg, 30.
Atlilt the Emra:cn, r agaitli tlh Tlurk,
37. Their ngt;itiati n with the Pope,
relative 1, a general counc;!, 38. Re-
new the league of Smalkalde for ten
years, 55. The motives for refusing
to aflilt the King of France againll the
E mpe or, 69. Reftle to acknowledge
the council ummoned Ity the ope at
Mantua, 99. A conference etween
their prio lpal di ines and a deputation
of Cathohliks, a RatiNiLn, 1.7. Thia
confrce hw Iendei trl Iruilelis 129.
Obtain a private grait tiun Charles in
their aour, 130. rovc theDukeof
BrunlwiLci from hi dlnmiliiuns, 157.
All ligo. ou eCtlith againit tilem Iul-
pelded by a retets of the diet of Spires,
16C Their remonllraiiLus to Ferditand
at tie diet of Wormr, 175. Their In-
Hixiblc adhcrence to the recefl of

Tpite',

Spires, i. Disclaim all connection
with the council of Trent, 176. Are
(rengthened by the acceflion of Frede-
rick Eletor Palatine, 180 Are alarm-
ed at the proceedings of the Emperr,
183, 196. The Emperor leagues with
the Ppe againlt them, 197. Pre-
pare to refil the Emperor, 2oo. Levy
an army, 20t. The operations of the
army diftrated by the joint comman-
ders, o07. The army dispersed, 1 I .
The Elecor of Saxony reduced, 45.
The Landgravedeceived b treaty and
confined, a54. The Emperor's cruel
treatment of them, 157. The lnterim,
a fylRem of theology recommended by
the Emperor to the diet at Augf(urg,
269. Are promised protection by the
Emperor at the council of Trent, 191.
The Emperor proceeds rigorouly a-
gainft them, 299. Their deputies ob-
tain a fafe-condut from the Emperor,
but are refused by the council, 305.
Maurice of Saxony raises an army in
theircaufe, 37. See Maurice. Trea-
ty of Paflau, 334. The Protestant
Princes again unite to flrengthen the
Protestant interefl, 387. Recess of the
diet of Auglfurg on the subjec ofreli-
gion, 388. Why originally averse to
the principles of toleration, 391.

fPrvece, is laid wafe by the marechal

Montmorency on the approach of the
Emperor Charles V. 11. 81. Is en-
tered by the Emperor, 8. The dif-
altrous retreat ot the Emperor from,
85.

Pr jssd, when conquered by the Teuto-

nick order, I. So6. Is erected into a
dutchy, and finally into a kingdom,
and enjoyved by the houle of Brandea-
burgh, 507.

R

Ratli/lo, a conference between a depu-

tation of rotcftant and Catholick di-
vines, hbfore the mperor and diet
there, 11. 1a7. This conterence how
rendered fruitless, 9. A diet open-
ed theri by the Emperor, 194.
The Catholic members o, aert the
atilhrity of the couiil ot T ent, 195.
The Protelfant prelent a memorial a-
gainft it, *b. The Prutellant dpu-
ties ietire, 197.

ReftermatIou, in ltligion, the lisr of, ex-

plained, I. 366. Tlie ilit at Wns
called by Charles V. o check the prn-
gref 1iI it, ib. Account f Mar-
tin Iutlhel, the Reformer, 369. lr-
ginnoig of it n witearland ty uingli-

us, 379. State of in Germany, at the
arrival of CharlesV. 381. Refleaion
on the conduct of the court of Rome
toward Luther, 381. And on Lu-
ther's condu&t, 383. Inquiry into
the causes which contributed to
the progress of, 384. Observations on
the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius 1I. 385. The immoral lives of
the Romish clergy, 386. The progreft
of, favoured by the invention of print-
ing, 39. And the revival of learn-
ing, 396. The great progrels of, in
Germany, 464. \dvantages derived
to, from the diet at Nuremburgh, 467.
Its tendency in favour of civil liberty,
503. The dissensions between the
Emperor and the Pope, favourable to,
526. The great spread of, among the
German Princes, II. y. The consef-
son of Augiburg drawn up by Melanc-
thon, 30. Causes which led to that
of England, 4. The excesses it
gave rife to, 44. See Proteflatsl,
Manrice, and Smalkalde. I eflablilh-
ed in Saxony, loz. The gicat alte-
ration occafiooed by, in the court of
l'ome, 471. Contributed to im-
prove both the morals and learning of
the Romilh church, 476.

Reggia, inveled by the French, who are

repulsed by the governor Guicciardini
the hitlorian, 1. 414.

Remenfirance of grievances drawn up by

the Hly Junta, the particulars of,
I. 433 Remarks on, 435.

Reverje, a deed so called, signed by the

arch-duke Ferdinand on bei.g eleced
King of Bohemia, 1. 516.
Rheggo, plundered and burnt by Barba-

roula, II. 153.

Rosdes, the island of, besieged by Soly-

man the Magnificent, 1. 413. Taken
by him, 44. The iand of Malta
granted to the knights of, by the Em-
pelor Charles V. ib.

Richliru, Cardinal, his remarks on De

Retz's hiltory of Fielco's conspiracy,
II. a3. Note.

Rtiacr, the French ambafador at the

PI'ote, the motives of his return to
Fiance, II. 141. Is murdered in hia
journey back to Constantinople, by or-
der of the Imperial governor of the
Milanele, 143.

Rom, refletions on the conduc of the

c.urt of, respecting the proceedings
against Martin Luther, . 31. The
exorbitant wealth of the church of,
p;evioua to the Reformation, 388.
Venality of, 394. How it drained

other

other countries of their wealth, ib.
The city seized by Cardinal Colonna,
and Pope Clement VII. besieged in the
cafile of St. Angelo, 5i4. The city
taken by the Imperialists, and Bour-
bon killed, 513. Is plundered, ib.
The great revolution in the court of,
during the sixteenth century, 11. 471.
How affeaced by the revolt of Luther,
ib. The spirit of its government
changed by, 474.

Ronquillo, sent by Cardinal Adrian with

troops to fupprels the infurretion in
Segovia, I. 417. Is routed by them,
ib.

Rovere, Francesco Maria de, reflored to

his dutchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian,
I 450.
Rsxalana, a Ruffian captive, becomes the

favourite mistress of Sultan Solyman
the Magnificent, II. 357. Her only
daughter married to Rulan the Grand
Vifier, i. Procures herself to be
declared a free woman by the Sultan,
358. Is formally married to him, ib.
Renders Solyman jealous of the virtues
of his son Muftapha 359. Muftapha
Rrangled, 361.

Ruar, Grand Vifier to Solyman the

Magnificent, is married to his daughter
by Roxalana, 1I. 357 Enters into
Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muftapha, ib. Is lent with an
army to destroy him, 360. Draws
Solyman to the army by false reports,
361.

S

Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand

of Aragon, and his fon-in-law Philip,
1. 315.

Satler, Prince of, heads the difaffeaed

Neapolitans, against the opprefiiuns of
the viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, II.
348. Solicits aid from Henry 11. of
France, who innigates the Turks to
invade Naples, rb.

Solaces, marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in

the command of the French army be-
fore Naples, 11. 16. Retires to
Averfa, where he is taken prisoner by
the Prince of O ange, b. Betrayb his
charge in Piedmont, 80.

sancrre, count de. defends St. Difier,

againlt the Emperur Charles, I1. 165.
Is deceived intoafurrender by the Car-
dinal Granvelle, 166.

Sanv'g, a Fleming, made chancellor of

Caltile by Charles, on the death of
Ximenes, I. 340. His extortion, ib.
av4Una, is fortilied, and it harbour clear-
ed bythe Frenh to favour its rivallhip
with Gaua, II. 14.

Savoy, a view of the (late of, during the

sixteenth century, 11. 479.

Charles Duke of, marries Bea-

trix f Portugal, sifter to the Emperor
Charles V. 11. 70. The caule of
Francis's dilplealure against him, ib.
His territories overrun by the French
troop,, 71. Geneva recovers its li-
berty, 7. His fituationby the truce
at Nice, between the Emperor and
Francis, 93. Is besieged at Nice,
by the French and Turks, 153

---- Emmanuel Phillibert Duke of,

appointed by Philip of Spain to com-
mand his a my in the Low-Counties,
II. 416. Invellts St. Quintin, ib. De-
feats D'Ande!ot in an endeavou to
join the garrilun, 48. But doer
not hinder him from entering the
town, ib. Defeats the Conllable
Montmorcncy, and takes him pri-
soner, 419. Is graciously visited inthe
camp by Philip, 430. Takes St.
Quintin by alault, 431. Affitts Mont-
morency in negotiating peace between
Philip and Henry, 448. Marries Hen-
ry's sifter Elizabeth, 459, 461.
axony, Eletlor of, appointedjoint com-
mander of the army of the Protetlant
league, with the landgrave of Hcfe,
11. 107. Their characters compared,
ib. Opposes the Landgrave's inten-
tion of giving battle to the Emperor,
a 0. His Electorate eized by Maurice,

1 6. The army of the league dil-
perle, 218. Recovers Saxony, zl.
Is amuled by Maurice with a negotia-
tion, ib. Raises an army to defend
himielf against the Emperor, 14.
Is irrelolute in his mealures, s&.
Charles passes the Elbe, 41. Is at-
tacked by the Imperialifis, 144. Is
taken prilolier and ha lhly received by
the Emperor, 45. Is condemned to
death by a court martial, 47. His
relulution on the occalion, 48.
induced by regard to his family to fur-
render his clecoralt, 149. Refuse
the Emperor's desire of his approving
the Interrm, 172. The rigour of his
Lonfinement increased, 73. Iscarried
by the Emperor with him into the Ne-
therlands, 75. Isrelealed bythe Emn-
pcror on Maurice taking arms against
him, but choules to continue withthe
Emperor, 33. Obtains his lilerty
after the treaty of Pallau, 338.

George Duke of, a enemy to

the Reformation, 11. ot. Hi death
an advantage to the Reformat;sn, ib.
The Protellant religion eftabldhed by
Henry Duke of, o0 Heur) is lu(-

ccddii

ceeded by his son Maurice, 154.
His mollie s for not acceding to the
league of Smilkalde, ic. Marches
to the altance of Ferdinand in Hun-
gary, :b. J,ini the Emperor againlt
the Proteflants, 03, 213. See Mau-

rice.

Scherel, Shaflian, a commander in the

arrry of the Protefltnt league, his
vlg.r'or' commenccment (jfhNflilitir,
11: o6. I, i,,jidi io fly recalled, ib.
Is expel'ed fium Aigiburg on the dil-
perfion of the Proteltant army, 19.

Sc:land, lames V. of. mairied to Mary

of OGuilf, dutchefs-dowager of Longue-
ville II. 97. Death of lames, and
acceflion ns his infant daughter Mary,
149. Mary colntraed to the Dauphin
of Fl ance, 64. The marriage cele-
brated, 443. Mary assumes the title
and at ins of England on the death of
Mary of England, 46. Included in
the tlraty of Chateau Cambrefis, 49.
Alteration in the conduO of England
to, ard, 471.

Seis in teligion, refieCtioison the origin

<i, II. 4.

Segovia, an infu rieion there, on account

of their representative Tordefillas vot-
ing foi tle donative to Charles V. I.
4-6. He is killed h the populace,
ib. The insurgents there defeat
Ronquillo, Ient to upprele them by
Cardinal Adrian, 47. Surrenders as-
ter the battle of Villalar, 444.
&elim II. Sultan, extirlates the Mama-

luke, and adds Egypt and Syria to
his empire, 1. 344. Conlideredasfor-
midable to the European powers, 345-

Sjir.a obtains of Charles V. the invelli-

ture of Milan, 1. 489. Forfeits the
dutchy, y) his intrigies with Moronc,
493. Joil, in a league agaiilt Charles
for the recovery o Milan, 509. Is
forced to llrrenmler Milan to the Im-
perialiflb, i13. Obtains again of the
Emcror the invefitui of Milan, 11.
2i. Il'iter ilnt a prirate tieaty with
Flantih, 67. Meivedle, Francis'sen-
voy, exetuted for murder, b. Dies,
74.
Stenl, the inhabitants of, implore the

alifinhce of the lllelo, r Charles V.
to i ifelnd them at;linfl their nobles,
II 347. The Imli'eial troopl endea-
vour t enflnave th n, Ih. Regain
Iu'fOliin of theil city, b. Re pulle
an attack of the Gerrmans, 35. Is
brfiegedhy the marqcui dr Marignlno,
37. I'he commander Monluc re-
luilc» the allaultb vii;uroully,376. The

town reduced by famine, ib. Num
bets of the citizens retire, and ea-
blifh a free government at Monte Al-
cino, 377. The remaining citizens
oppressed, ib. And flock to Monte
Alcino, ib. Is granted by the Em-
peror to his son Philip, 378. The in-
veltiture given by Philip to Cosmo
di Medici, 436.

Sievet Ihoaen, battle of, between Maurice

of Saxon), and Albert of Branden-
burgh, 11. 351.

&on, Cardinal of, his rfheme for weaken-

ing the French army in the Milanese,
I. 417. Leaves the Imperial army
to attend the conclave on the death of
Leo X. 418.

Smalkalde, the Protestants enter into a

league there, for their mutual support,
11. 31. Thc league renewed at a
second meeting there, 34. The
league of, renewed for ten years, 55.
A manifesto, refusing to acknowledge
a counsel called by the Pope, 99.
The king of Denmark joins the league,
ioo. The Princes of, protest againt
the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and the recess of the diet at Nurem-
burgh, 158. Publish a manifesto
againtt the proceedings of the council
of Trent, 181. Are alarmed at the
proceedings of the Emperor, 183. A
want of unity among the members,
ib. The views of the Elector of Sax-
ony, and the Landgrave, eplained,
184. Appear at the diet of Ratilbon by
deputies, 194. Their deputies protelt
against the council of Trent, 195.
Their deputies alarmed at the Empe-
rorh' proceedings and declarations,
leave the diet, 196. The Emperor
leagues with the Pope againit them,
197. Piepare to refiR the Emperor,
200. Are diappointed in their appli-
cation to the Venetians and Swils, o01.
As allo with Henry VIII. and Francis,
2o1. Alfemble a large army, 103.
Are put under the ban of the Empire,
o05. Declare war againlt the Em-
peror, o06. Holltilitic begun by
Schertel,. ib. They recall him, ib.
The l.letor of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hefre appointed joint commanders
of their army, 07. The characers
of the two commanders compared, b.
Their operations diltradtcd by tlis
joint command, ib. Cannonade the
Emlieror's camp, alo. Make over-
tures of peace tu the Emperor, iH8.
Their army dilperle, ib. The Elec-
tor of Saxony cduccd, 245. The

Landgrave

Landgrave deceived and confined,
a 54. Their warlike tores seized by
the Emperor, 257. See Maurice.

Sslyhsa the Magnificent, ascends the

Ottoman throne, 1. 366. Invades
Hungary and takes Belgrade, 423.
Takes the iland of Rhodes, ib. De-
feats the Hungarians at Mohacz, 55.
His fcceffes, and the number of pri-
foners he carried away, i. Besieges
Vienna, II. 25. Enters Hungary
again with a vast army, but is forced
to retire by the Emperor Charles, 36,
37. Takes Barbarossa the pirate un-
der his proteaion, 58. Concludes an
alliance with Francis King of France,
90o Prepares to invade Naples, ib.
Protecs Stephen King of Hungary,
and defeats Ferdinand, 131. Seizes
Hungary for himself, 133. Over-
runs Hungary again, in fulfilment of
his treaty with Francis, 153. Con-
cludes a truce with the Emperor, 93.
Loses Transylvania, 308. Ravages
the coasts of Italy, 330, 348. Car-
ries a mighty army into Hungary,
331. Re-eftablilhes Isabella and her
son in Transylvania, 356. His vio-
lent attachment to his concubine
Roxalana, 357. Is prevailed on to de-
clare her a free woman, ib. For-
mally marriesher, 358. Is rendered
jealous of the virtues of his son Mufla-
phab by the arts of Roxalana, 359.
Orders him to be strangled, 361. Or-
ders the murder of Mutapha' son, 361.
Spain, the state of, at the death of

Ferdinand of Aragon, 1. 314. Charles
King of, apires to the Imperial crown
on the death of Maximilian, 344.
Is eleAed Emperor, 351. Refletions
of the Spaniards on that event, 353.
Charles appoints viceroys, and departs
for Germany, 357. Inrfrreaions
there, 415. A view of the feudal
syRem in, 49. An account of the
confederacy, termed the Holy Junta,
ib. Causes which prevented an union
of the malecontents in the refpeCive
provinces, 448. The moderation of
Charles toward them on his arrival,
449. Infance of the haughty fpirnt
of the grandees, II. o04. Is invaded
by the Dauphin, 1 4. The dominions
of, resigned by Chares to his son Philip,
407. The arrival of Charles, and his
reception there, 419. The place of
his retreat described, 40. The regal
power In, how enlarged by Charles,
464. The foreign acquisitions added
to, 465. See Arsrn, Caflilr, Galiis,

VoL. 11.

Valercia, Cortes, Germanara, and Ho-
ly Junta.

Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative

to the Reformation, I. 5;6. Ano-
ther diet called there by the Emperor,
II. 28. Another diet at, 58. Re-
cefsof, infavourofthe Proteltants, i66.

Spiritual censures of the Romish church,

the dreadful effecs of, I. 391.

St. Difir, in Champagne, inve/ted by the

Emperor, II. 165. Isobtained by the
artifice of cardinal Granvelle, 166.

St. 7ufit, monastery of, in Plazencia, is

chosen by the Emperor Charles V.
for his-retreat after his resignation, I.
420. His fitustion described, ib.
His apartments, ib.

St. itin, invested by the Spanilh

troops, and defended by admiral Co-
ligni, II. 416. D'Andelot defeated
in an endeavour to join the garrifor,
ib. But enters the town, 48.
Montmorency defeated by the duke of
Savoy, 419. The towntaken by assault
431.

Stroerzi, Peter+ some account of, 11.

373. Is intrusted with the command
of the French army in Italy, 374.
Is defeated by the marquis de Marig-
nano, 375.

Siabia, an infdrreCion of the peasants

againt the nobles there, I. 502.
They publilh a-memorial of their
grievances, ib. The insurgents dif-
pered, 503. The Protestant religion
suppressed there by the Emperor
Charles V. 11. 300.
ufolk, duke of, invades Picardy, pene-
trates almost to Paris, but is driven
back, . 459.

Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to

the Emperor Charles V. 1. 412.
Obliged to retire out of Picardy by the
duke de Vendome, 413.

Sweden, a ummary view of the revo-

lutions in, during the sixteenth cen-
tury, II. 481.

Swterlanld, the cantons of, espouse the

pretenions of Charles V. to the Im-
perial crown, . 347. Commence-
ment of the Reformation there by
Zuinglius, 379. The regulationander
which they hire out their troops, 416.
The precipitate battle, insisted on by
their troops under Lautrec, loft, 4ao.

Syria, how and by whom added to the
Ottoman Empire, 1. 345.

T

ert, m marechal de, governor of Ca-
lais, takes Dunkirk by storm, II.
0 · *44.

444 Engages the count of Egmont,
and is defeated by the accidental ar-
rival of an English squadron on the
coast, ib. Is taken prisoner, 445.
Terr#ane, taken and demolilhed by the

Emperor Charles V. 11. 354.
'etizel, a Dominican friar, his fhamefal

condua in the sale of Indulgences in
Germany, 1. 368, His form of ab-
solution, and recommendation of the
virtues of Indulgences in Germany, i.
Note. His debauched course of life,
369. Publilhes thefesagaiift Luther,
37z.
Teutonic order, a character of, I. 506.

Conquer the province of Pruflia, tb.
Their grand mailer Albert made duke
of Pruflia, 507.

Theatiaes, the orderof, by whom found-

ed, 11. 394.
Tbionville, in Luxembourg, taken by the

duke of Guise, 11. 444.
Tburingia, an infurreaion of the pea-

sants there, against the nobility, I.
503. The fanatical notions inspired
into them by Thomas Muncer, 504.
Their disorderly army defeated, 5o5.

Tcledo, infurre&ion in, at the departure

of Charles V. for Germany, 1. 357,
415. The cathedral of, fripped of
its riches to support the army of the
Holy Junta, 439. Padillo's letter to,
at his execution, 443. I infligated
to continue in arms by Padillo's wife,
444. Is reduced, 445.

Tscedo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo

di Medici sent by his uncle to nego-
tiate with Philip II. of Spain for the
investiture of Siena, 11. 435.

'sledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples,

oppresses the Neapolitans, II. 348.
And occasions the Turks to ravage the
coalts of Napler, ib.

'oleration, refledions on the progress of,

in Germany, 11. 389. Why mutu-
ally allowed among the ancient Hea-
thens, ib. How the primitive Chris-
tians became averle to, ib.

'TImorri, Paul, a Francilcan monk, arch-

bishop of Golocza, is made general
of the Hungarian army againit Soly-
man the Magnificent, and is defeated
by him, 1. 515.

'Iordejilla, the residence of Queen Joan-

na, the confederacy of malecontents
called the Holy Junta, removed thither,
1. 431. The Queen taken there by
the conde de HaIo, 438.
YTrdl/llas, one of the representatives of

Segovia, killed by the populace for vo-
ting the donative to Charles V. atthe
Cotir afembled in Galicia, 1. 4,6.

Traofylaia, is surrendered toFerdinand

King of the Romans by Queen Isabella,
11. 308.

qfremolle, La, drives the Engliih under

the duke of Suffolk out of Picardy, I.
459.

Trert, the council of, summoned, 11. 156.

Prorogued, £57. Again summoned,
174. Is opened, a11. Declares the
apocryphal scriptures canonical, 19g.
Ellablilhes the authority of the church
traditions, ib. The council, on ru-
mours of an infection in the city, is
translated to Bologna, z6i. Henry I.
of Prance protets against the council,
198. The council breaks up on the
approach of Maurice of Saxony, 33.
Historical remarks on this council, 314.
Charaaers of its historians, i.

Trest, cardinal of, ent by the Emperor

CharlesV. to conclude an alliance with
the Pope, II. 196. The nature of this
treaty, 97.

Tuais, the means of its coming under the

power of Barbarossa, traced, 11. 58.
The Emperor and other Chrifian
powers unite to expel Barbroffa, and
restore Muley Hafce, 60. Is taken
by the Emperor, 64. Muley lafcen
restored, and his treaty with Charles,
ib.

Tufrcay, a review of the tate of, during
the lixteenth century, II. 479.

V

VYalenia, an infurreaion in, 1. 354. The

people there greaily oppressed by the
nobles, ib. The nobles refuse to as-
femble the Coites except the King is
prelent, 355. Charles authorises the
people to continue in rms, i. They
expel the nobles, ib. Associate under
the Gerranda, and appoint their own
magiitrates, ib. Don Diego de Men-
doza, Conde de Melito, appointed re-
gent, on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 357. The Germanada refule
to lay down their arms, 446. Defeat
the nobles in several ation*, 447.
Are at length routed by the conde de
Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles
toward the insurgents on his arrival,

449. Valesltiais, dutchess of. ee Diana of
PAitiers.

'alladolid, the firl public entry of Charles

V. to that city, I. 339. The inhabi-
tants rife, burn Fonlcca's house, and
fortify the town, 418. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, and difTo-
lutioP of the Holy Junta 444.

Vwitts,

yVctrlks, treaty of, between Charles

V. and Henry II. of France, 11. 408.
Vrendmi, duke of, his plan of operations

in opposing the progress of the invasion
of Picardy by Henry VIII. L 43.
Obliges him to retire, ib.

AFnice, the republic of, incline in favour

of the pretensions of Francis I. of
France, to the Imperial crown, 1. 347.
Their views and apprehenlons on the
approaching rupture between the Em-
peror Charles V. and Francis, 360.
Leagues with the Emperor against
Francis, 45. A final accommodation
between, and the Emperor, 11. 16. Re-
frues to enter into the league of the
Italian dates, formed by the Emperor,
39. A review of the tate of that
republic during the sixteenth century,
478.

Verrina, the confident of the count of

Lavagno, encourages him in his rcheme
of overturning the government of Ge-
noa, II. 15. Isproteaed by Francis
on the ruin of that conspiracy, 137.

FiteUwille, the French governor of Metz,

deteas father Leonard's conspiracy to
betray the city tothe Imperialist, II.
38 . Executes the conspirators, 381.

Vitena, is besieged by Sultan Solymanthe

Magnificent, II. 15.

Fillalr, battle of, between Padilla, and

the conde deHaro, 1. 441.
Fillena, marquis de, his spirited reply to

the requeR of the Emperor to lodge
Bourbon in his palace, 1. 495.

U/m, the government of that city vio-

lently altered, and its reformed minis.
ter carried away in chains, by the
Emperor Charles V. 11. 174.

Unitrd Provinces, of the Netherlands a

brief view of their revolt against the
dominion of Spain, II. 480.

Urbnto, restored by Pope Adrian to Fran-
cefco Maria de Rovere, 1. 450.

W

WIalls, Sir John, joins the Emperor

Charles V. it the siege of Landrecy,
with a body of English troops, II. 151.

War, the method of carrying on in Eu-

rope, how improved at this period from
the prastice of earlier ages, 1. 458.
General reflectio on the vicifitude
of, II. 430.

Wartbrrr, Martin Luther concealed

there by the Elecor of Saxony, 1. 401.
VWouiwortr, lord, governor of Calai, re-
monftrate in vain with the Englifl
privy council to provide forits security,
11. 439. 1 attacked by the duke of
Guile, aod forced to capitulate, i.

Wittcmberg, invested by the Emperor

Charles V. and defended by Sybillaof
Cleves, wife to the Eletor of 6Saoay
II. 146.

W'/cIy, cardinal, his rife, character, and

influence over Henry VII. of England,
I. 361. Receives a penrion from Fran-
cis I. of France, 363. And from the
Emperor Charles V. ib. Detached
from the French interefl by the latter,
364. Inclines Henry tojoin the Em.
peror against Francis, 4o5. Sent by
Henry toCalais, to negotiate an accom.
modation between the Emperor and
Francis, 411. Has an interview with
Charles at Bruges, and concludes a
league with him on the part of Henry,
againlf France, 411. Meditates re-
venge againf Charles on his second
disappointment of the Papacy by the
eletionof ClementVII. 458. Obtains
of Clement a legantinc commission in
England for life, ib. Negotiates a
league with Francis againfi the Em-
peror, II. 4.

Worms, a diet called thereby Charles V.

to check the progress ofthe Reformers,
I. 366. Proceedings of, 400. Martin
Luther cited before it, ib. Refuses
to retrat his opinions,401. An edici
pnblilbed againf him, 402. Diet at,
opened, II. 174.

Wrrtemberg, Ulric duke of, why ex-

pelled his dominions, II. 53. Recovers
his dominions by the afliftance of Fran-
cis King of France, and receives the
ProteRant religion, ib.

la, Sir Tbomrs, raises an infurrec-

tion in Kent against Queen Mary of
England, on account of the Spanilh
match, II. 366. Is subdued and
puniLhed, ib.

Xinmstn, archbishop of Toledo, adheres

to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute
with the archduke Philip concerning
the regency of Castile, I. 3 3. Espouses
Ferdinand'aclaim to theregencyofCaf.
tile on Philip' death, 319. Conquera
Oran, and other places in Barbary, for
the crown of Castile, 31. Appointed
regent of CaRtile, by Ferdinand's will,
until the arrival ot Charles V. in Spain,
315. His rife and charater, b. Admits
the claim to the regency of cardinal
Adrian, sent with that commilion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with
him, 317. Takes the infant Don Ser-
dinand to Madrid under hie own eye,
ib. Procures Charles, who aumed
the regal title, to be acknowledged by
the CaRilian nobility, 318. chemea
to extend the regal prerogative, i.

Depreflc.

DeprelTes the nobility, 319. Frees the
King from the feudal limitations, and
eftablilhes a regal army to check the
barons, ib. Suppresses a mutiny head-
ed by the grandees, 330. Resumes the
grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 331.
His prudent application of the revenue,
ib. His bold aflertion of his authority
to thedifcontented nobles, 331. Other
afTociates in the regency appointed at
the instigation of the Flemilh cour-
tiers, ib. Retains the superior ma-
nagement, 333. Defeats John D'AI-
bert's invalion of Navarre, ib. Dif-
mantles all the caftks there, except
Pampeluna, which he strengthens, ib.
The troops rent by him against Bar-
baroffa defeated, and his equanimity
on that occasion, 34. Alarmed at

the corruption of the Flemish court, he
persuades Charles to vift Spain ib.
Falls sick on his journey to meet
Charles at his arrival, 338. His let-
ter of council to Charles, ib. Re-
quefls an interview, ib. The ingra-
titude of Charles to him, ib. His
death, 339. His charaEer, ib. Reve-
rence paid to his memory by the Spa-
niards, b.

Z

Zamra, bishop of, raises a regiment of

priefis to defend Tordefillas, for the
Holy Junta, which is forced by the
conde de Haro, I. 438.
Ziwnliur, attacks the Iale of Indal.

gences at Zurich in Switzerland, I.
379.
FINIS
