THE '
H I S T O R Y

OF
S C O T L A N D

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY, AND OF KING JAMES VI.

TILL
HIS ACCESSION TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW OF THE SCOTTISH HISTORY,

PRElIOUS T0 rTHAT PERIOD;

AND AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING ORIGINAL PAPERS.
BY' WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL O THE UNIVERSITY O EDINBURGH, AND

HISTORIOGRAPHEL TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
THE FOURTEENTH EDITION,

WITH ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

DUBLIN:
PRINTED FOR J. MOORE, NO. 4S, COLLEGE-GREEN.

1793.

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE-

FIRST EDITION.

1 DELIVER this book to the world with all
the diffidence and anxiety natural to an author orl
publishing his first performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to conceal, until it be known
whether that approbation hall ever be bestowed
upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many instances, from

former historians, as I have placed fa&s in a different
light, and have drawn charaters with new colours, I
ought to account for this condut to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of
two centuries, I presume to contradict the testimony
of less remote, or even of contemporary historians.

THE transaCtions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercest. political hatred, embittered by religious
zeal. Each of these produced historians of confider-
able merit, who adopted all their sentiments, and
defended all their ations. Truth was not the sole
objeCt of these authors. Blinded by prejudices, and
heated by the part which they themselves had acted
in the scenes theydefcribe, they wrote an apology for
a faction, rather than the history of their country.
Succeeding Historians have followed these guides
almost implicitly, and have repeated their errors and
misrepresentations. But, as the fame passions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to their

posterity;
I

posterity; as almost every event in Mary's reign has
become the objec of doubt or of dispute the eager
spirit of controversy soon discovered, that without
some evidence more authentic and more impartial than
that of such Hiflorians, none of the points in question
could be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been pro-
duced, and public archives, as well as the repositories
of private men, have been ransacked by the zeal and
curiofitv of writers of different parties. The attention
of Cecil to collect whatever related to that period, in
which he aed so conspicuous a part, hath provided
such an immense store of original papers for illuftrat-
ing this'part of the English and Scottifi history, as are
all-of sufficient to satisfy the utmost avidity of an
Aniquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whose library is
now the property of the Public) made great and va-
luable additions to Cecil's collection; and from this
mnrgazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabala, An-
derfon, Keith, Haines, Sorbes, have drawn most of
the papers which they have printed. No History of
Scotland, that merits any degree of attention, has
appeared since these collections were publilhed. By
consulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
stances, to correct the inaccuracies of former Hifto-
rians, to avoid their mistakes, and td deteat their
inifreprefentations.

B-r many important papers have escaped the no-

tice of those industrious Colletors; and, after all
t!hey have produced to light, much still remained in
da:rkneis, unobserved or unpublished. It was my
duty to search for these and I found this unpleasant
tailk attended with considerable utility.

THu library of the Faculty of Advocates at Edin-

burgh, contains not only a large collecioh of original
papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but copies
of ethers no lets curious, which have been preserved
bv Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the Public
Offces in England. Of all these the Curators of
that library were pleased to allow me the perusal.

THOUC H

THOUGH the British Museum be not yet open to

the Public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is
well known, procured me access to that noble col-
le&ion, which is worthy the magnificence of a great
and polished nation.

THAT vast and curious collection of papers relat-

ing to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by
Dr. Sorbes, and of which he published only two vo-
lumes, having been purchased since his death by the
Lord Viscount Royftol, his Lordship was so good as
to allow me the use of fourteen volumes in quarto,
containing that part of them which is connected with
my subjet.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

valuable collecion of original papers in two large
volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbishop Spottif-
wood's hand; and it appears'from several passages
in his history, that he had perused them with great
attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Clergy-

inan of the last century, compiled an history of Scot-
land from the beginning of the reign of James V. to
the death of James VI. in fix large volumes: wherein
he has inserted many papers of consequence, which
are no where else to be found. This History has not
been published; but a copy of it, which still remains
in manuscript, in the possession of the church of
Scotland, was put into my hands bymyworthy friend
the Reverend Doctor George Wifflart, principal
Clerk of the church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to

me the papers which he has collected relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy; but, by explaining to me his
fntiments with regard to that problematical passage
in the Scottilh history, has enabled me to place that
tranfadion in a light which dispels much of the dark-
ness and coniufion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

MR.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the conduct and characer of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communi.
cated to me a volume of manuscripts in his possession,
which contains a great number of valuable papers
copied from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper-office, by the late Reverend Mr. Crawfotd,
Regius Professor of Church Hiltory in the University
of Edinburgh. I likewise received from him the
original Register of letters kept by the Regent Len-
nox during his adminiitration.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any use towards illustrating
that period of which I write the history. With
what success I have employed them to confirm what
was already known, to ascertain what was dubious,
or to determine what was controverted, the Public
must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different re-

pofitories to which I had access, as many papers as
would have rendered my Appendix equal in size to
the molf bulky collection of my predecessors. But
I have satisfied myself with publishing a few of the
molt curious among them, to which I found it ne-
ceffary to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.
None of these, as far as I can recolled, ever ap-
peared in any former collecion.

I HAVE added a Critical Difertation concerning the

murder of King Henry, and the genuineness of the
.ueen's letters to Botbhwll. The fa&s and obferva-
tions which relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my
friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and induftrv.

PREFACE.

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE

ELEVENTH EDITION.

IT is now twenty-eight years since I publiihed the
liftory of Scotland. During that time I have been
favoured by my friends with several remarks upon
it; and various ftritures have been made by persons
who entertained sentiments different from mine, with
refpea to the tranfations in the reign of Queen
Mary. From whatever quarter information came,
in whatever mode it has been communicated, I have
confidered it calmly and with attention. Wherever
I perceived that I had erred, either in relating
events, or in delineating characters, I have, with-
out hesitation, corrected those errors. Wherever I
am satisfied that my original ideas were just and well-
founded, Iadhere to them; and, refting upon their
conformity to evidence already produced, I enter
into no difcuflion or controversy in order to support
them. Wherever the opportunity ofconfulting ori-
ginal papers either in print or in manuscript, to which
1 had not formerly access, has enabled me to throw
new light upon any part of the History, I have made
alterations and additions, which, I flatter nyfelf,
will be found to be of some importance.

COLLEGE OF EDINBURGH,

March 5th, 1787.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to the Death of JAMES V.

H
THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
S C O T L A N D.

BOOK I.
Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previou to

the Death of JAMES V.

THE first ages of the Scottih history are dark and fa- a o o K
bulous. Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by i.
degrees, and the events, which happened during their in- WV
fancy or early youth, cannot be recolleced, and deserve not The origin
to be remembered. The gross ignorance which anciently of nations
covered all the North of Europe, the continual migrations f'bdulo

and o.

of its inhabitants, and the frequent and deftruive revolu- cure.
tions which these occasioned, render it impoflible to give
any authentic account of the origin of the different king-
doms now established there. Every thing beyond that short
period to which well-attefted annals reach, is obscure; an
immense space is left for invention to occupy; each nation,
with a- vanity inseparable from human nature, hath filled
that void with events calculated to display its own antiquity
and lustre. History, which ought to record truth and to
teach wisdom, often sets out with retailing fi&ions and
absurdities.

THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high as Origin of

any of their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, the Scos.
and the traditions of their bards, ill more uncertain, they
reckon up a series of kings several ages before the birth of

VOL, I. B Christ;

B O K ehrift; and give a partrutr detai of the ocCuraces which

r. happened in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as
_^vY^ well as the other northern nations, we receive the earliest

accounts on which we can depend, not from their own, but
A.D. S8. from the Roman authors. When the Romans, under

Agricola, first carried their arms into the northern parts of
Britain, they found it pofleffed by the Caledorians, a, fierce
and warlike people; and having repulsed, rather than con-
quered them, they ereted a strong wall between the firths
of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries of their
empire. Adrian, on account of the difficulty of defending
A.D. zin. such a distant frontier, contraced the limits of the Roman

province in Britain, by building a second wall, which ran
between Newcastle and Carlisle. The anmbition qs fuoceed-
ing Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adriali had aban-
doned; and the country between the two walls was alter-
nately under the dominion of the Romans, and that of the
Caledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, the
inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Ro-
mans, in order to defend the centre of their empire, to re-
cal those legions which guarded the frontier provinces; and
at that time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.
A.D. 41. THEIR long residence in the island had polished, in some

degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted
to their intercourse with the Romans, for the art of writ-
ing, and the use of numbers, without which it is impollible
long to preserve the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the

dominion of the Scots and Pias. The former, who are not
mentioned by any Roman author bofore the end of the
fourth century, were probably a colony of the Celta or
Gauls: their affinity to whom appears from. their language,
their manners, and religious rites; circumstances more de-
cifive with regard to the origin of nations, than. either fa-.
bulous traditions; or the tales of ill-informed and credulous
Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe the comnmon ac-.
counts, fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves.
by degrees, landed at last on the coast Qppotte t tohat iland,,
and fixed their habitatiqns there. Fierce au; bloo4dy wars
were, during fcvera ages, carried on between them and the
A.D. 838. Piss. At length, Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth King of the.

Scots (according to their own fabulous authors) qbtained a:
complete victory over the Pias, and; united wider ole mo-
narchy, all the country, from the wall of Adrian, to the
northern ocean. The kingdom, henceforward, became
known by its present nam., which it derived froIn a people.

who

who at first fettled there as strangers, and rmained long 1 o o F
obscure and inconsiderable. i

FROM this period the history of cotland would merit v

some attention, were it accompanied with any etirnty. tfti ,t
But as our remote antiquities are involved in the fame dark- ScE*41d
ness with those of other nations, a calamity peculiar to o~. p,~"uli'
selves has thrown almost an equal obscurity etr our more
recent tranfaftions. This was occasioned by the malicious
policy of Edward I. of England. Towards the end of the
thirteenth century, this monarch called in question the in-
dependence of Scotland ; pretending that the kingdom wat
held as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjeftd to
all the conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to cftablit
his claim, he seized the public archives, he ransacked churehes
and monasteries, and getting pocflion, by force of fraud
of many historical monuments, which tended to prove the
antiquity or freedom of the kingdom, he carried fom of
them into England, and commanded the reft to be burned *.
An universal oblivion of past tranfa&ions might have been
the effet of this fatal vent, but some imperfet Chronicles
had escaped the rage of Edward i foreign writers had re-
corded some important fats relating to Scotland; and the
traditions concerning recent occurrences were fresh and
worthy of credit. These broken fragments John de For.
dun, who lived in the fourteenth eenturt, colleded with a
pious industry, and from them gleaned materials which he
formed into a regular history. ia.work was received by
his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse could be
had to more antient records, it supplied the place of the
authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copied in man.y
monasteries, and the thread of the narrative was continued
by different monks, through the fubfeqpent reigns. In the
beginning of the sixteenth century, John Major tnd H¢etor
Boethius published their histories of Scotland, he former a
fuccind and dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one,
and both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bucha.
nan undertook the fame work ; and if his accuracy and im.
partiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance of
his tafke, and to the purity and vigour of his ftxt, hit
history might be placed on akvl with the most admired
compofitidns of the antients. But, instead of rjeting the
improbable tales of Chrmnicklwriters, he was t dhe utn~f
pains to doun them; andhath'cQothe, with all the beau.

B I tiea
a Innes, Eslay SSa.

p o Q K ties and graces of ficion, those legends, which formerly had

1. only its wildness and extravagance.

'*yOW The history of Scotland may properly be divided into four
For . periods. The firR reaches from the origin of the mo-
markab narchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. The second from Ken-

Mt^ he neth's conquelf of the Pids, to the death of Alexander III.
hior. The third extlds to the death of James V. The last, from

thence to the accession of James VI. to the crown of Eng-
land.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and conjeAure,

and ought t be totally negleaed, or abandoned to the
induftrr and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to
dawn in the second period, with a light, feeble at first, but
gradually increasing, and the events which then happened
may beflightly touched, but merit no particular or laborious
inqury. In the third period, the history of Scotland, chiefly
by means of records preserved in England, becomes more
authentic: not only are events related, but their causes and
effecs explained; the charaaers of the actors are displayed;
the manners of the age described; the revolutions in the
constitution pointed out: and here every Scotsman hould
begin not to read only, but to study the history of his coun-
* try. During the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were

so mingled with those of other nations, its situation in the
political state of Europe was so important, its influence on
the operations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so visible,
that its history becomes an object of attention to foreigners;
and without some knowledge of the various and extraordi-
nary revolutions which happened there, they cannot form a
just notion with refpea either to the most illustrious events,
or to the chara&ers of the most diftinguiihed personages in
the sixteenth century.

AreriewOf THE following history is confined to the last of there pe-
the riods: to giveaview of the political state of the kingdom

during that which immediately preceded it, is the design of
this.preliminary Book. The imperfe& knowledge which
strangers have of the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices
Scotsmen themselves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country, render such
an introducion equally necessary to both.

.THE period from the death of Alexander III. to the
death of James V. contains upwards of two centuries and a
half, from the year one thoufand.two. hundred and eightyr
fix,. to the year one thousand five hundred and forty-two.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the in-
contsriy dependence of Scotland Before the union of the two king-

doms,

doms, this was a question of much'importance If the one B O 0o
crown had been confidered not as imperial and independent .
but as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could'not A
'have been concluded on equal terms, and every advantage concerning
which the dependent kingdom procured, rnfift have been the inde-
deemed the conceflion of a Sovereign to his vassal. Accord- Seotland
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while
a treaty of union between the two kingdoms was negotiating,
this controversy was agitated with all the heat which national
animofities naturally inspire. What was then the subjef of
serious concern, the union of the two kingdoms had ren-
dered a matter. of mere curiosity. But though the objeEts
which at that time warmed and interested both-nations, exist
no longer, a question which appeared so momentous to our an-
ceftors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninftruCtive to us.

SOME of the northren counties of England were early in

the hands of the Scottish Kings, who, as far back as the
feudal customs can be traced, held these poffeions of the
Kings of England, and did homage to them on that account.
This homage, due only for the territories which they held in
England, was in no'wise derogatory from their royal dignity.
Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than that the fame
perfn hould be both a Lord and a Vafial, independent in
one capacity, and dependent in another b. The Crown of
England was, without doubt, imperial and independent,
though the Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the
vassals of the Kings of France; and, in consequence of their
poffefions in that kingdom, bound to perform all' the ser-
t-ices which a feudal sovereign has a title to exact. The - "
fame was the cohdition of the Monarchs of Scotland; free
and independent as Kings of their own country, but, as pof-
felTing English territories, vassals to the King of England.
The English Monarchs, satisfied with their legal and uncon-
troverted rights, were, during a long period, neither capable,
nor had any thoughts of usurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided'by them into many
small kingdoms, was in no condition to extenid its dominion

over

CbA very lingular proof of this occurs in the French history. Arpin fold the

vicomte of the city Bourges to Philip I. who did homage to the count of San-
cerre for a part of these lands, which he held of that Nobleman, A. D. x oo.
I believe that no example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own subjects.
is to be met with in the histories either'of England or Scotland. Philip le el
abolished this praCtice in France A. D. 1302. HIn.ut Atbrae Cbrond. Somewhat
similar to this, is a charter of the Abbot of Melrofi, A. D. I 35, eqnfuting
James V. the Bailiff or Steward of that Abby, velting in him all the powers
which pertained to that office, and requiring him to be anfiterable to the
Abbot for his exercifc of the fame. Arciv.fiI. Edii.

a 6 0 · everScotland, united t thattime underoneMonarch. And

. though these petty prndipalitics were gradually formed into
x-o ( one kingdom, the reigning princes, exposed to continual in-

vations of the Danes, and often subjected to the yoke of
those formidable pirates, seldom turned their arms towards
Scotland, and were little able to eltablilh new -ights in that
country. The first Kings of the Norman race, busied with
introducing their own laws and manners into the kingdom
which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
on the throne which some of them possessed by a very dubi-
ous title, were as little solicitous to acquire new authority,
or to form new pretensions in Scotland. An unexpected
calamity that besel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the Englifi to think of bringing his kingdom under depen-
dence. William firnamrd the Lion being taken prisoner at
Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only
extorted from him an exorbitant ranfoi, and a promise to
surrender the places of greatel ftrengh in his dominions,
but compelled him to do homage for his whole kingdom.
Richard I. a generous Prince, solemnly renounced this claim
of homage, and absolvcd William from the hard conditions
which Henry had impoied. Upon the death of Alexander III.
near a century after, Edward I. availing himself of the
situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence in that
kingdom which no English monarch before him ever pofleifed,
and, imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather than the
magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to
which the former had pretended.

Pretenfioton MAR. P.ET of Norway, Grand-daughter of Alexander, and
of Erace heir to his crown, did not long survive him. The right of
a mlied.l succession belonged to the decendants of David Earl of Hunt-

ingdon, third son of King David I. Among these, Robert
Bruce, and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for the
crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel, Earl David's
second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of Margaret the eldest
daughter. According to the rules of succession which are
now eftablifihd, the right of Baliol was preferable, and not-
wibftanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother
and grandmother, would be deemed inconectable. But in
that age, the order of succession was not ascertained with
the fame precision. The question appeared to be no left
intricate, than it was important. Though the prejudices of
the people, and perhaps the laws of the kingdom, favoured
Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by a powerful facion.
Arns alone, it was feared, mult terminate a dispute too

weighty

'weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid :je

t o o k

miseries of a civil war, Edward was chosen iumpire, and i.
both parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. .This had well .V
nigh proved fatal to the Independence of Scotland, and the
nation, by its eagerness to guard against a civil war, wag riot
only exposed to that calamity, but almost fubjeted to a so-
reign yoke. Edward was atful, brave, enterprifng, and
commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace with.the
whole world. T'he anarchy which prevailed in Scotlaid, and
the ambition of competitors ready to sacrifice their country
in order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to subjet the kingdom. The authority
of an umpire, which had been unwarily bestowed upon him,
and from which the Scots dreaded no dangerous confe-
quences, enabled him to execute his schemes with thk
greater facility. Under pretence of examining the queftibh
with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish
Barons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated
others, he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting
Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland
to be a fief of the English Crown, and to swear fealty to
him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord. This ftep led to ano-
ther Rill more important. As it was vain to prononce a
sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward de-
manded poilfflion of the kingdom, that he might be
able to deliver it to him whose ight hould be found pre-
*ferable; and such was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and
the impatient ambition of the competitors, that both assented
to this firange demand, and Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of
Angus, was the only man who refuted to surrender the
castles in his cultody to the enemy of his country. Edward
finding Baliol the mot obsequious and the least formidable
of the two competitors, soon after gave judgment i his
favour. Baliol once more professed himfelfthe vafll of Eng-
land, and submitted to every condition which the Sovereign
whom he had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creatutre bs his own Upoh

the throne of Scotland, and comptlled the iiobles to r-
nounce the ancient liberties and independence of their coun-
try, had reason to conclude that his dominion was now stilly
established. But he begah too soon t aflirfhe the hmafer;
his new vassals fierce and independent, bore with impatierinc
a yoke, to wli'li they were not ccilftdmed. PtovOked by
his haughtiness, even the pffive spirit of Baliol begai tb
mutiny.- But Edward, who had no longdt ufd for futh a
pageant king, forced him to resign te Crown, and openly
attempted tf feie it is fallen to hiifirel by the fbeion

of

B o O r of his vassal. At that critical period arose Sir William

i. Wallace, a hero, to whom the fond admiration of his coun-
__-^ trymen hath ascribed many fabulous ats of prowess, though

his real valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, are such
as need not the beightenings of fiction. He, almolt
tingle, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom,
and his boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen.
At aft, Robert Bruce, the grandson of him who stood in
competition with Baliol, appeared to assert his own rights,
and to vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles,
ashamed of their former baseness, and enraged at the many
indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his standard.
In order to crush him at once, the English Monarch entered
'Scotland, at the head of a mighty army. Many battles were
fought, and the Scots, though often vanquished, were not
subdued. The ardent zeal.with which the nobles contended
for the independence of the kingdom, the prudent valour of
Bruce, and above all a national cnthufiafm inspired by such
a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Edward, and coun-
terbalanced all the advantages which he derived from the
number and wealth of his fubjzEts. Though the war con-
tinued with little intermission upwards of seventy years,
Bruce and his posterity kept poffeflion of the throne of Scot-
land,-and reigned with an authority not inferior to that of
its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes

between contending nations, was employed to terminate this
controversy, neither Edward nor the Scots seemed to dif-
trust the jujiice of their cause; and both appealed to history
and records, and from these produced, in their own favour,
such evidence as they pretended to be unanswerable. The
letters and memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and often
appealed to as the common judge of all Christian Princes,
are till extant. The fabulous tales of the early British
history; the partial testimony of ignorant Chroniclers; sup-
pofititious treaties and charters; are the proofs on which
Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homage done by the Scottish monarchs for their
lands in England is prepolferoufly supposed to imply the
fubjetion of their whole kingdom c I11 founded, however,
as their right was, the English did not fail to revive it, in all
the subsequent quarrels between' the two kingdoms; while
the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost indignation. To
this we mull impute the fierce-and implacable hatred to each

other,
:Aderifo's Historical Efly concerning the Independency;, &c.

other, which long inflamed both. Their national antipathies a o o .
were excited, not only by the usual circumstances of fre- 1.
quent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the English OW
confidered the Seots as vai.als who had presumed to rebel,
and the Scots, in their turn, regarded the Englifli as usurpers
who aimed at enslaving their country.

AT the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scot- 1306.
land, the fame form of governent was eltablilhed in all the State of the

kingdom

kingdoms of Europe. This surprising similarity in their wniBruc
contitution and laws demonstrates that the nations which began is
overturned the Roman empire, and ereaed these kingdoms, reig.
though divided into different tribes, and diitinguifled by
different names, were either derived originally from the fame
source, or had been placed in similar situations. When we
take a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that
itupendous and singular fabric erected by them, the firt
object that strikes us is the King. And when we are told
that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands within his do-
minions, that all his fubjets derive their possessions frcn
him, and in return consecrate their lives to his service;
when we hear that all marks of diflintlion, and titles of
dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of honour;
when we behold the most potent peers on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his feet,
and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign and their Liege
Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a powerful, nay an ab-
solute monarch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal govern-
ment was purely aritlocratical. With all the ensigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of despotic power,
a feudal king was the molt limited of all princes.

BErORE they sallied out of their own habitations to con- Origin of

quer the world, many of the northern nations seemed not the feudal
to have been subjed to the government of kings d; and even governr'ct-

and its as-

where monarchical government was eftabliihed, the Prince toratil
pofliffed but little authority. A General rather than a genius.
King, his military command was extensive, his civil jurif-
diction almost nothing e. The army which he led was not
composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve, but
of such as voluntarily followed his standard . These con-
quered not for their leader, but for themselves; and being
free in their own country, renounced not their liberty when'
they acquired new settlements. They did not exterminate
the ancient inhabitants of the countries which they sub-

dued

'Ca. libi. cib .
vi. Tacit. de Mor. Gera, c. 7. I. f Cz ibid

I o o K dued, but seizing the greater part bs theit lands, they took

i. their pcrfons under protefdion. The difficulty of maintaining
k,**~ a new conquest, as well as the danger of being attacked by

new invaders, rendering it necessary to be aiways in a posture
of defence, the form of government which they eftablihed
was altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country. Their
General still continuing to be the head of the colony, part
of the conquered lands were allotted to him; the remainder,
under the name of beeficia orfifs, was divided amongst his
principal officers. As the common safety required that these
officers hould, upon all occasions, be ready to appear in
arms, for the common defence, and hould continue obe-
dient to their General, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men,
in proportion to the extent of their territory. These great
officers again parcelled out their lands among their fol-
lowers, and annexed the fame condition to the grant. A
feudal kingdom was properly the encampment of a great
army; military ideas predominated, military ubordination
was established, and the possession of land was the pay
which soldiers received for their personal service. In con-
sequence of these notions, the poeffilon of lald was granted
during pleasure only, and Kings were ele&ive. In other
words, an officer disagreeable to his General was deprived of
his pay, and the person who was most capable of conducing
an army was chosen to command it. Such were the firit
rudiments, or infancy of feudal government.

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century,

the feudal system had undergone many changes, of which
the following were the most confidcrable. Kings,- formerly
ele&ive, were then hereditary; and fiefs, granted at first
during pleasure, descended from father to son, and were
become perpetual. These changes, not less advantageous
to the nobles than to the prince, made no alteration in the

GenTra ariftocratical spirit of the feudal constitution. The King,
a"es who at a diltance seemed to be invested with majeity'and
mited the power, appears, on a nearer view, to poisess almost none of
poer of those advantages which bestow on monarchs their grandcur
thefeudal and authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a
m<odncs- ilanding army; and the jurifdition he pofleffed was cir-

cumfcribed within very narrow limits.

Their rev- AT a time when pomp and splendor were f'ttle known,
nts mcre even in the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown

received scarcely any salary besides the fees and perquisites of
their office; when embassies to foreign courts were rare; when

stmies

armies were composed of soldiers who served without pay; B t t
it was not neceflary that a king should poless a great revenue; I.
nor did the condition of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes \v-j
to be opulent. Commerce made little progrcfs in the king-
doms where the feudal government was eftab!ifhed. Infti-
tutions, which had no other object but to inspire a martial
spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to make arms the
only honourable profcffion, naturally discouraged the com-
mercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes, im-
posed on the different branches of commerce, were by con-
sequence inconsiderable; and the prince's treasury received
little supply, from a source, which among a trading people,
flows with filch abundance, and is almost inexhauitible. A
fixed tax was not levied even on land; such a burthen would
have appeared'intolerable to men who received their estates
as the reward of their valour, and who confidered their
fcrvice in the field as a full retribution for what they pof-
fefled. The king's defiesr, or the portion of land which he
fill retained in his own hands unalienated, furniflled sub-
fiftence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of go-
vernmentg. The only stated taxes which the feudal law
obliged vasals to pay to the king, or to those of whom they held
their lands were three; one when his eldest son was made
a knight; another when his eldest daughter was married;
and a third in order to ransom him if he flould happen
to be taken prisoner. Besides these, the king received the
feudal casualtics of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own
vaflals. And on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjets
granted him.an aid, whiclr they distinguished by the name
of a benevolence, in order to declare that he received it not in
consequence of any right, but as a gift, flowing from their
good will h. All thele added together, produced a revenue,
so scanty and precarious'as naturally incited a feudal c-
narch to aim at diminifling the exorbitant power and wealth
of the nobility, but inltead of enabling him to carry on his
schemes with full effe&, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

NOR could the king supply the defet of his revehnes, The had

by the terror of his arms. Mercenary troops and ffanding no I(anding
armies were unknown, as long as the feudal government ar"ies
subsisted in vigour. Europe was peopled with soldiers.
The vassals of the king, and the fub-vaffals of the barons,
were all obliged to carry arms. While the poverty of princes

prevented

t Cralg de Feud. lib. i. Dleg. I4, Dt Care Glof. toe. Dormitcum.
" DuCange, oc. AunliuMn.

B o o K prevented them from fortifying their frontier towns, while

. a campaign continued but a few weeks, and while a fierce

and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every quarrel
to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay and with
little discipline, was fuficient for all the purposes both of
the security and of the glory of the nation. Such an army,
however, far from being an engine at the king's disposal,
was often no less formidable to him, than to his enemies.
The more warlike any people were, the more independent
they became; and the fame persons being both soldiers and
fubje&ts, civil privileges and immunities were the confe-
quence of their victories, and the reward of their martial
exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their
own people, as well as the scourges of mankind, were com-
monly, under the feudal constitution, the most indulgent of
ail princes to their subjects, because they stood most in need
of their afiftance. A prince, whom even war and vi&ories
did not render the master of his own army, pofleffed hardly
any hadow of military power during times of peace. His
disbanded soldiers mingled with his other fubjeas; not a
single man received pay from him; many ages elapsed even
before a guard was appointed to defend his person; and def-
titute of that great instrument of dominion, a tanding army,
the authority of the king continued always feeble, and was
often contemptible.

Their jnurf- NOR were there the only circumstances which contributed
dktion as towards depressing the regal power. By the feudal systems as

has been already observed, the king's judicial authority was
extremely circumscribed. At first, princes seem to have been
the supreme Judges of their people, and, in person, heard and
determined all controversies among them. The multiplicity
of causes oon made it necessary to appoint Judges, who in
the king's name, decided matters that belonged to the royal
jurifdidion. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Europe,
having destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries
which they seized being cantoned, out among powerful chiefs,
who were blindly followed by numerous dependants, whom,
in return, they were bound to prote& from every injury; the
administration of justice was greatly interrupted, and the
execution of any legal sentence became almost impracticable.
Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder of all kinds, prevailed
in every kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible,
and scarce compatible with the subsistence of civil focietv.
Every offender sheltered himself under the protetion of
some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the pursuits

of

of justice. To apprehend, and to punih a criminal, often B o o K
required the union and effort of half a kingdomi. In order to x.
remedy these evils, many persons of diftinaion were en- _J
trusted with the adminifration of jufice within their own
territories. But what we may presume was, at first, only a
temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the incroaching
spirit of the nobles gradually converted into a right, and ren-
dered hereditary. The lands of omne were, in process of
time, ereted into Baronies, those of others into Regalities.
The jurifdition of the former was extensive; that of the
latter, as the name implies, royal, and almost unbounded.
Ail causes, whether civil or criminal, were tried by judges,
whom the lord of the regality appointed; and if the king's
courts called any person within his territory before them, the
lord of regality might put a stop to their proceedings, and
by the privilege of repledging, remove the cause to his own
court, and even punish his vassal, if he fibmitted to a so-
reign jurifdi6tionk. Thus almost every question, in which
any person who resided on the lands of the nobles was inte-
refted, being determined by judges appointed by the nobles
themselves, their vaflals were hardly fenfib!e of being, in
any degree, subjed to the crown. A feudal kingdom was
split into many small principalities, almost independent, and
held together by a feeble and commonly an imperceptible
bond of union. The king was not only stripped of the au-
thority annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but his
revenue suffered no small diminution, by the loss of those
pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that age, due to the
person who administered justice.

IN

A remarkable inltance of his occurs in the following history, so late as the

year one thousand five hundred and fixty-one. Mary, having appointed a court
of justice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less than eleven
counties were summoned to guard the person, who was to aft as judge, and to
enable him to enforce his decisions. The words of a proclamation, which
afford such a convincing proof of the feeblenes of the feudal government,
deserve our notice.-" And because it ;s neceflary for the execution of her
Highness' commandments and service, that her justice be well accompanied,
and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a good power of
her faithful fubjefts-Therefore commands and charges all and sundry Earls,
Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling
within the aid counties, that they, and every one of them, with their kin,
friends, servants, and-houfehold-men, well bodin in feir of war in the most
fubftantious manner [i. e. completely armed and provided], and with twenty
days victuals to meet and pass forward with him to the borough of Jedburgh,
and there to remain during the said space of twenty days, and to receive
such direction and commands, as hall be given by him to them in our Sovereign
Lady's name for quietness of the county; and to put the fame in execution
under the pain of losing their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hist. of
Scotland, ge8.

Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

S o o K I the fame propotion that the king funk in power, the

i. nobles rose toward independence. Not satisfied with hav-
_ >.#-.. ing obtained a hereditary right to their fiefs, which they for-

merly held during pleasure, their ambition aimed at some-
thing bolder, and by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as
human ingenuity and invention can reach that end, to render
their pofcilions unalienable and everlasting. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance traiifmitted to them from their
ancetors, but none to dimin.ih it; time alone, by means of
mrr.ages, legacies, and other accidents, brought continual
acceffins of wealth and of dignity; a great family, like
a rivsr, became considerable from the length of its courfc,
and as it roiled cn, new honours and new property flowed
successively into it. Whatever influence is derived from
titles of honour, the feudal barons likewise pofieffed in an
ample manner. These marks of diflinftion are, in their
owa nature, either official or pcrfonal, and being annexed
to a particular charge, or beltowed by the admiration of
mankind upon illustrious characers, ought to he appropri-
ated to these. But the son, however unworthy, could
rc:. bear to be stripped of that appellation by which his
faihei had been distinguished. His presumption. claimed,
what his virtue did not merit; tides of honour became he-
red.itry, and added new lustre to nobles already in pof-
fecllon of too much power. Something more audacious and
inbre extravagant fill remained. The supreme direction of
tal aifairs, both civil and military, being committed to the
grea: officers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes,
as wei! as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abili-
ties of these officers. But such was the preposterous ambition
of the nobles, and so successful even in their wildest attempts
to aggrandize themselves, that in all the kingdoms where
the feudal institutions prevailed, most of the chief offices of
fate were annexed to great families, and held, liks fiefs, by
hereditary right. A person whose undutiful behaviour ren-
dered him odious to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed
him to the contempt of the people, often held a place of
power and trust of the greatest importance to both. In
Scotland, the offices of Lord Justice General, Great Cham.
berlain, High Steward, High Constable, Earl Marshal, and
High Admiral, were all hereditary; and in many counties,
the office of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and whose

power was so great, could not fail of being turbulent and
formidable. Nor did they want instruments for executing
their bodeft designs. That portion of their lands, which

they

they parcelled out among their followers, supplied them aB o, o,
with a numerous band of faithful and determined vassals; i.
while that which they retained in their own hands, enabled
them to live with a princely splendor. The great hall of an
ambitious baron was often more crowded than the court of
his sovereign. The strong castles in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious.
A great part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of
indigent, but bold retainers. And if at any time they left
their retreat to appear in the court of their sovereign, they
were accompanied, even in times of peace, with-a vast train
of armed followers. The usual retinue of William the sixth
Earl of Douglas consisted of to thousand horse. Those
of the other nobles were magnificent and formidable in pro-
portion. Impatient of ubordination, and forgetting their
proper rank, such potent and haughty barons were the rivals,
rather than the fubjets, of their prince. They often de-
spifed his orders, insulted his person, and wrested from him
his crown. The history of Europe, during several ages;
contains little else but the accounts of the wars and re-
volutions occasioned by their exorbitant ambition.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its pro- Theirpow.

per bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm ergreateria
that the balance which ought to be prefened between a king Scotland

than in any

and his nobles was almost entirely loft. in Scotland. The other king-
Scottish nobles enjoyed, in common with those of other dom.
nations, all the means for extending their authority which
arise from the ariftocratical genius of the feudal govern-
ment. Besides these, they possessed advantages peculiar to
themselves: the accidental sources of their power were con-
fiderable; and singular circumstances concurred with the
spirit of the conffitution to aggrandize them. To enume- The parti-
rate the most remarkable of these, will serve both to explain cular caufcs
tte political state of the kingdom and to illustrate many of th .
important occurrences in the period now under our review.

. THE nature of their country was one cause of the The nature

power and independence of the Scottish nobility. Level of the
and open countries are fqnred for servitude. The authority country
of the fuprene magistrate reaches with ease to the moit
distant corners; and when nature has ereded no barrier,
and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious are soon de-
teated and punified. Mountains, and fens, and rivers, set
bounds to defpatic power, and amidst. these is the natural
feat of freedom and independence. In such places did the
Scottih nobles tfually fx their reidence. By retiring to
his. own castle, a. mutinous baron could defy the power of.

his

nB o o his sovereign, it being almost impracicable to lead an army,

i. through a barren country, to places of difficult access to a

single man. The fame causes which checked the progress
of the Roman arms, and rendered all the efforts of Edward I.
abortive, often proteted the Scottifl nobles from the ven-.
geance of their prince; and they owed their personal inde-
pendence to those very mountains and marihes which saved
their country from being conquered.

The fnall IH. THE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not
number of a little to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken
peo ars. tiht of the prince. Wherever numbers of men afemble to-

gether, order must be established, and a regular form of go-
vernment instituted; the authority of the magistrate must
be recognised, and his decisions meet with prompt and full
obedience. Laws and Subordination take rife in cities - and
where there are few cities as in Poland, or none as in Tartary,
there are few or no traces of a well-arranged police. But
under the feudal government, commerce, the chief means
of assembling mankind, was neglected; the nobles, in order
to strengthen their influence over their vassals, resided among
them, and seldom appeared at court, where they found a
superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with equals.
In Scotland, the fertile counties in the South lying open
to the English, no town situated there could rife to be great
or populous amidst continual inroads and alarms: the refi-
dence of our monarchs was not fixed to any particular place;
many parts of the country were barren and uncultivated;
and in consequence of these peculiar circumstances, added
to the general cause flowing from the nature of the feudal
institutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and
very inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupied a
diftind portion of the kingdom, and formed a separate and
almost independent focicty. Instead of giving aid towards
reducing to obedience their seditious chieftain, or any whom
he took under his protection, they were all in arms for his
defence, and obftru&ed the operations of justice. to the
utnmoft. The prince was obliged to connive at criminals
whom he could not reach; the nobles, conscious of this
advantage, were not afraid to offend; and the difficulty of
punifling almost assured them of impunity.

The iait.- III. THE division of the country into clans had no small
.ton of effec't in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations

which over-ran Europe were originally divided into many
small tribes; and when they came to parcel out the lands
which they had conquered, it was natural for every chieftain
to bestow a portion, in the sirss place, upon those of his

own

own tribe or family. These all held their lands of himt; B o o K
and as the safety of each individual depended on the general i.
union, these small societies clung together, and were dif- .,
tinguifhed by some common appellation, either patronymical,
or local, long before the introduction of surnames, or en-
fgns armorial. But when these became common, the de-
fcendants and relations of every chieftain assumed the fame
name and arms with him; other"vaflals were proud to imi-
tate their example, and by degrees they were communicated
to all those who held of the fame superior. Thus clanlhips
were formed; and in a generation or two, that confangui-
nity, which was at first in a great measure imaginary, was
believed to be real. An artificial union was converted into
a natural one ; men willingly followed a leader whom they
regarded both as the superior of their lands and the chief of
their blood, and served him not only with the fidelity of
vassals, but with the affetion of friends. In the other feudal
kingdoms we may observe such unions as we have described
imperfecly formed ; but in Scotland, whether they were
the production of chance, or the effeft of policy, or intro-
duced by the Iriih colony above mentioned, and ttrengthened
by carefully preserving their genealogies both genuine and
fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Such a confederacy
might be overcome, it could not be broken; and no change
of manners, or of government, has been able, in some
parts of the kingdom, to difolve aflociations which are
founded upon prejudices so natural to the human rmind.
How formidable were nobles at the head of follo6ers,
who, counting that cause just and honourable' which their
chief approved, rushed into the field at his comriiand,; evei
ready to sacrifice their lives in defence of his prfoi or of
his fame; against such men a king contended with great
disadvantage; and that cold service which money purchifes,
or authority extorts, was not an equal match for their irdovit
and zeal.

IV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned The small

among the causes of the grandeur of the S'cttifh nobles number of
Our annals reach not back tb the firt division of property the nobles.
in the kingdom; but so far as we' can trace the'fmatter, the
original pofieffions of the nobles seem to have been extensive.
The ancient Thanes were the equis' and the rivals of their
prince. Many of the'earls and barons wio succeeded them,
were masters of territories no less ample. France and Eng-
land, countries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to a
numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom
neither extensive nor rich, coutl not contain many such

Vol.. I. C overgrown

B O o 1 overgrown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy

I. always diminishes in proportion to the increase of its num-
xwyo bers ; feeble if divided atnong a multitude, irrefifible if

centered in a few. When nobles are numerous, their ope-
rations nearly resemble those of the people they are routed
only by what they feel, not by what they apprehend; and
submit to many arbitrary and oppressive asss before they
take arms against their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more sensible and more impatient; quick in dif-
cerning, and prompt in repelling danger ; all its motions are
as sudden as those of the other are flow. Hence proceeded
the extreme jealousy with which the Scottish nobles observed
their monarchs, and the fierceness with which they opposed
their incroachments. Even the virtue of a prince did not
render them less vigilant or less eager to defend their rights;
and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the splendor of his vic-
tories and the glory of his name, was upon the point of ex-
periencing the vigour of their resistance, no less than his un-
popular descendant James III. Besides this, the near al-
liance of the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was
the natural consequence of their small number; and as con-
sanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union, all
the kindred of a Nobleman interested themselves in his quar-
rel, as a common cause ; and every contest the king had,
though with a single baron, soon drew upon him the arms of
a whole confederacy.

Thei V. THOSE natural connexions, both with their equals and
lagues and ith their inferiors, the Scottish nobles strengthened by a
combima-
tig, device, which, if not peculiar to themselves, was at least

more frequent among them, than in any other nation. Even
in times of profound peace, they formed aflciations, which,
when made with their equals, were called agues of mutual
defnce; and when with their inferiors, bonds of manrent.
By the former, the, contracting parties bound themselves
mutually to assist each other, in all causes and against all
persons. By the latter, protecion was ipulated on the
one hand, and fidelity and personal service promised on the
other'. Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men atfirft
into these confederacies; and while disorder and rapine were
universal, while government was unsettled, and the autho-
rity of laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it neceflary to unite in this manner for their security,
and the weak were obliged to court the patronage of the
strong. By degrees, these associations became so many

alliances
A 3o. ParL 1414. At 43. Parl. 1555.

alliances offensive and defensive against the throne; and as B o o K
their obligation was held to be more sacred than any tie i.
whatever, they gave much umbrage to our kings, and con-
tributed not a little to the power and independence of the
nobility. In the reign of James II. William the eighth earl
of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the earls
of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton,
Balveny, and other powerful barons; and so formidable was
this combination to the king, that he had recourse to a mea-
sure no less violent than unjust, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and ScotlandThe fre-
proved another cause of augmenting the power of the no-quent was

t- with Eng-

bility. Nature has placed no barrier between the two king-lad Eng
doms ; a river, almost every where fordable, divides them
towards the east: on the weft, they are separated by an ima-
ginary line. The slender revenues of our kings prevented
them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in the towns on
the frontier ; nor would the jealousy of their subje&s have
permitted such a method of defence. The barons, whose
estates lay near the borders, confidcred themselves as bound
both in honour and in interest to repel the enemy. The
suardenjiips of the different marches, offices of great power
and dignity, were generally bestowed on them. This gained
them the leading of the warlike counties in the south; and
their vassals, living in a tate of perpetual hostility, or enjoy-
ing at belt an insecure peace, became mort inured to war
than even the reft of their countrymen, and more willing to
accompany their chieftain in his molt hardy and dangerous
enterprises. It was the valour no less than the number of
their followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The
nobles in the northern and midland counties were often, du-
tiful and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs always
found it impracicable to subdue mutinous and ungo-
vernable spirit of the borderers. Il our domestic quarrels,
those who could draw to their iB the inhabitants of the
southern counties, were almost fre of victory; and, con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who possessed authority
there, were apt to forget the duty *hich they owed their
sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of subje&s.

VII. THE calamities which besel ou$ kings contributedThe fre-

more than any other cause to deftroy'the royal authority.quentmi-
Never was any race of monarchs so unfortunate as the "O'tiCS
Scottish. Of fix successive princes, from Robert ill. topcnciin
James VI. not one died a natural death ; and the minorities, Scotlad.
during that time, were longer, and more frequent, than ever
happened in any other kingdom. From Robert .rB e/io

C 2 James

B o James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of these were

I. called to the throne while they were minors, and almost in-
x*Jr sants. Even the most regular and best established govern-

ments feel sensibly the pernicious effects of a minority, and
either become languid and inaCtive, or are thrown into vio-
lent and unnatural convulsions. But under the imperfec
and ill-adjufted fytem of government in Scotland, these
effects were fill more fatal ; the fierce and mutinous spirit
of the nobles, unrestrained by the authority of a king, scorned
all fubjefion to the delegated jurifdidion of a regent, or to
the feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority was
circumscribed within narrower limits than ever the prero-
gatives of the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced
almost to nothing ; and the ariftocratical power gradually
rose upon the ruins of the monarchical. Left the personal
power of a regent hould enable him to at with too much
vigour, the authority annexed to that office was sometimes
rendered inconsiderable, by being divided; or, if a single
regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and the heads of the
more illustrious families, were seldom raised to that dignity.
It was often conferred upon men who possessed little influence
and excited no jealousy. They, conscious of their own
weakness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and
to permit others; and in order to support their authority,
which was destitute of real strength, they endeavoured to
gain the most powerful and active barons, by granting them
possessions and immunities, which raised them to till greater
power. When the king himself came to assume the reins
of government, he found his revenues wafted or alienated,
the crown lands seized or given away, and the nobles so ac-
customed to independence, that, after the struggles of a
whole reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to the fame
state in which they had ben at the beginning of his minority,
or towreft from them wlhthey had usurped during that time.

Review of If we take a view of whl happened to each of our kings,
the events who was so unfortunate as to be placed in this situation, the
favourable
to the no- truth and importance of this observation will fully appear.
bles during THE minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was
eh mino-difturbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who relying
rit9. on the aid of England, and on the support of Some difaffeced

I3219.
David II. barons among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success

which at first attended his arms, obliged the young king to
retire to France; and Baliol took possession of the throne.
A fmiall body of the nobles, however, continuing faithful to
their exiled prince, drove Baliol out of Scotland; and after
an absence of nine years, David returned from France, and

took

took the government of the kingdom into his own hands. B o o K
But nobles, who were thus wafting their blood and treasure i.
in defence of the crown, had a right to the upiRfurbed __
possession of their ancient privileges; and even some title to
arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim in that
age, that every leader might claim as his own, the territory
which his sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by ite nobility in that way : and to these
the gratitude and liberality of David added, by distributing
among such as adhered to him the vast poleffions which fell
to the crown by the forfeiture of his enemies. The family
of Douglas, which began to rife above the other nobles, in
the reign of his father, augmented both its power and its
property during his minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the Engliih during the continuance 1405.

of a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner almost James .
nineteen years. During that period, the kingdom was go-
verned, first by his uncle Robert duke of Albany, and then
by Murdo the son of Robert. Both these noblemen aspired
to the crown; and their unnatural ambition, if we may be-
lieve most of our historians, not only cut short the days of
prince David, the king's elder brother, but prolonged the
captivity of James. They flattered themselves that they
might ftep with less opposition into a throne, when almolt
vacant : and, dreading the king's return as the extincion of
their authority and the end of their hopes, they carried on
tlhe negociations for obtaining his liberty with extreme re-
miffnefs. At the fame time, they negleced nothing that
could either soothe or bribe the nobles to approve of their
scheme. They slackencd the reins of government; they
allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon ; they sus-
sered the most irregular ats of power, and even wanton
instances of oppreflion, to pass with impunity; they dealt
out the patrimony of the crown among those whose emnity
they dreaded or whose favour they had gained; and re-
duced the royal authority to a tate of imbecility, from
which succeeding monarchs laboured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the administration of I437.

affairs as well as the custody of the king's person were corn- James II.
mitted to Sir William Crichton and Sir Alexander Livings-
ton. Jealousy and discord were the effects of their con-
junEt authority, and each of them, in order to strengthen
hirmfelf, bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men whose aid he courted. While the young earl of Douglas,
encouraged by their divisions, erected a fort of independent
principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his vassals to

acknowledge

B O O K acknow-lcdge any authority but his own, he created knights,

i. appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military,
'.v-v- assumed every ensign of royalty but the title of king, and

appeared in public with a magnificence more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during
Jmceslll. the minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by feiz-

ing the person of the young king, and by the ascendant
which he acquired over him, soon engrofed the whole au-
thlority. He formed the ambitious project of raising his
fami!y to the fame pitch of power and grandeur with those
of the prime nobility ; and he affltded it. While intent on
this, he relaxed the vigour of government, and the barons
became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and indepen-
lence. The power, which Boyd had been at so much pains
to acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his
family, according to the fate of favourites, was sudden and
deftrucdive; but upon its ruins the family of Hamilton rose,
which soon attained the highest rank in the kingdom.
]3-5s V. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise

more turbulent, than those of the preceding kings. And
the contending nobles, encouraged or proteted either by the
king of France, or of England, formed themselves into niore
regular fattions, and disregarded more than ever the re-
firaints of order and authority. The French had the ad-
vantage of feeing one, devoted to their interest, raised to be
regent. This was the duke of Albany, a native of France,
and a grandson of James II. But Alexander Lord Home,
the most eminent of all the Scottiih peers who survived the
fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures during
the firit years of his administration; and the intrigues of the
queen dowager, sifter of Henry VIII. rendered the latter
part of it no less feeble. Though supported by French
auxiliaries, the nobles despised his authority, and regardless
either of his threats or his intreaties, peremptorily refused,
two several times, to enter England, to the borders of which
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these repeated in-
stances of contempt, the regent abandoned his troublesome
station, and, retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of
a private life, to an office destitute of real authority. Upon
his retreat, Douglas earl of Angus became mailer of the
king's person, and governed the kingdom in his name.
Many efforts were made to deprive him of his usurped au-
thority. But the numerous vaTals and friends of his family
adhered to him, because he divided with them the power and
emoluments of his otice ; the people reverenced and loved
;he nam off Dou: las; he e:ercif:d, without the title of

rPgent,

regent, a fuller and more absolute authority than any who B o o K-
had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous i.
preeminence of the Douglases seemed to be restored. v

To there, and to many other causes, omitted or unobserved

by us, did the Scottilh nobility owe that exorbitant and un-
common power, of which initances occur so frequently in
our history. Nothing however demonitrates so fully the
extent of their power, as the length of its duration. Many
years after the declension of the feudal systems in the other
kingdoms of Europe, and when the arms or policy of princes
had, every where, haken, or laid it in ruins, the founda-
tions of that ancient fabric remained, in a great measure,
firm and untouched in Scotland.

THE powers which the feudal institutions vested in the The power

nobles, soon became intolerable to all the princes of Europe, of the
who longed to possess something more than a nominal and bles be-
precarious authority. Their impatience to obtain this, pre- came into-
cipitated Henry III. of England, Edward II. and some other lerable to
weak princes, into rafl and premature attempts against the rinces.
privileges of the barons, in which they were disappointed or
perished. Princes, of greater abilities, were content to mi-
tigate evils which they could not cure ; they fought occupa-
tion for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars;
and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign
expeditions, which if they brought no other advantage,
secured at least domestic tranquillity. But time and acci-
dents ripened the feudal governments for deftruaion. To-The at.
wards the end of the fifteenth century, and beginning of the tempts to

humble the

sixteenth, all the princes of Europe attacked, as if by con- nobles uc-
cert, the power of their nobles. Men of genius then un-cefsfulin
dertook, with success, what their unikilful predecessors had France and
attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the most profound inEngland.
and the most adventurous genius of that age, began, and in
a single reign almost completed, the scheme of their deftruc-
tion. The.fure but concealed policy of Henry VI. of Eng-
land produced the fame effect. The means, indeed, employed
by these monarchs were very different. The blow which
Lewis Itruck was sudden and fatal. The artifices of Henry
resembled those flow poisons, which waite the constitution,
but become not mortal till some distant period. Nor did they
produce consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly added to
the crown whatever he refted from the nobles. Henry
undermined his barons, by encouraging them to fell their But the
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight nobles con-
in the legislature unknown to their predecessors. But whilee to

h ga-
these great revolutions were carying cn in two kingdoms ftrngth ia

withscotland.

B a a K with which Scotland was intimately connecded, little alter-

i. ation happened there; our kings could neither extend their
,_,- own prerogative, nor enable the commons to encroach upon

the aristocracy; the nobles not only retained most of their
ancient privileges and possessions, but continued to make
new acquisitions..

Our kings THIS was not owing to the inattention of our princes, or
enceocrt- to their want of ambition. They were abundantly fenfiblc of
e- to exe the exorbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous
ro~ A.i- to humble that order. They did not, however, poflefs means
,:~.;:. fuffciert for accompliihing this end. The resources of our

monarchs were few, and the progress which they made was

ce;-r! of courf inconsiderable. But as the number of their fol-
nrr-cn.s - Icwers, and the extent of their jurifdiion, were the two
va;t a; chicf c-rcumfta.ceS which rendered the nobles formidable;

ta in order to counterbalance the one, and to rcftrain the othcr,

all our kinpgs had reccurfe to nearly the fame expedients.

Encourage I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpoliihed
dii'ord manners, surroundod with valETls bold and licentious, whom
alcg the they were bsund by interest and honour to protec, the cause3

of dilcord were many and unavoidable. As the contending
parties could seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of
any common superior or judge, and their impatient spirit
would seldom wait the flow decisions of juflice, their quar-
rels were usually terminated by the sword. The offended
baron affembied his vaffils, and wafted the lands, or shed the
blood of his cnemv. To forgive an injury, was mean; to
forbear rerznge, infamous or cowardly'. Hence quarrelswere
:ranfinitted from father to son, and, under the name of deadly
f.dsi, fubfiled for many generations with unmitigated ran-
cour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguish these quarrels; and by scattering or cherishing
the feeds of discord among the nobles, that union, which
would have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which

must

" The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but,

what is more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought
the profcution of an injury offered to his family too troublesome, or too dan-
gerous, the Salique laws permitted him publicly to desist from demanding
vengeance ; but the fame laws, in order to punilf his cowardice, and want
of afetion to Lis family, deprivei him of the right of fucceflion. Henault's
Abreg Chronol. p. 8r. Among the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular infti-
tution diftinguiflbd by the name off adtiiu ; a voluntary association, the ob-
ject whereof was the personal security of those who joined in it, and which the
feebleness of government at that time rendered necelary. Amongother re.
gulations, which are contained in one of thefc fill extant, the following de-
serves notice: u If any ffociate hall either eat or drink with a person who
has killed any member of the fidalitium, unlcfs in the presence of the king,
the bifop, or the count, and unless he can prove that he did not know the
person, let him pay a great fine" Hicks Difert. Epiftolar. apud Thefaur.
L12g. Septrntr. iol. p. . .

mull at once have annihilated the prerogative, was effec- B o o K
tual!v prevented. To the fame cause, our kings were in- 1.
debted for the success with which they sometimes attacked _v-
the mosl powerful chieftails. They employed private re-
venge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming againlt
the person who had incurred their displeasure those rival fa-
nilies which wilhed his fall, they rewarded their service by
ltaring among them the spoils of the vanquiihcd. But this
expedient, though it erved to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility. Those who were now
the instruments of their prince's vengeance became, in a
hlort time, the objeRtsof his fear. Having acquired power
and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their turn, set
up for independence : and though there might be a flutua-
tibn of powecr and of property though old families fell, and
new ones rose upon their ruins ; the rights of the aristocracy
reiained entire, and its vigour unbroken.

11. As the adminitlration ofjufticc is one of the most pow- Extend the

clful tics bz:v.een a king and his subjects, all our monarchs jurifditioa
were at the utmost pains to circumscribe the jurifdiaion of k th
t!hc barons, and to extend that of tie crown. the external cout,
forms of fubordinaticn, natural to the feudal system, fa-
ioured this attempt. An appeal lay from the judges and
courts of the barons, to those of the king. The right,
however, of judging in the firt instance belonged to the
nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the effet of
appeals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The
royal jurisdiction was lmoft confined within the narrow
limits of the king's demesnes, beyond which his judges
claimed indeed much authority, but poffefled next to none.
Our kings were fcnfible of these limitations, and bore them
with impatience. But it was impossible to overturn in a
moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to strip the nobles,
at once, of privileges which they had held so long, and which
xwere wrought almost into the frame of the feudal conftitu-
tion. To accomplish this, however, was an objecE of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes. James I. led
the way here, as well as in other instances, towards a more
regular and perfect police. He made choice, among the
estates of parliament, of a certain n.mber ofperfons, whom
he difllnguifhed by the name of Lords of Seffon, and ap-
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil causes three
times in the year, and forty days at a time, in whatever place
he pleased to name. Their jurifdi&ion extended to all
matters which formerly came under the cognizance of
the king's council, and being a committee of parliament,
their decisions were final. James II. obtained a law, an-

Reyin.-

B 0 o K nexing all regalities, which honld be forfeited to the crown,

. and declaring the right of jurifdiclion to be unalienable for

the future. James III. imposed revere penalties upon those
judges appointed by the barons, whose deeifions should be
found on a review to be unjuit; and by many other re-
gulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his own
court". James IV. on pretence of remedying the in-
conveniences arising from the short terms of the court of
Session, appointed other judges called Lords of Daily Council.
The Sejsn was an ambulatory court, and met seldom : the
Daily Council was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh;
and though not composed of members of parliament, the
fame powers which the Lords of Session enjoyed were vested
in it. At last James V. ereted a new court that till sub-
sifts, and which he named the College of jitlice, the judges
or Senators of which were called Lords of Council and Sifion.
This court not only exercised the fame jurifdidion which
formerly belonged to the Session and Daily Council, but
new rights were added. Privileges of great importance
were granted to its members, its forms were prescribed, its
terms fixed, and regularity, power, and splendour conferred
upon it . The persons constituted judges in all these dif-
ferent courts had, in many refpeEts, the advantage of those
who presided in the courts of the barons; they were more
eminent for their skill in law, their rules of proceeding were
more uniform, and their decisions more consistent. Such
judicatories became the objects of confidence, and of vene-
ration. Men willingly submitted their property to their de-
termination, and their encroachments on the jurifdifions of
the nobles were popular, and for that reason successful.
By devices of a similar nature, the jurifdiion of the nobles
in criminal causes was refrained, and the authority of the
court of tutliciary extended. The crown, in this particular,
gaining insensibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample
authority; and the king, whose jurifdicion once resembled
that of a baron, rather than that of a fovereignp, came

more

A= ct 6. P.I469.'AC94. P. 1493. At 99. P. 1487. Keith, App, 74, &c.
The moll perfecl idea of the feudal system of government may be at-

tained by attending to the (tate of Germany, anc to the history of France.
In the former, the feudal institution still subsist with great vigour; and though
altogether abolished in the latter, the public records have been so carefully
preferred, that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with
more certainty and precision than those of any other country in Europe, to
trace its rife, its progress, and revolutions. In Germany, every principality
may be confidered as a fief, and all its great princes as vassals, holding of the
emperor. They possess all the feudal privileges; their fiefs are perpetual;
their uriIidtions ithin their own territories separate and extensive; and the

great

more and more to be confidered as the head of the commu- B o o K
nity, and the supreme dispenser of justice to his people. i.
These acquisitions of our kings, however, though compa- '-
ratively great, were in reality inconfidcrable ; and, notwith-
flanding all their efforts, many of the separate jurifdieions
poffefled by the nobles remained in great vigour; and their
final abolitionwas referred to a distant and more happyperiod.

BUT besides there methods of defending their prerogative Each of our
and humbling the aristocracy, which may be confidered as kings pur-

sued frme

common to all our princes, we shall find, by taking a review pla, of
of their reigns, that almost every one of our kings, from humbling
Robert Bruce to James V. had formed some particular the nobles.
system for depressing the authority of the nobles, which was
the objca both of their jealousy and terror. This conduct
es our monarchs, if wc reft satisfied with the accounts of our
historians, must be confidered as flowing entirely from their
resentment against particular noblemen; and all their at-
tempts to humble them must be viewed as the sallies of
;:ivate pafion, not as the consequences of any general plan
of policy. But though ome of their actions rmay be im-
puted to tofe passions, though the dilfcrent genius of the
r.mn, the temper of the times, and the fiate of the nation,
nccflarily occasioned great variety in their schemes; yet This pror-
without being chargeable with excessive refinement, we may ed by a -
aifirm that their end was uniformly the fame; and that the eventss
project of reducing the power of the aristocracy, sometimes theirrcigns.
avowed, and pursued with vigour; sometimes concealed, £
or seemingly suspended ; was never altogether abandoned.

No

offices of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed to particular families.
At the fame time the emperor retains many of the prerogatives of the feudal
monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretenoons are innumerable, and his
power (mall; his jurifdiaion within his own demesnes or hereditary countries
is complete; beyond the bounds of these it is almost nothing; and o per-
manent are feudal principles, that although the feudal fyvtem be overturned
in almost every particular Rtate in Germany, and although the greater part
of its princes have become absolute, the original feudal conflitution of the
empire till remains, and ideas peculiar to that form of government diret all
its operations, and determine the rights of all its princes. Our observations
with regard to the limited jurifdiaioii of kings under the feudal governments,
are greatly illutfrated by what happened in France. The feebleness and do.
tage of the decfendants of Charlemaigne encouraged the peers to usurp an in-
dependent jurifdiaion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown ; all
was seized by them. When Hugh Capet acended the throne, A. D. 98-,
he kept pofflllon of his private patrimony the Conte of Paris; and all the
jurifdikion which the kings his successors exercised for ofme time, was within
its territories. There were only four towns in France where he could efla-
blilh Grands Baillti, or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French Monarchs
had recourse for extending theirjurifdiCion were exactly timilar to those em-
ployed by our princes. Hnault's AbrcgS, p. 617, &c. De l'Efprit des
Loix, liv. 3. chl. ;c, &c.

B O 0 K No prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Ro-

. bert Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and

v-_.- placed him on the throne. His gratitude and generosity be-
Raert ftlowed on them the lands of the vanquished. Property has
srce. seldom undergone greater or more sudden evolutions, than

those to which it was subject at that time in Scotland. Ed-
ward I. having forfeited the estates of most of the ancient
Scottish barons, granted them to his Englifl fubjeds.
There were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized by
new masters. Amidit such rapid changes, confusion was
unavoidable; and rrany possessed their lands by titles ex-
tremely defective. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their being weary of war
than desirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for check-
ing the growing power and wealth of the nobles. He fum-
moned them to appear, and to shew by what right they held
their lands. They assembled accordingly, and the question
being put, they fiarted up at once, and drew their swords,
' By these, said they, we acquired cur lands, and with these
we will defend them." The king, intimidated by their
boldness, prudently dropped the project. But so deeply did
they resent this attack upon their order, that, notwithftand-
ing Robert's popular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a
dangerous conspiracy againfl his life.
raira. DAvIn his son, at sirss an exile in France, afterwards a

prisoner in England, and involved in continual war with
Edward III. had not leisure to attend to the internal police
of his kingdom, or to think of retrenching the privileges of
the nobility.
Ribert l. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the mili-

tnrv than the civil tranfations of the reign of Robert II.
Skirimifhes and inroads of littie consequence they describe
minutely; but with regard to every thing that happened
during several years of tranquillity, they are altogether
silent.
Robert m. THE feeble adminifration of Robert III. must likewise be

pased over slightly. A prince of a mean genius, and of a
frail and sickly constitution, was not a fit person to enter
the lifts with active and martial barons, or to attempt wrest-
ing from them any of their tights.
James I. THE civil tranfadions in Scotland arc better known since

the beginning of the reign of James I. and a complete fe-
ries of our laws supplics the defeCts of our historians.
The English made ome amends for their injustice in de-
taining that prince a prisoner, by their generous care of his
education. During his long residence in England he had an

opportunity

opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more ad- B o o z
vanced itate, and refined from many of the imperfetions 1.
which still adhered to it in his own kingdom. He saw their .vo
nobles great, but not independent; a king powerful, though
far from absolute: he saw a regular administration of go-
vernment; wife laws enacted; and a nation flourishing and
happy, because all ranks of men were accustomed to obey
them. Full of these ideas, he returned into his native
country, which presented to him a very different scene.
The royal authority, never great, was now contemptiie,
by having been so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony and revenues of the crown were almost totally
alienated. During his long absence the name of king was
little known, and less regarded. The licence of many years
had rendered the nobles independent. Universal anarchy
prevailed. The weak were exposed to the rapine and op-
pression of the strong. In every corner some barbarous
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the king nor
pitied the people q.

JAMES was too wife a prince to employ open force to cor-

rect such inveterate evils. Neither the men nor the times
would have borne it. He applied the gentler and less offen-
five remedy of laws and statutes. In a parliament held im-
mediately after his return, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-eftablilh
order, tranquillity, and justice in the kingdom. But, at the
fame time that he endeavoured to secure these blessings to
his fubjets, he discovered his intention to recover those pof-
feflions of which the crown had been unjustly bereaved;
and for that purpose obtained an at, by which he was
impowered to summon such as had obtained crown lands
during the three last reigns, to produce the rights by which
they held themr. As this statute threatened the property
of the nobles, another which passed in a subsequent par-
liament aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By it the
leagues and combinations which we have already described,
and which rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown;
were declared unlawful'. Encouraged by his success in the
beginning of his enterprise, James's next ftep was still bolder
and more decisive. During the fitting of parliament he

seized,

q A cotemporary monkish writer defcribcs there calamitics very feelingly,

in his rude Latin : In diebus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed quilibet potcn-
tiorum juniorem oppreffit; et toturn regnum suit unum latrocin:um; homi-
¢idia, depradationes, inceydia, et ctera maleficia remanferunt impunita; et
jufiitia relegata extra terminos regni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud Innei
Eflay, vol. i. p. 272.

At 9. P. 1424. * At. 30. P. 1424.

B o o K seized, at once, his cousin MIurdo duke of Albany, and his

i. sons; the earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March, and
k-vj above twenty other peers and barons of prime rank. To

all of them, however, he was immediately reconciled, ex-
cept to Albany and his sons, and Lennox. These were tried
by their peers, and condemned; for what crime is now
unknown. Their execution struck the whole order witli
terror, and their forfeiture added vast poffeffipns to the
crown. He seized, likewise, the carldoms of Buchan and
Strathern, upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell to
him by inheritance. The patience and inacivity of the
nobles, while the king was proceeding so rapidly towards
aggrandizing the crown, are amazing. The only obltruc-
tion he met with was from a flight infurretion headed by
the duke of Albany's youngcft son, and that was easily sup-
prefed. The splendour and presence of a king, to which
the great men had been long unaccustomed, inspired reve-
rence: James was a prince of great abilities, and conducted
his operations with much prudence. He was in friendship
with England, and closely allied with the French king:
!:e rws adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual security
and happiness under his administration: and all his acqui-
fitions, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been
gained by attacks upon individuals; were obtained by deci-
sions of law; and being founded on circumstances peculiar
to the persons who suffered, might excite murmurs and ap-
prehensions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a general
rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt which the
king made. Encouraged by the facility with which he had
hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure that irritated
the whole body of the nobility, and which the events
shew either to have been entered into with too much pre-
cipitancy, or to have been carried on with too much vio-
lence. The father of George Dunbar earl of March had
taken arms against Robert III. the king's father; but that
crime had been pardoned, and his lands restored by
Rcbert duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the re-
gent had exceeded his power, and that it was the preroga-
tive of the king alone to pardon treason, or to alienate lands
annexed to the crown, obtained a sentence, declaring the
pardon to be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earl-
dom. Many of the great men held lands by no other right
than what they derived from grants of the two dukes of
Albany. Such a decision, though they had reason to expet
it in consequence of the statute which the king had obtained,
occafoned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at present

the

the only sufferer, the precedent might be extended, and B o K
their titles to possessions which they confidered as the re- I.
wards of their valour, might be fubjeded to the review of k,-
courts of law, whose forms of proceeding, andjurifdi&ion,
were in a martial age little known, and extremely odious.
Terror and discontent spread fast upon this discovery of the
king's intention; the common danger called on the whole
order to unite, and to make one bold stand, before they were
stripped fucceflively of their acquisitions, and reduced to a
state of poverty and insignificance. The prevalence of these
sentiments among the nobles encouraged a few desperate
men, the friends or followers of those who had been the
chief sufferers under the king's administration, to form a
conspiracy againt his life. The first uncertain intelligence
of this was brought him, while he lay in his camp before
Roxburgh castle. He durst not confide in nobles, to whom
he had given so many causes of disgust, but initantly dif-
miffed them and their vassals, and, retiring to a monastery
near Perth, was soon after murdered there in the molt cruel
manner. All our historians mention with astonishment this
circumstance, of the king's disbanding his army at a time
when it was so necessary for his preservation. A king,
fay they, surrounded with his barons, is secure from fc-
cret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But those very
barons were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it
is evident from this review of his administration, that he had
greater reason to apprehend danger, than to expeL defence,
from their hands. It was the misfortune of James, that
his maxims and manners were too refined for the age in
which he lived. Happy! had he reigned in a kingdom more
civilized; his love of peace, of justice, and of elegance,
would have rendered his schemes successful; and instead of
perishing because he had attempted too much, a grateful
people would have applauded and seconded his efforts to
reform and improve them.

CRICHTON, the most able man of those who had the

diretion of affairs during the minority of James II. had
been the minister of James I. and well acquainted with his
resolution of humbling the nobility. He did not relinquifli
the dfign, and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the
fame sentiments. But what James had attempted to effe&
slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crichton pursued
with the impetuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with the
fierceness peculiar to that age. William the sixth earl of
Douglas was the first vi&im to their barbarous policy. That
young nobleman (as we have already observed), contemning

the

B o o K the authority of an infant prince, almost openly renounced

i. his allegiance, and aspired to independence. Crichton, too
'V'J-' high spirited to bear such an insult, but too weak to curb

or to bring to justice so powerful an offender, decoyed him
by many promises to an interview in the castle of Edin-
burgh, and, notwithstanding these, murdered both him and
his brother. Crichton, however, gained little by this at of
treachery, which rendered him universally odious. William
the eighth earl of Douglas was no less powerful, and no less
formidable to the crown. By forming the league which we
already mentioned with the earl of Crawford and other
barons, he had united against his sovereign almost one half
of his kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fame
snare which had been fatal to the former earl. Relying on
the king's promises, who had now attained to the years of
manhood, and having obtained a fafe-conduc under the great
feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle. James
urged him to dissolve that dangerous confederacy into
which he had entered; the earl obstinately refused; " if
you will not;" said that enraged monarch, drawing his dag-
ger, "tbhs shall;" and stabbed him to the heart. An action
so unworthy of a king filled the nation with astonishment
and with horror. The earl's vassals ran to arms with the
utmost fury, and dragging the fafe-condu&, which the king
hLd granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they marched to-
wards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to besiege
the castle. An accommodation, however, ensued; on what
terms is not known. But the king's jealousy, and the new
earl's power and resentment, prevented it from being of long
continuance. Both took the field at the head of their armies,
and met near Abercorn. That of the earl, composed chiefly
of borderers, was far superior to the king's both in number
and in valour; and a single battle must, in all probability,
have decided whether the house of Stuart or of Douglas
ras henceforth to possess the throne of Scotland. But,
while his troops impatiently expected the signal to engage,
the carl ordered them to retire to their camp; and Sir James
Hamilton of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the
greatest confidence, convinced of his want of genius to im-
prove an opportunity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This example was
followed by many; and the earl, despised or forsaken by
all, was oon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to de-
pend for his subsistence on the friendship of the king of
England. The ruin of his great family, which had so long
rivalled and overawed the crown, and the terror with which

such

fich an example of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, B o o K
secured the king, for some time, from opposition; and the I.
royal authority remained uncontrolled and almost abWWot.
James did not fuffcr this favourable interval to paIs unim*
proved; he procured the content of parliament to laws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and more subversive of the
privileges of the aristocracy, than were ever obtained by any
former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of these, not only all the vast poffefions of the

earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior
and future alienations of crown lands were declared to-be
void, and the king was impowered to seize them at plea-
sure, without any process or form of law, and oblige the
pofleflors to refund whatever they had received from them .
A dreadful instrument of oppreflion in the hands of a prince!

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenflip of the marches

to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in several instances,
the jurifdicion of that office, and extended the authority
of the king's courts u.

BY a third, it was enaced that no Regality, or exelufive

right of administering justice within a man's:own lands,
fliould be granted in time to come, without the. content of
parliament ; a condition which implied almift an express
prohibition. Those nobles who already pofleffed that great
privilege, would naturally be solicitous to prevent it. from
becoming common, by being bestowed on many. Those
who had not themselves attained it, would envy: others the
acquisition of such a flattering diftinCion, and both would
concur in rejecting the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth at, all new grants of hereditary offices were

prohibited, and those obtained since the death'of the last
king were revoked .

EACH of these Atatutes undermined some of the great

pillars on which the power of the aristocracy refted. Dur-
ing the remainder of his reign, this prince-purfued the plan
which he had begun with the utmost vigour; and had not
a sudden death, occafioded by tho splinter of a cannon thieh
burst near him at the siege of Roxbutrgh, prevented hi po-
grefs, he wanted neither genius nor courage to prfec it:
and Scotland ight, in all probability, have been the first
kingdom in Europe which would have fern the ifub sion
of the feudal system.

JAMIS II. discovered no l6s egernefs tr his father or Jas II.
grandfather to humble the nobility.; bat far inferir to

VOL. I. D eithr
At 4I. . 1455. - Ibid. Ac 4. ' Ibid4. A -43 Aa 44.

B o o t either of them in abilities and address, he adopted a plan

. extremely impolitic, and his reign was disastrous, as well as
.vyru his end tragical. Under the feudal government, the nobles

were not only the king's ministers, and poflefled of all the
great offices of power or of trust; they were likewise his
companions and favourites, and hardly any but them ap-
proached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But
James, who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at
an unusual distance, and bestowed every mark of confidence
and afffeion upon a few mean persons, of professions so
dishonourable as ought to have rendered them unworthy of
his presence. Shut up with there in his castle of Stirling,
he seldom appeared in public, and amused himself in archi-
teaure, music, and other arts which were then little esteem-
ed. The nobles beheld the power and favour of these
minions with indignation. Even the sanguinary measures
of his father provoked them less than his neglect. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every
man thought himself injured, because all were contemned.
Their discontent was much heightened by the king's recal-
ling all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities,
and every other concession which was detrimental to his
prerogative, and which had been extorted during his mi-
nority. Combinations among themselves, secret intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war,
were the effets of their resentment. Alexander duke of
Albany, and John earl of Mar, the king's brothers, two
young men of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame coldness as
he did the other great men, entered deeply into all their
cabals. The king deteced their designs before they were
ripe for execution, and, seizing his two brothers, commit-
ted the duke of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The earl of
Mar having remonstrated with too much boldness against
the king's condut, was murdered, if we may believe our
historians, by his command. Albany, apprehensive of the
fame.fate, made his escape out of the castle, and fled into
France. Concern for the king's honour, or indignation
at his measures, were perhaps the motives which firt in-
duced him to join the malecontents. But James's attach-
ment to favourites rendering him e:ery day more odious to
the nobles, the profpe& of the advantages which might be
derived from their general difaffe&ion, added to the resent-
ment which he felt on account of his brother's death and his
own injuries, soon inspired Albany with more ambitious and
criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.

of

of England, in which he assumed the name of Alexander B o .
king of Scots; and in return for the afliftance which was . .
promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound J
himself, as oon as he was put in poffefflon of the kingdom,
to swear fealty and do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to contract a
new one with England, and to surrender some of the strongest
castles and molt valuable counties in Scotland z. That aid,
which the duke so basely purchased at the price of his own
honour and the independence of his country, was punc-
tually granted him, and the duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him'towards Scotland. The
danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the
affftance of those nobles whom he had so long treated with
contempt. Some of them were in close confederacy with
the duke of Albany, and approved of all his pretensions.
Others were impatient for any event which would restore
their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They seemed,
however, to enter with zeal into the measures of their so-
vereign for the defence of the kingdom against its invaders",
and took the field at the head of a powerful army of their
followers, but with a stronger disposition to redress their
own grievances than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed
resolution of punishing those minions whose insolence they
could no longer tolerate. This resolution they executed in
the camp near Lauder, with a military dispatch and rigour.
Having previously concerted their plan, the earls of Angus,
Huntly, Lennox, followed by almost all the barons of chief
note in the army, forcibly entered the apartment of their
sovereign, seized all his favourites except one Ramsay,
whom they could not tear from the king, in whose arms he
took flielter, and, without any form of trial, hanged them
instantly over a bridge. Among the molt remarkable of
those who had engrofled the king's affetion, were Cochran
a mason, Hommil a taylor, Leonard a smith, Rogers a
musician, and Torfifan a fencing-mafter. So despicable a
retinue discovers the capriciousness of James's characer,
and accounts for the indignation of the nobles, when they
beheld the favour due to them, bestowed on such unworthy
obje&s.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under

his command, and, difmifiing it, shut himself up in the
castle of Edinburgh. After various intrigues; Albany's
lands and honours were at length restored to him, and he

) z2 seened
Aberc, Mart. Atch. v. ii. p. 443. ' Blck Ats: fol. 65.

o o e teme~ even to have regained his brother's favour by some
r. important services. But their friendship was not of long
iv - duration .James abandoned himself once more to the

guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lauder did not deter others from courting that dan-
gros pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt
had been made to take away his life by poison, fled from
court, and, retiring to his cattle of Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of barons than attended on the king himself.
At the fame time he renewed his former confederacy with
Edward; the earl of Angus openly negociated that infa-
mous treaty; other barons were ready to concur with it;
and if the sudden death of Edward had not prevented
Albany's receiving any aid fronr England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of this un-
worthy combination with the enemies of his country. But,
instead of any hopes of reigning in Scotland, he found, upon
the death of Edward, that he could not reside there in safety;
and, flying firt to England and then to France, he seems
from that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the king and
his ministers multiplied the insults which they offered to the
nobility. A standing guard, a thing unknown under the
feudal governments, and inconsistent with the familiarity
and confidence with which monarchs then lived aidft their
nobles, was raised for the king's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created earl of Bothwtll, the
fame person who had so narrowly escaped when his com-
panions were put to death at Lauder. As if this precaution
had not been sufficient, a proclamation was issued, forbid-
ding any person to appear in arms within the precincts of
the court ; which, at a time when no man of rank left his
own house without a numerous retinue of armed followers,
was,--in effet, debarring the nobles from all access to the
king. James at the fame time became fonder of retirement
·than ever, and, funk in indolence or fhperftition, or atten-
tive only to amusements, devolved his whole authority upon
his favourites. So many injuries provoked the mot confider-
able nobles to take arms, and having persuaded or obliged
the duke of Rothesay, the king's eldest son, a youth-of fifteen,
to set himself at their head, they openly declared their in-
tention of depriving James of a crown of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by this danger,
the king quitted his retirement, took the field, and encoun-

tered
k Fercrius 398.

tered them near Bannockburn; but the valour of the Bor- a o o ,
derers, of whom the army of the malecontents was chiefly 1.
composed,. soon put his troops to flight, and he himself r
was lain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole conduc; but the charaaer of a
cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to
h.m by our historians. His neglect of the nobles irritated,
but did not weaken them; and their discontent, the immo-
derate ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have disturbed
a more vigorous administration, and to have rendered a
prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation which many persons of rank ex-

pressed against the conduc of the conspirators, together
with the terror of the sentence of excommunication which
the pope pronounced against them, obliged them to use their
vicory with great moderation and humanity. Being con-
fcious how detestable the crime of imbruing their hands in
the blood of their overeign appeared, they endeavoured to
regain the good opinion of their countrymen, and to atone
for the treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty
towards the son. They placed him instantly on the throne,
and the whole kingdom soon united in acknowledging his
authority.

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in James IV.

an high degree, all the paflions which animate a young and
noble mind. He loved magnificence, he delighted in war,
and was eager to obtain fame. During his reign the an-
cient and hereditary enmity between the king and nobles
seems almost entirely to have ceased. He envied not their
splendor, because it contributed to the ornament of his
court nor did he dread their power, which he confidered as
the security of his kingdom, not as an object of terror to
himself. This confidence on his part met with the proper
return of duty and affection on theirs; and, in his wat with
England, he experienced how much a king beloved by his
nobles is able to perform. -Though the ardour of his courage
and. the spirit of chivalry, rather than the profpet of any
national advantage, were the motives of that expedition,
such was the zeal of his fubjets for the king's glory, that
he was followed by as gallant an army as ever any of his
ancestors had led upon English ground. But-though James
himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimental to the
aristocracy, his reign was diftinguifhedby an event extremely
fatal to it and one accidental blow humbled it more than

all

B o O x all the premeditated attacks of preceding kings. In the

L rash and unfortunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility
xv-«o chose rather to die than to desert their sovereign. Twelve

earls, thirteen lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an
incredible number of barons, fell with the king'. The
whole body of the nobles long and sensibly felt this disaster;
and if a prince of full age had then ascended the throne,
their consternation and feebleness would have afforded him
advantages which no former monarch ever poffefled.
Jams V. BTr James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant

of a year old; and though the office of regent was conferred
upon his cousin the duke of Albany, a man of genius and
enterprise, a native of France, and accustomed to a govern-
tment where the power of the king was already great; though
he made many bold attempts to extend the royal authority;
though he put to death lord Home, and banished the earl of
Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in the king-
dom, the aristocracy loft no ground under his administration.
A Rranger to the manners, the laws, and the language of
the people whom he was called to rule, he aed, on some
occasions, rather like a viceroy of the French king, than the
governor of Scotland; but the nobles aflerted their own
privileges, and contended for the interest of their country
with a boldness which convinced him of their indepen-
dence, and of the impotence of his own authority. After
several unsuccessful struggles, he voluntarily retired to
France; and the king being then in his thirteenth year, the
nobles agreed that he hould assume the government, and that
eight persons hould be appointed to attend him by turns,
and to advise and assist him in the administration of public
affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of that number,
did not long remain satisfied with such divided power. He
gained ome of his colleagues, removed others, and inti-
midated the reft. When the term of his attendance expired,
he fill retained authority, to which all were obliged to
submit, because none of them was in a condition to dispute
it. The affection of the young king was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an active
and high-fpirit prince submitted, with great impatience,
to the reitraint in which he was kept. It ill suitet his years,
or disposition, to be confined as a prisoner within his own
palace; to be treated with no refped, and to be deprived of
all power. He could not, on some occasions, conceal his
refertrtent and indignation, Angus foresaw that he had

much
A.bcr. ii. 540.

much to dread from these; and as he could not gain the a o o K
king's heart, he resolved to make sure of his person. James i.
was continually surrounded by the Larl's spies and con e

r. ~

dents; many eyes watched all his motions, and obfe&ved
every ftep he took. But the king's eagerness to obtain li-
berty eluded all their vigilance. He escaped from Falkland
and fled to the cafie of Stirling, the residence of the queen
his mother, and the only place of strength in the kingdom
which was not in the hand of the Douglases. The nobles,
of whom some were influenced by their hatred to Angus,
and others by the refpe for the king, crowded to Stirling,
and his court was soon filled with persons of the greatett
diftinsion. The earl, though aftoniihed at this unexpeted
revolution, resolved at first to make one bold push for re-
covering his authority, by marching to Stirling at the head
of his followers; but he wanted either courage or ftreigth
to execute this resolution.- In a parliament-held soon after,
he and his adherents were attainted, and after escaping from
many dangers, and enduring much misery, he was at length
obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though extremely

young, the full authority of a king. He was inferior to no
prince of that age in gracefulness of person or in vigour of
mind. His understanding was good, and his heart warm;
the former capable of great improvement, and the latter
susceptible of the best imprellions. But, according to the
usual fate of princes who are called to the throne in their
infancy, his education had been negleced. His private
preceptors were more ready to flatter than to inftrut hinm
It was the interest of those who governed the kingdom,
to prevent him from knowing too much. The earl of
Angus, in order to divert him from business, gave him an
early taste for such pleasures as afterwards occupied and
engrofled him more than became a king. Accordingly we
discover in James all the features of a great but uncultivated
spirit. On the one hand, violent passions, implacable re*
fentment, an immoderate desire of power, and the utmost
rage at disappointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punishment of private oppressors, confidence in
his favourites, and the most engaging openness and affability
of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power

of the nobles, led him early to imitate his predecessors in
their attempts to humble them. The plan he formed for
that purpose was more profound, more systematic, and pur-
sUed with greater conitancy and steadiness, than that of anyof

his

sa'b i ancLfiors , and he influence of the events in his reign

1. upn thofe.of the fulequcnt period render it nectflary to
.V% cxplaia his conduct . greater length, and to enter into a

nore minute detail of his aions. He had penetration
enough to discover those defets in the schemes adopted by
former kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife 4aws operate
slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce spirit of the feu-
dal -noles was not to be subdued by these alone. The
effas of the violent measures of James II. convinced him,
that thepprclion of one great family is apt either to excite
the suspicion and resentment of the other nobles, or to en-
.rich with-its spoils some new family, which would soon
adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally formidable
to'the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of James III.
that neglect wassill more intolerable to the nobles than op-
prefion, and that the ministry of. new men and favourites
was both dishonourable and dangerous to a prince. At the
fime time he felt that the authority of the crown was not
fafficirnt to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy, and
that ithout fomc new accefflon of strength he could exped
no better faccefs in the struggle than his ancestors. In this
extremity he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they
would both reliih his plan, and concur, with all their in-
fluence, in enabling him. to put it in execution. Under the
feudal government the church, being.reckoned a third estate,
'had its reprefenttivaes in parliament; the number of these
was confiderablec: and they possessed great influence in that
assembly. The fupertition of former.-kings, and the zeal
of many ages of ignorance, had bestowed on ecclesiastics a
great proportion o. the national wealth; and the autho-
rity'which d-ty acquired by; the everence of the people,
was superior even-to that which they derived from their
Triches. This powerful body, however, depended entirely
on the crown. The popes, notwithtanding their. atten-
-tioa to extend their usurpations, had neglefted Scotland as a
distant and poor kingdom and permitted its kings to exercise .
powers which theydifputed with mon considerable princes.
,The Scottish monarchs had the sole right of nomination to
aCaat .bishopric and abbeys d; nd James naturally con-
cluded, that men who. expected preferment from his favour,
would be willing to merit it, by promoting; his designs.
Happily for him, the nobles had not yet recovered the blow
which ftel n their order at Elowden, and if. we may judge

either
a Epift.Reg. Scot. . 197, &c. A 15. P. P. 14o.

either from their condu&, or from the chara&er given of X o o x
them by Sir Ralph Sadler, the Englih -envoy in Scotland, i.
they were menof little genius, of no experience in bulinefs,
anl incapable of aQiig either with unanimity, or with vi-
gour. Many of the clergy, on the other hand, were dif
tingtifhed by their great abilities, and no les by their ambi-
tion. Various causes of disgust had arisen between them
and the nobles, who despised their charaEter, and envied
their power or their wealth. By ating in concert with the
king, they not only would gratify him, but avenge them-
selves, and hoped to aggrandize their own order, by de-
prefing those who were their sole rivals. Secure of so pow-
erful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with greater
boldness. In the firit heat of resentment, he had driven
the earl of Angus out of the kingdom; and, sensible that
a person so' far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles which would retard or render
ineffetual all its schemes, he solemnly swore, that he would
never permit him to return into Scotland; and, notwithftand-
ing the repeated solicitations of the king of England, he ad-
hered to his vow with unrelenting obtinacy. He then pro-
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and
other caitlcs, and to fill his magazines with arms and ammu-
nition. Having taken these precautions by way of defence, he
began to treat the nobilitywith the utmost coldness and re-
serve. Those offices, which they were apt, from long poflef-
sion, to confider as appropriated to their order, were now
bKftowed on ecclesiastics, who alone possessed the king's ear,
and, together with a few gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom
he had communicated his schemes, were intruted with the
management of all public affairs. These ministers were
chosen with judgment; and cardinal Beatoun, who soon
became the most eminent among them, was a man of fupfrior
genius. They served the king with fidelity, they carried on
his measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success.
James no longer concealed his distrust of the nobles, and
fuffcred no opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight
offences were aggravated into real crimes, and punilhed with
feveritv. Every accusation against persons of rank was
heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt was exa-
mined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to those who
were accused: The banishing Hepburn earl of Bothwell for
reasons extremely frivolous, beheading the eldest Ion of lord
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt, and the con-
demning lady Glamis, a sifter of the earl of Angus, to
he burnt for the crime of witchcraft, of which even that

credulous

B o o K credulous age believed her innocent, are monuments both of

I. the king's hatred ofthe nobility, of the severity of his
wvu government, and of the stretches he made towards absolute

power. By these acs of authority, he tried the spirit of the
nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their
patience increased his contempt for them, and added to the
ardour and boldness with which he pursued his plan. Mean-
while they observed the tendency of his schemes with con-
cern and with resentment; but the king's sagacity, the
vigilance of his ministers, and the want of a proper leader,
made it dangerous to concert any measures for their defence,
and impoflible to at with becoming vigour. James and his
counsellors, by a false ftep which they took, presented to
them, at length, an advantage which they did not fail to
improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted

Henry VIII. to disclaim the pope's authority, and to
seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His system of
reformation satisfied none of his fubjets. Some were
enraged because he had proceeded so far, others murmured
because he proceeded no farther. By his imperious temper,
and alternate persecutions of the zealots for popery, and
the converts to the protestant opinions, he was equally for-
midable to both. Henry was afraid that this general diffatif-
faction of his people might encourage his enemies on the
continent to invade his kingdom, He knew that both the
pope and the emperor courted the friendfrip of the king of
Scots, and endeavoured to engage him in an alliance agaiuft
England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effets
of their negociations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew. In order to accomplish this, he transmitted to
James an elaborate memorial, representing the numerous
encroachments of the fee of Rome upon the rights of so-
vereigns c ; and that he might induce him more certainly to
adopt the fame measures for abolishing papal usurpation,
which had proved so efficacious in England, he sent am-
baffadors into Scotland, to propose a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to accept this
invitation; the affitance of so powerful an ally, the high
honours which were promised him, and the liberal subsidies
he might have obtained, would have added no little dignity
to his domestic government, and must have greatly facilitated
the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand, a
war with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he

rejected
Strypc, Ecdcf. Mem. . App. Ijj.

reje&ted Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with B O O K
all his views. Thiswould bring him to depend on his barons; i.
an army could not be raised without their affitance: to call v.i
nobles incensed against their prince into the field, was to
unite his enemies, to make them feufible of their ownftrength,
and to afford them an opportunity of revenging their wrongs.
James, who was not ignorant that all there consequences
might follow a breach with England, liltened at fiirt to
Henry's proposal, and consented to the interview at York.
But the clergy dreaded an union, which mufi have been efta-
blifled on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken great
pains to infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concern-
ing religion, and had frequently solicited him, by ambafiadors,
to renounce the usurped dominion of the pope, which was
no less diflonourable to princes than grievous to their sub-
jets. The clergy had hitherto, with great address, diverted
the king from regarding these solicitations. But, in an ami-
cable conference, Henry expeted, and they feared, that
James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced
by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of
the church were an alluring objet to a prince who wanted
money, and who loved it ; that the pride and ambition of
ecclesiastics raised the indignation of the nobles; that their
indecent lives gave offence to the people; that the protestant
opinions were spreading fast throughout the nation and
that an universal defection from the eftablifled church would
be the consequence of giving the smallest degree of encou-
ragement to these principles. For these reasons, they em-
ployed all their credit with the king; and had recourse to
every artifice and insinuation, in order to divert him from
a journey, which must have been so fatal to their interest.
They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by magnifying
the danger to which he would expose his person, by ven-
turing so far into England, without any security but the word
of a prince, who having violated every thing venerable and
sacred in religion, was no longer to be trulted; and by way
of compensation for the fums which he might have received
from Henry, they offered an annual donative of fifty thousand
crowns; they promised to contribute liberally towards car-
rying on a war with England, and flattered him with the
profped of immense riches, arising from the forfeiture of
persons who were to be tried and condemned as heretics.
Influenced by there considerations, James broke his agree-
ment with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had
already come to York; and that haughty and impatient
monarch relented the affront by declaring war against Scot-

land.

a o o K land. His army was soon ready to invade the kingdom.

1. James was obliged to have recourse to the nobles, for the
\os defence of his dominions. At his command, they assembled

their followers; but with the fame dispositions which had
animated their ancestors in the reign of James III. and with
a full resolution of imitating their example, by punishing
those to whom they imputed the gfievances of which they
had reason to complain; and if the' king's ministers had not
been men of abilities, superior to those of James III. and
of considerable interest even with their enemies, who could
not agree among themselves what vicims to sacrifice, the
camp of Fala would have been as remarkable as that of
Lauder, for the daring encroachments of the nobility on the
prerogative of the prince. But though his ministers were
saved by this accident, the nobles had oon another oppor-
tunity of discovering to the king their dissatisfaction with
his government, and their contempt of his authority.
Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of the eafon, having
obliged the English army, which had invaded Scotland, to
retire, James imagined that he could attack them, with great
advantage, in their retreat; but the principal barons, with
an obstinacy and disdain which greatly aggravated their dif-
obedience, refused to advance a ftep beyond the limits of
their own country. Provoked by this insult to himself, and
suspicious of a new conspiracy against his ministers, the
king inftantlv disbanded an army which paid so little regard
to his orders, and returned abruptly into the heart of the
kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited prince could riot brook

such a mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been
rash, and his despair upon a disappointment was excellive.
He felt himself engaged in an unnecessary war with England,
which, instead of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that
he expe&ed, had begun with such circumstances, as encourag-
ed the insolence of his fubjets, and exposed him to the scorn
of his enemies. He saw how vain and ineffeaual all his pro-
jets to humble the nobles had been, and that, though in times
of peace a prince may endeavour to depress them, they will
rife, during war, to their former importance and dignity.
Impatience, resentment, indignation, filledlis bosom by turns.
The violence of there passions altered his temper, and, per-
haps, impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and
retired. He seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up
in profound meditation, and, through the night, he was
disturbed with those visionary terrors which make impreflion
upon a weak understanding only, or a disordered fancy. In

order

orderto revive the king's spirits, an inroad on the western o o K
borders was concerted by his ministers, who prevailed upon I.
the barons in the neighbouring provinces to raise as many \-v
troops as were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's
country. But nothing could remove the king's aversion to
his nobility, or diminish his jealousy of their power. He
would not even entrust them with the command of the forces
which they had assembled; that was reserved for Oliver
Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take pof-
feflion of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and
indignation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army.
Five hundred English, who happened to be drawn up in
fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the
king, and contempt of their general, produced an effe to
which there is no parallel in history. They overcame the fear
of death and the love of liberty; and ten thousand men fled
before a number so far inferior, without striking a single blow.
No man was desirous of a victory, which would have been
acceptable to the king, and to his favourite; few endeavour-
ed to save themselves by flight; the English had the choice
of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almof every
person of diftinacion, who was engaged in the expedition,
remained in their handss. This astonishing event was a
new proof to the king of the general difafeftion of the
nobility, and a new discovery of his own weakness and want
of authority. Incapable of bearing those repeated insults,
he found himself unable to revenge them. The deepest
melancholy and despair succeeded to the furious transports
of rage, which the first account of the route of his army
occasioned. All the violent passions, which are the enemies
of life, preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a
y6uthful and vigorous confitution. Some authors of that
age impute his untimely death to poison; but the diseases of
the mind, when they rife to an height, are often mortal;
and the known effets of disappointment, anger, and resent-
ment, upon a sanguine and inpetuous temper, sufficiently
account for his unhappy fate. "His death (fays Drum-
mond) proveth his mind to have been raised to an high
strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but could not
digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfortune, one
of two things must have happened: either the violence of
his temper would have engaged him openly to attack the.

nobles,

C According to an account of this event in the Hamilton MSS. about

thirty were killed, above a thousand were taken prisoners, and among them
a hundred and sixty persons of condition, Vol. ii. 86. The small number
of the Englilh prevented their taking more prifiners.

a o o K nobles, who would have foundin Henry awilling and powerful

r. protector, and have derived the fame affitance from him,
W which the malecontents in the succeeding reign did from his

daughter Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war
must have been the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, ne-
ceffity might have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers,
and be reconciled to his nobility. In that event the church
would have fallen a sacrifice to their union; a Reformation,
upon Henry's plan, would have been established by law i a
great part of the temporalties of the church would have
been seized; and the friendihip of the king and barons
would have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

StCH were the efforts of our kings towards reducing the

exorbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended
with success, we must not for that reason conclude that they
were not conduted with prudence. Every circumstance
seems to have combined against the crown. Accidental
events concurred with political causes, in rendering the best
concerted measures abortive. The affafination of one king,
the sudden death of another, and the fatal despair of a third,
contributed no less than its own natural trength, to preserve
the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our kings

pofleffed in their parliaments, is a circumstance seemingly
inexplicable, and which merits particular attention. As
these assemblies were composed chiefly of the nobles, they,
we are apt to imagine, muff have ditated all their decisions;

T'eextra- but, initead of this, every king found them obsequious to
crdiary in- his will, and obtained such laws as he deemed necessary for
Bacnce of
thSicti; extending his authority. All things were conduced there
kinz in with dispatch and unanimity; and in none of our historians
pr-iient. do we find an instance of any opposition formed against the

court in parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying
through the measures which were agreeable to the king. In
order to account for this singular fact, it is necessary to in-
quire into the origin and constitution of parliament.

The ra- THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all.its
f ns of it. operations, produced the fame effets in small as in great

societies; and the territory of a baron was, in miniature, the
model of a kingdom. He possessed the right of jurifdi&ion,
but those who depended on him being free men, and not
slaves, could be tried by their peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to assist both
in passing and executing his sentences. When assembled on
these occasions, they established, by mutual content, such re-
gulations as tended to the welfare of their small society; and

often

often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior, as B o o K
his necessities required. Change now a single name: in I.
place of baron, substitute king, and we behold a pailiament v
in its first rudiments, and observe the first exertions of
those powers, which its members now poflefs as judges,
as legislators, and as dispensers of the public revenues.
Suitable to this idea, are the appellations of the King's
Courts, and of the King's Great Council, by which par-
liaments were anciently diftinguifihed; and suitable to
this, likewise, were the constituent members of which
it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, such
as held the king in chief were bound, by the condition of
their tenure, to attend and to afiift in his courts. Nor was
this eteemed a privilege, but a service b. It was exacted
likewise of biihops, abbots, and the great ecclesiastics,
who, holding vast possessions of the crown, were deemed
subjea of the fame burden. Parliaments did not continue
long in this state. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a con-
fiderable hare of the public taxes were levied on them, the
inhabitants grew into etimation, and, being enfranchised
by the sovereign, a place in parliament was the consequence
of their liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or to impose such
a burden on a whole community, every borough was permit-
ted to chufe one or two of its citizens to appear in the name
of the corporation; and the idea of reprefintation was first
introduced in this manner. An innovation still more im-
portant naturally followed. The vassals of the crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful; but as
it is impossible to render property fixed and permanent,
many of their possessions came, gradually, and by various
methods of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into
different hands. Hence arose the diftintion between the
Greater and the Lser Barons. The former were those who
retained their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and less potent vassals of the crown. Both were bound,
however, to perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in parliament. To the lesser barons, who
formed no inconfiderable-body, this was an intolerable griev-
ance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure, boroughs re-
nounced their right of electing, charters were obtained con-
taining an exemption from attendance; and the anxiety with
which our ancestors endeavoured to get free from the obli-
gation of fitting in parliament, is furpafld, by that only

with.

r Du Cange, voc. Curia. h id. voc. Placitum, coL 5r9. Magna
Charta, a. 4. At. Jac. I. 1425. cap. 52.

B o O K with whlich their posterity solicit to be admitted there. In

I. order to acommodate both parties, at once, to secure to the
·V_ . king a fuffcieut number of members, in his great council,

and to save his vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy
expedient was found out. The obligation to personal at-
tendance was continued upon the greater barons, from which
the lesser barons were exempted, on condition of their elel-
i'., in each county, a certain number of reprifentatives, to
appear in their name. Thus a parliament became complete
in all its members, and was composed of lords spiritual and
temporal, of knights of the hires, and of burgesses. As
many causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfetion in England than in Scotland; as the rigour-of the
feudal institutions abated fooncr$ and its defeas were sup-
plied with greater facility in the one kingdom than in the
other; England led the way in all these changes, and bur-
geffes and knights of the shire appeared in the parliaments
of that nation, before they were heard of in ours. Bur-
geffes were first admitted into the Scottish parliaments
A-. r;6. by Robert Bruce'; and in the preamble to the laws of

Robert III. they are ranked among the constituent members
1427. of the alfembly. The lesser barons were indebted to James I.

for a statute exempting them from personal attendance, and
permitting them to eled representatives: the exemption was
eagerly laid hold on; but the privilege was so little valued,
that, except one or two instances, it lay negleCted during one
hundred and sixty years; and James IV. first obliged them
to fend reprefcntatives regularly to parliament .

A SCOTT-rSH parliament, then, consisted anciently of great

barons, of ecclesiastics, and a few representatives of boroughs.
Nor were there divided, as in England, into two houses,
but composed one assembly, in which the lord chancellor
presided'. In rude ages, when the science of government
was extremely imperfect among a martial people, unac-
cuainted with the arts of peace, strangers to the talents

which

Abercromby, i. 635.
k Ellays on Brit. Antiq. Es(. II. Dalrymp. Hil. of Feud. Prop. ch. 8.
I In England, the peers and commons seem early to have met in separate

houses; and James I. who was fond of imitating the Englilh in all their cuf-
to.ns, had probably an intention of introducing some considerable ditinftion
between the greater and lefler barons in Scotland; at least he determined
that their consultations should not be carried on under the diretion of the fame
president; for by his law, A. D. 1317, it is provided, " that out of the com-
mifiioners of all the hires hall be chosen a wife and expert man, called the
common speaker of the parliament, who shall propose all and sundry needs
and canies pertaining to the commons in the parliament or general counciL"
No fnch speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen; and by a subsequent law
the chancellor w~ declared perpetual president of prliament.

which make a figure in debate, and despising them, parlit- B 0 e x
ments were not held in the fame estimation as at present i.
nor did haughty barons love those courts, in which they ap- .-v~ '
peared with such evident marks of inferiority. Parlia-
ments were often hastily assembled, and it was, probably, in
the king's power, by the manner in which he issued his writs
for that purpose, to exclude such as were averse to his mea-
fures. At a time when deeds of violence were common,
and the restraints of law and decency were little regarded,
no man could venture with safety to oppose the king in hi#
own court. The great barons, or lords of parliament; were
extremely few; even so late as the beginning of the reign
of James VI." they amounted only to fifty-three. The ee-
clefiaftics equalled them in number, and being devoted im-
plicitly to the crown, for reasons which have been already
explained,- rendered all hopes of victory in any struggle def-
perate. Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious as might
be imagined, to prevent as of parliament favourable to the
royal prerogative; conscious of their own strength, and of
the king's inability to carry these ads into execution without
their concurrence, they trusted either to elude or to contemn
them; and the statute revoking the king's property, and an-
nexing alienated jurifdidions to the crown, repeated in every
reign, and violated and despised as often, is a tanding proof
of the impotence of laws, when opposed to power. So
many concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account
for the ascendant which our kings acquired in parliament.
But, without having recourse to any of these, a ingle cir-
cumftance, peculiar to the constitution of the Scottish par-
liament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto avoided,
will abundantly explain this fa&, seemingly so repugnant to
all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the lung, and
the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to race the confti-

tution of our parliaments, we find a committee, diitinguiihfd
by the name of Lords of A-ticles. It was their buGinef to
prepare and to digest all matters which were to be laid be-
fore the parliament. There was rarely any buinefs intro.
duced into parliament, but what had passed through Lb
channel of this committee; every motion for a new law was
first made there, and approved of, or re¢&ed by the em
hers of it; what they approved wma formed into a bill, 4
presented to parliament; and it eems probable, that wba
they reje&ed could not be introduced into thi house, Thip
committee owed the xtrar4diary PW pt vgAR4 t i t

Vo,-. .
E th,4

t Ais. e&U ,. i. pr 44.

I

B o O I the military genius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to

I. submit to the drudgery of civil business, too impetuous to
x.o'~e observe the forms, or to enter into the details necessary in

conduting it, they were glad to lay that burden upon a
small number, while they thenfelves had no other labour
than simply to give, or to refuse, their assent to the bills
which were presented to them. The lords of articles, then,
not only direaed all the proceedings of parliament, but pof-
fefled a negative before debate. That committee was chosen
and contituted in such a manner, as put this valuable pri-
vilege entirely in the king's hands. It is extremely probable,
that our kings once had the sole right of nominating the
lords of articles . They came afterwards to be ele&ed by
the parliament, and conifted of an equal number out of
each estate, and most commonly of eight temporal and eight
spiritual lords, of eight representatives of boroughs, and of
the eight great officers of the crown. Of this body, the
eight ecclesiastics, together with the officers of the crown,
were entirely at the king's devotion, and it was scarce pof-
fible that the choice could fall on such temporal lords and
burgesses as would unite in opposition to his measures. Ca-
pable either of influencing their eleAion, or of gaining them
when eleaed, the king commonly found the lords of arti-
cles no less obsequious to his will, than his own privy coun-
cil, and, by means of his authority with them, he could put
a negative upon his parliament before debate, as well as as-
ter it; and what may seem altogether incredible, the most
limited prince in Europe atually poffefled, in one instance,
a prerogative which the molt absolute could never attain °.

To

' It appears from authentic records, that a parliament was appointed to

be held March xI, 1566, and that the lords of articles were chosen and met
on the 7th, five days before the aflembling of parliament. If they could be
regularly eleted so long before the meeting of parliament, it is natural to
conclude, that the prince alone pofleffed the right of eleing them. There
are two different accounts of the manner of their election at that time, one
by Mary herelf, in a letter to the archbilhop of Glasgow: " We, accom-
" panied with our nobility for the time, pals to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh,

for holding of our parliament on the 7th day of this infant, and eleted

" the lords articulars." If we explain these words, according to the firiC
grammar, we muff conclude that the queen herself eleed 'them. It is,
however, more probable that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then pre-
sent with her, viz- her privy counsellors, and others, elected the lords of ar-
tides. Keith's Hi.L of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruth-
yen's, who exprefiy airms that the queen herself eleted them. Keith's
Append 2. 26. Whether we embrace the one orth other of these opinions,
is of no cn1equne. If the privy counsellors and nobles attending the court
had a right to elef the lords of articles, it was equally advantageous for the
crown, as if the prince had had the sole nomination of them.

* Having deduced the history of the committee of lords of articles as low
as the fbjeft of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps,

to

To this account of the internal constitution of Scotldaid, B o o KC

it will not be improper to add a view of the political fate of 1.
Europe at that period, where the following history com- Lv sW
mences. A thorough knowledge of that general system, of State of
which every kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re- turope at
quifite towards understanding the history of a nation, than the begin,
an acquaintance with its peculiar government and laws. sixteenth
The latter may enable us to comprehend domestic occur' century.
rences and revolutions; but without the former, foreign
traifaftions must be altogether mysterious and unintelligible.
By attending to this, many dark pafages in our history may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of historians
have seen only the effea, we may be able to discover the
cause.

E THE

to frme of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this singular
institution, and the political use which our kings made of there. When par-
liaments became more numerous, and more considerable by the admission of
the representatives of the lesser barons, the prefervingtheirinfluence overthe
lords of articles, became, likewise, an obje& of greater importance to our
kings. James VI. on pretence that the lords of articles could not find lei-
sure to confider the great multitude of affairs laid before them, obtained an a,
appointing four perons to be named out of each atek, who (hould meet
twenty days before the commencement of parliament , to receive all fuppli
cations, &c. and rejeting what they thought frivolous, (hould engross in a
book what they thought worthy the attention of the lords of articles. No
provision is made in the at for the choice of this felet body, and the king
would, of course, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I.
was beginning to introduce those innovations which gave so much offence to
the nation, he dreaded the opposition of his parliament, and in order to pre-
vent that, an artifice was made use of to secure the lords of articles for the
crown. The temporal peers were appointed to choose eight bihops, and the
bilhops eight peers; these sixteen met together, and elected eight knights of
the hire, and eight burgefres, and to these the crown officers were added as
usual. If we can only suppose eight persons of so numerous a body as the
peers of Scotland, were become by that time attached to the court, thef, it
is obvious, would be the men whom the bilhops would choose, and f confe-
quence the whole lords of articles were the tools and creatures of the king.
This practice, so inconsistent with liberty, was abolished during the civil war:
and the statute of James VI. was repealed. After the restoration, parliaments
became more servile than ever. What was only a temporary device, in the
reign of Charles I. was then converted into a landing law. " For my part,"
fays the author from whom I have borrowed many of these particulars, I
" hould have thought it less criminal in our restoration parliament, to have
"openly beflowed upon the king a negative before debate, than in such an
U underhand artificial manner to betray their constituents and the nation.'
Essays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a letter of Ran.
dolph's to Cecil, o Aug. I560, printed in the Appendix, that this parlia-
ment had some appearance of ancient precedent to justify their unworthy con-
dut. Various queftionsconcerning the constituent members of the Scottili
parliament; concerning the zra at which the representatives of boroughs were
introduced into that aflembly ; and concerning the origin and power of the
committee of lords of articles, occur ad have been agitated with great
warmth. Since the first publication of this work, all there disputed points
have been confidered with calmnefsand accuracy in Mr. Wright's Inquiry in-
to the Rife and Progress of Parliament, &c. 4to Edit. p. I 7, &c.

* A . P. 1594.

B o o K THE subversion of the feudal government in France, and

I. its declension in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned

a remarkable alteration in the political slate of Europe.
Kingdoms, which were inconsiderable when broken, and
parcelled out among nobles, acquired firmness and strength,
by being united into a regular monarchy. Kings became
conscious of their own power and importance. They medi-
tated schemes of conquest, and engaged in wars at a distance.
Numerous armies were raised, and great taxes imposed for
their subsistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were kept
in constant pay ; that service grew to be honourable; and
cavalry, in which the strength of European armies had hither-
to consisted, thought proper enough for the short and vo-
luntary excursions of barons who served at their own ex-
pence, were found to be unfit either for making or defend-
ing any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France

and Spain and Germany first appeared to make a trial of
their new strength. The division of that country into many
small states, the luxury of the people, and their effeminate
aversion to arms, invited their more martial neighbours to
an easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustomed to.
mock battles only, and to decide their interior quarrels by
innocent and bloodless victories, were astonished, when the
French invaded their country, at the fight of real war;
anid as they could not resist the torrent, they suffered it to
take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
supplied the want of strength. Necessity and felf-prefer-
vation led that ingenious people to the great secret of modern
politics, by teaching them how to balance the power of one
prince, by throwing that of another into the opposite scale.
By this happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preserved.
The scales were poised by very kilful hands ; the smallest
variations were attended to, and no prince was allowed to
retain any superiority, that could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of condua, pursued with so much success in

Italy, was not long confined to that country of political re-
finement. The maxim of preserving a balance of power is
founded so much upon obvious reasoning, and the situation
of Europe rendered it so necessary, that it soon became a
matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.. Every ltep
any prince took was observed by all his neighbours. Am-
baffados,(a kind of honourable spies) authorised by the mu-
tual jealousy of kings, refidrd amoft. constantly at every
different court, and had it in charge to'watch allits motions.
Dangers were foreseen at a greater di'stance, and prevented

w.ith

with more ease. Cnfederacies were formed to humble any Bo o0
power which rose above itb .'ue proportion. Revenge or ..
fel£-defence were no longer the only causes of hostility, it kv
became common to take arms out of policy ; and-war,' both
in its commencement and in its operations, was more an
exercise of the judgment, than of-the palfions of men. Al-
moil every war in Europe became general, and the moll in-
considerable states acquired importance, because they could
add weight to either scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year

one tilotfand five hundred and fifteen, and Charles V. who
obtained the Iniperial Crown in the year one thousand five
hundred and nineteen, divided between them the strength
and affections of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity was
not owing solely either to personal jealousy, or to the caprice
of private palfion, but was founded so much in nature and
true policy, that it fbfited between their posterity for fe-
veral ages. Charles succeeded to all the dominions of the
house of Austria. No family had evr gairied so much by
wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind
the Austrian princes rose, in a short time, from obscure
counts of Haplbourg, to be ai chdukes of Auffria and kings
of Bohemia, and were in pofleflon of the Imperial dignity
· b a fort of hereditary right. Besides these territories in
Germany, Charles was heir t the crown of Spain, and to
all the dominions which belonged to the house of Burgundy.
The Burgundian provinces engrofled, at that time, the riches
and commerce of one-half of Europe and he drew from
them, on many occasions, thole immense fums, which no
people without trade and liberty are able to contribute.
Spain furnished him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his conquests. At the
fame time, by the discovery of the new world, a vein of
wealth was opened to him, which all the extravagance of
ambition could not exhaust. These advantages rendered
Charles the first prince in Europe ; but he wished to be
more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His ge-
nius was of that kind which ripens lowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew Up, without observation, to an unex-
peted height and vigour. He pofleffed, in an eminent
degree, the charateriftic virtues of all the different races of
princes to whom he was allied. In forming his' schemes,
he discovered all the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand
his, grandfather; he pursued them with that obstinate and
inflexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar to the,
Austrian blood; and in executing them he could employ

the

a o o the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian ancestors.

I. His abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them
Ik _ would have been inferior to his designs, had not Providence,

in pity to mankind, and in order to preserve them from the
worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I.
to defend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were less
extenrvo, but more united, than the emperor's. His sub-
jcs were numerous, aive, and warlike, lovers of glory,
and lovers of their king. To Charles, power was the only
obje& of desire, and hepurfued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance
with his ambition; and though he negleced some advan-
tages, which a more phlegmatic or more frugal prince would
have improved, an aive and intrepid courage fupplie all
his defects, and checked or defeated many of the emperor's
designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of these

mighty rivals with a jealous attention. On the one fide, the
Italians saw the danger which threatened Christendom, and
in order to avert it, had rccoufe to the expedient which
they had often employed with success. They endeavoured
to divide the power of the two contending monarchs into
equal scales. and, by the union of several small states, to
counterpoise him whose power became too great. But what
they concerted with much wisdom, they were able to exe-
cute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were
feeble fences against the incroachments of military power.

0- the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the ba-

lance with less delicacy, but with a stronger hand. He was
the third prince of the age in dignity and in power; and
the advantageous situation of his dominions, his domestic
tranquillity, his immense wealth, and absolute authority,
rendered him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.
Each of the rivals courted him with emulation; he knew it
to be his interest to keep the balance even, and to retrain
both, by not joining entirely with either of them. But he
was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he-was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the paflions
of the man were an ovennatch for the maxims of the king.
Vanity and resentment were the great springs of all his un-
dertakings, and his neighbours easily found the way, by
touching these, to force him upon many rash and inconsistent
cnterprifes. His reign was a perpetual series of blunders in
politics; and while he esteemed himself the wisest prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those who found it necef-
fary, and could submit, to flatter him.

IN

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto B o o K

wafted her strength in the quarrels between France and Eng- 1.
land, emerged from her obscurity, took her station in the v.S
system, and began to have some influence upon the fate of
distant nations. Her afliftance was frequently of confe-
qunce to the contending parties, and the balance was often
so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to make it lean
toeither fide. The part assigned her, at this jun&ure, was
to divert Henry from carrying his arms into the continent.
That prince having routed the French at Guinegat and in-
vested Terouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition which ended
with his life. For the fame reason Francis encouraged and
assisted the duke of Albany to ruin the family of Angus and
Home, which were in the interest of England, and would
willingly have persuaded the Scots to revenge the death of
their king, and to enter into a new war with that kingdom.
Henry and Francis having united not tong after against the
emperor, it was the interest of both kings, that the Scots
should continue inaftive; and a long tranquillity was the
effet of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and
to embarrass Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For
this end he made great advances to James V. flattering the
vanity of the young monarch, by elecing him a knight of
the Golden Fleece, and by offering him a match in the Im-
perial family; while, in return for these empty honours, he
demanded of him to renounce his alliance with France, and
to declare war against England. But James, who had much
to lose, and who could gain little by closing with the empe-
ror's proposals, rejeced them with decency, and keeping
firm to his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to a& up-
on the continent with his whole strength.

HENRY himself began his reign by imitating the example

of his ancestors with regard to Scotland. He held its power
in such extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain
its friendship ; but, on the contrary, he irritated the whole
nation, by reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown
of England to the sovereignty over Scetland. But his own
experience, and the example of his enemies, gave him a
higher idea of its importance. It was impossible to defend
an open and extensive frontier against the incursions of an
ative and martial people. During any war on 'the conti-
nent, this obliged him to divide the strength of his king-
dom. It was necessary to maintain a kind of army of ob-
servation in the North of England; and after all precau-
tions, the Scottish borderers, who were superior to all man-

kind

B o kind in the ptaaice of irregular war, often made fuccefiful

I. inroads, and spread terror and desolation over many coun-
kvVo ties. He fell, at last, upon the true secret of policy, with

refpea to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little
penetration to discover, or too much pride to employ. The
situation of the country, and the bravery of the people, made
the conquest of Scotland impoflible but the national po-
verty, and the violence of faction, rendered it an easy mat.
ter to divide, and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore,
the former design, and resolved to employ his utmost address
in executing the latter. It had not -yet become honourable
for one prince to receive pay from another, under the more
decent name of a subsidy. But in all ages the fame argu
ments have been good in courts, and of weight with minis-
ters, factious leaders, and favourites. What were the
arguments by which Henry brought over so many to his in-
Lereft during the minority of James V. we know by the
original warrant ftil. extant , for remitting considerable
Iums into Scotland. By a proper diitribution of these,
many persons of note were gained to his party, anda faction
which held secret correspondence with England, and re-
ceived all its dire&ions from thence, appears henceforward
in our domeRtic contests. In the sequel of the history, we
ihall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scot-
land. His fucceiors adopted the fame plan, and improved
upon it. The affairs of the two kingdoms became inter-
woven, and their interests were often the fame. Elizabeth
divided her attention almost equally between them, and the
authority which he inherited in the one, was not greater
than that which he acquired in the other.

P Bum. HiL Ref. vol i. .

-B I

# BOOK II.

B O O K .II.

/jIARY queen of Scots, the daughter of JamedV. nrd B o o ;
of Mary of Guise, was born a few days before the death il.
of her father. The situation in which he left the kingdom .-J
alarmed all ranks of men with the profpet of a turbulent tlrth o
and disastrous reign. A war against England had been un -ary.le.,
dertaken without necessity, and carried on without fucefs. s8. xs4
Many persons of the first rank had fallen into the hands of th kl^
the English, in the unfortunate route near the firth of Sol- don.
way, and were still prisoners at London. A:ong the tell
of the nobles there was little union either in their views or
in their affetion; and the religions difpnttes occafiofed by
the opinions of the reformers, growing every day more vio-
lent, added to the rage of those fdions which are natural
to a form of government nearly ariftoCratical.

THE government of a queen was unknown in Sc.*land,

and did not imprint much reverence in the minds of a mar
tial people. The government of an infant qieen was still
more deitue of real authority; and the profpeA of a long
and feeble minority invited to fation by the hope of impu-
nity. James had not even provided the common remedt
against the disorders of a minority, by committing to proper
persons the care of his daughter's education, and the admi-
niftration of affairs in her name. Though he saw the clouds
gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burst into a
storm, he was so little able to disperse them, or to defend his
daughter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that,
in mere despair, he abandoned them both to the mercy o
fortune, and left open to every pretender, the office of re.
gent, which he could not fix to his own fatisfation.

CARDnAL Beatoun, who had for many years been confi- PreterIoens

dered as prime minister, was the first who claimed that high of cardinal
dignity; and in support of his pretension, he produced a aton t
tetament , which he himself had forged in the name of the cy.
tate king; and without any othet right, instantly assumed
the title of regent. He hoped, by the affifance f'the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance of the
queen dowager, and the support of the whole pbpiih faaion,
to Id14 by force, what he had seized on by frauds But Bea-

toun
Sadler's Lett. 6r. Hayies, State tpers, 486.

B o o K toun had enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the

ii. nation. Those among the nobles who wished for a reforma-
_'Vt. tion in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered

the elevation of a churchman to the highest office in the
kingdom as a deprefion of themselves. At their instigation,
James Hamilton earl of Arran, and next heir to the queen,
roused himself from his inactivity, and was prevailed on to
aspire to that station, to which proximity of blood gave him

ar of Ar- a natural title. The nobles, who were assembled for that
ran chosen purpose, unanimously conferred on him the office of regent;
regnt. 'and the public voice applaudedtheir choice b.
Chrafter No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and
of Ba- characer, than the earl of Arran and cardinal Beatoun.
thn; The cardinal was by nature of immoderate ambition; by

long experieice he had acquired addrcfs and refinement;
and insolence grew upon him from continual success. His
high station in the church placed him in the way of great
civil employments; his abilities were equal to the greatest
of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be above his
merit. As his own eminence was founded upon the power
of the church of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that
superstition, .and for the fame reason an avowed enemy to
the doctrine of the reformers. Political motives alone de-
termined him to support the one, or to oppose the other.
His early application to public business kept him unac-
quainted with the learning and controversies of the age; he
gave judgment, however, upon all points in dispute, with a
precipitancy, violence, and rigour, which cotemporary
hifiorians mention with indignation.
Of Arran. THE charader of the earl of Arran was, in almost every

thing, the reverie of Beatoun's, He was neither inse-ted
with ambition, nor inclined to cruelty: the love of ease
extinguished the former, the gentleness of his temper pre-
served him from the latter. Timidity and irresolution were
his predominant failings, the one occasioned by his natural
constitution, and the other arising from a consciousness that
his abilities were not equal to his station. With there difpo-
fitions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but
his public condu& was without courage, or dignity, or con-
fifence: the perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by con-
sequence, the perpetual tool of those who found their advan-
tage in praatifing upon them. But as no other person could
be set in opposition to the cardinal, with any probability of
success, the nation declared ih his favour with such general

consent,
Epi Reg. Scot. vol. ii. p, 3o8.

consent, that the artifices of his rival could not withstand its B o o x
united strength. I.

THE earl of Arran had scarce taken poieffion of his new v-.

dignity, when a negociation was opened with England, Schemes of
which gave birth to events of the most fatal consequence to Hen. VIII.
himself, and the kingdom. After the death of James, tb regar
Henry VIII. was no longer afraid of any interruption from
Scotland to his designs against France; and immediately
conceived hopes of rendering this security perpetual, by the
marriage of Edward his only son with the young queen of
SCots. He communicated his intention to the prisoners
taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it,
by the promise of liberty, as the reward of their success. In
the mean time he permitted them to return into Scotland,
that, by their presence in the parliament which the regent
had called, they might be the better able to persuade their
countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause, intrudfed
to such able and zealous advocates, could not well miss of com-
ing to an happy issue. All those who feared the cardinal, or
who desired a change in religion, were fond of an alliance,
which afforded protection to the doctrine which they had em-
braced, as well as to their own persons, against the rage of
that powerful and haughty prelate.

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable Il-condnt-

of improving this favourable conjuncture. Address and deli- ed by him-
cacy in managing the fears, and follies, and interest of men, fdf
were arts with which he was utterly unacquainted. The
designs he had formed upon Scotland were obvious from
the marriage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise or to conceal them. Infead of
yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots, what time
and accidents would soon have enabled him to recover, he at
once alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by demand-
ing that the queen's person hould be immediately com-
mitted to his custody, and that the government of the
kingdom hould be put into his hands during her mino-
rity.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious con- odi~s to

ditions to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they the Scots.
were reje&ed, with indignation, by rnen who scorned to thim-
purchase an alliance with England at the price of their own edbytes
liberty. .The parliament of Scotland, however, ifluenced
by the nobles who returned from England; desirous of peace
with 'that kingdom; and delivered, by the regent's con- March ti
fining the cardinal as a prisoner, from any opposition to 1543.
which he might have given rife; conented to a treaty of

marriage

X o o r marriage and of union, but upon 'terms somewhat more

1. equal. After some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by
..,-y.i which his ambassador endeavoured p carry off the young

queen and cardinal Beatoun into England,'Henry was
obliged to give up his own proposals, and to accept of
theirs. On his fide, he consented that the queen should
continue to reside in Scotland, and himself remain ex-
cluded from any hare in the government of the king-
dom. On the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their
sovereign into England as soon as she attained the full age
of ten years, and inftantiy to dliver fix persons of the firit
rank, to be kept as hostages by Henry till the queen's arrival
at his court.

Ftz-ou-r THE treaty was till so manifestly of advantage to England,
tr t- re- that the regent loft much of the public cofidence by con-
e^-""* senting to it. The cardinal, who had now recovered !i-

berty, watched for such an opportunity of regaining credit,
and he did not fail to cultivate and improve this to the ut-

Orpfd byr most. He complained loudly that the regent had betrayed
t: ;idi- -the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies, and sacrificed

its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the extinction
of the true ratholic religion, under the tyranny of an ex-
communicated heretic; but aboye all, he lamented to fee
an ancient kingdom consenting to its own servitude, de-
feending into the ignominious tation of a dependent pro-
vince and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a
single man surrendering even' thing for which the Scottifi
nation had struggled and fought during so many ages. These
remonstrances of the cardinal were not without effeEt. They
were addressed to prejudices and passions which are deeply
rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
e.nies of their country, the fame jealousy of national
honour, and pride of independence, which, at the begin-
ning of the present century, went near to prevent the-Scots
from consenting to an union with England, upon terms of
great advantage, did at that time induce the whole nation to
declare against the alliance which had been concluded. In
the one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace be-
tween the two nations, the habit of being fubjebed to the
fame king, and governed by the fame maxims, had con-
fiderably abated old animofities, and prepared'both people
for incorporating. In the other, injuries were still frefl, the
wounds on both fides were open, and in the warmth of
rfentmcnt, it was natural to seek revenge, and tobe averse
from reconcilement. At the Union in one thousand seven
hundred and seven, the wisdom of parliament despised the

ground-

groundless murmurs occasioned by antiquated prejudices; o o K
but in one thousand five hundred and forty-three, the con- I.
plaints of the nation were better founded, and urged with a vJ
zeal and unanimity, which it is neither just nor fai to difre-
gard. A rath measure of the king of England added greatly
to the violence of this national anirnofity. The Scots, re-
lying on the treaty of marriage and union, fitted out several
flips for France, with which their trade had been inter-
rupted for some time. These were driven by stress of wea-
ther to take refuge in different ports of England; and Henry,
under pretext that they were carrying provisions to.a king-
dom with which lie was at war, ordered them to be
seized and condetnned as lawful prizes c. The Scot,' afto-
nifhed at this proceeding of a prince, whose interest it was
manifestly, at that juncure, to court and to sooth them,
felt it not only as an injury, but as an insult, and exprefied
all the resentment natural to an high-fpirited peoplea.
Their rage rose to such an height, that the English ambafla-
dor could hardly be proteted from it. One spirit seemed now
to animate all orders of men. The clrgy offered to con-
tribute a great furi towards preserving the church from the
dominion of a prince, whose nobles, after having mortified the
cardinal so lately in such a cruel manner, were now ready
to applaud and to second him, as the defender of the honour
and liberty of his country.

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful barons, He excites
declared openly against the alliance with England. By their almrnt the

whole na-

assistance, tion a;i.nl

c Keith, 32. 34. Epi(f. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 31I. Hamilton MSS. vol. i 389. the Enllhu.
d In the 1S. Collection of Papers belonging to the Duke of Hamilton, Sir

Ralph Sadler describes the spirit of the Scots as extremely outrageous. In his
letter from Edinburgh, September , I543, he fays, " The flay of the hips has
brought the people of this town, both men and women, and especially the mer-
chants, into such a rage and fury, that the whole town is commoved againfi me,
and swear great oaths, that if their Ihips are not reflored, that they would
have their amends of me and mine, and that they would set my house here oa
fire over my head, so that one of us hould not escape alive; and also it hath
much incensed and provoked the people against the governor, faying, that he
hath coloured a peace with your Majesty only to undo them. This is the
unreasonableness of the people, which live here in such a beastly liberty, that
they neither regard God nor governor; nor yet jultice, or any good policy,
doth take place among them; assuring your highness that, unless the thips
be delivered, there will be none abiding here for me without dang.er."
Vol. 4I. In his letter of September 5, h writes, that the rag of the
people ill continued so violent, " that neither I'nor any of my-folks dasi
go out of my doors; and the provost of the town, who hath much ado to
flay them from assaulting me in my houif, and keepeth watch therefore
nightly, hath sent to me sundry times, and prayed me to keep myself and
my folks within, for it is scant in his power to repress or reifi the fury of
the people. They fay plainly, I hall never pass out of the town alive,
except they have their hips reflored. This is the rage and beastliness of '
this nation, which God keep all honefl men from." lb. 47. -.

B o o afiftance, the cardinal seized on the persons of the young

i. queen and her mother, and added tohis party the splendour

and authority of the royal name '. He received, at the fame
time, a more real accession to his strength, by the arrival
of Matthew Stewart earl of Lennox, whose return from
France he had earnestly solicited. This young nobleman
was the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamillon. He
had many claims upon the regent, and pretended a right to
exclude him, not only from succeeding to the crown, but to
deprive him of the pofleffion of his private fortune. The
cardinal flattered his vanity with the prospect of marrying the
queen dowager, and asseted to treat him with so much
respect, that the regent became jealou* of-him as a rival in
power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the abbot of

Paisley, who returned into Scotland some time before the
earl of Lennox, and ated in concert with the cardinal.
He was a natural brother of the regent, with whom he had
great credit; a warm partisan of France, and a zealous de-
fender of the eftablified religion. He took hold of the
regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to bring
about a change in his sentiments, by working upon his fears.
The desertion of the nobility, the difaffecion of the clergy,
and the rage of the people; the resentment of France, the
power of the cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox ; were
all represented with aggravation, and with their most threat-
ening asped.

MEANWHILE, the day appointed for the ratification of the

treaty with England, and the delivery of the hostages, ap-
proached, and the regent was still undetermined in his own
mind. He aed to the last with that irresolution and in-
consistence which is peculiar to weak men when they are so
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the conduc of dif-
ficult affairs. On the 25th of August he ratified the treaty
with Henryf, and proclaimed the cardinal, who still con-

Obliges the tinued to oppose it, an enemy to his country. On the third
vgent to of September he secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met
r~nde with the cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendihip of

with England, and declared for the interest of France g.
ngland; HENRY, in order to gain the regent, had not spared the

most magnificent promises. He had offered to give the
princess Elizabeth in marriage to his eldest on, and to con-
ftitute him king of that part of Scotland which lies beyond
the river Forth. But, upon finding his interest in the

kingdom

Keith's Hil. of Scotl. 30. f Rymer, Sued. xv. p. 4.
t Sadler, 339. 36. Hamilton MSS. 470, &c.

kingdom to be less considerable than he had imagined, the B o o K
English monarch began to treat him with little refpe&. The I.
young queen was now in the custody of his enemies, who t-v
grew every day more numerous ad more popular. They
formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to elec
another regent. The French king was ready to afford them
his protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the English,-
would have united in their defence. In this situation, the
regent could not retain his authority, without a sudden
change' of his measures; and though he endeavoured, by
ratifying the treaty, to preserve the appearances of good faith
with England, he was obliged to throw himself into the arms
of the party which adhered to France.

SOON after this sudden revolution in his political princi- and to per-

ples, the regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. fecute the
The spirit of controversy was then new and warm; books of-ref
that kind were eagerly read by men of every rank; the
love of novelty, or the conviction of truth, had led the regent
to express great esteem for the writings of the reformers;
and having been powerfully supported by those who had em-
braced their opinions, he, in order to ratify them, entertain-
ed in his own family two of the most noted preachers
of the protestant docrine, and in his first parliament, con-
sented to an a, by which the laity was permitted to read
the scriptures in a language which they understood h. Truth
needed only a fair hearing to be an over-match for error.
Absurdities, which had long imposed on the ignorance and
credulity of mankind, were detected and exposed to public
ridicule; and under the countenance of the regent, the re-
formation made great advances. The cardinal observed its
progress with concern, and was at the utmost pains to ob-
strut it. He represented to the regent his great imprudence
in giving encouragement to opinions so favourable to Len-
nox's pretensions; that his own legitimacy depended upon
the validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the pope's
authority; and that by suffering it to be called in question,
he weakened his own title to the succession, and furnished
his rival with the only argument by which it could be ren-
dered doubtful . These insinuations made a deep impression

on

h Keith, p. 36, 37.

The pretensions of the earl of Lennox to the succession were thus founded.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was married to James lord Hamilton, whom
James III. created earl of Arran on that account. Elizabeth, a daughter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew earl of Lennox, and the present earl
was her grandson. The regent was likewise the grandson of the princess
Mary. But his father having married Janet Beatouh the regent's mother,
after he had obtained a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife,

Lennox

B o K on the regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpe&t of fute

i. imaginary dangers, was as much startled as the cardinal
-.-I.i could have wished; and his zeal for the protestant religion

was not long proof against his fear. He publicly abjured
the doctrine of the reformers in the Franciscan church at
Stirling, and declared not only for the political, but the
religious opinions of his new confidents.

TiE proteifant doctrine did not susser much by his apof.

tacy. It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that
no discouragement or severity could extirpate it. The re-
gent indeed consented to every thing that the zeal of the
cardinal thought necessary for the preservation of the efta--
blified religion. The reformers were persecuted with all
the cruelty which fuperitition inspires into a barbarous people.
Many were condemned to that dreadful death, which the
church has appointed for the punishment of its enemies;
hut they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the pa-
stence and fortitude of the primtive martyrs, that more were
converted than terrified by such fpcctacles.

Eaton THE cardinal however was now in poflffion of every
-e:7: '- thing his ambition could desire; and exercised all the au-
dreira.n o tority of a regent, without the envy of the name. He had

-. nothing to fear from the earl of Arran, who having by his

ihnconfillency forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by
one half of the nation, and little trusted by the other. The
pretensions of the earl of Lennox were the only thing which
remained to ebarrafs him. He had very successfully
made ue of that nobleman to work upon the regent's
jcaloufy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of
such an infrument, he was willing to get rid of him with-
decency. Lennox soon began to suspect his intention;
promiies, flattery, and respect, were the only returns he had
hitherto received for fubitantial services; 'but at last the
cardinal's artifices could no longer be concealed, and Len-
nox, instead of attaining power and dignity himself, saw
that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition urged him
ta seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing
his inrereft, had so ungenerously purchased the earl of Arran's
friendihip. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and
l'eciared for the party at enmity with the cardinal, which,
vita open arms, received a convert who added so much lustre
to their cause.

THE

I.nnox pretended that the sentence of divorce was nnjufl, and that the
rt,-nt being born we Elizabeth Home was till alive, ought to be cop-

sG d
rC il lek-.i-e.e Craf. Peer. 19-.

THE two fations which divided the kiigd6io were ill o o 1

the fame, without any alterations in their views or principles; it.
but by one of those strange revolutions which were frequent
in that age, they had, in the course of a few weeks, changed
their leaders. The regent was at the head of the paitifais
of France and the defenders of popery, and Lennox in the
fame tation with the advocates foi the English alliance, and
a reformation in religion. The one laboured to pull down
his own work, which the other upheld with the fame hand
that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start of the

cardinal's aivity. He surprised both him and the regent
by a sudden march to Edinburgh with a numerous army;
and might easily have crushed them before they could pre-
pare for their defence. But he was weak enough to liften
to proposals for an accommodation; and the cardinal amused
him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such a length,
that the greater part of the earl's troops who served, as is
usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their own
expence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace, instead
of giving the law,'he was obliged to receive it. -A second
attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfortunately.
One body of his troops was cut to pieces, and the reft dif-
perfed; and with the poor remains of a ruined party, he
mutt either have submitted to the coriquerer, or have fled out
of the kingdom, if the approach of an Englilh army had
not brought him a hort relief.

HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity Henry

with which he had been treated, both by the regent and invades
parliament of Scotland, who, at the timewhen theyrenounced Scotland.
their alliance with him, had entered into a new and flriter
confederacy with France. The rigour of the season retarded
for some time the execution of his vengence.' But in the
spring a considerable body of infantry, which was destined
for France, received orders to fail for Scotland, and a
proper number of cavalry was appointed to join it by land.
The regent and cardinal little expeced. such a visit. They
had trufted'that the French war would find employment for
all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable security,
were wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom.
The earl of Hertford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age,
commanded this army, and landed it, without 6ppofitidrr; a
few' miles above Leith. He was quickly master ds ti place';
and marching directly to Edinburgh, enfered s'ith the Ma 5i4.
fame ease. After plundering the adjacent counry, the
iicheft and most open in Scotlan, hi si on6 fire both

VOL. I F thtfe

B o o K there towns, and upon the approach of some troops gathered

n. together by the regent, put his booty on board the fleet, and
k.d'o%. with his land forces retired safely to the English borders, de-

livering.the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an
invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on at great
expence, and attended with no advantage. If Henry aimed
at the conquef of Scbtland, he gained nothing by this ex-
pedition; if the marriage he had proposed was till in his view,
he loft a great deal. Such a rough courtfliip, as the earl of.
Huntly humouroufly called it, difgufed the whole nation;
their aversion for the match grew into abhorrence; and,
exasperated by so many indignities, the Scots were never at
any period more attached to France, or more alienated
from England.

THE earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the regent and

Frenchking, continued a correfpondencewith England, which
ruined his own interest, without promoting Henry'sk. Many
of his own vassals, preferring their duty to their country
before their affetion to him, refused to concur in any
design to favour the public enemy. After a few feeble
and unsuccessful attempts to disturb the regent's admini-
firation, he was obliged to fly for safety to the court of
England, where Henry rewarded services which he had the
inclination, but not the power to perform, by giving him
in marriage, his niece the lady Margaret Douglas. This
unhappy exile, however, was destined to be the father of
a race of kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley mount
the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual exclusion of that
rival who -now triumphed in his ruin. From that time
his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms, by
one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.

A peace MEANWHILE hostilities were continued by both nations,
Oadded but with little vigour on either fide. The hiftdrians of

that age relate minutely the circumstances of several fiir-
mihies and inroads, which, as they did not produce any
considerable effe&, at this distance of time deserve no
remembrance'. At length and end .was put to this languid

and

k Rer, xv. p. 2.
Though tiswirwas diftinguifed byno important or decisive ation, itwas,

however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There still remain two original pa-
pers, which gives us some idea of the mieries to which ome of the molt fertile
conaties in the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and deltrudive incursions
of the borders. The firt seems to be the report made to Henry by the Eng-
li& wardens of the marches for the year 1544, and contains their exploits from
the ad of July to the I th of November. The account it gives of the different

inroads,

and inative war, by a peace, inrrwhich England; Trance, I o0o r
and Scotland' were comprehended. Henry laboured to in.
exclude the Scots from the .benefit f this treaty, an& to k i
reserve them for that vengeance which his attention t6
the affairs of the continent had hitherto delayed. But
although a peace with England was of the last confe-
quence to Francis I. whom the 'emperor was preparing
to attack with all his forces, he was too generous to aban-
don allies who had served him with fidelity, and he
chore rather to purchase Henry's friendship with difadvan-
tage to himself, than to leave them exposed to danger. By
yielding some things to the interest, and more to the vanity
of that haughty prince; by fubmiflion, flattery, and address,
he at length prevailed to have the Scots included in the peace
agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before the conclu- The mur-

lion of this peace, rendered it more acceptable to the whole der of
nation. Cardinal Beatoun had not used his power with
moderation, equal to the prudence by which he attained
it. Notwithstanding his great abilities, he had too many
of the passions and prejudices of an angry leader of a sac-
tion, to govern a divided people with temper. His resent-
ment against one party of the nobility, his insolence to-
wards the reft, his severity to the reformers, and, above all,
the barbarous and illegal execution of the famous George

F 2 : Wihart,

inroads, or Sorrys, as they are called, is very minute; and in conclauion, the
furn total of michief they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, ftedes, barnekyns, parifhe-churcces,

baftel-houfes, call down or burnt - 191

Scots slain - 403
Prisoners taken - - - - 816
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle taken - 1,386
Sheep - - - 11,49.
Nags and geldings . - i ,96
Goats - -

_ O

Bolls of corn . - -8a
Inlfght-gear, i. e. houlhold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State PaperS, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the earl of Hertford, be-

tween the 8th and a3d of September, 545; thF narrative is more general,
but it appears that he had burnt, rafed, and 4detroyed, in the counties ot Bcr-
wick and Roxburgh only,

Monafleries and Friar houses - - i
Cafiles, towers, and piles - · - 26
Market towns - -
Villages ' - 243
Milns . - - ' i3
Hospitals - - 3

All there were cast down or burnt. Haynes, 5. As the Scots were no left

filful in the practice of irregular war, we may conclude that the damage which
they did in England was not inconsiderable; and that their rail wer no le
wasteful than theforray of the Englilh.

o Wi1it, ima of honoarable birth and of primitive fantity,
11. *ore out the pti'ence of a fiere age; and nothi'g but
xv _~ a bold hnd was wanting to gratify the public. wish by his

dftntio. Private revenge, inflamed.and fandtified by a
false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this want. Norman
Lfly, the eldest son of the earl of Rothes, : ad been treated
by the cardinal with injustice and conterrpt. It was not
the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly.to
diget an affront. As the profefion of his ad erfary kfreened
him from the ese&s of what is called an honourable resent-
ment, he refblved to take that fatisfation which he could not
demand. This resolution deserves as much censure, as the
singular courage and conduct with which he put it in exe-
cution excite wonder. The cardinal at that time resided in
the castle of Saint Andrew's, which he had fortified at great
expence, and in the opinion of the age had rendered it im-
pregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town at his de-
votion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In this situation, sixteen persons undertook to furprize his
eafle, and to affaflinate himself; and their success was equal

May, 29, to the boldness of the attempt. Early in the morning they
J546. feiled on the gate of the castle, which was set open to the

workmen who were employed in finishing the fortifications;
and having placed centries at the door of the cardinal's
apartment, they awakened his numerous domestics one by
one, and turning them out of the castle, they, without noise
or tumult, or violence to any other person, delivered their
country, though by a most unjustifiable action, from an
ambitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles,
as his cruelty and cunning were great checks to the re-
formation.

The regent His death was fatal to the chatholic religion, and to the
attempt in French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both con-

ain to s"i tinued among a great party in the nation, but when deprived

the mar-
dcrer of the genius and authority of so skilful a leader, operated

with lefi effet. Nothing can equal the conternation which
a blow (f uinexpeoed occasioned among such as were attach-
ed to him, while the regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not'only eclipsed
his greathefs,'but almost exiriguithed his power. Decency,
however, the honour of the church, the importunity of the
queen dowager, and her adherents, his -engagements with
France, and above all there, the desire of recovering his
eldetR tn, whon the cardinal had detained sot some time at
Saint Andre's in pledge of his fidelity, and -who, together
with the castle, had falle info the hands of.the conspirators,

induced

induced him to take arms, in order to reoene the death ds a B o o
man whom he hated. iL

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to ecute it. .-J

One part of military fience, the art of ttackig forti-
fled places, was then iperfectly underftsod in Scotland.
The weapons, the discipline, and impetuosity of the Scets
rendered their armies as unfit for sieges, as they were aivt
in the field. An hundred and fifty men, which was th
greatest number the conspirators ever aflembled, resifted a'
the efforts of the regent for five months m, in a place which
a single battalion, with a-sew battering cannon, would now
reduce in a few hours. This tedious liege was concluded by
a truce. The regent undertook to procure for the confpir-.
tors an absolution from- the pope, and a pardof in parlia-
ment; and upon obtaining there, they engaged to surrender
the castle; and set his son atliberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this

treaty. On both fides they fought only to amuse, and to.
gain time. The regent had applied to France for afifrance,
and expeEed soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On
the other hand, if Lefly and his associates were not at first
incited by Henry to murder the cardinal, they were, in the
sequel, powerfully supported by him. Notwithstanding the
silence of contemporary historians, there are violent pre-
fumptions of the former; of the latter there is undoubted
certainty . During the fiegc, the confpiratoys had received
from England supplies both of money and provisions; and
as Henry was preparing to renew his proposals concerning
tle marriage and the union he had projected, and to feend
his negociations with a numerous army, they hoped, by eb*-
curring'with him, to be in a fituatior in which rey weuti
no longer need a pardon, but might claim a teward.

THE death of Henry blaited ail these hopes. It Bhappeii January 28,

in the beginning of next year, after a reign of greaer fpIeA, 1547.
dour than true glory; bustling, though not aftive; oppref-
five in domestic government, and in foreign polis i v wild aid
irregular. But the vices of this prince were more benefciai
to mankind, than:the virtues of others. His tapacioefnefj.
his profusion, and 'evcn his tyra"y, by depressing the: asi
cient nobility, arid by adding new property and powOt ttliM .
commons, laid-or strengthened tsie fouldaticos of the fiJBr
liberty.. His other paflrons contributed no less toward. thi
downfal of popery, and the: eftablifnlenc of religious freedai
a the nation. His refentarsnt lk hit -aboliihbef powerv .

* Ei f. e, g .3 -.
> Kitb, 6o.

and

o o t and his covetousness to seize the wealth of the church;
11. and by withdrawing these supports, made it easy, inthe fol-
v lowing reign, to overturn the whole fabric of superstition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a prince, wha had been

alternately his rival and-his friend; but his fucceffiir Henry II.

T-mrs r- was not neglecful of the French interest in Scotland. He
i, from fernt.a considerable body of men, under the command of Leon

re Strozzi, to .the regent's aliftance. By their long experience

in the Italian and German wars, the French had become as
dexterous in the conduct-of sieges, as the Scots were igno-
rant; and as the boldness and despair of the conspirators
could not defend them against the superior art of these new

soar the assailants, they, after a hort refinance, surrendered toStrozAi,
cafle ofSt. who engaged in the name of the king his master, for the
Ande, s security of their lives; and, as his prisoners, tranfpnrted
dr. them into France. The castle itself, the monument of Bea-

toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obedience to
the canon law, which, with admirable policy, denounces its
anathemas even against the houses in which the sacred blood
of a cardinal happens to be flied, and ordains them to be
laid in ruins .

THE archbishopric of St. Andrew's was bestowed by

the regent upon his natural brother John Hamilton, abbot of
Paisley.

rh THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the confpi-
: th Eng- rators. Those ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief
"is dire&ion of affairs duirng the minority of his son Edward VI.

conduded themselves, with regard to Scotland, by the
maxims of their late master, and resolved to frighten the
Scots into a treaty, which they had not abilities or address to
bring about by any.other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their

invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall stop to take notice
of a circumstance unobserved by contemporary historians,
but extremely remarkable for the discovery it makes of the
sentiment. and spirit which then prevailed among the Scots.
The conspirators against cardinal Beatoun found the regent's
cideft son in the castle of St. Andrew's; and as they needed
the protedicn of the Englih it was to be feared that they
might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering to them 'this
important prize. . The presumptive heir to thy crown in the
hainds of the avewed enemies of lte kingdom, was a dread-
fuftrofpec. In order to-avoid it, the. parliament fell upon
a very extrzordinary expedient. By an ad made on purpose,

'mrI. Hil Ref. L 338

they
.'

they excluded " the regent's eldest son from all right of Bo O K
i' succession, public or private, so long as he should be de- n.
" tained a prisoner, and fubflituted in his place his other
- brothers, according to their seniority, and in failure of
" them, those who were next heirs to the regent P." Suc-
cession by hereditary right is an idea so obvious and so popn-
lar, that a Tation seldom ventures to make a breach in i,
but in cafes of extreme necefity. Such a necessity did the
parliament discover in the present situation. Hatred to Eng-
land, founded on the memory of past hostilities, and height-
ened by the smart of recent injuries, was the national passion.
This dilated that uncommon statute, by which the order of
lineal fucceflion was so remarkably broken. The modern
theories, which represent this right as divine and unalienable,
and that ought not to be violated upon any consideration
whatsoever, seem to have been then altogether unknown.

I: the beginning of September, the earl of Hertford, now Scotland

duke of Somerset, and protector of England, entered Sept- inaded by
land at the head of eighteen thousand men, and, at the fame i Eng-
time, a fleet of sixty hips appeared on the'toaft to fecbnd
his land forces. The Scotshad for ome time observed this
storm gathering, and were prepared for it. Their army was
almost double to that of the enemy, and potted to the greatest
advantage on a rising ground, above Munfelburgh, not far
from the banks of the river Elke. Both these circumstances
alarmed the duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, and
would willingly have extricated himself out of it, by a new
overture of peace, on conditions extremely reasonable. But
this moderation being imputed to fear, his proposals were
rejeced with that scorn which the confidence of success in-
spires; and if the condud of the regent, who comnmanded
the Scottish army, had been in any degree equal to his confi-
dence, the deftrudion of the English must have-been inevita-
ble. They were in a situation precisely similar to'that of their
countrymen under Oliver Cromwell in the following centu-
ry. The Scots had-chofen their ground so well, that it was
impossible to force them to give battle ; a few days had ex-
haufted the forage and provision of a narrow country; the
fleet could only furnish a scanty and precarious subsistence;
a retreat therefore was necessary; but disgrace, and perhaps
ruin, were the consequences of retreating.

ON both these occasions, .the national heat and impetuosity
of the Scots saved the English, and precipitated their own

country
r Epift. Rcg. Scet. . 359.

B o o K country into the utmost danger. The undjfciplined courage

ii. of the private men became impatient at the fight of an ene-

' 't my. The general was afraid of nothing, but that the Eng-
Battle of lif might escape from him by flight and leaving his strong

camp, he attacked the duke of Somerset near l'ilkney, with
tptrno bet:er success than his rashness deserved. The protector

had drawn up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now
the advantage of ground on his fide. The Scottish army
consisted almost entirely of infantry, whose chief weapon wns
a long fFear, and for that reason their files were very deep
and their ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy
in three great bodies, and, as they passed the river, were
considerably exposed to the fire of the Englifl fleet, which
lay in the bay of Muffelburgh, and had drawn near the
fliore. The English cavalry, fluffed with an advantage
which they had gained in a kirmifl some days before, began
the attack with more impetuosity than good conduct. A
body so firm and compact as the Scots easily refilted the im-
pression of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off the
field. The Eng!ifh infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
fromfour hundred foreign fusileers who served the enemy,
and to their canon, which were planted behind the infantry
on the highest part of the eminence. The depth and close-
ness of their order making it impossible for the Scots to. (tand
long in this situation, the earl of Angus, who commanded
the vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground, and to re-
tire towards the main body. But his friends unhappily
mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into confusion. At
that very inilant, the broken cavalry, having rallied, re-
turned to the charge; the foot pursued the advantage they.
had gained; the profpec of victory redoubled the ardour of
both: and in a moment the rout of the Scottish '

.my be

came universal and irretrievable. The encounter in the
field was not long nor bloody; but in the pursuit, the Eng-
liih difccvered all the rage and fierceness whichnational anti-
pathy, kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by recipro-.
cal injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit was cntinued
for five hours, and to a ereat distance. All the three roadS,
by which the Scots fled, were strewed with spears, and fwordp,
and targets, and covered with the bodies f the flai...
Above ten thousand men fell on this day, one' of the m~
fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken prifoner.r
and anong these ome persons of diflintion. The pro-
tlctpr had it n;w in his power to become master of a kings

dom,

iom, out of which, not many hurs before, he was almQof B o o
obliged to retire with infamny q. It.

I3VT this victory, however great, was of no real utility, x r ,

for want of fi.1l or of leisure to improve it. Every new Thei.-i -
injury rendered the Scots mnQre avere from an unioR with tonr.of lt-
Englaiid; and the protecor nlegleded the only easure tie b.e"'

-u-h~~~ch~

woum have r~~~~~~~to the ag-

-which would have made it necefiary for them to have li.
given their consent to it. He anused hiiflf iiu wafting
the open country, and in taking oz building several petty
caftls ; whereas by fortifying a few places which were ac-
ceiiiblc by fca,, he would have laid the kingdom open to the
Eniglih, and, in a fiort time, the Seots must either have
accepted of his terms, or have iubmittcd to his power. Byt
such an improvement of it, the vi.ctor at Dunbar gave
Cromwell tle. command of Scotlaud. The battle of Piuknelr
had no other effeft but to precipitate the Scots into new en-
gagelments with France. 'he situation of tle. Engflia couxt,
mnay, indeed, he pleaded in cxcufe so- the duke of Somer-
fct's conduit. 'LTat cabal ofh.is enemies, which occafioued
his tragical end, was already formed; and while it ti-
umphed in Scotland, they .fcretly undermined is power
and credit at home. Seif-prefervatinn, therefore, obliged
him to prefer his safety before his fame, and to return

withdut

q The followingpaiage in.a curious and rare journal of th protetor'sea.

pedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined i comro -
lion with Cecil, as judge marlhal of the army, and printed in 1548, dferve
our notice; as it gives a jufl idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that
tiine. " But what after I learned, ipiecially touching their order, their ar-
mour, and their manner as wtll of going to offend, as of Ltanding to dcf~tn
I have though necefary here to utter. Hackbutters have they fewb'or nono
and appoint their fight moll commonly always a foot. They come to the ficL
well furnished all with jack and ikull, dagger and'buckler, and swords au broau
and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally so made to lice, that as
I never liw none fogood, so I think it hard to devise the better. Heret~
every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice about his
neck,-not for cold, but for cutting. In their array towards joining with the
enemy, they-cling and thrult so near in the fore rank, Ihoulder and ihoulder
together, with their pikes in both their hands firaight aforn them. and thei
followers in that order so hard at their backs, layig their pikes ceP ther
foregoers Ihoplders, that if they do aail undiscovered, no force can well
githftand-them. Standing at defence they thrusts honlders likewise fE nigb
together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, sloop low before, their feLt
lows behind holding their- pikes with both hands, and therewith intlheir le
their bucklers, the one end of their pike againf their right foot, and th
*ther agajpflt the enemy breaf high; their followers crossing their pike points,
with then forward ; and thus mith each other so nigh as pace andplaoe wil
susser, through. the whole ward, so thick, that. as eaily Ihal a bare fg6s
pierce through, the Ikin of an angry hedge-hog, as. any encounter the front og
theirpikes." Other curious particulars are found in this journal, from whichl
Sir John Hayward has borrowed his account -f this expeditioa. Lfe of
idward VI. 79, &c.
The-length of the Scotch pike or spear waeopoined by ;Ab, . I4A
to bgfiy ells; i, c. eighteen feet fix inches,

B o o r without reaping the fruits of his vitory. At this time,

sI. however, the cloud blew over: the conspiracy by which he
_ovy..j fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his presence sus-

pended its effect for ome time. The supreme power still
remaining in his hands, he employed it to recover the op-

Alprl, portunity which he had loft. A body of troops, by his
1348 command, seized and fortified Hadingtoun, a place which,.

on accountof its distance from the sea, and from any Eng-
lifh garrison, could not be defended without great expence
and danger.

Forces te MlrAWHILE the French gained more by the defeat of
Scots intoa their allies, than the English by their victory. After the

ferunion death of cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the queen dow-
with Fraace, ager, took a confiderabl: ifhare in the direetion of affairs.

She was warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
the French intercft: and, in order to promote it, improved
with great dexterity every event which occurred. The spirit
and itrength of the Scots were broken at I'inkney; and in
an assembly of nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon
the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards
France, no profped of safety appearing but in assistance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace with Eng-
land, the queen represented that they could not expet him
to take part in their quarrel, but upon views of personal
advantage and that without extraordinary concessions in his
favour, no assistance, in proportion to their present exigen-
cies, could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation pow-
erfully seconded these representations of the queen. What
often happens to individuals, took place among the nobles
in-this convention; they were swayed entirely by their pas-
sions; and in order to gratify them, they deserted their
former principles, and disregarded their true interest. In
the violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal for
the independence of Scotland, which had prompted them

and to ofer to rejec their proposals of Henry VIII. and by offering, vo-
their qeen luntarily, their young queen in marriage to the dauphin,
in mrdag eldest son of Henry II. and, which was still more, by pro
phin. posing to fend her immediately into France to be educated

at his court, they granted, from a thirst of vengeance, what
formerly they would not yield upon any consideration of
their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom as Scot-
land, was a matter of no small consequence to France.
Henry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scot-
tifh ambassadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of
his new acquisition. Six thousand veteran soldiers, under
the command of Monsieur Defce, assisted by some of the
heft officers who were formed ini tle long wars of Francis I.

arrived

arrived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scotland, B o o x
with a spirit equal to their former fame. But their exploits xi.
were not cufiderable. The Scots, soon becoming jealous Ai _
of their designs, negreeed to support them with proper vi-
gour. The caution of the Englith, in aing wholly upon
the defensive, prevented the French from attempting anyen-
terprife of confzquence ; and obliged them to exhailt their
strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under many difadvan-
tages. Their efforts, however, were not without some be-
nefit to the Scots by compelling the Englifl to evacuate Had-
dingtoun, and to surrender fcveral small forts, which they
poRielfed in different parts of the kingdom.

BuT the effets of there operations of his troops were fill

of greater importance to the French king. The diversion
which they occasioned enabled him to wreit Boulogne out of
the hands of the English ; and the influence of his army in
Scotland obtained the concurrence of parliament with the
overtures whioh had been made to him, by the afembly of
nobles at Stirling, concerning the queen's marriage with the
dauphin, and her education at the court-of France. In vain
did a few patriots remonstrate against such extravagant con-
cellions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of
France ; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the Thetreaty
kingdom; by which the friendlhip of France became more for that
fatal than the enmity of England; and every thing was purp<d
fondly given up to the one, that had been bravely defended
againit the other. A point of so much consequence was
hastily decided in a parliament assembled in the camp before
Haddirgtoun: the intrigues of the queen dowager, the zeal June 5.
of the clergy, and resentment against England, had prepared i54&.
a great party in the nation for such a ftep; the French ge-
neral and ambassador, by their liberality and promises, gained
over many more. The regent himself was weak enough to
foop to the offer of a pension from France, together with the
title of duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A confider-
able majority declared for the treaty, and the interest of a
facion was preferred before the honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and fatal refolu- Maryfe

tion, the source of many calamities to themselves and to tobe a-
their sovereign, the French allowed them no time for re- cated
fle&ion or repentance. The fleet which had brought over
their forces was still in Scotland, and without delay convoyed
the queen into France. Mary was then fix years old, and -
by her education in that court, one of the politest but most
corrupted in Europe, he acquired every accomplishment
that could add to her charms as. a woman, and contraced

many

a o o K many of those prejudices which occasioned her misfortunes

lu. as a queen.
_^\J FROM the time that Mary was put into their hinds, it was

the interest of the French to fufler the war in Scotland to
languish. The recovery of the Boulonnois was the objec
which the French king had most at heart; butia flight di-
version in Britain was ufficient to divide the attention and
strength of the English, whose domestic factions deprived
both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour.
The government of England had undergone a great revolu-
tion. The duke of Somerset's power had been acquired with
too much violence, and was exetcifed with too little mode-
ration, to be of long continuance. Many good qualities,
added to great love of his country, could not atone for his
ambition in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Many of
the mcft eminent courtiers combined againll him; and the
earl of Warwick their leader, no less ambitious but more
artful than Somerset, conducted his measures with so much
dexterity as to raise himself upon the ruins of his rival.
Without the invidious name of protector, he succeeded to'
all the power and influence of which Somerset was deprived,
and he quickly found peace to be necessary for the establish-
nent of his new authority, and the execution of te va:t de-
fgns he had conceived.

rCeae con- HENRY was no firanger to Warwick's -ftuation, and im-
clude. proved his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conducing

the negotiations for a general peace. He prescribed what
terms he pleased to the Englifli minifte, who scrupled at
nothing, however advantageous to that monarch and his al-
Mch 24, lies. England consented to restore Boulogne and its depeid-

I * - encies to France, and gave up all pretenfiona to a treaty of

marriage with the queen of Scots, or to the conquest of her
country. A few finall forts, of which the English troops
had hitherto kept poffeilon, were rafed; and peace between
the two kingdoms was eftabliflied on its ancient foundation.

BoTrH the British nations loft power, as well as reputa-

tion by this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war
of emulation and resentment, rather than of interest and
was carried on under the influence of national animofities,;
which were blind to all advantages. The French, who
entered into it with great coolness, conducted it with more
fill; and by dexterouly availing themselves of every circum-
lance which occr-red, recovered poffeffien of an important
territory which they had loft, and added to their monarchy
a sew kingdom. The ambition of the English minister be-
Wa-ed to ta s
i the.r faem ; the inconfiderat rage of the

Scots

Scots against their ancient enemies bestowed o them the B o ·*
latter; their own address and' good policiy merited both. in.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the vo

French. forces left Scotland, as much to-their own satis- The Scots
faction, as that of the nation. The Scots soon found, ecomejea-
that the calling to their assistance a people more powerful lo's 'fthe
than themselves was a dangerous expedient. They beheld,
with the utmost impatience, those who had come over to
protect the kingdom, taking upon them to command in it;
and on many ocafions they repented the rafl invitation
which they had given. The peculiar genius of the French
nation heightened this difgult, and prepared the Scots to
throw off the yoke, before they had well begun to feel it.
Thie French were, in that age, what they are at present,
bne of the mos polifled nations in Europe. But it is to be
observed, in all their expeditions into foreign cogntries,
whether towards the south or north, that their manners have
been remarkably incompatible with the manners of every
other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own cuf-
toms, because they want knowaledge and taste to discover the
reasonableness and propriety of customs which differ from
them. Nations which hold the first rank in politeness, are
frequently no less tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were
so in the ancient world; and the French are the fame in the
modern. Full of themselves; flattered by the imitation of
their neighbours; and acculfomed to confider their own
modes as the standards of elegance; they scorn to disguise,
or to lay aside, the distinguishing manners of their own na-
tion, or to make any allowance for what may differ from them
among others. For this reason, the behaviour of their
armies has, on every occasion, been infupportable'to ftran-
gers, and always epkofed them to hatred, and often to
deftru&ion. In that age, they over-ran Italy four feverJ
times by their valour, and loft it as often by their insolence.
The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people,
and who, of all nations, can least bear the most distant in-
finuation of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all
the pretenlions of such assuming guests: The symptoms of
alienation were soon visible; they seconded the military
operations of the French troops with the utmost coldness;
.their disgust grew insensibly to a degree of indignation that
could hardly be restrained; and on occasion of a very flight
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A private French
soldier engaging in an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edin-
burgh, boh nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence
of their countrymen. The provost of Edinbugh, his son,

and

n o K and several citizers of diftindion, were killed in the fray;

11. and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of the iha-
^_y- bitants, by retiring out of the city. Notwithstanding the

ancient alliance of France and Scotland, and the lobg inter-
course of good offices between the two nations, an aversion
for the French took its rife at this time from the Scots, the
effecs whereof were deeply felt, and operated powerfully
through the filbfcquent period.

pRgrrof FKOm. the death of cardinal Beatoun, nothing has been
th refto- aid of the state of religion. While the war with England

continued, the clergy had no leisure to molest the protellants;
and they were not yet considerable enough to expet any
thing more than connivance and impunity. The new doc-
trines were still in their infancy; but during this hort in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired strength, and advanced
by large and firm teps towards a full establishment in the
kingdom. The first preachers against popery in Scotland,
of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were nore eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning.
Their acquaintance with the principles of the reformation
was partial, and at second hand; some of them had been
educated in England; all of them had borrowed'iheir no-
tions from the books publihed there; and in the first dawn
of the new light, they did not venture far from their leaders.
But in a short time the docrines and writings of the foreign
rerormers became generally known; the inquisitive genius
of the age pressed forward in quest of truth; the discovery
of one error opened the way to others; the downfal of one
unpolure drew many after it; the whole fabric, which ig-
t-or.nce and fuperfititon had erected in times of darkness,
began to totter; and nothing was wanting to complete its
rain, but a. daring and aive leader to direc the attack.
Such was the famous John Knox, who, with better qualifi-
cations of learning, and more extensive views, than any of
his predecessors in Scotland, possessed a natural intrepidity
of mind, which set him above fear. He began his public
mxniftry at St. Andrew's in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and forty-feven, with that success which always ac-
companies a bold and popular eloquence. Instead of amu-
sing himfelfwith lopping the branches, he struck diretly
at the root of popery, and attacked both the doftrine and
discipline of the etablifhed church, with a vehemence pecu-
liar to himself, but admirably suited to the temper and wishes
of the age.

A. adversary so formidable as Knox, would not have easily
escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency

and

and progress of his opinions with the utmost concern. But, B O K
at first, he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, li.
and while the conspirators kept possession of it, preached v'
publicly under their protetion. The great revolution in
England, which followed upon the death of Henry VIII.
contributed no less than the zeal of Knox towards demolifm
ing-the popish church in Scotland. Henry had loosened
the chains, and lightened the yoke of popery. The mini-
llers of his son Edward VI. call them off altogether, and
eftabliffed the protestant religion upon almost the fame foot-
ing whereon it now stands in that kingdom. The influence
of this example reached Scotland, and the happy effeds
of ecclesiastical liberty in the one nation, inspired the other
with an equal desire of recovering it. The reformers had,
hitherto, been obliged to conduct themselves with the ut-
most caution, and seldom ventured to preach, but in private
houses, and at a distance from court; they gained credit, as
happens on the first publication of every new religion,
chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen, of the greatest diftintion, having,
about this time openly espoused their principles, they were
no longer under the necessity of ;Eting with the fame re-
serve; and with more security and encouragement, they had
likewise great success. The means of acquiring and spread-
ing knowledge became more common, and the spirit of in-
novation, peculiar to that period, grow every day bolder and
more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was frill under

some restraint. It had not yet attained firmness and vigour
sufficient to overturn a system founded on the deepest policy,
and supported by the most formidable power. Under the
present circumstances, any attempt towards action must
have been fatal to the protestant dodrines; and it is no small
proof of the authority, as well as penetration, of the heads
of the party, that they were able to restrain the zeal of a fiery
and impetuous people, until that critical and mature j unture,
when every ftep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement from two

different quarters whence they never could have expeted it.
The ambition of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of
Mary of England, hastened the subversion of the papal
throne in Scotland; and by a singular disposition of Provi-
dence, the persons who opposed the Reformation in every
other part of Europe with the fiercest zeal, were made in-
ltruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY
-

B 0 OK MAiY of Guise possessed the fame bold and aspiring spirit

in. which distinguished her family, But in her it was softened
_.-. by the female character, and accompanied with great tem-

The qen per and address. Her brothers, in order to attain the high
o_-rao objects at which they aimed, ventured upon such daring
ies taf'he measures as suited their great courage. Her designs upon
o4n.- cf re- .

te supreme power were concealed with the utmost care,
and advanced by address and refinements more natural to
her sex. By a dexterous application of those talents, she
had acquired a considerable influence on the councils of
a nation hitherto unacquainted with the government of wo-
men; and, without the finalleft right to any share in the
adrminiiration of affairs, had ngrofl'ed the chief direcion
of them into her own hands. But he did not long test fa-
tisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious power, which
the fickleness of the regent, or the ambition of thdfe Who
governed him, might so easily dilturb; and she began to set
on foot new intrigues, with a design of undermining him,
and of opening to herself a way to succeed him in that high
dignity. Her brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and
aupported it with all their credit at the court of France.
The French king willing- concurred in a measure, by which
he hoped to bring Scotland entirely under management, and,
in any future broil with England, to turn its whole force
upon that kingdom.

Ix order to arrive at the desired elevation, the queefi

dowager had only one of two ways to chufe; either violently
to wrest the power out of the hands of the regent, or to ob-
tain it by his content. Under a minority, and among a
warlike and facious people, the formet was- a very uncer-
tain and dangerous experiment. The latter appeared to be
no less impradicable. To persuade a man voluntarily to
abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a level with those,
above whom he was raised; and to be content with the fe-
cond place where he had held the first, may well pass for a
wild and chimerical projec. This, however, the queen at-
tempted; and the prudence of the attempt was sufficiently
ju.ftfied by its success.

T.iE regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together with

Ye calamities .which had befallen the kingdom under' his
adminifiration, raised the prejudices both of'the nobles and
of the people against him, to a great height ; and the queen
secretly fomented there with much indufnry. An who wished
for a change met with a gracious reception in her court, and
their pirit of difaffedion was nourished by such hopes arid
promisfs, as in every age imposes on the credulity of the

facious

fa&ious. The favourers of the Reformation being the oft B o o K
numerous and spreading body of the regent's enemies, he n.
applied to them with a particular attention; and the gentle- v-
nes of her disposition, and seeming indifference to the re- Courts the
ligious points in dispute, made all her promises of prote&ion reformers.
and indulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so
great a part of the nation willing to fall in with her measures,
the queen set out for France, under pretence of visiting her Oa. °sso.
daughter, and took along with her those noblemen who pof-
fefled the greatest power and credit among their country-
men. Softened by the pleasures of an elegant court, flatter-
ed by the civilities of the French king and the carefles of the
houle of Cuife, and influenced by the seasonable diftribu-
tion of a few favours, and the liberal promise of many more,
they were brought to approve of all the queen's preten-
sions.

WHILE she advanced by these flow but sure steps, the

regent either did not foresee the danger which threatened
him, or neglected to provide against it. The first discovery
of the train which was laid, came from two of his own con-
sidents, Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Panter bishop of Ross,
whom the queen had gained over to her interest, and then
emnployed as the most proper instruments for obtaining his
ccn:icnt. The overture was made to him in the name of the
French king, enforced by proper threatenings, in order to
work upon his natural timidy, and sweetened by every pro-
mile that could reconcile him to a proposal so disagreeable.
On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title, toge-
ther with a considerable pension, the parliamentary acknow-
ledgment of his right of fuccetlion to the crown, and a public
ratification of his conduct during his regency, were offered
him. 0i the other hai:d, the diipleafure of the French king,
the power and popularity of the queen dowager, the difaf-
fetion- of the nobles, with the danger of an after-reckon-
ing, were represented in the strongest colours.

IT was not poflible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary

and unexpected, without ome previous struggle; and had
the archbihop of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the
irresolute and passive spirit of the regent, he, in all probabi-
lity, would have rejecded it with disdain. Happily for the
queen, the sagacity and ambition of that prelate could, at
this time, be no obitruftion to her views. He was lying at
the point of death, and in his absence the influence of the
queen's agents on a flexible temper counterbalanced several
of the strongest paflions in the human mind, and obtained
his coufent to a voluntary furrcnder of thc supreme power.

G ArTIR

a o 0 t AreTt gaining a point of such diffietlty with so mutuh

In. ease, the queen returned into Scotland, in ftll expe&atid of

S rva- taking immediate poffeffidn of her new dignity, But by this
ee. iix. time the archbishop of St. Andrew'* had tecevertd of thrtt

diftleper, which the ignorance of the Scottilb phyfitiana had
protouftced to be incurable. This he owed to the affiftanee
of the famous Catdanr ode of those irregular adventurers if
philosophy, of whom Italy produced f imady about this
period. A bold genius led him to foie useful discoveries,
which merit the esteem of a more difcetning age; a wild
imagination engaged him in those chimerical sciences, which
drew the admiration cf his cotemporaries. As a pretendet
to astrology and magic, he was revered and confdtltd by all
Eutope; as a proficient in natural phiofophy, he was btit
little known. The archbishop it is probable, cofideted him
as a powerful magician, when he applied to him for relief;
but it was his knowledge as a philofophet, which enabled him
to cure his disease .

TOGETHER with his health, the archbifhp tecdtered the

entire government of the regent, and quickly persuaded him
to recal that dilhonourable promise, which he. had been fe-
duced by the artificee of the queen to grant. However
great her surprise and indignation were at this fre(h instance
of his inconitancy, he was obliged to diffemnble, that he
might have leisure to renew her intrigues with all parties;
with the protestants, whom {he favoured and courted more
than ever; with the nobles, to whom he rendered herself
agreeable by various arts; and with the regent himself, in
order to gain whom, she employed every argument. But
whatever impressions her emissaries might have made on the
regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate
the archbishop. Under his management, the negotiations
were spun out to a great length, and his brother maintained
his station with that address and firmness, which its impor-
tance so well merited. The universal defection of the no-
bility, the growing power of the ptoteftants, who all adhered
to the queen dowager, the reiterated felicitations of the
French king, and above all, the interposition of the young
queen, who was now entering the twelfth yeat of her age,
and claimed a right of nominating whom she pleased to be

Pr-ralson regent', obliged him at last to resign that high office, which
the regent he
gt reGn hs 5 *Cardon himself was more defiroes of being confidered a an Ifrologer than

a philosopher; in his book Dc Giturih, wve find a calculation of the arch-
billop's nativity, from which he pretends both to have predited his difeafe,and
to have effetted hi cure. He received from the archbishop a reaTrd of 8go
crowns; a great fam in that age. De vita fia, p. 32.
' J.efey, de Reb. (.Cel. Scot. ap. Jebb. . 87.

he had held marly years. He obtained, however, the fame s o o k
advantageous terms for himself, which had been formerly ri.
tfipulated. ~

IT was in the parliament which met oi the tenth of April She obtains

one thousand five hundred and fifty-four, that the ear of the regen-
Arran executed this extraordinary resignation ; and at the cy
fathm tine Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had beeh b long the objec bs her .Wishes. Thus, with their
own approbation, a woman and a fttahger was advanced to
the supreme athority, over a fierce and turbulent people,
who seldom ubmitted, without reluEtance, to the legal ahd
ancient government of their native monarchs.

WHILE the queen dowager of Scotland contributed so Reforma-
much towards the piogrefs of the Reformation, by the pro- tion conti-

nues to

tedion which Ihe afforded its from motives of ambition; the make great
English queen, by her indiscreet zeal/ filled the kingdom progress.
with persist ait in ptomoting the fame cause. Mary July 6,
ascended the thtohe of England oh the death of her brother 1553.
Edward and fooh aftet married Philip II. of Spain. To
the persecuting spirit of the Romish fuperfitiion, and the
fiecenefs of that age, the added the private resentment of
her own ad of her mother's sufferings, with which Hle
loaded the reformed religion ; and the peevifhlefs and fe-
verity of het natural temper carried the acrimony of all these
passions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her perse-
cutioh equalled the deeds of those tyrants who have been
the greatest reproach to human nature. The bigotry bs her
clergy could scarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her
zeal. Evet the unrelenting Philip was obliged, ori tome
occasions, to mitigate the rigour of htr proceedings. any
among the most eminent reformers fufftred for the doftrines
which they had taught; others fled from the flotm. To
the greater part of there, Switzerland and Germany opened
a fecltie asylum; and not a few, out of choice or rieeffity,
fled into Scotland. What they had seen and felt in England,
did not abate the warmth and zeal of their indignation agaihfR
popery. Their attacks were bolder and mote fuccefsfll than
ever; and theit do&rines made a apid progress among all
ranks of tnen.

THESE dotrines, calculated to rectify the opihloris, and

to reform the mannersi of mankind, had hitherto produced
no other effects; but they soon began to operate with greater
violence, and proved the occasion, not bnly of subverting the
eftabliihed religion, but of haking the throne and endan-
geritg the kingdom. The caufeg which facilitated the in- A view of
troduftioh of these new opinions into Scotland, and which the politi-

G 2 diflemirated cl calie

B o o K disseminated them so fast through the nation, merit, on that

II. account, a particular and careful inquiry. The Reforma-

'^y^. tion is one of the greatest events in the history of mankind,
which con- and, in whatever point of light we view it, is inftrueive and
tributed to- interesting.
,wrds that. THE revival of learning in the fifteenth and sixteenth cen-

turies routed the world from that lethargy in which it had
been funk for many ages. The human mind felt its own
strength, broke the fetters of authority by which it had been
so long restrained, and venturing to move in a larger sphere,
pushed its inquiries into every subjed with great boldness and
surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity ofexercifing

their reason, than religion was one of the first objeas which
drew their attention. Long before Luther published his
famous Theses which shook the papal throne, science and
philosophy had laid open, to many of the Italians, the im-
posture and absurdity of the established superstition. That
subtle and refined people, satisfied with enjoying those dif-
coveries in secret, were little disposed to assume the danger-
ous character of reformers, and concluded the knowledge of
truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar minds
must be overawed and governed by popular errors. But,
animated with a more noble and disinterested zeal, the Ger-
man theologian boldly erected the standard of truth, and
upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity, which merits
the admiration and gratitude of all succeeding ages.

THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with the

tenets of the Romifl church, and how, from a small rup-
ture, the quarrel widened into an irreparable breach, is
known to every one who has been the least conversant in his-
tory. From the heart of Germany his opinions spread, with
astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and, wherever they
came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-founded
system. The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
co-operating with the power and bigotry of the Austrian fa-
mily, suppressed these notions on their first appearance in
the southern kingdoms of Europe. But the fierce spirit of
the north, irritated by multiplied impositions, could nei-
ther be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame
force; and encouraged by some princes from piety, and by
others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble oppofi-
tion of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE superstition of popery seems to have grown to the

most extravagant height in those countries which are situated
towards the different extre.mities of Europe. The vigour of

imagination

imagination, and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inha- B o o K
bitants of southern climates, rendered them susceptible of the 11.
deepest impressions of superstitious terror and credulity. LA
Ignorance and barbarity were no less favourable to the pro-
grefs of the fame spirit among the northern nations. They
knew little, and were disposed to believe every thing. The
most glaring absurdities did not hock their gross understand-
ings, and the most improbable fidtions were received with
implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of popery which prevailed in

Scotland was of the most bigotted and illiberal kind. Those
dotrines which are molt apt to hock the human under-
standing, and those legends which farthest exceed belief,
were proposed to the people without any attempt to palliate
or disguise them; nor did they ever call in question the rea-
fonablenefs of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the

progress of superstition ; for it is the nature of that spirit to
obefrve no bounds in its refped and liberality towards those
whose chara&er it esteemes sacred. The Scottish kings early
demonstrated how much they were under its influence, by
their vast additions to the immunities and riches of the
clergy. The profuse piety of Iavid I. who acquired on
that account the name of Saint, transferred almost the
whole crown lands, which were at that time of great extent,
into the hands of the ecclesiastics. The example of that
virtuous prince was imitated by his successors. The spirit
spread among all orders of men, who daily loaded the priest-
hood with new pofleffions. The riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland was one of those
countries, wherein they had farthelt exceeded the just pro-
portion. The Scottifhi clergy paid one half of every tax
imposed on land ; and as there is no reason to think that in
that age they would be loaded with any unequal hare of the
burden, we may conclude that, by the time of the Reforma-
tion, little less than one half of the property in the nation
had fallen into the hands of a society, which is always ac-
quiring, and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of their property

extended the influence of the clergy. Many estates, through-
out the kingdom, held of the church; church-lands were
let in lease at an eafv rent, and were possessed by the younger
sons and descendants of the best families '. The connection,
between fiperior and v/l, between landlord and tenant,

created
K(lth, 5»I. Not. ().

B O o £ created dependences, and gave rife to an union of great ad-

11. vantage to the church; and in cftimating the influence of
k ~t the popith ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as well as

the real amount of their revenues, must be attended to, and
taken into the account.

THIS extraordinary (hare in the national property was ac-

companied with proportionable weight in the supreme conn-
cil of the kingdom. At a time when the number of the
tempo peers was extremely small, and when the lesser
barons and reprefemntati of b~ egh *cuam att par-
liaments, the ecclesiastics formed a considerable body there.
It appears from the ancient rolls of parliament, and from
the manner of chafing the lords of article, that the pro-
ceedings of that high court must have been, in a great mea-
sure, under their direcion u.

THE revcence due to their sacred character, which was

often carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards
the grov.th of their power. The dignity, the titles, and
precedence of the popilh clergy are remarkable, both as
causes and effets of that dominion which they had acquired
over the reft of mankind. They were regarded by the cre-
dulous laity as beings of a superior species; they were neither
subjed to the fame laws, nor tried by the fame judgesx.
Every guard that religion could supply, was placed around
their power, their polelfions and their persons; and endea-
vours were used, not without success, to represent them all
as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconfider-

able, was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the re-
verence which they derived from religion. The principles
gs found philosophy, and of a just taste, were altogether
unknown; in place of these were substituted studies barbarouc'
and uninftrutive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were con-
versant in them, this procured them esteem; arid a very
slender portion of knowledge drew the admiration of rude
ages, which knew little. War was the sole profession of the
nobles, and hunting their chief amusement; they divided
their time between fhefe: unacquainted with the arts, and
unimproved by science, they disdained any employment

foreign

' Spot. Hill. of the church of Scotland, 449.
x How far this claim of the clergy to exemptir) from lay-jurifdiaioa ex-

tended, appears from a remarkable traction in the parliamce t held in I546.
When that court was proceeding to the forfeiture of the murderers of cardinal
Beatoun, and were about to include a priest, who was one of the aflaffins, in
the general sentence of condemnation, odious as the crime was to ecclefiftics,
a delegate appeared in their name, and repledged or claimed exemption of him
from the judmnent of parliament as afpirihull ma. This claim was fuflained;
snd his name s nct inserted in the aft of forfeiture. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii.
o50. 36r.

foreign fro~m fiitary affairs, or which required athler 1pe- B o o K
tratwrn ai ad14ref, thn bo ily vigor. Wherever the for- II.
ner were eceTry, the clergy were entrusted beeue they /-~ .
alone were-properly qualified for the truit. Almost as the
high offces in civil government devolved, on this acowut,
into their hands, The lord chancellor was the first fubje
in the kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From the
earliet ages of the monarchy, to the death of cardinal
Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that high office and
of these, forty-three had been ecclefialtics Y. The lords of
session were supreme judges in all matters of civil right;
and by its original constitution, the president and one half of
the fenatprs in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated

frorn the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, and un-
diftraded by those cares, and unincumbered with those bur-
dens, which occupy and- oppress other men, the inteefl of
their order became their only objec, and they were at full
leisure to pursue it.

THE nature of their funtion gave them access to all per-

sons and at all seasons. They could employ all the motives
of fear and of hope, of terror and of consolation, which
operate most powerfully on the human mind. They haunted
the weak and the credulous; they besieged the beds of the
sick and of the dying; they suffered few to go out of the
world without leaving marks of their liberanty to the church,
and taught them to compound with the Almighty for their
fins, by bestowing riches upon those who clled tlenifeves
his servants.

WHEN their own induftrv, or the fupertition of ankind,

failed of producing this effeed, the ecciefiaftic had infuence
enough to call in the aid of law. When a perfoa died
inted7ate, the disposal of his efFees was vested in the biihop of
the diocese, after paying his funeral charges and debts, and
distributing among his kindred the fums to which they were
refpetively entitled: it being presumed tlat no Christian
would have chosen to leave the world without defining some
part of his fubftanee to pious uses As men are apt to trft
to thecontinuance of life with a fond confidence, and child;
ifily ihbn every thing that forces them to think of their
mortality, many die without fettling their affairs by will; and
the right of dminiftration in that event, acquired by the
clergy, must have proved a considerable source both of wealth
and of-power to the church.

AT

Cravf. Oic. of State. Eflys on Brit. Antiq, 174. Anals as i
Icotd, >)y ir Ivy hi$rynple, Vol. i, Append. No ii.

a o O K AT the fame time, no matrimonial or testamentary cause

n. could be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which
x'_- the clergy themselves had framed. The penalty too, by

which the decisions of these courts were enforced, added to
their authority. A sentence of excommunication was no
iefs formidable than a sentence of outlawry, It was pro-
nounced on many occasions, and against various crimes: and
hefides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from Chriltian
privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men, or
as citizens; and the aid of the secular power concurred with
the superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of
the church no less deftrudive than terrible.

'o theie general causes may be attributed the immense

growth both of the wealth and power of the popilh church;
and without entering into any more minute detail, this may
serve to discover the foundations on which a ftru'ture so itu-
pendous was ereded.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their own super-

ftition and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty and
ebfcurity to riches and eminence, they began, by degrees, to
feel and to murmur at their encroachments. No wonder
haughty and martial barons should view the power and pof-
sessions of the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
inactive character of churchmen with the utmost contempt;
while, at the fame time, the indecent and licentious lives of
the clergy, gave great and just offence to the people, and
considerably abated the veneration which they were ac-
customed to yield to that order of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and,

above all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had concurred to
introduce this corruption of morals among many of the
clergy, who, presuming too much upon the submission of
the people, were at no pains either to conceal or to disguise
their o*n vices. According to the accounts of the reformers,
confirmed by4feveral popish writers, the most open and scan-
dalous dissolution of manners prevailed among the Scottish
clergy '. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public pomp
which is due to-a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of
his natural daughter with the earl of Crawfords son b; and,
if we may believe Knox, he publicly continued to the end of
his days a criminal correspondence with her mother, who was
a woman of rank. The other prelates seem not to have been
more regular and exemplary than their primate c.

MEN

* inzet ap. Keith. Append. 202. Lo5. Les. de Reb. Gest. Scot. 232.
bThe marriage articles, subscribed with his own hand, in which he calls her
-y d^rgter, are fill extant. Keith, p. 42.

A reizarkable prof of the diTlute manners of the clergy is found in th

public

MEN of such characters ought, in reason, to have been B o o K

alarmed at the first clamours raised against their own morals, 1n.
and the doctrines of the church, by the protestant preachers; i
but the popifi ecclesiastics, either out of pride or ignorance,
negleded the proper methods for silencing them. Intead
of reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they as-
feded to despise the censures of the people. While the re-
formers, by their mortifications, and austerities, endeavoured
to resemble the first propagators of Christianity, the .popilh
clergy were compared to all those persons who are most
infamous in history for the enormity and scandal of their
crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or

colouring over the absurdity of the established doctrines
instead of attempting to found them upon scripture, or to
reconcile them to.reafon; they left them without any other
support or recommendation, than the authority of the church
and the decrees of councils. The fables concerning purga-
tory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the merits of the faints,
were the topics on which they insisted in their discourses to
the people; and the duty of preaching being left wholly to
monks of the lowest and most illiterate orders, their com-
positions were till more wretched and contemptible, than
the fubjeas on which they infited. While the refrmers
were attended by crowded and admiring audiences, the
popish preachers were either universally deserted, or listened
to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order to recover

their declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith
of the people, was equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As
many doctrines of their church had derived their credit at
first from the authority of false miracles, they now endea-
voured to call in these to their aid d. But thoie lying won-
ders, which were beheld with uniufpicious admiration, or
heard with implicit faith, in times of darkness and of igno-
rance, met with a very different reception in a more en-
lightened period. The vigilance of the reformers deteted
these impostures, and exposed not only them, but the cause
which needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

As'

public records. A greater number of letters of I-.nimation was granted during
the first thirty years after the Reformation, than during the whole period that
has elapsed since that time. These were obtained by the sons of the popish
clergy. The ecclesiastics, who were allowed to retain their benefices, alien-
ated them to their children; who, when they acquired wealth, were desirous
that the t(ain of illegitimacy might no longer remain upon their families. In
Keith's Catalogue of tbe ScttiJb Bijhops, we find several inflances of such alien-
ations of church lands, by the popifb inii;mbents, to their natural children.
d Spotfwood, 69.

o o As the popish clei~htics becae more and more the oh-
' n. jes of hatrcd an4 of contempt, the discourses of the re.
1, i tormgnF waere liR; ed t9 «s so mfny calls to liberty; and

befi4. the pious indigpntion which they excited agai.ft tbofe
corrupt doarijes which bad perverted the nature of true
CQhriltiiity bcfids thi geaA which they inspired for the
knowledge of truth nd the purity of religion ; they gave
rife also, among the $cpttifl nobles, to other vitws and
paiffns. They hoped to 1fake off the yoke of ecclesiastical
dominion, which they had long felt to be oppreflive, and
which they now discovered to be unchristian. They expet-
ed to recover polfftlion of the church revenues, which they
were now taught to confider as alienations made by their
ancestors, with a profufiop no less undifcerning than un-
bounded. They flattered thcmfelycs, that a check would be
given to the pride and luxury of tlhe clergy, who would be
cbliged, henceforward, to confine themselves within the
sphere peculiar to their sacred clargcer. An aversion for
the eilabjilhed church, which sowed from so many concur-
ring causes, which was raised by considerations of religion,
and heightened by motives of policy, spread ft through
the nation, and excited a spirit, that burst out, at last, with
irresistible violence.

RsLicGIOUs considerations lone were sufficient to have

roused this spirit. The points in controversy with the church
of Rome were of so much importance to the happiness of
niankind, and so efential to Christianity, that they merited
a:. the zeal with which the reformers contended in order to
c.,abliih them. But the reformation having been represented
,s the eiftec of some wild and enthufialtic frenzy in the
human mind, this attempt to account for the eagerness and
zaal with which our nceftors embraced and propagated the
proteftarn doctrines, by taking a view of the political mor
Lv.es alone which influenced them, and by fliewing how
;.auraUy these prompted them to a& with so much ardour,
wiii not, perhaps, be deemed an unnecessary digression.
We now return to the course of the history.
i- 4. THE queen's elevation to the office of regent seems to have

transported her, at first, beyond the known prudence and

Th; qa-.en moderation of her chlracter. She began her administration,
rrent be- by conferring upon. foreigners several offices of trust and of
rn hrat- dignity; a fep which, both from the inability of stranger* to

,n ;t discharge these offices with vigour, and from the envy which
,oie unpo- their preferment excites among the natives, is never aittended
k '" r with good confequcncea. Vilmort was made comptroller,

id cEntrufted wiith the management of the piblic revenues;

Bolont

Benot was appointed governor of Orkney; rnd Rubay lh- X 0 4 .
noured with the custody of the great feal, and the title Of a.
vice chancellor c. It was with the highest indignation, that 'JV.
the Scots beheld offices of the greatest eminence and author
rity dealt put among strangers f. y these promotions they
conceived the queen to have offered an inuilt both to their
understandings and to thei courage; to the former, by sup-
posing them nfit for those ffations which their ancefteor had
filled with so much dignity: to the latter, by imagining that
they were tame enough not to complain of an affront,
which, in no former age, would have been tolerated with
impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an incident

happened which inflamed their aversion from Prenoh coun-
cils to the highest degree. ver since the famous contoft be-
tween the houses of Valois and Plantagenet, the French had
been accustomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
strength, by the sudden and formidable incursions of their
allies, the Scots. But, as these inroads were seldom attend-
ed with any real advantage to Scotland, and exposed it to the
dangerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the Scots
began to grow left tradable than formerly, and scrupled any
longer to serve an ambitious ally t the price of their own
quiet and security. The change, too, which was daily in-
troducing in the art of war, rendered the afliftanca of the
Scottifl forces of less importance to the French monarch.
For these reasons, Henry having resolved upon a war with
Philip II. and foreseeing that the queen of England would
take part in her huffand's quarrel, was extremely oflicitous
to secure in Scotland the afiftance of some troops, which
would be more at his command than an undisciplined army,
led by chieftaina who were almost independent. In pro-
fecution of this design, but under pretence of relieving the
nobles from the expence and danger of defending the borders,
the queen regent proposed, in parliament to regilter the I5sJ.
value of lands throughout the kingdom, to impose on them
a fmaU tax, ad to apply that revenue towards maintaining
a body of regular troops in constant pay. A fixed tax upon
land, which the growing expence of government hath intro-
duced into almost every part of Europe, was unknown at
that time, and seemed altogether inconfitent with the
genius of feudal government. Nothing could be more

lhocking

Lecy de REb, Gest. Scot. 189.
The resentment of the nation against the Ftencb roe to such a eigSit

that an a of parliament was-pafleJq on prpole to restrain or noderate it
arL . QMir, e. C 60

B o OK hocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the entrust-

ii. ing to mercenary hands, the defence of those territories
__,V'/ which had been acquired, or preserved, by the blood of
x155. their anceitors. They received this proposal with the ut-

moit diffatisfation. About three hundred of the lesser
barons repaired in a body to the queen regent, and repre-
sented their sense of the intended innovation, with that
manly and determined boldness which is natural to a free
people in a martial age. Alarmed at a remonfirance de-
livered in so firm a tone, and supported by such formidable
numbers, the queen prudently abandoned a scheme, which
(he found to be universally odious. As the queen herself
was known perfectly to understand the circumstances and
temper of the nation, this measure was imputed wholly to
the suggestions of her foreign counsellors; and the Scots
were ready to proceed to the mol violent extremities againit
them.

Attempts THE French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to
to engage the flame. They had now commenced hostilities against
thte k- Spain, and Philip had prevailed on the queen of England
dom in a
war ith to reinforce his army with a considerable body of her troops.
England. In order to deprive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as

he projeced, to the Scots; and attempted to excite them
to invade England. But, as Scotland had nothing to dread
from a princess of Mary's character, who, far from any am-
bitious scheme of disturbing her neighbours, was wholly oc-
cupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjeds;
the nobles, who were assembled by the queen regent at New-
battle, listened to the solicitations of the French monarch
with extreme coldness, and prudently declined engaging
the kingdom in an enterprise so dangerous and unnecessary.
What {he could not obtain by perfaafion, the queen regent
brought about by a itratagem. Notwithstanding the peace
which subsisted between the two kingdoms, she commanded
her French soldiers to rebuild a small fort near Berwick,
which was appointed by the last treaty to be rafed. The
garrison of Berwick sallied out; interrupted, the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult roused the fiery
spirit of the Scots and their promptness to revenge the least
appearance of national injury, diifipated, in a moment, the
wife and pacific resolutions which they had io lately formed.
War was determined, and orders inftantlv given for raising
a numerous army. But before their forces could assemble,
thc ardour of their indignation had time to cool, and the
Engli{h having discovered no intention to push the war with
vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific fvftem, and resolved

to

to stand altogether upon the defensive. They marched to o 0oK
the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions of s1.
the enemy; and having done what they thought sufficient v '~
for the safety and honour of their country, the queen could iss6.
not induce them, either by her entreaties or her artifices, to
advance another ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inacivity, D'Oyfel, the

commander of the French troops, who possessed entirely the
confidence of the queen regent, endeavoured, with her con-
nivance, to engage the two nations-in hostilities. Contrary
to the orders of the Scottish general, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and inveted Werk, a garrison
of the Englilh. The Scots, instead of seconding his at-
tempt, were enraged at his presumption. The queen's par-
tiality towards France had long been fufpeded; but it was
now visible that she wantonlyfacrificed the peace and fafetyof
Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally.
Under the feudal governments, it was in camps that fubjets
were accustomed to address the boldest remonstrances to
their overeigns. While arms were in their hands, they
felt their own strength; and at that time all their reprefen-
tations of grievances carried the authority of commands.
On this occasion, the resentment of the nobles broke out
with such violence, that the queen, perceiving all attempts to
engage them in adtion to be vain, abruptly dismissed her army,
and retired with the utmost shame and disgust; having dif-
covered the impotence of her own authority, without effet-
ing any thing which could be of advantage to France g.

IT is observable, that this first instance of contempt for

the regent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the
influence of the new opinions in religion. As the queen's
pretensions to the regency had been principally supported by
those who favoured the Reformation, and as he still needed
them for a counterpoise to the archbiihop of St. Andrew's,
and the partisans of the house of Hamilton; she continued
to treat them with great refpet, and admitted them to no
inconsiderable hare in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy
of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators against car-
dinal Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her from
banishment; and, through her connivance, the protestant
preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of
great advantage to their cause. Soothed by there instances
of the queen's moderation and humanity, the protestants
left to others the office of remonstrating; and the leaders of

the
e Strype's Memor. iii. Append. 74. Lefley, 96.

B o o £ the opposite fadion set them the first example of disputing

ii. the wil of their faoereigt.

x s
& As the queen regent felt how limited ad precarlotis her
Int authority was, while it depended on the poise of these con-
qcen's trary factions, file endeavoured to etabliih it on a broader

'Iari and more secure foundation, by haftenlig the coriclufion of
,~h;i.b her daughter's matiage with the dauphin. Amiable as the

queen of Scots then was, in the bloomi of youth, and con-
fiderable as the territories were, which she would have added
to the French monarchy teafors were not wanting to dif-
fuade Henry from completing his first plan of marrying her
to his son. The constable Montmorency had employed all his
interest to defeat an alliance which refleted so much IRftre on
the princes of Lorrain. He had represented the impoffibilityof
maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbulent people,
during the absence of their sovereign; and for that eafon
had advised Henry to bestow the young queen upon one of
the princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland might
prefrie that kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a
nearer union to the crown, would become a mutinous and
ungovernable province . But at this time the conflable was
a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards; the pinces of
Lorrain were at the height of their power; and their influ-
ence, seconded by the charms of the young queen, triumphed
over the prudent, but envious, reionfirances of their rival.

De 4, THE French king accordingly applied to the parliament of
si57. Scotland, which appointed eight of its members' to repre-

sent the whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the
queen. Among the persons on whom the public choice con-
ferred this honourable charater, were some of the most
avowed and zealous advocates for the Reformation; by
which may be estimated the degree of refped and popularity
which that party had now attained in the kingdom. The
inftrucions Qs the parliament to those commissioners still
remain k, and do honour to the wisdom and integrity of that
assembly. At the fame time that they manifested, with te-
fpea to the articles of marriage, a laudable concern for the
dignity and interest of their sovereign, they employed every
precaution which prudence could dislate, for preserving the
liberty and independence of the nation, and for securing the
succession of the crown in the house of Hamilton.

WItH

h Melv. Memn. IS.

Viz. The archbilhop of Glafigow, the bilhop of Ross, the bishop of Ork-

ney, the earls of Rothes and Caffils, lord Fleming, lord Seton, the prior of
St. Andrew's, and John Erikine of Dun.

Keith, Append. 3.

Wit tegard to eatch of there, the ~ 6t bained whit- b b c

ever fatisfaaion theit feir' or jelmtify could dertarid. The It.
young esMne the dauphin, and the king of Prante, ratified w
ever airticle With the ffoft solemn oaths, ad confirti d Anifis of
them by deeds in form undet their hands and feals. Itt Oih n thc iec
the part of France, all this was one cotitimued fcerie the mar-
fitdied and elaborate deceit. trevious to these public ta~tl- ag
aCtions with the Scottith deputies, Miry hdd been persuaded
to subscribe privately three deeds, equally enjuftf aid Irl-
valid; by which, failing the heirs of her own body, she eCon-
ferred the kingdom of Scotland, with whatevet inheritance
ot succession might accrue t6 it, in free gift upon the erdwn
of Ftanee declaring all prolrifes to the c6ittaty, which the
necessity of her affairs, and the folicitatiorts 6f het fubjeQs,
hiad extorted, or might etott from her, to be void and of
no obligation '. As it gives us a proper idea of the charaser
of the French court under Henry II. we may Obferee that
the king himself, the keeper of the great feals, the duke of
Guise, and the cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons eh-
gaged in condudting this perfidious and dishonourable pro-
jed. The queen of Scots was the only innocent aoT i'
that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience, het
education in a foreign country, and her deference to the
will of her uncles, muff vindicate her, in the judgmrent of
every impartial person, from any imputation of blame on
that account.

Tins grant,by which Mary bestowed the inheritance of her
kingdom upon ftrahers, was concealed with the utmost cate
from her fubjets. 'They seem, however, not to have been
unacquainted with the intention of the French to ovetturn
the settlement of the succession in favour of the duke of
Chatellierault. The zeal with which the archbishop of St.
Andrerw's opposed all the measures of the queen regent,
evidently proceeded from the fears and suspicions of that
prudent prelate on this head m.

THn marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; Apil 14,

and the French, who had hitherto affected to draw a veil 1r58.
over their designs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their
intentions without any disguise. In the teaty 6f nrarriae,
the deputies had agreed that the dauphin fhoiuld aflumei the
name of King of Scotlafd. This they conidered only as an
honorary title; but the French laboured to annex to it some

foll

I C6rp; Diplnrnif. tomi. . I Keith, 3.
m Abrot this tne tht Prnh fleerii to have had ome defgn ft reviving

the earl of Lennox's pretensions to the fuccelion, in order to intimidate and
.nlaththeduke ofCatelherault, Haynes, 3 rI. r19. PorTbes's Culet . il.i.i9.

B o K solid privileges and power. They insisted that the dauphin's

u1. title should be publicly rccognifed; that the Crown Matri-
-Y > mernial should be conferred upon him ; and that all the rights

pertaining to the huband of a queen ihould be vested in his
person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heiress kept poffelfion of her estate during his own life, if he
happened to survive her and the childern born of the mar-
riage . This was called the courtesy of Scotland. The
French aimed at applying this rule, which takes place in
private inheritances, to the fucceflion of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the Crown Ma-
trimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scottish historians, and
which they have neglected to explain . As the French had
reason to expec difficulties in carrying through this mea-
sure, they began with founding the deputies who were then
at Paris. The Englifl in the marriage-articles between
their queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to the
age, of that prudent jeaioufy and reserve with which a so-
reigner should be admitted so near the throne. Full of the
fame ideas, the Scottish deputies had, in their oath of alle-
giance to the dauphin, expressed themselves with remarkable
caution . Their anvwer was in the fame spirit, refpeEtful,
but firm; and discovereu a fixed resolution of consenting to
nothing that tended to introduce any alteration in the order
of succession to the crown.

FOUR of the deputiesq happening to die before they re-

turned into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed
to the effects of poison, which was supposed to have been
given them by the emissaries of the hcne of Guise. The
historians of all nations discover an amazing credulity with
refped to rumours of this kind, which are so well calculated
to please the malignity of some men, and to gratify'the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that in every age

they

- Reg. Maj. lib. ii. g8.
o As far as I can judge, the hulband of the-queen, by the grant of the Crown
Af'imaicial, acquired a right to assume the title of king, to have his name
ramped upon the current coin, and to sign all public instruments together with
the queen. In consequence of this, the fubjeets took an oath of fidelity to him.
Keith, Append. o. His authority became, in some measure, coordinate with
that of the queen; andwithout his concurrence, manifested byfigning his name,
no public deed eems to have been confidered as valid. By the oath of fidelity
of the Scottish commissioners to the dauphin, it is evident that, in their opini-
on, the rights belonging to the Crewn Matrimonial ubfilted only during the
continuance of the marriage. Keith, Append. to. But the conspirators againil
Rizio bound themselves to procure a grant of the Croan fatrinorial to Darn-
cly during all the days of his life. Keith, Append. 20o. Good. i 227.

r Keith, Append. 2o.

The bihfop of Orkney, the earl of Rothes, the earl of Calfils, and lord
Flming.

tley have been swallowed without examination, and believed B o o jC
contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots hould easily give 1i.
credit to a ufpicion, which received such strong colours of _Vs
probability, both from their own resentment, and from the
known charader of the princes of Lorrain, so little fcrupu-
lous about the juflice of the ends which they pursued, or of
the means which they employed. For the honour of human
nature it muff, however, be observed, that as we can dif-
cover no motive which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove that it
was committed. But the Scots of that age, influenced by
national animofities and prejudices, were incapable of eka--
mining the circumstances of the cafe with caimnefs, or of
judging concerning them with candour. Ail parties agreed
in believing the French to have been guilty of this detestable
action; and it is obvious how much this tended to increase
the aversion for them, which was growing among all ranks
of men.

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which their pro- The regent

pofal concerning the Crown iMatrimonial met with from thc p:evails on
Scottish deputies, the French ventured to move it in parlia- the parlia-
ment. The partisans of the house of Hamilton, suspicious rrant it.
of their designs upon the ficceTon, opposed it gith great Nov. z2.
zeal. But a party, which the feeble and unsteady conduct
of their leader had brought under much difreputation, waj
little able to withltand the influence of France, and the
address of the queen regent, seconded, on this occasion, by
all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Belides,
that artful princess drefled out the French demands in a eifs
oifenfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as seemed
to render them of finail consequence. These either deceived
the Scots, or removed their feruples; and in compliance to
tlie queen, theypaffed an al, conferring the Crown Matri-
menial on the dauphin ; and with the fondest credulity,
trusted to the frail fccurity of words and statutes, against the
dangerous encroachments of power r.

TaHE concurrence of the protestants with the queen regent, Continues

in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while the to cout
popish clergy, under the influence of the archbifiiop of St. atheprote't
Andrew's, opposed it with so much violence', is one of those

VOL. I. H fngular
The a of parliament is worded with the utmolt care, with a view to

guard againftany breach of the order of fuccefrion. But the duke, not rely-
ingon this alone, entered a solemn protcflation to secure his own right. Keith,
76. It is plain, that he fufpet&ed the French of having some intention to set
afde his right of fuccelon; and indeed, if they had no design of that kind,
the eacernefs with which tlhey urged their demand, was childish.

' Melv. 47

B o o singular circumstances in the conduc of parties, for which

II. this period is so remarkable. It may be ascribed, in some
5_Wl degree, to the dexterous management of the queen, but chiefly

to the moderation of those who favoured the Reformation.
The protestants were by this time almof equal to the catho-
lics, both in power and in number; and, conscious of their
own strength, they submitted with impatience to that tyran-
nical authority with which the ancient laws armed the eccle-
fiaftics against them. They longed to be exempted from this
oppressive jurifdition, and publicly to enjoy the liberty of
profeffling those opinions, and of exercising that worihip,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded
in truth, and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indul-
gence, to which the whole weight of priestly authority was
oppoTed, there were only two ways of obtaining. Either
violence must extort it from the relucant hand of their fove-
reign, or by prudent compliances they might expe& it from
her favour or her gratitude. The former is an expedient for
the redress of grievances, to which no nation has recourse
suddenly; and subjects feldor venture upon resistance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity.
On this occasion the Reformers wifely held the opposite
course, and by their zeal in forwarding the queen's designs,
they hoped to merit her protection. This disposition the
queen encouraged to the utmost, and amused them so art-
fully with many promises, and some concessions, that, by
their assistance, she surmounted in parliament the force of
a national and laudable jealousy, which would otherwise have
swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat to acquire

the regent such considerable influence in this parliament. In
Scotland, all the bishoprics, and those abbeys which conferred
a title to a feat in parliament, were in the gift of the crown'.
From the time of her accession to the regency, the queen had
kert in her own hands almost all those which became va-
cant, except such as were, to the great disgust of the nation,
bestowed upon foreigners. Among these, her.brother, the
cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and
Melrofs, two of the inoft wealthy foundations in the king-
dom ". By this conduct, she thinned the ecclesiastical
bench', which was entirely under the influence of the arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's, and which, by its numbers and au-
thority, usually had great weight in the house, so as to ren-

der

See Book I. Leley, 202.
It appears from the rolls of this parliament, hich Lefley calls a very fll
one, that only seven bilhops and sixteen abbots were prcfcnt.

der any oppoftio it oold give t that time of litce cotde- o o
quenee. 11.

THE eart of Agyll, and James Stewart prior of St. An* '

drew's% si the most powrful, and the other the Bolt
popular leader of the protants, were appoibmd to carry
the crown and ortr ensigns of royalty to te duphin. Bu
fron this they'were diverted by the art they were called to
at in a more interesting foene, which no begins to optn.

BEFoRt we turn towars this, it is Maefrwl o bfe Elizabeth

fucceedsto

thAt on the fevemteenth of N ember on oi e

th e crown

hundred and fifty-eight, DIary of England finifihd her short of England.
and inglorios reign. Her si&er Elizabeth took pofffio of
the throne withot opposition; and the protestant religion
was, once nore, efabliihed by law in England. Tbe ac-
cefin of a queen, wAo, under very di'ficult circumftanc,
had given trong ndications of thoie eminent qualitie,
which, in the (equel, rendered her reign so illustrious, at-
trated the eyes of all Europe. Amog the Scots, both
parties observed her firRt motions with the htmoft fdicitude,
as they eaily foresaw that she would not remain long an in-
different fpetator of their tranfattins.

UNERa many difeouragemetts and much oppression, the

Reformation advanced towards a full establishment in Scot-
land. All the low country, the mot populous, and at that
time the most warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinc-
turedwith the protelarnt opinions; and if the fame impreflions
were not made in the more ditant counties, it was owing to
no want of the fame difpcfitions among the people, but to
the cfarcity of preachers, whoe most indefatigable zeal could
not fatisfy'the avidity of those who desired their iaitruftions.
Among a people bred to arms, and as prompt as the Scots to
as with violence; and in an .age when religious paflions had
taken- such trong poffeffito of the hmaan mind, and moved
'and agitated it with so much violenc, the peaceable and re-
gular demeanor of so numerous a party is foni~fing. From
the death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the firt who suffered
in Scotland for the protestant religion, thirty yeaet had
elapsed, and dring so long a period no violation of public
order or tranquillity had proceeded f that fef ; and
though roused and irritatod by the mot cra eefls of
ecclesiastical tytanny, they did, in no infttane, tranfgre
those bounds of daty which the law prefctibes to faijet.

2 efiles

Y The murder of cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private revenge, and

being contrived and e~ted byfixtea p~fon aly, ca-not with juflice be
imputed to the whole protestant party.

a oo K Besides the Drudence of their own leaders, and the pro-

11. teeion which the queen regent, from political motives,
\v _ afforded them. the moderation of the archbihop of St. An-

drew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That prelate,
whose private life cote.mporary writers tax with great irre-
gularities z governed the church, for ome years, with a
temper and prudence of which there are few examples in
that age. But some time before the meeting of last par-
liament, the archbihfop departed from those humane maxims
by which he had hitherto regulated his conduc ; and whether
in spite to the queen, who had entered into so close an union
with the protestants, or in compliance with the importunities
of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of persecution against
the reformed ; sentenced to the flames an aged priest, who
had been convicted of embracing the protestant opinions;
and summoned several others, fufpe&ed of the fame crime,
to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to
convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the protestants at this

unexpected anc barbarous execution, but the zeal with which
they espoused the defence of a cause that now seemed de-
voted to deftrL-tion. They had immediate recourse to the
queen regent; and as her success in the parliament, which
was then about to meet, depended on their concurrence, fihe
not only heltered them from the impending storm, but per-
miitted them the exercise of their religion with more free-
dom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with this
precarious tenure by which they held their religious liberty,
the proteilants laboured to render their possession of it more
secure and independent. With this view they determined
to petition the parliament for iome legal protecion againift
the exorbitant and opplretive jurifdicion of the ecclesiastical
courts, which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,
founded in the canon law, were led to sentences the most
,hocking to humanity, by maxims the most repugnant to
justice. But the queen, who dreaded the effet of a debate
on this delicate subjed, which could not fail of exciting high
and dangerous paflions, prevailed on the leaders of the party,
by new and mere solemn promises of her protecion, to desist
from any application to parliament, where their numbers
and influence would, in all probability, have procured them,
if not the entire redress, at least fme mitigation, of their
grievances.

THEY
' Knog, Buchanan, Keith, og.

THEY applied to another afiembly, to a convocation- of the B o o K

popish clergy, but with the fame ill success which hath always Il.
attended every 'proposal for reformation, addressed to that xv -
order of men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce
lucrative error, are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals
has, on ome occasions, offered to truth; but from any so-
ciety of men no such effort can be expected. The corrup-
tions of a society, rccommended by common utility, and-
jultified by universal practice, are viewed by its members
without hame or horror; and reformation never proceeds
from themselves, but is always forced upon them by some
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit
was the behaviour of the convocation' in the present conjunc-
ture. All the demands of the protestants were rejeEted with
contempt; and the popish clergy, far from endeavouring, by
any prudent concessions, to sooth and to reconcile such a nu-
merous body, asserted the dotrines of their church, concern-
ing ome of the mot exceptionable articles, with an ill-
timed rigour which gave new offence .

DURING the fitting of the convocation,-the protestants first 1559.

began to fufpe& some change in the regent's disposition to-
wards them. Though joined with them for many years by
interest, and united as they conceived, by the strongest ties
of affection and of gratitude, she discovered, on this occasion,
evident symptoms, not only of coldness, but of a growing
disgust and aversion. In order to account for this, our his-
torians do little more than produce the trite observations
concerning the influence of prosperity to alter the character
and to corrupt the heart. The queen, fay they, having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with an
insolence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon those
by whose afliftance she had been enabled to rife so high:
But it is neither in the depravity of the human heart, nor in
the ingratitude of the queen's disposition, that we mutt search
for the motives of her prcfcnt conduct. - These were derived
from another, and a more remote source, which, in order to
clear the subsequent tranfacions, we hall endeavour to open
with some care.

THE ambition of the princes of Lorrain had been no less Amhitious

successful than daring; but all their schemes were diftin- views of
guifhed by being vaft-and unbounded. Though strangers at the piiLces
the court of France, their eminent qualities had raised them, of Lorri
in a short time, to an height of power, superior to.that of
all other' fubjedts, and had placed them on a level even with

the
s Keith, 8I.

Ba a K the princes of the ood themfehves. The urch, the army,

U. the revenue, were under their dirreaion. Nothing but the

>ws, royal dignity remained unattalned, and they were levated
1559. to a near allince with it, by the marriage of the queen of

Scots to the dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity,
and to render their niece more worthy the heir of France,
they set on foot her claim to the crown of England, which
was founded on pretences not unplaufible.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are

known to all he world. Moved by the caprices of his love,
or of his refeutment, that impatient and arbitrary monarch
had divorced or beheaded four of the fix queens whom he
married. In order to gratify him, both his daughters had been
declared illegitimate by adc of parliament; and yet, with
that fan'tastic iconfitence which dittinguites his charader,
he, in his lafi will, whereby he was empowered to fettle
the order of succession, called both of them to the throne upon
the death of their brother Edward; and, at the fame time,
passing by the pofteriry of his eldest ifter Margaret queen of
Scotland, he appointed t;e line of fuccefion to continue in
the descendants of his yr unger sifter, the duchess of Sus-
folk.

IN consequence of thi. detination, the validity whereof

was admitted by the Engif, but never recognized by so-
eigners, Mary had reignd in England without the least
complaint of neighbolring princes. Bt the fame causes
which facilitated her accffion to the throne, were obifactes
to the elevation of her fiiter Elizabeth, and rendered her
possession of it precarious and insecure. Rome trembled
fr the catholic faith, utnder a protestant queen of such emi-
nent abilities. The fame superstitious fears alarmed the
court of Spain. Fraice beheld with concern a throne, to
which the queen of Scots could form so many pretenfnis,
.ccupied by a rival, '.wiofe birth, in the opinion of all good
catholics, exchuded her from any legal right of fuccefion.
The impotent hatred cf the Roman pontiff, or the flow
councils of Philip II. w-ould have produced no fuaden So for-
midable effe&t. The ardent and impetuous ambition of the
princes of Lorrain, who at that time governed the court of

rev per- France, was more decisive, and more to be dreaded. Infti-
-ae Mary gate& by them, Hnry, soon after the death of Mary, per-
tbi tide of fuadcd his daughter-in-lar, and her husband, to afiime the
roa'e tiSieof king and queen of England. They affected to pub-
~ni'r, l lilh this to all Earope. They used that style and appella.

tion in public papers, fime of which fill r.emiaa b The

A* rder Diplom. Scot, No. 68 and 164.

arms ofEngland were engraved on their coin and plate, and B o o K
borne by them on all occasions. No preparations, however, 1I.
were made to support this impolitic and premature claim. \I
Elizabeth was already feated on her throne; fle possessed x59.
:ll the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy, which
were neceflary for maintaining that station. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The marine of
France had been utterly negleced and Scotland remained
the only avenue by which the territories of Elizabeth could
be approached. It was on that fide, therefore, that the Refolre to
princes of Lorrain determined to make their attack C; and, invade
by using the name and pretenlions of the Scottish queen, England.
they hoped to rouse the Englith catholics, formidable at that
time by their zeal and numbers, and cxafperated to the ut-
most against Elizabeth, on account of the change which she
had made in the national religion.

IT was vain to expe& the afliftance of the Scottish pro- In order to

teftants to dethrone a queen, whom all Europe esteemed this, ne-
the guardian and defender of the reformed faith. To break ceffary to

check the

the power and reputation of that party in Scotland became, Reforma-
for this reason, a necessary ftep towards the invzfion of Eng- tion in
land. With this the princes of Lorrain resolved to open Scotland.
their scheme. And as persecution was the only method for
suppressing religious opinions known in that age, or dilcated
by the despotic and sanguinary spirit of the Romlfh super-
ftition, this, in its utmost violence, they determined to em-
ploy. The earl of Argyll, the prior of St. Andrew's, and
other leaders of the party, were marked out by them for im-
mediate deftru&ion d; and they hoped, by punishing them,
to intimidate their followers. Inftrucions for this purpose
were sent from France to the queen regent. That humane
and sagacious princess condemned a measure which was
equally violent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
she had become acquainted with the eager and impatient tem-
per of the nation; he well klew the power, the number,
and popularity of the protestant leaders; and had been a
witness to the intrepid and unconquerable rsolution which
religious fervour could inspire. What then could be gained
by routing this dangerous spirit, which hitherto all the arts
of policy had scarcely been able to restrain ? If it once broke
loose, the authority of a regent would be little capable to
fubduc, or even to moderate, its rage. If, in order to quell
it; foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive power

which
r rrbes, Collet, i.a3. 269. ,79. 404. Sorbes, i. r.

B o O K which the French poffelled in the kingdom, and suspicious

1i. of all their designs. Amidst the hock which this might oc-

<_w»v cafion, far from hoping to exterminate the protestant doc-
Iss9. trine, it would be well if the whole fabric of the eliablifhed

church were not fhakcn, and perhaps overturned from the
foundation. These prudent remonstrances made no imprcf-
sion on her brothers; precipitant, but inflexible in all their
resolutions, they insisted on the full and rigorous execution
of ther plan. MIary, passionately devoted to the interest of
l'rl:'ce, ad redy, o- all occasions, to sacrifice her own
oninoins to the inclilations of her brothers, prepared to
executetheir commnans with implicit submission , and, con-
trary to her own judgment and to all the rules of found po-
licy, ihe cca ne 'the iitrument of exciting civil commotions
in Scoib.jtd, the fatal termination of which ftie foresaw and
dreaded.

The rgent Fh.O'I the trne of the queen's competiticr for the regency
atr Wir with the duke ,f Chatelherault, the popith clergy, under
ni r- l the direction o the archbishop of St. Andrew's, had set
tn the pro- themselv-es in cppolition to all her measures. Her first tep
tetlants. tcward the execution 3f her new fchcme, was to regain their

favcur. Nor was thi- reco-:cilement a matter of difficultv.
The popish ecclesiastics, separated from the reft of m'ankind
by the law of celibacy, the boldest and most successful in-
vention of human poicyv; and combined among th6mfelvcs
in t e closest and molt sacred union; have been accustomed,
in every age,. to f.crifice all private and particular pafiions
to the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted on this
cccafion with the profpeC of triumphing over a faaion, the
encroackr.ent o which they had long dreaded, and ani-
m.atcd with the hopes cf re-eitablithing their declining gran-
deur on a firmer bafi ; they at once, cancelled the memory
of pait injurics. and engaged to second the queen in all her
attempts to check the progress of the reformation. The
queen, being fccure of their affitance, openly approved of
the decrees of the convocation, by which the principles of
the reformers were condemned; and at the fame time she
issued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter according to the Romifi ri-
tual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake the queen's inten-

tions, the protestants, who saw the danger approach, in or,
der to avert it, employed the earl of Giencairn, and Sir
Hugh Campbell of London, to expostulate with her con-

cerning
Melv. 48. Mem. de Caftlenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446.

cerning. this change towards severity, which their former B o o K
services had so little merited, and which her reiterated pro- u.
mises gave them nq reason to expe&. She, without disguise ^~,'
or apology, avowed to them her resolution of extirpating the 1559.
reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, upon their
urging her former engagements with an uncourtly, but
honeit boldness, ihe so far forgot her usual moderation, as
to utLcr a i':;timent, which, however apt those of royal con-
dition may be to entertain it, prudence hould teach them
to conceal as much as possible. " The promises of princes,
fays he, ught not to be too carefully remembered, nor the
pcrformance of them exacted, unless it suits their own coil-'
veniency."

TH'i indignation which betrayed the queen into this rath ummots

exprefion, was nothing in comparison of that with which she their
was animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the preawclt

appear Ib-

reformed religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. foreher.
At once she threw off the mask, and iflued a mandate, fum-
moning all the protestant preachers in the kingdom to a court
of jutice,whichwas to be held at Stirling on the tenth of May.
The proteftants,who, from their union, began about this time
to be distinguished by the name of the CONGREGATION,
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger; and in-
ftantly resolved not'to abandon the men to whom they were
indebted for the most valuable of all blessings, the know-
ledge of truth. At that time there prevailed in Scotland,
with refpea to criminal trials, a custom, introduced at irft
by the intitutions of vaflalage and clanfhip, and tolerated
afterwards under a feeble government; persons accused of
any crime were accompanied to the place of trial by a re-
tinue of their friends and adherents, aflembled for that pur-
pole from every quarter of the kingdom. Authorised by this
ancient prafice, the reformers convened in great numbers,
to attend their pastors to Stirling. The queen dreaded their
approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed; and
in order to prevent them from advancing, he empowered
John Erskine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the
party, to promise in her name, that he would put a stop to
the intended trial, on condition the preachers and their reti-
nue advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced
himself of the queen's sincerity, served her with the utmost
zeal; and the protestants, averse from proceeding to any -
ad of violence, listened with pleasure to so pacific a propo-
fition. ' The preachers, with a few leaders of the party, re-
mained at Perth; the multitude which had gathered from
different parts of the kingdom dispersed, and retired to their
own habitations,

BUT

BR oK Bur, oithftanding this folerm promise, thequeen, on

1i. the tenth of May, proceeded to cal to trial the persons who
-V had b ees funmmmd, and upon their nn-appearmce the ri-
riS9. gor of jufic ook place, and they were pronounced out-
Brts a laws. By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with regal dig-

tmY oa r ay, and o inconfitent with that integrity which should pre-
,.i.';.r vail in all tranfaion between fovcreigns and their fubjeds,

the queen forfeite& the cftcm and confidence of the whole
nation. The prmRftants, shocked no lefi at the indecency
with which ihe violated the public faith, than at the danger
which threatened themfees, prepared boldly for their own
defence. Erikine, enraged at having been made the inftru'
ment for deceiving his party, infRantly abandoned Stirling,
and repairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his affciates,
by his tcprefentations of the queen's inflexible refohltion to
suppress their religion.
Ttci ac 'The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his

sanin- representations: he having beae carried a prisoner into
t Peth. France, together with the other persons taken in the castle

of St. Andrew's, soon made his escape out of that country;
and residing sometimes in England, sometimes in Scotland,
had at last been driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of
the popiih clergy, and was obliged to retire into Geneva.
Thence he was called by the leaders of the protestants in
Scotland; and, in compliance with their solicitations, he set
out for his native country, where he arrived a few days be-
fore the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to
'erth, to share with his brethren in the common danger, or
to assist them in the common eaufe. While their minds
were in that ferment, which the queen's perfidiousness and
their own danger occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by
a vehement harangue againt idolatry, inflame the multi-
tude with the utmofi rage. The indiscretion of a priest,
who, immediately after Knox's fennon, was preparing to
celebrate mass, and began to decorate the altar for that pur-
paok, precipitated them into immediate aion. With tu-
multuary, but irrefiftibleviolence, theyfell upan the churches
in that city, overturned the altars, defaced the pictures
broke in pieces the images; and proceeding nea to the
ptanafeies, they in a few hours laid those fumspts fabrics
almost level with the ground. This riotous infrrteeion
was not the efc& of any concert, or previous deliberation;
censured by the nefmened preachers, and publicly eondemned
by persons of most power and credit with the party, it must be
.ren.rded merely as an accidental eruption of popular rage 4.

s s, Hs. 127, I23.

Bur to the queen dowager these poceedings appeared hit- o

a very differeht light. Besides their manifest contempt fr i.
her authority, the protetants had violated every thing in re- v
ligion which she cicemed venerable or hol i nd on both irY
there accounts he determined to infiit the fvereft ven- '1Phc
geance on the whole party. She had already drawn the ..
troops in French pay to Stirling; with these, and whatthm..
Scotti forces she coiud levy of a sudden, The marched dire&t-
ly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the protestant ladenr
before they could assemble their followers, whom, out of
confidence in her disingenuous promises, they had been
rashly induced to dismiss. Intelligenceof thee preparations
and menaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The protestants
would gladly have soothed the qucen, by addresses both
to herself and to the persons of greatest credit in her
court ; but finding her inexorable, they, with great rigour,
took measures for tuir own defenc. Their adherents,
animated with zeal for religion, and eager to expose them-
selves in so good a cause, flocked in such numbers to Perth,
that they not only fccured the town from danger, but withii
a few days were in a condition to take the field, and to face
the queen, who advanced with an army seven thousand
frong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to engage. The
queen dreaded the event of a battle with men whom the
fervour of religion raised above the sense of fear or of danger.
The protestants beheld with regret the earl of Argyll, the
prior of St. Andrew's, and foie other eminent persons of
their party, still adhving to the queen and destitute of
their aid and counsel, declined hazarding an ation, the ill
fuccefsof which might have proved the ruin of their cause.
Theprofpea of anaccommodationwasfor these reafonshigltey
acceptable to both fides: Argyll and the prior, who were
the queen's comnfionern for conducting the negotiation,
seem to haie been sincerely desirous of reconciling the con-
tending factions; and the earl of Glencairn arriving unex-
pecedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation,
augmented the queens eagerness for a peae. A teaty ws A treaty
accordingly concluded, in which it was stipulated that both concluded,
armies {ouhl be diianded, and the gates of Perth set open
to the queen ; that indemnity shold be granmd to the in-
habitants of that city, and to all others concerned in the lte
infurredion; that no trench garrifoi fluol be les in Perth,
and no French fotdier flu approack within thlee milesof

lt place; and that a parliament ibauld immediately b-

* held,

B O o r held, in order to comrpofe whatever differences might still

ii. remain .

, - THE leaders of the Congregation, distrustful of the queen's

1559. sincerity, and fenuible that concessions, flowing not from in-
May 29. clination, but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could

not long remain in force, entered into a new association,
by which they bound themselves, on the first infringement
of the present treaty, or in the leait appearance of danger
to their religion, to re-assemble their. followers, and to take
arms in defence of what they deemed the cause of God and
of their country h.

Broken by THE queen, by her condu&t, demonstrated there precau-
the rgent tions to be the result of no groundless or unnecessary fear.

No sooner were the protcitant forces dismissed, than flie
broke every article in the treaty. She introduced French
troops into Perth, fined inme of the inhabitants, banished
others, removed the magiltrates cut of office, and, on her
retiring to Stirling, ihe left behind her a garrison of fix
hundred men, with orders to allow the exercise of no other
religion than the Roman catholic. The situation of Perth,
a place at that time of some strength, and a town among the
mnol proper of any in the kingdom for t- tation of a gar-
rifon, eems to have allured the queen to this unjustifiable
and ill-judged breach of public faith; which she endeavour-
ed to colour, by alledging that the body of men left at Perth
was entirely composed of native Seots, though kept in pay,
by the king of France.

THE queen's scheme began gradually to unfold, it was

now apparent, that not only the religion, but the iberties ;
the kingdom were threatened; and that the French troops
. ere to be employed as instruments for subduing the Scots,
and wreathing the yoke about their necks. Martial as the
genius of the Scots then was, the poverty of their country
made it impoiible to keep their armies long assemblcd i and
even a very small body of regular troops might have proved
formidable to the nation, though consisting wholly of soldiers.
But what number of French forces were then in Scotland,
at what times, and under what pretext they returned, after
having left the kingdom in one thousand five hundred and
fifty, we cannot with any certainty determine. Contem-
porary hift3rians often feleEt with little judgment the cir.
cumftances which they transmit to posterity; and with re-
fpet to matters of the greatest curiosity and importance,
evare succeeded ages altogether in the dark. We may con.

je&ure
Keith, 89. h Knox, 138.

jeEture however, from some paflages in Buchanan, that the B o o K
French and Scots in French pay, amounted at least to three 1i.
thousand men, under the command of Monsieur D'Oyfel, a _
creature of the house of Guise and they were soon aug- i5S9.
mented to a much more formidable number.

THE queen, encouraged by having so considerable a body

of well-difciplined troops at her command, and infligated
by the violent counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have
observed, to violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash
ation, once more threw the nation into the most dangerous
convulsions. The earl of Argyll and prior of St. Andrew's The pro-
instantly deserted a court where faith and honour seemed to teFtants
them to be no longer regarded; and joined the leaders of again take
the Congregation, who had retreated to the eastern part of
Fife. The barons from the neighbouring counties repaired
to them, the preachers roused the people to arms, and
wherever they came, the fame violent operations which ac-
cident had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged out of
policy. The enraged multitude was let loose, and churches
and monasteries, the monuments of ecclefiaffic pride and
luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the queen, without losing

a moment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the
Congregation got the start once more of her vigilance and
activity. In that warlike age, when all men were accustom-
ed to arms, and on the least profpeE of danger were ready
to run to them, the leadersof the protestants found no dif-
ficulty to raise an army. Though they set out from St.
Andrew's-with a slender train of an hundred horse, crowds
flocked to their standards from every corner of the country
through which they marched; and before they reached
Falkland, a village only ten miles distant, they were able to
meet the queen with superior force .

THE queen, surprised at the approach of so formidable a

body, which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner
as added greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again re-
course to negotiation. She found, however, that the pre-
servation of the protestant religion, their zeal for which had
.at firfl routed the leaders of the Congregation to take arms,
was not the only object they had now in view. They were
animated with the warmest love of civil liberty, which they
conceived to be in imminent danger from the attempts of the
French forces; and these two passions mingling, added re-
ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with more Theyaimat

enlarged redressing
KnoX, 141.

B o o enlarged notions in religion, the Refornation filled the

n1. human mind withamore liberal and generous sentiments con-
kv ~W cerning civil government. The genius of popery is ex-

s559. tremely favourable to the power of princes. The implicit

cil as well fubruilion to all her decrees, which is eattaed by the Ro-
' reigio mifh church, prepares and breaks the mind for political ser-

c vitude; and the dotrines of the Reformner by overturning

the eftablifihed system of fuperfition, weakened the firmedt
foundations of civil tyranny. That bold fpiTit of inquiry,
which led men to reject theological errors, accompanied
them in other sciences, and discovered every-where the fame
manly zeal for truth. A new study, introduced at the fame
time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men be-
came more acquainted with the Greek and Roman authors,
who described exquisite models of free governm.nt, far fu-
perior to the inaccurate and oppressive system cftablifhed by
the feudal law; and produced such illustrious examples of
public virtue, as wonderfully suited both the circumtances
and spirit of that age. Many among the moet eminent re-
formers were themselves considerable masters in ancient
learning; and all of them eagerly adopted the maxims and
spirit of the ancients, with regard to government . The
most ardent love of liberty accompanied the protetant reli-
gion throughout all its progress; and wherever it was em-
braced, it roused an independent spirit, which rendered men
attentive to their rivileges as fubjeas, and jealous of the
encroachments of their foverc-,ns. Knox, and the other
preachers of the Reformation infused generous sentiments
concerning government into the minds of their hearers; and
the Sco-tilh barons, naturally free and bold, were prompted
to assert their rights with more freedom and boldnef6 than
ever. Instead oi obeying the queen regent, who had en-
joined them to lay down their arms, they demanded not only
the redress of their religious grievances, but, as a prelimi-
nary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties,
required the immediate expulsion of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in te queen's power to make so im-
portant a concession without the concurrence of the French
monarch; and as some time was requisite in order to obtain

that,

k The exefve admiration of ancient policy vas the the occasion of Knox's

famous book concerning the Gve~rnmet f Woen, wherein, conformable to
the maxim of the ancient legislators, which modern experience has proved to
be ill founded,he pronounces the elevation of womento the supreme authority,
to be utterly deflracive of good government. His principles, authorities, and
examples, were all drawn from ancient writers. The fame observation may
be made with regard to Buchanan's Dialogue, De Jure Regni apud Srofos. It is
foanded, not on the maxim-s of feldal, but o. ancient republican government.

that, he hoped, during this interval, to receive such rei- o o i
forcements from France, as would insure the accomplilh- n.
nent of that dcfign which she had twice attempted with ~v
unequal fthength. Meanwhile, lhe agreed to a celation of 559-
arms for eight days, and before the expiration of these, ea- Jne 13-
gaged to transport the French troops to the south fide of the
Forth; and to fend commitfioners to St. Andrew's, who
should labour to bring all differences to an accommodation.
As he hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe
the protestants in the southern counties, the former article
in the treaty was puntually e:ecuted; the latter, having
been inserted merely to amuse the Congregation was no
longer remembered.

BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the A sccr.d

queen loft all credit with her adversaries; and no safety ap- treaty i"-
pearing in any other course, they again too'. arms with more "lted.
inflamed resentment, and with bolder and more extensive
views. The removing of the French forces had laid open
to them all the country situated between Forth and Tay.
The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining fubjeecd to the in-
folence and exadions of the garrison which the queen had
left there, implored the assistance of the Congregation for their
relief. Thither they marched, and having without effct re-
quired the queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. 'he queen em-
ployed the earl of Huntly and lord Erskine to divert thern
from this enterprise. But her wonted artifices were owof
no avail; repeated so often, they could eceive no longer i
and without listening to her offers, the proteltants contiuiud
the siege, and soon obliged the garrison to capitulate.

AFTER the loss of Perth, the queen endeavoured to seize

Stirling, a place of some strength, and, from its command
of the only bridge over the Forth, of great importance.
But the leaders of the Congregation having intelligence f
her design, prevented the execution of it, by an halty march Ra
thither with part of their forces. The inhabitants, heartily marh :id
attached to the cause, set open to them the gates of their ficcefsof
town. Thence they advanced, with the fame rapidity to- titprLa-
wards Edinburgh, which the queen, on their approach, a3ts"
abandoned with precipitation and retired to Dunbar.

THE protestant army, wherever it came, kindled or spread

the ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excefles of
violence were committed upon churches and monasteries.
The former were spoiled of every decoration, which was
then eftecmred sacred; the latter were laid in ruins. We
are apt, at this distance of time, to condemn the furious

zeal

B o o K zeal of the reformers, and to regret the overthrow of so

n. many flately fabrics, the monuments of our ancestors mag.

nificence, and among the noblest ornaments of the kingdom.
ij59. But amidst the violence of a Reformation, carried on in op-

position to legal authority, some irregularities were unavoid-
able; and perhaps no one could have been permitted more
proper to allure and interest the multitude, or more fatal to
the grandeur of the eftabiifhed church. How absurd soever
and ill-founded the speculative errors of popery may be,
some enquiry and attention are requisite towards difcoverilg
them. The abuses and corruptions which had crept into
the public worihip of that churclllay more open to obfcr-
vation, and by riking the senses, excited more universal
disgust. Under the long reign of heathenism, fuperliition
seems to have exhausted its talent of invention, so that when
a superstitious firit seized Christians, they were obliged to
imitate the heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their
ceremonies, and to borrow from them the ornaments and
decorations of their temples. To the pure and imple wor-
ship of the primitive Chriltians, there succeeded a fpccies of
splendid idolatry, nearly refcmbling those pagan originals
whence it had been copied. The contrariety of such obfer-
vances to the spirit of Chriitianity, was almost the first
thing, in the Romish system, which awakened the indig-
nation of the reformers, who, applying to these the denun-
ciations in the Old Testament against idolatry, imagined
that they could not endeavour at fupprefing them with too
much zeal. No task could be more acceptable to the mul-
titude, than to overturn those feats of fupcrfition; they ran
with emulation to perform it, and happy was the man whose
hand was most adventurous and successful in executing a
work deemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to re-
strain this impetuous pirit of reformation. Irregular and
violent as its I.Illies were, thcv tended direaly to that end
which they had in view ; for, by demolilhing the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and setting at liberty their wretched
inhabitants, they hoped to render it impotlible ever to re-
build the one, or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidit these irregular proceedings, a circumstance

which does honour to the conduct and humanity of the
leaders of thp Congregation deserves notice. They so far
restrained the rage of their followers, and were able so to
temper their heat and zeal, that few of the Roman catholics
were exposed to any personal insult, and not a single man
suffered death '

Ar
i Lesey, ap. Jebb, vol. i. Z3I.

AT the fame time we diicover, by the facility with which B o o X

these great revolutions were effeaed, how violently the cur- 1n.
rent of national favour ran towards the Reformation. No 'y
more than three hundred men marched out of Perth under 1559.
the earl of Argyll and prior of St. Andrew'sm; with this
inconsiderable force they advanced. But wherever they
came, the people joined them in a body; their army was
seldom less numerous than five thousand men; the gates of
every town were thrown open to receive them and, with-
out striking a single blow, they took possession of the capital June 9.
of the kingdom.

THIS rapid and astonishing success seems to have encou-

raged the reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their
demands. Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration
for their religion, they now openly aimed at establishing the
protestant dotrine on the ruins of popery. For this reason
they determined to fix their residence at Edinburgh; and by
their appointment Knox, and ome other preachers, taking
poeffgion of the pulpits, which had been abandoned by the
affrightened clergy, declaimed against the errors of popery
with such fervent zeal as could not fail of gaining many
proselytes.

IN the mean time the queen, who had prudently given

way to a torrent which flie could not resist, observed with
pleasure that it now began to subside. The leaders of the
Congregation had been above two months in arms, and by
the expenees of a campaign protraced so long beyond the
ufuel time of service in that age, had exhausted all the
money which a country, where riches did not abound, had
been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled with their fuc-
cess, and concluding the work to be already done, retired to
their own habitations. A few only of the more zealous or
wealthy barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh.
As intelligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty,
whatever was tranfa&ted at Edinburgh was soon known at
Dunbar. The queen, regulating her own condu& by the
situation of her adversaries, artfully arnufad them- with the
profpea of an immediate accommodation; -while, at the fame
time, she by. studied delays spun out the negotiations for
that purpose to such a length, that, in the end, the party
dwindled to an inconsiderable number; and, as if peace had
been already re-established, became arelefs-'f military di-
cipline. The queen, who watched for fich an opportunity,
advanced unexpe&edly, by a sudden march in the ight,

VOL. I. I with

"Keith, 94.

B o o x with all her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled

11. that city with the utmost consternation. The protestants,
t^rw weakened by the imprudent dispersion of their followers,

5sg9. durst not encounter the French troops in the open field

and were unable to defend an ill-fortified town against their
aflaults. Unwilling, however, to abandon the citizens to
the queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the enemy's
army, to gain time for collecting their own afociates. But
the queen, in spite of all their refitance, would have easily
forced her way into the town, if the seasonable conclusion of
a truce had not procured her admission without the effusion
of blood.

A third THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the leaders of
vtorea the Congregation to liften to any overtures of peace and as

the queen was looking daily for the arrival of a strong rein-
forcement from France, and expe&ed great advantages from
a cessation of arms, she also agreed to it upon no unequal
conditions. Together with a suspension of hostilities, from
the twenty-fourth of July to the tenth of January, it was
stipulated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the protef-
tants should open the gates of Edinburgh next morning to
the queen regent; remain in dutiful fubje&tion to her go-
vernment; abtain from all future violation of religious
houses; and give no interruption to the eftablifled clergy,
either in the discharge of their functions, or in the enjoy-
ment of their benefices. On the other hand the queen
agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or professors
of the protestant religion; to allow the citizens of Edinburgh,
during the cessation of hostilities, to enjoy the exercise of
religious worship according to the form moit agreeable to
the conscience of each individual, and to permit the free
and public profession of the protestant faith in every part of
the kingdom a. The queen, by these liberal concefflons in
behalf of their religion, hoped to sooth the protestants, and
expe&ed, from indulging their favourite passion, to render
them more compliant with refp-ft to other articles, parti-
cularly the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland.
The anxiety which the queen expressed for retaining this
body of men, rendered them more and more the objects of
national jealoufyand aversion. The immediate expulsion of
them was therefore demanded anew, and with greater
warmth; but the queen, taking advantage of the diftrefles of
the adverse party, eluded the request, and would content to
nothing more, than that a French garrison should not be in-
troduced into Edinburgh.

TH
Keith, 98. Maitland, Hist. of Edin. 16, r7.

THE desperate state of their affairs imposed on the Con- B o o K

gregation the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, in.
however, was very far from giving them fatisfa&ion. What-
ever apprehensions the Scots had conceived, from retaining ss59.
the French forces in the kingdom, were abundantlyjuflified
during the late commotions. A small body of those troops,
maintained in constant pay, and rendered formidable by re-
gular discipline, had checked the progress of a martial people,
though animated with zeal both for religion and liberty.
The smallest azdition to their number, and a considerable
one was daily expeEled, might prove fatal to the public
liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the danger of be-
ing reduced from an independent kingdom, to the mean
condition of a province, annexed to the dominions of its
powerfully ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent calamity, the

duke of Chatelherault, and earl of Huntly, immediately after
concluding the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs
of the Congregation. These two noblemen, the most po-
tent at that time in Scotland, were the leaders of the party
which adhered to the eftabliflied church. They had followed
the queen, during the late commotions, and having access
to observe more narrowly the dangerous tendency of her
councils, their abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing
for their country surmounted all other considerations, and
determined them rather to endanger the religion which they
professed, than to give their aid towards the execution of
her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and pro-
rnifed to Argyll, Glencairn, and the prior of St. Andrew's,
who were appointed t'meet them, that if the queen should,
with her usual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of
truce, or refuse to gratify the wishes of the whole nation,
by difiniffing her French troops, they would then instantly
join with their countrymen in compelling her to a measure,
which the public safety, and the preservation of their liber-
ties, rendered necessary .

ABOUT this time died Henry II. of France; just when July 8.

he had adopted a system with regard to the affairs of Scot-
land, which would in all probability, have restored union
and tranquillity to that kingdom P. Towards the close of
his reign, the princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in
favour, and the conitable Montmorency, by the assistance of
the duchess of Valentinois, recovered that ascendant over
the spirit of his master, which his great experience, and his

I 2 faithful,
° Knox, 154. P Melv. 49.

B o O faithful, though often unfortunate, services seemed justly to

ii. merit. That prudent minister imputed the infurre&ions in
_ ,^yJ Scotland wholly to the duke of Guise and the cardinal of
s559. Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could not

fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men
whose minds were possessed with that jealousy which is in-
separable from the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that
ardour which accompanies religious zeal. Montmorency,
in order to convince Henry that he did not load his rivals
with any groundless accusation, prevailed to have Melvil ,
a Scottith gentleman of his retinue, dispatched into his native
country with inftru&ions to observe the motions both of the
regent and of her adversaries; and the king agreed to
regulate his future proceedings in that kingdom by Melvi's
report.

DID history indulge herself in these speculations, it would

be amuing to enquire what a different direction might have
been given by this resolution to the national spirit; and to
what a different issue Melvil's report, which would have set
the condut of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conducted the public disorders. Perhaps by
gentle treatment, and artful policy, the progress of the Re-
formation might have been checked, and Scotland brought
to depend upon France. Perhaps, by gaining ppofeflion of
this avenue, the French might have made their way into
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's title to
the crown, they might not only have defeated all Elizabeth's
measures in favour of the Reformation, but have re-efta-
blifhed the Roman catholic religion, and destroyed the liber-
ties of that kingdom. But, into this boundless field of fancy
and conje&ure, the historian must make no excursions; to
relate realoccurrences, and to explain their real causes and
effects, is his peculiar and only province.

Acceffonof THE tragical and untimely death of the French monarch
Francis II. put an end to all moderate and pacific measures with regard
to the to Scotland. The duke of Guise, and the cardinal his
crown ofr
Frae brother, upon the accession of Francis II a prince void of

genius and without experience, assumed the chief diretion
of French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by the
marriage of their neice the queen of Scots with the young
king, they now wanted but little of regal dignity, and no-
thing of regal power. This power did not long remain in-
aaive in their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambition,
which they had planned out under the former reign, were

again
q The author of the Memoirs.

again resumed ; and they were enabled, by possessing such B o o K
ample authority, to pursue them with more vigour and 1n.
greater probability of success. They beheld, with infinite _
regret, the progress of the protestant religion in Scotland; Iss9.
and, sensible what an unsurmountable obstacle it would
prove to their designs, they bent all their strength to check
its growth, before it rose to any greater height. For this
purpose they carried on their preparations with all possible
expedition, and encouraged the queen their ifter to ex-
pest, in a short time, the arrival of an army so power-
ful as the zeal of their adversaries, however desperate, would
not venture to oppose.

NOR were the lords of the Congregation either ignorant

of those violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of
France since the death of Henry, or careless of providing
against the danger which threatened them from that quarter.
The success cf their cause, as well as their personal safety,
depended entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their own
resolutions, they endeavoured to guard against division, and
to cement together more closely, by entering into a strider
body of confederacy and mutual defence. Two persons
concurred in thisnewafbociation,who brought a greatacceffion
both of reputation and of power to the party. These were
the duke of Chatelherault, and his eldest on the earl of
Arran. This young nobleman, having resided some years in
France, where he commanded the Scottish guards, had im-
bibed the protestant opinions concerning religion. Hurried
along by the heat of youth and the zeal of a proselyte, he
had uttered sentiments with refped to the points in con-
troverfy, which did not suit the temper of a bigotted court,
intent at that juncture on the extinaion of the protestant
religion; in order to apcomplifh which, the greatest excefles
of violence were committed. The church as suffered to
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were fufpedted of heresy:
Courts were erected in different parts of France, to take
cognizance of this crime, and by their sentences fcveral per-
sons of diftinfion were condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror, the princes

of Lorrain resolved to felet, for a sacrifice, some person
whose fall might convince all ranks of men, that neither
splendour of birth, nor eminence in station, could exempt
from punishment those who should be guilty of this unpar-
donable transgression. The earl of Arran was the person
destined to be the unhappy victim . As he was allied to

one
Thuan. lib. ;xiv. p. 46. Edit. Francs'.

B OO K one throne, and the presumptive heir to another; as he

11. poffefted the first rank in his own country, and enjoyed an
C\-v-J honourable station in France; his condemnation could not

j59. fail of making the desired impression on the whole kingdom.

But the cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some exprefflons,
which railed Arran's suspicions of the design, he escaped the
intended blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resent-
ment, all prompted him to feck revenge upon these perse-
cutors of himself and of the religion which he professed;
and as he passed through England, on his return to his native
country, Elizabeth by hopes and promises inflamed those
passions, and sent him back into Scotland, animated with
the fame implacable aversion to France, which poffeifed a

r of Ar- great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated

rainr these sentiments to his father the duke of Chatelherault,
;hcprott.- who was already extremely disgusted with the measures

is carrying on in Scotland and as it was the fate of that noble-

man to be governed in every instance by those about him, he
now fuffcred himself to be drawn from the queen regent;
and, having joined the Congregation, was confidered, from
that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpedt to him, this diffinction was merely no-

minal. James Stewart, prior of St. Andrew's, was the per-
son who moved and actuated the whole body of the pro-
teftants, among whom he possessed that unbounded con-
fidence, which his strenuous adherence to their interest and
his great abilities fojuftly merited. He was the natural son
of James V. by a daughter of lord Erskine; and as that
amorous monarch had left several others a burden upon the
crown, they were all destined for the church, where they
could be placed in stations of dignity and affluence. In con-
sequence of this resolution, the priory of St. Andrew's had
been conferred upon James: but, during so busy a period,
he soon became difguited with the indolence and retirement
of a monastic life; anc his enterprising genius called him
forth, to a a principal part on a more public and confpi-
cuous theatre. The scene in which he appeared required
talents of different kinds: military virtue, and political dif-
cernment, were equally necessary in order to render him il-
luftrious. These he possessed in an eminent degree. To the
mcft unqueffionable personal bravery, he dded great kill
in the art of war, and in every enterprise his arms were
crowned with success. His sagacity and penetration in civil
affairs enabled him, amidst the reeling and turbulence of
fadions, to hold a prosperous course: while his boldness in
defence cf the Reformation, together with the decency, and

even

even severity, of his manners, secured him the reputation of B o O K
being sincerely attached to religion, without which it was ii.
impossible in that age to gain an ascendant over mankind. 'v_.

IT was not without reason that the queen dreaded the s159.

enmity of a man so capable to obftru& her designs. As he
could not, with all her address, make the least impreflion on
his fidelity to his aflociates, he endeavoured to lessen his in-
fluence, and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy and
distrust, by insinuating that the ambition of the prior aspired
beyond the condition of a subjet, and aimed at nothing less
than the crown itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little credit.

Whatever thoughts of this kind the presumption of un-
expe&ed success, and his elevation to the highest dignity in
the kingdom, may be alledged to have inspired at any fubfe-
quent period, it is certain that at this juncture he could form
no such vaif design. To dethrone a queen, who was lineal
heir to an ancient reign of monarchs ; who had been guilty of
no ation by which she could forfeit the esteem and affection
of her fubjests; who could employ, in defence of her rights,
the forces of a kingdom much more powerful than her own;
and to substitute in her place, a person whom the illegiti-
macy of his birth, by the pra&ice of all civilized nations,
rendered incapable of any inheritance either public or pri-
vate, was a projec so chimerical as the molt extravagant
ambition, would hardly entertain, and could never conceive
to be practicable. The promise too, which the prior made
to Melvil, of residing constantly in France, on condition
the public grievances were redressed ; the confidence re-
posed in him by the duke of Chatelherault and his son, the
presumptive heirs to the crown; and the concurrence of al-
most all the Scottish nobles, in promoting the measures by
which he gave offence to the French court; go far towards
his vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with
the imputation of which the queen endeavoured at that time
to load him.

THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, Troops ar-

in ome degree, for the loss which the queen sustained by rive rom
the defetion of the duke of Chatelherault, These were im- fortify
mediately commanded to fortify Leith, in which place, on Leith.
account of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh and in a plentiful country,
the queen resolved to fix the head-quarters of her foreign
forces. This unpopular measure, by the manner of exe-

cuting
Mlvil, s4.

B o K cuaing it, was rendered Rill more unpopular. In order to

li. bring the town entirely under their command, the French
_>. turned out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking
x5s9S poellion of the houses, which they had obliged them to

abandon, presented to the view of the Scots two obje&s
equally irritating and offensive; on the one hand, a number
of their countrymen expelled their habitations by violence,
and wandering without any certain abode; on the other, a
colony of foreigners ettling with their wives and childern
in the heart of Scotlnd, growing into strength by daily
reinforcements, and openly preparing a yoke, to which,
without some timely exertion of national spirit, the whole
kingdom must of necefity submit.

The pro- IT was with deep concern that the lords of the Congre-

ftants re gation beheld this bold and decisive ftep taken by the queen
oenfths. regent: nor did they hesitate a moment, whether they

should employ their whole strength, in one generous effort,
to rescue their religion and liberty from impending deftruc-
tion. But, in order to justify their own conduct, and to
throw the blame entirely on their adversaries, they resolved
to preserve the appearance of decency and refiec towards
their superiors, and to have no recourse to arms without the
-eit. 9. most urgent and apparent necessity. They joined, with this

view, in an address to the regent, representing in the
strongest terms,their difiatisfa&ionwith the measures she was
pursuing, and befecchirg her to quiet the fears and jealousies
of the nation by defiftin., from fortifying Leith. The queen,
conscious of her prese it advantageous situation, and elated
with the hopes of fresh uccours, was in no disposition for
litening to demands ut :erly inconsistent with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity which is so little acceptable
to princes '.

'he rtnt THE suggestions of hcr French counsellors contributed,
disregards without doubt, to alienate her still farther from any scheme
heir re- of accommodation. As the queen was ready on all occa-
nnran- sions to discover an extraordinary deference for the opinions

of her countrymen, her brothers, who knew her secret dif-
approbation of the violent measures they were driving on,
took care to place near her such persons as betrayed her, by
their insinuations, into many aions, which her own un-
biassed judgment would have highly condemned. As their
success in the present junCure, when all things were haften-
ing towards a crisis, depended entirely on the queen's firm-
ness, the princes of Lon'rin did not trust wholly to the in-

fuence
t Hayns, 2II.

fluence of their ordinary agents but, in order to add the B o o X
greater weight to their councils, they called in aid the mi- i.
nifters of religion; and, by the anthority of their sacred cha- v
rater, they hoped effeeually to recommend to their sifter, Issg.
that system of severity which they had espoused. With
this view, but under pretence of confounding the protestants
by the kill of such able matiers in controversy, they ap-
pointed fcveral French divines to reide in Scotland. At the
head of these, and with'the charaaer of legate from the
pope, was Pelleve bishop of Amiens, and afterwards arch-
biflop and cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot , servilely de-
voted to the house of Guise, and a proper inftrurr.ent for
recommending or executing the most outrageous measures.

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these dotors

had little opportunity to display their address in the use of
their theological weapons. But they gave no small offence
to the nation by one of their ations. They persuaded the
queen to seize the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which
had remained ever since the late truce, in the hands of the
protestants; and having, by a new and solemn consecration,
purified the fabric from the pollution with which they sup-
posed the profane ministrations of the protestants to have
defiled it, they in dire& contradi&ion to one article in the
late treaty, re-established there the rights of the Romish
church. This, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the queen received their remonstrances, con-
vinced the lords of the Congregation, that it was not only
vain to expet any redress of their grievances at her hands,
but absolutely necessary to take arms in their own defence.

THit eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as Thev take

every consideration of good policy, prompted them to take arms in
this bold ftep without delay. It was but a small part of the their own
French auxiliaries which had as vet arrived. The fortifica- dfe
tious of Leith, though advancing fast, were still far from
being complete. Under these circunftances of disadvantage,
they conceived it poflible to furprifi the queen's party, and,
by one sudden and decisive blow, to prevent all future blood-
shed and contention. Full of these expecations, they ad-
vanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army.
But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary as vigilant oo,,et .
and attentive as the queen regent. With her usual sagacity,
ihe bothforefaw the danger, and took the only proper course
to avoid it. Instead of keeping the field against enemies
superior in number, and formidable on a day of battle by the

ardour
LefCley, Iy. (-nlh-l,anl, a ]b. *.ol.ii. 441. 473. X Davila Brantome

o o ardour of their courage, he retired into Leith, and deter-
n. mined patiently to wait the arrival of new reinforcements.

~vo-J Slight and unfinilhed as the fortifications of that town then
'559- were, fihe did not dread the efforts of an army, provided nei-

ther with heavy cannon, nor with military ifores, and little
acquainted with the method of attacking any place fortified
with more art than those ancient towers ereced all over the
kingdom in defence of private property against the incursions
of banditti.

NOR did the queen mean while neglet to have recourse

to those arts which she had often employed to weaken or
divide her adversaries. By private solicitations and promises
fie shook the fidelity, or abated the ardour, of some. 'By
open reproach and accusation he blasted the reputation, and
diminiihed the authority of others. Her emissarics were
every where at work, and notwithstanding the zeal for re-
iigion and l:berty, which then animated the nation, they
ieem to have laboured not without success. We find Knox,
about this period, abounding in complaints of the luke-
warm and languid spirit which had begun to spread among
his pary r. But if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered
a momentary intermission, it oon blazed up with fresh vi-
gour, and rose to a greater height than ever.

--w TTHE queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply

he which she made to a new remonstrance from the lords of the
monfrn- Congregation. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once

more represented to her t'le dangers arising from the increase
of the French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other
measures, which they conceived to be deftrutive to the
peace and liberty of the kingdom; and in this address they
spoke in a firmer tone, and avowed, more openly than ever,
their resolution of proceeding to the utmost extremities, in
order to put a flop t such dangerous encroachments. To
remonstrance of thii; nature, and urged with so much bold-
ness, the queen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.

brtt withcut She pretended that she was not accountable to the cnfede-
':ei1. rate lords for any part of her conduct; and upon no repre.

festation of theirs would she either abandon measures which
il:e dee-ed :-ecefiarv, cr dismiss forces which she found use-
ful, or cemolifh a frtification which might prove of adven.
tage. At the fame time fTe required them, on pain of trea.
fan, to diiband the forces which they had assembled.

THIS ha',ghty and imperious stile founded harshly to
Sce:t;h nobics, impatient, from their national character, of

the
· Knox. rS.

the fligheft appearance of injury; accustomed even from BOOK
their own monarchs to the most refpe&ful treatment; and li.
poffelling, under an ariftocratical form of government, such vw
a share of power, as equalled at all times, and often con- is559
trolled that of the sovereign. They were sensible, at once,
of the indignity offered to themselves, and alarmed with
this plain declaration of the queen's intentions; and as there
now remained but one itep to take, they wanted neither
public spirit nor resolution to take it.

BUT, that they might not.feem to depart from the efta- Deliberate

blifhed forms of the contitution, for which, even amidst concerin
their most violent operations, men always retain the greatest hich they
reverence, they assembled all the peers, barons, and repre- oughtto
fentatives of boroughs, who adhered to their party. These take.
formed a convention, which exceeded in number, and OcAt. 2
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parliament. The
leaders of the Congregation laid before them the declaration
which the queen had given in answer to their remonstrance;
rcprefented the unavoidable ruin which the measures she
therein avowed and justified would bring upon the kingdom;
and required their direction with regard to the obedience
due to an administration so unjust and oppressive, they
submitted to their decision a quefion, one of the most deli-
cate and interesting that can possibly fall under the confider-
ation of fubjetcs.

THIS assembly proceeded to decide with no less dispatch

than unanimity. Strangers to those forms which protra&
business; unacquainted with the arts which make a figure
in debate; and much more fitted for aion than discourse;
a warlike people always haften to a conclusion, and bring
their deliberations to the shortest issue. It was the work but
of one day, to examine and resolve this nice problem,
concerning the behaviour of subje&s towards a ruler who
abuses his power. But however abrupt their proceedings
may appear, they were not deltitute of solemnity. As the
determination of the point in doubt was conceived to be no
less the office of divines than of laymen, the former were
called to assist with their opinion. Knox and Willox ap-
peared for the whole order, and pronounced, without hefi-
tation, both from the precepts and examples in scripture,
that it was lawful for subjects not only to resist tyrannical
princes, but to deprive them of that authority, which, in
their hands, becomes an instrument for destroying those
whom the Almighty ordained them to proteCt. The decision
of persons revered so highly for their sacred charader, but
more for their zeal and their piety, had great weight with

the

a o o K the whole aembly. Not satisfied with the common indif-

Ix. criminate manner of signifying consent, every person present

w-s# was called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising
SS;9. up in order, all gave their suffrages, without one dissenting

They dc- voice, for depriving the queen of the office of regent, which
prve nth' she had exercised so much to the detriment of the kingdom Z
the odcs of THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the love
regert. of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In the a of depriva-
The mo- tion, religious grievances are sightly mentioned; and the dan-
ti-- of gerous encroachments of the queen upon the civil conftitu-
eat oan- tion are produced, by the lords of the Congregation, in or-

der to prove their condut to have been not only just but ne-
ceffary. The introducing foreign troops into a kingdom at
peace with all the world; the seizing and fortifying towns in
different parts of the country; the promoting strangers to
offices of great power and dignity; the debasing the current
coin '; the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing of
new and burder.fome taxes; and the attempting to subdue
the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and re-
peated ats of violence, are enumerated at great length, and
placed in the strongest light. On all these accounts, the
Congregation maintained, that the nobles, as counsellors by
birth-right to their monarchs, and the guardians and defend-
ers of the constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the king and
queen, and with many expressions of duty and fubmiflion
towards them, they deprived the queen regent of her office,
and ordainzd, that for the future, no obedience hould be
given to her commands b.

VIOLENT as this actien may appear, there wanted not

principles in the constitution, nor precedents in the history
of Scotland, to justify and to authorise it. Under the arif-
tocratical form of government eflablifhed among the Scots,
the power of the sovereign was extremely limited. The

more

Knox, 184.
The standard of money in Scotland was -ontinually varying. In the 16th

a James V. A. D. i529, a pound weight of gold, when coined produced o8
pounds of current money. But under the queen regent's administration,
A. D. IJ56, a pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was con-
.erably increa!ed, produced I441. current money. In 1529, a pound weight
flrver, when coined, produced 9. 2s. but in 1556, it prodtced 13I. cur-
rent money. Ruddiman. Pr2fat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotin, p. 80, 8r.
trom whi:h it appears, that this complaint, which the malecontents often
repeated, was not altogether dftitute of foundation.

1 . Cafilenau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the princes of

Lorrain, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges with his usual
,andour, that the Scots declared war against the queen regent, rather front
a dcire of vindi-aing thtir civil liberties, than from any motive of eligion,
x2 cL 446.

more considerable nobles were themselves petty princes, pof- a o o x
fessing extensive jurifdi&tions, almost independent of the 11.
crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in every wJv-
contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to xi55j
the king. Hence the many instances of the impotence of
regal authority, which are to be found in the Scottish history
In every age, the nobles not only claimed, but exercised,
the right of controlling the king. Jealous of their privileges,
and ever ready to take the field in defence of them, every
error in administration was observed, every encroachment
upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indignation, and
no prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries which
the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
fiftance, which shook or overturned his throne. Encouraged
by the spirit of the constitution, and countenanced by the ex-
ample of their ancestors, the lords of the Congregation thought
it incumbent on them, at this juncture to inquire into the
mal-administration of the queen regent, and to preserve
their country from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving
her of the power to execute such a pernicious scheme.

The at of deprivation, and a letter from the lords of

the Congregation to the queen regent, are still extant .
They discover not only that masculine and undaunted spirit,
natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are re-
markable for a precision and vigour of expression which we
are surprised to meet with in an age so unpolifhed. The
fame observation may be made with refpet to the other pub-
lic papers of that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an
age may render the compositions of authors by profeffioa
obscure, or asseted, or absurd; but the language of bufi-
ness is nearly the fame at all times, and whenever men
think clearly, and are thoroughly interested, they express
themselves with perspicuity and force.

KOX, O4

B O K

# BOOK III.

B 0 0 III

5o o
1 T HE lords of the Congregation oon found, that their

in. zeal had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was

Xv~.' beyond their utmost ability to accomplish. The French gar-

1s59. rifon, despising their numerous but irregular forces, refused
The Con to furrenderLeith, and to depart out of the kingdom ; nor

.g'e were they sufficiently skilful in the art of war to reduce the
J tteir~ place by force, or pofleffed of the artillery, or magazines,

requisite for that purpose; and their followers, though of
undaunted courage, yet being accustomed to decide every
quarrel by a battle, were strangers to the fatigues of a long
campaign, and soon became impatient of the revere and con-
ftant duty which a ege requires. The queen's emiflaries,
who found it easy to mingle with their countrymen, were at
the utmost pains to heighten their disgust, which discovered
itself at first in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion of
the want of money for paving the army, broke out into open
mutiny. The most eminent leaders were hardly secure from
the unbridled insolence of the soldiers; while some of in-
ferior rank, interposing too rafily in order to quell them,
fell victims to their rage. Discord, consternation, and per-
plexity, reigned in the camp of the reformers. The duke,
their general, funk, with his usual timidity, under the terror
of approaching danger, and discovered inanifeft fvmptoms of
repentance for his rashness in espousing such a desperate
cause.

ply to ' IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had re-
Elizabeth course to Elizabeth, from whose protection they could derive
for Iffi- their only reasonable hope of success. Some of their more

f' agacious leaders, having foreseen that the party might pro-
bably be involved in great difficulties, had early endeavoured
to secure a resource in any such exigency, by entering into
a secret correspondence with the court of England '. Eliza-
beth aware of the dangerous designs which the princes of
Lorrain had formed against her crown, was early sensible
of how much importance it would be, not only to check the
progress of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own
influence in that kingdom b; and perceiving how effectually
the present infurretions would contribute to retard dr de-

feat

Burn. His. Ref. 3. Append. 2 Keith, Append. 2x.
' Se Append. No. I.

feat the schemes formed against England, he lifteped with 8 o o t
pleasure to these applications of the malccontents, and gave ln.
them private aurances of powerful support to their cauft. m v-i
Randolphc, an agent extremely proper for conduding any 3ij9.
dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scotland, and tefiding
secretly among the lords of the Congregation, observed and
quickened their motions. Money eemed to be the only
thing they wanted at that time; and it was owing to a sea-
fonable remittance from England d, that the Scottifl nobles
had been enabled to take the field, and to advance towards
Leith. But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and
studious to preserve appearances with France, her fnbfidies
were bestowed at first with extreme frugality. The subsist-
ence of an army, and the expences of a siege, soon exhaut-
ed this penurious supply, to which the lords of the Congre-
gation could make little addition from their own funds; and
the ruin and dispersion of the party must have instantly fol-
lowed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton was sent she fenad

with the utmolt expedition, to the governors of the town and them a
calle of Berwick. As Berwvck was at that time the town of frma fm
greatest importance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sad- of mmy,
ler and Sir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were
employed to command there, and were entrusted with a dif-
cretionary power of supplying the Scottish malecontents, ac-
cording to the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock-
burn received four thousand crowns, but little to the advan-
tage of his party. The earl of Bothwell, by the queen's in- which is
ftigation, lay in wait for him on his return, dispersed his fol- inte cel-
lowers, wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the party.
In mere despair some of the more zealous attempted to afiault
Leith ; but the French beat them back with disgrace, seized
their cannon, and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh,
were on the point of entering along with them. All the
terror and confusion which the profpedl of pillage or of maf-
sacre can excite in'a place taken by form, filled the city on
this occasion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by the
opposite gate; the forces of the Congregation were irrefo-
lute and difinayed and the queen's partisans in the town
openly insulted both. At las a few of the nobles ventured
to face the enemy, who,'after plundering some houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city from
this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days after, was
no less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to

intercept
Keith, Append- 2. * d Kio, 114.' Keith, Append44.

BO OK intercept a convoy of provisions which was destined for

u. Edinburgh. The lords of the Congregation, having intelli-
xY>W gence of this, marched in all haste with a considerable body of
15$9. their troops, and falling upon the enemy between Reftalrig

and Leith, with more gallantry than good condut, were al-
most Surrounded by a second party of French, who advanc-
ed in order to support their own men. In this situation a
retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots; but a
retreat over marfliy ground, and in the face of an enemy fu-
perior in number, could not long be conduced with order.

They re- A small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and
tire from
Leith in foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing
conffioD. to the over-caution of the French, that any of the party es-

caped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congre-

gation funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure
even within the walls of Edinburgh, but instantly determin-
ed to retire to some place at a greaterdiftance from the enemy.
In vain did the prior of St. Andrew's and a few others,
oppose this cowardly and ignominious flight. The dread of
the present danger prevailed over both the sense of honour
Nowemb. 6. and zeal for the cause. At midnight they set out from Edin-

burgh in great confusion, and marched without halting till
they arrived at Stirling C.

DURING this last infurrction, the great body of the Scot-

tifh nobility joined the Congregation. The lords Seton and
Borthwick were the only persons of rank who took arms for
the queen,'and aflilted her in defending Leith f. Bothwell
openly favoured her cause, but resided at his own house.
The earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy which
diftingifhes his characer, amused the leaders of the Con-
gregation, whom he had engaged to assist, with many fair
promises, but never joined them with a single man g. The
earl of Morton, a member of the Congregation, flutuated
in a state of irresolution, and did not ad heartily for the com-
mon cufe. Lord Erskine, governor of Edinburgh castle,
though a protestant, maintained a neutrality, which he deem-
ed becoming the dignity of his office; and having been en-
trusted by parliament with the command of the principal for-
trefs in the kingdom, he resolved that neither fadion should
get it into their hands.

Maitled A FEW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the
revolts queen futfered an irreparable loss by the defeEtion of her
from the principal fecretarv, William Maitland of Lethington. His
queen dow- zeal
ager. zeal

e Keith, Append. zI-45. f Keith, Append. 3.
* Keith, Append. 33. Knox, 222.

zeal for the reformed religion, together with his warm re- B o o K
movrances against the violent measures which the queen In.
was carrying on, exposed him so much to her resentment, and v-
to that of her French counsellors, that he, fufpeding his life 15j9.
to be in danger, withdrew secretly from Leith, and fled to
the lords of the Congregation h; and they with open arms
received a convert, whole abilities added both ftrengtb and
reputation to their cause. Maitland had early applied to
public bufirefs admirable natural talents, improved: by an
acquaintance with the liberal arts ; and at a time of life when
his countrymen of the fame quality were following the ple-
fures of the chace, or serving as adventurers in the armies of
France, he was admitted into all the secrets of the-cabinet,
and put upon a level with persons of the most consummate
experience in the management of affairs. He possessed, in
an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit which delights il pur-
filing bold designs, and was no less master of that poli-
tical dexterity which is neceflary for carrying them on with
success. But these qualities were deeply tinctured with the
neighbouring vices. His address forntimes degenerated into
cunning; his acuteiefs bordered upon excess his inventions
over-fertile, suggested to him, on foime occaftins, chimerical
systems of policy, too refined for the genius of his age orcoun-
try; nd his enterprising spirit engaged him in projets vait
and splendid, but beyond his utmost power to execute. All
the cotemporary -writers, to whatever fadtion they belong,
mention him with an admiration which nothing could have
excited but the greatest uperiorkyof penetration and abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased to

such a degree the terror and confusion which had Seiaed the
party at Edinburgh, that, before the army reached Stirling,
it dwindled to an inconsiderable number. The spirit of
Knox, however, still remained undaunted and eret,. and
having mounted the pulpit, he addressed, to his despond-
ing hearers, an exhortation which wonderfully animated
and revived them. The heads.of this discourse are in-
ferted in his history', and afford a striking example of the
boldness and freedom of reproof afliuned by the rt re-
formers, as well as a pecimen of his own (kill in chuing the
topics molt fitted to influence and rouse his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what The!.rdsof

course they should hold, now that their own refourccswere all tl:cCo:rrc-
exhausted, and their detrudtion appeared to.bh unavoidable gion
without foreign aid, they turned their eyes once more to Eli ,to

VOL. I. K England,

h KnoW, lxa- ' KAnz id

B o o K England, and resolved to implore the aiftance of Elizabeth

ili. towards finishing an enterprise, in which they had so fatally
vYow experienced their own weakness, and the strength of their
·* X9. adversaries. Maitland, as the most able negociator of the

party, was employed in this embafTy. In his abence, and
during the inacive season of the year, it was agreed to dif-
miss their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign
which had so far exceeded the usual time of service. But,
in order to preserve the counties most devoted to their in-
terest, the prior of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders,
retired into Fife. The duke of Chatelherault, with the reft,
fixed his residence at Hamilton. There was little need of
Maitland's address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take
his country under her protecion. She observed the preva-
lence of the French counsels, and the progress of their arms
in Scotland, with great concern; and as he well foresaw, the
dangerous tendency of their schemes in that kingdom, he
had already come to a r solution with regard to the part fihe
herself would act, if their power there fliould grow still more
formidable.

Motives IN order to give the queen and her privy council a full and
which de- diftind view of any important matter which might come be-
ertoindfi fore them, it seems to have been the pratice of Elizabeth's
her to afift
the., ministers to prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated'

the point under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the
conduct which they held to be most reasonable, and proposed
a. method for carrying their plan into execution. Two papers
of this kind, written by Sir William Cecil with his own hand,
and submitted by the queen to the consideration of her privy
council, still remain ; they are entitled, " A hort discussion
of the weighty matter of Scotland," and do honour to the
industry and penetration of that great minister. The mo-
tives which determined the queen to espouse so warmly the
defence of the Congregation, are represented with perspicuity
and force ; and the consequences of suffering the French to
eftablifi themselves in Scotland, are predidted with great
accuracy and discernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both

of God and of nature, that every focietyhath a right to defend
itself, not only from the present dangers, but from such as
may probably ensue; to which he adds, that nature and rea-
son teach every prince to defend himself by the fame means
which his adversaries employ to distress him. Upon these
grounds he eftablifies the right of England to interpose in

the
Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283 Forbcis, 37, &c. Keith, Append. 24,

the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that B o o K
kingdom, at which the French openly aimed. 'The French, IM.
he obfcrves, are the ancient and implacable enemies of '.. J
England. Hostilities had sublisted between the two nations 1559.
for many centuries. No treaty of peace into which they
entered had ever been cordial or sincere. No good effe&
was therefore to be expeted from the peace lately agreed
upon, which, being extorted by present necessity, would be
negligently observed, and broken on the slightest pretences.
In a very short time, France would recover its former opu-
lence; and though now drained of men and money by a
tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a con-
dition for a&ing, and the restless and martial genius of the
people would render aion necessary. The princes of Lor-
rain, who at that time had the entire direction of French
affairs, were animated with the most virulent hatred against
the Englifl nation. They openly called in question the le-
gitimacy of the queen's birth, and by advancing the title and
prentenfions of their niece the queen of Scotland, fludied
to deprive Elizabeth of her crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the English from the treaty of
Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a fe-
parate peace with Spain. They had persuaded Henry I.
to permit his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
queen of England; and even since the conclufionof the peace,
they had solicited at Rome, arid obtained, a bull declaring
Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate. Though the wisdom and
moderation of the Constable Montmorency had for some time
checked their career, yet these restraints being now removed
by the death of Henry II. and the disgrace of his minister,
the utmost excesses of violence were to be dreaded from
their furious ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scot-
land is the quarter where they can attack England with most
advantage. A war on the borders of that country exposes
France to no danger, but one successful ation there may
hazard the crown, and overturn the goverment, of England.
In political conduct, it is childish to wait till the designs of
an enemy be ripe for execution. The Scottish nobles, after
their utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field; and
far from expelling the invaders of their liberties, they behold
the French power daily increasing, and must at last cease
from truggling any longer in a contest so unequal. The
invading of England will immediately follow the reduction of
the Scottifl malccontents, by the abandoning of whom to
the mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a way for her
enemies into the heart of her own kingdom, and expose it

: 2 to

B o o IK to the calamities of war, and the danger of conquest. No-

iii. thing therefore remained but to meet the enemy while yet

w~v-xa at a distance from England, and by supporting the Congre-
xs59. gation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre

of the war, to crush the designs of the princes of Lorrain in
their infancy, and, by such an early and unexpected es-
fort, to expel the French out of Britain, before their power
had time to take root and grow up. to any formidable height.
But as the matter was of as much importance as any which
could fall under the consideration of an English monarch,
wisdom and mature counsel was necessary in the firit place,
and afterwards vigour and expedition in conduct; the dan-
ger was urgent, and, by losing a single moment, might be-
come unavoidable .

THESE arguments produced their full effet upon Eliza-

beth, who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pre-
tender to her crown, and no less anxious to preserve the
tranquillity and happiness of her fubjeds. From these mo-
tives she had ated, in granting the Congregation an early
ftipply of money; and from the fame principles ihe deter-
mined, in their present exigency, to afford them more effec-
tual aid. One of Iaitland's attendants was instantly dif-
patched into Scotland with the strongest aflurances of her
protection, and the lords of the Congregation were delired
to fend commiiioners into England to conclude a treaty, and
to fettle the operations of the campaign with the duke of
Norfolk ".

r:bsc.t1Cn TMEAN WHILE the queen regent, from whom no motion of
o';agcr the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the fuc-
fends her cess of this negotiation with the court of England, and fore-
Frc-n i fiaw how little he would be able to resist the united effort of
tros lhe t o kingdoms. For this reason flie determined, if polfible,

to get the tart of Elizabeth; and by venturing, notwith-
s"anding the inclemency of the winter season, to attack the
malecontents in their present dispersed and helpless ftua-
tion, he hoped to put an end to the war before the arrival
of their Englifli allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were

augmented. about this time by the arrival of the count de
Martigues, with a thousand veteran foot and some cavalry,
were commanded to march to Stirling. Having there crofi-
ed the Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife, de-

stroying

'The rgaments hich the Scots employed, in order to obtain Elizabeth's

aiffance, ae urged aith geat force, in a paper of Maitland's. See Append.
No. 11.
' Kei:b, r. Ry:.-;r, xv. p. 69.

stroying and plundering, with exceflive outrage, the houses B K
and lands of those whom they deemed their enemies. Fife iii.
was the most populous and powerful county in the king- '
dom, and most devoted to the Congregation, who had hi- 1559.
therto drawn from thence their molt considerable supplies,
both of men and provisions; and therefore, befidqs punish-
ing the difaffeeion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the coun-
try, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's,
and to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle the mutinous
spirit of the province, and to keep possession of a port situ-
ated on the main ocean n.

BUT on this occasion, the prior of St. Andrew's, lord

Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of the most
atiive leaders of the Congregation, performed, by their
bravery and good conduc, a ervice of the utmolt importance
to their party. Having aflerbled fix hundred horse, they
infested the French with continual incursions, beat up their
quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions, cut off their
Itraggling parties,and so harraffedthemwithperpetual alarms,
that they prevented them for more than three weeks from
advancing °.

AT lalt the prior, with his feeble party, was constrained to s560

retire, and the French set out from Kirkaldv, and began to
move along he coast towards St. Andrew's. They had ad- Januaryl2,
vanced but a few miles, when, from an eminence, they def-
cried a powerful fleet steering its course up the Frith of
Forth. As they knew that the marquis D'Elbeuf wa at
that time preparing to fail for Scotland with a numerous
army, they haltilyconcluded that thele ships belonged to hinl,
and gave way to the molt immoderate transports of joy, on
the profpe& of this long-expeecd succour. Their great
guns were already fired to welcome their friends, and to
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival among their
enemies, when a small boat from the opposite coast landed,
and blasted their premature and short-lived triumph, by in-
forming them, that it was the fleet of England which was
in fight, intended for the aid of the Congregation, and was
soon to be followed by a formidable land army p.

THROUGHOUT her whole reign Elizabeth was cautious, TleEnglif

but decisive ; and by her promptitude in executing her refo- Hcct arrives
lutions, joined to the deliberation with which he formed to their
them, her administration became remarkable, no less for it aance
vigour than for its wisdom. No sooner did flhe determine to
afford her protecion to the lords of the Congregation, than

they
* Haynes, 221, &c. o Knox, 202. r ibid. 203.

B O O K they experienced the ativity, as well as the extent of her

ill. power. The season of the year would not permit her land
_-0 army to take the field; but left the French should, in the
is6o. mean time, receive new reinforcements, she instantly ordered

a strong squadron to cruise in the Frith of Forth. She
seems, by her inftrutions to Winter her admiral, to have
been desirous of prefering the appearances of friendship to-
wards the French . But these were only appearances; if
any French fleet {hould attempt to land, he was commanded
to prevent it, by every as of hostility arid violence. It was
the fight of this squadron, which occasioned at firt so much
joy among the French, but which oon inspired them with
such terror, as saved Fife from the effects of their vengeance.
Apprehensive of being cut off from their companions on the
opposite fiore,they retreated towards Stirling with the utmost
precipitation, and in a dreadful season, and through roads
almost impassable, arrived at Leith, harafled and exhausted
with fatigue r.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, and

continuing in that fiation till the conclusion of peace, both
prevented the garrison of Leith from receiving succours of
any kind, and considerably facilitated the operations of their
own forces by land.

They con- SOON after the arrival of the Englih 'squadron, the com-
dudeatrea- mffloners of the Congregation repaired to Berwick, and
t with
England. concluded with the duke of Norfolk a treaty, the bond of
Feb. :7. that union with Elizabeth, which was of so great advantage

to the cause. To give a check to the dangerous and rapid
progress of the French arms in Scotland, was the professed
design of the contrating parties. In order to this, the
Scots engaged never to susser anyclofer union of their country
with France; and to defend themselves to the uttermost
tgainft all attempts of conquest. Elizabeth, on her part,
promised to employ in Scotland a powerful army for their
afiftance, which the Scots undertook to join with all their
forces; no place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of
the English ; whatever fh6uld be taken from the enemy was
either to be rafed, or kept by the Scots, at their choice; if
any invasion should be made upon England, the Scots were
obliged to afift Elizabeth with part of their forces; and
to ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty, they
bound themselves to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the
march of her army into Scotland; in conclusion the Scots
made many proteflations of obedience and loyalty towards

their
'Xe:th, Appondix 45. Haynes, 23. Knox, 203,

their own queen, in every thing not inconsistent with their B o K
religion, and the liberties of their country . ii.

THE English army, consisting of fix thousand foot and kv ~

two thousand horse, under the command of lord Gray of x560.
Wilton, entered Scotland early in the spring. The mem- The Eng-
bers of the Congregation assembled from all parts of the l army
kingdom to meet their new allies; and having joined them, to Litl.
with great multitudes of their followers, they advanced to- April 2.
gether towards Leith. The French were little able to keep
the field against an enemy so much superior in number. A
ltrong body of troops deRined for their relief, had been
scattered by a violent storm, and had either periflied on the
coalt of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of
that kingdom '. But they hoped to be able to defend
Leith, till the princes of Lorrain ihould make good the
magnificent promises of assistance, with which they aily
encouraged them; or till scarcity of provisions should con-
strain the English to retire into their own country. In order
to haften this latter event, they did not neglect the ufial,
though barbarous precaution for diftreflng an invading ene-
my, by burning and laying waste all the adjacent-coun-
try . The zeal, however, of the nation frustrated their in-
tentions; eager to contribute towards removing their oppref-
fors, the people produced their hidden stores to support their
friends; the neighbouring counties supplied every thing
necessary, and far from wanting subsistence, the Englihf
found in their camp all forts of provisions at a cheaper rate
than had for ome time been known in that part of the
kingdom x.

ON the approach of the English army, the queen regent

retired into the cafle of Edinburgh. Her health was now
in a declining state, and her mind broken and deprefled by
the misfortunes of her administration. To avoid the danger
and fatigue of a siege, he committed herself to the pro-
tedion os'lord Erskine. This nobleman still preserved his
neutrality, and by his integrity, and love of his country,
merited equally the esteem of both parties. He received
the queen herself with the utmost honour and refpet, but
took care to admit no such retinue as might endanger his
command of the castle 7.

A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland the Englifli April 6.

inveRted Leith. The garrison hut up within the town was
almost half as numerous as the army which fat down before

it,

* Knox, 217. Haynes, 53, &c. ' Mer. e C.-itcl. 40.
Knox Knox, 2 ibid. Forles's Co.leCt. vol. i. 503. Keith, i2r.

B o o K it, Emd by an obstinate defence protra&ed the siege to a

iII. great length. The circumstances of this siege, related by

>__y^ contea;porary historians, men without knowledge or expe-
I560. rience in the art of war, are often obscure and imperfet,

and at this difRance of time are not considerable enough to
be entertaining.
April . AT sirs the French endeavoured to keep pofeffion of

the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far ditant from the
town, but were beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly
by the furious attack of the Scottifi cavalry. Within asew
dav; the French had their full revenge; having sallied out
with a strong body, they entered the English trenches, broke
their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and killed at least
dbuble the number they had loft in the former skirmish.
Nor were the Elith fimore fortunate in an attempt which
they made to take the place by alault; they were met with
:.nv:-. equal courage, and repulsed with considerable loss. From

the detail of these circumiftances by the writers of that age,
it is easy to observe the different chara&ers of the French
and Englih troops. The former, trained to war under the
.tive reigns of Francis . and Henry Hs. defended them-
selves not only with the bravery but with the tkill of veterans.
The latter, who had been more accustomed to peace, still
refere.d the intrepid and desperate valour peculiar to the
nation, but discovered few marks of military genius, or of
experience in the pratice of war. Every misfortune or
.iifippointment during the siege muff be imputed to manifest
errors in condut. The success of the besieged in their sally
v.3 owing entirely to the security and negligence of the
Tnglit; many of their officers were absent; their soldiers
had left their stations; and the trenches were almoR without
a uard . The ladders which had been provided for the
a.ault, van:ted a great deal of the necessary length; and the
troops enpoyed in that feriwce were ill supported. The
trenches were opened at f;r i an improper place; and as it
was found epedient to change the ground, both time and
labour were loft. The weakness of their own generals, no
1fs than the strength of the French garrison, rendered the
progress of the English wonderfully flow. The long con-
tinvance, however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to ex-
treme diftrcfs for want of rovifions, which the profpeE of
relief made them bear with'admirable fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of.the French protraaed
.e siege so far beyond expectation, the leaders of the Con-

eregatic3
' Havncs, 294. 298. J3O, &c,

gregation were not idle. By new aflociatiqns and confede- B o o K
racics, they laboured to: unite their party more perfecly. iI.
By publicly ratifying the treaty concluded at Berwick, they r_
endeavoured to render the alliance with England firm and 1j56o
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these papers we find
the earl of Huntly, and some others, who had not hitherto
concurred with the Congregation in any of their measures .
Several of these lords, particularly the earl of Huntly, still
adhered to the popish church; but on this occasion neither
their religious sentiments, nor their former cautious maxims,
were regarded; the torrent of national resentment and in-
dignation agaillt the French hurried them on b.

T'E queen regent, the instrument, rather than the cause, Death and

of involving Scotland in those calamities under which it charaser of
groaned at that time, died during the heat of the siege. No the queen
princess ever pofl'effed qualities more capable of rendering une 1o.
her administration illuitrious, or her people happy. Of
much discernment, and no less address; of great intrcpidity,
and equal prudence; gentle and humane, without weakness;
zealous for her religion, without bigotry; a lover of justice,
without rigour. One circumstance, however, and that too
the excess of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all these
great qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of France, her
native country, and attached to the princes of Lerrain, her
brothers, with molt pafflonate fondness ; she departed, in
order to gratify thenm from evcrv maxim which her own
wisdom or humanity would have approved. She outlived, in
a great measure, that reputation and popularity which had
finoothed her way to the highest fation in the kingdom; and
many examples of falsehood, and some of severity, in the
atter part of her aminiftration, alienated from her the as-
felions of a people who had once placed in her an unbound-
ed confidence. But even by lier enemies, these unjustifiable
assions were imputed to the facility, not to the malignity,
i,f her nature ; and while they taxed her brothers and Frenchi
counsellors with raffinefs and cruelty, they still allowed hcc

· Burn. vol. iii. -. Knox, 21. 1-aynes, 61. 263.
i The dread of the French power did on many occasions frrmount the ze.l

which the catholic obles had for their religion. Betides the presumptive evi-
dnce for this, ailitig from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hitl. of th.
Reformation, vol. iii. 28z. and publifled by him, App. p. 278; the inftrac-
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that ma-
ny zealous papists thought the alliance with England to be necessary for pre-
ferring the liberty and independence of the kingdlom. Keith, 158. Huntly
himself began a correspondence with Elizabeth's ministers, before the marrlh
of the Engliih army into Scotland. Hayne's Stte Papers, 6z. 63j. ,c
Append. No. 111I.

o oK. the praise of prudence and of lenity . A few days efort,
iII. her death, he d~ired an interview with the prior of St.

Andrew's, the earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the Con-
x6$,. gregation. To them she lamented the fatal iflue of.thofe

violent councils which hie had been obliged to follow; and,
with the candour natural to a generous mind, confessed the
errors of her own administration, and begged forgiveness of
those to whom they had been hurtful; but at the fame time
she warned them, amidst their struggles for liberty and the
ihock of arms, not to lose fight of the loyalty and fubjeaion
which was due to their sovereign d. The remainder of her
time ihe employed in religious meditations and exercises.
She even invited the attendance of Willox, one of the most
eminent among the reformed preachers, listened to his in-
ftru&ions with reverence and attention e, and prepared for
the approach of death with a decent fortitude.

;otives of NOTHING could how fare the French troops hut up in
the Fren Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the ar-

CIOdCte rival of a powerful army from the continent. The princes
I'mt of Lorrain amused their party in Scotland with continual

expetations of the latter, and had thereby kept alive their
hopes and courage; but at last, the situation of France,
rather than the terror of the English arms, or the remon-
irances of the Scottish malecontents, constrained them,
though with reluctance, to turn their thoughts towards pa-
cific councils. The protestants of France were at that time
a party formidable by their number, and more by the valour
and enterprising genius of their leaders. Francis II. had
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every
ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extirpate their religion,
and to ruin those who professed it. At the profpcet of this
danger to themselves and to their cause, the protestants were
alarmed, but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and in-
flamed with resentment, they not only prepared for their own
defence, but resolved, by some bold adtion, to anticipate the
schemes of their enemies; and as the princes of Lorrain
were deemed the authors of all the king's violent measures,
they marked them out to be the first viCtims of their indigna-
tion. Hence, and not from any disloyalty to the king,
Mrach ir. Froceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise; and though

the vigilance and good fortune of the princes of Lorrain dif-
covered and disappointed that design, it was easy to observe
new florms gathering in every province of the kingdom, and
ready to burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war.

In
aichan. 2:-:. ~ Lefle-, de Rebus Gef. Scot. s;2. ' Knox, z$.

In this situation, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was B o o x
called off from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend iIn.
the honour and dignity of the French crown, and instead of
fending new reinforcements into Scotland, it became necef- zj6o.
fary to withdraw the veteran troops already employed in that
kingdom f.

IN order to condu& an affair of so much importance and The nego-

delicacy, the princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc ciatio nsfr
bishop of Valence, and of the fieur de Randan. As both Pthir-
these, especially the former, were reckoned inferior to no
persons of that age in address and political refinement,
Elizabeth opposed to them ambassadors of equal abilities;
Cecil her prime minister, a man perhaps of the greateit
capacity who had ever held that office; and Wotton dean of
Canterbury, grown old in the art of negociation under three
successive monarchs. The interests of the French and Eng-
lifh courts were soon adjusted by men of so great dexterity
in business ; and as France easily consented to withdraw
those forces which had been the chief occasion of the war,
the other points in dispute between that kingdom and, Eng-
land, were not matters of tedious or of difficult difcuflfon.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their denands

upon their own sovereigns for redress, employed longer time,
and required to be treated with a more delicate hand. After
so many open attempts, carried on by command of the king
and queen, in order to overturn the ancient constitution,
and to suppress the religion which they had embraced, the
Scottifli nobles could not think themselves secure, without
fixing some new barrier against the future encroachments of
regal power. But the legal steps towards accomplishing
this were not so obvious. The French ambafladors conli-
dered the entering into any treaty with fubjeds, and with
rebels, as a condescension unsuitable to the dignity of a so-
vereign ; and their scruples on this head might have put an
end to the treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace
had not suggested an expedient, which seemed to provide for
the security of the subjec, without derogating from the ho-
nour of the prince. The Scottifil nobles agreed, on this Articls of
occasion to pass from the point of right and privilege, and the treakr.
to accept the redress of their grievances as a matter of fa-
vour. Whatever additional security their'anxiety for per-
fonal safety, or their zeal for public liberty, prompted them
to demand, was granted in the name of Francis and Mary,
as as of their royal favour and indulgence. And left con-

cessions
f Lesey, 224.

R o o cessions of this kind fbould seem precarious and liable to be

in. retrated by the fame power which had made them, the

\rV_ French ambassador agreed to insert them in the treaty with
i5o. Elizabeth, and thereby to bind the king and queen inviolably

to obfen-e them .

Ix relating this tranfation, contemporary historians have

confounded the concessions of Francis and Mary to their
Scottif fubjecds, with the treaty between France and Eng-
land; the latter, besides the ratification of former treaties
between the two kingdoms, and stipulations with regard to
the time and manner of removing both armies out of Scot-
land, contained an article to which, as the source of many
important events, we shall often have occasion to refer. The
right of Elizabeth to her crown is thereby acknowledged in
the ftrongeit terms; and Francis and Mary solemnly engage
neither to arme the title, nor to bear the arms of king and
queen of England in any time to come h.
July 6 HOSOtURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the

conditions she obtained for her allies the Scots were no less
advantageous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in
the name of Francis and Mary, that the French forces in
Scotland should inflantly be sent back into their own ceuntry,
and no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into the king-
&km without the knowledge and consent of parliament;
that the fortifications of Leith and Dunbar flould imme-
diately be raf.d, and no new fort be erecd without the per-
mifion of parliament ; that a parliament should be held on
the firtl day of Auguit, and that assembly be deemed as valid
in all refpecs as if it had been called by the express com-
mandment of the king and queen; that, conformable to the
aicient laws and customs of the country, the king and queen
h.o'ld nct declare war or conclude peace without the con-
currence of parliament; that during the queen's absence,
the adminirtraton of governme.t should be vested in a
juncil of twelve pcrfons, to be chosen out of twenty-four
.:,micd by parliament, seven of which council to be elected
ty the queen, and five by the parliament; that hereafter the
ing and queen should not advance foreigners to places of
iru. or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices of
reafurer or comnptroller of the revenues upon any eccleliaf-
.ic; thit an at of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and me-
rmory of all offences committed since the sixth of March one
thousand five hundred and fifty-eight, fould be passed in
th ensuing parliament, and be ratified by the king and

queen

Keith, 1.4, &c. } Keith, 134. Rymcr, xv. p. 581. 591, &c.
ti 7t; 3;, 64

queen that the king and queen should not, under the co- B o
lour of punishing any violation of'their authority during that in.
period, seek to deprive any of their fubjefts of the offices, 'sv
benefices, or estates which they now held ; that the redress zsc-
due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had sustained
during the late infurrefions, (hould be left entirely to the
cognizance of parliament. Wuith regard to religious con-
troverfies, the ambassadors declared that they would not pre-
fume to decide, but permitted the parliament, at 'their firlt
meeting, to examine the points in difference, and to repre-
sent their sense of them to the king and queeni.

To such a memorable period did the lords of the Congre- The ft^

gation, by their courage and perseverance, condu& an en- ofi
terprife which at first promised a very different issue. From
beginnings extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the
party grew by degrees to great power; and being favoured
by many fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of their
own queen, aided by the forces of a more considerable king-
dom. The sovereign authority was by this treaty transferred
wholly into the hands of the Congregation ; that limited
prerogative, which the crown had hitherto possessed, wasal-
most entirely annihilated; and the ariftocratical power, which
always predominated in the Scottiih government, became
supreme and incontrolable. By this treaty too theinfluelce
of France, which had long been of much weight in the as-
fairs of Scotland, was greatly diminiflied; and not only were
the prcfent encroachments of that ambitious ally restrained,
but, by confederating with England, protedtion was provided
againit any future attempt from the fame quarter. At the
fame time, the controversies in religion being left to the con-
fideration of parliament, the protestants might reckon upon
obtaining whatver decision was most favourable to the opi-
nions which they professed.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the
French and English armies quitted Scotland.

THEi eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned to- A parl

wards the approaching parliament. A meeting, summoned merntlhf
in a manner so extraordinary, at such a critical juncture,
and to deliberate upon matters of so muzh consequence, was
expccted with the utmost axietv.

A SCOl'l.tsH parliament suitable to the ariftocratical genius

of th,' government, was properly an assembly of the nobles.
It was comnpnfed of bilhops, abbots, barons, and a few com-
miilioie:s of boroughs, who met altogether in one house.

The
i Keith, 137, &c.

B o o K The lefter barons, though posses'ed of a right to be present,

Mi. either in person or by their representatives, seldom exercised
_
-y- it. The expence of attending, according to the fashion of
i560. the times, with a numerous train of aflals and dependants;

the inattention of a martial age to the fornrs and detail of
civil government; but above all, the exorbitant authority of
the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into
their own hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to
be almost neglected. It appears from the ancient rolls, that
during times of tranquillity, few commiflioners of boroughs,
and almost none of the lefler barons, appeared in parliament.
The ordinary administration of government was abandoned,
without scruple or jealousy, to the king and to the greater
barons. But in extraordinary conjuncures, when the ftrug-
gle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to the
crown rose to an height, the burgefles and lesser barons were
routed from their inactivity, and stood forth to vindicate the
rights of their country. The turbu:ent reignof James III.
affords examples in proof of this observation k. The public
indignation against the rash designs of that weak and ill-ad-
vised prince, brought into parliament, besides the greater no-
bles and prelates, a considerable number of the lesser barons.

THE fame caufesoccafioned the unusual confluence of all

orders of men to the parliament, which met on the first of
Augulf. The universal passion for liberty, civil and religious,
which had seized the nation, suffered few persons to remain
unconcerned spectators of an assembly, whose acts were likely
to prove decisive with respect to both. From all cowyers of
the kingdom men flocked in, eager and determined to aid,
with their voices in the fnate, the fame cause which they
had defended with their swords in the field. Besides a full
convention of peers, temporal and spiritual, there appeared
the representatives of almost all the boroughs, and above an
hundred barons, who, though of the lefler ordet, were gen-
tlemen of the first rank and fortune in the nation .

THE parliament was ready to enter on business with the

utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started concerning the
lawfulness of the meeting. No commiflioner appeared in
the name of the king and queen, and no signification of
their content and approbation was yet received. These were
deemed by many essential to the very be'ng of a parliament.
But, in opposition to this sentiment, the express words of
the treaty of Edinburgh were urced, by which this assembly
was declared to be as valid, in all respects, as if it had been

called
k Keith, 147- ' Ibid. 146.

called and appointed by the express command of the king B o o I
and queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly iim.
outnumbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. _
Their boldest leaders, and thbfe of most approved zeal, were 1560.
chosen to be lords of the articles, who formed a committee
of ancient use, and of great importance in the Scottish par-
liament m, The deliberation of the lords of the articles were
carried on with the mot unanimous and aAive zeal. The
ad of oblivion, the nomination of twenty-four persons, out
of whom the council, intrusted with supreme authqrity, was
to be eleded; and every other thing prescribed by the late
treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it effetual, Itsproceed-
passed without dispute or delay. The article of religion em- ings with
ployed longer time, and was attended with greater difficulty. regrd to
It was brought into parliament by a petition from those who relglon.
adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many doctrines
of the popish church were a contradidion to reason and a
disgrace to religion; its discipline had become corrupt and
oppressive; and its revenues were both exorbitant and ill-
applied. Against all these the protestants remonstrated with
the utmost asperity of style, which indignation at their ab-
furdity, or experience of their pernicious tendency, could
inspire ; and encouraged, by the number as well as zeal of
their friends, to improve such a favourable jundure, they
aimed the blow at the whole fabric of popery ; and besought
the parliament to interpose its authority for recifying these
multiplied abuses ".

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the ancient super-

ftition, were present in this parliament. But during theft
vigorous proceedings of the protestants, they stood con-
founded and at gaze; and persevered in a silence which was
fatal to their cause. They deemed it impossible to resist or
divert that torrent of religious zeal, which was f/ill in its
full strength; they dreaded that their opposition would ir- ·
ritate their adversaries and excite them to new ats of vio-
lence; they hoped that the king and queen would soon be
at leisure to put a stop to the career of their insolent fubjedts,
and that, after the rage and havoc of the present florm, the
former tranquillity and order would be restored to the church
and kingdom. They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the
docrine and even the power of the church, in order tq ensure

the

From an original letter of Hamilton, archbitfop of St. Andrew's, it

ppears, that the lords of articles were chosen in the manner aftermards ap-
pointed by an at of parliament, 1633. Keith, p. 487. Spottifwcod freips
to confider this to have been the common practice. Hilt. 149.
"-Kuo, 23 7-

B o o K the safety of their own persons, and to preserve the possession

iu. of those revenues which were still in their hands. From

'.vy whatever motives they aed, their silence, whieh was im-
160o. puted to the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded matter

of great triumph to the protestants, and encouraged them
to proceed with more boldnes and alacrity °.

THE parliament did not think it enough to condemn those

doarines mentioned in the petition of the protestants they
moreover gave the fandion of their approbation to a Con-
session of Faith presented to them by the reformed teachers P;
and composed, as might be expeEted from such a performi
ance at that juncure, on purpose to expose the absurd tenets
and practices of the Romish church. By another a, the
jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts was abolished, and
the causes which formerly came under their cognizance
were transferred to the decision of civil judges q. By a third
statute, the exercise of religious worship, according to the
rites of the Romith church, was prohibited. The manner
in which the parliament enforced the observation of this
law discovers the zeal of that assembly; the sirs tranfgrefion
fubjeeted the offender to the forfeiture of his goods, and to
a corporal punishment, at the discretion of the judge; ba-
nifhment was the penalty of a second violation of the law;
and a third at of disobedience was declared to be capital .
Such firangers were men at that time to the spirit of tolera-
tion, and to the laws of humanity; and with such indecent
haste did the very persons who had just escaped the rigour of
ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of fe-
verity of which they themselves had so justly complained.

With re- THE vigorous zeal of the parliament overturned in a few
gard to the days the ancient system of religion, which had been efta-
rcyvnues of blified so many ages. In reforming the dodtrine and difci-

pline of the church, the nobles kept pace with the ardour
and expectations e'".. of Knox himself. But their proceedings,
with refped to these, were not more rapid and impetuous,
than they were flow and dilatory when they entered on the
consideration of ecclefiatical revenues. Among the lay
members, some were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expecation the wealthy be-
nefices which still remained untouched., The alteration in
religion had afforded many of the dignified ecclesiastics
themselves an opportunity cf gratifying their avarice or am-
bition. The demolition of the monateries having set the
noiks at liberty from their confinement, they instantly dif-

perfed
' Knox, :53- Id. ibid. q Keith, ijz. ' Knox, 54.

petsed all over the kingdom, and commonly betook them- B. 0 o K
selves to some secular employment. The abbot, if-he had iil.
been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Reform- x s
ation from conviction, or so cunning as to espouse them out x56o.
of policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and,
except what he allowed for the subsistence of a few fuperan-
nuated monks , applied them entirely to his own use. The
proposal made by the reformed teachers, for applying these
revenues towards the maintenance of ministers, the educa-
tion of youth, and the support of the poor, was equally
dreaded by all these orders of men. They opposed it with
the utmolt warmth, and by their numbers and authority
easily prevailed on the parliament to give no ear to such a dil-
agreeable demand '. Zealous as the first reformers were, and
animated with a spirit superior to the low considerations of
interest, they beheld these early fvmptoms of felfiihnefs and
avarice among their dherents with amazement and sorrow;
and we find Knox expressing the utmost sensibility of that
contempt with which they were treated by many from whom
he expeted a more generous concern for the success of re-
ligion and the honour of its ministers .

A DIFFICULTY hath been Itarted with regard to the aas of The validi.

this parliament concerning religion. This difficulty, which aty fthist
at such a distance of time is of no importance, ,was founded called in
on the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the par- queflion.
liament was permitted to take into consideration the state of
religion, and to signify their sentiments of it to the king and
queen. But instead of presenting their desires to their fove-
reigns in the humble form of a supplication or address, the
parliament converted them into so many ads; which, al- -
though they never received the royal assent, obtained, all
over the kingdom, the weight and authority of laws. In
compliance with their injunctions, the established system of
religion was every where overthrown, and that recommend-
ed by the reformers introduced in its place. The partiality
and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any defe in
the form of these ads of parliament, and rendered the ob-
fervance of them more universal than ever had been yielded
to the statutes of the molt regular or contitutional assem-
bly. By those proceedings, it must, however, be confessed
that the parliament, or rather the nation, violated the last
article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the
powers which belong to fubjjcts. But when once men

VOL. I. L have

Keith, 496 Appe. , ee Append.

9e. V.
' Knox, 239. z26.

B0 0o K have been actuftomed to break through the common boun-

ii. daries of fubjedion, ind their minds are inflamed with the

paflions which civil war inspires, it is mere pedantry or ig-
ij6-. norance to measure their conduct by those rules, which can

be applied only where government is in a state of order and
tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to employ such extra-
ordinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every
thing which can promote this great end; and the necessity
of the cafe, as well as the importance of the object, justify
any departure from the common and established rules of the
conftttution.

Ambaffa- IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by
dors ent the ordinary forms of business, it became necessary to lay
by the parliament the proceedings of parliament before the king and queen.
to France, For this purpose, fir James Sandilands of Calder lord St.

John was appointed to repair to the court of France. After
holding a course so irregular, the leaders of the Congrega-
tion had no reason to flatter themselves that Francis and
Mary would ever approve their conduc, or confirm it by
their royal assent. The reception of their ambafiador was
no other than they might have expected. He was treated by
the king and queen with the utmost coldness, and dismissed
without obtaining the ratification of the parliament's pro-
ceedings. From the princes of Lorrain, and their partisans,
he endured all the scorn and insult which it was natural for
them to pour upon the party he represented x.

and to El- THOUGH the earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland
2betbi. of Le.hington, the ambassadors of the parliament to Eliza-

beth their protedrefs, met with a very different reception;
thev were not more successful in one part of the negociation
entrusted to their care. The Scots, f.nfible of the fecuritv
which they derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this view they
empowered these eminent leaders of their party to testify to
Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable and effectual
aid which she had afforded them, and at the fame time to
beseech her to render the friendflip between the nations per-
petual, by condescending to marry the earl of Arran, who,
though a subjec', was nearly allied to the royal family of
Scotland, and, after Mary, the undoubted heir to the
crown.

To the former part of this commission Elizabeth listened

with the utmost fatisfadion, and encouraged the Scots, in
any future exigency, to hope for the continuance of her good

offices;

Knox irj. Buch. 37. State Papers publilhed by Iord Iardmickc,
vol. p. p. 1;, &c.

s

offices; with regard to the latter, she discovered those fen- B o o K
timents to which he adhered throughout her whole reign. .- i.
Averse from marriage, as some maintain through choice, v ^
but more probably out of policy, that ambitious princess I560.
would never admit any partner to the throne; but delighted
with the entire and uncontroulcd exercise of power, he fa-
crificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of transmitting
her crown to her own posterity. The marriage with the earl
of Arran could not be attended with any such extraordinary
advantage, as to hake this resolution ; he declined it there-
fore, but with many expressions of good will towards the
Scottish nation, and of refped for Arran himself y.

TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diflinguifhed by so The death

many remarkable events, there happened one of great im- of Francis
portance. On the fourth of December died Francis II. a
prince of feeble constitution, and of a mean understanding.
As he did not leave any issue by the queen, no incident
could have been more fortunate to those who, during the
late commotions in Scotland, had taken part with the Con-
gregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty, had acquired
an entire ascendant over her husband; and as flie transferred
all her influence to her uncles the princes of Lorrain,'Fran-
cis followed them implicitly in whatever track they were
pleated to lead him. The power of France, under such di-
rection, alarmed the Scottifl malecontents with apprehen-
sions of danger, no less formidable than well-founded.
The intestine disorders which raged in France, and the sea-
fonable interposition of England in behalf of the Congrega-
tion, had hitherto prevented the princes of Lorrain from
carrying their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it was im-
poflible that the commotions in France could be of long con-
tinuance, and many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's
attention, for the future, from the affairs of Scotland. In
either of these evelts, the Scots would stand exposed to all
the vengeance which the resentment of the French court
could inflid. The blow, however, long suspended, was
unavoidable, and muit fall at last with redoubled weight.
From this profpet and expetation of danger, the Scots
were delivered by the death of Francis; the ancient confe-
deracy of the two kingdoms had already been broken, and
by this event the chief bond of union whi-h remained was
dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who, during the minority
Qs Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the entire diredtion

L 2 of
Bun. 3. Append. 308. Keith, I54, &c.

X

B O O K of the French councils, was far from any thoughts of vindr-

In. cating the Scottish queen's authority. Catherine and Mary

had been rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
''C- had contended for the government of that weak and unexpe-

ricnced prince; but as the charms of the wife easily tri-
umrpha over the authority of the mother, Catherine could
;:e r orge f such a disappointment in her favourite passion,
and beheld now, with secret pleasure, the difficult and per-
plexing scene on which her daughter-in-law was about to
enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow which so
fai a reverse of fortune could occasion; flighted by the
queen-mother ; and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers,

..'2- r- who appear only in the sunshine of prosperity, retired to
t:rs fry Rheims, and there in solitude indulged her grief, or hid her
France. indignation. Even the princes of Lorrain were obliged to

contraic- their views; to turn them from foreign to domestic
objects; and intlead of forming vast projecs with regard to
Brf.t.n, they found it necessary to think of acquiring and
eftablifling an interest with the new administration.

I r is impossible to describe the emotions of joy which, on

all there accounts, the death of the French monarch excited
among the Scots. They regarded it as the only event which
could give firmness and stability to that system of religion
and government which was now introduced ; and it is no
wonder cotemporary historians should ascribe it to the im-
mediate care of Providence, which, by unforeseen expe-
dients, can secure the peace and happiness of kingdoms, in
those situations where human prudence and invention would
utterly dcfpair .

Efhbl'fb- ABOUT this time the protestant church of Scotland began
ient of to assume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the
Frenlbte' fantion of public authority, and some fixed external policy
church go- became necessary for the government and preservation of the
vcrnment. infant society. The model introduced by the Reformers

differed extremely from that which had been long eftabliihed.
The motives which induced them to depart so far from the
ancient system deserve to be explained.

THE licentious lives of the clergy, as has been already

obfcrved, seem to have been among the first things that ex-
cited any suspicion concerning the truth of the doctrines
which they taught, and roused that spirit of inquiry which
proved fatal to the popish system. As this disgust at the
vices of the ecclesiastics was oon transferred to their persons,
and shifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled at

last
' Heault, 340. Callen.. 5 ' Knox, $59.

las upon the offices which they enjoyed; the effe&s of the B o o K
Reformation would naturally have extended not only to the in.
doEtrine, but to the form of government in the popish k
church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former, xs60.
would have overturned the latter. But in the arrangements
which took place in the different kingdoms and states of Eu-
rope in consequence of the Reformation, we may observe
Something similar to what happened upon the first establish-
ment of Christianity in the Roman empire. In both periods,
the form of ecclesiastical policy was modelled, in some mea-
sure, upon that of the civil government. When the Chris-
tian church was patronised and established by the state, the
jurifdidion of the various orders of ecclesiastics, distinguished
by the names of Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, was
made to correspond with the various divisions of the empire;
and the ecclesiastic of chief eminence in each of these pof-
fefled authority more or less extensive in proportion to that
of the civil magistrate who presided over the fame diltrict.
When the Reformation took place, the episcopal form of
government, with its various ranks and degrees of fubordi-
nation, appearing to be most confident with the genius of
monarchy, it was continued, with a few limitations, in fe-
veral provinces of Germany, in England, and in the northern
kingdoms. But in Switzerland and some part of the Low
Countries, where the popular form of government allowed
more full scope to the innovating genius of the Reformation,
all pre-eminence of order in the church was destroyed, and
an equality etablifhed more suitable to the spirit of repub-
lican policy. As the model of episcopal government was
copied from that of the Christian church as established in the
Roman empire, the situation of the primitive church, prior
to its' establishment by civil authority, seems to have suggest-
ed the idea, and furnihed the model of the latter fyltem,
which has fnce been denominated Presbyterian. The firit
Christians, oppressed by continual persecutions, and obliged
to hold their religious aflemblies by stealth and in corners,
were contented with a form of government extremely simple.
The influence of religion concurred with the sense of danger
in extinguishing among them the spirit of ambition, and in
preserving a parity of rank, the effet of their sufferings,
and the cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose de-
cifions were received among many protestants of that age
with incredible submission, was the patron and restorer of
this scheme of ecclesiastical policy. The dcurch of Geneva,
formed under his eye and by his direction, was deemed
the most perfect model of this government; and Knox,

who,

B O o R who, during his residence in that city, had studied and ad-

ii. -mired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of his
w\v%.. countrymen.
xs56. AMONG the Scottif nobility, some hated the persons,

and others coveted the wealth, of the dignified clergy; and
by abolishing that order of men, the former indulged their
resentment, and the latter hoped to gratify their avarice.
The people, inflamed with the most violent aversion to po-
pery, and approving of every scheme that departed farthell
from the practice of the Romilh church, were, delighted
with a fvytem so admirably suited to their predominant pas-
sion: while the friends of civil liberty beheld v.ith pleasure
the proteftan clergy pulling down with their own hands
that fabric of ecclesiastical power which their pr.ieceffors
had reared with so much art and indutry , and flattered
themselves, that by lending their aid to trip churchmen of
their dignity and wealth, they might entirely de!lvcr the na-
tion from their exorbitant and oppressive juriidLicon. The
new mode of government easily made its way among men
thus prepared, by their various interests and pa;ions, for
its reception.

BuT, on the first introducion of his fy'ternr Knox did

not deem it expedient to depart altogether ronm'the ancient
form b. Instead of bishops, he proposed to elablifh ten or
twelve fuperintendants in different parts ci the kingdom.
These, as the name implies, were empowcred to infpedt
the life and doctrine of the other clergy. The',' presided in
the inferior judicatories of the church, andl performed several
other parts of the episcopal funtion. Their jurifdition,
however, extended to sacred things only ; they claimed no
feat in parliament, and pretended no right to he dignity or
revenues of the former bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of pa-

rochial duty could be committed, was still extremely small;
they had embraced the principles of the Reformation at
different times, and from various motives; during the pub-
lic commotions, they were scattered, merely by chance,
over the different provinces of the kingdon ; and in a few
places only were formed into regular classes or focicties.
Dec. :c. The first general aembly of the church, which was held

this year, bears all the marks of an infant and unformed so-
ciety. The members were but few in number, and of no
considerable rank ; no uniform or confitent rule seems to
have been observed in electing them. From a great part es

the
b Spotfwood, x1.8

the kingdom no representatives appeared. In the name of B o o K
some entire counties, but one person was present; while in in.
other places, a single town or church sent several members. j-
A convention, so feeble and irregular, could not posiess ex- i56o.
tensive authority; and, conscious of their own weakness,
the members put an end to their debates, without venturing
upon any decision of much importance c.

IN order to give greater trength and confidence to the x161.

prfibyterian plan, Knox, with the aflift.nce of his brethren,
composed the first book of discipline, which contains the
model or platform of the intended policy d. They presented
it to a convention of estates, which was held in the beginning
of the year. Whatever regulations were proposed with re- Jan. 15.
gard to ecclesiastical discipline and jurifdidon, would have
easily obtained the fanaion of that alfembly; but a design to
recover the patrimony of the church, which is there infinu-
ated, met with a very differcnt reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages which would

accrue to the public, by a proper application of ecclesiastical
revenues. In vain did they propose, by an impartial diftri-
bution of this fund, to promote true religion, to encourage
learning, ind to support the poor. In vain did they even
'intermingle threatenings of the divine displeasure against the
unjust detainers of what was appropriated to a sacred use.
The nobles held fast the prey which they had seized ; and
bestowing upon the proposal the name of a r!dr,ott im.irnaini,
they asseted to confider it as a projet altogether visionary,
and treated it with the utmost scorn e.

THIS convention appointed the prior of St. Andrew's to The queen

repair to the queen, and to invite her to return into her na- inlitedto
tive country, and to aflume the reins of government v.-hich retun into
had been too long committed to other liands. 'Fhougii forme
of her fubjeds dreaded her return, and others foretaw dLan-
gerous consequences with which it might be attended ,
the bulk of them desired it with so much ardour, that the
invitation was given with the greatest appearance of unani-
mity. But the zeal of the Roman catholics got the fart of
the prior in paying court to Mary ; and Lciiey, afterwards
bishop of Ross, who was commifioned by them, arrived
before him at the place of her rcfidence . Lefley endea-
voured to infuse into the queen's mind suspicions of her pro-
teftant fubjets, and to persuade her to throw herfclf entirely
into the arms of those who adhered to her own religioi.
For tis purpose, he infiftedthat flie should land at Abet-

deen;

' Keith. 498. ,I Spots. i2. ' Knox, 256.
' See Append. No. V. g .efy 22^.

B O O K deen; and as the proteflant doctrines had mzde no confider-

xri. able progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave her affur-

1-.e~w ance of being joined in a few days by twenty thousand men
EjiI. and flattered her, that with such an army, encouraged by

her presence and authority, he might easily overturn the
reformed church, before it was firmly fettled on its founda-
tions.

BUT at this juncture, the princes of Lorrain were not dif-

posed to lilten to this extravagant and dangerous proposal.
Intent on defending thzmfelves againit Catherine of Medicis,
whofc insidious policy was employed in undermining their
exorbitant power, they had no leisure to attend to the as-
fairs of Scotland, and wished their niece to take possession
of her kingdom with as little disturbance as possible. The
French officers too, who had ferned in Scotland, dissuaded
\Iary from all violent meafurcs ; and, by eprefenting the
power and number of the protestants to be irrefiffible, deter-
mine, her to court them by every art ; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as minister3, than to provoke
them, by a fruitless opposition, to become her enemies h.
Hence proceeded the confidence and affecion with which
the prior of St. Andrew's was received by i:he queen. His
representation of the slate of the kingdom gained great cre-
dit; and Leley beheld with regret the new channel in which
court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER convention of estates was held in May. The

arrival of an ambassador from France seems to have been the
occasion of this meeting. He was inftrulced to solicit the
Scots to renew their ancient alliance with France, to break
their new confederacy with England, and to restore the po-
pish ecclesiastics to the possession of their revenues and the
exerc~e of their funtions. It is no easy matter to form any
conjeture concerning the intentions of the French court in
making there extraordinary and ill-timed propositions. They
were rejected with that scorn which might well have been

expeaced from the temper of the nation i..
Is this convention, the protestant clergy did not obtain a

more favourable audience than formerly, and their profpe&
of recovering the patrimony of the church still remained as
distant and uncertain as ever. But, with regard to another
point, they found the eal of the nobles in no degree abated.
The book of discipline seemed to require that the monuments
of popery, which frill remained in the kingdom, should be
demoli:h.ed ; and, though neither the fame pretence of

policy,
' tf2Iv. :6i. ' Knox, 69. 73. x Spotfwood, I53.

policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the people,, re- B o o x
mained to justify or excuse this barbarous havoc,-the con- in.
vention, confidering every religious fabric as a relic of y
idolatry, passed sentence upon them by an a in form; and xl6..
persons the most remarkable for the ativity of their zeal
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, cathedrals,
churches, libraries, records, and even the sepulchres of the
dead, perished in one common ruin. The storm of popular
infurredion, though impetuous and irresistible, had extend-
ed only to a few counties, and soon spent its rage; lit now
a deliberate and univcrfal rapine completed the devastation of
every thing venerable and magnificent which had escaped its
violence'.

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Mary

Scotland. Accu{iomed o the elegance, splendour, and begns t
gaiety of a polite court, file still fondly lingered in France, frore P
the scene of all these enjoyments, and contemplated with
horror the barbariin of her own country, and the turbulence
of her fubjets, which presented her with a very different
face of things. The impatience, however, of her people,
the persuasions of her uncles, but above all, the ftudiedland
mortifying neglec with which she was treated by the queen
mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable
voyage m. But while he was preparing for it, there were
sown between her and Elizabeth the feeds of that personal
jealousy and discord, which embittered the life and flortened
the days of the Scottifli queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the Originr

immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; the true cause of the discod
it lay much deeper. Almost every article in that treaty had between

her ana

been executed by both parties with a scrupulous exa&nefs. Elizabet.
The fortifications of Leith were dcmolifhned, and the armies
of France and England withdrawn within the appointed time.
The grievances of the Scottish malecontents were redressed,
and they had obtained whatever they could demand for their
future security. With regard to all these Mary could have
little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratification
of the teaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of contest and

difficulty. No minister ever entered more deeply into the
schemes of his sovereign, or pursued them with more dexte-
rity and success than Cecil. In the conduc of the negociatio
at Edinburgh, the found underifanding of this able politician
had proved greatly an overmatch for Mouluc's refinements

In
I Spotfwoo1, 14. r Brantonie. Jcbb, vol. ii. 422.

a o in intrigue, and had artfully induced the French ambassadors,

ur. not only to acknowledge that the crowns of England and
^vvy> Ireland, did of right belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to
ifi. promise, that in all times to come Mary Ihould abstain from

tfing the titles, or bearing the arms, of those kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article would have been of the most

fatal consequence to Mary. The crown of England was an
object worthy of her ambition. Her pretnfioits to it gave
her great dignity and importance in the eyes of all Europe.
By many, her title was elteemed preferable to that of Eliza-
beth. Among the English themselves, the Roman catholics,
who formed at that time a numerous and adive party, openly
espoused this opinion; and even the protestants, who sup-
ported Elizabeth's throne, could net deny the queen of Scots
lobe her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to avail her-
self of ll these advantages could not, in the course of things,
be far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring this
opportunity rearer than was expected. In these circum-
Pances, Mary, by ratifying the article in diqfute, would have
loft that rank which' fle had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing princes the zeal of her adherents muff have gradually
cooled; and the might have renounced, from that moment,
all the hopes of ever wearing the Englifli crown .

NONE of these beneficial consequences escaped the pene-

trating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had recourse
to every thing by which she could hope either to sooth or
frighten the Scottith queen into a compliance with her de-
rmands; and if that princess had been so unadvised as to ra-
tify the rash concefions of her ambassadors, Elizabeth, by
that deed, would have acquired an advantage, which, under
her management, mruf have turned to great account. By
such a renuncia-ion, the question with regard to the right
of fuccefion w;uld have been left altogether open and un-
decided ; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependence, or, by
the authority of her parliament, he might have broken in
UDpn the order of lineal fucceifion, and transferred the crown
to onme other descendant of the royal blood. The former
conduc she oferved towards James VI. whom, during his
whole reign, he held in perpetual fear and fubjeEtion. The
latter and more rigorous method of proceeding would, in all
probability, have been employed againt Mary, whom, for
r.anv reasons she both envied and hated.

NOR
c Haynes, 3"'3, &c.

NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unprecedented in B o O K

the hilory, or inconsistent with the constitution, of Eng- f.
land. Though succession by hereditary right be an idea'fo v
natural and so popular, that it has been eftablifled in almost `I56.
every civilized nation, yet England affords many memorable
initances of deviations from that rule. The crown of that
kingdom having once been seized by the hand of a con-
queror, this invited the bold and enterprising in every age to
imitate such an illultrious example of fortunate ambition.
From the time of William the Norman, the regular coufe,
of descent had seldom continued through three successive
reigns. Those princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to
them a way to the throne, called in the authority of the great
council of the nation to confirm their dubious titles. Hence
parliamentary and hereditary right became in England of
equal consideration. That great assembly claimed and ac-
tually possessed a power of altering the order of regal fuc-
cession; and even so late as Henry VIII. an at of parlia-
ment had authorised that capricious monarch to fettle the
order of succession at his pleasure. The Englifl, jealous of
their religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of
strangers, would have eagerly adopted the paflions of their
sovereign, and might have been easily induced to exclude the
Scottifli line from the right of succeeding to the crown.
'These seem to have been the views of both queens, and these
were the difficulties which retarded the ratification of the
treaty of Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no

higher than this treaty, an inconliderable alteration in the
words of it might have brought the present queflion to an
amicable iflue. The inlefinite and ambiguous expression
which Cecil had inserted into the treaty, might have been
changed into one more limited but more precise; and Mary,
instead of promising to abstain from bearing the title of
Queen of England, in all times to conme might have en-
gaged not to assume that title during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful poterity °.

'This expedient for terminating the difference between Elzabeth and Mar'

was fb obvious, that it could not fail of presenting itself to the view of the Eng-
lifh ministers. " There hath been a matter secretly thought of (fays Cecil in
a letter to Throkmorton, July 14, 561), which I dare communicate to yoi,
although I mean never to be an author thereof; and that is, if an accord might
be made betwixt our mistress and the Scottilh queen, that this houid by par.
liament in Scotland, &c. furrendcr into tle queen's majeltyall matter of claim,
and unto the heirsof her body; and in conideration thereof, tle Scottih queen'
interest should be acknowledged in default of heirs of the body of the queen's
m;itefti. Well God fend our miltress a hLuand, and by time a fon,that we Iray

Il~E

B o O K SUCH an amendment, however, did not suit the views of

mn. either queen. Though Mary had been obliged to suspend

sopv^ for some time the prosecution of her title to the English
1r56. crown, he had not however relinquished it. She deter-

mined to revive her claim on the first profpea of success,
and was unvilling to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
not to take advantage of any such fortunate occurrence.
Nor would the alteration have been more acceptable to
Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it, would have tacitly re-
cognised the right of her rival to ascend the throne after her
decease. But neither the Scottish nor English queen durst
avow these secret sentiments of their hearts. An open dif-
covery of an inclination to disturb the tranquillity of Eng-
land, or to wrest the scepter out of Elizabeth's hands, might
have proved fatal to Mary. Any suspicion of a design to
alter the order of succession, and set aside the claim of the
Scottish queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much and
deserved censure, and have railed up againff her many and
dangerous enemies. These, however carefully concealed or
artfully disguised, were, in all probability, the real motives
which determined the one queen to solicit, and the other to re-
fuse, the ratification of the treaty in its original form ; while
neither had recourse to that explication of it, which to an
heart unwarped by political interest, and sincerely desirous of
union and concord, would have appeared so obvious and
natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occasioned this

rupture between the British queens, rivalfhip of another kind
contributed to widen the breach, and female jealousy in-
created the violence of their political hatred. Elizabeth,
with all those extraordinary qualities by which she equalled
or surpassed such of her sex as have merited the greatest
renown, discovered an admiration of her own person, to a
degree which women of ordinary understandings either do
not entertain, or prudently endeavour to conceal. Her at-
tention to dress, her solicitude to display her charms, her
Jove of fattery, were all excessive. Nor were there weak-
neffes confined to that period of life when they are more
pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the wisest wo-

men

hope cur poflerty fnaU have a masculine succession. This matter is too big for
weak folks, and too deep for simple. The queen's majesty knoweth of it."
Hardw. State Pap. i.7 -A. But with regard to every point relating tothe sic-
cefiion, Elizabeth was so jealous, and so apt to take offence, that her mofd con-
,dential ministers durfs not urge her to advance one fep fartherthanfehherfelf
choe to go. Cecil, mentioning some scheme about the fucceflion if the queen
fhouid not marry or leave issue, adds, with his usual caution; " This song hath
ma=y parts; but, for my par, I have no ikill but in plain song." Ibid. 78.

men of that, or perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, e o o K
and affeEted the manners of a girl P. Though Elizabeth was it.
as much inferior to Mary in beauty and gracefulness of per- ko
son, as he excelled her in political abilities and in the arts of xs6i.
government, she was weak enough to compare herself with
the Scottish queen q; and as it was impoflible he could be
altogether ignorant how much Mary gained by the com-
parison, she envied and hated her as a rival by Whom he was
cclipfed. In judging of the condu& of princes, we are apt
to ascribe too much to political motives, and too little to the
passions which they feel in common with the reft of man-
kind. In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as
her subsequent condut towards Mary, we must not always
confider her as a queen, we mutt Sometimes regard hermerely
as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with

refpeft to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated ap-
plications, to ratify it . Mary, under various pretences, still
contrived to gain time, and to elude the request. But while
the one queen solicited with persevering importunity, and
the other evaded with artful delay, they both tudied an ex-
treme politeness of behaviour, and loaded each other with
professions of fifteriy love, with reciprocal declarations of
unchangeable eteem and amity.

IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that among Elizbeth

princes these expressions of friendship are commonly far Atay.
dirtant from the heart. In failing from France to Scotland, fafe-con-
the course lies along the Englifll coast. In order to be safe dua.
from the insults of the.Englifll fleet, or, in cafe of term-
peftuous weather, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that
kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand of Elizabeth a
fafe-condut during her voyage. This request, which de-
cency alone obliged one prince to grant to another, Elizabeth
rejected, in such a manner as gave rife to no flight fufpicioin
of a design, either to obftrut the paflage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottilh queen .

MARY, in a long conference with Throkmorton, the Eng-

lifh ambassador in France, explained her sentiments concern-
ing this ungenerous behaviour of his mistress, in a rain of
dignified expostulation, which conveys an idea of her abilities,
address, and spirit, as advantageous as any tranfadion in her
reign. Mary was at that time only in her eighteenth year;
and as Throkmorton's account of what passed in his inter-

view

P Johnston Hil. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699. Catalogue of

Royal and Noble Authors, article Esex. q Melvil, 98.
' Keith, 157. 6o,&c. Keith, x7l. Camden. Seec Apendix, No.VI.

o o K view with her, is addressed diretly to Elizabeth , that
ill. dexterous courtier, we may be well afirred, did not embellith

\,,- the discourse of the Scottish queen with any colouring too

1s56. favourable.
I ar WHATEVER resentment Mary might feel, it did not re-
begins her tard her departure from France. She was accompanied to
voyage. Calais, the place where she embarked, in a manner suitable

to her dignity, as the queen of two powerful kingdoms.
Six princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the most
eminent among- the French nobles, were in her retinue. Ca-
therine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it
with every circuimftance of magnificence and refpec. After
bidding adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad heart,
and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdom, the flior
but only feene of her life in which fortune finiled upon her.
While the French coast continued in fight, she intently
gazed upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful posture, on that
height of fortune whence she had fallen, and presaging, per-
haps, the disasters and calamities whl;ich embittered the re-
mainder of her days, she figked often, and cried out, " Fare-
" v.e!l France! Farewell beloved country, which I flall
" never more behold !" Even when the darkness of the night
had hid the land fror.. i-r view, ihe would neither retire to
the cabin, nor taife sotd, but comi.an.ding a couch to be
placed on the deck, fle there waited te return of day
with the utmost impatience. Fortune soothed her on this
occafiocn; the galley made little -way during the night. In the
morning, th coast of France was fill within fight, and she
continued to her imelncholy with the profped ; and as
long a her eves couli ditinguilh it, to utter the fame tender
expreiiclni or regret 1. At 1l!t a brilk. gale arose, by the
fa.vour of -lhich ti:.r foe days, and afterwards under the
cover o a t':ick io, I.iary cfaped the Engiifli fleet, w!hich
lay in ait to initercept her ; and on the nineteenth of

August,

* CabSba!, p. - iwh, -, &c.
Brantome, 4PR. 1c himl.:f -as in the ame galley with the queen.
· Gnoda!. vo.i, i. I 7. Ca-nmde. ininuates, rathc; than affirns, that it was

tie oicc of theEnlilh .sect to i:;ter.-et _arv. This, however, seems to be
dou .t-il. EiLza.eth poit i\ ly A'crts, that at the requefl of the king of Spain
he had ftted o:t a fe-. fcips of lender force, in order to clear the narrow seas
of pirates, nhici inseted them: and lth anp-als for the truth of this to
Mary's o. n miniller. ATp.pNo.VI.p.;. Cecil,in a letter toThrokmorton,
Aug. 6, I56 .in'orms him, that "the queen's hips, which were upan the
flais to clean :ti'em of pirates, saw her [i. e. Mar, and saluted her 'ga!lys, and
ftavinl her ir.i?, e'-n.mined t'-em of pirates, and diftniled them gently. One
Scottith ;.ip th:ey- detan as vehemently i tiiecTed of piracy." Hard. State
Papers, i. ; (. Ca!'.lnau, s ho accompanied Mary in this voyage, onfirms the
circumi-.ctc f hcralcis ' ei.igin il: of the Englilh fleet.' IMen.ap. Jcbb, xi.
4-;.

August, after an absence of near thirteen years, landed B o K
fifely at Leith in her native kingdom. Ili.

MARY was received by her fubjeds with fliouts and accla- \

mations of joy, and with every demonfiration of welcome rs61.
and regard. But- as her arrival was unexpeted, and no Arries ni
faitable preparation had been made for it, they could not,
with all their efforts, hide from her the poverty of the coun-
try, and were obliged to conduEt her to the palace of Holy-
rood-houfe with little pomp. The queen, accustomed from
her infancy to splendour and magnificence, and fond of them,
as was natural at her age, could not help obfcrving the
change in her situation, and fccmed to be deeply affeacid
with it Y.

NEVER did any prince ascend the throne at a junmure Stateoft.e

which called for more wisdom in council, or more courage ki'ngd.M t
and teadinefs in aion. The rage of religious controversy tl:a tinve-
was still unabated. The memory of past oppre sion exai-
perated the protestants; the fmrt of recent injTi rendered
the papilts desperate; both were zealous, fierce-;id irrecon-
cilable. The absence of their sovereign had accustomed the
nobles to independence; and during the late commotions,
they had acquired such an increase of wealth, by the foils
of the church, as threw great weight into the fcalc of the
ariflocracy, which Rood no in need of any accefion of power-
The kingdo;ii had long been under the governmcntof regents,,
who exercised a delegated jurifdi&ioniatteludedwith little au-
thority, and which inspired no reverence. A Rate of pure
anlarcy had prevailed for the two last years, without a regent,
witlout a fuprene council, without the power, or even the
form of a regular govcrnment . A licentious spirit, unac--
quainted with subordination, and lif(daining the rftraints of
law and juitice, had spread among all ranks of men. The in-
1fuence of F'rance; the ancient ally of the kingdom, was with-
draw-n or despised. The Engliih, who of enemies become
confederates, had grown into coinfidehce with the natioi, ald
had gained an ascendant over ail its councils. The Scotiilh
monarchs did not derive more fplendcur or power from the
ftiendiflip of the former, than they had reason to drcad injury
and diminution from the interposition of the latter. Every
consideration, whether of interclt or felf-prefervat.in, oblig-
ed Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scot!and, and
to create the prince perpetual dificulties, by fomenting zhe
fpirir of difiatisfa'ion among the people.

IN this pcfture were the aairs of Scotland, when the
zdimini'lrat.on fell into the hands of a young queen, not nire-

tC 11
B:ant, 484. ' Keith, Appendix, 9.

o o K teenth years of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws
III. of her country, a tranger to her fubjeds, without experi-
.v j ence, without allies, and a!moft without a friend.
561. ON the other hand, in Mlary's ituation we find some cir-

cumlrances, which, though they did not balance these dif-
advantages, contributed however to alleviate them; and,
with skilful management, might have produced great effecs.
Her subjes, unaccustomed so long to the residence of their
prince, were not only dazzled by the novelty and splendour
of the royal pretence, but inspired with awe and reverence.
Besides the places of power and profit belfowed by the fa-
vour of a prince, his protection, his familiarity, and even
his fniiles, confer honour and win the hearts of men. From
all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify
their duty and affection to their sovereign, and fludied by
every art to wipe out the memory of past mifcondut, and to
lay in a flock of future merit. The amusements and gaiety
of her court, which was filled with the most accomplished
of the French nobiliry, who had attended her, began to
soften and to polish the rude manners of the nation. Mary
herself poufeffed many of those qualifications which raise as-
fecion and procure esteem. The beauty and gracefulness of
her person drew universal admiration, the elegance and po-
litenefs of her manners commanded general refped. To
all the charmns of her own sex, he added many of the ac-
complifhments of the other. The progress she had made in
all the arts and fcienccs, which were then deemed necefary
or ornamental, was far beyond what is commonly attained
bv princes ; and al her other qualities were rendered more
a rLeable bv a courteous afability, which, without leflenin,
tli dignity of a prince, iteals on the hearts of fubjels wnit
a Lc.'vithi:g i::,;n.:>tlon.

F1ROM theic circumiltnces, notwithftandilg the threaten-

ing afpFec! of an.irs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwith-
franding the clouds which gathered on every hand, a political
obferrer would have predicted a very different iflue of her
reign; and whatever sudden gusts of facion he might have
expcced, he would never have dreaded the,deftruive
violence of that ftormn which followed.

W\HiLE all parties were contending who should discover

the mcrft dutiful attachment to the queen, the zealous and
impatient spirit of the age broke out in a remarkable instance.
On the Sunday after her arrival, the queen commanded mass
to be celebrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
mrnur of this occasioned a secret murmuring among the pro-
telants who attended the court; complaints and threaten-

ings

ings soon followed; the servants belonging to the chapel B 0 0 K
were insulted and abused; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's ii.
had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might have pro- v
cceded to the utmost excesses . 1S6x.

IT is impossible, at this diitance of time, and under cir-

cumftances so very different, to conceive the violence of that
zeal against popery, which then pofleffed the nation. Every
instance of condescension to the papists was deemed an at
of apoltacy, and the toleration of a single mass pronounced
to be more formidable to the nation than the invasion of ten
thousand armed men b. Under the influence of these opi-
nions, many protestants would have ventured to go danger-
ous lengths; and, without attempting to convince their so-
vereign by argument, or to reclaim her by indulgence,-would
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in
that manner which alone she thought acceptable to him.
But the prior of St. Andrew's and other leaders of the party,
not only reitrained this impetuous spirit, but, in spite of the
murmurs of the people and the exclamations of the preachers,
obtained for the queen and her domestics the undisturbed
exercise of the catholic religion. Near an hundred years
after this period, when the violence of religious animofities
had begun to subside, when the time and progress of learn-
ing had enlarged the views of the human mind, an English
house of commons refused to indulge the wife of their so-
vereign in the private use of the mass. The protestant lead-
ers, deserve, on this occasion, the praise both of wisdom and
of moderation for condut so different. But, at the fame
time, whoever reflects upon the encroaching and sanguinary
spirit of popery in that age, will be far from treating the fears
and caution of the more zealous reformers as altogether ima-
ginary and destitute of. any real foundation.

THE leaders of the protestants, however, by this prudent

compliance with the prejudices of their sovereign, obtained
from her a proclamation highly favourable to their religion,
which was iflued fix days after her arrival in Scotland. The Aug. 5s.
reformed dotrine, though established over all the kingdom
by the parliament, which met in consequence of the treaty
of pacification, had never received the countenance or fanc-
tion of royal authority. In order to quiet the minds of those
who had embraced that doCtrine, and to remove any dread
of molestation which they might entertain, Mary declared,
(v that until ihe hould take final orders concerning religion,
vith advice of parliament, any attempt to alter or subvert

VOL. I. M the

· Knox, 84 Hes, 377. b Knoa, 287.

Bo o K the rcligion which he found universally pracifcd in the

in. realm, hould be deemed a capital crime. ." Next year a
.#^~V second proclamation to the fame effed was published g.
1561. THE queen, conformable to the plan which had been con-

She em- certed in France, committed the adminitration of affairs
ploys only entirely to protestants. Her council was filled with the most
protetants intheadmi- eminent persons of that party; not a ingle papist was ad-
nitration. mitted into any degree of confidence . The prior of St.

Andrew's and Maitland of Ie:thington feerned to hold the
firit place in the queen's affecion, and pofliefed all the power
and reputation of favourite miniters. Her choice could not
have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people; and,
by their prudent advice, Mary conduted herself with so
much moderation, and deference to the sentiments of the
nation, as could not fail of gaining the affedion of her sub-
jecds , -the firmest foundation of a prince's power, and the
only genuine source of his happiness and glory.
Attempts A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another

gto ga n objec of great importance to Mary; and though she seems
favour. to have had it much at heart, in the beginning of her admini-

ftration, to accomplish such a desirable conjuntion, yet many
events occured to widen, rather than to close, the breach.
The formal offices of friendihip, however, are seldom ne-
glected among princes; and Elizabeth, who had attempted
sb openly to obftrud the queen's voyage into Scotland, did
not fail, a few days after her arrival, to command Randolph
to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that Ihe might be on
equal terms with her, sent Mlaitland to the English court,
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for Elizabeth s.
Both the ambassadors were received with the utmost civility;
and on each fide the profellions of kindness, as they were
made with little finccrity, were 1itened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something more

than mere matter of ceremony.. Randolph urged Mary,
with fresh importunity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh.
Maitland endeavouredto amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for
the dilatory conduc of his mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival in Scot-
land, the importance of the question in dispute, and the
absence of many noblemen, with whom he was obliged in
decency to consult, were the pretences offered in excuse ;or
her conduct; the real causes of it were those -which ha'e

already

Keith, 534-. Ihid. 51o. e Kr.jx, AS.
*-L X wljj . tK-. &t.

already beet mentioned. But, in order to extricate herself ' o o K
out of these difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh in.
had led her, Mary was brought to yield a point, which for- 'I4/
merly he seemed determined never to give up. She in- i16i.
ftrueted Maitland to signify her willingness to disclaim any
right to the crown of England, during the life of Elizabeth,
and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure of these, she
was declared next heir by at of parliament b.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to Mary, who

therebyprecludedherielf from disturbing Elizabeth'spofleffion
of the throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Eliza-
beth'sintereft, or more contradicory to a paflion which pre-
domintted in the character of that princess. Notwithstanding
all the great qualities which threw such uftre on her eign,
we mar observe that she was tincured with a jealousy of her
right to the crown, which often betrayed her into-mean and
ungelerous ations. The peculiarity of her situation height-
enedno doubt, and increased, but did not infuse this paflion.
It detended to her from Henry VII. her grandfather, whom,
in several features of his character, he nearly resembled.
Like him, he suffered the title by which she held the crown
to renain ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit
it toparliamentary discussion, or derive any addition to her
right from such authority. Like him, he observed every
pretnder to the succession, not onlywith that attention which
pruk&nce prescribes, but with that aversion which suspicion
infpies. The present uncertainty with regard to the right
of ftcceffion operated for Elizabeth's advantage, both on her
fubts and on her rivals. Among the former, every lover
of is country regarded her life as the great security of the
naibnal tranquillity; and chose rather to acknowledge a
tite which was dubious, than to search for one that was un-
kDwn. The latter, while nothing was decided, were held
it dependence, and obliged to court her. The manner in
vhich he received this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish
qaeen, was no other than might have been expected. She
rejected it in a peremptory tone, with many expreflions of
a resolution never to permit a point of so much delicacy to
be touched.

ABOUT this time the queen made her public entry into Sept. .

Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing was negleted which
could express the duty and'affetion of the citizens towards
their sovereign. But amidst these demonstrations of regard,
the genius and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves
in a circumstance, which, though inconsiderable, ought not

M 2 to
h Camden, 387: Buch. 329.

a o o K to be overlooked. As it was the mode of the times to ex-

Ill. hibit many pageants at every public solemnity, most of these,
_.\,- on this occasion, were contrived to be representations of the
1561. vengeance which the Almighty had infli&ed upon idolaters'.

Even while they studied to amuse and to flatter the queen, her
fubjeds could not refrain from testifying their abhorrence of
that religion which she profefied.

Refrins To restore the regular administration of justice, and to
the licence reform the internal policy of the country, became the next
of the bor- object of the queen's care. The laws ena&ed for preferva-

tion of public order, and the security of private property,
were nearly the fame in Scotland as in every other civilized
country. But the nature of the Scottifl constitution, the
feebleness of regal authority, the exorbitant power of the
nobles, the violence of fa&ion, and the fierce manners of
the people, rendered the execution of there laws feeble, ir-
regular, and partial. In the counties which border onEng-
land, this defec was most apparent; and the confeqiences
of it most sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers p in-
duftry, averse from labour, and unacquainted with the arts
of peace, subsisted chiefly by spoil and pillage, and, being
confederated in feps or clans, committed these excefes not
only with impunity, but even with honour. Durilg the
unsettled state of the kingdom from the death of Janes V.
this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual htight;
and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were become
no less intolerable to their own countrymen than to theEng-
lifh. To restrain and punish these outrages, was an '&ion
equally popular in both kingdoms. The prior of St An-
drew's was the person chosen for this important feiice,
and extraordinary powers, together with the title o the
queen's lieutenant, were veRsed in him for this purpose

NOTHING can be more surprising to men accultomet to

regular government, than the preparations made on thiscc-
cafion. They were such as might be expeced in the rudd
and most imperfet state of society. The freeholders ofelev4r
several counties, with all their followers completely armal,
were summoned to assist the lieutenant in the difciarge of
his office. Every thing resembled a military expedition,
rather than the progress of a court.of justice k. The priox
executed his commiflion with such vigour and prudence, as
acquired him a great increase of reputation and popularity
among his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffered
the punishment due to their crimes; and, by the impartial
and rigorous administration of justice, order and tranquillity
were restored to that part of the kingdom.

DURING
. Kith, I89. ' Ibid. 19S.

DURING the absence of the prior of St. Andrew's, the B o o K

leaders of the popish faction seem to'have taken some steps inI.
towards insinuating themselves into the queen's favour and
confidence'. But the archbilhop of St. Andrew's, the most x56x.
remarkable person in the party for abilities and political ad- The papists
dress, was received with little favour at court; and whatever attempt, in

vain, to gt

secret partiality the queen might have towards those who iatofavour
profefled the fame religion with herself, he discovered no with her.
inclination at that time to take the adminiftrationof affairs
out of the hands to which she had already committed it.

THE cold reception of the archbishop of St. Andrew's,

was owing to his conneEtion with the house of Hamilton;
from which the queen was much alienated. The duke of
Guise and the cardinal could never forgive the zeal with
which the duke of Chatelherault and his son the earl of
Arran had espoused the cause of the Congregation. Princes
seldom view their successors without jealousy and distrust.
The prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the duke as a
rival in power. All these causes concurred in infusing into the
queen's mind an aversion for that family. The duke in-
dulging his love of retirement, lived at a distance from
court, without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour;
and though the earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the
queen, he, by a most unpardonable aft of imprudence, was
the only nobleman of diftinftion who opposed Mary's enjoy-
ing the exercise of her religion; and by rashly entering a
public protestation against it, entirely forfeited her favour m.
At the fame time, the fordid parsimony of his father obliged
him either to hide himself in some retirement, or to appear
in a manner unbecoming his dignity as first prince of the
blood, or his high pretensions as suitor to the queen .
His love inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience
exasperated by neglec, preyed gradually on his reason;
and, after many extravagancies, broke out' at last in un-
governable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a convention of estates was Dec. o.

held, chiefly on account of ecclesiastical affairs. The as-
fembly of the church which fat at the fame time pre-
sented a petition, containing many demands with refpe to
the suppression of popery, the encouraging the protestant
religion, and the providing for the maintenance of the
clergy e. The latter was a matter of great importance, and
the steps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

~k ~ THOUGH

Keith, o03. " Ibid, 1oI. 04. Knox, a86. D Keith, 196.
* ibid. xo.

o K ThoucG the number of protestant preachers was now
II. considerably increased, many more were ill wanted, in

wv every corner of the kingdoi. No legal provision having

1561. been made for them, they had hitherto drawn a scanty. and
A nw rc- precarious fubfitence from the benevolence of their people.
gutio To susser the ministers of an established church to continue
cocerning
tlhrev- in this state of indigence and dependence, was an indecency
nue; of the equally repugnant to the principles of religion, and to the
church. maxims of found policy ; and would have justified all the

imputations of avarice with which the Reformation was then
loaded by. its enemies. The revenues of the popish church
were the oniy fund which could be employed for their re-
lief; but during the three last years the slate of thcfe was
greatly altered. A great majority of abbots, priors, and
other heads of religious houses, had, either from a sense of
duty, or from views of interest, renounced the errors of
popery; and, notwithstanding this change in their senti-
ments, they retained their ancient revenues. Almost the
whole order of bihfops, and several of the other dignitaries,
still adhered to the Romish superstition; and though de-
barred from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy the
temporalities of their benefices. Some laymen, especially
those who had been acive in promoting the Reformation,
had, under various pretences, and amidst the licence of civil
wars, got into their hands possessions which belonged to the
church. Thus, before any part of the ancient ecclesiastical
revenues could be applied towards the maintenance of the
protestant ministers, many different interests were to be ad-
justed; many claims to be examined; and the prejudices
and passions of the two contending parties required the ap-
plication of a delicate hand. After much contention, the
following plan was approved by a majority of voices, and'
acquiesced in even by the popish clergy themselves. An
exact account of the valhe of ecclesiastical benefices through-
out the kingdom was appointed to be taken. The present
incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, were allowed
to keep possession: two-thirds of their whole revenue were
reserved for their own use, the remainder was annexed to
the crown; and out of that,' the queen undertook to assign
a sufficient maintenance 'for the protestant clergy P.

As most of the bishops and several of the other dignita-

ries'were still firmly attached to the popihl religion,, the
extirpation of the whole order, rather than an a of such
extraordinary indulgence, might have been expeted from

the
Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 194.

the zeal of the preachers, and from the spirit which had B O O K
hitherto animated the nation. But, on this occasion, other tit.
principles obftruted the operations of such as were purely re- <s
ligious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, two 156i.
passions extremelybppofite, concurred in determining the pro.
teltant leaders to fall in with this plan, which deviated fr
manifestly from the maxims by which they had hitherto re-
gulated their condut.

IF the reformers had been allowed to a& without controul,

and to level all diftinCtiois in the church, the immense re-
venues annexed to ecclesiastical dignities could not, with
any colour of justice, have been retained by those in whose
hands they now were ; but must either have been distributed
among the protestant clergy, who performed all religious
offices, or must have fallen to the queen, from the bounty
of whose ancestors the greater part of them was originally
derived. The former fchemie, however suitable to the re-
ligious spirit of many among the people, was attended 'aith
manifold danger. The popifll ecclesiastics had acquired a
lhare in the national property, which far exceeded the pro-
portion that was consistent with the happiness of the king-
dom; and the nobles were determined to guard against this
evil, by preventing the return of those vast pofleffions into
the hands of the church. Nor was the latter, which cx-
posed the constitution to more imminent hazard, to be
avoided with less care. Even that circumferibed prerogative,
which the Scottish kings pofieiled, was the object of jealoaffy
to the nobles. If they had allowed the crowii to seize the
spoils of the church, uch an increase of power mutt have
followed that accession of property, as would have raised the
royal authority above controul, ad have rendered the nieft
limited prince i Europe the most absolute and independent.
The reign of Henry VIII. presented a recent and alarming
example of this nature. The wealth which flowed in upon
that prince, from the suppression of the oliaiteries, not
only changed the maxims of his government, but the tein et
of his mind; and he who had formerl fubinitted to his pat-
liaments and coaited his people, dcated from that time to
the former with intolerable insolence, and tyrannred 'ofet
the latter with unprecedented feveritv. And if his polieiat
not been extremely thortfighted, i he had not fquanleret
what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his rapaciousness,
and wich defeated his ambition, he migght have etablilhed
despotism in England, on a basis so broad and strong as all
the efforts of the fubjeds would never have been able to
flake. In Scotland, where the richcs of the clergy bore as

great

B o o K great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom, the acquil

lu. fition of church lands would have been of no less importance

to the crown, and no less fatal to the aristocracy. The
i56x. nobles, for this reason, guarded against such an increase of

the royal power, and thereby secured their own inde-
pendence.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for the interest

of their order. The re-uniting the possessions of the church
'to the crown, or the bestowing them on the protestant clergy,
would have been a fatal blow, both to those nobles who had,
by fraud or violence, seized part of these revenues, and to
those abbots and priors who had totally renounced their ec-
clefiaftical characer. But as the plan which was proposed
gave some fandion to their usurpation, they promoted it with
their utmost influence. The popish ecclefiaffics, though the
lopping off a third of their revenues was by no means agree-
able to them, consented, under their prefcnt circumstances,
to facririce a part of their poneffions, in order to purchase
the ecure enjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming
the whole irrevocably loft, they confidered whatever they
could retrieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dig-
nitaries were men of noble birth; and as they no longer
entertained hopes of restoring the popiih religion,they wished
their own relations, rather than the crown, or the protestant
clergy, to be enriched with the spoils of the church. They
connived, for this reason, Pt the encroachment of the nobles;
they even aided their avarice and violence they dealt out
the patrimony of the church among their own relations, and
by granting ser and perpetual leafes of lands and tithes,
gave, to the utmost of their power, some colour of legal
poflfion to what was formerly mere usurpation. Many
veftigs of such alienations still remain q. The nobles, with
the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended their en-
croachments, and gradually stripped the ecclesiastics of their
r:cheft and molt valuable poleffions. Even that third part,
which was given up in order to silence the clamours of the
protestant cl-rgy, and to be ome equivalent to the crown
for its claims, amounted to no considerable um. The thirds
due by the more powerful nobles, especially by such as had
embraced he Reformation, were almost universally remitted.
Others, by producing fraudulent rentals; by estimating the
corn, and other payments in kind, at an undervalue and
by the connivance of collectors, greatlydiminifhed the charge
against themselves : and the nobles had much reason to be

satisfied
Keith, 507. Spotfw. 171. 'eithl, Append.S. : S. potfw. l83.

satisfied with a device which, at so small expence, ecure4 o o Z
to them such vafR posIes ions. '

NOR were the protestant clergy considerable gainers by this \v'

new regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to isa.
kindle zeal, than to extinguish avarice. Those very me epi.
whom formerly they had swayed with absolute authority, ,g,
were now deaf to all their remouftrances. The prior of ne
St. Andrew's, the earl of Argyll, the earl of Morton, and it
Maitland, all the most zealous leaders of the Congregation,
were appointed to assign, or, as it was called, to modify their
itipends. An hundred merks Scottish was the allowance
which their liberality afforded to the generality of ministers.
To a few three hundred merks were granted'. About
twenty-four thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been
the whole fum allotted for the maintenance of .a national
church established by law, and esteemed throughout the
kingdom the true church of God'. Even this fum was paid
with little exaanefs, and the ministers were kept in the fame
poverty and dependence as formerly.

THE geritlenefs of the queen's administration, and the x15S2

elegance of her court, had mitigated, in ome degree, the iff~hclt
ferocity of the nobles, and accustomed them to greater mild- nu t
ness and humanity i ,while, at the fame time, her presence
and authority were a check to their fa&ious and tumultuary
spirit. But, as a state of order and tranquillity was not
natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not be of long con-
tinuance; and this year became remarkable for the most vio-
lent eruptions of intetfine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a

monarch could poffcfs little authority, and exercise no ex-
tensive or rigorous jurifdidion. The interfering of interest,
the unsettled state of property, the frequency of public com-
motions, and the fierceness of their own manners, owed
among the great families the feeds of many quarrels and
contentions. These, as we have already observed, 'were
frequently decided not by law, but by violence. The of-
fended baron, without having recourse to the monarch, or
acknol~edging his superior authority, assembled his own fol-
lowers, and invaded the lands of his rival in an hostile man-
ner. Together with his estate and honours, every nobleman
transmitted some hereditary feud to his posterity, who were
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with the fame
inveterate rancour.

Su.d.
' Knox, 301o, ' Kith, Append. 188°

· 6 1 SCCs a dissension had subsisted between the house of HIa.

in. milton and the earl of Bothwell, and Was heightened by mu.
iv/, rual injuries during the late commotions ". The earl of Ar-

s.6:- ran and Bothwell happening to attend the court at the fame.

time, their followers quarrelled frequently in the streets of
ttr~-y. Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that city. At

i.ut the mediation of their friends, particularly of Knox,
brought about a reconcilement, but an unfortunate one to
both these noblemen .

A FEw,days after, Arran came to Knox and, with the

urmoft terror and cof.fufion, confefled firit to him, and then
to the prior of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the
sole direction of affairs, Bothwell, and his kinf.ien the Ha-
milton's, had ccnfpired to murder the prior, Maitland, and
theother favourites of the queen. The duke of Chatelhe-
rault regarded the prior as a rival, who had supplanted him
in the queen'sfavour, and who filled that place at the helm,
which he imagined to be due to himself, as first prince of the
blocd. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which
?e had received from the prior during the ate commotions,
was no less exasperated against him. But whether he and
the Hamiltons had agreed to cement their new alliance with
the blood of their common enemy, or whether the eonfpiracy
existed only in the frantic and disordered imagination of the
tart of Arran, it is ipoflible, amidst the contradiction of
hi!Lorians and the defedivenefs of records, positively to de-
rrmninc. Among men inflamed with resentment and impa-
tient for revenge, rash expressions might be uttered, and viol
knt and criminal expedients proposed; and on that founda-
:ion, Arran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fu-
-erftrucdure of a conspiracy. All the person's accused denied
lieir guilt with the unmoft confidence. But the known cha-
ricers of the men, and the violent spirit of the age, added
.reatly to the probability of the accusation, and abundantly
jLt;fied the conduct of the queen's miniflers, who confined
Bothwe!l, Arran, and a few of the ringleaders, in separate
prisons, and obliged the duke to surrender the fro castle
of Dumbarton, which he had held ever since the tiM 'ohis
resigning the office of regent y.
; * : c' THE designs of the earl of Huntly againfi the prior of St.

Andrew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable
and more tragical-events. George Gordon earl of Huntly,
,t-- haraing bLen one of the nobles who conspired againit James

IL. and who raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed

a gre.t
Ke;:. :l- * K-:ox, 335. v IL. 307, 308.

: great share in the confidence of that generous prince '. By o10
his bounty, great accefions of wealth and power were added- ' inl.
to a family already opulent and powerful. On the death JtAi-~
that monarch, Alexander the next earl, being appointed lotd. si.
lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left the other
nobles to contend for offices at court; and retiring to the
north, where his estate and influence lay, resided there in a
kind of princely independence. The chieftains in that part
of the kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his en-
croachments. Some of his rivals he secretly undermine',
others he subdued by open force. His efate far exceede& -
that of any other subjec, and his filperiorities and jurifdic- :
tions extended over many of the northern counties. With
power and poflefl;cns so immense, under too long and feeble
minorities, and anidit the fock of civil commotions, the
earls of Huntly might have indulged the most elevated hopes.
But happily for the crown, an aive and enterprising spirit
was not the characleriftic of that family, and whatever ob-
jet their ambition might have in view, they chofr rather to'
acquire it by political address, than to fcize it openlT, and
by force of arms.

THE conduct of George the present earl, during the late

commotions, h;ad been perfec.ly fuitabke to the character
of the family in that ge, dubious, variable, and craftyi
While the success- of the lords of the Congregation was un-
certain, he assisted the qeen regent in her at-tempts to crulh
liem. When their ifi.irs put on a better aspec, lie pre-
cnd(et to join them, ,ut l'ever heartily favoured their eaufe.
lie was courted and feared by cach of the contending par-
tic; both connived at his encroachments in the north; anl,
by artifice and force, which lhe well knew how to employ al-
errnatelv, and in their roper p!aces, he aJdcd every day to
dit exorbitant power and wealth which he possessed.

HE obfevved the growing reputation and authority of tlhe

prior of St. Andrew's with the gieatei jealousy and con-
cern, and confidered him as a rival' who had egroiTcd that
Ihare in the queen's confidence, to whicl his own zeal for
the Popish religion seemed to give liim a preferable title.
Personal injuries soon increased the milluderlanding occa-
lioned by rivallliip in power. The queen, having determined'
to reward the services of the prior of St. Andrew's, by cre-
ating him n earl, lhe made choice of Mar, as the place
whence he fh.ud take his title; andl that he night be better

CrAwf. Ottffice'; v! S etat, I

o o x able to apport his new honour, bestowed upon him at the
il. fame time the lands of that name. Thefewere part of the royal
x. ' demesnes ', but the earls of Huntly had been permitted, for

zx6i several years, to keep poffeflion of them b. On this occasion
FdCb. i the earl not only complained, with some reason, of the lofi

which he sustained, but had real cause to te. alarmed at the
intrufon of a formidable neighbour into the heart of his terri.
tories, who might be able to rival his power, and excite his
oppressed vassals to hake off his yoke.
J~e t7. AN incident, which happened soon after, increased and

confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third
son, and lord Ogilvie, had a dispute about the property of an
eftatc. This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They hap.
pened unfortunately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh,
and being both attended with armed followers, a scuffle en-
sued, in which lord Ogilvie was dangerously wounded by Sir
John. The magistrates seized both the offenders, and the
queen commanded them to be ftri&ly confined. Under any
regular government, such a breach of public peace and order
would expose the person offending to certain puniihment.
At this time some severity was necessary, in order to vindi.
cate the queen's authority from an insult, the most heinous
which had been offered to it since her return into Scotland.
But, in an age accustomed to licence and anarchy, even this
moderate exercise of her power, in ordering them to be kept
in custody, was deemed an a of intolerable rigour: and
the friends of each party began to convene their vassals and
dependants, in order to overawe, or to frustrate, the deci-
sions of justice c. Meanwhile Gordon made his escape out
of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfhire, complained loudly
of the indignity with which he had been treated; and as all
the queen's ations were, at this juncure, imputed to the
earl of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment which
Huntly had conceived against that nobleman.
Andnfi. AT the very time when these passions fermented, with the

utmost violence, in the minds of the earl of Huntly and his
family, the queen happened to set out on a progress into
the northern parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the
earls of Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of
that party. The presence of the queen, in a country where
no name greater than the earl of Huntly's had been heard of,
and no power superior to his had been exercised, for many
years, was an event of itself abundantly mortifying to that
haughty nobleman. But while the queen was entirely under

the
· Craf. Peer. 297. b Bcb 334. ' Keith, 213.

the direcion of Mar, all he actions were more apt to be B o o
misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a thoufanal i
circumstances could not but occur to awaken Huntly's jea- k~s
lousy, to offend his pride, and to inflame his resentment. 156a
Amidlt the agitations of so many violent paflions, some
eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife,
a woman capable of executing the commiflion with abun-
dance of dexterity, to sooth the queen, and to intercede for
pardon for their son. But the queen peremptorily required
that he hould again deliver himself into the hands of justice,
and rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to do so;
and being enjoined by the queen to enter himself prisoner
in the castle of Stirling, he promised likewise to obey that
command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was at that time
governor of this fort. The queen's severity, and the place in
which he appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented
the hatred of the Gordon's against him.

MEANTIME, Sir John Gordon set out towards Stirling; Sept. .
but itead of performing his promise to the queen, made his
escape from his guards, and returned to take the command
of his followers, who were rising in arms all over the north.
These were destined to second and improve the blow, by
which his father proposed, secretly and at once, to cut off
Alar, Morton, and Maitland, his principal adversaries. The
time and place for perpetrating this horrid deed were fre-
quently appointed ; but the executing of it was wonderfully
prevented, by some of those unforeseen accidents, which so
often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate the
hearts, of afflffins . Huntly's own house at Strathbogie
wvas the last and most convenient fcerie appointed for com-
mitting the intended violence. But on her journey thither,
the queen heard of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and
refusing, in the firlt transports of her indignation, to enter
under the father's roof, by that fortunate expression of her
resentment saved her ministers from unavoidable deftrutione.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipi- Take armS
tated Huntly into open rebellion. As the queen was en- againt the
tirely under the diretion of his rivals, it was impossible to queen.
compass their ruin without violating the allegiance which
he owed his sovereign. On her arrival at Inverness, the
commanding officer in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut
the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the

town,
i Keith, o30. ' Knox, 8xS.

o o K town, which was open and defenceless; but this too wag
ul. quickly surrounded by a multitude of the earl's followers r,

\%Vo^j The utmost conftrnatnion seized the queen, who was attend.
1j62. ed by a very slender train. She every moment expeded the

approach of the rebels, and some ships were already ordered
into the river to secure her escape. The loyalty of the Mon.
roes, Frazers, Mackintoshes, and some neighbouring clanm,
who took arms in her defence, saved her from this danger.
By their affiifance, he even forced the castle to surrender,
and inflicted on the governor the punishment which his in.
folence deserved.

THIS open at of disobedience was the occasion of a mea.

sure more galling to Huntly than any the queen had hitherto
taken. Lord Erlkine having pretended a right to the earl.
dom of Mar, Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at thr
fame time Mary conferred upoa him the title of earl of Mur.
ray, with the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been
in the poffelfion of the earl of Huntly lince the year 1548'.
From this encroachment upon his domains he concluded that
his family was devoted to deftrution; and dreading to b
itripped gradually of those possessions which, in reward of
their services, the gratitude of the crown had bestowed on
himself or his ancestors, he no longer disguised his inten-
tions, but, in defiance of the queen's proclamation, openly
took arms. Initead of yielding those places of strengh,
which Mary required him to surrender, his followers dii
perfed or cut in pieces the parties which he dispatched to
take possession of them h; and he himself advancing withs
considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place
the queen was now returned, filled her small court with con-
fternation. Murray had only an handful of men in whom he
could confide . Ia order to form the appearance of an ar-
my, he was obliged to call in the assistance of the neigh-
bouring barons; but as rnmo of these either favoured
Huntly's designs, or itood in awe of his power, from them
no cordial or effedtual service could be expe&ed.
Caober _. WITH these troops, however, Murray, who could gain

nothing by delay, marched briflly towards the enemy.
found them at Corrichie, poted to great advantage; e
commanded his northern aTociatcs inftantlv to begin the at-
tack; but on the firlt motion of the enenm, they treache-
roufly turned their backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing
aside their spears, and breaking their ranks, drewtheir ',vordl

He is e- and rushed forward to the pursuit. It was then that Murra
steted by gav

Craa. Offcers of State, 87, 88. r Craw. Peer. .9;.
Knox, 39. i Keith, 23o.

gave proof, both of feady courage and of prudentconldua. B o o K
He Rood immoveable on a rising ground, with thefmall sm
but tnity bodyof his adherents, who presenting their p ~aró Cv
to die enemy, received them with determined refohation, * ,56-
which they little expected. The Highland broad sword is theatett
not a weapon fit to encounter the Scottifi spear. In every M '-
civil commotion, the superiority of the latter has been evi-
dent, and has always decided the contest. On this occafio
the irregular attack of Huntly's troops was easily repulsed by
Murray's firm battalion. Before they recovered from the
confusion occasioned by this unforeseen resistance, those who
had begun the flight, willing to regain their credit with the
viftorious party, fell upon them, and completed the rout.
Huntlyhimfelf, who was extremely corpulent, was trodden
to death in the pursuit. His sons, fir John and Adam, were
taken, and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with
his prisoners.

THE trial of men taken in atual rebellion against their
sovereign was extremely hort. Three days after the battle,
fir John Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother
Adam was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord Gor-
don, who had been privy to his father's designs, was seized
in the south, and upon trial found guilty of treason; but,
through the queen's clemency, the puniiihment was remitted-
'Ihe irft parliament proceeded againtl this great family with
the utmoit rigour of law, and reduced their power and for-
tune to the lowest ebb k.

As

'This conspiracy of the earl of Hintly is one of the mo intricate anus

myferious paiTages in the Scottilh hillory. As it was a tranaction purely do-
neftic, and in xchich the Engliff were little interested, few original papers
conce ning it have been found i Cecil's Colleclion, the great fiorchoufe of
evidence and information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan uppofes Mary to have formed a dfgn abort this time of de-
stroying Murray, and of employing the power of the earl of Huntly for this
purpose. But hi. account of this hole tranfation appeals to be o void of
truth, and even of probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that
time Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination to commit
any aft of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this matter:
but they appear to be equally remote from truth.

1. It cannot well be conceived, that the queen's journey to the north was
z scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the earl of Huntly. . Huntly
had resided at court almost ever since the queen's return. Keit!v, 98.
Append. I7S, &c. This swas the proper place in which to have I£ized him.
.To attack him in Aberdeenfhire, the feat of his power, and in the midf of
his vallals, was a project equally ahfurd and hazardous. 2. The queen wa
not accompanied with a body of troops, capable of attempting any thing
against Huntly by violence; her train was not more numerous than ias usual
in times of reateft tranquillity. Keith, 230. 3. There remain to original
letters with regard to this conlpiracy, one from Randolph the English refi-
dent, and another from Maitland, both direced to Cecil. They talk of
Huntly's measures as notoriously treasonable. Randolph mentions his re-

peated

·OOK As thefallofthe earl of Huntly is the. i~ftimportant

in. event of this year, it wold have been improperto interrupt
_% ~ the narrative by taking ntice of lesser trai~nasm, which
x6a. may now be related with equal propriety. . ,. -

Aniner- IN the beginning of funier, Mary, whowas'defirous of
- be entering into a more intimate correspondence and familiarity

e - with Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal in-
bpm- w terview with her, somewhere i the north of England. As

this proposal could not be rejected with decency, thetime,
the place, and the circumRftaces of the meeting, were in-
ftantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent enough
not to admit into her kingdom a rival who outlhone herself
so far in beauty and gracefulness of person; and who ex-
celled so eminently in all the artr of insinuation and address.
Under pretence of being confined to London, by the atten-
tion which ihe was obliged to give to the civil wars hi France,
ihe put off the interview for that season , and prevented
her fubjets from feeing the Scottih queen, the charms of
whose appearance"and behaviour he envied, and had some
r-afon to dread.
lme 2. DURING this year, the assembly of the church met twice.

-ecm. In both these meetings we exhibited many complaints of the
poverty and dependence of the church and many murmurs
against the negligence or avarice of those who had been ap-
pointed to collect and ditribute the frall fund, appropriated
for the naintenance of preachers m. Apetition, craving redress
of their grievances, was presented to the queen; but without
any effet. There was no reason to expet that Mary would
discover any forwardness to grant the requests of such sup-

plicants,

peated attempts to afafllnate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any previous
resolution, formed by Mary's ministers, to ruin Huntly and his family.
Had any such design ever exilled, it was Randolph's duty to have disco-
vered it; nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the Eng-
lii secretary. Keith, 29. 232.

II. To suppose that the earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the

queen and her ministers, seems to be no less improbable. . On the queen's
arrival in the north, he laboured in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to
obtain a pardon for his Ifn. Knox, 318. 2. He met the queen, firt at
Aberdeen, and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any such treasonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3.
His condut was irrefohute and wavering, like that of a man disconcerted by
an unforeseen danger, not like one executing a concerted plan. 4. The most
considerable persons of his clan fubmittei to the queen, and found surety to
obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had the earl been previously deter-
mined to rife in arms againfi the queen, or to seize her ministers, it is proba-
ble he wenld have imparted it to his principal .followers, nor would they have
deserted him in this manner.

For these reasons we have, on the one hand, vindicated the earl of Mur-

ry from any deliberate invention of ruining the family of Gordon; and
on the other hand, we have imputed the violent condut of the earl of
Huntly toa sudden fart of resentment, without charging him with any pre-
mitated purpose of rebellion.

A Keith. 216. o, 311r . 13.

plicants. As her ministers, though all most zealous pro- B 0 K
teftants, were themselves growing rich on the inheritance of iii.
the church, they were equally regardless of the indigence __J
and demands of their brethren. 1563.

MARY had now continued above two years in a tate of Negocia-

widowhood. Her gentle administration had secured the tions with
hearts of her fubjeas, who were impatient for her marriage, regard to

the queen's

and wihed the crown to descend in the right line from their mtirrqige
ancient monarchs. She herself was the most amiable woman
of the age, and the fame of her accomplifliments, together
with the favourable circumstance of her having one kingdom
already in her possession, and the prospect of mounting the
throne of another, prompted many different princes to soli-
cit n alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by its situation,.
threw so much weight and power into whatever scale it fell,
that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's determi-
nation; and no event in that age excited stronger political
fears and jealousies; none interested more deeply the pas-
sions of several princes, or. gave rife to more contradictory
intrigues, than the marriage of the Scottish queen.

THE princes of the house of Austria remembered what She i ifoii-

vast projecs the French had founded on their former alliance cited bydif-
with the queen of Scots and though the unexpected death, ferent
first of Henrv and then of Francis, had hindered these from prin
taking effect, yet if Mary should again make choice of a
husband among the French princes, the fame designs might
be revived and prosecuted with better success.

IN order to prevent this, the emperor entered into a nego- By the

ciation with the cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposcd to ar;, . e
mna;/ the Scottish queen to the archduke Charles, Ferdi-
nand's third son. The matter was communicated to Mary;
and Melvil, who at that time attended the elecdor palatine,
was commanded to inquire into the character and situation
of the archduke ".

PHIIIP II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's falling By Do:

once more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferd - Carlos ,-
nand the acquisition of so important a prize ; and as his own sr' '
insatiable ambition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe,
he employed his ambaffldor at the French court, to folict
the princes of Lorrain in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at
that time the heir of all the extensive dominions which be-
longed to the Spanlfl monarchy °.

CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the By the
marriage of the Scottish queen with any of theAultrian du'e o

VOL. I. N princes, Anjou.

· Melv. 6. 6. Keith, 239. See Append. No. VII.
CatReln. 461. Addit.a Labour. 501. 503.

B o O K princes, which would have added so much to the power and

iii. pretensions of that ambitious race. Her jealousy of the
v'-^w princes of Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an alli-
1563. ance which, by securing to them the protecion of the em-

peror or king of Spain, would give new boldness to their
enterprising pirit, and enable them to set the power of the
crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance; and
as she was afraid that these splendid proposals of the Austrian
family would dazzle the young queen, he instantly dif-
patched Caltlenau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
duke of Anjou, the brother of her former husband, who
soon after mounted the throne of France P.

Mary's d- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of o many
icerations rivals. The archduke had little to recommend him, but his
,oncermi high birth. The example of Henry VIII. was a warning

against contracting a marriage with the brother of her former
husband ; nor could flie bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which he had formerly
held in that kingdom. She listened, therefore, with par-
tiality to the Spanish propositions, and the profpeat of such
vat -

power and dominions slAtered the ambition of a young
and aspiring princess.

THREE several circumstances, however, concurred to di,
-ert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

THE firit of these was the murder of her uncle the duke

,f Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had
involved his country in a civil war; which was conducted
with furious animofitv and various success. At lait the duke
laid siege to Orleans, the bulwark of the protestant cause;
and he had reduced that city to the last extremity, wheti he
was affallinated by the frantic zcal of Poltrot. This blow
proved fatal to the ueen of Scots. The young duke was a
mi-ior; and the cardinlAl of Lorrain, though subtle and in-
tr'guing, wanted that undaunted and entcrprifing courage,
which rendered the ambition of his brotber so formidable.
Catherine, instead of encouraging the ambition, or further-
ing the pretensions, of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure
in mortifying the one, and in disappointing the other. In
this situation, and without such a protector, it became ne-
ceiTarv for Mary to contra.c her views, and to proceed with
caution; and whate er prospect of advantage might allure
her, he could venture upon no dangerous or doubtful
measure.

She ic1s TIE second circumiiance which weighed with Mary, was
;f Eliza- .e opinion of the queen of England. The marriage of the

Scottiih
r Caftnan, 461.

Scottish queen interested Elizabeth more deeply than any B 0 0 K
other prince; and she observed all her deliberations concern- Ill.
ing it with the most anxious attention. She herself seems v
early to have formed a resolution of living unmarried, and she 1563.
discovered no small inclination to impose the fame law on
the queen of Scots. She had already experienced what use
might be made of Mary's power and pretensions to invade
her dominions, and to disturb her pofleffion of the crown.
The death of Francis II. had happily delivered her from this
danger, which she determined to guard against for the future
with the utmost care. As the restless ambition of the Auf-
trian princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons of the catho-
lic fuperfttion, made her, in a particular manner, dread their
neighbourhood, {he inftru&ed Randolph to remonstrate, in
the strongest terms, against any alliance with them; and to
acquaint Mary, that as she herself would confider such a
match to be a breach of the personal friendships in which
they were o happily united ; so the English nation would
regard it as the diflblurion of that confederacy which now
fubfilted between the two kingdoms : that, in order to pre-
serve their own religion and liberties, they would, in all
probability, take some ftep prejudicial to her right of fuc-
celfion, which, as he well knew, they neither wanted power
nor pretences to invalidate and set aside. This threaten-
ing was accompanicd with a promise, but exprefid in very
ambiguous terms, that'if Mary's choice of a husband should
prove agreeable to the Englith nation, Elizabeth would ap-
point proper persons to examine her title to the succession,
and, if well founded, command it to be publicly rccognifed.
She observed, however, a mysterious silence concerning the
person on whom {he wiflied the choice of the Scottifl queen
to fall. The revealing of this fccret was reserved for some
future negociation. Meanwhile fhie threw out some obscure
hints, that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank,
would be her safest and most inoffensive choice q. An ad-
vice offered with such an air of superiority and command
mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scottish queen. But,
under her present circumstances, she was obliged to bear this
indignity. Destitute of all foreign affiltance, and intent up-
on the English succession, the great objet of her wishes and
ambition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom, with-
out manifest imprudence, {he could not venture to offend.

THE inclination of her own fubjeds w: s another, and The senti-
not the leaRt conEiderable circumitance, which calicd for mcnts of

N 2 Mary's her own
N 2 Mary s fub:eets.
q Keith, 242. 45.

B o o K Mary's ateention at this conjuncture. They had been taught,

ln. by the fatal experiment of her former marriage, to dread an

>_#->-. union with any great prince, whose power might be employed
r563. to oppress their religion and liberties. They trembled at the

thoughts of a match with a foreigner; and if the crown
flould be strengthened by new dominions or alliances, they
foresaw that the royal prerogative would soon be itretched
beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eagerness to pre-
vent this could hardly fail of throwing them once more into
the arms of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford
them her aid towards obftruting a measure so disagreeable
to herself. It was easy for them to seize the person of the
sovereign. By the assistance of the Englifli fleet, they could
render it difficult for any foreign prince to land in Scotland.
The Roman catholics, now an inconsiderable party in the
kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the earl of Huntly,
could give no obftruion to their designs. To what violent
extremes the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke might
have been carried, is manifest from what he had already
seen and experienced.

FOR these reasons Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts

of foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own
ambition, in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and
to quiet the fears of her own fubjeds.

A paria- THE parliament met this year, for the first time since the
menthed, queen's return into Scotland. Mary's administration had
'5 »6. hitherto been extremely popular. Her ministers possessed the

confidence of the nation; and by consequence, the proceed-
ings of that assembly were conducted with perfea unanimity.
The grant of the earldom of Murray to the prior of St. An-
drew's, was confirmed: the carl of Iuntly, and several of
his vasals and dependants, were attainted: the attainder
against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his accomplices in
the murder of cardinal Beatoun, was reversed r: the at of
oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the royal fantion. But Mary, who had determined never to
ratify that treaty, took care that this fandion should not be
deemed any acknowledgment of its validity; she granted
her consent merely in condescension to the lords in parlia-
ment, who, on their knees, besought her to allay the jea-
loufies and rpprehenfions of her fubeds, by such a gracious
law .

Nothing No attempt was made, in this parliament, to procure
determined the queen's assent to the laws establishing the protestant re-
with egard lignon
r-L;gion ;l

Kncx ;3l. Parl. 9, Q.ary-, c. 67. Spots 188.

ligion. Her ministers, though zealous protestants thena- o o C
ielves, were aware, that this could not be urged without ill.
mzniieft danger and imprudence. She had consented, through __J
their influence, to tolerate and protea the reformed ddc- 1563.
trine. They had even prevailed on her to imprison and
prosecute the archbishop of St. Andrew's, and prior of
Whithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclama-
tion . Mary, however, was still paflionately devoted to
the Romish church; and though, from political motives, fie
had granted a temporary protetion of opinions which ihe
disapproved, there were no grounds to hope that he would
agree to establish them for perpetuity. The moderation of
those who profefled it, was the best method for reconciling
the queen to the protestant religion. Time might abate her
bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off gradually, and at
lay she might yield to the withes of her people, what their
importunity or their violence could never have extorted.
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in parliament;
and to defeat all these, by such a fruitless and ill-timed ap-
plication to the queen, would have been equally injurious to
individuals, and detrimental to the public.

THE zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all these which oft

considerations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked fends the
no delay: severe and inflexible, it would condescend to no clergy
compliances. The leading men of that order infiited, that
this opportunity of eftablilhing religion by law, was not to
be neglected. They pronounced the moderation of the
courtiers, apoftacy ; and their endeavours to gain the queen,
they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox solemnly re-
nounced the friendship of the earl of Murray, as a man de-
voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as to
become regardless of those objecs which he had hitherto es-
teemed most sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof
of Murray's sincere attachment to the queen at that period,
continued about a year and an half .

THr preachers being disappointed by the men in whom

they placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their in-
dignation in their pulpits. These echoed mr.c: loudly than
ever, with declarations againt idolatry; with dismal pre-
fages concerning the queen's marriage with a foreigner; and and occa-
with bitter reproaches againit thfe who, from interested sions a tu-
motives, had deierted that cause which they once reckoned it mult t
their honour to support. The people, inflamed by such vehe- pneLt
ment declamations, which were dilated by a zeal more

sincere
' Keith, 3;: . " Knox, 3r.

B o K finc er than prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable acs

in. of violence. During the queen's absence, on a progress into
v_ ..' the weft, mass continued to be celebrated in her chapel at
1;63. Holyrood-houfe. The multitude of those who openly re-
Angui. forted thither, gave great offence to the citizens of Edin-

burgh, who, being free from the restraint which the royal
pretence imposed, assembled in a riotous manner, interrupted
the ferric4, and filled such as were present with the utmost
consternation. Two of the ringleaders in this tumult were
seized, and a day appointed for their trial x.

Kno tried KNOx, who deemed the zeal of these persons laudable,
on that ac- and their condut meritorious, confidered them as sufferers
count, but in a good cause; and in order to screen them from danger,
acquitted.
Otober . he iflued circular letters, requiring all who professel the

true religion, or were concerned for the preservation of it,
to assemble at Edinburgh, on the day of trial, that by their
presence they might comfort and assist their distressed bre-
thren . One of these letters fell into the queen's hands. To
aflemble the fubjeds without the authortty of the sovereign,
was construed to be treason, and a resolution was taken to
prosecute Knox for that crime, before the privy council.
Dec. is. Happily for him, his judges were notonly zealous protest-

ants, but the very men who, during the late commotions,
had openly resifted and set at defiance the queen's authority.
It was under precedents, drawn from their own condud,
that Knox endeavoured to ihelter himself. Nor would it
have been an easy matter for these counsellors to have found
out a distinction, by which they could censure him, without
condemning themselves. After a long hearing, to the
astonishment of Lethington and the other courtiers z, he was
unanimously acquitted. Sinclair bishop of Ross, and prefi-
dent of the court of feifion, a zealous papist, heartily con-
curred with the other counsellors in this decision'; a re-
markable facd, which shews the unsettled state of govern-
ment in that age; the low condition to which regal autho-
rity was then funk i and the impunity with which fubjeds
might invade those rights of the crown which are now held
sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottish queen continued still to be
N-oc°a- the objec of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth,
tions with
rcgaud to even while he wished to direc Mary, treated her with a
the queen's disgustful reserve; though {he kept her, without necessity,
marriage, in a state of suspense; and hinted often at the person whom

file

Knox, 335. · Ibid. 3,6. ' Calderw. MS. Hilt. i. 832.
Knox, 343.

she destined to be her husband, without directly mentioning B o o K
his name; yet Mary framed all her aftions to express such a Ill.
prudentrefpet for the English queen, that foreign princes v
began to imagine she had given herself up implicitly to her 1564.
diretion b.. The profpet of this union alarmed Catherine
of Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure all along
in doing ill offices to the queen of Scots; though, oon as-
tcr the duke of Guise's death, he had put upon her a most
mortifvilg indignity, by stopping the payment of her dowry,
by depriving her subjed the duke of Chatelherault of his
penion, and by bellowing the command of the Scottish
guards on a Frenchman ; fle resolved, however, to pre-
vent this dangerous conjunction of the Britifi queens. For
this purpose he now employed all her art to appease Mary d,
to whom flie had given so many causes of offence. The ar-
rears of her dowry were instantly paid ;more pundual re-
mittances were promised for the future; and offers made,
not only to reftorc, but to extend the privileges of the Scot-
tifl nation in France. It was easy for Mary to penetrate
into the motives of this sudden change; 1he well knew the
characer of her mother-in-law, and laid little stress upon
professions of friendship which came from a princess of such
a false and unfeeling heart.

'THE negotiation with England, relative to the marriage.

suffered no interruption from this application of the French
queen. As Mary, in compliance with the wiflies of her
subjet;, and pressed by the trongeft motives of interest, de-
termined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was obliged to break
that unaccountable, silence which he had hitherto affelted. March.
The secret was disclosed, and her favourite lord Robert Elizabeth
Dudley, afterwards earl of Leicelter, was declared to be the reom-
happy man whom he had chosen to be the hulband of a Leicester to
queen courted by so many princes e. her for a

ELIZADETH'S wisdom and penetration were remarkable in huiband

the choice of her ministers ; in distinguishing her favourites
those great qualities were less conspicuous. She was in-
fluenced in two cafes so opposite, by merit of very different
kinds. Their capacity for business, their knowledge, thei*
prudence, were the talents to which flie alone attended in
chufing her ministers; whereas beauty and gracefulness of
person, polished manners, and courtly address, were the
accompliihments on which fie bellowed her favour. She
adted in the one cafe with the wisdom of a queen, in the

other
Keith, 248. Ibid. 244. ' See Append. No. VII. Keith, 21.

B o o K other he discovered the weakness of a woman. To this

Iii. Leicester owed his grandeur. Though remarkable neither
»~vt s for eminence in virtue nor superiority of abilities, the queen's

564S partiality distinguished him on every occasion. She raised

him to the highest honours, fie bestowed on him the most
important employments, and manifested an affedion so dif-
proportionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that age,
it could be accounted for only by the power of planetary in-
fluence f.

Mary of- THE high spirit of the Scottish .queen could not well bear
fended at the first overture of a match with a subje6t. Her own rank,

the splendour of her former marriage, and the solicitations
at this time of so many powerful princes, crowded into her
thoughts, and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dif-
refpeciful Elizabeth's proposal was. She dissembled, how-
ever, with the English resident; and though {he declared,
in strong terms, what a degradation she would deem this
alliance, which brought along with it no advantage that could
jutlify such negleE of her own dignity, he mentioned the
earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of re-
fpeEt .

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wish that the pro-
riews in re- pofal hould be received in any other manner. After the
omnmend- extraordinary mark she had given of her own attachment

to Leicester, and while he was still in the very height of
favour, it is not probable she could think seriously of be-
stowing him upon another. It was not her aim to persuade,
but only to amuse Mary h. Almof three years were elapsed
since her return into Scotland; and though solicited by her
fubjecs, and courted by the greatei princes in Europe, he
had hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the
artifices of Elizabeth. If at this time the English queen
could have engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour
of Leicester, her power over this creature of her own would
have enabled her to protract the negotiation at pleasure; and
by keeping her rival unmarried, he would have rendered the
prospect of her fucceflion less acceptable to the English.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely delicate and

embarrassing. To gain pofleffion of the most amiable wo-
man of the age, to carry away this prize from so many con-
tending princes, to mount the throne of an ancient kingdom,
might have flattered the ambition of a subjed much more
confiderab!e than him. He saw all these advantages, no
doubt; and, in secret, they made their full impression on

him.
Camden, 49. t Keith, 252. ' Melv. 104, lo5.

him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst not yen- Bo o
ture on the most distant discovery of his sentiments, or take in.
:Iny ftep towards facilitating his acquisition of objeEts so .a,-y
worthy of Aefire. 1,6

ON the other hand Elizabeth's partiality towards him,

which ile was at no pains to conceal , might inspire him
with hopes of attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom
more illustrious than Scotland. Elizabeth had often declard
rhat nothing but her resolution to lead a single life, and his
being born her own fubjeet, would have hindered her from
chuiing the earl of Leicester for a husband. Such confidera-
tions of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
.:tl Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence of her
a.icaion would at length triumph both over the maxims of
policy and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him,
now and then, to conclude the proposal of his marriage with
the Scottiih queen to be a projeOc for his deftruEion; and he
imnuted it to the malice of Cecil, who, under the fecious
pretence of doing him honour, intended to ruin him in the
good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary k.

A TREATY 'of marriage, proposed by one queen who

dreaded its success; listened to by another, who was fecrctlv
determined against it; and scarcely desired by the man him-
self, whole interest and reputation it was calculated, in ap-
pearance, to promote; could nclt, under so many unfavour-
able circumll.aces, be brought to a fortunate issue. Both
Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to aft with equal
dilfimulation. The former, notwithstanding her fears of losing
Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The latter, though
the began about this time to calt her eyes upon another sub-
jeic of England, did not at once venture finally to rejec
Elizabeth's favourite.

THE persons towards whom Mary began to turn her Maryen.

thoughts, was Henry Stewart lord Darnly, eldest son of the tertains
earl of Lennox. That nobleman, having been driven out of thoughts of
Scotland under the regency of the duke of Chatelherault, had lord Darn-
lived in banishment for twenty years. His wife, lady Mar- ly.
garet Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous rival in her claim
upon the Englifi succession. She was the daughter of Mar-
g:iret, the eldest sifter of Henry VIII. by the earl of Angus,
whom that queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of fucceflion
v-as not fettled with the fame accuracy as at present. Time,
ard tlhe dcificn of almost every cafe that can po!fibly happen,

have
MClv. 93, 94. k Ibi. ICT.

o o have at last introduced certainty into a matter, which na.
II1. turally is fubjeEt to all the variety arifing-from the caprice of
x _v.o lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies.
1564. The countess of Lennox, though born of a second marriage,

-as one degree nearer the royal blood of England than Mary.
She was the daughter, Mary only the grand-daughter, of
Margaret. This was not the only advantage over Mary
which the countess of Lennox enjoyed. She was born in
England, and by a maxim of law in that country, with re-
gard to private inheritances, " whoever is not born in Eng-
land, or at least of parents who, at that time of his birth,
were in the obedience of the king of England, cannot enjoy
any inheritance in the kingdom ." This maxim, Hales, an
English lawyer, produced in a treatise which he publifled at
this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the right of f;c-
cession to the crown. In a private cause, these pretexts
might have given rife to a long and doubtful litigation;
where a crown was at alake, such nice disputes and fubtilities
were to be avoided with the utmost care. If Darnly should
happen to contrat an alliance with any of the powerful
families in England, or fiould publicly profess the protestant
religion, these plausible and popular topics might be so
urged, as to prove fatal to the pretentions of a foreigner and
of a papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and, in order to prevent any

danger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate
a friendly correspondence with the family of Lennox. In
the year one thousand five hundred and fixty-two m, both the
earl and the lady Margaret were taken into custody by Eliza-
beth's orders, on account of their holding a secret corref-
pondence with the Scottish queen.

Elizaeth FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties
secretly which would attend her marrying a foreign prince, she en-
pealied tered into a fill closer conneEtion with the earl of Lennox°,

and invited him to return into Scotland. This fie endea-
voured to conceal from Elizabeth; but a tranfacion of so
much importance did not escape the notice of that discerning
princess. She observed, but did not interrupt it. Nothing
could fall in more perfectly with her views concerning
Scottish affairs. he was pleased to fee the pride of the
Scottish queen stoop at last to the thoughts of taking a sub-
jedt to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her
jealoufyor her fears. His father's eflate lay in England, and
by means of this pledge ihe hoped to keep the negotiation

entirely
1 Cartc, Hilt. of Eng. vol. iii. 422. " Camd 3. 38 Ibid. 396-

entirely in her own hands, to play the fame game of artifice B o K
and delay, which she had planned out, if her recommenda- itr.
tion of Leicester had been more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no subjed of one is64.

kingdom could pass into the other without the. permission of
both sovereigns ; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of
prosecuting his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus,
apply to Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, ihe gave him letters,
warmly recommending his person and cause to Mary's friend-
flip and proteion °. But at the fame time, as it was her
manner to involve all her tranfacions with regard to Scot-
land in some degree of perplexity and contradidion; flie
warned Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might prove
fatal to herself, as his return could not fail of reviving
the ancient animosity betwecn him and the house of Hamil-
ton.

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from

her an angry reply, which occasioned for ome time a
total interruption of all correspondence between the two
queens P. Mary was not a little alarmed at this; he both
dreaded the effets of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt fen-
sibly the disadvantage of being excluded from a free inter-
course with England, where her ambafladors had all alcng
carried on, with some fccefs, secret negotiations, which
increased the number of her partisans, and paved her way to-
wards the throne. In order to remove the causes of the
present dilficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of
England. He found it no difficult matter to bring abouu a
reconcilement; and oon re-eflablifhled the appearance, but
not the confidence of friendship, which was all that had
subsisted for some time between the two queens.

DURING this negotiation, Elizabeth's professions of love to

Mary, and Melvil's replies in the name of his mistress, were
made in the language of te warmest and most cordial friend-
ship. But what Melvil truly observes with refped to Eliza-
beth, may. be extended without injustice, to both queens.
"There was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great dissimulation, envy, and fear q."

LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence which he Lennox ar-

had obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the rives ir
queen, not only with the refpce'due to a nobleman fc nearly Scotad-
allied to the royal family, but treated with a distinguished
familiarity which could not fail of inspiring him with more

elevated
o Keith, is. 06 P Keith253. Melv. 83. MAlv. 104.

o o K elevated hopes. The rumour of his son's marriage to the
su. queen began to spread over the kingdom; and the eyes of

. all Scotland were turned upon him as the father of their
*64. future master. The duke of Chatelherault was the sirs to

take the alarm. He confidered Lennox as the ancient and
hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in his
grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the
queen interposed her authority to prevent any violent rupture,
and employed all her influence to bring about an accommo-
dation of the differencesr.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's

return,from an apprehension that he would wrest the earldom
of Angus out of their hands. But the queen, who well
knew how dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and
other great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to pur.
chafe their friendship, by allowing his lady's claim upon the
earldom of Angus to drop s.
December. AFTER there preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call

a meeting of parliament. The a of forfeiture passed
against Lennox in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-five was repealed, and he was publicly reltored to the
honours and estate of his ancestors'.

June 25. THE ecclesiastical transactions of this year were not con-
Dec. 25. fiderable. In the assemblies of the church, the fame corn-
The clergy plaints of the icreafe of idolatry, the fame representations
fafpsclous concerning the poverty of the clergy, were renewed. The
of the
qseen'szeal reply which the queen made to these, and her promises of
forpopery. redress, were more satisfying to the protestants than any

they had hitherto obtained u. But, notwithstanding her de-
clarations in their favour, they could not help harbouring
many suspicions concerning Mary's defEgns againfl their re-
ligion. She had never once consented to hear any preacher
of the reformed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her
bigotted attachment to the Romish faith. The genius of
that superstition, averse at all times from toleration, was in
that age fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given her friends
on the continent repeated assurances of her resolution to
re-eftablifil the catholic churchx. She had industriously
avoided every oppoitunity of ratifying the ads of parliamcnt
one thousand five hundred and sxty, in favour of the Re-
formation. Even the protection which, ever since her re-
turn, ifie had afforded the proteflant religion, was merely
temporary, and declared, by her own proclamation, to be of
force only " till he hould take ome final order in the mat-

ter

Keith, 159. * Ibid. 268. Note (b). ' See Append. No. IX
- Keith, 533. S39. - Carte, vol. iii. 415.

ter of religion ." The vigilant zeal of the preachers was a o o
inattentive to none of these circumstances. The coldness ill.
of their principal leaders, who were at this time entirely _ J
devoted to the court, added to their jealousies and fears. tsf.
These they uttered to the people, in language which they
deemed suitable to the necessity of the times, and which tire
queen reckoned difrefpe&tful and insolent. In a meeting of
the general aflembly, Maitland publicly accused Knox of
teaching seditious dotrine, concerning the right of sub-
jects to refifl those sovereigns who trespass againit the duty
which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
justify what he had taught; and upon this general dotrine
of resistance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in
its application to particular cafes, there ensued a debate,
which admirably displays the talents and character of both
the disputants; the acuteness of the former, embellished
with learning, but prone to subtlety; the vigorous under-
tanding of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and
superior to all fear Z.

Two years had already been consumed in fruitless nego- T565.

tiations concerning the marriage of the Scottish queen. Dtionbothi
Mary had full leisure and opportunity to discern the fallacy Elizabeth
and deceit of all Elizabeth's proceedings with refped to that and Mary
affair. But, in order to set the real intentions of the Eng- with regar

to her hnac

lifh queen in a clear light, and to bring her to some explicit riage.
declaration of her sentiments, Mary at last intimated to Feb. .
Randolph, that on condition her right of succession to the
crown of England were publicly acknowledged, she was
ready to yield to the solicitations of his mistress in behalf
of Leicester ', Nothing could be farther than this from the
mind and attention of Elizabeth. The right of fucceflion
was a mystery, which, during her whole reign, her jealousy
prcfcrved untouched and unexplained. She had prom.fed
however, when he first began to interct herself in the mar-
riage of the Scottifi queen, all that was now demanded.
How to retreat with decency, how to elude her former offer,
was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility with which lord Darnly obtained permifion

to visit the court of Scotland was owing, in all probability,
to that embarraflinent. From the time of Melvil's embaffv,
the counters of Iennox had warmly folcited this liberty for
her son. Elizabeth was no ftrangei to the ambitious opes
with which that young nobleman flattered himself. She
had received repeated advicc from her ministers of the en

i Keith, 04. 510. ' Kno, 349- ' ;eith, 26.

B o o . timents which Mary began to entertain in his favour b. It

TrT. was entirely in her power to prevent his stirring out of Lon-

den. In the present conjuncture, however, nothing could
t56j. be of more advantage to her than Darnly's journey into

Scotland. She had already brought one aflor upon the
flage, who, under her management, had, for a long time,
amnufed the Scottish queen. She hoped, no less absolutely,
to direct the motions of Darnly, who was likewise her sub.
ject; and again to involve Mary in all the tedious intricacies
of negotiation. These motives determined Elizabeth and
her ministers to yield to the solicitations of the countess of
Lennox.
DT-yV ar- BUT this deep-laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted.

Such unexpected events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to
aL love, are at fometinies really produced by that passion. An

affair which had been the object of so manypolitical intrigues,
and ha: moved and interested so many princes, was at laut
decided by the sudden liking of two young persons. Lord
Darnly was at this time in the first bloom and vigour of
youth. In beauty and gracefulness of person he furpaflcd
all his cotemporaries; he excelled eminently in such arts
as add cafe and elegance to external form, and which enabled

Gains the it not only to dazzle but to please. Mary was of an age,
occn i and of a temper, to feel the full power of these accomplish-
iFe. . ments. The impression which lord Darnly made upon her

w-as vitible from the time of their first interview. The whole
bufnefi of the court was to amuse and entertain this illus-
trious guef '; and in all these scenes of gaiety, Darnly,
w-haoe qualiications were altogether superficial and showy,
uapeared to gi-t advantage. His conquest of the queen's
heart became complete; :;mn. inclination now prompted her
to conciude a marriage, the first thoughts of which had been
fugefllet by conefderatio:s r.erely political.

EIbt;i F Cvr!H co:tributed, and perhaps not without design,

to increaie the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnly's
arrival in Scotland, fie, in return to that message whereby
MIary had Cfiified her rwillingnrefs to accept of Leicester,
Save an answer, in such terns as plainly unravelled her ori-
ginal intention in that intrigue d. She promised, if the
Scortifh queen's marriage with Ieicefter should take place,
to advance him to great honours i but with regard, to Mary's
ttle to the Englith succession, he would neither susser any
legl inquiry to be made concerring it, nor permit it to be
publicly recognised, until he herself hould declare her refo-

lution
Keitb, 259. ;6. 66. ' Knox, 369. a Kcith, 27c. App. 158.

lution never to marry. Notwithitanding Elizabeth's former B o o x
promises, Mary had reason to expet every thing contained II.
in this reply ; her high spirit, however, could not bear With I
patience such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, 1x5.
and mockery, with which, under the veil of friendship, she
had been so long abused, She burst into tears of indigna-
tion, and exprefled, with the utmost bitterness, her sense of
that disingenuous craft which had been employed to deceive
her .

THE natural effec of this indignation was to add to the
impetuosity with which she pursued her own scheme. Blind-
ed by resentment as well as by love, she observed no defeEts
in the man whom flie had chosen ; and began to take the
necessary fleps towards accomplifling her design, with all
the impatience natural to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the queen, the canon

law made it necessary to obtain the popes dispensation before
the celebration of the marriage. For this purpose she early
set on foot a negotiation with the court of Rome f.

SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the con- TheFrenr

sent of the French king and his mother. Having communi- court ap-
cated her design, and the motives which determined her proe of
choice, to Caftelnau the French ambassador, fie employed thematen.
him, as the most proper person, to bring his court to fall
in with her views. Among other arguments to this purpose,
Caftclnau mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly, which
he represented to be so violent and deep-rooted, that it was
no longer in her own power to break off the match . Nor
were the French minilters backward in encouraging Mary's
passion. Her pride would never stoop to an alliance with
a fubjeEt of France. By this choice they were delivered from
the apprehension of a match with any of the Auitrian
princes, as well as the danger of too close a union with
Elizabeth; and as Darnly profefied the Roman catholic
religion, this suited the bigotted schemes which that court
adopted.

WHILE Marywas endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts Damly di-

to a measure which the had so much at heart; Darnly and guftsfever
his father, by their behaviour, were raiing up enemies at of the
home to obftrut it. Lennox had, during the former part
of his life, discovered no great coinpafs of abilities or po-
litical wiftom ; and appears to have been a man of a weak
undcrftanding and violent p:tfions. Darnly was not superior
to his father in .underftandi.g, and all his pafiions were still

more
' Kith, Append. 59. ' Canid. 96. r Cafteln. 464.

a o K more impetuous b. To these he added that insolence, which

I11. the advantage of external form, when accompanied with
~\-,o no quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with

1565. the queen's favour, he began already to assume the haughti.

nets of a king, and to put on that imperious air, which ma-
jefty itfeif can scarce render tolerable.

p-=idc;li IT was by the advice, or at least with the coifcnt of
Mrray. Murray and his party, that Lennox had been invited into

Scotland': and yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing
in that kingdom, than he began to enter into fecrct clbal
with those noblemen who were known to be avowed enemies
to Murray, and with regard to religion, to be either neutrals
or favourites of popery . Darnlv, till more imprudent,
allowed ome rash expressions concerning those favours which
the queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to escape
him '.

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly culti.

vated with David Rizio, contributed to increase the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

T ri' efT THE low birth and indigent condition of this man placed
Riiio'sf;- him in a fation in which he ought naturally to have rc-

mained unknown to posterity. But what fortune called him
to at and to susser in Scotland, obliges hiitory to descend
from its dignity, and to record his adventures. He was the
ion of a musician in Turin, and having accompanied the
PIea:ncntefe ambassador into Scotland, gained admiflion into
the queen's family by his skill in music. As his dependant
condition had taught him suppleness of spirit and insinuating
m-nners, he quickly crept into the queen's favour, and her
French fccrctarv happening to return at that time into his
own country, was preferred by her to that office. He now
began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man of
consequence. Tile whole train of suitors and expetants,
who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths which
iead most directly to success, applied to him. His recom-
incndations were observed to have great influence over the
qucen, and he grew to be confidered not only as a favourite,
but as a miniftcr. Nor wvas Rizio careful to abate that envy
ihich al-;-ays attends such an extraordinary and rapid change
of fortune. He itudied, on the contrary, to display the
whole extent of his favour. He asseted to talk often and
ifT.iliarly with the.queen in public. He equalled the greatest
and mGlt opulent fubje-ts, in richness of dress,. and in the
nur.ber of his attendants. He discovered, in all his beha-

viour,

h Keith, 272, 273. iKnox, 367. Keith, 74.
I KCi;h,
r 2. Keith, 274.

viour, that assuming insolence, with which unmerited pro- o o K
fperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with the utmost in- in.
dignation that the nobles beheld the power; it was with the _
utmof difficulty that they tolerated the arrogance, of this x565.
unworthy minion. Even in the queen's presence they could
not forbear treating him with marks of contempt. Nor was
it his exorbitant power alone which exasperated the Scots.
They confidered him, and not without reason, as a danger-
ous enemy to the protestant religion, and fufpe&ed that
he held, for this purpose, a secret correspondence with the
court of Rome '.

IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management Darnly's

of this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on connexion
his vanity and unexperience. Rizio's whole influence on with him.
the queen was employed in his behalf, and contributed, with-
out doubt, towards establishing him more firmly in her as-
feftions ". But whatever benefit Darnly might reap from
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the contempt, and
even infamy, to which he was exposed, on account of his fa-
miliarity with such an upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the queen's as-
fetions, lhe conducted herself, however, with such pru-
dent reserve, as to impose on Randolph the English resident,
a man otherwise flirewd and penetrating. It appears from
his letters at this period, that he entertained not the leaf sus-
picion of the intrigue which was carrying on; and gave his
court repeated afllurances, that the Scottiih queen had no
design of marrying Darnly ° In the midst of this security,
Mary dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to Eliza-
beth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage with Darnly.
This embassy was the first thing which opened the eyes of
Randolph.

ELIZABETH asseted the greatest surprise at this sudden AprilIS.

resolution of the Scottiffl queen, but without reason. The Elizabeth
train was laid by herself, and lhe had no cause to wonder dedares a

gainfi the

when it took effet. She expressed at the fame time her difap- queen's
probation of the match, in the strongest terms; and pre- marriage
tended to foresee many dangers and inconveniencies arising ith
from it, to both kingdoms. But this too was mere affect&- Darnly
tion. Mary had often and plainly declared her resolution to
marry. It was impossible she could make any choice more
inoffensive. The danger of introducing a foreign interest
into Brtain, which Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was
entirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both crowns,

VOL. I. O and

"ucian.34. Mtcl. o07, 7 Mlv. . "
1. ith, 273, ad Append. 159.

o K and posiesed of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable
il. to neither. It is evident from all these circnmftanceS, that
x~v -. Elizabeth's apprehensions of danger could not poffibl be

156s. ferions; and that in all her violent declatations againt

Darnly, there was much more of grimace than of reality '.

THERE were not wanting, however, political motives of

such weight, as to induce that wife princess to put oh the ap-
pearance of great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this,
might perhaps delay her marriage; which Elizabeth desired
to obftrud with a weakness that little suited the dignity of
her mind and the elevation of her characer. Besides, the
tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great objet of
Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her diffatisfaaion with
Mary's condut, he hoped to alarm that party in Scotlatd,
which was attached to the English inteteft, and to encourage
such of the nobles as secretly difapptoved the match openly
to oppose it. The feeds of discord would by this means be
scattered through that kingdom. Intefine commotions
might arise. Amidlt these, Mary could form none of thoft
dangerous schemes to which the union of her people might
have prompted her. Elizabeth would beceme the umpire
between the Scottish queen and her contending fubjets; and
England might look on with security, while a Roren, which
the had raised, wafted the only kingdom which could pofflbly
disturb its peace.
May . IN prosecution of this scheme, fie laid before her pivy

council the meIfage from the Scottish queen, and consulted
them with regard to the afwer she should return. Their
determination, it is easy to conceive, was perfe&lytonform-
able to her secret views. ;rhey drew up a reinonftrahct
agaihft the intended match, fll of the imaginary dangers

ends with which that event threatened the kingdom q. Not did
Th~rgr- (he think it enough, to signify her difaprtobation of the
t to o mneafure, either by Maitland, Mary's abaffador, or by Ran-

dolph, her own tefident in Scotland ; in order to add more
dignity to the farce which (ht choie to ad, ht appointed fir
Nicholas Throgmnorton her arnbalTador etraordinaty. Sht
commanded hibm to declare, in the strongest terms, her dif-
fatisfation with the ftep which Mary propofd to take; and

at

P Even the hiftotiansof thit tge cktorMedge,thattht hitrriage othe Scot-

tilh queen with a subjet was far fron lbing difag teable to Elizabeth. Knos,
369, 373. Budhan. 339. Caflelnau, who at tat tme wac well acquainted
~ith the intrigres bs bth the Britiih etortts, aftirts, unpn gtusds of gat
probability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work: Cafeln. 462.
and that fe rejoiced at the accomplilhment of it, appears from the letters of
her own ambassadors. Keith, 280. 88.

Reith, z74. See Append. No. X.

at the fame time to produce the determination of the privy m o o K
council, as au evidelce that the fentitnets of de nation wee m.
not different from her own. Not long after, fIe confined the _-
countess of Letnox as a prisoner, first in her house, and 6as3.
thlen sent her to the Tower r

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland before he a -

rival of the En1lilh ambassador. In the irft transports of her
indignation, Mary resolved no longer to keep any measures
with Elizabeth and sent orders to Maitland, who accom-
panied Throgmotton, to return instantly to the Englith curt,
and in her name to declare to Elizabet, that after having
been amufdl so long to so little purpose; after having been
fooled, and imposed on o grossly by her artifices; he was
now resolved to gratify her own inclination, and to a(k no
otler consent, btt-that of her own fibjeds, in the choice of
an hband. Maitland, ith his usual sagacity, foresaw all
the effets of such a rath and angry message, and ventured
rather to incur the displeasure of his mnilefs, by lifobeying
her commands, than to be made the inftanient of tearing
asunder so violently the few remaining ties which fill linlked
together the two qeens '.

MARY herself soon became fenfibe of hererror. She te-

ceived the EFnglifh ambafador with refect ; jutified her own
condu& with decency and though unalterable in her refolu-
tion, BTe a effted a wonderful solicitude to reconcihe Eliza-
beth to the measure; and even pretended, out of complai-
fance towards her, to put off the confumnation of the mat-
riage far ome months '. It is probable, however, that the
want of tle pope's dispensation, and the profpet of gaining
dte cotfent ofl er own subje-s, were the real motives of this
delay.

Tils consent Mary laboured with the utmost industry to Murray's

obtain. The earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, aversion to
whose concurrence was of the greatest importance; but {fe Darnly.
had reason to fear that it would not be procured -without ex-
treme difeukly. From the time of Lennrx's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived thrt the queen's feetions began
gadually to be estranged from him. Dariny, Arhol, Riiio,
all the court favourites, combined against him. His amtibi-
tious fpitit could not brook this diminution of his power,
which his former services had so little merited. He retired
into the country, and gave way to riva4s, with wom re
was 'nable to contend u. The return of the earl -of Bth-
well, his avowed enemy, who had been accuffd cf a design

0 2 upon

_eit_, Append -_l. IIbid. 60. '
1 ith, 2.

B o o K upon his life, who had resided for ome time in foreign

in. countries, obliged him to attend to his own safety. No in-

*.v treaty of the queen could persuade him to a reconcilement
.x565. with that nobleman. He insisted on having him brought to

a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity, to have a
day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not appear in opposition to
a man, who came to the place of trial attended by five thou-
sand of his followers on horseback. He was once more con.
strained to leave the kingdom; but, by the queen's command,
the sentence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear-
ance, was not pronounced against him x.
Mry S. MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much import-

ance it was to gain a subjed so powerful and so popular as
the earl of Murray, invited him back to court, and received
him with many demonstrations of refpe& and confidence.
At last he desired him to set an example to her other sub-
jes by subscribing a paper, containing a formal approbation
of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had many reasons to
hesitate, and even to withhold his afient. Darnly had not
only undermined his credit with the queen, but discovered,
on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person. By con-
senting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him
such an accession of dignity and power, as no man willingly
bestows on an enemy. The unhappy consequences which
might follow upon a breach with England, were likewise of
considerable weight with Murray. He had always openly
preferred a confederacy with England, before the ancient al-
liance with France. By his means, chiefly, this change in
the fytem of national politics had been brought about. A
league with England had been etablished; and he could
not think of sacrificing, to a rash and youthful passion, an
alliance of so much utility to the kingdom; and which he
and the other nobles were bound, by every obligation, to
maintain . Nor was the interet of religion forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by protestant coun-
fellors, had found means to hold a dangerous orrefpond-
ence with foreign catholics. She had even courted the
pope's protection, who had sent her a subsidy of eight
thousand crowns Z. Though Murray had hitherto endea-
voured to bridle the zeal of the reformed clergy, and to
set the queen's condut in the most favourable light, yet her
obstinate adherence to her own religion could not fail of
alarming him, and by her resolution to marry a papist, the
hope of reclaiming her, by an union with a protestant, was

for
Keith, Appead. 6. r Kdei, 69. 'Ibid. 295. Melv. 114.

for ever cut off'. Each of there considerations had its in- -B o o K
fluence on Murray, and all of them determined him.ito de-- iIl.
clule complying at that time with the queen's request.

THE Convention of nobles, which was affembled'a few 56s.
days after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the May 4.

A conven-

queen. Many of them, without hesitation, expressed their tion of the
approbation of the intended match; but as others were nobles ap-
Rartled at the fame dangers which had alarmed Murray, or proves of
were influenced by his example to refute their content, the mar-
another Convention was appointed at Perth, in order to de- nag
liberate more fully concerning this matter b.

MEANWHILE Mary gave a public-evidence -of her own in-

clination, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour pecu-
liar to the royal family. The. opposition he had hitherto
met with, and the many contrivances employed to thwart
and disappoint her inclination, produced their usual effect on
her heart, they confirmed her passion, and increased its vio-
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an affection so
excessive, to the influence of witchcraftc. It was owing,
however, to no other charm, than the irresistible power of
youth and beauty over a young and tender heart. Darnly
grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a
queen, and the applause of -many among her fubjedts, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became insupportable, and
he could no longer bear advice, far less contradiction..
Lord Ruthven, happening to be the first person who in-
formed him that Mary, in order to ooth Elizabeth, had
delayed for tome time creating him duke of Albany, he
in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger, and attempted to
stab him d. It required all Mary's attention, to prevent his
falling under that contempt to which such behaviour deferv-
cdly exposed him,

IN no tcene of her life was ever Mary's own address more Mary's ad-

reniarkably displayed. Love harpened her invention, and dress in
made her study every method of gaining her subje&s. giubier.
Many of the nobles she won by her address, and more by
her promises. On ome he bestowed lands, to others he
gave new titles of honour e. She even condescended to
court the protestant clergy; and having invited three of
their fuperintendants to Stirling, he declared, in strong
terms, her resolution to protec their religion, expressed her
willingness to be present at a conference upon the points in
do&trine which were disputed between the protestants and
papists, and went o far as to hew ome desire to hear such

of

Keith, App. 60. i Keith, 283. Knox, 373. c Keith, 283.
Ibid. Append. 160, * Ktith, 283.

B o of their preaeheys as were most remarkable for their !moe-

i1. ration'. By thfa arts the queen gained wonlevfwly upon

the people, who, uiefs their jcaoufv be raised by epeated
I5st) injurics, are always ready te view the actions of theirfove-

reign with an indugent eye.

Os the other hand, Mutrray and his affbciates were plainly

the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in f high a
strain of her displeasure at the intended miatc; he tteatctd
lady Lernox with so mnch rigour; he wrote to the Sottish
queen in such strong terms; he recalled the earl of Innox
and his son in such a pereiptorymanner, and with such fe-
vere denunciations of her vengeance if they houl) presume
to disobey a that all these expressions of aversion fully per-
fuaded them of her sincerity. This belief fortified their
ferutple with rcfpect to the match, and encouraged them to
oppose it. They began with forming amog themselves
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence they entered ito
a feTert corrcfpondence with the English resident, in order to
secure liabzth's assistance when it lhould become needful h
they endeavoured to ill the nation with such apprehensions
of danger, as might counterbalance the influence of those
arts which the queen had employed.

Schrres of BLswmes thef intrigues, there were secretly carried on,
Darnly and by both parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and
Murray - rore fted to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient f
g-ins each
ot er. that opposition, which he imputed wholly to Murray, and

rcfolving at any rate to get rid of such a powerful enemy,
formed a plot to affiahnate him, during the meeting of the
Convention at Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing of
preventing the marriage by any other means, had, together
with the duke of Chatctherault, and the earl of Argyll, con-
certed meaiures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a pri-
seer into England.

IF eithe of these c"nfpiracies had taken effec, this Con-

vemion might have been attended with consequences ex-
tremely tragical; but both were rendered abortive, hy the
vigilance or good fortune of those against whom they were
formed. Murvay, being warned of his danger by omre re,
tiners to the court, who still favoured his interefl, avoided
the blow by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intelli-
gence of Miurray's enterprise, retired with the utmost ex-
pedition, along with Darn!y, to the other fide of Forth.
Consciou.s, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with re-
fentment, it was impossible they could either forgot the
violence which themselves had meditated, or forgive the in-

juries
Knox, 373 ' Keith, z85, 286. h Ibid. 289. 29Z. 298.

jries iutepded aginft liem. From that wom nt all hope B o o K
of reconcilernget was at 11 ecd, q4) their uituall ernWity 11u.
burst out with every fyriptQpi of implable hatred'. \

QN S65.

The reatyqity f theft two pgfite cfinihra ias bgiren occafios to many dif

putes and much cqntradltion. Some deny that any design was formed aginif
the life of Murray; ethers call in queftlon the truth of the eoafpiacy against
Darnly. Ther feem,howceverto be plqfilGUtl reons fqr believi-ngthatthere i
fame loundaticuo for'i*hat has ben afertcd with regar tQ both; thouBtlheeal
apd credulity of party.writers have added to each many exaggerated circum-
flanca. The following arguments render it probable that foeic violence was
itended against Murray:

I. 'Ti is iR poityIvey aftert4 by aWchsAw, 341. a. The pgllhW refi4dpt

writes tq Cecil, that Murry wa' assuredly informe that a design was formed
of murdering hitn at Perth, and mentions various circumfiances concerning the
manner in which the crime was to be committed. If the whole had been a sic-
tion of his own, cr of Murray it is impoffibhl that he qeud4 have writte is this
frain to fucb i discerning minilter. Kcith, 1 7. 3. Mlray hilftlf co.pasfnty
,nd publicly perfited in affirming that such a design was forpied against his
life. Keith, Ap. o8. He was required by the queen to transmit in writing an
account of the cnfpiracy which he pretended had been formed against his life.
This he did aordingly i 4ut ' wheni it was brought to her Majfty by her ser,
\4npt sent for that pgrpodf, it appears Ir her lighnefs and her council, that his
purgation in that behalf was not so fuffieent as the matter required." Keith,
App. 0o9. H was therefore fummnoned to appear within three days before the
quea in HQlyrod-houf; and i order Qt encouragei him t o o so, a afe-cop
du1t wms offered to hiLm Ibi. Touglh he ha once coafented to appear, ch
3fterwards declin d to do so. put whoever confiders Muray's situation, and thq
charafter of those who direced Mary's councils at that time, will hardly deem
it a dcifive proof of his guilt, that he did not chue to rik his person on
such fccurity. 4.The furious pallions of Darnly,the fireepef of his refrrltmint,
which frupled at no violence, and the manpers of the age, rendcr the imputa-
tion of such a crime less improlable.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to feite Darnly in his return

from Perth, appears with till greater certginty; . Froln the aprefs tef-
tiiay of MFlv, liei lthoigll ]vchaia4, p. 341. ad Ipiox, p. 377. as,
fest, withqut reason, 9t reprefrt this as an idle rumour. ;. The question w$
put to Randolph, Whether the governor of Berwick would receive Lennox and

Tis son, if they were delivered at that place His answer was, " that they
maid not refuse their own, i. e, their own ftbjes, in whatsoever frt they

¢anle unto us, i. e. whether they returned to Epglaqd oluntarily as they had

been required, or were brought thithec by force." This plainly flrew, that
Ime fitch design was in hand, and Randolph did not difeourage it by the an-
fCer which he gave. Keith. 190. 3. The precipitation with which the queen
retired, and the reason he gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned by Ran-
.dolph. Keith, Z r. 4. A great partof the copttilh nobles, and among. these the
arTLs Qs Argyll and gRthes, who were theinfelves privy to the dcfign, assert the
realityftlhe nfiracy. Good. vo. i;. ..

All these circoiultaiqces render the truth of both conspiracies probable. Bat
we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from puhbic records, falls

phart, pn both fides, f legal and formal eviderce. Buchana and pgapdolph, in

thsir accounts of the cgpfpiriy againf Muri.ay differwielyin almost every cir-
cumltance. The accQunts of the attempt upon Darnly are not more conqfient.
Melvil allaes, that the deignq of the confpiratorswas to9 arry Darplyaprifoper
i9 Eo a iPdithe proposJ mad toRapnolph airees with this. Randolph fays,

t tha ite ded tp car' the gqeFn to St. A ndrew's, and Darnly to Cadt.e

Crmpbell.. The rds, in their declaration, affirm the defin of th¥ conspirators
to have been to mutrdr Parnly and his father, to conn6e the queeil irLLochlcven
during life, and to usurp the government. To believe i.nylicitly whatever

they

B o O K ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her vassals

xil. by proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair
\v_^ thither in arms, for the proteflion of her person against her

xs65. foreign and domestic enemies k. She was obeyed with all

Mary fu- the promptness and alacrity with which fubjeds run to de-
" h' t fend a mild and popular administration. This popularity,
tae arms however, (he owed in a great measure to Murray, who had
agin1 direced her adminiitration with great prudence. But the
-Murry. crime of oppoffing her marriage obliterated the memory of

his former services; and Mary, impatient of contradiction,
and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as enemies
to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight
of her vengeance. For this purpose she summoned him to
appear before her upon a short warning, to answer to such
things as hould be laid to his charge '. At this very time
Murray, and the lords who adhered to hinm, were assembled
at Stirling, to deliberate what courfe-they should hold in such
a difficult conjuncture. But the current of popular favour
ran so strongly against them, and notwithfanding some fears
and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a general dif-
position to gratify the queen in a matter which so nearly con-
cerned her, that, without coming to any other conclusion,
than to implore the queen of England's protetion, they put
an end to their ineffectual consultations, and returned every
man to his own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness of her

enemies, the confluence of her subjeCts from all corners of
the kingdom afforded Mary an agreeable proof of her own
strength. While the queen was in this prosperous situation,
she determined to bring to a period an affair which had so
long engrossed her heart and occupied her attention. On the
twenty-ninth of July, he married lord Damly. The cere-

C!ebr.'t mony was performed in the queen's chapel, according to the
hr .:-: rites of the Romith church; the pope's bull dispensing with
n;e with their
Dinly.

they find in an ancient paper, is a flly to which, in every age, antiquaries are
zetremely prone. Ancient papers, however, often contain no more than
the sanders of a party and the lie of the day. The declaration of the no-
bles referred to, is of this kind; it is plinly rancorous, and written in the
very heat of faction. Many things affcrtd in it, are evidently false and ex-
igeerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitious as we can fiup
poe, they muR have had some pretences, and plaufibkl ones too, before they
could venture to imprison their Coveregn for life, and to seize the reins of
pgvernment; but, at that time, the queen's conduct had afforded no colour-
able excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is likewise remarkable,
that in allthe proclamations against Murray, of which so many are published
in Keith, Appendix og, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly nor
that which he is alledged to have formed againfl the queen herself, are ever
*nce mentioned.

* Keith, 98. Keith, Append. lo8.

their marriage having been previouly obtained m. She ifiued B o o K
at the fame time proclamations, conferring the title of king in.
of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that hence-
forth all writs at law should run in the joint names of 5J6S.
king and queen D. Nothing can be a stronger proof of the
violence of Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than
this last ftep. Whether Ihe had any right to chufe a husband
without consent of parliament, was, in that age, a matter of
some dispute" i that he had no right to confer upon him,
by her private authority, the tide and dignity of king, or by
a simple proclamation to raise her husband to be the malfer
of her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis II. in-
deed, bore the fame title. It was not, however, the gift of
the queen, but of the nation; and the content of parliament
was obtained, before he ventured to assume it. Darnly's
condition, as a fubjeEt, rendered it Rill more necessary to
have the concurrence of the supreme council in his favour.
Such a violent and unprecedented stretch of prerogative, as
the substituting a proclamation in place of an a of parlia-
ment, might have justly alarmed the nation. But at that
time the queen possessed so entirely the confidence of her
subje&s, that, notwithstanding all the clamours of the male-
contents, no symptoms of general discontent appeared on
that account.

EVEN amidst that scene of joy which always accompanies

successful love, Mary did not fiffer the course of her ven-
geance against the malecontent nobles to be interrupted.
Three days after the marriage, Murray was again summoned
to court, under the severest penalties, and upon his non-
appearance the rigour of justice took place, and he was de-
clared an out-law P. At the fame time the queen set at
liberty lord Gordon, who, ever since his father's infurre&ion
in the year one thousand five hundred and fixty-two, had
been detained a prisoner; he recalled the earl of Sutherland,
who, on account of his concern in that conspiracy, had
fled into Slanders; and he permitted Bothwell to return
again into Scotland. The first and last of these were among
the mos powerful fubjeds in the kingdom, and all of them
animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
deemed the enemy of their families and the author of their
own sufferings. This common hatred became the foundation
of the ftriteft union with the queen, and gained them an
ascendant over all her councils. Murray himself confidered
this confederacy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain

indication

" Keith, 37. = Anderson, i.33. SeeAppend.No.XL
* Buchn.. 4I. P K(i.h, 309, 3Io0

B o o K indicatien than any measure she had yet tken, s'her ie-

lir. orabie resentment.
xJ,-x. THE malecontents had not yet opealy taken up arams .

,rz5. But the queen having ordered hr fuhiels to march aglinlt

Marhes them, they we'e driven to the last catremity. They found
a^,il '. themfeives una'&ie to make head against the numerous forces
and his a- which Mary had aienibled ; ad fleil into Argyiefhire, in ex-
Xodtes. peetation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they had secretly

dispatched a meienger, in order to implore her immediate
aflitlance .

F14z.eth MEANWHILE, Eliaabeth endeavoured to embarnafs Mary,
s::p o..s by a new dBciraatiin ofditfuft at her conduct. She blamed
u' i.r fa- both her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with

which he had concluded the mirriage. She required Len-
nox and Darnlv, vhom fnte fiill called her fubje'cs, to Te-
turn into England ; and at the fame time fl warmly inter.
ceed in behatfof Murray, whose behaviour she represented
to be not only innocent but laudab!e. 'This meflige, so mor-
tifving to the pride of the queen, and so full of contempt for
her hulband, was rendered fill more insupportable by the
petulant and faucv demeanor of Tamworth, the person who
delivered it'. Mary vindicated her own conduit with
warmth, but with great strength of reason and rejeded the
intercefflon in behalf of Murray, not without signs of re-
fentment at Elizabeth's pretending to intermeddle in the in-
ternal government of her kingdom r.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the leat the

*rdour with which the pursued Murray and his adherents .
They now appeared openly in arms : and having received a
small supply in money from Elizabeth s, were endeavouring
to raise their followers in the weitern counties. But Mary's
vigilance hindered them from affinebling in any confiderabi
body. All her military operations at that time were con-
certed 'with wividom, executed with vigour, and attended
v.th success. In order to encourage her troops, she herfell
marched long with them, rode with loadel pistols , and en.

dured

A fter thei fruitless consultation in Stidirg the l(ods retirM tri tir -t

Loeafs. Keith. 3o4. Murray as Ili!l at St. Andrew'son July Z. K#ith,
3c6. By the place: of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the dif-
ferent cou;,itCs, August , it appears that the queen's intention was to march
into Fife, the count' in which Munay, Rathes, Kirkatdi, and ether chiefs
cf the male-contents rfcided. Keith, 30. 'heir flight into the wqfl, Keith,
;zi, prevented this epedition, and the former rdezvous was atere.
Keith. 3 Ic.

* Keith, 3r2. Knox, -;o. ' Crmb.98. Keith, Appmd. 99.

The moet confiierable persons ho joined Mrray, were, the duke of

Ch2:-t!hera'ilt, te earls of Argyll, Glenrairn, Rothes; lord Boyd and Ochil-
tect; the lairds of Grange, CunninThamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers,
Bar, Dreghorn, Pittarrow, Comptrollcr, and the tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

Knox, ;35. > Keith, Append, 164.

dured all the fatigues qs war with admirable fortitude. Her s o o
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refoution, in.
which, together with their superiority in number, deterred --vJ
the malecontents froam facing them in the field ut having ijs5.
artfully passed the queen's army, they marched with great
rapidity to '.dinburgh, and endeavoured to rouse the inha-
bitants of that city to arms. 'The queen did not susser them Augull 31.
to remain toug inmmoleiled; and on her approach, they were
forced to abandon that place, and retire in confusion towards
the western borders Z.

As it was uncertain, for ome time, what route they had Theyare
taken, Mary employed that interval in providing for the fe- obliged to

retire into

curity of the counties in the heart of the kingdom. She egnand.
fcized the places of strength which belonged to the rebels;
and obliged the colfiderablc barons in those flires which she
most fufpetted, to join in albciations for her defence.
Having thus left all the country behind her in tranquillity,
she, with an army, eighteen thousand Rfrong, marched to-
wards Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During their
retrcat, they had sent letters to the queen, fromn almot every
place where they halted, full of fubmiffon, and eontainilg
various overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary,
who detcrmincd not to let flip fueh a favourable opportunity
of crushing the mutinous spirit of her fubjeits, ejected them
with disdain. As flie advanced, the malecontents retired.
And, having received no effecQual aid from Elizahethb, they on. 20
despaired of any other means of safety, fed into England,
and put themselves under the protection of the earl of Bed-
ford, warden of the marches.

NOTHING., which Bedford's personal friendship for Mur- They rnet

ray could supply, was wanting to render their retreat agree- with uncm-
able. But Elizabeth herself treated them with extreme ne- pcacd ill-

treatment

gleci. She' hd fully gained her end, ad, by their means, from Eiiza-
had escited such difeord and jeatloufies among the Scots, as beth.
would, in all probability, long diltra& and weaken Mary's
councils. Her business now was to fare appearances, and
to justify herself to the ministers of France and Spain, who
accused her of fomenting the troubles of Scotland by her in-
trigues. The expedient she contrived for her vindication
strongly displays her own character, and the wretched con-
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign
prince. Murray and Hamilton, abbot of Kilwinning, being
appointed by the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, in-
stead of meeting with that welcome reception which was due

to
Kdith, Append. 31. Ibid. II3. Sec Append. No. Xtl. Xnl.

B o oK to men, who out of confidence in her promises, and in order

In. to forward her designs, .had hazarded their lives and for-

j tunes, could not even obtain the favour of an audience, until
JS65. they had meanly consented to acknowledge, in the pretence

of the French and Spaniih ambassadors, that Elizabeth had
given them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner did
they make this declaration, than the astonished them with
this reply: " You have declared the truth I am far from
setting an example of rebellion to my own fubjeft, by
countenancing those who rebel against their lawful prince.
The treason, of which you have been guilty, is detestable;
and as traitors I banish you from my pretence c." Notwith-
flanding this scene of farce and of falsehood, so dishonour-
able to all the persons who aded'a part in it, Elizabeth per-
mitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in her dominions,
supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her inter-
cession with the Scottish queen in their favour d.

THE advantage fie had gained over them did not satisfy

Mary; fle rcfolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a
party, which he dreaded, from ever recovering any footing
iL the naton. With this view he called a meeting of par-
liament; and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might be
legally pronounced against the banished lords, (he summoned
them, by public proclamation, to appear before it C.
Dcc. . THE duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application,

obtained a separate pardon; but not without difficulty, as the
king violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to
leave the kingdom, and to reside for some time in France f.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into the field,

the vigour with which he aed, and the length of time she
kept them in arms, resemble the efforts of a prince with re-
venues much more considerable than those which he pof-
fefled. But armies were then levied and maintained by
princes at small charge. The vassal followed his superior,
and the superior attended the monarch, at his own expence.
Six hundred horsemen, however, and three companies of
foot, betides her guards, received regular pay from the
qu:en. This extraordinary charge, together with the dif-
burfements occasioned by her marriage, exhausted a treasury
which was far from being rich. In this exigency, many
devices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines were
levied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee,
which were suspeCted of favouring the malecontents. An
unusual tax was imposed on the boroughs throughout thl

kingdom;

: Il.l .
I. d Kox, 389 e Keith, 3zo. i KnoY,3 9-

kingdom; and a great fum was demanded of the citizens of B o o K
Edinburgh, by way of loan. This unprecedented exadtion il.
alarmed the citizens. They had recourse to delays, and w i
tfarted difficulties in order to evade it. These Mary con- 1565.
ftrued to be ads of avowed disobedience, and instantly com-
mitted several of them to prison. But this severity did not
subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty which prevailed among
the inhabitants. The queen was obliged to mortgage to the
city the fiperirty of the town of Leiith, by which she ob-
tained a considerable fum of money . The thirds of eccle-
fiaftical benefices proved another source whence the queen
derived some supply. About this time we find the protestant
clergy complaining more bitterly than ever of their poverty.
The army, it is probable, exhausted a great part of that
fund which was appropriated for their maintenance .

THE assemblies of the church were not unconcerned spec- Church as-

tators of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the fairs.
meeting held the twenty-fourth of June, previous to the
queen's marriage, several of the malecontent nobles were
present, and seem to have had great influence on its decisions.
The high strain in which the assembly addressed the queen,
can be imputed only to those fears and jealousies with regard
to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse into the na-
tion. The assembly complained, with some bitterness, of the
flop which had been put to the progress of the Reformation
by the queen's arrival in Scotland; they required not only
the total fuppreflion of the popish wohllip thoughout the
kingdom, but even in the queen's own chapel; and besides
the legal eftablifliment of the protestant religion, they de-
manded that Mary herself should publicly embrace it. The
queen, after some deliberation, replied, that neither her
conscience nor her interest would permit her to take such a
ftep. The former would for ever reproach her for a change
which proceeded from no inward convition, the latter
would susser by the offence which her apoftacy muff give to
the king of France, and her other allies on the continent .

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the

queen's affairs during this year, began to work ome change
in favour of her religion. The earls of Lennox, Athol, and
Cafls, openly attended mass; fie herself afforded the ca-
tholics a more avowed protection than formerly; and, by
her permillion, some of the ancient monks ventured to
preach publicly to the people k.

BOOK

g Knox, 383. 386. Mh aitl. Hifi. of Edinburgh, 27.
* Knox, 374. 376. - Ibid.389, 390.

# BOOK IV.

BOOK IV.
I o O K A S the day appointed for the meeting of parliament ap-

iv. proached, Mary and her minillers were employed in
w.v~s deliberating concerning the course which it was molt proper
Ix66. to hold with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives

Mary's de- prompted her to set no bounds to the rigour ofjuftice. The
liberations malecontents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her
te exilncg interest conspired with her pafions in rendering dear to her;
nobles. they were the leaders of a party, whose fricndhllip flie had

been obliged to court, while she held their principles in ab-
horrence; and they were firmly attached to a rival, whom
flie had good reason both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty considerations

might be urged. The noblemen, whose fate was in sus-
penfe, were among the molt powerful fubjeds in the king-
dom, their wealth great, teir connections extensive, and
their adherents numerous. They were now at mercy, the
objects of compafnion, and suing for pardon with the most
humble fubmiflion.

IN those circumstances, an a of clemency would exalt

the queen's charater, and appear no less splendid among
foreigners, than acceptable to her own subjects. Mary her-
self, though highly incensed, was not inexorable; but the
king's rage was implacable and unrelenting. They were
solicited in behalf of the fugitives from various quarters.
Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had been mem-
bers of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their ancient
union with :urray and his fellow fufierers; nor neglecful
of their safety, which they deemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Mlvil, who at that time poftefltd the queen's
confidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray hav-
ing stooped so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who
was desirous of securing his protection against the king,
whose displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded the in-
terceffons of his other friends with the whole of his influ-
ence'. The interposition of fir Nicholas Throgmorton, who
had lately been Elizabeth's ambassador in Scotland, in behalf
of the exiles, was of more weight than all these, and attended
with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to Cecil,
had embarked deeply in all the intrigues which were carried

on.
' MClv. I2.

on at te Etnlifl court, in order to undtrmine the power o
and credit of that minriet. He espoused, for this reason, Iv.
the cause of the Scottish queen, towards whose title and pre-
tetfions the other was known to beat little favour; and t,
rentured in the present critieal juntture, to write a letter
to Mary, containing the tmoft salutary advices with regcrd to
her conduti. He recommended the pardoning of the earl
of Murray and his alociates, as a measure no less prudent
tilan popular. An aionl of this nature," fays he, the
pure efca of your majesty's generosity, will fprtad the tame
of your lenity and moderation, and engage the English to
look towarls vour accession to the throne, not only without
ptejuice, but with defier. By the fame means, a perfea
harmony will be restored among your own fubjeds, who, if
any rupture hould happen with England, will erve you
with that grateful zeal which your clemency cannot fail of
inspiring b.

THEst prudeht remohftrances of' hrogmorton, to which she r-
his reputation for wifdon, and known attachment to the solves t

treat theti

queeh, added great authority, made a deep irnprelfio on riat t.-
her spirit. Her cortiers cultivated this happy disposition, men.y.
and prevailed on her, ottithftanding the king's inficible
temper, to sacrifice her own privat resentment to the inter-
ceflion of her fubjeds and the wifhfes of her friends t. With
this view, the parliament which had been called to meet
on the fourth of February, was prorogued to the seventh of
Aptild ; and in the mean time he was busy in confiderilg
the anhner indr forrt in *hich {he fliould extend her favour
to the lords who were under disgrace.

ThOUvcH Mary difovered on this occasion a mind na Is diverted
turally pohe to humanity and capable of forgiving, he from this

reiblution

iranred firrnnefs, however, to resist the influence which was by the !bli
fatally employed to disappoint the efcCts of this amiable citation of
difpofitibn. About this time, and at no great distance from Fr-nce, nd
each other, two envoys arrived from the French kilrg. The hper ze for
ortmer was intrusted with matters of mere ceremony alone; February 3.
he congratulated the queen on her matriage, and invelted
the king with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael.
The inftrudtions of the latter related to matters of more in-
portance, and produced greater effects c.

As interview between Charles IX. and his sifter the queen

of Spain had been often proposed; and after many obstacles
arising frbom the opposition of political inteteft, Was at last
appoilted at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis attorpanied

her

1 Mclt11s.. .

Ibid , . VO, I

Gd. 24.
e Keith, 3. Append. 67.

B o o K her oa ; the duke of Alva attended his mistress. Aidl

iv. the scenes of public pomp and pleasure, which seemed to be

tyv>. the sole occupation of both courts, a scheme was formed,
zs66. and measures concerted, for exterminating the Hugonots in

France, the Protestants in the Low Countries, and for
fupprelfing the Reformation throughout all Europe . The
aIive policy of pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the cardinal
of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions so fuita-
ble to the genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial
to their own order.

IT was on account of this holy league which the second

French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her at the fame
time, in the name of the King of France and the cardinal
of Lorrain, not to retore the leaders of the protestants in
her kingdom to power and favour, at the very time when the
catholic princes were combined to destroy that fed in all
the countries of Europe .

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the

strong possession it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of
deep infight in the human character, and improved by the
experience and observation of many successive ages; it ar-
rived at last to a degree of perfetion, which no former
system of superstition had ever attained. There is no power
in the underfianding, and no paftion in the heart, to which
it does not present objects adapted to rouse and to interest
them. Neither the love of pleasure which at that time pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition
which occupied the court of Spain, had secured them from
the dominion of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers were agi-
tated with that furious and unmerciful zeal which is com-
monly confidered as peculiar to ecclesiastics; and kings and
ministers thought themselves bound in confcienoe to extir-
pate the protestant doctrine. Mary herself was deeply
tincured with all the prejudices of popery; a passionate
attachment to that superstition is visible in everypart of her
character, and runs through all the scenes of her life: she
was devoted too with the utmost submission to the princes of
Lorrain, her uncles; and had been accustomed from her in-
fancy to liften to all their advices with a filial refped.
The profped of restoring the public exercise of her own re-
ligion, the pleaftre of complying with her uncles, and the
hopes of gratifying the French monarch, whom the present
situation of her affairs in England made it neceflay to court,
counterbalanced all the prudent considerations which had

formerly
Thian. lib. 3 7 Mstl. ia6.

formerly weighed with her. She instantly joined the con- B o o K
federacy, 'which had been formed for the deftrution of the iv.
protetants, and altered the whole plan of her conduc with .
regard to Murray and his adherents h, 1566.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the fuhfequcnt

calamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scot-
land, fortune may be said to have been propitious to her,
rather than adverse; and if her prosperity did not rife to any
great height, it had, however, fffered no considerable in-
terruption. A thick and fettled cloud of adversity, with
few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoyment, covers the
remainder of her days.

THE effects of the new system which Mary had adopted A parlia-

were oon visible. The time of the prorogation of parlia- mentcalled
ment was shortened; and by a new proclamation the twelfth to attaint
of March was fixed for its meeting . Mary relolved, without nobles
any further delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel
lords, and at the fame time determined to take some teps
towards the re-establishment of the Romish religion in Scot-
land . The Lords of the Articles were chosen, as ufua!,
to prepare the business which was to come before the par-
liament. They were all persons in whom the queen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin of
Murray and his party seered now inevitable, and the danger
of the reformed church imminent, wheni an event unexpect-
edly happened which saved both. If we regard either the
barbarity of that age, when such ats cf violence v;cre com-
mon, or the mean condition of the unhappy pcrfon who
suffered, the event is little remarkable i but if we reflec up- and pre.
on the circumRances with which it was attended, or upon vented by
the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely ythe corf
memorable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be Rizio.
traced with great care.

VOL. I. P DARNLY'S
h See Append. No. XIV. i Keith, 36.
k It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the queen with

the design of re-eflablifhing the Roman catholic religion, or at leaf of ex-
empting the profeflors of it from therigour of those penal laws to which they
were fubjested. Heindeed asserts that the altars, which Ihould have been erected
in the church of St. Giles, were already provided, 394. i. Mary herself,
in a letter to the archbilhop of Glasgow, her ambassador in France, acknow-
ledges, "· that in that parliament Ihe intended to have done ome good, with
refped to restoring the old religion." Keith, 331. 2. The spiritual lords,
i. e. the Popilh ecclefiatics, had, by her authority, resumed th:ir ancient
place in that assembly. Ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bay-
onne. Keith, Append. 67. 4. She allowed mas to be celebrated in dif-
ferent parts of the kingdom, ibid.; and declared that Ihe would have mats free
for all men that would hear it. Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who was
furnished by the archbishop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Alartyr
de Jl.ri, affirms that the queen intended to have procured, in this paria-
ment, if not the re-eltablilhment of the catholic reliigio, at lelft fcgetbing
for the cafe of catholics. Jebb, vol. il. o24.

B OO K DARNLT'S external accomplishments had excited that

iv. sudden and violent paflion which raised him to the throne.
\vvyj But the qualities of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty

1566. of his person. Of a weak underflanding, and without ex-

Darnly perience, conceited, at the fame time of his own abilities,
queen's as- and acribing his extraordinary ficcefs entirely to his dif-
fecion. tinguifhed merit. All the queen's favour made no impretlon

on uch a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle his
imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her attention to
place about him persons capable of directing his condut,
cou-l :c.t preserve him from rash and imprudent acionsl.
Fond of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices
of youth, he became by degrees careless of her person, and
a firanger to her company. To a woman, and a queen,
such behaviour was intolerable. The lower {he had stooped
in order to raise him, his behaviour appeared the more unge-
nerous and criminal: and in proportion to the strength of her
first affeaion, was the violence with which her disappointed
paflion now operated. A few months after the marriage
their domestic quarrels began to be observed. The extrava-
gance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to these. Instead of be-
ing satisfied with a hare in the administration of government,
or with the title of king, which Mary, by an unprecedented
stretch of power, had conferred on him, he demanded the
Crown Matrimonial with the most insolent importunity m.
Though Mary alleged that this gift was beyond her power,
and that the authority of parliament must be interposed to
bellow it, he wanted either understanding to comprehend,
or temper to admit, so just a defence; and often renewed,
and urged his request.

SurpeOs Rlzlo, whom the king had at first taken into great confi-
Rizio to be dence, did not humour him in these follies. By this he in-
the ca' f curred Henry's displeasure; and as it was impossible for

Mary to behave towards her husband with the fame assec-
tion which distinguished the first and happy days of their
union, he imputed this coldness, not to his own behaviour,
which had so well merited it, but to the insinuations of
Rizio. Mary's own condut 'confirmed and trengthened
there suspicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity,
and admitted him to a hare in her confidence, to which
neither his first condition, nor the office he had lately be-
stowed on him, gave him any title. He was perpetually in

her
I Good. vol. Il1.

Keith, 39. Id. App. T65, r66. Knox, 404. The eagerness of the

king to ohbaii the Cm~ M~atrimnal is not surprising, when the extent of
the powers which that title conveyed, as eplained in the text and note
p. 96, is taken into conlidcration.

her pretence, intermeddled in every business, and, together B o o K
with a few favourites, was the companion of all her private iv.
amusements. The haughty spirit of Darnly could not bear _v
the intrusion of such an upitart; and impatient of any delay, xj66.
and unreifrained by any scruple, he instantly resolved to get
rid of him by violence.

AT the fame time another design, which took its rife from Rizio ha-

very different motives, was carrying on against the life of ted by the
Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and Maitland, were the "the exied
contrivers of it. In all former commotions they had been nobles.
ftridly united with Murray, though in the late infurredion
they had deserted him, for various reasons. Morton was
nearly allied to the family of Angus, and, during the mino-
rity of the present earl, aed as chief of the name of Dou-
glas. Ruthven was married to the king's aunt. Lindsay's
wife was of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the queen in promoting a marriage which did
so much honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally ex,
peeled, that, under a king of their own blood, the chief ma-
nagement of affairs would be committed to them. Maitland,
with his usual sagacity, foresaw that Murray's opposition to
the match would prove dangerous and ineffectual; but who-
ever ruled at court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents,
to render himself necessary and of importance. They were
all equally disappointed in their expectations. The king's
headstrong temper, rendered him incapable of advice. The
queen could not help distrusting men who, had been so long
and so intimately conneced with Murray, and gave herself
up entirely to such counsellors as complied with all her
inclinations. The return of that nobleman and his followers
was therefore the only event which could restore Morton,
Maitland, and their associates, to their former ascendant
over the queen's councils. For this reason, nothing could
be more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they
imputed to Rizio, who, after he had engaged td aid Mur-
ray with all his interest, was now the most aive inftru-
ment in promoting the measures which were concerted for
the ruin of that nobleman. This officious zeal completed the
disgust which they had conceived againfit him, and inspired
them with thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to jus-
tice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the king They com-

communicated his refoluticn to be avenged of Rizio to lord bine in or-
Ruthven, and implored his assistance, and that of his friends, derto mur
towards the execution of this design. Nothing could be

P more

B 0 o K more acceptable to them than this overture. They saw at

iv. once all the advantages they would reap, by the concurrence

of such an associate. Their own private revenge upon Rizio
1566. wou!d pass, they hoped, for an a of obedience to the king l

and they did not despair of obtaining the restoration of their
banishcd friends, and security for the protestant religion, as
the price of their comnilance with his will.

BL-T as Henry was no less fickle than rath, they hesitated.

for some time, and determined to advance no farther, without
taking everypoffible precaution for their own safety. They did
not, in the mean time, susser the king's resentment to abate.
Morton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing age
in all the arts of insinuation and address, took the young
prince under his management. He wrought upon his ruling
passion, ambition to obtain the Matrimonial Crown. He
represented Rizio's credit with the queen to be the chief and
only obilacle to his success in that demand. This minion
alone, he said, poffefled her confidence; and out of com-
plaifance to him, her fubjeds, her nobility, and even her
-husband, were excluded from any participation of her secret
councils. UTnder the appearance of a confidence merely po-
litical, he insinuated, and the king perhaps believed, that a
familiaritv of a quite different and very ciminal nature
might be concealed". Such various and complicated paflions
raged in the king's bosom with the utmost fury. He became
more impatient than ever of any delay, and even threatcned
to strike the intended blow with his own hand. At last, pre-
liminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for their

mutual

' Of all our hiflorians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses Mary of a cri-

,ninal love for Rizzio, 30. 44. Knox nightly insinuates that such a fuipi-
cion was entertained. 391. Mcvil, in a convcrfation with the queen, inti-
mates that he vas afraid her familiarity Kith Rizio might be liable to mil-
ronfruction, Ioi. The king himfclf ficms, both by Melvil's account, and
by his expostulation with the queen, which Ruthyen mentions, to have given
credit to these suspicions. Melv. 127. Kith, Append. 123, IZ4. That
the king's fifpiciorrs were strong, is likw ife evident from the paper publiflhrd
Append. No. XV. But in opposition to these ufpicions, and they are no.
thing more, we may observe that Rau!et, the queen's French secretary, was
dismissed from her fer-ice, and Rizio advanced to that office in December,
r164. Keith, 68. It was in confeqtence of this preferment, that he ac-
quired his great credit ith the queen. Mclvil 107. Darnly arrived in
s-otland about two months after. Keith, 269 The queen immediately
conceived for him a pelion, which had all the symptoms of genuine and vio-
lent love. Rizio aided this paffon, and promoted the marriage with all his
intert;t Mc!v. IIv. During some months after the marriage, the queen's
fondness for Darnly continued. She Ioon proved with child. From this
enumeration of circumflances, it appears ahnofR imponible-that the queen,
uniefs we fuppore her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry
on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph, the Eng-
iiih resident, a man aundantly ready to mention and to aggravate Mary's
faults. a-d '.- d,,es not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed
any thing crimin , i ;!flf a fuient vindication of her innocence.

mutual security agreed upon. The king engaged to prevent B 0 0 K
the attainder of the banified lords, to consent to their return iv.
into Scotland, to obtain from them an ample remission of all -J
their crimes, and to support, to the utmost of his power, the r566.
religion which was now established in the kingdom. On
their parts, they undertook to procure the Crown Matrimo-
nial for Henry, to secure his right of succession, if the queen
lhould die before him, and to defend that right to the utter-
noft, against whatever person should presume to dispute it;
and if either Rizio, or any other person hould happen to be
killed in prosecuting the design, the king promised to ac-
knowledge himself to be the author of the enterprise, and to
protec those who were embarked in it °

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan of ope- Perpetrate

ration, to chufe the adors, and to assign them their parts in that crime
perpetrating this deteftablc crime. Every circumtance here in the

queen's pa-

paints and charadlerifes the manners and men of that age, lace.
and fills us with horror at both. The place chosen for com-
mitting such a deed, was the queen's bedchamber. Though
Mary was now in the sixth month of her pregnancy, and
though Rizio might have been seized elsewhere without any
difficulty, the king pitched upon this place, that he might
enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio with L'.
crimes before the queen's face. The earl of Morton, the
lord high chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to direEt an
enterprise, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which he
was bound to be the guardian. The lord Ruthven, who had
been confined to his bed for three months by a very danger-
ous dittemper, and who was till so feeble that he could
hardly walk, or bear the weight of his own armour, was in-
trusted with the executive part; and while he hinfelf needed
to be supported by two men, he came abroad to commit a
murder in the presence of his sovereign.

ON the ninth of March, Morton entered the court of the

palace with an hundred and sixty men ; and without noise,
or meeting with any refitance, seized all the gates. Whie
the queen was at supper with the countess of Argyll, Rizio,
and a few domestics, the king suddenly entered the apart-
ment by a private paflage. At his back was Ruthven, clad
in complete armour, and with that ghastly and horrid look
which long sickness had given him. Three or four of his molt
trusty accomplices followed him. Such.an unusual ap-
pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio inllantly
apprehended that he was the vidim at whom the blow w;a

aimed
° Good. vol. i. 266.

B o K aimed; and in the utmost consternation retired behind the

rr. queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the reverence due
__v- to her person might prove some protedtion to him. The
-:66. conspirators had proceeded too far to be restrained by any

consideration of that kind. Numbers of armed men rushed
into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a
furious mien and voice commanded Rizio to leave a place of
which he was unworthy, and which he had occupied too
long. Mary employed tears and entreaties, and threatcnings
to save her favourite. But, notwithstanding all thcfe, he
was torn from her by violence, and before he could be dragged
through the next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an
end to his life, piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds P.

ATHO.L, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the

queen who had apartments in the palace, were alarmed at
the uproar, and filled with the utmost terror on their own
account ; but either no violence was intended against them,
or the conspirators durst not fed the noblest blood in the
kingdom in the fame illegal manner with which they had
ventured to take the life of a stranger. Some of them were
dismissed, and others made their escape.

The con- THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept possession of the
fine the palace, and guarded the queen with the utmost care. A
queen her- proclamation was publi/hed by the king, prohibiting the par-

liament to meet on the day appointed; and measures were
taken by him for preventing any tumult in the city q. Mur-
ray, Rothes, and their followers, being informed of every
ftep taken against Rizie, arrived at Edinburgh next evening.
Murray was graciously received both by the king and queen:
by the former, on account of the articles which had been
agreed upon between them ; by the latter, because she hoped
to prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take part
with the murderers of Rizio. Their power she still felt and
dreaded; and the insult which they had offered to her au-
thorty and even to her person, so far exceeded any crime he
could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her ven-
geance on them, she became extremely willing to be recon-
ciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men who had hazarded their lives on his account,
engaged him to labour for their fafcty. The queen, who
scarce had the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit
Morton and Ruthven into her presence, and to grant them
the promfe of pardon in whatever terms they should deem
necessary for their own security.

THE
ACec Appendix, No. XV. q Keith, Appendix, 126.

THE king, meanwhile, stood astonished at the boldness B o o K

and success of his own enterprise, and uncertain what course iv.
to hold. The queen observed his irresolution, and availed k-r'J
herself of it. She employed all her art to disengage him 6ut 6.
from his new associates. His consciousness of the insult gainsthe
which he had offered to so illustrious a benefadrefs, inspired king, and
him with uncommon facility and complaisance. In spite of makes her
all the warnings he received to distrust the queen's artifices, cfcape.
she prevailed on him to dismiss the guards which the con-
fpirators had placed on her person ; and that fame night he
made his escape along with her, attended by three persons
only, and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight March .
had been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and they
were quickly joined by them and several other of the nobles.
Bothwell's estate lay in that corner of the kingdom, and his
followers crowded to their chief in such numbers, as soon
enabled the queen to set the power of the conspirators at
defiance.

THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible confter- is recon.

nation. They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it ciled to the
now appeared from the queen's condut, that nothing more eiled no-
was intended by this promise than to amuse them, and to
gain time. They vemtured, however, to demand the ac-
complibment of it; but their meflenger was detained a pri-
loner, and the queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at the
head of eight thousand men, talked in the highest strain of
resentment and revenge. She had the address, at the fame
time, to separate Murray and his associates from the ccnfpi-
rators against Rizio. Sensible that the union of these par-
ties would form a confederacy which might prove formida-
ble to the crown, he expressed great willingness to receive
the former into favour; towards the latter she declared her-
self inexorable. Murray and his followers were no less
willing to accept a pardon on her terms. The conspirators March 19.
against Rizio, deprived of every resource, and incapable of Theconipi-
resistance fled precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed gaitr R
situations with Murray and his party, who left that place a zio fly into
few days before. England.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning,

as the earl of Morton, ever engaged i a more unfortunate
enterprise. Deserted basely by the king, who now denied
his knowledge of the conspiracy by public proclamations,
and abandoned ungenerously by Murray and his party r, he
was obliged to fly from his native country, to resign the

highest
Mlv. 130.

B O O K highest office, and to part with one of the molt opulent for-

iv. tunes, in the kingdom.
1 J) ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed
i566. against thole concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the ut-

most rigour of law. But, in praise of her clemency, it must
be observed, that only two persons, and thete of no coi -
derable rank, suffered for this crime .

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the
confederacy between the king and the ccnspirators, the real
intention of which was aaffination, the prefcrvihg of the
reformed church is, nevertheless, one of the molf confider-
able articles; and the fame men who were preparing to vio-
late one of the first duties of morality, afeted the highell
regard for religion. History relates these extravagances of
the human mind, without pretending to justify, or even to
account for them; and regulating her own opinions by the
eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, points
out uch inconfitencies, as features of the age which he
describes, and records them for the inftruaion of ages to
come.

An acconat As this is the second instance of deliberate assassination
of the fre- which has occurred, and as we hall hereafter meet with
qlncy of many other inflances of the fame crime, the causes which
ions in gave rife to a practice so ihocking to humanity deserve out
;zat age. particular attention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife

reasons, one of the strongest passions in the human mind.
The natural demand of this passion is, that the person who
feels the injury should himself inflict the vengeance due
on that account. The permitting this, however, would
have been defirucive to society; and punithment would
have known no bounds, either in. severity or in duration.
For this reason, in the very infancy of the social state, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and committed to the
magistrate. But at first, while laws aimed at restraining,
they really strengthened the principle of revenge. The ear-
lier and most simple punishment for crimes was retaliation;
the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life. The
payment of a compensation to the person injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former institution. In both these, the
gratification of private revenge was the objeC of law; and he
who suffered the wrong was the only person who had a right
to pursue, to exact, or to remit the punishment. While laws
allowed such full scope to the revenge of one party, the in-

terests
Kcith, Appcndix, 130. 34.

terests of the other were not negle&ed. If the evidence of B o o
his guilt did not amount to a full proof, or if he reckoned iv.
himnlelf to be unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime 1v-.
was imputed had. a right to challenge his adversary to ingle zI66,
combat, and, on obtaining the vi-orv, vindicated his own
honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether civil
or criminal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of
the innocence, or the property, of the parties. Jftice had
seldom occasion to use her balance; the sword alone decided
everyconteft. The paflion of revenge was nourished by all
these means, and grew, by daily indulgence, to be incre-
dibly itrong. Mankind became habituated to blood, not
only in times of war, but of peace ; and from this, as well
as other causes, contrated an amazing ferocity of temper
and of manners. Tis ferocity, however, made it neceflary
to discourage the trial by combat; to abolih the payment of
compensations in criminal cafes; and to think of some milder
method of terminating disputes concerning civil rights.
The punifhmcnts for crimes became more severe, and the
regulations concerning property more fixed; but the princes
w-hose province it was to inflic the one, and to enforce the
other, possessed little power. Great offenders despise their
:authority ; smaller ones fneltered temfelves under the jurif-
dicion of those from whose protection they expeaed im-
punity. The administration of justice was extremely feeble
and dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a chieftain,
or even of his vassals, often excited rebellions and civil wars.
To nobles, haughtyand independent, amongwhom the causes
of discord were many and unavoidable, who were quick in
discerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it; who
deemed it infamous to fuhmit to an enemy, and cowardly to
forgive him; who confidered the right of punilfing thofc-
who had injured them, as a privilege of their order and a
mark of independence ; such low proceedings were extremely
-unfatisfattory. The blood of their adversary was, in their
opinion, the only thing which could wash awav an affront;
where that was not hed, their revenge was disappointed,
their courage became fufpeced, and a stain was left on their
honour. That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the
magistrate could not infliA, their own could easily execute.
Under governments o feeble, men aumed, as in a state of
nature,the right of judging, and redressing their own wrongs;
and thus affaFln?tiofll, a crime of all others the molt dc-
ftruftive to society, came not only to be allowed, but to be
reckoned honourable.

TE hiltory of Europe, during the fourteenth and sis-
teenth centuries, abounds with detcftable iiftanccs of this

crime.

B o o crime. It prevailed chiefly amony the French and Scots,

iv. between whom there was a close intercourse at that time,

and a surprising resemblance in their national characters. In
is6& one thousand four hundred and seven, the only brother oi

the king of France was murdered publicly in the streets of
Paris; and so far was this horrible aion from meeting with
proper punifihent, that an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the peers of France, and avow,
edly to maintain the lawfulness of assassination. In one
thousand four hundred and seventeen, it required all the
eloquence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail
on the council of Constance to condemn this proposition,
"' That there are some cafes in which affaflination is a virtue
more meritorious in a knight than in a squire, and more meri-
torious in a king than in a knight t." The number of emi-
nent persons who were murdered in France and Scotland,
on account either of private, or political, or religious quar-
rels, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, is almost
incredible. Even after those causes, which first gave rife
to this barbarous pracice, were removed; after the jurif-
diction of magiftratcs, and the authority of laws, were better
established, and become more universal; after the progress
of learning and philosophy had polibed the manners, and
humanized the minds of men, this crime continued in ome
degree. It was towards the close of the seventeenth cen-
tury before it disappeared in France. The additional vi-
gour, which the royal authority acquired by the accession of
James VI. to the throne of England, seems to have put a
stop to it in Scotland.

TIHE influence, however, of any national custom both

on the understanding and on the heart, and how far it may
go towards perverting or extinguishing moral principles of
the greatest importance, is remarkable. The authors of
those ages have perfecly imbibed the sentiments of their co-
temporaries, with regard to assassination; and they, who had
leisure to reflect and to judge, appear to be no more hocked
at this crime, than the persons who committed it during the
heat and impetuosity of pamion. Buchanan describes the
murder of cardinal Beatoun and of Rizio, without expressing
those feelings which are natural to a man, or that indigna-
tion which became an historian U. Knox, whose mind was
fiercer and more unpolilhed, relates the death of Beatoun
and of the duke of Guise, not only without censure, but

with
' L'nfant, Hil. Conc. de Conil. a Buchan. 95 345.

with the utmost exultation . On the other hand the B o o
bishop of Ross mentions the assassination of the earl of Iv.
Murray with-fome degree of applause y. Blackwood dwells '_-vr
upon it with the molt indecent triumph, and ascribes it di- x56.
retly to the hand of God a. Lord Ruthven, the principal
ador in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account ofi't
some flort time before his own death, and in all his long
narrative there i not one expression of regret, or one fymp-
tom of compuncion, for a crime no less dishonourable than
barbarous a. Morton, equally guilty of the fame crime, en-
tertained the fame sentiments concerning it; and in his last
moments, neither he himself, nor the ministers who attended
him, seem to have confidered it as an aion which called
for repentance; even then he talks of David's flaughterMs
coolly as if it had been an innocent or commendable deedb.
The vices of another age astonish and hock us; the vices
of our own become familiar, the excite little horror . I
return from this digreflon to the course of the history.

THE charm, which had at first attached the queen to e
Darnly, and held them for some time in an happy union; 'qu't
was now entirely dissolved; and love no longer covering his Darn -
follies and vices with its friendly veil, they appeared to cafe
Mary in their full dimension and deformityd. Though
Henry publifled a proclamation, difclaiminlg any knowledge
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the queen was fully con-
vinced, that he was not only acceflary to the contrivance, but
to the cmmiffion of that odious crime . That very pover
which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondncfs, fle had con-
ferred upon him, he had employed to insult her'authority,
to limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person. Such
an outrage it was impossible any woman could bear or for-
give. Cold civilities, secret distrust, frequent quarrels, fuc-
ceeded to their former transports of affeeion and confi-
dence. The queen's favours were no longer conveyed
through' his hands. The crowd of expetants ceased to court

hip,

' Knox, 334. Y Anders. 3. 8. Jebb, . 263.
· Keith, Append. I19. 1 Crawf. Mem. Append.
'In the first accounts of Rizio's murder lent to England there seem to have

been mingled (as is usual in relating extraordinary events) some circumllancers
which afterwards appeared to be false: among others, that a friar, named
Bracl, had been slain at the fame time with Rizio. Parkhurft bihop of Nor-
wich,in communicating this intelligence to his correspondent Bullinger,an emi-
nent reformed divine of Zurich, exprefes no condemnation of the murder of
Rizio, and exults over the supposed death of the friar, in terms which, in or
times, will appear as Pfoking as they are puerile: A" Fraterculus quidam, no-
mine Blac,, Papiflarum antefignanus, eodem tempore in aula orciditur: Sic
niger hic nebulo, nigra quoque morte peremptus, invitus nigrum subito d,.
fcendit in Orcum." 'Burn. Hist. of Reform. iii. App. 360

4 See Appendix, So. XVi. ' Keith, 3So.

B o o K his patronage, which they found to avail so little. Among

iv. the nobles some dreaded his furious temper, others com-

_v_- plained of his perfidiousness; and all of them delfpifcd the
1s66. weakness of his underltanding and the incontancy ,o hij

heart. The people themfeives oferved some parts of his
conducd, which ittle suited the dignity of a king. Addi&et
to drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular passions, which even the licen-
tioufnefs of youth could not excuse, he, by his indecent be-
haviour, provoked the queen to the utnofit; and the passions
which it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes, both
in public and private f. Her averlion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. lie was often ab-
sent from court, appeared there with little splendour, and
was trulted with no power. Avoided equally by those who
endeavoured to please the queen, who favoured Morton ant
his afbociates, or who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he
was left anof alone in a negieced and unpitied solitude .

T;e rs; rs ABOuT this time a new favourite grew into great credit
Bothweit's with the queen, and soon gained an ascendant over her
favour. heart, which encouraged his enterprising genius to form de-

signs that proved fatal to himself, and the occasion of all
Mary's fibfequent misfortunes. This was James Hepburn,
earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and, by
his cxeenfive possessions and numerous vaflals, one of the
noft powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that tur-
butlent age, when so many vast projects were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to ation, no man's ambition
wass more daring than Bothweli's, or had recourse to bolder
or more ingular cxpedients for obtaining powerh. When
almoit evryv person of diPtindion in the kingdom, whether
pl?ilt or protestant, had joined the Congregation in op-
porhig tile dangerous encroachments of the French upon the
lib-rtries of the nation, he, though an avowed protestant, ad-
Icered to the queen regent, and ated with vigour on her fide.
The fuccefi which attended the arms of the Congregation,
having obliied him to retire into France,hewas taken into the
queen's service, and continued with her till the time of her re-

turn

' K;th, 329. E MIel. 131, &Sc.
The enterprifng sprit ofBoth ell was so confpiuous as to procare him f-

eral marks of diftstion during his residence in France. Hardwicke's State
Papers, i. 143. Throgmorton, the Englilh ambassador at Paris, and one of the
mjit agacious miairers employed by Elizabeth,points him out as a person who
was to be dreaded and obferwed. " The earl of Bothwell," fays he in a letter,
No--. 28, 156. " is departed to return into Scotland, and hath made boast that
he will do great things, and live in Scotland in despite of all men. He is a glo
r ,us. rash and hazardous yong man; and therefore it were meet that his adver-.

rs,
r s hould bath have an eye to hi., and also keep him short." Ibid. p. X4.

turn into Scotland i. From that period, every ftep of his o o K
conduct towards Mary was remarkably dutiful ;- and amidit Iv.
11 the shiftings of facion we scarcely ever find him holding _
any course which could be ostensive to her. When Mur- I566.
ray's proceedings with regard to her marriage gave umbrage
to the queen, the recalled Bothv'ell from that banilhment
into which he had with reluctance driven him, and con-
fidered his zeal and abilities as the most powerful supports of
her authority. When the conspirators against Rizio seized
1'er person, he became the chief instrument of recovering her
liberty, and served her on that occasion, with so much
fidelity, and success, as made the deepest impreiion on her
mind, and greatly increased the confidence which ihe had
hitherto placed in him k. Her gratitude loaded him with
marks of her bounty; he rifed him to offices of profit and
of trust, and transacted no matter of importance without his
advice'. By complaisance and afliduity he confirmed and
fortified theie dispositions of the queen in his favour, and in-
sensibly paved the way towards that vast project, which his
imnioderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, ill spite of many difficulties, and at the expence of
many crimes, he at last accomplished.

THE hour of the queen's delivery now approached. As
her palace was defended only by a dender guard, it seemed
imprudent to expose her person, at this time, to the infuits
lie might susser in a kingdom torn by factions and prone to
mutiny. For this reason the privy council advised the queen
to fix her rei!icncc in the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest
fortress in the kingdom, and the mofl proper place for
the security of her person m. In order to render this fecuritv
more perfe&t, Mary laboured to extinguifli the domestic
feuds which divided some of the principal nobles. Murray
and Argyll were exafperad against Huntly and Bothwell,
by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The queen, by her au-
thority and entreaties, effeeted a reconcilement among them,
:.nd drew from them a promise to bury their discords in ever-
iaiting oblivion. This reconcilement Mary had so much at
heart, that fle made it ihe condition on which the ag.in re-
ceive.u Murray into favour ".

ON the nineteenth of June, Mary was delivered of her Birth of
rnly son James, a prince whose birth was happy for the JamcsVI.
Wiolc island, and unfortunate to her alone. His accession
to ite throne of England united the two divided kingdoms
in one mighty monarchy, and eftabliihed the power of

Great

'Anders. i. 90. 1 Tbid. 9z, 93. 'Melv. 3. Ki.:cx, 396.
" Keith, 35. Ibid. 336. Append. 139.

s o Great Britain on a firm foundation: while he, torn early

rv. from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed
kY w to indulge those tender paflions, nor to tafe those joys which

566. fill the heart of a mother.
- MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with an ac-

J count of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at first, in a fen.

ible manner; and the advantage and superiority which her
rival had acquired by the birth of a son, forced tears from
her eyes. But before Melvil was admitted to audience, flie
had so far recovered the command of herself, as to receive
him not only with decency, but with excessive cheerfulness;
and willingly accepted the invitation which Mary gave her,
to stand godmother to her ofn °.

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, ffle resolved

to celebrate the baptism of the young prince with great
pomp; and for that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind
to the French king, and to the duke of Savoy, the uncle of
her former husband.

The queen THE queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her
continues sentiments with refpec to the king P. The death of Rizio,
o trat and the countenance he had given to an action so insolent
wDith i i and unjustifiable, were still fr-fli in her memory. She was
er e and frequently pensive and dejectedq. Though Henry some-
h-egQ. times attended court, and accompanied her. in her pro-

grefles through different parts of the kingdom, he met with
little reverence from the nobles, while Mary treated him
with the greatelf reserve, and did not susser him to possess
any authorityr. The breach between them became every
day more apparent '. Attempts were made towards a recon-
cilement, particularly by Caftelnau the French ambassador
but after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy matter
to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on
the king and qu en to pass two nights together , we may,
with great probability, pronounce this appearance of union,
to which Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere; we
know with certainty that it was not lasting.

Herattach- BOTH.WEL, all this while, was the queen's prime confi-
mentto dent. Without his participation no business was concluded
Bothwel andnofavourbeftowed. Together with this afendantover
imaseL" her councils, Bothwell, if we may believe the contemporary

historians, acquired no less sway over her heart. But at
what precise time this ambitious lord firt allowed the senti-
ments of a lover to occupy the place of that duty and refpet
which a subjec owes his sovereign; or when Mary, inltead

· Ii. ri.. P See Append. No. XVfI. q Melr. r4.
Keith, 350. Melv. 132. Keith, Append. 69. Ibid. 169.

I

of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a paflion of another B o o
nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine. iv.
Such delicate transitions of pafiion can be discerned only by
those who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and -56i
who can view the secret workings of the heart with calm
and acute observation. Neither Knox nor Buchanan en-
joyed these advantages. Their humble station allowed them
only a distant access t the queen and her favourite. And
the ardour of their zeal and the violence of their prejudices
rendered their opinions rash, precipitate and inaccurate. It
is by the effeEs of this reciprocal paflion, rather than by
their accounts of it, that subsequent historians can judge of
its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's project to gain the queen may

appear, it was formed and carned on under very favourable
circumstances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She
poffefled great sensibility of temper, and was capable of the
utmost tenderness of affection. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy objet, who requited it with ingratitude,
and treated her with neglet, with insolence, and with bru-
tality. All these she felt and resented. In this situation, the
attention and complaisance of a man who had vindicated
her authority and prote6ed her person, who entered into
211 her views, 'who oothed all her pallions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design
and recommending his passion U, could hardly fail of making
an impression on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

THE haughty spirit of Danly, nursed up in flattery, and The king

accustomed to commahd, could not bear the contempt under resolves to
which he had now fallen, and the ate of insignificance to leave Scot-
which he saw himself reduced. But in a country where he land
was universally hated or despised, he could never hope to
form a party, which would second any attempt he might
make to recover power. He addressed himself, therefore, to
the pope, and to the kings of France and Spain, with many
professions of his own zeal for the Catholic religion, and
with bitter complaints against the queen, for neglecing to
promote that interest : and soon after, he took a resolution,
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board a flip
which he provided, and of flying into foreign parts. It is
almost impoflible to form any satisfactory conjecure con-
cerning the motives which influence a capricious and irre-
gular mind. He hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to
the Catholic princes on the continent by his zeal for religion

and
' Anderi . 93, 94. Knox, 39j.

I o o K and that they would employ their interest towards rein-

iv. stating him in the possession of that power which he had loft.
_.v.J Perhaps he expeeted nothing more than the comfort of
x66. hiding the disgrace under which he was now fallen, among

strangers, who had never been witnesses of his former prof-
perity.

is caprici- HE communicated the design to the French ambassador Le
ous beha- Croc and to his father the earl of Lennox. They both en-

deavoured to diTfuade him from it, bus without success. Len-
nox, who seems as well as his son, to have loft the queen's
confidence, and who, about this time, was seldom ,at court,
inftantiy communicated the matter to her by a letter. Ilenry,
who had refused to accompany the queen from Stirling to
Edinburgh, was likewise absent from court. He arrived
there, however, on the fame day she received the account of
his intended flight. But he was more than usually wayward
and peevish; and scrupling to enter the palace unless certain
lords who attended the queen were difiifled. Mary was
ebliged to meet him without the gates. At last he suffered
her to conduc him into her own apartment. She endeavoured
to draw from him the reasons of the firange resolution which
he had taken, and to divert him from it. In spite however
of all her arguments and intreaties he remained silent and
inflexible. Next day, the privy council, by her direcion,
expoltulated with him on the fame head. He pcrfifted, not-
withitanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy; and neither
deigned' to explain the motives of his conduct, nor signified
any intention of altering it. As he left the apartment, he
turned towards the queen, and told her that fle hould not
fee his face again for a long time. A few days after, he
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as grounds of
his difgult. She herself, he said, no longer admitted him
into any confidence, and had deprived him of all power ; and
the nobles, after her example, treated him with open neglet,
so that he appeared in every place without the dignity and
splendour of a king.

rAar- en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary, than this
deavcursto intended flight of the king's, which would have spread the
preenet hs infamy of their domestic quarrel all over Europe. Compafnion
i.t. for a monarch who would then appear to be forced into exile

by her neglect and ill usage, might have disposed mankind
to entertain sentiments concerning the causes of their discord,
little to her advantage. In order, therefore, to prepossess
the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation from any
censure with which Darnly might endeavour to load it, the
privy council rran:fmitted a narrative of this whole tranfai;tion

both

both to the king and to the queen mother of France. It is B o o
drawn with great art, and sets Mary's condat in the mot Iv.
favourable point of light. -.

ABOUT this time the license of the borderers called for z56§.

redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court of juftic at
Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several adjacent counties were
summoned to attend their sovereign in arms, according to
cultom . Bothwell was at that time lieutenant or warden
of all the marches, an office among the most important in
the kingdom ; and though usually divided into three diftint
governments, bellowed bythe queen's favour upon him alone.
In order to display his own valour and aivity in the dif-
charge of this trust, he attempted to seize a gang of ban-
ditti, who, lurking among the marshes of Liddefdale, infested
the reft of the country. But while he was laying hold upon October 6.
one of those desperadoes. he was wounded by him in several
places, so that his followers were obliged to carry him to
Hermitage catle. Mary instantly flew thither, with an im-
patience which has been confidered as marking the anxiety
of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a queen '. Finding
that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom,
the returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of
such a journey, added to the anguish of mind ihe had sus-
sered on Bothwell's account, threw her next morning into
a violent fever b; Her life was despaired of, but her youth,
and the vigour of her constitution, resifted the malignity of
her disease. During the continuance of the queen's illness,
the king, who resided at Stirling, never came near Jed- Nov. .
burgh i and when he afterwards thought fit to make his
appearance there, he met with such a cold reception, as did
not encourage him to make any long flay d. Mary soon reco-
vered strength enough to return along the eastern borders to
Dunbar.

WHILE she resided in this place, her attention was turned
towards England. Elizabeth, otwithftanding her promise,

VOL. I. Q and

Keith, 345. 347. .' keith, 353. Good. vot.i. 30z.

* The distance between Jedburg' and Hermitage is eighteen ScottM hmilt,

through a country almost impafable. The season of the year was far ad-
vanced. Bothwellreems to have been wounded in a scuffle, ocafioned by te
despair of a single man, rather than any open infurreetion of the bonrerert.
It does not appear that the queen was attended there by any confid-rble
train. Had any military operation been neeeffary, as is fippofed, Good. vol.
i. 304, it would have been extremely improper to rifque the queen's person
in an expedition agatnft thieves. As soon as the quee found Both vll to be
in no danger, Ihe iftaantly returned, and after this we hear no more of the
infurretion, nor have we any proof that the rioters took refuge in England.
As there is no farther evidence with refpeO to the motives of this extraordi-
nary journey, the reader must judge what degree of credit is due to Knox anil
Buchanan, who ascribe it to tbt queen's love of Bothwcll.

Keith, 351, 35. C Ibid.Append, 33. ' IKno 4o

B o o K and even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowedy

iv. but encouraged, Morton and his aflbciates to remain in Eng-

xvov land '. Mary, on the other hand, offered her protecion to
1566. several Englifl fugitives. Each queen watched the motions

of the other with a jealous attention, and secretly counte-
nanced the pratices which were carrying on to disturb the
administration of her rival.

The Eng- FOR this purpose Mary's ambassador, Robert Melvil, and
lil parlia- her other emissaries, were extremely active and successful.
murt a- We may impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that
y's pre- spirit which appeared in the parliament of England, and
tensions to which raised a storm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic
thefccf- tranquillity more than any other event of her reign,, and

required all her art and dexterity to allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years without discover-

ing the lerft intention to marry. A violent distemper, with
which she had lately been seized, having endangered her life,
and alarmed the nation with the profpet of all those cala-
mities which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious fuc-
cession; a motion was made, and eagerly listened to in both
houses, for addressing the queen to provide againR any such
danger in times to come, either by signifying her own refo-
lution to marry, or by consenting to an ad, establishing the
order of succession to the crown . Her love to her fubjecs,
her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, it was
asserted, not only called upon, but obliged her to take one
of these steps. The insuperable aversion which ihe had all
alon;! discovered for marriage, made it improbable that she
would chufe the former; and if she complied with the latter
request, no title to the crown could, with any colour of jus-
tice, be set in opposition to that of the Scottish queen. Eliza,
beth was agacious enough to fee the remotest consequences
of this motion, and observed them with the greatest anxiety.
Mary, by refusing so often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,
had plainlyintimated a design of embracing the first promising
opportunity for prosecuting her right to the English crown;
and by her secret negociations, (he had gained many to favour
her title . All the Roman cathalics ardently wilhed for her
succession. Her gentleness and humanity had removed many
of those apprehensions which the protestants entertained
on account of her religion. The court fa&ion, which envied
the power of Cecil, and endeavonred to wrest the adminiftra-
tion out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the Scot-
tifh queen in opposition to him. The union of the two king-

doms
Cald. vol ii. . . ' D'Ewes Journ. of Parl. los. t Melv. 136.

doms was a desirable objet to all wife men in both nations; B o o K
and the birth of the young prince was a security for te con- iv.
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

UNDER these circuftanccs, and while the nation was in 1566.

such a temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title Elizabeth's
would have been highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The pre- perplehait
fcnt unsettled state of the fuccelfion left much in her power. count.
Her resentment alone might have gone far towards excluding
any of the competitors from the cro.wn; and the dread of
this had hitherto restrained and overawed the ambition of
the Scottish queen. But if this check hould be removed by
the legal acknowledgment of her title, Marv would be more
at liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to ac without
fear or reserve. Her partisans were already meditating
schemes for infurreions in different parts of the kingdom h
and an at of parliament, recognising the rights of that prin-
cess, whose pretensions they favoured, would have been no-
thing less than a signal to arms ; and notwithstanding Eliza-
beth's just title to the affetions of ler fubjeds, might
have haken and endangered her throne.

WlHI.LE this matter remained in suspense in both houses, Maryen-
an account of it was transmitted to Mary by Melvil her am- deavours to

improve

baffador. As she did not want advocates for her right, even thioppor-
among those who were near Elizabeth's person, he endea- tunity.
voured to cultivate the disposition which appeared towards
fettling the right of succession in her favour, by a letter to the
privy counsellors of England. She expressed in it a grateful
sense of Elizabeth's friend!hip, which flie ascribes chiefly to
their good offices with their sovereign in her behalf. She
declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity with Eng-
land, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the crown,
any farther than should be areeable to the queen. But, at
the fame time, as her right of succession was undoubted, he
hoped it would be examined with candour, and judged of
with impartiality. The nobies who attended her, wrote to
the Englih privy council in the fame firain . Mary artfully
gave these letters the air of being nothing more than a de-
claration of her own and of her fubjcets gratitude towards
Elizabeth. But as he could not be ignorant of the jealousy
and fear with which Elizabeth observed the proceedings of
parliament, a ftep so uncommon as this, of one prince's entcr-
ing into a public correspondence with the privy counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise construed than as taken with
an intention to encourage the spirit which had already beeri

Q2 rtailed
M OcXv. 47. 3iCith, 354. Appceil. 136.

B o o K raised among the English. In this light it seems to have ap-

iv. peared to Eiizabeth herfelfk. But the disposition of her
_ v..> people rendering it necessary to treat Mary's person with
1566. great decency, and her title with much regard, she mentioned

it to her only in the softest language.

Elizabeth NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mortification
focths and to a princess of Elizabeth's characer, than the temper which
gains her both houses of parliament discovered on this occasion. She
pliament, bent all her policy to defeat and elude the motion. After

allowing the first heat of their zeal to evaporate, she called
into her presence a certain number of each house. She
soothed and caressed them; she threatened and promised;
the remitted ubfidies which were due, and refused those
which were offered ; and in the end prevailed to have this
formidable motion put off for that session. Happily for her,
the conduct of the Scottiih queen, and the misfortunes
which besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in
any future parliament .

MEANTIME, in order to preserve the reputation of impar-

tiality, and that she might not drive Mary into any desperate
measure, she committed to the tower one Thornton, who
had published something derogatory to the right of the Scot-
tifh line " ; and signified her displeasure against a member of
the house of commons, who seemed, by some words in a
speech to glance at Mary n.

An extra- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to
ordiriary promote the' interest of that religion which she professed.
flepof fa- The re-establishment of the Romith doctrine seems to have
ry's in fa-

our of been he'r favourite passion; and though the design was con-
popery. cealed with care and conducted with caution, she pursued

it with a persevering zeal. At this time she ventured to lay
aside somewhat of her usual reserve; and the aid which fle
expeted from the popish princes, who had engaged in the
league of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a ftep, which, if
we confider the temper of the nation, appears to be extremely
bold. Having formerly held a secret correspondence with
the court of Rome, she now resolved to allow a nuncio
from the pope publicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal
Laurea, at that time bishop of Mondovi, was the person on
whom Plus V. conferred this offic, and along with him he
sent the queen a present of twenty thousand crowns °. It
is not the character of the papal court to open its treasury
upon distant or imaginary hopes The business of the

nuncio

k Keth, 35.

D'EtcsJcurn. I^4-13o. Camd. 399. Melv. T19. Haynes, 446.
Camd.lcx. - Haynes, 449. ° Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn.
vol. iii. p. 3 5.

nuncio in Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a re- B o o r
conciliation of that kingdom to the Romish fee. Thus iv.
Mary herself understood it, and in her answer to a letter _
which flse received from the pope, after expressing her grate- x566.
ful sense of his paternal care and liberality, he promises that
lhe would bend her whole strength towards the re-establish-
ment and propagation of the catholic faith that he would
receive the nuncio with every possible demonstration of re-
fpeft, and concur, with the utmost vigour, in all his designs
towards promoting the honour of God, and restoring peace
to the kingdom; that she would celebrate the baptism of the
prince according to the ceremonies which the Romifli ritual
prescribes, hoping that her fubjecs would be taught, by
this example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and
that the would be careful to instil early into her on the prin-
ciples of a sincere love and attachment to the catholic faith P.
But though the nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
sent over one of his attendants with part of the money, the
queen did not think the juncture proper for his reception.
Elizabeth was preparing to fend a magnificent embassy into
Scotland, against the time of the prince's baptism, and as it
would have been improper to offend her, she wifely con-
trived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Paris q.
The convulsions into which the kingdom was thrown soon
after, made it impossible for him to pursue his journey any
farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on these

negociations for fubrerting the reformed church, she did not
scruple publicly to employ her authority towards obtaining
for its ministers a more certain and comfortable subsistence.
During this year, the issued several proclamations and as
of council for that purpose, and readily approved of every
scheme which was proposed for the more etftual payment
of their flipends. This part of her condut does little ho-
nour to Mary's integrity: and thoughjuftified by the exam-
ple of princes, who often reckon falsehood and deceit among
the neceflary arts of government, and even authorised by the
pernicious casuistry of the Roman church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics from the lift of crimes to that of
duties, such dissimulation, howvcer, must be numbered
among those blemifies which never stain a truly great and
generous character.

As

P ConaiVita Maria, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 5. q Keith, Append. 3i5.
' Keith, 561, 562. Knox, 401.

B o o K As neither the French nor Piedmontefe ambassadors were

Iv. yet arrived, the baptism of the prince was put off from time

k-^-~J to time. Meanwhile, Mlary fixed her residence at Craig-
1566. millar'. Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the present

December.
Her aver- temper of her mind, and induced her to prefer it before her
sion for the own palace of Holy-rood-houfe. Her aversion for the king
kingex- grew every ay mere confirmed, and was become alto-

gether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to that
gaiety of spirit which v-as natural to her. The rashness and
levity of her own choice, and the king's ingratitude and ob-
ilinacy, filled her with shame and with delpair. A variety
of paions preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations
were exquifitc, and all its emotions strong, and often ex-
torted from her the last wish of the unfortunate, that life
itself might come to an end t.

EBt- as the earl of Bedford, and the count de Brienne,

the Englith and French ambafladors, whom flie had long
expected, arrived about this tin;c, Mary was obliged to sup-
press what paifed in her xbofom, and to set out for Stirling,
in order to celebrate the baptifin of her son. Bedford was
attended by a numerous and splendid train, and brought
presents from Eiizabeth, suitable to her ow-n dignity, and
the refpec with which file affeced, at that time to treat the
queen of Scots. Great preparations had been made by
Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on this occa-
son exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scot-
pcc. i7. land. The ceremony itself was performed according to the

rites of the Romish church. But neither Bedford nor any
of the Scottish nobles who professed the protestant religion,
entered within the gates of the chapel . The spirit of that age
firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any inducement,
condescend to witness an aion which it deemed idolatrous.

Theking's HENRY'S behaviour at this juncture, perfectly discovers
cpr-icus the excess of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chose

t.ehat"r to ref!de at Stirling, but confined himself to his own apart-
rn of the ment; and as the queen ditrufted every nobleman who ven-
pmrce. tured to convcrfe with him, he was left in absolute solitude.

Notling could be more singular, or was less expeced, than
his chusing to appear in a manner that both published the
contempt under which he had fllen, and by exposing the
queen's dcme'ric unhappiness to the observation of so many
foreigners, looked like a ftep taken on purpose to mortify
and to offend her. Mry felt this insult sensibly; and not-
withstanding all her efforts to assume the gaiety which
;;:ited the occasion, and which was necessary for the polite

rccep-
*Kith, 35j. " Keith, Pref. ii. " Keith, 3o.

reception of her guests, fie was sometimes obliged to retire, B o 0 K
in order to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow, and give vent iv.
to her tears x. The king till persisted in his design of retir- \- J
ing into foreign parts, and daily threatened to put it into x566
execution .

THE ceremony of witnefling the prince's baptism was not Elizabeth
the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His inftruaions endeavours

to accom-

contained an overture, which ought to have gone far towards rmodate her
extinguiihing those jealousies which had so long fubfilted be- differences
tween the two queens. The treaty of Edinburgh, which with Mary.
has been so often mentioned, was the principal occasion of
these. The spirit, however, which had risen to such an
height in the late parliament, the power of the party which
favoured the Scottifil queen's title, the number and aivity
of her agents in different parts of the kingdom, alarmed
Elizabeth, and induced her to forego any advantage which
the ambiguous and artful exprelions in that treaty might as-
ford her. Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but to re-
nounce any title to the crown of England during Elizabeth's
life and the lives of her poferity who, on the other hand,
engaged to take no ftep which might prove injurious to
MIary's claim upon the fucceflion .

MARY could not, with deccncy, reje& a proportion
so equitable; he insisted, however, that Elizabeth fliould

order

Keith, Pref. vii.
Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not

to give Darnly the title of king. As this was an indignity not to he borne
either by Mary or her husband, it hath been afterted to be the cause of the
king's abfenec from the ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good.
319. But, . No fuchthingis to befoundamong Bedford'sinftrudions, the
original of which, still remains. Keith, 356. . Bedford's advice to the
queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with Camden's aflertion Melv.
153. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's inftrufions to Sir
Henry Norris, where Ihe affirms that Ihe commanded Bedford to employ his
bet offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which she had attempted
to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaf. p. 13. A paper published, Ap-
pend. No. XVIII. proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French resident
mentions the king's ablence, but without givingthat reason for it, which has
been founded on Camden's words, though if that had been the real one, it is
hardly possible to conceive that he hould have neglected to mention it. Le
Croc's sirs letter is dated December 2, some time prior to the arrival of the
earl of Bedford in Scotland; and when his inftrutions, either public or secret,
could hardly be known. Le Croc plainly supposes that the discord between
the king and queen was the cause of his abience from the baptism, and his
account of this matter is that which I have followed. Keith, Pref. vii. 4.
He informs his court, that on account of the difierenee betwixt the king and
the queen, he had refused to holdjany further correspondence with the former,
though he appears, in many instances, to have been his great confident. Ibid.
5. As the king was not present at the baptism, he seems to have been ex-
cluded from any (hare in the ordinary adminiltration of business. Two ats
of privy council, one on the 2oth, and the other on the gift of December,
are found in Keith, 56z. They both run in the queen's name alone. The
king seems not to have been present. This could not be owing to Elizabeth's
jfltruaions to Bedford. Keith, 356.

B o o K order the right upon which she claimed, to be legally exat

iv. mined and publicly recognised, and particularly that the tef-

tament of Henry VIII. whereby he had excluded the de-
rx66. fcendants of his eldest sifter the queen of -Scotland, from

the place due to them in the order of fucceflion, might he
produced, and confidered by the English nobility. Mary's
ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this
testament, which they so justly conceived to be injurious to
their mistress, was a mere forgery; and on different occa-
sions had urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would have
suffered considerably by gaining this point. The original
testament is fill extant, and not the least doubt can be en-
tertained of its genuineness and authenticity. But it was
not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the title of
the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the queRfion concerning the succession perplexed and
undecided, and by industriously eluding this request, he did
real service to Mary's cause a.

A FEw days after the baptism of the prince, Morton and

all the other conspirators against Rizio obtained their pardon,
and leave to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto
continued inexorable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded
at last to the felicitations of Bothwell b. He could hope for
no success in those bold designs on which his ambition re-
filved to venture, without drawing aid from every quarter.
By procuring a favour for Morton and his associates, of which
they had good reason to despair, he expeced to secure a
band of faithful and determined adherents.

THE king ftil remained at Stirling in solitude and under

contempt. His impatience in this situation, together witl
the alarm given hini by the rumour of a delign to seize his
person, and confine him to prison c, was the occasion of his
leaving that place i an abrupt manner, apd retiring to his
father at Glasgow.

june . ' Two aflemblies of the church were held during this year.
Dec. 25. New complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the

;airs.h poverty and contempt under which the protestant clergy

were fufiered to languih. Penurious as the allotment for
their subsistence was, they had not received the least part of
what was due for the preceding year d. Nothing less than a
teal, ready to endure and to susser every thing for a good
cause, could have persuaded men to adhere to a church so

indigent

Rymcr, rxv. p. ic. Keith, 361. 38. Note (c). Murdin, 368.
-Od. voL i. 40. elv. IS4. ' Keith, Pref. viii, " Ibid. 562;

indigent and so neglected. The extraordinaryexpences oc- B o o
cafioned by the prince's baptism had exhausted the queen's iv.
tieafury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence of v-.
the clergy were diverted into other channels. The queen was 66
therefore obliged to prevent the just remonstrances of the
aaembly, by falling on some new method for the relief of
the church. Some symptoms of liberality, some stretch to-
wards munificence, might have been expeced in an assign-
ment whicih was made with an intention of soothing and
silencing the elergy, But both the queen and the nobles held
fart the riches of the church which they had seized. A fum
which, at the highest computation, can hardly be reckoned
equal to nine thousand pounds sterling e, was deemed fuffi-
cient for the maintenance of a whole national church, by
men who had lately seen ingle monasteries possesed of re-
venues far superior in value.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances which

affected themselves alone with astonishing patience; but
wherever the reformed religion was threatened, they were
extremely apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest
manner, their apprehensions of danger. A just occasion of
this kind was given them, a lhort time before the meeting of
the assembly. The usurped and oppressive jurifdiion of
the spiritual courts had been abolifled by the parliament
in the year one thousand sivd hundred and sixty, and commis-
saries were appointed to hear and determine the causes which
formerly came under their cognizance f. Among the few
aas of that parliament to which Mary had paid any regard,
this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the com-
miffaries, and had given them inflruaions for directing their
proceedings g, which are (till of great authority in that court.
From the time of their firit appointment, these judges had
continued in the uninterrupted exercise of their funSion,
when of a sudden the queen issucd a proclamation, restoring
the archbifllop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdi&ion,
and depriving the commiffaries of all authority h.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered the queen

not unwilling to venture upon this rash ation. She had
been contriving for some time how to re-establish the
popifi religion ; and the restoring the ancient ccclefiaftics to
their former jurifdi&ion seemed to be a considerable ftep to-
wards that end. The motive which prompted Bothwell, to
whole influence over the queen this a&ion must be chiefly -

iAlputedj

Keith, 562. f Iid. 152. g Ibid. 2$.
' Knox, 403.

s o o iputed i, was still Inor: cri-ninal. His enterprising ambition

rv. had already formed that bold dcfign, which he oon after

v_> ^ put hn execution ; and the u which we ihall hereafter find
iS66. him making of that authority which the popish ecclesiastics

reailcd, discovers the reasons of his present in conduc,
contributing to revive their power. Tlie protestant clergy
were not unconcerned fpeaators of an eventwhich threatened
their rciiginl with unavoidable deIfruction; but as they de-
fpaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the queen her-
ielf, they addressed a remonstrance to the whole body of the
protefant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which
the danger to which it -as cxpolcd at that time, seemed to
require '. What effects this vehement exhortation might
have produced, we have no opportunity of judging, the
attention of the nation being quickly turned towards events
of aother and more tragical nature.

The king IMM'EDIATELY upon the king's leaving Stirling, and before
ialls (ik at he could reach Glagow, h'e was seized with a dangerous
GItr". distemper. The symptoms which attended it were violent

and unuifual, and in that age it was commonly imputed to
the effects of poison . It is impoffibie, amidit the contra-
dictions of historians, to decide with certainty concerning
its nature or its cause m. His life was in the utmost danger
but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour of his con-
ftitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.

NegIeead M.ATR's neg;et of the king on this occasion was equal to
by M'a. that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jed.

burgh. She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affecion
which prompts to sympathy, and delights in all thole tender

offices

K nox, 403. Keith, 567. Melv. 54. Knox, 4o0.
- Buchanan and Knox are pofitire that the king had beea-'poifoned.

They mention the black and pu:rid pcftules which broke out all over his
boly. Bu-hanan adds, that Al:erntlhy the king's physician plainly declared
that poison was tht caune of these tymptoms, and that the queen refused to
ailow iher ow n physician to attend him. Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Black.
wood, Cafin, c. Jehb, vol. ii. 59. 214. art, that the finall-pox was the
diicaafc ith v hih the king was seized. He is called a Pock/b man in the
queen's letter. Good. ol. ii. 15. 'The reason given by Frenbc P, ris for
lodging the king at the Kirk of Field, \ia. left the young prince should catch
the infection f he staid in the paiace, eenms to favour this opinion. Anders.
vol. 9i- 3. Carte mentions it as a prof of AMary's tenderness toher husband,
that though One never had the small-pox herelif, he ventured to attend him,
eol. iii. 4-6. This, if it had been true, wcnld have afforded a good pretence
for not i:iting him fooncr; but Mhar had the frall-pox in her infancy.
Sadle's tLetters, p. 3,. An additional proof of this is produced from a poem
of Adrian Turnebus, by the publisher of ancient Scottilh poems, p. 308. 3.
Bi:nop Lefle- afirms, that th( king's difeafc was the French pox. Keith, 364.
Nnte .t). In that age, this di:eafe uas eiteemed so coltagious, that perfous
.'e;rld »ith it wer rem eove without the walls of cities.

(,Ices which sooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At this B o o m
juncture, he did not even put on the appearance of this pas- iv.
ioni. Notwithstanding the king's danger, he anused her- vj
self with excursions to different parts of the country, and I56t .
fOffered near a month to elapse before he visited him at Glaf-
gow. By that time the violence of the distemper was over,
and the king, though weak and languiihing, was out of all

danger. '!HE breach between Mary and her hulband was not occa- The bra
ioned by any of those fligiht disgusts which interrupt the bet,
doinietic union, without diflolving it altogether. Almo ft ml"-
all parfions which operate with greatest violence on a
female mind, and drive it to the most dangerous extremes,
concurred in rising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel.
Ingratitude for the favours flie had beftowved, contempt
of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, encroach-
ments on her power, conspiracies against her favourites,
jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy, were the injuries of which
Mary had great reason to complain. She felt them with the
utmoil fenhbility; and added to the anguifll of disappointed
love, they produced those symptoms of despair which we
have already described. Her resentment against the king
seems not to have abated from the time of his leaving Stir-
ling. In a letter written with her own hand to her ambassador
in France, on the day before she set out for Glasgow, no
tokens of sudden reconcilement appear. On the contrary, Jan. 2
(he mentions, with ome bitterness, the king's ingtatitude,
the jealousy with which he observed her adions, and the in-
clination he discovered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmolt scorn ".

AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, at the time of

her departure from Edinburgh to Glasgow, a visit to the Vifitsthe
king, which had been negleaed when his situation rendered kingat
it most necessary, appears singular, and it could hardly be Glasgow.
expected that any thing but marks of jealousy and diitruft
should appear in such an interview. This, however, was
far from being the cafe; he not only visited Henry, but by
all her words and actions; endeavourcd to express an un-
common affection for him: and though this made impression
on the credulous spirit of her husband, no ess flexible on some
occasions than obstinate on others; yet, to those who are
acquainted with the human heart, and who know how fel-
dom and how slowly fucli wounds in domestic happiness
are healed, this sudden transition will apppear with a very

suspicious
j Kcth, Prer. vji.

B o o X suspicious air, and will be confidered by them as the efSet

iv. of artifice.

B'TJ it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is'charged

1567. with dissimulation in this part of her condu. Two of her
^,.;ts famous letters to Bothwell were written during her Rtay at

Glasgow, and fully open this scene of iniquity. He had
so far succeeded in his ambitious and criminal design, as to
gain an absolute ascendant over the queen and in a situation
aucb as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, services of far in-
ferior importance, and address much less insinuating tha
Bothwell's, may be supposed to teal imperceptibly on a
female heart and entirely to overcome it. Unhappily, among
those in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, often, neither many nor strong: nor
did the manners of that court in which Mary had been edu-
cated, contribute to incrcafe or to fortify them. The amo.
rous turn of Francis I. and Henry II. the wildness of the
military character in that age, and the liberty of appearing
in all companies, which began to be allowed to women, who
--d not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment, and those
-pciiined manners, which alone can render this liberty inno-
cent, had introduced, among the French, a licentioufiefs
es morals that rose to an astonishing height. Such examples,
twhich were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly
fail of diminishing that horror of vice which is natural to a
rirtuous mind. The king's behaviour would render the firEt
approach of forbidden sentiments less hocking; resentment,
and disappointed love, would be apt to represent whatever
fothed her revenge, as justifiable on that account; and so
many concurring causes might, almost imperceptibly, kindle
a new passion in her heart.

- heni Bt T whatever opinion we may form with regard to the
r-ts of it. rife and progress of this pailion, the letters themselves breathe

all the ardour and tenderness of love. The affection which
Mary there expresses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every
subsequent part of her conduc; which without admitting
this circumftance,appears altogether mysterious, inconsistent,
and inexplicable. That reconcilement with herhulband, of
which, if we allow it to be genuine, it is impossible to give
any plauible account, is difcvered by the queen's own con-
session to have been mere artifice and deceit. As her aversion
for her husband, and the suspicious attention with which
the observed his conduct, became universally known, her
ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such cafes, with
groundless or aggravated accounts of his ations. By some
tie was told, that the king intended to seize the person of the

prince

pince his son, and in his name to usurp thegovernment; by B o o K
others (he was assured that he resolved instantly to leave the iv.
kingdom ; that a vessel was hired for this purpose, and lay in v_
the river Clyde ready to receive him o. The last was what 67-
Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring into a foreign country
must have been highly dishonourable to the queen, and
would have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided at Glasgow at a distance from her, and in
that part of the kingdom where the interest of his family was
greatest, he might with more facility accomplish his deligns.
In order, therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild-
scheme, it was neceflary to bring him to some place where
hewould be more immediately under her own eye. For this
purpose, she first employed all her art to regain his confi-
dence, and then proposed to remove him t the neighbour-
hood of Edinburgh, under pretence that there he would have Prevails n
easier access to the advice of physicians, and that he herself him to
could attend him without being absent from her son p. The "me t"
king was weak enough to susser himself to be persuaded; Ednwgh
and being still feeble, and incapable of bearing fatigue, was
carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house belong-
ing to the provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field.
It stood ahnoft upon the fame spot where the house belong-
ing to the principal of the university now stands. Such a
lituation, on a riling ground, and at that time in an open
field, had all the advantages of healthful air to recommend
it; but, or the other hand, the solitude of the place ren-
dered it extremely proper for the cominiffion of that crime,
with a view to which it seems manifeitly to have been
chosen.

MARY continued to attend the king with the most affldu- He is met
ous care. She seldom was absent from him through the deredthelt.
day; fie slept two nights in the chamber under his apart-
ment. She heaped on him so many marks of tenderness
and confidence, as in a great measure quieted those suspicions
which had so long disturbed him. But while he was fondly
indulging in dreams of the return of his former happiness, he
stood on the very brink of deftrudion. On Sunday the ninth
of February, about eleven at night, the queen left the Kirk
of Field, in order to be present at a masque in the palace.
At two next morning, the house in which the king lay was
blown up with gunpowder. The noise and shock which this
sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The

inhabitants
Keith, Pref. viii. Good. vol. ii. 8.

B o o inhabitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead

rv. bodyof the king, with that of the servant who slept in the fame

'.V.Y-s room, were found lying in an adjacent garden without the
1r67. city wall, untouched by fire, and with no bruise or mark of

violenr-e.

His charc- ScCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart lord Darnly,
ter- in the twenty-firft year of his age. The indulgence of for.

tune, and his own external accomplishments, without any
other merit had raised him to an height of dignity of which
he was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude,
he loft the heart of a woman who doated on him to diftrac.
tion. His insolence and inconstancy alienated from him
such of the nobles as had contributed most zealously towards
his elevation. His levity and caprice exposed him to the
scorn of the people, who once revered him as.the descendant
of their ancient kings and heroes. Had he died a natura
death, his end would have been unlamented, and his me.
mory have been forgotten; but the cruel circumstances of
his murder, and the fiameful remissness in neglecting to
avenge it, have made his name to be remembered with re-
gret, and have rendered him the object of pity, to which h
had otherwise no title.

Bothwell EVERY one's imagination was at work to gucfs who had
and the contrived and executed this execrabe deed. The suspicion
qpeed of fell, with almoit a general consent, on Bothwcll " and ome
themurder. reflections were thrown out, as if the queen herself were

no trangcr to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains
the fullerf evidence that the nature of the atiosl will admit.
The queen's known sentiments with regard to her husband,
gave a great appearance of probability to the imputation with
which he was loaded'.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by

the queen, offerin a confi'derabk reward to any pcrfen who
ihould discover those who had been guiltv of such a horrid
and detestable crime s; and though Bothwell was now one of
the greatest fubjeAs in the kingdom, formidable on account
of his own power, and protected by the queen's favour, i:
was impossible to suppress the sentiments and indignation of
the people. Papers were affixed to the most public places of
the city, accusing him of the murder, and naming his accom-
plices; pictures appeared to the fame purpose, and voices
were heard in die middle of the night, charging hiam with

that

Melv. r55. Anders. vol. ii. t56.
See Dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Darn!y,.and the genr
iLenels of Mary's letters to BothweH, Appendix,

Anders. vol. L 36.

that barbarous ation. But the authors of these rumours did n o K
not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone; they infinu- Iv.
ated that the queen herself was acceflary to the crimet. This
bold accufition, which so directly attacked Mary's reputation, 1567.
drew the attention of her council; and by engaging them in
an enquiryafter the authors of these libels, diverted them from
searching for the murderers of the king u. It could scarce be
expeted that Mary herself would be extremely solicitous to
dicfover those who had rid her of an husband, whom ihe had
so violently hated. It was Bothwcll's interest, who had the
supreme direction of this, as well as of all other affairs, to
stifle and suppress whatever evidence flhould be offered, and
to cover, if possible, the whole tranfadicn under the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made,
and some persons called before the council; but the exami-
nation was conducted with the most indecent remifinefs, and
in such a manner as to let in no light upon that scene of
guilt =.

IT was not her own fubjecis alone who fufpeEted Mary of

having been acceflary to this unnatural crime; nor did an
opinion, so dishonourable to her character, owe its rife and
progress to the jealousy and malice of her fatious nobles.
The report o the manner and circumstances of the king's
murder spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in thvat
age, which was accustomed to deeds of violence, it excited
univcrfal horror. As her unhappy breach with her husband
had long been matter of public difcourfc, the firfi conjec-
tures which were formed with regard to his death, were ex-
tremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offer for her conduct, called on her to prosecute the
murderers with the utmost diligence, and expected that the
tigour of her proceedings would prove the best and fullest
vintdcation of her innocence .

LENNOX at the fame time incited Mary to vengeance with Lennox ac.

inceflant importunity. This nobleman had fiared in his son's cufes Both.
disgrace, and being treated by Mary with neglec, irfually kiengs ns ,
resided at a distance from court. Roused, however, by an der.
event no less hocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to
ail his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write to the Feb. .
queen, and to offer his advice with rcfped to the molt es-
fedual method for discovering and convicing those who
had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of a husband.
He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty with

vigour,

Anders. vol. ii. 156. Id. vol. i. 38.
Id. vol. iv. part ii. 67, 68. T Keith Picf. ix.

a o vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared hie

Iv. own suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were named
~v as his accomplices; he required that, out of regard to de-
rS67. cency, and in order to encourage evidence to appear against

them, the persons accused of such an atrocious crime hould
be committed to custody, or at least excluded from her court
and pretence Z.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither he had retired after

the burial of the king, whose body was deposited among the
monarchs of Scotland, in a private but decent manner a. The
former part of the earl's demand could not on any pretence
be eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately

Mary con- to trial. But, instead of confining him to any prison, Mary
tinustofa- admitted him into all her councils, and allowed a person,

universally reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy
all the security, the dignity, and the power of a favourite b.
The offices which Bothwell already poffefled, gave him the
command of all the south of Scotland. The castle of Edin-
burgh, however, was a place of so much consequence that
he wished earnestly to have it in his own power. The
queen, in order to prevail on the earl of Mar to surrender it,
March 19. consented to put the person of the young prince in his hands,

and immediately bestowed the government of that important
fortress upon Bothwell . So many steps in her condu&t, in-
confiflent with all the rules of prudence and of decency, must
be imputed to an excess either of folly or of love. Mlary's
known character fully vindicates her from the former; of
the latter, many and firiking prcofs soon appeared.

Haftns on No diret evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell;
irS aLt but as time might bring to light the circumitances qs a crime

in which so many accomplices were concerned, it was of
great importance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than gnera! suspicions, and uncertain surmises, could be
produced by his accusers. For this reason, in a meeting of
privycouncil held on the twenty-eighth of March, the twelfth
of April was appointed for the day of trial. Though the
law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes were
carried on in that age required, a much longer interval, it
appears from several circumfances that this flort space was
considerably contracted, and that Lennox had only eleven
days warning to prepare for accusing a person so far superior
to himself both in power and in favour d. No man could be

less

*Reith, 369. 'Anders: vol. i. 23.
b Ander vo. i. .40, &c. c Andes. vol. i. Pref. 64. Keith, 379.
d The aft of privy council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears
date March the 2zth, which happened on a Tl:hlrfday. Ander. vJl i. 50. The

qlleen's

iefs in a condition to contend with an antagonist who was B O O K
thus supported. Though Lenox's paternal estate had been Iv.
restored to him when he was called into Scotland, it seems v' y
to lhve been confiderablv impaired during his banishment. Is57-
H}is vaflhls, while he resided in England, had been accuf-
toned to fcne degree of independence, and he had not
recovered that ascendant over them, which a feudal chief
usually poflefled. He had no reason to expect the concur-
rence of any of those fations into which the nobles were
divided. During the short period of his son's prosperity, he
had taken fucl steps as gave rife to an open breach with
Murray and all his adherents. The partifars of the house
of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies.
Huntly was linked in the clofcft confederacy with Both-
well; and thus to the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood
alone in a cause where, both honour and humanity called
so loudly on his countrymen to fccond him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himfelfwas present,

and fat as a member in that meeting of privy council, which
gave directions with regard to the time and manner of his
trial; and he itill enjoyed not only full liberty, but was re-
ceived into the queen's presence with the fame distinguished
familiarity asformerly .

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the Lennox

wishes and resentment of a father than such a premature craves a
trial; every ftep towards which seemed to be taken by di- delay.
retions from the person who was himself accuscd of the
crime, and calculated on purpose to conceal rather than to
detect his guilt. Lennox foresaw what would be the issue of
this mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himself, or
success to his cause, he could venture to appear on the day
prefixed. In his former letters, though under expressions
the molt refpeaful, some symptoms of his distrusting the
queen may be discovered. He spoke out now in plain lan-

VOL. I. R guage.

queen's warrant to the menrgers, ipowering them to ummon Lennox to be
present, is dated on the 9th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was flmmoned by
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the ame day. Ibid. roo. He was
summoned at his dwelling-houfes in Glasgow and Dumbarton the 30th of
March, the It and d days of April. Ibid. ioi. He was summoned at
Perth, April if. Ibid o10. Though Lennox reided at that time forty
miles from Einburgh, the citation might have been given him sooner. Such
an unneceflary delay affords some cause for suspicion. It is true, Mary, in
herletter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh the ensuing
week; this gave him warning some days sooner, that he intended to bring
on the trial without delay. But the precise time could not be legally or
certainly known to Leanox sooner than ten or twelve days before the day on
which be was required to appear. By the law and pracice of Scotland, at
that time parties w~re fmmoned, in cafes of treason, forty days previous to
the triaL Anders. vol. i. 50. 52.

B o O K guage. He complained of the injury done him, by hurryieg

iv. on the trial with such illegal precipitation. He represented
.,r- once more the indecency of allowing Bothwell not only to
1567. enjoy personal liberty, but to retain his former influence

over her councils. He again required her, as she regarded
her own honour, to give some evidence of her sincerity in
prosecuting the- murder, by confining the person who was
on good grounds fufpeaed to be the author of it; and till
that were done he signified his own rcfolution not to be pre-
sent at a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were
so irregular and unfatisfacory f.

Applies for HE seems, however, to h.ve expected little success from
this pur- this application to Mary; and therefore at the fame time
pofeto Eli- besought Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a

delav as he demanded . Nothing can be a stronger proof
how violently he suspected the one queen, than his submit-
ting to implore the aid of the other, who had treated his son
with the utmost contempt, and himself and family with the
greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to
interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote instantly to Mary,
advised her to delav the trial for some time, and urged in
such strong terms the fame arguments which Lennox had
used, as might have convinced her to what an unfavourable
conitruction her conduct would be liable, if she persisted in
her present method of proceeding h.

The trial NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of Lennox,
pry;eet. could prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed

Bothwell appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that
it would have been dangerous to condemn, and impoflible
to punifi him. Besides a numerous body of his friends and
va'1aTs aflembled, according to custom, from different parts
of the kingdom,- he was attended by a band of hired fol-
diers, who marched with flying colours along the streets of
Edinburgh i. A court of justice was held with the accuf-
torned formalities. An indifment was presented against
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his
accusation. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one
of his dep-ndants. He excused his matters absence, on
account of the fhcrtnefs of the time, which prevented his
assembling his friends and vail'Ls, without whose assistance
he could not with safety venture to set himself in opposition
to such a powerful antg'-niit. For this reason, he desired
the court to flop proceeding, and protetted, that any fen-

tencc

f Ander. vol. i.2. Good. vol. ii. 352-
' Anders. Pref. 6. Ste Apendix, No. XIX.
' Anderif voL i. i35.

telice viiich flibull be passed at that time ought to be deemed B o o K
illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted that Iv.
the court lhould instantly proceed to trial; One of Lcnnox's
own letters, in which he craved of the queen to profeciute 567-
the murderers without delay, was produced. Cunning-
ham's objections were over-ruled; and the jury, consisting
of peers and barons of the first rank, found Bothwell not
guilty of the crime.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witncfs Bothwell t

was examined, nor any evidence produced against him. The acquitted.
jury, under these circultitances, could do nothing else but
acquit him. Their verdic, however, was far from gratify-
ing the withes, or silencing the murmurs of the people.
Every circumstance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation ; and the judgment pronounced, in-
Read of beinga proof of Bothwell's innocence, was esteemed
an argument of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were as-
fixed to different places, expressing the sentiments of the
public with the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of the cen-

sure to which their proceedings would be exposed ; and, at
the fame time that they returned their verdid acquitting
Bothwell, the earl of Caithness protelted, in their name, that
no crime hould be imputed to them on that account, be-
caufc no accuser had appeared, and no proof was brought of
the indidment. He took notice likewise, that the ninth in-
stead of the tenth of February was mentioned in the indit-
ment, as the day on which the murder had been committed:
a ircumftance which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the inditment; and at a time when
men were disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious
of every thing, this small matter contributed to confirm and
to increase their fufpiciong t.

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment

which he had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication
of his innocence. Immediately after his acquittal, he, in
compliance with a custom which Was not then obsolete, pub;
lilhed a writing, in which le offered to fight in single coin-
bat any gentleman of good fame who should presume to ac-
cufe him of being acceflary to the murder of the king,

MARY, however continued to treat him as if he had been

cleared bythe most unexceptionable and fatisfaforyevidence.
The ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well as ove
her councils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who
could not expeA that his own Ierfon could be safe in a.

R 2 country
k Both. Tral, Andcrf. . ol. 91, &c.

B o o x country where the murderer of his son had been absolved,

iv. without regard to justice; and loaded with honours, in con-
-vJ tempt of decency; fled with precipitation towards England'.
'557- Twodays after the trial a parliament was held, at the open-
A parlia-

nt held, ing of which the queen diftinguified Bothwell, by appointing
April 14. him to carry the sceptre before her . Most of the ads passed

in this aembly were calculated on purpose to strengthen his
party, and to promote his designs. He obtained the ratifi-
cation of all the pofelffions and honours which the partiality
of the queen had conferred upon him; and the at to that
effect contained the strongest declarations of his faithful ser-
vices to the crown in all times pal. The surrender of the
calfle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The law of
attainder against Huntly as repealed, and he and his ad-
herents were restored to the estates and honours of their an-
ceftors. Several of those who had been on the jury which
acquitted Bothwell, obtained ratifications of the grants made
in their favour; and as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law
passed, whereby those into whose hands any paper of that
kind fell were commanded intantly to destroy it; and if,
through their neglet, it should be allowed to spread, they
were fubjeded to a capital punishment, in the fame manner
as if they had been the original authors ".

Remarka- BUT the absolute dominion which Bothwell had acquired
ble aw in over Mary's mind appeared in the clearest manner, by an ad
four of in favour of the protestant religion, to which at this time he
the Refor*
mation. gave her afent. Mary's attachment to the Romiih faith was

uniform and superstitious; she had never laid aside the de-
sign, nor loft the hopes, of refioring it. She had of late
come under new engagements to that purpose, and in con-
sequence of these had ventured upon some steps more public
and vigorous than any she had formerly taken. But though
none of these circumstances were unknown to Bothwell,
there were powerful motives which prompted him at this
juncture to conciliate the good-will of the protestants, by ex-
erting himself in order to procure for them some additional
security in the exercise of their religion. That which they
enjoyed at prefeat was very precarious, being founded en-
tirely on the royal proclamation issued soon after the arrival
of the queen in Scotland, which in express termswas declared
to be only a temporary regulation. From that period, neither
the solicitations of the general afTemblies of the church, nor
the intreities of her people, could extort from Mary any con-
cession in favour of the protestant religion, on which the pro-
fefFors might reft with greater confidence. This, however, by

the
Keith, 378. Note (). Id. ibid. Ibid. 30.

1

the more powerful influence of Bothwell, they now obtained. B o o K
An at was passed in this parliament, repealing all the laws, iv.
canon, civil, and municipal, adverse to the reformed religion, -v
and exempting such as had embraced it from the penalties 1567.
to which they might have been fu' jeted by these !aws,
either on account of their par conduct or present profession;
declaring at the fame time that their perfons,eftates,honours,
and benefices were taken under public protection against
every court, civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to
molest them on account of their religious sentiments. Thus
the protestants, instead of holding their sacred rights by no
better tenure than a declaration of royal indulgence, which
might be revoked at pleafure,obtained legal and parliamentary
protection in the exercise of their religion. By prevailing
on the queen to assent to this law, Bothwell seems to have
flattered himself that he would acquire such merit both with
the clergy and with the people, as might induce them to
favour his ambitious schemes, and to connive at what he had
done or might do, in order to accomplish them. The pro-
teftants accordingly, though this a was far from amount-
ing to a legal eftabliihment of the reformed faith, seemed to
have confidered it as an additional security of such import-
ance, that it was published among the laws enaded in a
parliament held towards the close of this year, under very
different leaders . EVERY

o I am indebted to the accuracy ofSir David Dalrymple, for pointing out (Re-
marks on the Hiflory of Scotland, ch. 9.) a considerable error into which I had
fallen with refpedl to this at, by fuppoliig it to be so favourable to the do~rine
of the Reformation, that the parliament which met Dec. I5, could substitute
nothing fironger or more explicit in its place, and thought it sufficient to ratify
it word for word. This error I have now correded; but after confidering the
a& with particular attention, though I am satisfied that it neither eflablilbed
the reformed religion or the religion of the slate, nor abolished popery, yet it
granted such new and legal security to the proteflants as was deemed in that
age, an acquisition of great value. The framers of the law seem manifeRfly
to have viewed it in that light; after reciting, " that the queen, ince her ar-
rival, had attempted nothing contrary to the fate of religion which file found
publicly and univertally flanding, on which account he'was moit worthy
to be served, honoured, and obeyed, &c."-the at goes on, " that as he
intends to continue the fame goodness and government in all times coming,
the professors of the religion aforesaid may and fIall have occasion to praise
God for her happy and gracious government, &c.: and to the effe that the
professors of the religion aforesaid may assure themselves to be in full surety
thereof, and of their lands, lives, &c. and may with the better will jeopard
and hazard their lives and goods in her highness's service, againl all enemies
to her, and to the commonweal of this realm, &c. therefore our sovereign,
with the advice of the whole etfates in parliament, &r." then follow the Ita-
tuary clauses mentioned in the text. The intention of palling the at is ap-
parent, and it is drawn with great art. This art is peculiarly manifest in the
concluding clause. In her first proclamation the queen had declared, that it
should continue in force only until he should take finalorderconcerningreligion
with the advice of parliament. In this aa the intention of taking further

order

B o K EVERY flep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attenfed

iv. with all the success which his most sanguine wishes could
'»-/VJ expet. He had entirely gained the queen's heart the mur-
B567. der of the king had excited no public commotion; he had
Bothwell
prevails on been acqui:ted by his peers of any share in that crime; alnd
the nolles their decifon had been in some fort ratified in parliament.
to e:om- But in a kingdom where the regal authority was so extremely
mend him
man hu- limited, and the power of the nobles so formidable, he durit
band to the not venture on the last aion, towards which all his ambi-
queen. tious projects tended, without their approbation. In order

to fecire this, he, immediately after the dissolution of par-
liament, invited all the nobles who were present to an enter-
April 9. tainment. Having filled the house with his friends and de-

pendants, and surrounded it with armed men P, lie opened to
the company his intention of marrying.the queen, whose con-
feat, he told them, he had already obtained; and demanded
their approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
less acceptable to their fovercign, than honourable to him-
self q. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwcll's
fichcres, and promoted thermwith the utmost zeal; the popifi
ccclefiaItics, who were absolutely devoted to the queen, and
ready to sooth all her passions ; inftantlv declared their satis-
i1sion with what he had proposed. Tbe reft, who dreaded
the exorbitant power wh'.ch Bothwell had acquired, and ob-
f-Nved the queen's growing affection towards him in all her
ations, were willing to m.ke a merit of yielding to a nia-
.ure which they could neither oppose nor defeat. Some few
were confounded and enraged. But in the end Bothwell,
p,?rtly by promises and flattery, partly by terror and force,
prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper, which

leaves

order concerning religion is mentioned, probably with a view to please the
queen: but it is worded with such fludied dexterity, that the protetfion grant-
ed by this law is no longer to be regarded as temporary, or depending upon
the queen taking such final order. Parl. . K. Ja. VI. c. 3. In the fime
light of an important acquisition of security to the reformed religion, this a't
is represented by the privy council in a proclamation issued May 23, 1567.
Keith, 571. Mary's principal adherents, in a paper subscribed by them,
September 12, 568, declare, that hc, ' by the advice of the three estates,
had aitsfied the deflic of the whole nobility in an at concerning all the
points f religion plTed in the parliament held April 1567." Goodal, ii.
357. The fame i afierted to be the intention and effea of this at in another
public paper in the year 1570. Harnes 6z1. From conlidcring all these
particulars, one need not wonder that a law " anent calling (as its title
bears), annulling, and abrogating of all laws, ats, and constitutions, canone,
civile, and municiral, with other conllitutions, contrare to the religion
now profelt within the realme," confirmed by the royal assent of the queen,
thould be pnhlihed among the Oatutes securing the protestant rehgion. We
find accordingh-, in a enr rre edition of the ats of parliament, imprintit at
Edinburgh by Robert lc.kFrevik, printar to the king's majellie, 6 day of
April 68, the aat of April 19 inserted among the ads of the Regent's par-
lament in December.
' Coo '. o. i1. I4. Anders. vol. i. 94.

leaves a deeper itain than any occurrence in that age on the B O O K
honour and chara&ter of the nation. .V.

lTHi .paper contained the strongest declarations of Both-

well's innocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his 1567.
good ferviccs to the kingdom. If any future accusation
ficuld be brought again{f him on account of the king's mur-
der, the subscribers promised to stand by him as one man,
and to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence. They
recommended him to the queen as the most proper person
she could chufe for a husband; and if he should condescend
to btlow on him that mark of her regard, they undertook
to promote the marriage, and to join him with all their
forces in opposing any person who endeavoured to obftrud
it . Among the subscribers of this paper we find some who
were the queen's chief confidents, others wlo were itrangers
to her councils, and obnoxious to her displeasure; some
'vho faithfully adhered to her through all the viciitudes of
her fortune, and others who became the principal authors
of ier fufterings ; some pallionately attached to the Romifll
superstition, and others zealous advocates for the proteitant
faith . No common intcreft can be fttppofet to have uniied
men of such opposite principles and parties, in rccammenl-
ing to their sovereign a ftep so injurious to her hlonur, and
so fatal to her peace. This strange coalition was the effee
of much artifice, and mult be confidered as tle boldest a;nd
nmoi mallerly itroke of Bothwcll's address. It is obfcrvable,
that amidit all the altercations and mutual reproaches of the
two parties which arose in the kilngdom, this unworthy ti..ns-
a&ion is seldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, 'lat in
this particular their conduc could ill bear examination, and
would redound little to their f:m-.e, they always touch upon
it unwillingly, and with a tend-r hand, seeming delirous that
it hould remain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But
as so many persons who, both at that time and ever after, pof-
sessed the queen's favour subscribcd this paper, the fuflicion
becomes strong, that Bothwe i's ambitious hopes were nei-
tiler unknown to Mary nor disapproved by her .

THESE

' Anders. vol. i. 177. * Keith, 32.

Of all the different fyflcms with re..rd to this traniation, that ofCanm-

den seems to be the least accurate, and the orft founded. He supposes that
Bothwell wjs hated by Murray, 'Morton, &c. who bad been his.allciatcs in
the murder of the king, and that they now wanted to ruin him. lie affirms.
at the fame time, that the fbcriptions to this paper were obtained by then.
out of fear that Bothwell mieht fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody
fccret, 4c4. But besides the absurdity of supposing that any man's enemies
would contribute towards raifii.g him to such high dignity, on .the uncertain
hopes of being able afterxards to deprive him of it; besides tie impolbilitv

of

B o o K THESE suspicions are confirmed by the most direct proof,

iv. Melvil at that time enjoyed a considerable share in her favour.

__J
~ I He, as well as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in
1567. England with those who favoured her pretensions to that

crown. The rumour of her intended marriage with Both-
well having spread early in that kingdom. excited universal
indignation; and Melvil received a letter from thence which
represented, in the strongest terms, what would be tle fatal
effects of such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter into
the queen's hands, and enforced it with the utmost warmth.
She not only disregarded these remonstrances, but commu-
nicated the matter to Bothwell; and Melvil, in order to
save his life, was obliged to fly from court, whither he durif
not return till the earl's rage began to abateu. At the fame
time Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy to
which fie would expose herself by such an indecent choice;
but an advice frcm her met with still less regardx.

'Bothwell TH REE days after the rising of parliament Mary went from

rries the Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the prince her fol,
qoeen by notwell
force to Bothwell
DunbIr. of accomplilfhing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to the queen

or disagreeable to her; e may obfcrve that this uppofition is destroyed by
the direc tefhmony of the queen herself, who arcribes the content of the no-
bles to Bothwell's artifices, li o purcha'd its y giving them to underjand ta t e
cere center tber-iwitb. Anders. vol. i. 94. 99. It would ha'e been no small
advantage to Mary, if he could have represented the consent of the nobles to
have been their own voluntary deed. It is still more surprising to find Lefly
ascribing this paper to Murray and his faction. Anders. vol. i. 26. The bi-
lboj himself was one of the persons who fubcfribed it. Keith, 383. The
king's commillloners, at the conference held at York 1568, pretended that
none of the nobles, except the earl of Huntly, would subscribe this paper till
a warrant from the queen was produced, by which they were allowed to do
o : this warrant they had in their custody, and exhibited. Anders. vol. i.
part 2. 5. This differs from Buchanan's account, who supposes that all the
nobles present subscribed the paper on the i9th, and that next day they ob-
tained the approbation of what they / ad done, by way of security to them-
selves, 355.

Mdv. 56. According to Melvil, Lord Herries likewise remonfirated

against the marriage, and conjared the queen, on his knees, to lay aside all
thoughts of such a dilbonourabl, alliance, 56. But it has been observed
that Herries is one of the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19. Keith,
383. 2. That he is one of the winefles to the marriage articles between the
queen and Bothwill, May 14. Good. vol. ii. 6r. 3. That he fat in council
with Bothwell. May 17. Keith, 36. But this remonltrance of Lord Her-
ries against the marriage happened before those made by Melvil himself, 157.
Melvil's remonstrance mull have happened ome time before the meeting of
parliament; for after offer.ding Bothwell he retired from court; he allowed
his rage time to subside, and had aga:n joined the queen, when she was seized
April 24. x5 8. The time which must have elapsed, by this account of the
matter, was perhapsfufficient to have gained Herries from being an oppoli'r to
become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have committed
some miflake wih regard to this fat, so far as relates to lord Herries. He
could not well be miitaken with regard to what himfcli did.

' Anders. vol. i. 1o6.

Bothwell had now brought his schemes to full maturity, n o o
and every precaution being taken which could render it iv.
fife to enter on the last and decisive ftep, the natural impetu- oy-w
olity of his spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer. 567-
Under pretence of an expedition against the freebooters on
the borders, he affenmbled his followers; and marching out
of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned suddenly to-~ 4r -
wards Linlithgow, met the queen on her return near that
place, dispersed her slender train without resistance, seized
on her person, and conducted her, together with a few of
her courtiers, as a prisoner to his caltle of Dunbar. She
exprefied neither surprise, nor terror, nor indignation, at
such an outrage committed on her person, and such an
insult offered to her authority, but leemed to yield without
struggle or regret . Melvil was at that time one of her
attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized informed
him, that nothing was (lone without the queen's own con-
sint Z. If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's
name, the scheme had been communicated to her, and every
fep towards it was taken with her participation and advice a.

BOTH the queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to

employ this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent
excuse for her condut; and while she could plead that it
was owing to force rather than choice, he hoped that her
reputation, among foreigners at least, would escape without
censure, or be exposed to less reproach. Bothwell could not
help distrusting all the methods which had hitherto been
used for vindicating him from any concern in the murder of
the kii:g. Something was Rill wanting for his security, and
for quieting his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the
great feal. By the laws of Scotland the moll heinous crime
muff be mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all lesser
offences are deemed to be included under the general clause,
and all other crimes TUhiaeirve'r

b. To seize the person of the

prince is high treason ; and Borhwell hoped that a pardon
obtained for this would extend to every thing of which he
had been accused c.

BOTHWELL having now got the queen's person into his s divorce

hands, it would have been unbecoming either a politician or from hi
a man of gallantry to have delayed consummating his owa wife.
schemes. The firit tep towards this was to have this mar-
riage with lady Jane Gordon, the earl of Huntly's filser,
diflblved. In order to accomplilh that, in a manner con-

fifent

Keith, 383. Mlelv. 158.
Good. vol. ii. 37. i Parl. 6Jac. IV. c. 62.
c Anders. voL i. part ii. 6i.

I o o t itent with the ideas of the queen on one hand, and with

iv. the sentiments of his countrymen on the other, two different
.-w precffes became necefflry: one founded on the maxims of
1567. the canon law, the other accommodated to the tenets of the

reformed church. Bothwell accordingly commenced a suit,
in his on name, in the spiritual court of the archbi{hop of
Ai.;l :7 St. Andrew's the jurisdiction of which the queen had re-

flored, by a fpecil commiiffon granted for this purpo'e, and
pieade., that lady jane and himself being cousins within the
prc'hibited degrees, and havi.g married without a papal dil.
penfation, th;ir union was null from the beginning . At
the lrme ti!ne iie prevailed with lady Jane to apply to the
prrtcitaint court of comlninifries for a divorce, on account cf
his having been guiity of adultery. The influence of Both-
well W-is of equal weight in both courts. In the courf
cf tour idas, witif the fame indecent and suspicious pre-
c^:pi;anc, the one dzcLred tle marriage to be illegal and.
nuit, the other pronounced a fehtence of divorce e.

WHiLrI this intamous traniaLtion was carrying on ti:e

qusen reicded at Dunbar dtained as a prifoncr, but treated
-:3. *wi:h the reateit rfpect. Soon aftcr rothwesl, with a nu-

merous train of his dependants, conrudted her to Edinburgh;
but, instead of Indging her in the palace of Holyrood-houfe,
he cnve ed her to the castle, of which he was governor.
The discontent of the nation rendered this precaution nc-
cefiarv. In -an houl: unfcrtified, and of easy access, tlle
qJueen min;ht hIn.ve been rescued without difficulty out of his
h--nds. I. a pkce of tlrength ihe was secured from all the
aft-~ptes of his e:emies.

O'.E finall dificultv itill remained to be surmounted. As

th auen

q -Uic k iept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a
rna:-Tia: conlnud-d in that condition might be imputed to

rce, an.d L-' held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary

appcared

'- ; er os-n t;r., it r.s urged as an a.ggrtatimO of the queen's guilt, that

ic giae her conctnt to marry the husband of another woman; and the charge
za; ceen often rpeated fr.ce. But according to Mary's oan ideas, confo-
-. to te .indcple of her r!'on, the ma;riage of Bothwell with lady Jane
Gc;dcn as -ir.lifl and void, and fne cnidered them as living together not
.: the hili sd c.r.ds of mat ,ir.ony, Lut in a state of criminal intercourse.
_.-.:AeU'cs a ciref.;, ',.h trick he r preteftant subjes not only as indecent
e-.: faeictius, c.uid not appear n ite fan:e light to her; and tis may be
.:-Ised in e.-eniat'icn of the me

i .pute.i to her of having listened to them.

B.t it ;ii nct ee-pt her from the charge of great imprudence in this un-
i.rtir.atC itep. -'v ';2as wed as inr.ted v. :th the ideas of her rubjets, and
itv;'.w - a: 'r.y v;-ud t i,-iak of; er civ.iag ear for a moment to the courtlhip

ac' man iatel marri ur.der hnr .-n eye, in the cillrch of her palace. Ap-

-nadix, N2c. XX. Ever-r cnideracn :hu lJ have restrained ler from frm-
-.' t;:s _: n, -v.h-i t her people m':r have 'ppcarsed J3ic.u aid ih-':ki n,
i C.;k, *.i:. t!e Fiir:tcr- of Scotland, p. 195, &c.

---r..e-. . 1,. A?. d. No . X.

pppeared in the court of fefflon, and, in presence of the p Q o
chancellor and other judges, and several of the nobility, dec Iv.
glared that she was now at full liberty; and though Bothwell's k ~
violence in seizing her person had at firit excited her indig- 1567.
nation, yet his reiledful behaviour since that time had not
only appeased her resentment, but determined her to raise
him to higher honours f.

WVHAT these were soon became public. The title of duke Is matricd

of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwe;l; and on the sis to the
teenth of May his marriage with the queen, which had so queen.
long been the object of his wiihes, and the motive of his
crimes, was solemnized. The ceremony was performed in
public, according to the rites of the protestant church, by
Adam Bothwell, bishop of Orkney, one of the few prelates
who had embraced the Rcfcrjr.tion, and on the fame day
was celebrated in private, according to the forms prescribed
by the popish religion . 'The bcldnefs with which Craig,
the minister who was commanded to publish the banns, tef-
tified again the def the gn; the fmail number of the nobles
who were prfcnt at the marriage; and the fullen and difre-
fpeaful silence of the people ,hcn the queen appeared in
public; were inanifeft symptoms of the violent and general
di;Ttisfaftion of her own fubjecls. The refusal of Du Croe,
the French ambaflador, to be present at the nuptial cere-
mony or entertainment, discovers the sentiments of her allies
with regard to this part of her condud ; and although every
other aion in Mary's life could be justified by the rules
of prudence, or reconciled to the principles of virtue, this
fatal marriage would remain an incontestable proof of her
rashness, if not her guilt.

MARY'S sirss care was to o.Tkr some apology for her. coil-

dut, to the courts of France and England. The inftrutions
to her ambaf`adors ttill remain, and are drawn by a niafterly
hand. But under all the artificial and false colouring site
employs, it is easy to lifcover, not only that many of the
fceps the had.taken were u;ljutifiable, but that flie herfelif
was conscious that they could not be uftified h.

THE title of king was the only thing wich was not be-

stowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her attachment to
hirp, Mary remembered the inconveniencies which had arisen
from tde rafi advancement of her former husband to that ho-
nour. She agreed, however, that he should sign, in token
of consent, all the public writs iftued in her name . Bui
.though the queen withlcld from him the title of king, 1h,

poiflUilk

And. i. 7. t Id. 136. ii. 276.
h An4. i. 9. Good. i..6Q.

B o o K pofefied, ncverthelefs, regal power in its full extent. The

Iv. queen's person was in his hands; The was surrounded more
I _v closely than ever by his creatures none of her fubjeQs could
1567. obtain audience without his permiflion ; and, unless in his

own pretence, none but his confidents were permitted to con-
verse with her k. The Scottiih monarchs were accustomed
to live among their subjects as fathers or as equals, without
distrust, and with little state; arrucd guards standing at the
doors of the royal apartment, difficulty ofaccefs, distance and
retirement, -.-ere things unknown and unpopular.

Eade-z THESE precautions were necessary for securing to Bcth-
ocsto- . well the power which he had acquired. But, without being
eos he master of the eron of the young prince, he esteemed all
prime's that he had gained to be precarious and uncertain. The
pcri. queen had committed her son to the care of the earl of Mar.

The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were too well
kaown to exrpec that he would be willing to put the prince
into the hands of the man who was so violently fufpefted of
having murdered his father. othwell, however, laboured
to get the prince into his power, with an anxiety which gave
rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address, as well as
authority, were employed to persuade, or to force Mar into
a compliance with his demands '. And it is no flight proof,
both of the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that
he prefenred a life of so much importance to the nation,
from being in the power of a man, whom fear or ambition
might have prompted to violent attempts against it.

Gerralin- THE eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed, at that
ignation time, upon the great events which had happened in Scot-
Whh the land during three months: a king murdered with the utmost
onduat ex- cruelty, in the prime of his days, and in his capital city;
rited the person suspected of that odious crime suffered not only to

appear publicly in every place, but admitted into the presence
of the queen, diltinguitlhed by her favour, and intrusted
with the chief diretion of her affairs; fubje&ed to a trial
which was carried on with most shameless partiality, and ac-
quitted by a sentence which served only to confirm the fufpi-
cions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences
frivolous or indecent; and after all this, instead of meeting
with the ignominy due to his aions, or the punishment
merited by his crimes, permitted openly, and without oppo-
fition, to marry a queen, the wife of the prince whom he had
/ affaffnated, and the guardian of those laws which he had

been guilty of violating. Such a quick succession of inci-

dents,
' Ad. i. 26. ' M6c. u. uch. 36x.

dnts, so singular and so detestable, in the space of three B o
months, is not to be found in any other history. They left, Iv.
in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the cha- \y
ralfer of the nation. The Scots were held in abhorrence all x567.
over Europe; they durt. hardly appear any where in public;
and after suffering so many atrocious deeds to pass with im-
punity, they were universally reproached as men void of
courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of the repu-
tation of their queen and the honour of their country m.

THESE reproaches routed the nobles, who had been hi- The nobks

therto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his combine
power. The manner in which he exercised the authority againanher
which he acquired, his repeated attempts to become master elB°t
of the prince's person, together with ome rafli threatening l
againf him, which he let fall", added to the violence and
promptitude of their resolutions. A considerable body of
them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an association
for the defence of the prince's person. Argy!l, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray
of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the fe-
cretary, were the heads of this confederacy 0. Stewart earl
of Athol was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted at-
tachment to popery; but his indignation on account of the
murder of the king, to whom he was nearly allied, and his
zeal for the safety of the prince, overcame, on this occasion,
all considerations of religion, and united him with the molt
zealous proteRtants. Several of the other nobles ated, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the safety of the
prince and the honour of their country. But the spirit which
some of them discovered during the subsequent revolutions,
leaves little room to doubt, that ambition or resentment were
the real motives of their conduc; and that, on many occa-
sions, while they were pursuing ends just and necessary, they
were auated by principles and passions altogether un-
justifiable.

THE first accounts of this league filled the queen and

Bothwell with great consternation. They were no strangers
to the sentiments of the nation with refpe& to their con-
duCt; and though their marriage had not met with public
opposition, they knew that it had not been carried on with-
out the secret disgust and murmurings of all ranks of men.
They foresaw the violence with which this indignation would
burst out, after having been so long suppressed; and in
order to prepare for the florm, Mary issued a proclamation, May2z.

requiring

"Anders. vol. i. 2S. 134. Mlv. 163. SeeAppcndix, No. XXI.
Mcl. 6s. Keith, 394.

o o K requiring her fubjeds to take arms, and to attend her hus.
iv. band by a day appointed. At the fame time, the pblifled

v a fort of manifelto, in which she laboured to vindicate her
1567. government from those imputations which it had been loaded

with, and employed the strongest terms to express her con.
cern for the safety and welfare of the prined her son.
Neither of these produced any considerable effec. Het
proclamation was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with
little credit P.

Theqadecn THE confederate lords carried on their preparations with
and BoRte no less ativity, and with much more success. Among a
re tre
toDbar. warlike people, men of so much power and popularity found

it an easy matter to raise an army. They were ready to
march before the queen and Bothwell were in a condition
to resist them. The castle of Edinburgh was the place
whither the queen ought naturally to have retired, and there
her person might have been perfectly safe. But the confe.
derates had fallen on means to fiake or corrupt the fidelity of
fir ames Balfour, the deputy governor, and Bothwell durst
Toe 6. not commit to him such an important trust. He conducted

the queen to the castle of Borthwick, and on the appearance of
lord Home, with a body of his followers, before that place,
he lied with precipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by
the quepn disguised in men's c'othes. The confederates ad-
vanced towards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in
rain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the town against
them. They entered without opposition, and were inftalitly
joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal became the
firmest support of their cause q.

IN order to set their own conduct in the most favourable

light, and to rouse the public indignation against Bothwell,
the nobles publihed a declaration of the motives which had
induced them to take arms. All-Bothwells past crimes were
enumerated, all his wicked intentions displayed and aggra-
vated, and every true Scotchman was called upon to join
them in avenging the one and preventing the other .

MEANWHILE 3othwell aflembled his forces at Dunbar,

and as he had many dependants in that corner, he soon ga-
thered such ftrcrgth, that he ventured to advance towards
the confederates. Their troops were not numerous; the
suddenness and secrecy of their enterprise gave their friendp
at a distance no time to join them; and as it does net appear
they were supported either with money or fed with hopes by
the queen of England, they could not have kept long in a

body.
Keith, 387. 395, 396. ' eith, 398. Ander. tot. i: r8g.

body. But on the other hand, Bothwell durst not rilkga B o K
delay'. His army followed him with reluiance in this Iv.
quarrel, and served him with no cordial a,'ction; so that \v
his only hope of success was in surprising the enemy, or in 15X-
striking the blow before his own troops had leisure to re-
collect thcmfclve, or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opi-
nion of his ations, which had spread over the reft of the
nation. These motives determined the queen to narch for-
ward, with an inconsiderable and fatal specd.

ON the irft intelligence of her approach, the confede- Tr. nolf

rates advanced to meet her. They fund her forces drawn -.arch
up almost on the fame ground which the English had occu- agnf
pied before the battle of Finkie. The numbers on both Jd',.l
fides were nearly equal; but there was no equality in point
of discipline. 'he queen's army consisted chiefly of a mul-
titude, hastily affcmbled, without courage or experience in
war. The troops of the confederates were composed of
gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their most
trusty dependants, who were no lcfs brave than zealous .

LE CROC the French ambafiador, who was in the field, An acc.-

laboured, by negociating both with the queen and the no- r '.
bles, to put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of
blood. Hi rcprefented to the confederates the queen's in-
cinations towards peace, and her willingness to pardon the
offences which they had committed. Morton replied with
warmth, that they had taken arms rot against the queen,
but against the murderer of her husband; and if he were
given up to justice, or banified from her presence, flie
liould find them ready to yield the obedience which is de
from fubjets to their sovereign. Glencairn added, that
they did not come to ak pardon for any offence, but to
punif{ those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambaflador, that his mediation would be in-
effeEtual, and that their passions were too high to allow them
to liiten to any pacific propositions, or to think of retreating
after having proceeded so far ".

THE queen's army was posted to advantage, on a rising

ground. The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely,
but slowly, and with the caution which was atural on that
unhappy field. Her troops were alarmed at their approach,
and discovered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them; ihe wept, flle threatene, he reroached
them with cowardice, but all in vain. A few of Bothwell's
immediate attendants were eager for the encounter; the reft

flood
'Keith, 401. ' Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49. u Keith, 401.

o o K stood wavering and irresolute, and some began to leal out
JV. of the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offer-

jvyo~ ing to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own innocence,
zsj7. in single combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of

Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and lord Lindsay, contended
for the honour of entering the lifts against him. But this
challenge proved to be a mere bravade. Either the cohfci.
oonefs of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage,
or the queen, by her authority sorbad the combat x.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers,

Mary would have been inexcusable had she hazarded a battle.
To have retreated in the face of an enemy who had alreadv
surrounded the hill on which he stood, with part of their
cavalry, was utterly impra&icable. In this situation, she
was under the cruel necessity of putting herself into the
hands of those fubjecs who had taken arms against her.
She demanded an interview with Kirka!dy, a brave and ge-
nerous man, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. He, with the content and in the name of the
leaders of the party, promised that, on condition the would
difs Bothwell from her presence, and govern the king-
dom by the advice of her nobles, they would honour and
obey her as their sovereign .

othwell DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last farewell of
obigcd to the queen, and rode off the field with a few followers. This
)' difinal reverse happened exacly one month after that mar-

riage which had cost him so many crimes to accomplish,
and which leaves so foul a Rain on Mary's memory.

Mary fiw- As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to Kir-
enders to kaldy, who conducted her toward the confederate army, the
th obles leaders of which received her with much refpea ; and Mor-

ton, in their name, made ample profeflions of their future
loyalty and obedience . But she was treated by the com-
mon soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity. As
she marched along, they poured upon her aH the opprobrious
names which are bestowed only on the lowest and moR in-
famous criminals. Wherever ihe turned her eyes, they
held up before her a standard, on which was painted the
dead body of the late king, firetched on the ground, and
the young prince kneeling before it, and uttering these
words, " Judge and revenge my cause, 0 Lord !" Mary
turned with horror from such a hocking fight. She began
already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints,

fle

Cald. vo ii. 5c. Good. vol. ii. 64. Melr. 65.
od. vol. ii. d165

The melted into tears, and could hardly be kept from finking 'B .o K
to the ground. The confederates condu&ed her towards iv.
Edinburgh; and in fpight of many delays, and after looking, vJ
with the fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate, si6j.
for some extraordinary relief, she arrived there. The streets
were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or curiosity had
drawn together, to behold such an unusual scene. The
queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dust, and be-
dewed with tears, was exposed as a fpeeacle to her own
fubjeds, and led to the provost's house. Notwithstanding
all her arguments and intreaties, the fame standard was car-
ried before her, and the fame insults and reproaches repeat-
ed . Awoman, young, beautiful, and in distress, is na-
turally the objet of compassion. The comparison of their
present misery with their former splendour, usually softens
us in favour of illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld
the deplorable situation of their sovereign with infehfibility;
and f strong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so great
the violence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their
queen did not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or
procure her that sympathy which is seldom denied to unfor-
tunate princes.

' Mely. 66. Buch. 364.
Vol. . S OO

# BOOK V.

BOOK V.
B o o K r HE confederate lords had proceeded to such extremitieo

v. T against their sovereign, that it now became almost im.

X.~v.J polible for them either to stop hort, or to pursue a course

1367. less violent. Many of the nobles had refuted to concur with

tiDsofehe them in their enterprise; others openly condemned it. A
nobles con- small circumstance might abate that indignation with which
cerng the the multitude were at present animated against the queen,
queen and deprive them of that popular applause which was the

chief foundation of their power. These considerations in,
dined some of them to treat the queen with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affection for Bothwell

continued as violent as ever; she obstinately refused to
hearken to any proposal for diflolving their marriage, and
determined not to abandon a man, for whose love ihe had
already sacrificed so much . If they hould allow her to
recover the supreme power, the first exertion of it would be
to recall Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his re-
fentment, from her conducE, and from their own, to e.pel
the fvereft effecs of her vengeance. Theft considerations
surmountcd every other motive, and reckoning themselves
absolved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from
the engagements which they had come under when she
yielded herself a prisoner, they, without regarding the duty
which they owed her as their queen, and without consulting
the reit of the nobles, carried her next evening, under a

They im- strong gua-.', to the castle of Lochlevin, and signed a war-
priion her rant to William Douglas, the owner of it, to detain her as
n Lcle- a prisoner. This catlie is situated in a small island, in the

middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it.belonged, was a
near relation of Morron's, and had married the earl of Mur-
ray's mother. In tis place, under firi& custody, with a
few attendants, and fubjeeed to the insults of a haughty
woman, who boasted daily of being the lawful wife of
James V. Mary suffered all the rigour'and miseries of
captivitv b.

IMMEDIATEI-t after the queen's imprisonment, the con-

federates were at the utmost pains to trengthen their party;
they entered into new bonds of association; they assumed the
title of Lords of the ferret Cunil, and without any other
right, arrogated to themfclves the whole regal authority. One
of their first acts of power was, to search the city of Edin-

burgl

Keith, 419. 446. 449. Meir. 67. SeeAppendix, No. XXII.
b Keith, 403. Note (b)

burgh for such as had been concerned in the murder of the B o K
king. This how of zeal gained reputation to themselves, and v.
threw an oblique refletion on the queen for her remiffnes. vs
Several fufpeted persons were seized. Captain Blackadder s67.
and three others were condemned and executed. But no
discovery of importance was made. If we believe some his-
torians, they were coivit&ed by sufficient evidence. If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjust, and they
denied, with their last breath, any knowledge of the crime
for which they tuffered c.

AN unexpe&ed accident, however, put into the hands of

Mary's enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of
her guilt. Bothwell having left in the castle of Edinburgh
a caiket, containing several sonnets and letters written with
the queen's own hand; he now sent one of his confidents to
bring to him this precious depofite. But as his messenger
returned, he was intercepted, and the casket seized by Mor-
ton i. The contents of it were always produced by the party
as the most ample justification of their own condu&t; and
to these they continually appealed as the most unanswerable
proof of their not having loaded their sovereign with the im-
putation of imaginary crimes c.

BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordi- Some of

naiy success, were fill far from being perfetly at ease. the nobles
That f' small a part of the nobles should pretend to dispose favour the
of the person of their sovereign, or to aume the authority quen.
which belonged to her, without the concurrence of the reft,
appeared to many of that body to be unprecedented and pre-
sumptuous. Several of these were now alembled at Hamil-
ton, in order to'deliberate what course they hould hold in
this difficult conjun&ure. The confederates made some at-
tempts towards a coalition with them, but without effet.
They employed the mediation of the aflembly of the church,
to draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but
with no better success. That party, however, though its
numbers were formidable, and the power of its leaders great,
soon loft reputation by the want of unanimity and vigour >
all its consultations evaporated in mutmurs and complaints,
and po scheme was concerted for obftruing the progrcfs
of the confederates f.

THERE appeared some profpe of danger fromt another Elibeth
quarter. This great revolution in Scotland had been carried "iltProfe

In her h"
on without any aid from Elizabeth, and even without her jn,.

S z knowledge.

Cald. vol. ii j3. Craf. Mem. 35. Andes. volLp92. Good. vol. ii. 90.
' See Dissertation at the end of the Hifory. ' Keith, 407.

o o K knowledge . Though ihe was far from being displeased a.
v. feeing the affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival,

whom the ihaed, reduced to distress; he neither wished that
rS67. it hould be in the power of the one faction entirely to sup-

press the ether, nor could he view the fReps taken by the
confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding the
popular maxims by which he governed her own fubjecs,
her notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority
of their sovereign, which they had no right to control, and
had offered violence to her person, which it was their duty
to eteem sacred. They had set a dangerous example to
other fubjeds, and Mary's cause became the common cause
of princes b. If ever Elizabeth was influenced with re-
gard to the affairs of Scotland by the feelings of her heart,
rather than by considerations of intcreft, it was on this oc-
cafion. Mary, in her present condition, degraded from her
throne, and covered v.ith the infamy attending an accufa-
tion of such atrocious crimes, could be no longer the object
of Elizabeth's jealorfv, either as a woman or as a queen.
Sympathy with a fovergeign in diitrefs seems, for a moment,
to have touched a heart not very susceptible of tender senti-
ments; and, while these were vet warm, he dispatched
june 3. Throgmorton into Scotland, with power to negotiate both

with the queen and with the confederates. In his inftruc-
tions there appears a remarkable solicitude for Mary's liberty,
and even for her reputation; and the terms upon which she
proposed to re-establish concord between the queei and her
fubjecs, appear to be so reasonable and well digested, as
might have ensured the fafetv and happiness of both. Zeal-
ous as Throgmorton was to accomplifl this, all his err-
deavours and ddrefs proved ineffectual. He found not
only the confederate nobles, but the nation in general, so
far alienated from the queen, and so much offended with the
indecent precipitancy of her marriage with the reputed mur-
derer of her former husband, as to be incapable of liflening
to any proposition in her favour.

DURING the state of anarchy occasioned by the imprison-

ment of the queen, and the dissolution of the established
government, which afforded such ample scope for political
speculation, four different fchemes.had been proposed for
the settlement of the nation. One, that Mary flould be re-
placed upon the throne, but under various and ftrit limita-
tions. The second that he hould resign the crown to

her
I Kcith, 415. W Id. 42,415

her son, and retiring out of the kingdom, hould reside, BOO K
during the remainder of her days, either in England or in v.
France. The third, that Mary hould be brought to public r
trial for her crimes, and after conviction, of which no doubt 1567.
was entertained, hould be kept in perpetual imprisonment.
The fourth, that after trial and condemnation, capital
punishment hould be ifli&ed upon her. 'Throgmorton,
though disposed as well by his own inclination as in con-
formity to the'fpirit of his inltrudions, to view matters in
the light most favourable to Mary, informed his court, that \
the milder schemes, recommended by Maitland alone, would
undoubtedly be reprobated, and on? of the more rigorous
carried into execution.

IN justification of this rigour, the confederates maintained

that Mary's affetion for Bothwell was till unabated, and
openly avowed by her; that flhe rejelcd with disdain every
proposal for dissolving their marriage ; and declared, that he
would forego every comfort, and endure any extremity, ra-
ther than give her consent to that measure. While these
were her sentiments, they contended, that concern for the
public welfare, as well as attention to their owi safety, ren-
dered it necessary to put it out of the queen's power to restore
a daring man, exasperated by recent injuries, to his former
station, which must needs prove fatal to both. Notwith-
standing their solicitude to conciliate the good-will of E!iza,
beth, they foresaw clearly what. would be the effct, at this
iuncture, of Throgmorton's'interpofitionl in behalf of the
queen, and that he, elated with the profpet of protection,
would refuse to liften to the overtures which they were about
to make to her. For this reason they peremptorily denied
Throgmorton access to their prifoiter; and what propofi-
tions he made to them in her behalf they either refuted or
eluded '.

MEANWHI.E they deliberated with the utmost anxiety Schemes of

concerning the settlement of the nation, and the future dif- the, confe-
pofal of the queen's person. Eiizabrith, obser-ving that aerate no-
Throgmorton made no progress in his negotiations with
them, and that they would liften to none of his demands in
Mary's favour, turned towards that party of the nobles who
were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to tke arms in
order to restore their queen to libertv, and pronifed to assist
them in such an attempt to the utmost of her powerk.
But they difovered no greater union and vigour than for-
merly, and, behaving lik, men who had given up all concern

either
t Keith, 417. 4.7. See Appendix, No. XXIII.

B o O K either for their queen or their country, tamely allowed an in.

v. considerable part of their body, whether we confider it with

__r2 refpet to numbers or to power, to fettle the government
1567. of the kingdom, and to dispose of the queen's person at

pleasure. Many consultations were held, and various opi-
nions arose with regard to each of these. Somtie seemed
deGrous of adhering to the plan on which the confederacy
was at sirs formed; and after punilhing the murderers of
the king, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after
providing for the safety of the young prince, and the fecu-
rity of the protestant religion ; they proposed to re-establish
the queen in the possession of her legal authority. The sic-
cess with which their arms had been accompanied, inspired
others with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no-
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the condemna-
tien, and punifhmnent of the queen herself, as the principal
conspirator againfi the life of her hufoand and the safety of
her son : the former was Maitland's system, and breathed
too much of a pacific and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to
the temper or wifles of the party. The latter was recom-
mended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by many laics
but the nobles durst not or would not venture on such an
unprecedented and audacious deed '.

They BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so mo-
oblige the derate as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to
queen to be persuaded or forced to resign the crown; the young prince
egoT .e was to be proclaimed king, and the earl of Murray was to
meat. be appointed to govern the kingdom, during his minority,

with the name and authority of regent. With regard to
the queen's own person, nothing was determined. It seems
to have been the intention of the confederates to keep her in
perpetual imprisonment; but in order to intimidate herself,
and to overawe her partisans, they still reserved to them-
selves the power of proceeding to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of

this plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and
accustomed to command. To induce her to acknowledge her
own incapacity for governing, to renounce the dignity and
power which she was born to enjoy, to become dependant
on her own fubjeas, to consent to her own bondage, and to
invest those perfonswhom she confidered as the authors of ill
her calamities with that honour and authority of which fne

herself

X Keith, 420, 421, 421. 58S.
m The intention of putting the queen to death eems to have been carried

on by some of her fubjeis : at this time we often find Elizabeth boalling that
lary owed her lile to her iterpofition. Digger's CompL Amb. 4, &c.
SeC Appnd.No. XVI U.

herfeli was stripped, were points hard to be gained These, o o K
however, the confederates attempted, and they did not want V.
means to insure success. Mary had endured, for several J
weeks, all the hardfifips and terror of a prison ; no profpeft 567.
of liberty appeared; none of her fubiedts had either taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief n ; no person in whom
flhe could confide was admitted into her presence; even the
ambassadors of the French king, and queen of England, were
refused access to her. In this solitary itate, without a
counsellor or a friend, under the pressure ofdiftrefs ant the
apprehension of danger, it was natural for a woman to
hearken almost to any overtures. The confederates took
advantage of her condition and of her fears. They em-
ployed Lord Lindsay, the fiercelt zealot in the party, to
communicate their fchelne to the queen, and to obtain her
subscription to those papers which were necefi:ry for render-
ing it effectual. He executed his comm:iiffion with harshness
and brutality. Certain death was before Mary's eyes if file
refused to comply with his demands. At the fame time fie
was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in the name of Atlol,
Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confederates
who were molt attentive to her interest, that a resignation
extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was
void in law, and might be revoked as oon as he recovered
liberty. Throgmorton, by a note which he found means cf
conveying to her, fuggeted the fame thing °. Deference to
their opinion, as well as concern for her own far-ty, obliged
her to yield to every thing which was required, and to lign
all the papers which Lindfav p-resented to her. By one of
these flie resigned the crown, renounced all lhate in the go-
vernment of the kingdom, and consented to the coronation
of the young king. By another, she appointed the earl of J!y :4.
Murray regent, and conferred upon him all the powers amd
privileges of that high office. By a third, she fubifituted
some other noblemen in Mlurray's place, if he should refuse
the honour which was designed for him. M]iary, when she
subscribed these deeds, was bathed in tears; and while fIe
gave away, as it were with her own hands, the sceptre which
the had swayed so long, flle felt a pang of grief and indigna-
tion, one of the feverelt, perhaps, which can touch the hu-
man heart .

TiE confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all Jan:-. v-.
the weight and validity in their power, by proceeding without crownc,

a and 1Mw-
,delay to crown the yung prince. The ceremony was er- ra h l"ca

formeJ rcgcat.

» K itli, ;.J . . ''.lei;'.. ;".
,,s.

B O O K formed at Stirling, on the twenty-ninth of July, with much

v. foleinnity, in presence of all the nobles of the party, a con-
wvi fiderable number of lesser barons, and a great assembly of the
i567. people. From that time all public writs were issued, and the

government carried on, in the name of James VI q.

No revolution so great was ever effected with more ease,

or by means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and
in less time than two months, a part of the nobles, who nei-
ther possessed the chief power nor the greatest wealth in the
nation, and who never brought three thousand men into the
fielA, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned their queen, and
without shedding a ingle drop of blood, fct her son, an in-
sant of a year old, on the throne.

Reasonings DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes
of both of all the nation were turned on them with astonishment;
partie. and various and contradictory opinions were formed con-

cerning the extraordinary steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of government which

prevails in Scotland, said the favourers of the queen, and not-
withstanding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the
prince possesses considerable power, and his person is treated
with great veneration. No encroachments hould be made
on the former, and no injury offered to the latter, but in
cafes where the liberty and happiness of the nation cannot be
secured by any other means. Such cafes seldom exist, and
it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at least to a
majority of the society, to judge of their existence. By what
action could it be pretended that Mary had invaded the rights
or property of her fubjets, or what scheme had she formed
against the liberty and constitution of the kingdom ? Were
fears, and suspicions, and surmises, enough tojuftify the im-
prisoning and the deposing a queen, to whom the crown de-
scended from so long a race of monarchs ? The principal
author of whatever was reckoned culpable in her conduct,
was now driven from her presence. The murderers of the
king might have been brought to condign punishment, the
safety of the prince have been secured, and the protestant
religion have been established, without wresting the sceptre
out of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual imprison-
ment. Whatever right a free parliament might have had to
proceed to such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its
determinations might have merited, a sentence of this na-
ture, passed by a small part of the nobility, without acknow-
ledging or consulting the ret of the nation, must be deemed

a rebel-
i Ksith, 437.

a rebellion against the government, and a conspiracy against B o o K
the pcrfon of their sovereign. v

THE partisans of the confederates reasoned very differently. _

It is evident, said they, that Mary either previoully gave con- 567 -
sent to the king's murder, or did afterwards approve of that
horrid a&ion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers and
honours with which flhe loaded him, the manner in which
she fuffcred his trial to be carried on, and the indecent speed
with which she married a man Itained with so many crimes,
raise ltrong suspicions of the former, and put the latter be-
yond all doubt. To have lufi!red te uprelme power to con-
tinue in the hanls of an abitious manl, capable of the most
atrocious and df[peratc actiois, would have been disgraceful
to the nation, diihonourable to t!e queen, and dangerous to
the prince; Recourie was therefore had to arms. The
queen had been compelled to abandon a huiband so un-
worthy of herself. Ilut her asitc'ion toward him Iill con-
tinuing unabated; her indignation against the authors of this
reparation being ifible, and often exprefl-d in the ftrongelt
terms ; they, by restoring her to her ancient authority, would
have armed her with power to dc.roy themselves, have en-
abled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded her an oppor-
tunity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation with greater
cagernefs, and with more success. Nothing therefore re-
mained, but byone bold aCtion to deliver themselves and their
country from all future fears. The expedient they had
chosen was no less rcfpectful to the royal blood, than ne-
ceflary for the public safety. While one prince was sei afiGd
as incapable of governing, the crown was placed on his head
who was the undoubted representative of their ancient kings.

WHATErVER opinion poiterity lay form on comparing the

arguments of the two contending parties; whatever senti-
ments we may entertain concerning the jutice or necellity
of that course whlich the confederates held, it cannot be de-
nied that their conduct, so far as regarded themselves, was
extremely prudent. Other expedients, lcTs rigorous towards
Mary, might have been found for fettling the nation; but,
after the injuries which they had already oflered the queen,
there was none so effctual for securing their own safety or
perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation the conduct of the confede-

rates appearedl not only wife, but ju. The king'-s acceflion
to the throne was every where proclaimed, and his authority
submitted t without oppolition. Though several of the
nobles were still alTenblied at H;lmiltonl, and ieemed to be
entering into sonic combination aainft his government, an

affociatioa
\

to t aflociation for supporting it was formed, and signed by T

v. many persons of power and influence throughout the nation,

- as entirely discouraged the attempt .

Xs67^- TEa return of the earl of Murray about this time added
., tc ftreggth to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form.

,r Soo after the murder of the king, this nobleman had retired
moat into France, upon what pretence historians do not mention.

During his residence there, he had held a close correspond.
cncc with the chiefs of the confederacy, and at their desire
he now returned. He seemed at first unwilling to accept the
office of regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence or of duty. Murray wanted
neither the abilities nor the ambition which entitled him to
aspire to this high dignity. He had received the first ac-
counts of his promotion with the utmost fatisfafion; but by
appearing to continue for some days in suspense, he gained
time to view with attention the ground on which he was to
A: to balance the strength and resources of the two contend.
ing factions, and to examine whe-her the foundation on which
his future fame and success must reft were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution he waited on Marq

at Lochlevin. This visit to a sifter, and a queen, in a prison,
from which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor
to mitigate the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned
among the circumstances which discover the great want of
delicacy and refinement in that age. Murray, who was na-
turally rough and uncourtly in his manner 5, expoftulatcd so
warmly with the queen concerning her past conduct, and
charged her faults so home upon her, that Mary, who had
fattered herself with more gentle and brotherly treatment
fron him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely
to depair '. This interview, from which Murray could reap
no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so
severe and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bit-
ter circumstances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the
most unjustifiable steps in his conduEt.
Asi ft 1-- SooN after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted

the office of regent, and began to a in that character with
oat opposition.

-ate o AMIDST so many great and unexpeaed events, the fate of
i.th,,well. Bothell, the chief cause of them all, bath been almost for-

gotten. After his flight from the confederates, he lurked sot
some time among his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dun-
bar. But finding it iupoflible for him to make head in that

country
' Aadrf. voi. ii. 231. Keith, 96. Ibid. 445, 446.

country againit his enctnies, or even to secure himself fronm B o 0
their pursuit, he fled for fielter to his kinsman the bishop of v.
Murray; and when he, overawed by the confederates, was
obliged to abandon him, he retired to the Orkney Isles. 16
Hunted from place to place, defcrted by his friends, and ac-
companied by a few retainers as desperate as himself, he sus-
fcred at once the miseries of infamy and of want. His indi-
gence forced him upon a course which added to his infamy.
He armed a few small ships, which had accompanied him
from Dunbar, and attacking every vessel which fell in his
way, endeavoured to procursrfubfiitence for himself and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tullibardiu
were sent out againit him by the confederates; and surprising
him while he rode at anchor, scattered his fall fleet, took
a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a ingle hiptowards
Norway. On that coalt, he fell in with a vefiel richly laden,
and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with
armed boats to its aiftance, and after a desperate fight,
Bothwell and all his cew were taken prisoners. His name
and quality were both unknown, and he was treated at first
with all the indignity and rigour which the odious crime of
piracy merited. His real charater was loon discovered, and
though it saved him from the infamous death to which hi
aflociates were condemned, it could neither procure him
liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his imprisonment. He
languified ten years in this unhappy condition; melancholy
and despair deprived him of reason, and at lait he ended hit
days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unaflilted by ftran-
gers u. Few men ever accompliflied their ariiitious projec't
by worse means, or reaped from them less fatisfation. The
early part of his life was refllefs and enterprising, full of
danger and of vicilfitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur,
to which hc.attained by so many crimes, was extremely hort;
imbittered by much aniety, and diiquieted by many feara.
In his latter years he ffiered the most intolerable cala-
mities to which the wretched are fubjedt, and from which
persons who have moved in so high a sphere are commonly
exempted.

THE good etTec't of Murray's accession to the regency Csuio

were quickly felt. The party forming for the queen was the ti
weak, irresolute, and diftinited ; and no sooner was the goa io.
vernment of the kingdom n n the hands of a man so remark-
able both for his abilities and popularitv, than the nobles,
of whom it was compoled, loft all hopes of gaining ground,
and began to treat fep.ar.atly with the regent. So many of

" Melt ió.

B o K them were brought to acknowledge the king's authority, that

v. scarce any appearance of opposition to the citablifhed govern-

ment was left in tht, kingdom. Had they adhered to the
is6I. queen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth's

disposition at that time, tat he would have afforded them
such affillance as might have enabled them to face their ene-
mies in the field. But there appearect so little vigour or
harmony in their councils, that he was discouraged from
cfpoufing their cause; and the regent, taking avantage of
their situation, obliged them to submit to his government,
without granting any terms, either to themselves or to the
queen .

THE rezent was no less successful in his attempt to get

into his hands the places of frength in the kingdom. Bal-
four, the deputy governor, surrendered the cafile of Edin-
burgh; and as die reward of his treachery, in deserting
Bothwell his patron, obtained terms of great advantage to
himself. The governor of Dunber, who discovered greater
fdelity, was oon forced to capitulate: some other small
forts surrendered without resistance.

A arua- THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the re-
ownt, gent to call a meeting of parliament. Nothing was wanting

e.. to confirm the king's authority, and the proceedings of the

confederates, except the approbation of this supreme court;
and after the success which had attended all their measures,
there could be little doubt of obtaining it. The numbers
that resorted to an assembly which was called to deliberate
on matters of so much importance, were great. The meet-
ing was opened with the utmnit folemniy, and all its ats
patTed with much unanimity. Many, however, of the lords
who had discovercd the warmeil attachment to the queen
were present. But they had nradc their peace with the re-
gent. Argyll, Huntiv, and Hlerries acknowledged openly
i-l parliament, that their behaviuir towards the king had
been undutiful and criminal . Their compliance, in this
manner, with the measures cf the regent's party, was either
,he condition on which thev were admitted into favour, or
intended as a proof of the incrity of their reconcilement.

Coni.n- T HE parliament granted every thing the confederates could
thy pro- demand, either for the fafetv of their own persons or the fe-
zczdecg~ of curitv of that form of government which they had established
the confe-
iw.'ts. in te kingdom. Marys resignation of the crown was ac-

cepted, and declared to be valid. The king's authority and
Murray's election were recogniled and confirmed. The im-

prisoning

· Keith, 44-. 4.s: 463.
7 A.nders . vo. iv. 153. See Appendix, No. XXIV.

prisoning the queen, and all the other proceedings of the B o o K
confederates, were pronounced lawful. The letters which v.
Mary had written to Bothwell were produced, and he WvaG J
declared to be acceflary to the murder of the king t-. At. 1567.
the fame time all the ads of parliament of the year one thou-
sand five hundered and sixty, in favour of the protestant re-
ligion, were publicly ratified; new statutes to the fame pur-
pose were enaced; and nothing that could contribute to
root out the remains of popery, or to encourage the growth
of the reformation, was neglected.

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsimonious

spirit prevailed in this parliament, as in that of the year one
thousand five hundred and sixty. The protestant clergy,
notwithflanding many discouragements, and their extreme
poverty, had for seven years performed all religious offices
in the kingdom. The expedients fallen upon for their sub-
fiftence had hitherto proved ineffectual, or were intended to
be so. But notwithstanding their known indigence, and the
warm remonstrances of the assembly of the church which
met this year, the parliament did nothing more for their
relief, than prescribe some new regulations concerning the
payment of the thirds of benefices, which did not produce
aily considerable change in the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the dissolution of parliament, four of I6iS.

Bothwell's dependants were convicted of being guilty of the january 3-
king's murder, alid fuleired death as traitors. Their con-
feilions brought to light many circunlmtances relative to the
manner of committing that barbarous crime but they were
persons of low rank, and eem not to have been admitted
intb the secrets of the conspiracy .

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal submission to the re-

gent's authority, there itill abounded in the kingdom many
secret murmurs and cabals. The partisans of the house of
Hamilton reckoned Murray's promotion an injury to the
duke of Chatelherault, who, as fira prince of the blood,
had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to be regent. The
length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began, to move many
to commiserate her cafe. All who leaned to the ancieni
opinions in religion dreaded the effedts of Murray's zeal.
And he, though his abilities were great, did not poilfes the
talents requisite for soothing the rage or removing the jea-
loufies of the different fations. By insinuation or address he
might have gained or softened many who had opposed him;
but he was a stranger to these gentie arts. iii virtues were

severe;
' Ood vol. ii 66.. Anderr vo L. Lo6. * Andert vol. i 165.

a o o r feyere; and his deportment towards his equals, especially

v. after his elevation to the regency, distant, and haughty.

_vS_ This behaviour 9ffended some of the nobles and alarmed
if ters. The queen's faftion, which had been so easily dif-

perfed, began again to gather and to unite, and was secretly
favoured by some who had hitherto zealously concurred with
the confederates b.

Wary SUCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards
"P-s the queen, when he recovered her liberty, in a manner no
*oM *l"vin. _less surprising to her friends, than unexpected by her ene-

mies. Several attempts had been made to procure her an
opportunity of escaping, which some unforeseen accident, or
the vigilance'of her keepers, had hitherto disappointed. At
last Mary employed all her art to gain George Douglas, her
keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen. As her manners were
naturally affable and insinuating, he treated him with the
most flattering diftincion; he even allowed him to entertain
the mot ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expressions,
as if he would chufe him for her husband c. At his age,
and in such circumstances, it was impossible to resist fueh a
temptation. He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On
Sunday the second of May, while his brother fat at supper,
and the reft of the family were retired to their devotions,
ewe of his accomplices found means to steal the keys out of
his brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the queen
and one of her maids, locked them behind her, and then
threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipitation
to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching
the (fore was received with the utmost joy, by Douglas,
lord Seaton, and fir James Hamilton, who, with a few at-
tendants, waited for her. She instantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie, lord Seaton's feat
in Weft Lothian. She arrived there that night, without be-
ing pursued or interrupted. After halting three hours he
set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the fame pace, ihe
reached it next morning.

Arres at ON te first news of Mary's escape her friends, whono, in
Hamilton, their present disposition, a much finaller accident would have
and raites a rcoued, ran to arms. In a few days her court Was filled
,y. with a great and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by

such numbers of followers, as formed an army above fix
thousand strong. In their presence he declared that the
resignation of the crown, and the other deeds which he had
signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her by

fear,
b MCll. 179. Kti:h, 469. 481. Note.

fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and on B o o K
that, as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles v.
and chief men of her party pronounced all these tranfaiions v,J
void and illegal. At the fame time an association was is5R.
formed for the defence of her person and authority, and sub- May 8-
fcribed by nine earls, nine bishops, eighteen lords, and many
gentlemen of distinCtion . Among them we find fveral
who had been present in the last parliament, and who had
signed the counter-affociation in defence of the king's go-
vernment; but such sudden changes were then so common,
as to be no matter of reproach.

AT the time when the queen made her escape the regent Conflerna-
was at Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An event f tion of t

regent's

contrary to their expectations, and so fatal to their schemes, adherents.
gave a great flock to his adherents. Many of them appear-
ed wavering and irrefolutc; others began to carry on private
negotiations with the queen; and some openly revolted to
her fide. In so difficult a juncture, where his own fame,
and the being of the party, depended on his choice, the re-
gent's most faithful afrociates were divided in opinion. Some
advised him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The
queen's army was already firong, and only eight miles dif-
tant; the adjacent country was full of the friends and 4e-
pendents of the house of Hamilton, and other lords of the
queen's fation ; Glasgow was a large and unfortified town;
his own train eonfited of no greater number than was usual
in times of peace; all these reasons pleaded for a retreat,
But, on the other hand, arguments were urged of no incon-
fiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well as-
fecEed to the cause; the vasals of Glencairn, Lellox, and
Semple, lay near at hand, and were both numerous and full
of zeal; succours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, success depends upon reputa-
tion, as much as upon numbers ; reputation is gained or loft
by the first ftep one takes ; in his circumstances, a retreat
would be attended with all the ignominy of a flight, and
would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies
with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, the Hisprad
fuperiQrity of Mutrray's genius appeared, and enabled him ent co-
both to chufe with wifdoni and to ad with vigour. He de- dun-
dared against retreating, and fixed his head-quarters at Glaf-
gow. And while he amused the queen for. some days, by
pretending to hearken to some overtures, which she made
for accommodating their differences, he was employed with

the
dKeiti, 475,

o o K the utmost industry, in drawing together his adherents from
v. different parts of the kingdom. He was soon in a condition
Xv-J to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy in

568 number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops and

the experience of his officers, that he broke off the negotia-
tion, and determined to hazard a battle .
ILIy 13. AT the fame time, the queen's generals had commanded

her army to move. Their intention was, to conduc her to
Dunbarton-caftle, a place of great strength, which the regent
had not been able to wrest out of the hands of lord Fleming
the governor but if the enemy hould endeavour to inter.
rupt their march, they resolved not to decline an engagement.
In Mary's situation, no resolution could be more imprudent.
Apart only of her forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie,
and the northern clans, were soon expected her sufferings
had removed or diminiflhed the prejudices of many among
her subjects; the address with which he surmounted the
dangers that obflrutCed her escape, dazzled and interested
the people; the sudden confluence of so many nobles added
lustre to her cause ; she might assuredly depend on the
friendship and countenance of France; she had reason to
exped the protection of England; her enemies could not
possibly look for support from that quarter. She had much
to'hope from pursuing flow and cautious measures; they
had every thing to fear.

BuT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her

passions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition
from the depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance
ofprofperity, that ihe never doubted of success. Her army,
which was almost double to the enemy in number, confited
chiefly of the Hamiltons and their dependants. Of these the
archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief direcion, and
hoped, by a victory, not only to crush Murray, the ancient
enemy of his house, but to get the person of the queen into
his hands, and to oblige her either to marry one of the duke's
sons, or at least to commit the chief direetion of her affairs
to himself. His ambition proved fatal to the queen, to him-
self, and to his family f.

Batte of MARY'S imprudence in resolving to fight, was not greater
Lanid'" than the ill conduct of her generals in the battle. Between

the two armies, and on the road towards Dunbarton, there
was an eminence called Langfide Hill. This the regent had
the precaution to seize, and potted his troops in a small vil-

lage,
Bicha. 369. Anders. ol. iv. 32. Melvcvr.

lage, and among some gardens and inclofures adjacent. In B o O K
this advantageous situation he waited the approach of the v.
enemy, whose superiority in cavalry could be of no benefit J
to them on such broken ground. The Hamiltons, who corn- s68.
posed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that they
put themfclves out of breath, and left the main battle far
behind. T'he encounter of the fpearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed,
on the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of muf-
queteers, attacked on the other by the regent's most choice
troops, and not supported by the reft of the queen's army,
they were soon obliged to give ground, and the rout imme- The
diately became universal. Few vicories, in a civil war, and queen's
among a fierce people, have been pursued with less violence, anmy
or attended with less bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the defeated
field: in the flight almost none were killed. The regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching the soldiers
to spare their countrymen. The number of prisoners was
great, and among them many persons of distinction. The
regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks
to God for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless
ritory g.

DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no

great distance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with Her flight
such emotions of mind as are not easily described. When
flie saw the army, which was her last hope, thrown into ir-
retrievable confusion, her spirit, which all.her past misfor-
tunes had not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogetler.
In the utmost consternation, he began her flight, and so
lively were her impreflions of fear, that he never closed her
eyes till he reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway,
full sixty Scottish miles from the place of battle h.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less ra-

pid than singular. In the short space of eleven days, he had
been a prisoner at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies;
she had seen a powerful army under her command, and a
numerous train of nobles at her devotion; and now she was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and to lurk,
with a few attendants, in a corner of her kingdom. Not
thinking herself safe, even in that retreat, her fears im-
pelled her to an ation, the most unadvised, as well as the
most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retiring
into England, a ftep which, on many accounts, ought to
have appeared to her rafli and dangerous.

VOL. I. T BEFORR

Kith, 477. > Id. 4r.

B O O K BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual distrust and

v. jealousies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their
w^vs^ subsequent tranfadions had contributed to exasperate and in-
x Z8. flame these passions. She had endeavoured, by secret nego-

Refokleson tiations and intrigues, to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's
retiring
into Eng- government, and to advance her own pretensions to the
lnd. English crown. Elizabeth, who possessed great power, and

ated with less reserve, had openly supported Mary's rebel-
lious fubjeas, and fomented all the diffcnfions and troubles
in which her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-
licy still authorised that queen to pursue the fame course; as
by keeping Scotland in confusion fne effedually secured the
peace of her own kingdom. The regent, after his vicory,
had marched to Edinburgh, and not knowing what courie
the queen had taken, it was several days before he thought
of pursuing her i. She might have been concealed in that
retired corner, among subjects devoted to her interest, until
her party, which was dispersed rather than broken by the
late defeat, fnould gather such strength that she could again
appear with safety at their head. There was not any danger
which he ought not to have run, rather than throw herself
into the hands of an enemy, from whom he had already
suffered so many injuries, and who was prompted, both by
inclination and by interest, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement,

Elizabeth had declared againlt the proceedings of her sub-
jects, and solicited for her liberty with a warmth which had
all the appearance of finceritv. She had invited her to take
refuge in England, and had promised to meet her in person,
and to give her such a reception as was due to a queen and
an ally k. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might entertain
of AMary's designs while he had power in her hands, flhe
was at present the object, not of fear, but of pity; and to
take advantage of her situation, would be both ungenerous
and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's
memory, and if she hould fall a second time into the hands
of her fubjetds, there was no injury to which the prefump-
tion of fucccfs might not embolden them to proceed. To
attempt escaping into France was dangerous, and in her
situation a!moft impoflible; nor could flie bear the thoughts
of appearing as an exile and a fugitive in that kingdom
where she had once enjoyed all the splendour of a queen.
England remained her only asylum; and in spite of the en-
treaties of lord Herries, Fleming, and her other attendants,

who

i Crawf. em. .

5
k Canb. 48). adenrf. vol. iv. 99. 120. Murdin, 369.

who conjured her, even on their knees, not to confide in B o o K
Elizabeth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was in- v.
vincible, and he resolved to fly thither. Herries, by her kv
command, wrote to Lowther, the deputy governor of Car- x568.
lisle, to know what reception he would give her; and before Her recep-

tion at Car-

his aniwer could return, her fear and impatience were so lieonac
great, that he got into a fither-boat, and with about twenty May 6.
attendants landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, and thence
fle was conduced with many marks of refpet to Carlisle .

As soon as Mary arrived in England, he wrote a long Elizabeth

deliberates

letter to the queen, representing, in the strongest terms, the concerning
injuries which he had suffered from her own fubjeas, and the manner
imploring that pity and assistance which her present situation of treating
demanded m. An event so extraordinary, and the condu& her.
which might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at-
tention, and employed the thoughts, of Elizabeth and her
council. If their deliberations had been influenced by con-
fiderations of justice or generosity alone, they would not
have found them long or intricate. A queen, vanquished
by her own fubjeds, and threatened by them with the loss
of her liberty, or of her life, had fled from their vio-
lence, and thrown herself into the arms of her nearest
neighbour and ally, from whom lhe had received repeated
assurances of friendship and protecion. These circum-
stances entitled her to refpet and to companlion, and re-
quired that flie fiould either be restored to her own kingdom,
or at least be left at full liberty to seek aid from any other
quarter. But with Elizabeth and her counsellors the question
was not, what was molt just or generous, but what was
molt beneficial to herself, and to the English nation. Three
different resolutions might have been taken, with regard to
the queen of Scots. To reinstate her in her throne, was
one; to allow her to retire into France, was another; to de-
tain her in England, was a third. Each ofthefe drew con-
sequences after it, of the utmost importance, which were
examined, as appears from papers still extant , with that
minute accuracy which Elizabeth's ministers employed in all
their consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority

in Scotland, they observed, would render her more power-
ful than ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached
to the English interest would quickly feel the utmost weight
of her resentment. As the gratitude of princes is seldom

T 2 fRreg

lKeith, 483. Anders vol. iv. s, " d. 9.
^ Andcrf. vol. iv. 34. 99. Io-

B O0 K strong or lasting, regard to her own interest might soon

v. efface the memory of her obligations to Elizabeth, an
v--J prompt her to renew the alliance of the cottifh nation

368. with France, and revive her own pretensions to the English

crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circunfcribe the
Scottih queen by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and power-
fui. Her return, even without any support from England,
would inspire her friends with new zeal and courage; a
single vidtory might give them the superiority, which they
had loft by a single defeat, and render Mary a more formi-
dable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to return into

France, were no less obvious. The French king could not
refute his assistance towards restoring his sifter and ally to
her throne. Elizabeth would once more fee a foreign army
in the island, overawing the Scots, and ready to enter her
kingdom; and if the commotions in France, on account of
religion, were fettled, the princes of Lorrain might resume
their ambitious projects, and the united forces of France
and Scotland might invade England where it is weakest and
most defenceless.

Resolves to NOTH ING therefore remained but to detain her in England;
detain her and to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine

nglnd. her in a prison.' The former was a dangerous experiment.

Her court would become a place of resort to all the Roman
catholics, to the difaffeted, and to the lovers of innovation.
Though Elizabeth affected to represent Mary's pretensions to
the English crown as altogether extravagant and ill-founded,
she was not ignorant that they did not appear in that light
to the :.tion, and that many thought them preferable even
to her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had gained
her so many abettors, her own periblal influence was much
more to be dreaded ; her beauty, her addrcfs, her sufferings,
by the admiration and pity which they would excite, could
not fail of making many converts to her party °.

IT was indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary

as a prisoner would excite universal indignation against Eliza-
beth, and that by this unexampled severity towards a
queen, who implored, and to whom she had promised her
protection, she would forfeit the praise of justice and hu-
manity, which was hitherto due to her administration.
But the English monarchs were often so solicitous to secure
their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little scrupulous

about
Anders. vo. ir. 56. 60.

about the means which they employed for that purpose. B 0 0 K
Henry IV. had seized the heir of the crown of Scotland, v.
who was forced, by the violence of a storm, to take refuge v J
in one of the ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of ij6.
the rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender age,
or the tears and intreaties of his father, detained him a pri-
soner for many years. This aion, though detested by
posterity, Elizabeth refojved now to imitate. Her virtue
was not more proof than that of Henry had been, against
the temptations of interest; and the possession of a present
advantage was preferred to the profped of future fame.
The fatisfation which fie felt in mortifying a rival, whose
beauty and accomplifhmnents lie envied, had perhaps no less
influence than political considerations, in bringing her to
this resolution. But.at the fame time, in order to screen
herself from the censure which this conduCt merited, and to
make her treatment f the Scottish queen look like the effea
of necessity, rather than of choice, he determined to as-
fume the appearance of concern for her intereit, and of deep
sympathy with her sufferings.

WITH this view she initantly dispatched lord Scroope, May 20.

warden of the weft marches, and fir Francis Knollys, her
vice-chamberlain, to the queen of Scots, with letters full of
expressions of kindness and condolence. But at the fame
time they had private inftrucions to watch all her motions,
and to take care that she hould not escape into her own
kingdom P. On their arrival, Mary demanded a personal Mar de
interview with the queen, that ihe might lay before her the mands ad-

g mittance

injuries which he had suffered, and receive from her those into Eliza-
friendly offices which flhe had been encouraged to expect. beth's pre-
They answered, that it was with reluctance admiflion into fence.
the presence of their bovereign was at present denied her;
that while he lay under the imputation of a crime so horrid
as the murder of her husband, their mistress, to whom he
was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a stain
upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence; but
as soon as she had cleared herself from that aspersion, they
promised her a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid
proportioned to her distress q.

NOTHING could be more artful than this pretence ; and it She offer;
was the occasion of leading the queen of Scots into the tovindicate

her con-

snare in which Elizabeth and her ministers wiihed to en- dua.
tangle her. Mary expressed the utmost furprifc at this un-
expected manner of evading her requeit; but as hle could

not
P Anders. vol. iv. 36. o. 92. Ibid. vol. iv. 8. 55.

B o 0 K not believe so many professions of friendship to be void of

v. sincerity, he frankly offered to submit her cause to the cog-

k-v*-J nizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs
I568. of her own innocence, and of the falsehood of the accufa-

tions brought against her, as hould fully remove the fcru-

Elizabeth pies, and satisfy the delicacy of the English queen. This
takesad- was the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to bring
,s offer the matter. In consequence of this appeal of the Scottiih

queen, he now confidered herself as the umpire between
her and her fubjeds, and foresaw that he would have it
entirely in her own power to protrad the inquiry to any
length, and to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties.
In the mean time {he was furnished with a plausible reason
for keeping her at a distance from court, and for refusing to
contribute towards replacing her on the throne. As Mary's
conduc had been extremely incautious, and the prefump-
tions of her guilt were many and strong, it was not im-
possible her fubjeds might make good their charge against
her; and if this hould be the result of the inquiry, he
would, thenceforth, cease to be the object of regard or
of compassion, and the treating her with coldness and neg-
led would merit little censure. In a matter so dark and
mysterious, there was no probability that Mary could bring
proofs of her innocence, so incontefted, as to render the
conduc of the English queen altogether culpable; and, per-
haps impatience under restraint, suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or the discovery of her artifices, might engage
Mary in such cabals as would justify the using her with
greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early perceived many advantages which would

arise from an inquiry into the condud of the Scottiff queen,
carried on under her direction. There was ome danger,
however, that Mary might discover her secret intentions too
soon, and by receding from the offer which he had made,
endeavour to disappoint them. But even in that event, flhe
determined not to drop the inquiry, and had thought of fe-
veral different expedients for carrying it on. The countess
of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accessary to the murder
of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance which it was
natural for a mother to demand, had implored Elizabeth's
justice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her husband's, to bring the Scottish queen to a trial
for that crime r. The parents of the unhappy prince had a
just right to prefer this accusation; nor could {he, who was

their
Camd. 412. Haynes, 469.

their nearest kinswoman, be condemned for liltenirg to so B o O K
equitable a demand. Besides, as the Scottith nobles openly v.
accused Mary of the fame crime, and pretended to be able
to confirm their charge by sufficient proof, it would be no 1568.
difficult matter to prevail on them to petition the queen
of England to take cognizance of their proceedings against
their sovereign ; and it was the opinion of the English coun-
cil, that it would be reasonable to comply with the request .
At the fame time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of
England over Scotland began to be talked of; and on that
account it was pretended that the decision of the contest
between Mary and her fubjeds belonged of right to Eliza-
beth t. But though Elizabeth revolved all these expedients
in her mind, and kept them in reserve to be made use of as
occasion might require, lie wished that the inquiry into
Mary's conduct should appear to be undertaken purely in
compliance with her own demand, and in order to vindicate
her innocence; and so long as that appearance could be
preserved, none of the other expedients were to be em-'
ployed.

WIWEN Mary consented to submit her cause to Elizabeth,

she was far from fufpeEting that any bad consequences could
follow, or that any dangerous pretensions could be founded
on her offer. She expeded that Elizabeth herself would
receive and examine her defences u; (he meant to conider
her as an equal, for whose fatisf.ction he was willing to
explain any part of her conduct that was liable to censure,
not to acknowledge her as a superior, before whom she was
bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very dif-
ferent sense on MIary's offer. She confidered herself as
chosen to be judge in the controversy between the Scottihl
queen and her fubjeds, and began to a in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commissioners to hear the pieadings
of both parties, and wrote to the regent of Scotland to em-
power proper persons to appear before them, in his name,
and to produce what he could allege in vindication of his
proceedings against his sovereign.

MARY had hitherto relied with unaccountable credulity on Mary

Elizabeth's professions of regard, and expected that so many greatly ot-
kind speeches would at last be accompanied with tome suit- felded at
ale actions. But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She coildut.
plainly perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and sa.w
what a diminution itwould be to her own honour,to appearon
a level with her rebellious fubjeds, and to tland together with

them
Anders. ol. iv. rt 1. 37. ' l id. Andcrf. vol. ir. It.

B O o K them at the bar of a superior and a judge. She retracted

v. the offer which she had made, and which had been perverted
vo. to a purpose so contrary to her intention. She demanded

s568. with more earnestness than e er, to be admitted into Eliza-
June 13. beth's presence; and wrote to her in a itrain very different

from what file had formerly used, and which fully discovers
the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. " In
" my present situation," fays she, " I neither will nor can
" reply to the accusations of my subje&s. I am ready, of
"my own accord, and out of friendship to you, to satisfy
" your scruples, and to vindicate my own condu&. ly
" fubjeas are not my equals; nor will I, by submitting my
"cause to a judicial trial, acknowledge them to be so. I
" fled into your arms, as into those of my nearest relation
" and most perfec friend. I did you honour, as I ima-
" gined, in chufing you, preferably to any other prince,
" to be the restorer of an injured queen. Was it ever
' known that a prince was blamed for hearing in person the
" complaints of those who appealed to his justice against the
" false accusations of their enemies ? You admitted into
" your presence my bastard brother, who had been guilty of
" rebellion; and you deny me that honour ! God forbid
" that I fhouid be the occalion of bringing any stain upon
"' your reputation ! I expected that your manner of treating
" me would have added lustre to it. Suffer me either to
' implore the aid of other princes whose delicacy on this
' head will be less, and their resentment of my wrongs
" greater; or let me receive from your hands that assistance
" which it becomes you, more than any other prince, to
" grant; and by that benefit bind me to yourself in the
" indissoluble ties of gratitude x."

Jne ~a. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but
lizabeth's did not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the
precautions matter before the privy council, and it was there determined,

inl hcr. notwithstanding the intreaties and remonstrances of the

Scottith queen, to go on with the inquiry into her conduct,
and until that were finished, it was agreed that Elizabeth
could not consistently with her own honour, or with the
safety of her government, either give her the assistance
which she demanded, or permit her to retire out es the king-
dom. Left she should have an opportunity of escaping,
while fMe resided so near Scotland, it was thought advisable
to remove her to some place at a greater distance from the
borders y.

WHILE
A Lnderf. rol. iv. pa.t. i. 94. - Id. ibid Io.

WHII.E the Englifl court was occupied in these delibera- B o o C

tions, the regent did not-neglett to improve the vicory at va
Langfide. That event was of the utmost importance tohim. x ,
It not only drove the queen herself out of the kingdom, but xi6s.
left her adherents difpcrfed, and without a leader, at his Proceea.
mercy. He seemed resolved, at first, to proceed against them ings of the

regent

with the utmost rigour. Six persons of some diitindion, againt the
who had been taken prisoners in the battle, were tried and queen'sa&-
condemned to death, as rebels against the king's govern- re
ment. They were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful interceflion of Knox they obtained a pardon. Ha-
milton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the number, who lived
to give both the regent and Knox reason to repent of this
commendable a of lenity z.

SOON after the regent marched with an army, cnfifting

of four thousand horse and one thousand foot, towards the
weft borders. The nobles in this part of the kingdom were
all the queen's adherents ; but as they had not force sufficient
to obftrud his progress, he mull either have obliged them
to submit to the king, or would have laid waste their lands
with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was
to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to soothe
the Scottifli queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her
desire. After keep:ng the field two weeks, the regent, in
compliance to the Englifl ambaflador, difrifled his forces;
and an expedition, which might have proved fatal to his op-
ponents, ended with a few Cads of severity a.

THE resolution of the English privy council, with regard aryvr-

to Mary's person, was soon carried into execution; and, riedto B
without regarding her remonitrances or complaints, he was ton.
eonducted to Bolton, a caitle of lord Scroope's, on the bor- July 3
ders of Yorkffhire b. In this place, her correspondence with
her friends in Scotland became more difficult, and any prof-
ped of making her escape was entirely cut off She now
felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though
treated as yet with the refpeEt due to a queen, her real con-
dition was that of a prisoner.' Mary knew what it was to be
deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worst of all evils.
While the remembrance of her late imprisonment was still
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Eliza-
beth thought it a proper juncure to renew her former pro-Ju kz&

position,

' Cald. vol. ii. 99. I bid.
k Aricrf. vol. iv. 14. S'e Appciulix, No. XXV.

t o o position, that fbe would susser the regent and his adherents

v. to be called into England, and consent to their being heard

· J-v_- ia defence of their own conduct. She declared it to be
aj6. far from her intention to claim any right of judging between

Mary and her fubjets, or of degrading her so far as to re-
quire that he fouid answer to their accusations. On the
colnrary, Murray and his afociates were summoned to ap-
pear, in order to justify their conduc in treating their so-
-ereign so harfllv, and to vindicate themselves from those
ciameie with which lhe had charged them. On her part,
Eiizabeth promised, whatever should be the issue of this in-
quir-, to employ all her power and influence towards re-
placing Miary on her throne, under a few limitations by no

,tZres means unreasonable. Mary, deceived by this seeming at-
-;t an en- tention to her dignity as a queen; soothed, on one hand,
s  by a promise more flattering than any which he had hitherto
ierua- received from Elizabeth, and urged, on the'otler, by the
1i54 feelings which were natural on bcing conducted into a more

interior part of England, and kept there in more rigorous
confinemcnt, conplied at length with what Elizabeth re-
quired, and promised to fend commiflioners to the confer-
ences appointed to be held at York '.

Per CTi- I\ order to persuade Elizabeth that ffiedefired nothing so
sitifo much as to render the union between them as close as possible,
,wd to r- she Ciewed a disposition to relax somewhat in one point;
i on. with regard to which, during all her past and subsequent

mli-fortunes, ihe was uniformly inflexible. She exprciled a
great veneration for the liturgy of the church of England;
the was often present at religious worship, according to the
rites of the reformed church; made choice of a protestant
clergyman to be her chaplain; heard him preach against the
errors of popery with attention and seeming pleasure; and
dificovered a the fyilptoms of an approaching conversion d.
Such was Mary's kno-wn and bigotted attachment to the
ppiti religion, that it is nipoflible to believe her sincere in
thlis part of her conduct ; nor can any thing mark more
strongly the wretchedncfs of her condition, and the excess
of her fears, than that they betrayed her into diflimulation,
in a matter concerning wlich her sentiments were, at all
other imnes, scrupulously delicare.
Aguft iS. AT this time the regent called a parliament, in order to

rlia proceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to acknow-
mzat i

ledge

Ar.ndrf. vol. iv. art i. p. rtI, 12, &c. 19o, &c. Haynes, 468, &c.

State Trials, dit. Hargrave, i. 9.
1 Aa.:ti voL. . pa;t. i. 113. Hayn-es, $59. See Appendix, No. XXVI.

ledge the king's authority. The queen's adherents were B o o
ilarmed, and Argyll and Huntly, whom Mary had appointed v.
her lieutenants, the one in the south, and the other in the _v
north of Scotland, began to assemble forces to obftruC this I56
meeting. Compaflion for the queen, and envy at those who
governed in the king's name, had added so much ftrengthto
the party, that the regent would have found it difficult to
withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause
to Elizabeth, Ihe could not refuse at her desire, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently
until matters were brought to a decision in England. By
procuring this cessation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as sea-
fonable relief to the regent's faEtion as he had formerly given
to the queen's e.

THE regent, however, would not consent, even at Eli-
zabeth's request, to put off the meeting of parliament . But
we may ascribe to her influence, as well as to the eloquence
of Maitland, who laboured to prevent the one half of his
countrymen from exterminating the other, any appearances
of moderation which this parliament discovered in its pro-
ceedings. The most violent opponents of the king's govern-
ment were forfeited ; the reft were allowed still to hope for
favour g.

No sooner did the queen of Scots submit her cause to her Elizabet

rival, than Elizabeth required the regent to fend to York requires
deputies properly infrutqed for vindicating his conduct, in the regent

, - to defend

presence of her commissioners. It was not without hefita- hisco du
tion and anxiety that the regent consented to this measure.
His authority was already established in Scotland, and con-
firmed by parliament. To susser its validity now to be called
in question, and fubjeaed to a foreign jurifdiion, was ex-
tremely mortifying. To accuse his overeign before ftran-
gers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
talk. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to succeed
in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse fc-
tion daily increased. He dreaded the interposition of the
French king in its behalf. In his situation, and in a matter
which Elizabeth had so much at heart, her commands were
neither to be disputed nor disobeyed h.

THE necessity of repairing in perlon to York added to the Both tl!,

ignominy of the ftep which he was obliged to take. All his queen and
associates declined the office; they were unwilling to cxpofe e appoiUnt

commilf.
themselves to the odium and danger with which it was easy ri.,

to

¢ Anders. vol. i. t-j. ¢ See Append. No. XXVII
s Buch. 37I. ' Buch. 37z. See Append. No. XXVI\i.

s o to frcfee that the discharge of it would be attended, nnlefs

v. he hinfelf consented to lhare these in common with them.

_-.--s. The earl of Morton, Bothweil bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn
r:6. commendator of Dunfermling, ard lord Lindsay, were joined
Srpt. i. with him in commiiTion. ilacgill of Rankeilor, and Bal.

naves of Hailhill, two eminent civilians, George Buchanan,
Murray's faithful adherent, a man whose genius did honour
to the age, Maitland, and several others, were appointed to
attend them as afiflants. Maitland owed this distinction
to the regent's fear, rather than to his affection. He had
warmlv rernonftrated againl this measure. He wished his
country to continue in friendship with England, but not to
become dependant on that nation. He was desirous of re-
cftabliilng the queen in ome degree of power, not incon-
fiftent with that which the king possessed; and the regent
could not, with safety, leave behind him a man whose views
were so contrary to his own, and who by his superior abilities,
had acquired an influence in the nation, equal to that
which others derived from the antiquity and power of their
families

MARY empowered Lefly bishop of Ross, lord Livinglton,

lord Boyd, lord Herries, Gavin Hamilton commendator of
Kilwirming, fir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and fir James
Cockburn of Stirling, to appear in her name k.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard duke of Norfolk,

Thomas Ratcliff earl of Suffex, and fir Ralph Sadler, her
commiflioners to hear both parties.

Te co- THE fourth of Ocdober was the day fixed for opening the
ktmc at crnfereice. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides,
r'Vcc the dignity of the judges before whom they were to appear,

the high rank of the persons whose cause was to be heard,
and the importance of the points in dispute, rendered the
whole tranfacion no kss illustrious than it was singular.
The situation in which Elizabeth appeared, on this occasion,
strikes us with an air of magnificence. Her rival, an inde-
pendent queen, and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs,
was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her ambaffa-
dors, before her tribunal. -The r gent of Scotland, who
reprefeuted the majefly, and possessed the authority of a
king, flood in perlon at her bar. And the fate of a king-
dom, whose power her ancestors had often dreaded, but
could n- rer subdue, was now at her disposal.

~V.wn- o THE views, however, with which the several parties con-
the differ- sented
ant partie.

'Buch. 3;7T. Anders. vol.ir. . Mlre.l86.I88.
' A. _ , .. Iv ..

kfeted to this conference, and the issue to which they expeC- B o o K
ed to bring it, were extremely different. v.

MART'S chief objea was the recovering of her former au- \ J
thority. This induced her to consent to a measure againlt 1i68.
which ihe had long struggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her
ground for entertaining hopes of being retored to her king-
dom; in order to which, lhe would have willingly made many
concessions to the king's party and the influence of the Eng-
lifh queen, as well as her own impatience under her present
lituation, might have led her to many more '. The regent
aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's protetion to his
party, and seems not to have had the most distant thoughts
of coming to any composition with Mary. Elizabeth's views
were more various, and her schemes more intricate. She
seered to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and solicitous
that she ihould wipe off the aspersions which blemiflied her
charader. This he pretended to be the intention of the
conference; aufing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of
the French and Spanish ambafladors in her behalf, by repeat-
ed promises of assisting her, as soon as {he hould teuture to
do so without bringing disgrace upon herself. But under this
veil of friendship andgenerofity, Elizabeth concealed senti-
ments of a different nature. She expccted that the regent
would accuse Maryof being acceflary to the murder of er
husband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would peT-
mit, to take this desperate flep rn. And as this accusation
might terminate in two different ways, he had concerted
measures for her future condud suitable to each of there.
If the charge aainft MIary (hould appear to be well-foundled,
she resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wearing a crown,
and to declare that fle would never burden her own con-
cience with the guilt of an ation so detestable as the re-
ltoring her to her kingdom ". If it ihould happen that what
her accusers alledged did not amount to a proof of guilt, but
only of mal-admninilration, (he determined to set on foot a
treaty for restoring her, but on such conditions as would
render her hereafter dependant not only upon England, but
upon her own fubjeds o. As every flep in the progress of
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was in Eli-
zabeth's own power, {he would still be at liberty to chufe
which of there courses he would hold ; or if there appearedto
be anydanger or inconvenience inpurfuing eitherof them, ihe

might,

Anders. vol. ir. part L 33. oo-. voL ii 337.
mAnderf o. vo. ar. patiL Ir. 45. HIaynes, 487.
Andrf. vl. iv. part iL rI. * Aderf. voiiv.-partii. x(.

o o K might protra& the whole cause by endless delays, and involv
v. it in inextricable perplexity.

T THE conference, however, was opened with much folem

x568. nity. But the very first ftep discovered it to be Elizabeth'
f the intention to enflame, rather than to extinguish, the dissension
queen's and animofities among the Scots. No endeavours were use

ommi to reconcile the contending parties, or to mollify the fierce

rgaolt the ness of their hatred, by bringing the queen to offer pardoi
rgeat. for what was past, or her subje&s to promise more dutifu
Caober 8. obedience for the future. On the contrary, Mary's commit

fioners were permitted to prefer a complaint against the re
gent and his party, containing an enumeration of their trea
fonable actions, of their seizing her person by force of arms
committing her to prison, compelling her to resign the
crown, and making use of her son's name to colour their
usurpation of the whole royal authority; and of all these enor-
mities they required such speedy and effectual redress, as the
injuries of one queen demanded from the juitice of another.

IT was then expeted that the regent would have disclosed

all the circumitances of that unnatural crime to which he
pretended the queen had been accessary, and would have
produced evidence in support of his charge. But, far from
accusing Mary, the regent did not even answer the complaints
brought against himself. He discovered a relucance at un-
dertaking that office, and started many doubts and scruples,
with regard to which he demanded to be resolved by Eliza-
beth herself q. His reserve and hesitation were no less fur-
prifing to the greater part of the English commissioners than
to his own associates. They knew that he could not vindi-
cate his own conduc without charging the murder upon the
queen, and he had not hitherto shewn any extraordinary de-
licacy on that head. An intrigue, however, had been fe-
cretly carried on, since his arrival at York, which explains
this mvitery.

intri;esof THE duke of Norfolk was at that time the most powerful
Norfolk and moit popular man in England. His wife was lately dead
ith the and he began already to form a project, which he afterwards
'eO:n:. more openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland,

by a m; riage with the queen of Scots. He saw the infamy
which would be the consequence of a public accusation
againfi Mary, and how prejudicial it might he to her pre-
tensions to the English succession. In order to ave her from
this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland, and exprefled
his aftoniflment at feeing a man of so much reputation for

wifdor
-' Aderf.vol. . part ii. 5a. Haynes, 478.

¥1-ifdom concurring with the regent in a meafare so dif- nO o
honourable to themselves, to their queen, and to their coun- v.
try; submitting the public tranfattioits of the nation to the
judgment of foreigners; and publiflling the ignominy, and sijL-
exposing the faults of their sovereign, which they were boond
in good policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the fame
with the duke's, to vindicate his own condut. He affared
him, that he had employed all hi3 credit to dissuade his coun-
trymen from this measure; and would ill contribute, to
the utmost of his power, to divert them from it. This en-
couraged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the regent.
He repeated and enforced the fame arguments which he had
used with Maitland. He warned hni of the danger to which
le must expose himself by such a violent ation as the pub-
lic accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a
man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on
her charater. If the ever recovered any degree of power,
his deftrution would be inevitable, and he would jufly
merit it at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him
from this, by a public approbation of his conduct. For what-
ever evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce, she was
resolved to give no definitive sentence in the cause. Let
him only demand that the matter hould be brought to a
decision immediately after hearing the proof, and he would
be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be fr
him to appear as the accuser of his own fovereig: r. 'Tie
candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in these remon-
ftrances, as well as the truth which they contained, made a
deep impression on the regent. He daily received the
stronget assurances of Mary's willingness to be reconciled to
him, if he abstained from accusing her of such an odious
crime, together with the denunciations of her irreconcileable
hatred, if he aded a contrary part s. All these considerations
concurred in determining him to alter his purpose, and to
make trial of the expedient which the duke had suggested.

HE demanded therefore to be informed, before he pro- Otobr ?.

ceeded farther, whether the English commissioners were em-
powered to declare the queen guilty by a judicial at; whe-
ther they would promise to pass sentence without delay;
whether, the queen fliould be kept under such restraint as to
prevent her from disturbing the government now established
in Scotland ; and whether Elizabeth, if fle approved of the

proceedings

' Melr. 87. Haynes, 57.
' Anrlerf. vol. iv. part ii. 7. Good. vol i. i57. See Append. No. XXIX.

· o o K proceedings of the king's party, would engage to protet it

v. for ihe future '. The paper containing there demands wad

fvigned by himself alone, without communicating it to any of
i68. his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil ". B1ht left f,

many precautions fliould excite any suspicion of their pro-
ceeding, from some consciousness of defed in the evidence
which he had to produce againf his sovereign, Murray em-
powered Lethington, Macgill, and Buchanan, to wait upon
the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Suflex, and Sir Ralph Sad-
ler, and to lay before them, not in their public charaders as
conmiffioners, but as private persons, Nary's letters to
Bothwell, her sonnets, and all the other papers upon. which
were founded the charge of her being accellary to the mur-
der of the king, and to declare that this confidential commu-
nication was made to them, with a view to learn lwhether
the queen of England would confider this evidence as fuffi-
cient to eftabliih the truth of the accusation. Nothing could
be more natural than the regent's solicitude, to know on what
footing he tlood. To have ventured on a tfep so uncommon
and dangerous, as the accusing his sovereign, without pre-
:ioufly ascertaining that he might take it with safety, would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who
did not expect that he would have moved any such difficulty,
had not empowered her commifioners to give him that satis-
cicn which he demanded. It became necessary to tranf-
mit the articles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he wiflied that they ifouldl
make no flight impression on Elizabeth and her minifteri.
" Think not the Scots," said he, " over-fcrupulous or pre-
" cife. Let us view their conduc as we would wish our
" own to be viewed in a like situation. The game they play
,' is deep; their eflates, their lives, their honour are at itake.
" It is now in their own power to be reconciled to their
' queen, or to offend her irrecoverably; and in a matter of
" so much importance the utmo.t degree of caution is not
" excessive x.'

WHI.E the English commiffloners waited for fuller in-

ftruftions with regard to the regent's demands, he gave in an
;nfwer to the complaint which had been offered in name of
the'Scottifh queen. It was exprefled in terms perfetly con-
formable to the system wlich he had at that time adopted.
It contained no insinuation of the queen's being accessary to
the murder of her husband ; the bitterness of style peculiar
o the age was considerably abated; and though he pleaded,

that

' Ander.. rvo. iv. part ii. <S. State Trials, i. 9g, &c.
* Anders. o!. iv. part ii. j6. Mclv. 90o. ' Ander vol. iv. 77.

that the infamy of the marriage with Bothwell made it ne- B O O K
cellary to take arms in order to (difolve it; though Mary's v.
attachment to a man so odious juRified the keeping her for ' J
fomc time under restraint; yet nothing more was iaid on i568.
these fiijeds than was barely requisite in his own defence.
The queen's commissioners did not fail to reply Y. But while oaober,,7
the article with regard to the murder remained untouched,
these were only lkirmifhes at a distance, of no consequence
towards ending the contest, and were little regarded by Eli-
zabeth or her commissioners.

T'IHE conf.rence, had hitherto, been conduaed in a man- The con-

ner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced ference re-
none of those difeoverics which she had expected. The dif- moved to
tance between York and London, and the ncceflity of con- te,.
fulting ler upon every difficulty which occurred, consumed
much time. Norfolk's negotiation with the Scottilh regent,
however fccretly carried on, was not, in all probability, un-
known to a princess so remarkable for her sagacity in pene-
trating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
deepest schemes . Instead, therefore, of returning any
anfwver to the regent's demands, fle resolved to remove the
conference to Westminster, and to appoint new commifion-
ers, in whom she could more absolutely confide. Both the
queen of Scots and the regent were brought without difficulty
to approve of this resolution a.

We often find Mary boasting of the superiority in argu-

ment obtained by her co;nmmiffioners during the conference
at York, and how, by the strength of their reasons, they con-
founded her adversaries, and silenced all their cavils . The
dispute flood, at that time, on a footing, which rendered
her victory not only apparent, but easy. Her participation
of the guilt of the king's murder was 'tle circumltancc upon
which her fubjeds ought to have refted, as a justification of
their violent proceedings againlt her; and while they in-
duftrioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as
much as that of her advcrfaries loft by fuppreitfig this capital
argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enioy the fame

advantage in the conference to b held at Wefimilinfter. She
deliberated with the itinoft anxiety, how she might over-
come the regent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the
queen. She cofiidered of the most proper method for bring-
ing Mary's commissioners to answer such an accusation; and

VOL. I. U as

A Anders. vol. i. part ii. 64. 8o. Good. voL ii. I6o. Anders vol. ol. 24.
I' ayrne, 484. AndcrJ vl i. . 94 Good. vol. i. i86. 284. 3,

B o o t as he foresaw that the promises with which it was necessary

v. to allure the regent, and which it was impossible to conceal
_v...J from the Scottish queen, would naturally exasperate her to a
xj6S. great degree, he determined to guard her more narrowly

than ever; and though lord Scroop had given her no reafolr
to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he was the
duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, fie thought it proper to
remove the queen as soon as poflible to Tuthbury in StafFord-
shire, and commit her to the keeping of the earl of Shrews-
bury, to whom that castle belonged C.

lary's MARY began to fufpet the design of this second confer-
fufpicons ence; and notwithitanding the fatisfadion he expressed at
of Eliza-
beth's in- feeing her cause taken more immediately under the queen's
tentions. own eye d, he framed her inftrudions to her commissioners
Oaober I. in such a manner, as to avoid being brought under the ne-

ceffity of answering the accusation of her subje&s, if they
flould be so desperate as to exhibit one against her t. These
suspicions were soon confirmed by a circumfsance extremely
mortifying. The regent having arrived at London, in order
to be present at the conference, was immediately admitted
into Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only with
respect, but with affetion. This Maryjuftly confidered as
an open declaration of that queen's partiality towards her

Nov. 22. adversaries. In the first emotions of her resentment he
Claims a wrote to her commissioners, and commandedthem to com-
penale of plain, in the presence of the English nobles and before the
Elizabeth. ambassadors of foreign princes, of the usage he had hitherto

met with, and the additional injuries which he had reason
to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjecs were allowed access
to the queen, she was excluded from her pretence; they en-
joyed full liberty, fle languished under a long imprisonment;
they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself he
laboured under every disadvantage. For these reasons he
once more renewed her demand of being admitted into the
queen's pretence: and if that were denied, he instructed
them to declare, that he recalled the content which she had
given to the conference at Weftminiter, and protested, that
whatever was done there, should be held to be null and i*
valid .

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mary

could have taken. The pretences on which fine declined
the conference were plausible, and the junbure for offering
them well chofcn. But either the queen's letter did not

reach

Haynes, 487. d Anderson, vol. iv. part ii. 95.
Go&. vol. i. 349. f Good. vol. ii. 84.

reach her commissioners in due time, or they suffered them- B o o K
selves to be deceived by Elizabeth's professions of regard for v.
their mistress, and consented to the opening of the confer- -vi
ence . i568.

To the commissioners who had appeared in her name at Nov. 25.

York, Elizabeth now added fir Nicholas Bacon, keeper of
the great feal, the earls of Arundel and Leicester, lord Clin-
ton, and fir William Cecil h. The difficulties which ob-
ftrucled the proceedings at York were quickly removed. A
satisfying answer was given to the regent's demands; nor
was he so much disposed to hesitate and raise objections as
formerly. His negociation with Norfolk had been disco-
vered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he had
communicated it to Cecil . His personal safety, as well as
the continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By
favouring Mary, he might at any time ruin him, and by a
question which she artfully started, concerning the person
who had a right, by the law of Scotland, to govern the
kingdom during a minority, flie let him fee, that, even with-
out restoring the queen, it was an easy matter for her to
deprive him of the supreme direcion of affairs k. These con-
fiderations, which were powerfully seconded by most of his
attendants, at length determined the regent to produce his
accusation against the queen.

HE endeavoured to leflen the obloquy with which he was The regent

sensible this aion would be attended, by protesting, that it accuses the
was with the utmost reluctance he undertook this disagree- queen of
able talk; that his party had long suffered their conduct to ceffory to
be mifconfirued, and had borne the worst imputations in herhuf-
silence, rather than expose the crimes of their overeign to band's
the eyes of rangers; but that now the infoience and im- ur
portunity of the adverse faftion forced them to publifi what
they had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, endea-
voured to conceal '. These pretexts are decent; and the
considerations which he mentions had, during some time,
a real influence upon the condut of the party; but since
the meeting of parliament held in December, they had dif-
covered so' little delicacy and reserve with rcfpec to the
queen's ations, as renders it impossible to gi e credit to those
Itudied professions. The regent and his associates were
drawn, it is plain, partly by the necessity of their affairs,
and partly by Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation where no
liberty of choice was left to them ; and they were obliged

U 2 either

c Anderson, vol. iii. 25. h Id. vol. iv. part ii. 99. i Melv. 191.
' Hynes, 484. - Andcr:'; ol. i. part ii. 115.

B o o K either to acknowledge themselves to be guilty of rebellion,

v. or to charge Mary with having been accessory to the com-

v mifilon of murder.
1s6s. THE accufation'itfelfwas conceived in the strongest terms.

Mary was charged, not only with having consented to the
murder, but with being accessory to the contrivance and ex-
ecution of it. Bothwell, it was pretended, had been fcrcened
from the pursuits ofjuftice by her favour; and fle had
formed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
prince, than subversive of the liberties and confitution of
the kingdom. If any of these crimes should be denied, an
offer was made to produce the molt ample and undoubtcd
evidence in confirmation of the charge m.
-or. 9 AT the next meeting of the commillioners, the earl of

Lennox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tra-
gical and unnatural murder of his son, he implored Eliza-
beth's justice against the queen of Scots, whom he accused
upon oath of being the author of that crime, and produced
papers, which, as he pretended, would make good what he
alleged. The entrance of a new actor on the tage so op-
portunely, and at a juncture so critical, can scarce be im-
puted to chance. 'This contrivance was manifeily Eliza-
beth's, in order to incrcafe, by this additional accusation,
the infamy of the Scottiih queen ".

Her corn- MARY'S commiffoners exprilTed the utmost surprise anl
niioners indignation at the regent's prefuin'ption, in loading the queen
rtfuf to
anficr. with calumnies which, as thcy affirmed, she had so little,
De;, 4. merited. But, instead of attempting to vindicate her ho-

nour, by a reply to the charge, they had recourse to an ar-
ticlc in their instructions, w-!hich they had formerly neglcct-
ed to mention in its proper r!aic. Thlev demanded an au-
dience of Elizabeth; andl i hin;g renewed their miilrefs's
request of a personal interview, they protested, if that were
denied her, against all the future proceedings of the commis-
fioners . A proteltation of ti;s nature, offered jult at tile
critical time, when such a bold accusation had been preferred
againil Mary, and when the pronfs in fuport of it were ready
to be examined, gave reason to suspect that ihe dreaded the
event of that examination. This suspicion reccived tl:e
firongeft confirmation ronm . nother circu1mstance ; Ross and
Herries, before tliey were introdtlced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protestation, privately acquainted Lcicelter and Ce-
cil, that as their miltrefs had from the beginning discovered an
inclination towards bringing the differenccs between herself

and
' Andern val. iv. part ii. r,. * 1J. .bid. I22. ° d. iid. 3,. 158, &c.

and her fubjets to an amicable accommodation, so flie was B o o x
iiill desirous, notwithstanding the regent's audacious accufa- v.
tion, that they flould be terminated in that manner P.

SUrc moderation seems hardly to be compatible with the 1568.

firong resentment which calumniated innocence naturally
feels; or with that eagerncfs to vindicate itself which it
always discovers. In Mary's situation, an or so ill-timed
muit be confidered as a confession of the weakncfs of her cause.
The known character of her commiflioners exempts them
from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of treachery.
Some fecrot conviction, that the conduct of their mistress
could not bear so strict a scrutiny as must be made into it, if
they hould reply to the accusation preferred by Murray
agiinft her, seems to be the most probable motive of this
imprudent proposal, by which they endeavourcd to avoid
it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a Dec. 4.

pretence for rejecing it. She represented to Mary's com-
millioners, that in the present juncture, nothing could be
so dishonourable to their miltrefs as an accommodation ; and
that the matter would seem to be huddled up in this man-
ner, merely to suppress discoveries, and to hide their shame ;
nor was it possible that she could be admitted with any de-
cency into her presence, while she lay under the infamy of
such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commiflioners withdrew; and

as they had declined answering, there seemed now to be no
further reason for the regent's producing the proofs in firp-
port of his charge. But without getting these into her
hands, Elizabeth's schemes were incomplete; and her arti-
fice for this purpose was as mean, but as successful, as any
lhe had hitherto employed. She commanded her commis-
fioners to testify her indignation and displeasure at the re-
gent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a sub-
jec, as to accuse his sovereign of such atrocious crimes. He,
in order to regain the good opinion of such a powerful pro-
tectrefs, offered to flew that his accusations were not mali-
cious nor ill grounded. Then were produced and submit-
ted to the infpetion of the English commissioners, the aOts
of the Scottifli parliament in confirmation of the regent's
authority, and of the queen's resignation ; the confessions of
the persons executed for the king's murder; and the fatal
casket which contained the letters, sonnets, and contracts,
that have been already mentioned.

As
' Anderson, vol. i. part ii. 34. Cabbala, ij;.

B o o K As soon as Elizabeth got these into her pofeffion, file laid

v. them before her privy council, to which she joined, on this
ia'^-J occasion, several noblemen of the greatest eminence in her

36gh. kingdom ; in order that they might have an opportunity of

treats a- confidering the mode in which a inquiry of such public
n-rwih importance had been hitherto conducted, as well as the
reaterri- amount of the evidence now brought againlt a person who
Dec. 1. claimed a preferable right of fucceflion to the English crown.

In this refpedable aflembly all the proceedings in the con-
ferences at York and Westminster were reviewed, and the
evidence produced by the regent of Scotland against his
sovereign was examined with attention. In particular, the
letters and other papers said to be written by the queen of
Scots, were carefully compared " for the manner of writing
" and orthography," with a variety of letters which Elizabeth
had received at different times from the Scottish queen;
and as the result of a most accurate collation, the mem-
bers of the privy council, and noblemen conjoined with
them, declared that no difference between these could be dif-
covered . Elizabeth, having eftabliflled a faa so unfavourable
to her rival, began to lay aside the expressions of friendship
and refpec which she had hitherto used in all her letters to
the Scottish queen. She now wrote to her in such terms,
as if the presumptions of her guilt had amounted almost to
certainty; flie blamed her for refusing to vindicate herself
from an accusation which could not be left unanswered,
without a manifest injury to her character ; and plainly inti-
mated, that unless that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation r. She hoped that such a dif-
covery of her sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was
hardly recovered from the shock of the regent's attack on
her reputation, and force her to confirm her resignation of
the crown, to ratify Murray's authority as regent, and to
content that both herself and her son hould reside in Eng-
land, under English protetion. This scheme Elizabeth had
much at heart; she proposed it both to Mary and to her
commissioners, and neglected no argument, nor artifice,
that could possibly recommend it. Mary saw how fatal this
would prove to her reputation, to her pretensions, and even
to her personal safety. She rejeced it without hesitation.
"Death," said he, is less dreadful than such an igno-
"minious tfep. Rather than give away, with my own hands,
"the crown which descended to me from my ancestors, I

" will

1 Anderson, vol.iv.part ii. 170, &c.
ld. ibid. 179. 183. Good. vol. ii. 6o.

" will part with life; but the last words I utter, hall be B o o
< those of a queen of Scotland . v.

AT the fame time he seems to have been sensible how '^vJ

open her reputation lay to censure, while he suffered such I568.
a public accusation to remain unanswered; and though the
conference was now dissolved, the empowered her commis-
fioners to present a reply to the allegations of her enemies,
in which he denied, in the strongest terms, the crimes im-
puted to her; and recriminated upon the regent and his Dec. 4.
party, by accusing them of having devised and executed the
murder of the king . The regent and his affociatesafferted
their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
insist on a personal interview, a condition which {he knew
would never be granted . Elizabeth urged her to vindicate
her own honour. But it is evident from the delays, the
evasions, and subterfuges to which both queens had recourse
by turns, that Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire
to make, any further progress in the inquiry.

THE regent was now impatient to return into Scotland, 1569.
where his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to Feb. 2.

Dilmiffes

raise ome commotions. Before he set out, he was called the regent
into the privy council, to receive a final declaration of Eliza- without ei-
beth's sentiments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that therap-
on one hand nothing had been objeced to his condut, which Proving or

condemn-

fihe could reckon detrimental to his honour, or inconsistent inghiscon-
with his duty; nor had he, on the other hand, produced duct;
any thing against his sovereign, on which he could found
an unfavourable opinion of her acions; and for this reason
she resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland precisely in
the fame situation in which he had found them at the be-
ginning of the conference. The queen's commissioners
were dismissed much in the fame manner .

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so

earnestly upon this conference upwards of four months, such
a conclusion of the whole appears at first fight trifling and
ridiculous. Nothing, however, could be more favourable to
Elizabeth's future schemes. Notwithitanding her seeming but secret-
impartiality, he had no thoughts of continuing neuter; nor ly fuppo'ts
was fle at any loss on whom to bestow her prote&tion. Be- his party.
fore the regent left London, he fupllied him with a con-
fiderable fum of money, and engaged to support the king's
authority to the utmost of her power Y. Mary, by her

own

* Haynes, 497. SecAppendix, No. XXX. Good. vol. ii. 274. 31.

Good. ii. 85. Ibid. 283. Cabl'ala, 157.
.Gocd. ii. 315. 333, P hid. 113. Carte, ii 471,

B o o K own conduct, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the re.

v. peated instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which he

'vr d had discovered during the progress of the conference, and
I569. defp-iring of ever obtaining any succour from her, she en-

deavoured to route her own adherents in Scotland to arms,
by imputing such defins to Elizabeth and Murray, as could
not fail to inspire every Scotchman with indignation. Mur-
ray, the pretended, had agreed to convey the prince her son
into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places of greatest
Rrenzth in the kingdom ; and to acknowledge the depend-
ence of the Scottifi upon the Englilh nation. In return
for this, Murray was to be declared the lawful heir of the
crown of Scotland; and at the fame time the question with
regard to tie English succession was to be decided in favour
of the earl of Hartford, who had promised to marry one of
Cecil's l-aughters. An account of these wild and chimeri-
cal projects was spread industriously among the Scots. Eli-
zabeth, perceivilng it was calculated on purpose to bring her
government into difreputation, laboured to detroy its effets,
by a counter-proclamation, and became more disgusted than
ever with the Scottish queen '.

Yi-crtc f THE regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the ut-
M!ary' ad- most tranquillity. But the rage of the queen's adherents,
;nur which had been suspended in expecation that the confer-
.i .:. ence in England would terminate to her advantage, was now

ready to break out with all the violence of civil war. They
were encouraged too by the appearance of a leader, whose
high quality and pretensions entitled him to great authority
in the nation. This was the duke of Chatelherault, who
had resided for some years in France, and was now sent over
by that court with a small supply of money, in hopes that
the presence of the first nobleman in the kingdom would
ftrenzghen the queen's party. Elizabeth had detained him
in England, for some months, under various pretences, but
was obliged at last to fffer him to proceed on his journey.
'j. 25. Before his departure, Mary inveted him with the high dig-

nity of her lieutenant-general in Scotland, together with the
fantastic title of her adopted father.

-l. rlgr- TtHE regent did not give him time to form his party into
.: co.n- any regular body. He aflembled an army with his usual
;ór k expedition, and marched to Glasgow. The followers of

Argyll and Huntly, who compoed the chief part of the
queen's faction, being feated in corners of the kingdom
very diitant from each other, and many of the duke's

dependants
Haynes, c50. 503. See Appendix, No. XXXI.

dependants having been killed or taken in the battle of Lang- B o o r
fide, the spirit and strength of his adherents were totally v.
broken, and an accommodation with the regent was the only rj
thing which could prevent the detruftion of his estate and i.6p.
vafials. This was effected without difficulty, and on no
unreasonable terms. The duke promised to acknowledge
the authority both of the king and of the regent; and to claim
no jurifdidion in consequence of the commission which he
had received from the queen. The regent bound himself to
repeal the aCt which had palled for attainting several of the
queen's adherents; to restore all who would submit to the
king's government to the poffeflion of their estates and ho-
nours; and to hold a convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties flould be fettled by mutual con-
sent. 'f le duke gave hcftages for his faithful performance
of the treaty; and, in token of their sincerity, he and lord
icerries accompanied the regent to Stirling, and visited the
young king. The regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at
Langfide .

A GYLL and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty.

A secret negotiation was carrying on in England, in favour
of the captive queen, with so much success, that her affairs
began to wear a better afpecd, and her return into her own
kingdom seemed to be an event not very distant. The
French king had lately obtained such advantages over the
Hugonots, that the extinction of that party appeared to be
inevitable, and France, by recovering domeltic tranquillity,
would be no longer prevented from protecting her friends in
Britain. These circum{tances not only influenced Argvll
and Huntly, but made so deep an imprellion on the duke,
that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly
discovered that he wilihed to evade the accomplishment of
the treaty. 'The regent saw the danger of allowing the duke
to shake iimfelf loofc, in this manner, from his engagements;
and intantly formed a resolution equally bold and politic.
He commanded his guard to fcize Chatelherault in his own
house in Edinburgh, whither he had come in order to attend
the convention agreed upon ; and, regardlcfs either of his
dignity as the first nobleman in the kingdom, and next heir
to the crown, or of the promises of personal security, on
which he had rclied, committed him and lord Herries pri-
foners to the castle of Edinburgh h. A blow so ftal and
unexpected dispirited the party. Argyll submitted to the

kib .'-.

a Cabbala, 161. Crawf. Mem. o106.
h Clafi. . . i. t. 201.

B o king's government, and made his peace with the regent on

v. v-rv eafv terms; and Huntly, being left alone, was at lalt

obliged to lay down his arms.

r569. SooN after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought
apri :6. letters to the regent, both from the English and Scottish
-' , queen;- A convention was held at Perth, in order to con-

-or of rider thm. Elizabeth's letter contained three different pro.

Mlal re- pofals with regard to Mlary; that hDe ihould either be restored
caf. to the full pofiellion of her former authority; or be ad-

mitted to reign jointly with the king her son; or at least be
allowed to reside in Scotland, in ome decent retirement,
without any share in the administration of government.
These overtures were extorted by the importunity of Fenelon
the French anbaffador, and have some appearance of being
favourable to the captive queen. They were, however,
perfectly suitable to Elizabeth's general system with regard
to Scottifli affairs. Among propositions so unequal and dif-
proportionate, she ely saw where the choice would fall.
The two former were rejected; and long delays must ne-
ceffarily have intervened, and many difficulties have arisen,
before every circumstance relative to the las could be finally
adjufled .

MAiRY, in her letter demanded that her marriage with

Bothwell should be reviewedbytheproper judges,and if found
invalid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce.
This fatal marriage was the principal source of all the ca-
lamities she had endured for two years; a divorce was the
only thing which could repair the injuries her reputation
had suffered by that ftep. It was her interest to have pro-
posed it early; and it is not easy to account for her long

Norfolk's silence with refped to this point. Her particular motive
fche-ne for for proposing it at this time began to be so well known, that
,mnrg the demand was rejected by the convention of estates".
cf SctLs They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell,

as to her eagerncis to conclude a marriage with the duke of
Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that fercet negotiation in

England, which we have already mentioned. The fertile
and projeRing genius of Maitland first conceived this scheme.
During the conference at ork, he communicated it to the
duke himself, and to the biihop of Ross, The former rea-

dily

e SFotfirood, 3o.
4 Ibid. 3; ;. In a priv council, held July 30, I5t9, this demand was

confdered; and, of fifty-one members present, only even voted to comply
wijh tht qeen's requcft. Records Priv.Counc.MS.in the Lyon Office,p.J4.

dily closed with a scheme so flattering to his ambition. The B o o K
latter confidered it as a probable device for restoring his v.
miltrefs to liberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor
was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a correspondence r169.
by means of his sifter lady Scroop, averse from a measure,
which would have reltored her to her kingdom with so much
splendour . The sudden removal of the conference from
York to Weftminfler suspended, but did not break off this
intrigue. Maitland and Ross were still the duke's prompters,
and his agents; and many letters and love tokens were ex-
changed between him and the queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an administration so ConcealsIt

vigilant as Elizabeth's such an intrigue could be kept long from Eliza-
concealed, he attempted to deceive her by the appearance beth.
of openness and candour, an artifice which seldom fails of
success. He mentioned to her the rumour which was spread
of his marriage with the Scottish queen; he complained of
it as a groundless calumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of
that kind, with many exprefilons full of contempt both for
Mary's charater and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was
of every thing relative to the queen of Scots, fle seems to
have credited these professions f. But, inftcad of difcon-
tinuing the negotiation, he renewed it with greater vigour,
and admitted into it new associates. Among these was the
regent of Scotland. He had given great oflence to Norfolk,
by his public accusation of the queen, in breach of the con-
cert into which he had entered at York. He was then
ready to return into Scotland. The influence of the duke
in the north of England was great. The earls of Nor-
thumberland and Westmorland, the most powerful noble-
men in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the regent the injuries which he had done his sovereign.
Murray, in order to secure a safe return into Scotland, ad-
dressed himself to Norfolk, and after some apology for his
past condudt, he insinuated that the duke's fchenie of mar-
rying the queen his sifter was no less acceptable to him than
beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would concur with
the utmost ardour in promoting so desirable an event .
Norfolk heard him with the credulity natural to those who
are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
earls to desist from any hostile attempt against Murray, and
to that he owed his passage through the northern counties
without diltuibance,

ENCOURAGED.

Camd. 49. Haynes, 573. State Trials,i. 73.
Haynes, 74. State Trials, i. 79, o.
: Anderson, iii. 34.

o o K ENCOURtAGED by his success in gaining the regent, lie next
v. attempted to draw the English nobles to approve his design.

The nation began t despair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her

1569. jpaloufy kept the question with regard to the right of fuc-

Gans te cession undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which
"e dnoa had desolated England for more than a century on account
_:nk ( of the disputed titles of the houses of York and Lancaster,

was still recent. Almost all the ancient nobility had
perified, and the nation itfclf had been brought to the
brink ct deitrution in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
queen, though her right of fuccefion was generally held to
be undoubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marrva foreign and a popish prince, andbring both
iiberty and religion into danger. But, by marrying her to
an Enclifliman, a zealous poteilant, the most powerful and
most universally beloved of all the nobles, an effieual remedy
feenred to be provided againt all these evils. The greater part
of the peers, either directly or tacitly, approved of it, as a fa-
lutary project. The earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester,
and lord Lumlev,fubfcribcd aletterto tiheScottiih queen,writ-
tenwith Leicefltr's hand, in which theywarmly recommended
dte match, but infilted, by way of preliminary, on Mary's pro-
mise, that Ihe should attempt nothing, in consequence of her
pretensions to the Englifl crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth, or
to her poftcrity; that fie fmould consent to a league, of-
fenfive ad defensive, between the two kingdoms; that he
ihouid confirm the present establishment of religion in Scot-
land; and receive into fvour such of her fubjeds as hd
appeared in arms against her. Upon her agreeing to the
marriage and ratifying these articles, they engaged that the
Englith nobles would not only concur in restoring her im-
mediately to her own throne, but in fccuring to her that of
England in reversion. Mary readily consented to all these
proposals, except the second, with regard to which he de-
manded some time for consulting her ancient ally the French
king .

THE. whole of this negotiation was industriously conceal-

ed from Elizabeth: Her jealousy of the Scottish queen was
well kno-.n, nor could it be exerted that he would willing-
ly come into a measure, which tended so visibly to save the
reputation, and to increase the power of her rival. But in
a matter of so much consequence to the nation, the taking
a few steps without her knowledge could hardly be reckoned
criminal; and while every person concerned, even Mary and
Norfolk thzmfelves, declared that nothing should be con-

cluded
" Aderien, val. iuL r. Cad. 420o.

eluded without obtaining her content, the duty and allegi- B o K
ance of fubjets seemed to be fully preserved. The greater v.
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Those x-
who condudted the intrigue, had farther and more dan- 1s;.
gcrous views. They saw the advantages which Mary wold
obtain by tl:is treaty, to be present and certain; and the
execution of the promises which he came under, to be dif-
tnrt and uncertain. They had early communicated their
scheme to the kings of France and Spain, and obtained their
approbation '. A treaty concerning which they consulted
foreign princes, while they concealed it from their own so-
vereign, could not be deemed innocent. They hoped, how-
ever, that the union of such a number of the chief persons
in the kingdom would render it neceiIry for Elizdceth to
comply; they flattered thcmfelves that a combination so
strong would be altogether irresistible ; and such was their
confidence of success, that when a plan vas concerted in
the north of England for rescuing Mary out of the hands-of
her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if he recovered
ler liberty, her sentiments in his favour might change,
used all his interest to dissuade the conspirators from attempt-
ing it k.

IN this situation did the affair remain when lord Boyd arr

rived from Englanll; and, besides the letters which he pr-
duced publicly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and
Throkm;orton to the regent and to Maitland. These were
full of the most fnguine hopes. All the nobles of England
concurred, said they, in favouring the design. Every pre-
liminarv was adjusted; nor was it possible that a scheme
so deep laid, conduced with so much art, and supported
both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or be d-
feated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting but the
concluding ceremony. It depended on the regent to haften
that, by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would re-
move the only obitacle that ftoou in the way. This was
expeded of him, in consequence of his promise to Norfolk;
and if he regarded either his interest or his fame, or even his
safety he would not fail to fulfil these engagements .

BUT the regent was now in very different circun:mances

from those which had formerly induced him to affe& an
approbation of Norfolk's schemes. He saw that the downf.l
of his ownrpower must be the firri consequence of the duke's
success; and if the queen, who confidered him as the chief
author of all her misfortunes, flculd recover her ancielt au-

thcrity,

i Anders. vol. iii 63. k Cnmnd. 420.
l iaynes, 520. -Spotfw. ,30. Se Appendi, No. XXXII.

o o K thority, he could never expec favour, nor scarce hope fox
v. impunity. No wonder he declined a ftep so fatal to him-
I_.v.J self, and which would have eablifhed the grandeur of an-

569o other on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a de-

lay. But, as every other circumstance was fettled, the
bihop of Ross, in the name of his mistress, and the duke,
in person, declared, in presence of the French ambassador,
their mutual content to the marriage, and a contract to this
purpose was fgned, and intrusted to the keeping of the
ambassador m.

A i 3. THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could

Elizrahh not long remain a secret. It began to be whispered at
toers
he duke's court; and Elizabeth calling the duke into her presence,
&sign,nd expressed the utmost indignation at his conduct, and
deeats it. charged him to lay aside all thoughts of prosecuting such a

dangerous design. Soon after Leicester, who perhaps had
countenanced the project with no other intention, revealed
all the circumstances of it to the queen. Pembroke, Arun-
del, Lumley, and Throkmorton, were confined and exa-
mined. Mary was watched more narrowly than ever; and
Hastings earl of Huntingdon, who pretended to dispute with
the Scottish queen her right to the fucceflion, being joined
in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered her imprisonment
more intolerable, by the excess of kis vigilance and rigour ,.
The Scottish regent, threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure,
meanly betrayed the duke; put his letters into her hands,
and furnished all the intelligence in his power °. The
duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in
contempt of the summons to appear before the privy council,
fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprison-
ment of his afociates; coldly received by his friends in
that country; unprepared for a rebellion ; and unwilling per-
haps to rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obey-
ed a second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was firit
Eober 3- kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then sent to the

Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble submission to Elizabeth,
giving her a promise on his allegiance, to hold no farthet
correspondence with the queen of Scots P. During the pro-
grefs of Norfolk's negotiations, the queen's partisans in
Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in her reftora-
tion to the throne, with an increase of authority, were

aLtIani wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that party,
imprioned and
by the rc-
Lnt-

m Carte, vol. iii. 486. = Haynes, 525, 526. 530. 532.
* Append. No. XXXIIL r Halnes, 5 5. 597-

and the person whose activity and ability the regent chiefly B o o K
dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue which had v.
kindled such combustion in England. He continuedtofoment xr-"j
the spirit of difaffedion in Scotland, and had seduced from the x69.
regent lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former as-
fociates. While he enjoyed liberty, the regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason, having by
an artifice allured Maitland to Stirling, he employed captain
Crawford, one of his creatures, to accuse him of being ac-
ceflbry to the murder of the king; and under that pretence
he was arrested and carried as a prisoner to EdinburgLh
He would soon have been brought to trial, but was saved
by the friendhip of Kirkaldy, governor of the catle, who,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the regent,
got him out of the hands of the person to whose care he
was committed, and oonduted him into the castle, which
from that time was entirely under Maitland's command4.
The loss of a place of so much importance, and the defec-
tion of a man so eminent for military kill as Kirkaldy,
brought the regent into ome difreputation, for which, how-
ever, the success of his ally Elizabeth, about this time,
abundantly compeiffated-

THE intrigue carried on for reiRoring the Scottish queen A rebe~

to liberty having been discovered and disappointed, an at- agan"t iE-
tempt was made to the fame purpose by force of arms; but Za't,,b

Mary's a&-

the issue of it was not more fortunat .. The earls of Northumr- hi~et.
berland andWetmorlaiid, though little diltinguified by their
personal abilities, were two of the most ancient and power-
ful of the English peers. Their estates in the northern coun-
ties were great, and they poffefled that influence over the
inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and mar-
tial families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attach-
ed to the popish religion, and discontented with the court,
where new men and a new (fvftem prevailed Ever since
Mary's arrival in England, they had warmly espoused her
interest; and zeal for popery, opposition to the court, and
commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them in dif-
ferent plots for her relief. Notlh ithftanding the vigilance
of her keepers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their delignsr. They were
privy to Norfolk's' schemes; but the iautioni with which he
proceeded did not suit their ardour and impetuosity. The
liberty of the Scottilh queen was not their sole object. They
aimed at bringing about a change i the religion, and a
revolution in the government o t'ie klmgd"lm. For this

Yreafon
4 Spo Jw. S;,2. ' Haynes, 59. Mlrdin, 44 6a, ~c.

o 00 reason they solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the

v. avowed and zealous patron of popery in that age. No-
.-v.' thing could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Phi-
169. lip, or more necessary towards facilitating his fthemes in the

Netherlands, than the involving England in the confusion
and miseries of a civil war. The duke of Alva, by his di-
redion, encouraged the two earls, and promised, as soon
as they either took the field with their forces, or surprised
any place of strength, or rescued the queen of Scots, that
he would supply them both with money and a strong body
of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, founded the ports where it wduld be mos
proper to land. And Chiapini Vitel!i, one of Alva's ablest
officers, was dispatched into England, on pretence of set-
tling some commercial differences between the two nations;
but in reality that the rebels might be sure of a leader of ex-
perience, as soon as they ventured to take arms .

L
at-.. THE condut of this negotiation occasioned many meet-

ings and messages between the two earls. Elizabeth was
informed of these; and though she suspected nothing of
their real design, he concluded that they were among
the number of Norfolk's confidents. They were summon-
ed, for this reason, to repair to court. Conscious of guilt,
and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedience. A
H. 9. second, and more peremptory order was issued. This they

could not decline, without shaking off their allegiance; and
as no time was left for deliberation, they inftantlv erected
their standard against their sovereign. The re-establishing
the catholic religion; the fettling the order of fucceifion
to the crown; the defence of the ancient nobility; were
the motives which they alledged to justify their rebellion .
Many of the lower people flocked to them with fnch arms
as they could procure; and had the capacity of their lead-
ers been in any degree equal to the enterprise, it mufl have
soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth aed
with prudence and vigour; and was served by her fubjeds
with fidelity and ardour. On the first rumour of an infur-
redion, Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of strength,
which could not be taken without a regular siege; a de-
tachment of the rebels, which was fcnt to rescue her, re-
turned without success. Troops were aflembled in difecrent
parts of the kingdom; as they advanced, the malecontents
retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away, and
their spirits funk. Despair, and uncertainty whether to

direct
Carte, vol i. 489,490. C 421. ' Stp, vol. i. 47.

dire& their flight, kept together for some time a small body B o o
of them among the mountains of Northumberland; but they v.
were at length obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took re- .vy-
fuge among the Scottish borderers. The two earl, together 1569. j
with the counters of Northumberland, wandering for some Dec. 2I.
days in the waftes of Liddifdale, were plundered by the
banditti, exposed to the rigour of the season, and left-defti-
tute of the necessaries of life. Westmorland was concealed
by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherft, and afterwards
conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by the regent, who had marched with some troops towards
the borders, to prevent any impression the rebels might
make on those mutinous provinces u.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of the Church as-

church, for two years, have almost escaped our notice. Its fairs.
general assemblies were held regularly; but no business of
much importance employed their attention. As the num-
ber of the protestant clergy daily increased, the deficiency
of the funds set apart for their subsistence became greater, and
was more sensibly felt. Many efforts were made towards re-
covering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least as
much of it as was possesed by the popish incumbents, a race
of men who were now not only useless but burdensome to
the nation. But though the manner in which the regent re-
ceived the addresses and complaints of the general assemblies
was very different from that to which they had been accuf-
tomed, no effe&ual remedy was provided; and while they
suffered intolerable oppression, and groaned under extreme
poverty, fair words, and liberal promises, were all they
were able to obtain x.

ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping fuoh a pri- ElizTis

soner as the queen of Scots. During the former year, the resolves to
tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, first by give up
a secret combination of some of her nobles, then by the Mary to
rebellion of others ; and she often declared, not without rea- the regent.
son, that Mary was the hidden cause of both. Many of her
own fubjedts favoured or pitied the captive queen; the Ro-
man catholic princes on the continent were warmly inte-
refted in her cause. The detaining her any longer in Eng-
land, he foresaw, would be made the pretext or occalion of
perpetual cabals and infurretions among the former; and
might expose her to the hostile attempts of the latter. She
refolyed therefore to give up Mary into the hapds of the
regent, after stipulating with him, not only that her days

VOL. I. X - hould

Cabbala, 7r. Camd. 4z. Cald. voL ii. So. &c.

o OK Ihould not be cut hort, either by a judicial sentence or by
v. secret violence, but that he hould be treated in a manner

suited to her rank; and, in order to secure his observance
170. of this, he required that fix of the chief noblemen in the

kingdom {hould be ent into England as hostages . With
refpe& to the safe custody of the queen, {he relied on Mur-
ray's vigilance, whose security, no less than her own, de-
pended on .preventing Mary from re-afcending the throne.
The negociation for this purpose was carried some length,
when it was discovered by the vigilance of the bishop of Ross,
who, together with the French and Spanish ambafladors, re-
monftrated against the infamy of such an adion, and repre-
sented the surrendering the queen to her rebellious fubjets,
to be the fame thing as if Elizabeth {hould, by her own au-
thority, condemn her to instant death. This procured a
delay; and the murder of the regent prevented the revival
of that design Z.

But he is HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who com-
murdcred. mitted this barbarous adtion. He had been condemned to

death soon after the battle of Langfide, as we have already
related, and owed his life to the regent's clemency. But
part of his elfate had been bestowed upon one of the re-
gent's favourites, who seized his house, and turned out his
wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields, where,
before next morning, he became furiously mad. This in-
jury made a deeper impression upon him than the benefit
which he had received, and from that moment he vowed to
be revenged upon the regent. Party-rage strengthened and
inflamed his private resentment. His kinsmen the Hamil-
tons applauded the enterprise. The maxims of that age jus-
tified the most desperate course which he could take to ob-
tain vengeance. He followed the regent for some time, and
watched for an opportunity to strike the blow. He resolved
at last to wait till his enemy should' arrive at Linlithgow,
through which he was to pass in his way from Stirling to
Edinburgh. He took his stand in a wooden gallery, which
had a window towards the street; spread a feather-bed
on the floor, to hinder the noise of his feet from being
heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that his Thadow
might not be observed from without; and after all this
preparation, calmly expected the regent's approach, who
had lodged during the night in a part of the town not far
distant. Some indiftind information of the danger which
threatened him had been conveyed to the regent, and he
paid so much regard to it, that he resolved to return by

the
* Haynes, 524. ' Carte, vol. iii 491. Anders. vol. ii. 84.

the fame gate through which he had entered, and to fetch B o o t
acompafs round the town. But as the crowd about thegate v,
was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he pro- r
ceeded dire&ly along the freet; and the throng of the peo- I570.
pie obliging him to move very slowly, gave the affaflin time
to take so true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet
through the lower part of his belly, and killed the horse of a
gentleman who rode on his other fide. His followers in-
ltantly endeavoured to break into the house whence the
blow had come, but they found the door strongly bar-
ricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton had
mounted a fleet horse, which stood ready for him at a back-
passage, and was got far beyond their reach. The regent
died the fame night of his wound a.

THERE is no person in that age about whom historians His chano.

have been more divided, or whose character has been drawn ter.
with such opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military
skill, sagacity, and vigour in the administration of civil as-
fairs, are virtues, which even his enemies allow him to have
possessed in an eminent degree. His moral qualities are
more dubious, and ought neither to be praised nor censured
without great reserve, and many diftintions. In a fierce
age he was capable of using victory with humanity, and of
treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of
learning, which, among martial nobles, was either unknown
or despised. Zealous for religion, to a degree which diftinv
guifhed him, even at a time when professions of that kind
were not uncommon. His confidence in his friends was
extreme, and inferior only to his liberality towards them,
which knew no bounds. A disinterested paflion for the li-
berty of his country, prompted him to oppose the perni-
cious system which the princes of Lorrain had obliged the
queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland,
he served her with a zeal and affection, to which he facri-
siced the friendfllip of those who were most attached to his
person. But, on the other hand, his ambition was immode-
rate; and events happened that opened to him vail proje&s,
which allured his enterprising genius, and led him to acions
inconsistent with the duty of a subjet. His treatment of
the queen, to whose bounty he was so much indebted, was
unbrotherly and ungrateful. The dependence on Elizabeth,
under which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the
nation. He deceived and betrayed Norfolk with a baseness
unworthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such un-

X 2 expeted
Buchan. 385. Crawf. Mem. 4 Cala, i71.

s o o r capcted dignity inspired him with new pafions, with haugh,

v. tiness and reserve; and instead of his natural manner,

which was blunt and open, he affecaed the arts of diffimu-
ij7o. lation and refinement. Fond, towards the end of his life,

of flattery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by tooth.
ing his vanity, led him aray, while his ancient friends
food at a didance, and predited his approaching fall. But
amidst the turbulence and confusion of that facious period,
he dispensed justice with so much impartiality, he repressed
the licentious borderers with so much courage, and eftab.
lifhled such uncommon order and tranquillity in the country,
that his administration was extremely popular, and he was
long and affeionately remembered among the commons,
by the name of the Good Regent.

BOOK

# BOOK VI.

B 0 0 K VI*.
HE unexpeted blow, by which the egent was cut B 0 o k.

off, truck the king's party with the utroft conftcr- vi.

nation. Elizabeth bewailed his death as the most fatal difaf-
ter which could have befallen her kingdom; and was in- 1570.
consolable to a degree that little suited her dignity. Mary's Diforde
adherents exulted, as if now her reitoration were not only ca '
certain, but near at hand. The infamy of the crine nafu-t, ent,
rally fell on those who exprefled such indecent joy at the death.
commission of it; and as the ffaffin made his escape on t
horse which belonged to lord Claude Hamilton, and fld di-
redly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
was concluded that the regent had fallen a sacrifice to the
resentment of the queen's party, rather than to the revengd
of a private man. On the day after the murder, Scott of
Buccleugh, ad Ker of Ferniheti, both zealous abettors of
the queen's cause, entered England in an hostile manner, and
plundered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of which
expeEted no such outrage. If the regent had been alive,
they would scarce have ventured on such an irreguTar in.
curfioll, nor could it well have happened so soon. after hit
death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity to which the anarchy

that followed the regent's death gave occasion. Daring
such general confusion, men hoped for universal impunity,
and broke out into excefles of every kind. As it was im- Stepstakan
potlible to restrain these without a fettled form of goven_ tow~ds
ment, a convention of the nobles was held, in order to de- nolhe re
liberate concerning the election of a regent. The queen's gent.
adherents refused, to be pefernt at the meeting and protested Feb. x1.
against its proceedings. The kidg's own party was irresolute
and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldyhad set
at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then aRebled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had beenr
laid to his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of
the two parties, by proposing to admit the queen to the joint
administration of government with her son. Elizabeth, ad-
hering to her ancient system with regard to Scottish affairs,

laboure4

' In the former editions, the second volume began with Book VI. and the

references to the Appendix recommenced with No. L.-It has been thought
proper not to vary the numbers of the Appendixes in this edition, thit the rs
ferences of other writers to this work may not be deranged.

B a o K laboured, notwithstanding the solicitations of Mary's friends*,

vI. to multiply, and to perpetuate the factions, which tore in

v pieces the kingdom. Randolph whom she dispatched into
1570. Scotland on the first news of the regent's death, and who

was her usual agent for such services, found all parties so
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcilable
rancour, that it cost him little trouble to inflame their ani-
mofity. The convention broke up without coming to any
agreement; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of all
parties were invited, was appointed on the first of May b.

A oalition MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continued
of parties to acknowledge the king's authority, were at the utmost
attempted pains to restore some degree of harmony among their coun-

trymen. They procured, for this purpose, an amicable con-
ference among the leaders of the two factions. But while
the one demanded the restoration of the queen, as the only
thing which could re-establish the public tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the king's authority to be so
sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question
or impaired; and neither of them would recede in the least
point from their opinions, they separated without any prof-
pect of concord. Both were rendered more averse from re-
concilement, by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived
-from France with promises of powerful succour to the
queen's adherents ; and as the civil wars in that kingdom
feemred to be on the point of terminating in peace, it was
expeed that Charles would soon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the earl of Suffex was
assembling a powerful armv on the borders, and its opera-
tions could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the king's
party .

QCeen's THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the factions
party in proved ineffecual, it contributed somewhat to moderate or
of Edi- suspend their rage; but they soon began to at with their
burgh. usual violence. Morton, the most vigilant and able leader

on the king's fide, solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without
delay, for the safety of a party iJ devoted to her interest,
and which stood so much in need of her assistance. The
chiefs of the queen's factions, assembling at Linlithgow,
April i. marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was both

governor of the cattle and provolt of the town, prevailed on
the citizens, though with ome difficulty, to admit them
within the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the earl of
Athole, and Maitiand, acceded almoit openly to their party;

and

* See Appendix, No. 1. ' Crawf. Mem. xI3. Calderw. ii. I57.
' Crat.f. Mean. 1j4.

and the duke and lord Herries, having recovered liberty by B o o K
Kirkaldy's favour, resumed the places which they had for- vi.
merly held in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition .-J
of persons so illustrious by their birth, or so eminent for 1570.
their abilities, they publiflled a proclamation, declaring their
intention to support the queen's authority, and seemed re-
solved not to leave the city before the meeting of the ap-
proaching convention, in which, by their numbers and in-
fluence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices
on their fide d.

A-r the fame time they had formed a design of kindling Endeavour

war between the two kingdoms. If they could engage them to involve
in hostilities, and revive their ancient emulation and anti- the natioa
pathy, they hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great with Eng-
advantage to the king's cause, but to reconcile their coun- land,
trymen to the queen, Elizabeth's natural and molt dange-
rous rival. With this view they had, immediately after the
murder of the regent, prompted Scott and Ker to com-
mence hostilities, and had fihce instigated them to continue
and extend their depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on
the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to susser
such an insult on her government to pass with impunity;
ihe issued a proclamation, declaring that she imputed the
outrages which had been committed on the borders not to
the Scottish nation, but to a few desperate and ill-defigning
persons that, with the former, she was resolved to main-
tain an inviolable friendship, whereas the duty which he
owed to her own fubjets obliged her to chastise the licen-
tioufinefs of the latter'. Suffex and Scroop accordingly
entered Scotland, the one on the east, the other on the welt
borders, and laid waste the adjacent countries with fire and
sword f. Fame magnified the number and progress of their
troops, and Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe
in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affeced to
their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There, by a public pro- April 2:.
clamation, they asserted the queen's authority, and sorbad
giving obedience to any but the duke, or the earls of Argyil
and Huntly, whom flhe had constituted her lieutenants in
the kingdom.

THE nobles who continued faithful to the king, though King's par-

considerably weakened by the defection of so many of their ty enter
friends, assembled at Edinburgh on the day appointed. Edinburgh
They issued a counter-proclamation, declaring such as ap- May .

peared

i Crawf. Mem. 37. Caldew. ii. 176. ' Caldcrw. ii i.
' Cabala, 174.

B o O r peared for the queen enemies of their country; and charging

vi. them with the murder both of the late king and of the re-

v^rw gent. They could not, however, presume so much on their
1570. own strength as to venture either to elect a regent, or to

take the field against the queen's party; but the assistance
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do
both. By her order fir William Drury marched into Scot-
land, with a thousand foot and three hundred horse; the
king's adherents joined him with a considerable body of
troops, and advancing towards Glasgow, where the ad-
verse party had already begun hostilities by attacking the
castle, they forced them to retire, plundered the neighbour-
ing country, which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after
seizing some of their castles, and rafing others, returned to
Edinburgh.

Motives of, UNDER Drury's protection, the earl of Lennox returned
Elizabeth's into Scotland. It was natural to commit the government
oith regrd of the kingdom to him during the minority of his grandson.
to them. His illustrious birth, and alliance with the royal family of

England, as well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of
that honour. His resentment against Mary being implacable,
and his estate lying in England, and his family residing there,
Elizabeth confidered him as a man who, both from inclina-
tion- and from interest, would ad in concert with her, and
ardently wished that he might succeed Murray in the office
of regent. But, on many accounts, the did not think it
prudent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour his
pretensions too openly. The civil wars in France, which
had been excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and car-
ried on with a fierceness that did it real dishonour, appeared
now to be on the point of coming to an issue; and after
shedding the bell blood, and wailing the richest provinces
in the kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ardour
that facilitated the negotiations which were carrying on for
that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate
admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, sus-
ser a queen of France, and the most ancient ally of his
crown, to languish in her present cruel situation, without
attempting to procure her relief. He had hitherto been
obliged to satisfy himself with remonstrating, by his am-
baffadors, against the indignity with which she had been
treated. But if he were once at full liberty to pursue his
inclinations, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread
from the impetuosity of his temper and the power of his
arms. It therefore became necessary for her to a with
some reserve, and not to appear avowedly to countenance the

choice

choice of a regent, in contempt of Mary's authority. The B o o K
jealousy and prejudices of the Scots required no less manage- vl.
ment. Had she openly supported Lennox's claim; had he
recommended him to the convention, as the candidate of 157o.
whom she approved; this might have roused the independent
spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her in-
tention, he might have defeated its success. For these
reasons she hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers
to all the messages which he received from the king's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was at last ob-
tained, and an event of an extraordinary nature seems to
have been the occasion of it. Pope Pius V. having issued a
bull, whereby he excommunicated Elizabeth, deprived her
of her kingdom, and absolved her subje&s from their oath
of allegiance, Felton, an Engifhman, had the boldness to
affix it on the gates of the bishop of London's palace. In
former ages, a pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride,
or bigotry, denounced this fatal sentence againfl the mos
powerful monarchs; but as the authority of the court of
Rome was now less regarded, its proceedings were more
cautious; and it was only when they were roused by some
powerful prince, that the thunders of the church were ever
heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this ftep, which the
pope had taken, to a combination of the Roman catholic
princes against her, and fufpeted that ome plot was formed
in favour of the Scottiih queen. In that event, he knew
that the safety of her own kingdom depended on prefervingher
influence in Scotland; and in order to strengthen this, she
renewed her promises of protecing the king's adherents,
encouraged them to proceed to the eletion of a regent,
and even ventured to point out the earl of Lennox, as the
person who had the best title. That honour was accordingly
conferred upon him, in a convention of the whole party,
held on the 12th of Julyg.

THE regent's first care was, to prevent the meeting of the Lennoa

parliament which the queen's party had summoned to con- eleted
vene at Linlithgow. Having effected that, he marched gent.
against the earl of Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the north,
and forced the garrison which he had placed in Brechin to
surrender at discretion. Soon after he made himself mailer
of some other castles. Emboldened by this successful be-
ginning of his adminitration, as well as by the appearance
of a considerable army, with which the earl of Suffex ho-
vered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of

Secretary,
z Spotfw. 40. Cald ii. 86. See Appcnd. No. U.

o o £ secretary, and proclaimed'him, the duke, Huntly, and other
vI. leaders of the queen's party, traitors and enemies of their
i<_^ OUcountry h.
1570. IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the queen's ad-

Mary's ad- herents had recourse to the king of Spain , with whom
crentsne Mary had held a close correspondence ever since her con-
siti pa finement in England. They prevailed on the duke of Alva

to fend two of his officers to take a view of the country,
and to examine its coasts and harbours; and obtained from
them a small supply of money and arms, which were sent

Ilizabeth to the earl of Huntly k. But this aid, so disproportionate
Popofs a to their exigencies, would have availed them little. They
eomtoa- were indebted for their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth
*ion be- was carrying on, under colour of restoring the captive queen
twen to her throne. The first steps in this negotiation had been
3ra' and taken in the month of May; but hitherto little progress
her sub-
_Ads. was made in it. The peace concluded between the Roman

catholics and hugonots in France, and her apprehensions
that Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of his
ifter-in-law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affeced
to treat her prisoner with more indulgence, she listened more
graciously to the felicitations of foreign abaffadors in her
favour, and seemed fully determined to replace her on the
throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her sincerity, lhe
laboured to procure a cefhation of arms between the two
contending factions in Scotland. Lennox, elated with the
good fortune which had hitherto attended his adminiftra-
tion, and flattering himself with an easy triumph over ene-
mies whose estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited,
refused for some time to come into this measure. It was
not safe for him, however, to dispute the will of his pro-
tedrefs. A cessation of hostilities during two months,
to commence on the third of September, was agreed upon;
and, being renewed from time to time, it continued till the
first of April next year'.

SooN after Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir Walter

MIildmay to the queen of Scots. The dignity of these
ambassadors, the. former her prime minister, the latter
chancellor of the exchequer, and one of her ablest coun-
fellors, convinced all parties that the negotiation was serious,
and that the hour of Mary's liberty was now approaching.
The propositions which they made to her were advantageous
to Elizabeth, but such as a prince in Mary's situation had

reason

h Crawf. lem. rS9. Cald. ii. rgS. i See Append. No. Ill,
An1derf.iii. z2. Crawf. Mene. 53. Spotfw. 243.

reason to expea. The ratification of the treaty of Edii- n o o
burgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the English crown, vi
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the v
adhering to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the 3570.
pardoning her fubjecs who had taken arms against her;
and her promising to hold no correspondence, and to cou-
tenance no enterprise, that might disturb Elizabeth's govera-
nent; were among the chief articles. By way of ecuity
for the acconplifhment of there, they demanded that some
persons of rank ihould be given as hostages, that the prince
her son fbould reside in England, and that a few castles on
the border hould be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some
of these propositions Mary consented; some she endeavoured
to mitigate ; and others flie attempted to evaie. Ih the
mean time, Ihe tranfinitted copies of them to the pope,
to the kings of France and Spain, and to the duke of Alva.
She insinuated, that without some timely and vigorott.
interposition in her behalf, she would be obliged to accept
of these hatd conditions, and to purchase liberty at any
price. But the pope was a dillant and feeble ally, and by
his great efforts at this time against he Turks, his treafuTy
was entirely exhausted. Charles had already begun to me-
ditate that conspiracy against the hugonots, which marke
his reign with such infamy; and it required much eifure,
and perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan to
maturity. Phiip was employed in fitting out that feet
which acquired so much renown to the Christian arms,
by tile viEory over the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in
Spain threatened an infurreetion; and his subjects in the
Netherlands, provoked by much oppreflion and many indig-
nities, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of them,
for these different reasons, adviscd Mary, without depending
on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the belt terms flUi
could procure m.

MARY accordingly consented to many of Elizabeth's I.lIaLetl. A
demands, and discovered a facility of disposition, which pro- a;tifice i

the ondUA:

mised still further conceflions. But no conceflion he could; o t
have made, would have satisfied Ilizabeth, who, in spite
of her repeated profeilions of finccrity to foreign zmbaila-
dors, and notwvithftanding the filemnity with which lhe
carried on the treaty, had no other obj-dt in it, than to
amrufe MIar's allies, and to gain time ". After having so
long treatcd a queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-

generouu

" Anders. vol.iii. 119, 1i2.
DI:.,s, CompL Aaib. ;S.

o o K generous a manner, fle could not now dismiss her with
yr. safety. Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confine-
,^Y ment, Mary had found means to excite commotions in

X;o. England, which were extremely formidable. What defpe-

rate effe&s of her just resentment might be expeced,
if he were set at liberty, and recovered her former power ?
What engagements could bind her, not to revenge the
wrongs which Ihe had suffered, nor to take advantage of
*he favourable conjunctures that might present themselves ?
Was it pofible for her to give such security for her beha-
viour, in times to come, as might remove all suspicions
and fears? And was there not good cause to conclude,
that no future benefits could ever obliterate the memory
of pal: injuries? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though
The continued to ad as if her views had been entirely
different. She appointed seven of her privy counsellors
to be commiflioners for fettling the articles of the treaty;
and, as Mary had already named the bishop of Ross and
Galloway, and lord Levingfton, for her ambafladors, he
required the regent to impower proper persons to appear
. in behalf of the king. The earl of Morton, Pincairn abbot

of Dunfermling, and fir James Macgill, were the persons
chosen by the regent. They prepared for their journey
as flowlv as Elizabeth herself could have wished. At length
they arrived at London, and met the commilfioners of the
eb. r9. two queens. Mary's ambassadors discovered the strongest

inclination to comply with every thing that would remove
the obstacles which ilood in the wayof their mistress's liberty.
But when Morton and his aociates were called upon to
vindicate their conduct, and to explain the sentiments of
their party, they began, in justification of their treatment
of the queen, to advance such maxims concerning the li-
rnited powers of princes, and the natural right of fubjets
to resist and to controul them, as were extremely shocking
to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative, as has
been formerly observed, were very exalted. With regard
to the authority which the king now poflelted, they declared
that they neither had, nor could poflibly receive inftrudions,
to content to any treaty that tended to subvert, or even to
impair it in the least degree . Nothing could be more
trifling and ridiculous, than such a reply from the commis-
fioners of the king of Scots to the queen of England. His
party depended absolutely on her protection, her hand had

feated
Cald. ii 34. Digges, 51. Haynes, 523, 524.

feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed the a o
continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease she could vi.
have brought them to hold very different language; and \.-~
whatever conditions he might have thought fit to prescribe, 1571.
they would have had no other choice but to submit. This
declaration, however, he asseted to confider as an infuper-
able difficulty; and finding that there was no reason to It prom
dread any danger from the French king, who had not dif- fruitlels.
covered that egernefs in support of Mary, which was
expected, the reply made by Morton furnished her with March 2;
a pretence for putting a lop to the negotiation, until the
regent should fend ambaflhdors with more ample powers.
Thus, after being amused for ten months with the hopes of
liberty, the unhappy queen of Scots remained under ftriter
custody than ever, and without any profpea of escaping
from it; whi those fubjeds who till adhered to her were
exposed, without ally or proteCtor, to the rage of enemies,
whom their successes in this negotiation rendered still more
insolent P.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had Dunbartoa

been observed with little exadnefs on either fide, captain caile fur-
Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, prifed
performed a service of great importance to the regent, by
surprising the castle of Dunbarton. This was the only for-
tified place in the kingdom, of which the queen had kept
possession ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Its situation on the top of an high and almost inaccessible
rock, which rifes in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely firong, and, in the opinion of that age, impregna-
ble; as it commanded the river Clyde it was of great con-
sequence, and was deemed the most proper place inr the
kingdom for landing any foreign troops that might come to
Mary's aid. The strength of the place rendered lord Fle-
ming, the governor, more secure than he ought to have been,
confidering its importance. A soldier who had served in the
garrison, and had been disgusted by some ill usage, proposed
the cheme to the regent, endeavoured to demonstrate that
it was practicable, and offered himself to go the foremost man
on the enterprise. It was thought prudent to rifl any dagner
for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else
might be necessary, were prepared with the-utmoft secrecy
and dispatch. All the avenues to the catle were seized, that
no intelligence of the design might reach the governor. To-
wards evening Crawford marched from Glasgow with a small

but
P Aud. iii. 9, &.

x o o : but determined band. By midnight they arrived at the bot-

vrT tom of the rock. The moon was set, and the ky, which
ki-jv hitberto had been extremely clear, was covered with a thick

5'7 - fog.. It was where the rock was highef that the afiailants

made their attempt, because in that place there were few
centinels, and they hoped to- find them lear alert. The
- frit ladder was scarcely fixed, when the weight and eager-

ness of those who mounted, brought it to the ground. None
of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and none of the gar-
riton alarmed at the noise. Their guide and Crawford
frambled up the rock, and fastened the ladder to the roots
of a tree which grew in a cleft. This place they all reached
with the utmost difficulty, but were still at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was made fail a
ccond time; but in the middle of the ascent they met with
an unforeseen difficlty. One of their companions was
seized with some sudden fit, and clung, seemingly without
ife, to the ladder. All were at a ltand. It was impofilble
to pass him. To tumble liim headlong was cruel; and
might oceafion a discovery. But Crawford's presence of
mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to he
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit
was over; and turning the other fide of the ladder, they
mounted with there over his belly. Day now began to
break, and there ill remained a high wall to scale;. but
after surmounting so many great difficulties, this was soon
accomplished. A centrv obfened the firRf man who appear-
ed on the prapnet, and had just time to give the alarm, be-
fore he was knocked on the head. The officers and soldiers
of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more solicitous
about their own ffety, than capable of making resistance.
The assailants ruibed forwards, with repeated shouts and
with the utmost fury; took pofllffon of the magazine; seized
the cannon; and turned them againt their enemies. Lord
Fleming got into a finall boat, and fled all alone into Argyle-
flire- Crawford, in reward of his valour and good conduct,
remained maiter of the caste; and as he did not lose a single
man in the enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French envoy, and
Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrew's, weie the prisoners of
greatest difincion q.
ArChbishop VERAC'S character protected him from the usage which he

st. Ao- merited by his activity in tirring up enemies againtf the

dre,'s put king. The regent treated the lady with great politeness and
todeath by humanity.

hm.
s B3ach. 554.

humanity. But a very different fate awaited the archbishop; o t
he was carried under a strong guard to Stirling; and as he v.
had formerly been attainted by act of parliament, he was, k-v.
without any formal trial, condemned to be hanged; and *n 1571-
the fourth day after he was taken, the sentence was exe-
cuted. An attempt was made to convit him of being ac-
ceflary to the murder both of the king and regent, but theto
accusations were supported by no proof.- Our historians ob-
serve, that he was the first bishop in Scotland who died by
the hands of the executioner. The high offices he had en-
joyed, both in church and slate, ought to have exempted
him from a punifiment infliCted only on the lowel -crimi-
nI:l. But his zeal for the queen, his abilities, and his pro-
feiion, rendered him odious and formidable to the king's
adherents. Lennox hated him as the person by whose cont-
fels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. Party rage and personal enmity dictated that
indecent sentence, for which some colour was fought, by
imputing to him such odious crimes r.

THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment of the lirkia

archbihop, perplexed no less than they enraged the queen's defendsih
party; and hostilities were renewed with all the fierceness cattle
which difappointmcnt and indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, iEd tb
who, during the truce had taken care to increase the num- queen's
her of his garrison, and to provide every thing necefEary for amc'
his defence, iflued a proclamation declaring Lennox's au-
thority to be unlawful and usurped; commanded all-who
favoured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized
the arms belonging to the citizens ; planted a battery on the
steeple of St. Giles's, repaired the walls, and fortified the
gates of the city; and, though the affietions of the inha-
bitants leaned a different way, held out the metropolis against
the regent. The duke, Huntly, Home, Herries and other
chiefs of that faction, repaired to Edinburgh with their fol-
lowers ; and having received a finall fum of money and some
ammunition from France, formed no contemptible army
within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith
and fortified it; and the regent joined him with a conrider-
able body of men. While the armies lay so near each other,
daily kirmifhes happened, and with various success. The
queen's party was not trong enough to take the field against
the regent, nor was his superiority so great as to undertake
the siege of the castle or of the town .

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his Bothfpr-
enemies, the regent had summoned a parliament to meet in ties hold

that parlia-
Spotfw. 252. Cald. ii. 233, &c.

a o o X that place. In order to prevent any objecion againfl the

vr. lawfulness of the meeting, the members obeyed the pro-
I _ cn clamation as exactly as possible; and assembled in a house at
1571. te head of the Canongate, which, though without the
May 14. walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy exerted

himself to the utmost to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so strongly guarded, that all efforts were in vain. They
pased an act attainting Maitland and a few others, and then
adjourned to the 28th of August .

THE other party, in order that their proceedings might

be countenanced by the fame shew of legal authority, held
a meeting of parliament soon after. There was produced in
this assembly a declaration by the queen, of the invalidity of
that deed whereby he had resigned the crown, and consented
to the coronation of her son. Conformable to this declara-
tion, an at was passed, pronouncing the resignation to have
been extorted by fear; to be null in itself, and in all its con-
sequences; and enjoining all good fubjecs to acknowledge
the queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to support
those who aded in her name. The present etabliihment of
the protestant religion was confirmed by another statute;
and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was
appointed on the 26th of August .

Miable MEANWHILE all the miseries of civil war desolated the
omditiou kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends, brothers took different
f the fides, and ranged themselves under the standards of the

contending factions. In every county, and almost in every
town and village, King's men and Zeen's men were names of
distinction. Political hatred dissolved all natural ties, and
extinguishcd the reciprocal good-will and confidence which
hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal mingled
itself with there civil distinctions, and contributed not a
little to heighten and to inflame them.

Stte of THE factions which divided the kingdom, were in ap-
faiAns. pearance, only two. But in both these there were persons

with views and principles so different from each other, that
they ought to be extinguished. With ome, considerations
of religion were predominant, and they either adhered to
the queen, because they hoped by hertneans to re-establish
popery, or they defended the king's authority, as the best
support of the protestant faith. Among these the opposition
was violent and irreconcilable. Others were influenced by
political motives only, or allured by views of interest; the

regent
Crawf. Mem. I77. Id. ibid

regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair of gaining B o o ,
by gentle arts many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the vi.
king's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the -v-J
fame design of a coalition, but on such terms that the queen IS71.
might be restored to some hare in the government, and the
kingdom shake off its dependence upon England. Morton,
the ablest, the most ambitious, and the most powerful man
of the king's party, held a particular course; and moving
only as he was prompted by the court of England, thwarted
every measure that tended towards a reconcilement of the
facions; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed protection.

THE time appointed by both parties for the meeting of

their parliaments now approached. Only three peers and
two bishops appeared in that which was held in the queen's
name at Edinburgh. But, contemptible as their numbers
were, they passed an at for attainting upwards of two hun-
dred of the adverse facion. The meeting at Stirling was
numerous and splendid. The regent had prevailed on the
earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and lord Boyd, to ac-
knowledge the king's authority. The three earls were among
the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom, and had hi-
therto been zealous in the queen's cause. Lord Boyd had
been one of Mary's commissioners at York and Westminster,
and since that time had been admitted into all her most secret
councils. But, during that turbulent period, the conduct
of individuals, as well as the principles of factions, varied so
often, that the sense of honour, a chief preservative of con-
fiftence in charater, was entirely loft; and, without any
regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one party, and
adopted all the violent passions of the other. The defec-
tion, however, of so many persons of ditindtion not only
weakened the queen's party, but added reputation to her
advertaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that The king's

at Stirling began with framing ads againit the opposite sac- party fur-
tion. But in the midst of all the security, which confidence prifed i
in their own numbers or diltance from danger could inspire, St'ling
they were awakened,%arly on the morning of September the Sept. .
third, by the houts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment the houses of every person of diftiiction were
surrounded, and before they knew -what to :hink o o
strange an event, the regent, the earls of Argyll, Morton,
Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Montrose, Bucha i, the lords
Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made prisoners and

VOL. I. Y mounted

s o o mounted behind troopers, who were ready to carry them

vl. to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en-
_v--j terprife; and if he had not been induced by the ill-timed
1571. solicitude of his friends about his safety, not to hazard his

own person in conducing it, that day might have termi-
nated the contest between the two faCions, and have restored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred men,
under the command of Huntly, lord Claud Hamilton, and
Scott of Buccleugh, set out from Edinburgh, and, the
better to conceal their design, marched towards the south.
But they soon wheeled to the right, and horses having been
provided for the infantry, rode straight to Stirling. By four
in the morning they arrived there; not one sentry was post-
ed on the walls, not a single man was awake about the
place. They met with no resistance from any person whom
they attempted to seize, except Morton. He defending his
house with obstinate valour, they were obliged to set it on
fire, and he did not surrender till forced out of it by the
flames. In performing this, some time was consumed:
and the private men, unaccustomed to regular discipline,
left their colours, and began to rifle the houses and hops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town reached
the caitle. The earl of Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers;
fired brifldy upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the
officers kept together in a body. The townsmen took arms
to as their governor; a fdden panic struck the assail-
ants; some fled, some surrendered themselves to their own
prisoners; and had not the borderers,who followed Scott,pre-
vented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horses within the
place, not a man would have escaped. If the regent had
not unfortunately been killed, the loss on the king's fide
would have been as inconsiderable as the alarm was great.

The regent Thins on the archbfiJop of St. Andrew's, was the word among
killed. the queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to his me-

mory. The officer to whom he surrendered, endeavour-
ing to protect him, loft his own life in his defence. He
was slain, according to the general opinion, by command of
lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concerting
this plan with great secrecy and prudence; but Morton's
fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline among his
troops, deprived him of success, the only thing wanting to
render this equal to the most applauded military enterprises
of the kind x.

As
Mclv. z6. Craw. Mem. 20o4.

As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded B o o K

without delay to the eletion of a regent. Argyll, Morton, vi.
and Mar, were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen -v-
by a majority of voices. Amidst all the fierce dissensions IS57T

Marchouen

which had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin- regent
guifhed himself by his moderation, his humanity, and his Sept. 6.
disinterestedness. As his power was far inferior to Argyll's,
and his abilities not so great as Morton's, he was, for these
reasons, less formidable to the other nobles;. His merit,
too, in having so lately rescued the leaders of the party
from imminent deftrudion, contributed nor a little to his
preferment.

WHII.E these things were carrying on ir Scotland, the Proceed-

tranfadions in England were no less intereAing to Mary, ingsinEng-
and fill more fatal to her cause. The parliament of that landagaits
kingdom, which met in April, passed an at, by which it Ma
was declared to be high treason to claim any right to the
crown during the life of the queen; to affirm that the
title of any other person was better than hers, or to main-
tain that the parliament had not power to fettle and to
limit the order of succession. This remarkable statute was
intended not only for the security of their own sovereign,
but to curb the restless and intriguing spirit of the Scottish
queen and her adherents Y.

AT this time a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and Marriage
the duke of Anjou the French king's brother, was well ad- negotiated

between

vanced. Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and Eijzabeth
gave out, with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail and the
of taking place. Neither of them, however, wished it fuc- duke of
cess; and they encouraged it for no other end, but because AnjU.
it served to cover or to promote their particular designs.
The whole policy f Catherine of Medicis was bent towards
the accompliihment of her detestable projec for the de-
ftrution of the Hugonot chiefs.; and by carrying on a ne-
gotiation for the marriage of her on with a princess who
was julfly eteemed the proteCtress of that party, by yield-
ing some things in point of religion, and by difeovering an
indifference with regard to others, she hoped to amuse all
the protestants in Europe, and to lull asleep the jealousy
even of the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth flattered her-
self with reaping advantages of another kind. During the
dependence of the negotiation, the French could not with
decency give any open assistance to the Scottish queen; if
they conceived any hopes of success in the treaty of mar-

Y 2 riage,
Y' Cb. 436-

B O o K riage, they would of course interest themselves but coldly in

Vi. her concerns: Mary herself muff be dejefed at losing an
__v^ ally, whom he had hitherto reckoned her most powerful
1571. protecor; and by interrupting her correspondence with

France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues
which disturbed the kingdom would be ftopt. Both queens
succeeded in their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on
Elizabeth, and blinded the Hugonots. The. French disco-
vered the utmost indifference about the interest of the Scot-
tifh queen; and Mary, confidering that court as already
united with her rival, turned for protetion with more
eagerness than ever towards the king of Spain . Philip,
whole dark and thoughtful mind delighted in the mystery
of intrigue, had held a secret correspondence with Mary for
some time, by means of the bishop of Ross, and had sup-
plied both herself and her adherents in Scotland with
fmali fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine gentleman,
who resided at London under the character of a banker,
and who aed privately as an agent for the pope, was
the person whom the bishop intrusted with this negotiation.
Marv thought it necessary likewise to communicate the secret

orf'-irac to the duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored
in fiaourof to liberty, upon his solemn pomife to have no further inter-
Mtry; course with the queen of Scots. This promise, however,

he regarded so little, that he continued to keep a constant
correspondence with the captive queen; while he laboured
to nourish his ambitious hopes, and to strengthen his amo-
rous attachment by letters written in the fondest caressing
strain. Some of these he must have received at the very
time when he made that solemn promise of holding no far-
ther intercourse with her, in consequence of which Eliza-
beth restored him to liberty. Mnary, still confidering him as
her future husband, took no ftep in any matter of moment
without his advice. She early' communicated to him her
negotiations with Ridolphi; and in a long letter, which file
wrote to him in cyphers a, after complaining of the baseness
with which the French court had abandoned her interest,
she declared her intention of imploring the assistance of the
Spani{h monarch, which was now her only resource; and
recommended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a person ca-
pable both of explaining and advancing the scheme. The
duke commanded Hickford, his secretary, to decvpher, and
then to burn this letter; but whether he had been already

gained

Digges, 144. I48.' Carnm. 434.
Ha. ,es, ?), 598. Hardw. State Papers, i. 19o, &c. Digges Corn-
pleat Ammbti. I.

gained by the court, or resolved at that time to betray his B o o K
master, he disobeyed the latter part of the order, and hid the vi.
letter, together with other treasonable papers, under the kv
duke's own bed. 1571.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none

of those arguments, and spared none of those promises,
which are the usual incentives to rebellion. The pope, he
told him, had a great fum in readiness to betlow in so good
a cause. The duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten
thousand men not far from London. The catholics to a
man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were ripe for
a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes towards him, and called on him to re-
venge the unmerited injuries which he himself had suffered;
and to rescue an unfortunate queen, who offered him her
hand and her crown, as the reward of his success. Norfolk ap-
proved of the design, and though he refused to give Ri-
dolphi any letter of credit, allowed him to use his name in
negotiating with the pope and Alva b. The bishop of Ross,
who, from the violence of his temper, and impatience to
procure relief for his mistress, was apt to run into rash
and desperate designs, advised the duke to assemble secretly
a few of his followers, and at once to seize Elizabeth's per-
son. But this the duke rejected as a scheme equally wild
and hazardous. Meanwhile, the English court had received discovered
some imperfect information of the plot, by intercepting one bv Eliza-
of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident happened, which beth
brought to light all the circumstances of it. 'The duke had
employed Hickford to transmit to lord Herries some money,
which was to be distributed among Mary's friends in Scot-
land. A person not in the secret was intrudfed with con-
veying it to the borders, and he, suspecting it from the
weight to be gold, whereas he had been told that it was
silver, carried it directly to the privy council. The duke,
his domestics, and all who were privy, or could be suspect-
ed of being privy, to the design, were taken into custody.
Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover less
firmness, or servants betray an indulgent master with
greater baseness. Every one confessed the whole of what Sept.-
he knew. Hickford gave direcions how to find the papers
which he had hidden. The duke himself, relying at first
on the fidelity of his associates, and believing all dangerous '
papers to have been detroyed, confidently asserted his own
innocence; but when their depositions and the papers them-

selves
b Ander.ii. id.

B o o K selves were produced, astonished at their treachery, he ac-

vi. knowledged his guilt, and implored the queen's mercy.

His offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to ob-
z171. tain pardon; and Elizabeth thought it neceflary to deter her

fubjets, by his punishment, from holding correspondence
with the queen of Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by
his peers, he was found guilty of high treason, and, after
several delays, suffered death for the crime '.

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many effects,

extremely detrimental to Mary's interest. The bishop of
Ross, who appeared, by the confession of all concerned, to
be the prime mover in every cabal against Elizabeth, was
taken into custody, his papers searched, himself committed
to the Tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened
with capital punishment, and, after a long confinement, set
at liberty, on condition that he hould leave the kingdom.
Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal and his abilities, but was denied from that time
the privilege of having an ambassador at the English court.
The Spanish ambassador, whom the power and dignity of
the prince he represented exempted from such insults as
Ross had suffered, was commanded to leave England d. As
there was now the clearest evidence that Mary, from resent-
ment of the wrongs she had suffered, and impatience of the
captivity in which she was held, would not scruple to engage
in the most hotile and desperate enterprises against the efta-
blifhed government and religion, she began to be regarded
as a public enemy, and was kept under a ftriter guard
than formerly, the number of her domestics abridged, and
no person permitted to fee her, but in pretence of her
keepers '

:lizabeth AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm which
declares was gathering on the continent againit her kingdom, began
atwintthe to wish that tranquillity were reftored.in Scotland; and irri-
qocn's tated by Mary's late attempt against her government, he
party. determined to act, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour
oa. 23. of the king's party. This resolution he intimated to the

leaders of both faction. Mary, she told them, had held
such a criminal correspondence with her avowed enemies,
and had excited such dangerous conspiracies both against
her crown and her life, that he would henceforth confider
her as unworthy of protection, and would never consent to
restore her to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne.
She exhorted them, therefore, to unite in acknowledging

the

Anders ii. 149. State Trials,' 8. d Digges, 163.
' St.rpe, Ann. ii. 5c.

the king's authority. She promised to procure by her me- B o o K
diation equitable terms for those who had hitherto opposed vi.
it. But if they still continued refractory, {he threatened to x
employ her utmost power to compel them to submit . 1571.
Though this declaration did not produce an immediate es-
fe ; though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of
Edinburgh; though Huntly's brother, fir Adam Gordon, by
his bravery and good conduct, had routed the king's adhe-
rents in the North in many encounters yet such an expli-
cit discovery of Elizabeth's sentiments contributed not a
little to animate one party, and to depress the spirit and
hopes of the other *.

As Morton, who commanded the regent's forces, lay at s572.

Leith, and Kirkaldy still held out the town and castle of Hofiilities
Edinburgh, scarce a day passed without a skirmish and while caetedeon
both avoided any decisive acion, they harassed each other by them.
attacking small parties, beating up quarters, and intercept-
ing convoys. These operations, though little memorable in
themselves, kept the passions of both facions in perpetual
exercise and agitation, and wrought them up, at last, to a
degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not only of
the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and, during the heat of combat,
that this implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the
prisoners they took, of whatever rank or quality, without
mercy, and without trial. Great numbers suffered in this
shocking manner; and the unhappy vicims were led, by
fifties at a time, to execution ; and it -as not till both fides
had smarted severely, that they discontinued this barbarous
practice, so reproachful to the character of the nation h.
Meanwhile, those in the town and castle, though they had
received a supply of money from the duke of Alva , began
to susser for want of provisions. As Morton had destroyed
all the mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
small garrisons in all the houses of strength around it, scar-
city daily increased. At last all the miseries of famine were
felt, and they must have been soon reduced to such extre,
mities, as would have forced them to capitulate, if the Eng-
lifh and French ambassadors had not procured a suspension of
hostilities between the two parties .

THOUGH the negotiation for a marriage between Elizabeth League

and the duke of Anjou had been fruitless, both Charles and between
(he were desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between England
the two crowns. He confidered such a treaty,- not only as

the

' See Append. No. IV. e Cald. ii..289. 294. Strype, ii. 76.
' Crawf. Mem. 28. 2o. i Cald. ii. 345. ibid. 346.

B o O the best advice for blinding the protestants, against whom the

vi. conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution ; but as a good
w\^y.i precaution, likewise, against the dangerous consequences to
1572. which that atrocious measure might expose him. Elizabeth,

who had hitherto reigned without a tingle ally, now saw her
kingdom so threatened with intestine commotions, or exposed
to invasions from abroad, that she was extremely solicitous to
secure the ailiftance of so powerful a neighbour. The diffi-
culties arising from the situation of the Scottish queen were
the chief occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some
terms of advantage for Mary and her party. Elizabeth re-
fuied to liften to any proposition of that kind. Her obfti-
nacy overcame the faint efforts of the French monarch.
Marv's name was not so much as mentioned in the treaty;
and with regard to Scottish affairs, a short article was insert-
Apri 1 ed, in general and ambiguous terms, to this purpoe : "That

the parties contracting fliall make no innovations in Scot-
land; nor susser any stranger to enter, and to foment the
factions there; but it shall be lawful for the queen of Eng-
land to chastise, by force of arms, those Scots who shall con-
tinue to harbour the English rebels now in Scotland ." In
consequence of this treaty, France and England affeEted to
at in concert with regard to Scotland, and Le Croc and fir
William Drury appeared there, in the name of their refpec-
tive sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce for two months
was agreed upor, and during that time conferences were to
be held between the leaders of the opposite facions, in
order to accommodate their differences and restore peace to
the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquillity to the queen's adherents in the South: but in the
North it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon had
.till maintained his reputation and superiority there. Se-
veral parties, under different officers, were sent against him.
Some of them he attacked in the field ; againt others he em-
ployed stratagem; and as his courage and conduCt were equal,
none of his enterprises failed of success. He made war too
with the humanity which became so gallant a man, and
gained ground by that, no lefs'than by the terror of his arms.
If he had not been obliged by the truce to suspend his ope-
rations, he would in all probability have brought that part
of the kingdom to submit entirely to the queen's autho-
rity m.

Proceed- NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuccefs,Mary'.
ingsinEng- interest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom,
landagainf ' u

Digges, 17-191, Cind. 444D *'Sra. e.

but among the English. Nothing could be more offensive to B o K
that nation, jealous of foreigners, and terrified at the prof- vs.
pcc) of the Spanish yoke, than her negociations with.the v
dulke of Alva. The parliament, which met in May, pro- X57
ceeded against her as the molt dangerous enemy of the king-
dom; and after a folenm conference between the lords and
commons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill to declare
her guilty of high treason, and to deprive her of all right of
succession to the crown. This great cafe, as it was then
called, occupied them during the whole session, and was car-
ried on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though he ap-
plauded their zeal, and approved greatly of the course they
were taking, was fatified with hewiug Mary what he
might expet from the resentment of the nation but as ihe
did not yet think it time to proceed to the most violent ex-
tremity against her, she prorogued the parliament .

THESE severe proceedings of the English parliament were The

not more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect French nc
of her allies the French. 'The duke of Monrmorency, in- glee her
deed, who came over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, inb
made a hew of interesting himself in favour of the Scottish
queen; but, instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her re-
ftoration to her throne, all that he demanded was a flight mi-
tigation of the rigour of her imprisonment. Even this small
request he urged with so little warmth or opportunity, that
no regard was paid to it o.

'THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much satis- The massa-

faction, and she expected from it a great increase of security. cre of Pa-
S·r. now turned her whole att ntion towards Scotland, r'
where the animofities of the two factions were fill so high,
and so many interfering intercfts to be adjusted, that a gene-
ral pacification seemed to be at a great distance. But while
ihe laboured to bring them to ome agreement, an event
happened which filled a great part of Europe with astonish-
ment and with horror. This was the massacre of Paris; an
attempt to which there is no parallel in the history of man-
kind, either for the long train of craft and difiimulaticn with
which it was contrived, or for the cruelty and barbarity
with which it was carried into execution. By the molf so--
lemn promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the pro-
teftants were drawn to court; and though doomed tode-
ftrudioH, they were received with caresses, loaded with
honours, and treated; for seven months, with every possible
miark of familiarity and of confidence. In the midst of their 4.ngai 4

security,
" b'Ee, Jumn. zC, c * jeb'r, ii. fit.,

o o security, the warrant for their defirution was issued by their
vl. sovereign, on whefe word they had relied; and, in obedience
w<v, to it, their countrymen, their fellow-citizens, and com-
zs;,- panions, imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thousand

protestants, without diflincion of age, or sex, or condition,
were mnrdered in Paris ane. The fame barbarous orders
were ent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
cnfied. This deed, which no popiih writer, in the present
age, mentions without detestation, was at that time ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome solemn thanksgivings were
offered to God for its success. But among the protestants,
it excited incredible horror; a ftriling picture of which is
drawn by the French ambaflador at the court of England,
tn his account of his first audience after the massacre. " A
gloomy sorrow," fays he, " fat on every face ; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged
on each fide, all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed
through them, not one bestowed on me a civil look, or
made the least return to my salutes P.i'

De-imen- BUT horror was not the only paflion with which this event
a' to Ma- inspired the protestants ; it filled them with fear. They con-
t' 3i1r fidered it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed,

not without much probability, that all the popish princes had
conspired the deltruStion of their fee. This opinion was of
no small disservice to Mary's affairs in Scotland. Many of
ier adherents were protestants; and, though they wiihed
her reiteration, were not willing, on that account, to sacrifice
the faith whi;-h they profefled. They dreaded her attach-
ment to a religion which allowed its votaries to violate the
niolu solemn engagements, and prompted them to perpetrate
the moil barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the
pro:elant- seemed to them the only thing that could uphold
tie Reorm-tio!l against the league which was formed to
everturn it. Nor could the present establishment of religion
be long maintained in Britain, but by a ftrit union with
Elizabeth, and by tile concurrence of both nations, in es-
poufing the defence of it, as a common cause q.

ENCOURAGED by this general disposition to place confi-

dence in her, Elizabeth refimed a scheme which she had
fm-med during the regency of the earl of Murray, of fend-
ing Mary as a prisoner ilno Scotland. But her sentiments
and situation were now verv different' from what they had
been during her negociation with Murray. Her animosity

,*s~~~~~~~~~ against
' Cart', iii.32 ' Diggs, 44, 67.

against the queen of Scots was greatly augmented, by recent B o o K
experience of her inclination, as well as power, not only to vI.
disturb the tranquillity of her reign, but to wrest from her '
the crown; the party in Scotland favourable to Mary was 1571
almost entirely broken; and there was no reason to dread
any danger from France, which still continued to court her
friendship. She aimed, accordingly, at something very dif-
ferent from that which he had in view three years before.
Then he discovercd a laudable solicitude, not only for the
safety of Mary's life, but for securing to her treatment suited
to her rank. Now he required, as an express condition,
that immediately after Mary's arrival in Scotland, he should
be brought to public trial; and havislg no doubt that fen-
tence would be palTed according to her deserts, he insisted
that, for the good of both kingdoms, it hould be executed
without delay r. No tranfadion, perhaps, in Elizabeth's
reign, merits more severe censure. Eager to cut flort the
days of a rival, the objet both of her hatred and dread, and
no less anxious to avoid the blame to which such a deed of
violence might expose her, she laboured, with timid and tn-
generous artifice, to transfer the odium of it from herself to
Mary's own fubjeds. The earl of Mar, happily for the ho-
Aour of his country, had more virtue than to liften to such
an ignominious proposal; and Elizabeth did not venture to
renew it.

WHII.E she was engaged in pursuing this insidious mea- The reTge

sure, the regent was more honourably employed in endea- endcavonri
vouring to negociate a general peace among his countrymen. both 'i
As he laboured for this purpose with the utmost zeal, and ties.
the adverse faction placed entire confidence in his integrity,
hi; endeavours could hardly have failed of being successful.
Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained except the formality of
signing the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the dif-
appointment he met with in his pretensions to the regency;
his abilities, his wealth, and the patronage of the court of
England, gave him greater sway with the party, than even
the regent himself; and he took pleasure in thwarting every
measure pursued by him. He was afraid that, if Maitland
and his afociates recovered any share in the administration,
his own influence would be considerably diminished; and the
regent, by their means, would regain that ascendant which
belonged to his station. With him concurred all thofewho
were in possession of the lands which belonged to any of the
queen's party. His ambition, and their avarice, frustrated

the
* Mrjin:. e214.

B o K the regent's pious intentions, and retarded a blessing so ne-

vl. ceffary to the kingdom, as the eftabliihment of peace .
~\.,",,. SUCH a discovery of the felfiihnefs and ambition which

ija. reigned among his party, made a deep impression on there-

gent, who loved his country, and wished for peace with
. dc:. much ardour. This inward grief broke his spirit, and by

degrees brought on a fettled melancholy, that ended in a dif-
temper, of which he died on the twenty-ninth of Otober.
He was, perhaps, the only perfoi in the kingdom who could
have enioved the ofice of regent without envy, and have left
it without loss of reputation. Notwithstanding their mutual
animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be ho-
nourable, and his integrity to be uncorrupted '.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The queen

of England powerfully supported his claim, and notwith-
itandi:ng the fears of the people, and the jealoufyof the nobles,
r,.rtcn he was e!ected regent ; the fourth who, in te space of five

ei yc

re- years bhd held that dangerous office.
¢tmn, er. As the trure had been prolonged to the first of January,

this gave him an opportunity of continuing the negociations
with the opposite party, which had been set on foot by his
prcdeceffir. They produced no effects, however, till the be-
ginning of the next year.

BEFORE we proceed to there, some events, hitherto un-
touched, deserve our notice.

THE earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner

in Lochlevin ever since his flight into Scotland in the year one
thouand five hundred and fixty-nine, was given up to lord
Hunidon, governor of Berwick; and being carried to York,
suffered there the punifliment of his rebellion. The king's
party were io sensible of their dependence on Elizabeth's pro-
tection, that it was scarcely poflible for them to refuse putting
into her hands a person who had taken up arms againit her;
but as a fumn of money was paid on that account, and shared
between Morton and Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of
whom, during his exile in England, had been much indebted
to cNrthumberland's friendhip, the abandoning this unhappy
nobleman, in fucl a manner, to certain defirucRion, was
universally condemned as a mofl ungrateful and mercenary
action U.

faL;.s cf THIS year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in
t- chu-ch. the government of the church. Soon after the Reformation,

the popish biihops had been confirmed by law in poflefiion of
part of their benefices; but the spiritual jurifdiation, which
belonged to their order, was exercised by fuperintendanis,

though

Melv. 23. Craw.em.23f. Mer. 241.
Cra.L 'wf cm. e5. 222. Ca.;ud. 445.

though with more moderate authority On the death of B o o K
the archbishop of St. Andrew's, Morton obtained from the VL
crown a grant of the temporalities cos that fee. But as it was r/
thought indecent for a layman t hold a benefice to which .,2.
the cure of fouls was annexed, be procured Douglas, recor
of the univerfitv of St. Andrew's, to be chose archbishop .
and, allotting him a fmnall pension out of the revenues of the
fee, retained the remainder in his own hands. The nobles,
who saw the advantages they might reap from such a prac-
tice, supported him in the execution of his plan. It gave
great ofience, however, to the clergy, who, instead of perpe-
tuating an order whose name and power was odious to them,
wiihed that the revenues which had belonged to it might be
employed in supplying such parifles as were still unprovided
with fettled paltors. But, on the other hand, it would have
been raih in the clergy to have irritated too much noblemen,
on whom the very existence of the protestant church in
Scotland depended; and Morton, on the other, conducted
his schemes with such dexterity, and managed them with so
much art, that it was at lafi agreed, in a convention composed
of the leading men among the clergy, together with a corn-
mittee of privy council, "That the name and office of arcl-
bilhop and bishop hlould be continued during the king's sni-
nority, and these dignities be conferred upon the best quali-
fled among the proteitant miniiters but that, with regard to
ther ir spiritual jurifdtions, they should be subject to the ge-
neral aTembly of the church." The rules to be observed in
their election, nd the persons who were to supply the place,
and enjoy the privileges which belonged to the dean and
chapter in times of popery, were likewise particularly fpeci-
fed l. The whole being laid bfore the general assembly,
after fom exceptions to the name of archbi/op, dean, caps'r,
&c. and a proteftaton that it hould be confidered only as a
temporary constitution, until one more perfect could be in-
troduced, it obtained the approbation of that courtY. Even
Knox who was prevented from attending the afiembly by the
ill state of his health, though he declaimed loudly againit the
fimoniacal pation to which Douglas owed his preferent,
and blamed the nomination of a person worn out with age
and infirmities, to an office which required unimpaired vi-
Sour both of body and mind, fcems not to have condemned
the proceedings of the convention ; and, in a letter to the as-
fembly, approved of ome o their regulations with respect to
the ection of biihops, as worthy of being carefully ob-

served.
*C11d. ii. 3c3,. Id1. 35A>

B o o K served Z. In consequence of the aflembly's consent to the

vi. plan agreed upon in the convention, Douglas was installed
_yoJ~ in his office, and at the fame time an archbishop of Glasgow,
ij7i. and a bishop of Dunkeld, were chosen from among the pro-

teftant clergy. They were all admitted to the place in par-
liament, which belonged to the ecclesiastical order. But, in
imitation of the example set by Morton, such bargains were
made with them by different noblemen, as gave them pof-
session only of a very small part of the revenues belonging to
their fees '.

Nov. 7. SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, the
Defh and prime instrument of spreading and establishing the reformed
s- ro religion in Scotland, ended his life, in the fixty-feventh year

of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, disinterestedness, were vir-
tues which he poffefled in an eminent degree. He was ac-
quainted too with the learning cultivated among divines in
that age; and excelled in that species of eloquence which
is calculated to rouse and to inflame b. His maxims, how-
ever, were often too feverc, and the impetuosity of his
temper excessive. Rigid and uncomplying himself, he
shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others. Re-
gardlefs of the diftindions of rank and character, he uttered
his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more
apt to irritate than to reclaim. This often betrayed him
into indecent and undutiful expressions with refped to the
queen's person and conduct. Those very qualities, how-
ever, which now render his character less amiable, fitted
him to be the instrument of Piovidence for advancing the

Reformation

See Appendix, Ne. V. Spots. 26r.
A iriking description of that species of eloquence for which Knox was

d;flinguilhed, is given by one of his contemporaries, Mr. James Melville,
minilter of Anfiruther. " But of all the benefites I had that year [I571],
was the coming of that molt notible Prophet and Apostle of our nation,
Mr. John Knox, to St. Andrews, who, by the faction of the queen occu-
pying the castle and town of Edinburgh, was compelled to remove therefra
with a number of the bet, and chufcd to come 'to St. Andrews. I heard
himi.teach there the prophecies of Danivl that summer and the winter fol-
lowing. I had my pen and little buik, and took away sic things as I could
comprehend. In the opening of his text, he was moderate the space of half
an hour; but when he entered to application, he made me so togrue [thrill]
and tremble that I could not hal, the pen to write.-He was very weak.
1 aw him every day of his do&rine go lie [slowly] and fair, with a furring
of marticks about his neck, a ftaffin the one hand, and good godlie Richart
Ballanden holding him up by the oxter [under the arm], from the abbey to
the parilh kirk; and he the said Richart and another servant lifted him up to
the pulpit, where he behoved to lean at his firfl entrie; but e're he was done
with his sermon, he was so active and vigorous, that he was like to ding the pl-
pit i ad, [beat the pulpit to pieces], and fly out of it." MS. Life of Mr.
James Melville, belonging to Mr. Paton of the Culom-houfe, Edinburgh,
P- 14. I.

Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled him to face B o o K
dangers, and to surmount opposition, from which a person vI.
of a more gentle spirit would have been apt to shrink back. k
By an unwearied application to itudy and to business, as zi71.
well as by the frequency and fervour of his public discourses,
he had worn out a conflitution naturally robust. During a
lingering illness he discovered the utmolt fortitude; and met
the approaches of death with a magnanimity inseparable from
his character. He was constantly employed in ads of de-
votion, and comforted himself with those profpe's of im-
mortality which not only preserve good men from despond-
ing, but fill them with exultation in their last moments.
The earl of Morton, who was present at his funeral, pro-
nounced his eulogium in a few words, the more honourable
for Knox as they came from one whom he had often cen-
fured with peculiar severity: "There lies He, who never
feared the face of man ."

THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such generous 573-

motives as the former regent, he laboured, however, in The ret
good earnef, to eftablith it. 'he public confusions and thes uet'
calamities, to which he owed his power and importance party.
when he was only the fccond person in the nation, were ex-
tremely detrimental to him, now that he was raised to be
the firit. While so many of the nobles continued in arms
againit him, his authority as regent was partial, feeble, and
precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of extinguifling
the flame which she had kindled and kept so long alive in
Scotland c. She had discovered the alliance with France,
from which flie had expected such advantages, to be no
foundation of fecuity. Though appearances of friendfliip
still subsisted between her and that court, and Charles daily
renewed his protestations of inviolable adherence to the
treaty, she was convinced, by a fatal example, how little
she ought to rely on the promises or oaths of that perfidious
monarch. Her ambassador warned her that the French
held secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scot-
land, and encouraged them in their obstinacy d. The duke
of Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom with less
disguise. She was persuaded that they would embrace the
first ferete interval, which the commotions in Frace and
in the Netherlands would allow them, and openly attempt
to land a -body of men in Scotland. She resolved, therefore,
to prevent their getting any footing in the island, and to cut

off
b Spots. 66. Cald. ii. 273, ' Digges, 299. Id. 296. 3;.

B o
o K off all their hopes of finding any aflilfance there by uniting

vI. the two parties.
x.yo THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the regent to
1573. carry on his negociations with them to great advantage.

His orcr- They were now divided into two fations. At the head of
Ijeed by the one were Chatelherault and Huntly. Maitland and
laitland Kirkaldy were the leaders of the other. Their high rank,
and Kirk- their extensive property, and the numbers of their followers,
aIdy. rendered the former considerable. The latter were indebted

for their importance to their personal abilities, and to the
strength of the castle of Edinburgh, which was in their pof-
session. The regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the queen's party,
if it remained entire, would be able to thwart and embarrass
his administration, he resolvcd to divide and weaken it, by
a separate negociation. He made the firt overture to
Kirkaldy and his aiibciates, and endeavoured to renew the
negociation with them, which, during the life of his prede-
ceffor, had been broken o by his o-n artifices. But
Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and fyitem of government,
to be very different from those of the former regent. Mait-
land considered him as a personal and implacable enemy.
They received repeated assurances of prctection from France,
and though the ficge of RDchelle employed the French arms
at that time, the fame hopes, which had so often deceived the
party, still amused them, and they expected that the oblti-
nacy of the hugonots would soon be subdued, and that
Charles would then be at liberty to ad with vigour in Scot-
land. Meanwhile, a supply of money was sent, and if the
caltle could be held out till W'hitfunday, effectual.aid was
promised . Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes
that were dangerous; and Kirkaldy pofllesld the intrepidity
necelfary for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so fituatd, that it might defy all the regent's
power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would net violate the treaty
with France, by fending forces to his aflittance ; and if the
French ilfould be able to land any considerable body of
men, it might be poirible to deliver the queen from captivity,
or at least to balance the influence of France and England
in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the diflionour-
able dependance upon the latter, under which it had fallen.
This splendid but chimerical project they preferred to the

friendihi
Digges, 314.

friendship of Morton. They encouraged the negotiation, B o o K
however, because it served to gain time ; they proposed, for vi.
the fame purpose, that the whole of 'the queen's party -
lhould be comprehended ill it, and that Kirkaldy shou!d 1573.
retain the command of the caltle fix months after the
treaty was signed. His interesl prompted the regent to
reject the former; his penetration discovered the danger
of complying with the latter; and all hopes of accommo-
dation vanishcd .

As oon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on

the city of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inha-
bitants whom he had expelled, was devoted as zealously as
ever to the king's cause. But as the regent had now set
on foot a treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, the ceflation
of arms still continued with them.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, and lif- Accepted

tened eagerly to his overtures. The duke was naturally eraultean
unlleady, and the approach of old age increased his irrefo- Huntly.
lution, and aversion to ation. The miseries of civil discord
had afflicted Scotland almost five years, a length of time far
beyond the duration of anyformer contest. The war, instead
of doing service, had been detrimental to the queen; and
more ruinous than any foreign invasion to the kingdom. In
prosecuting it, neither party had gained much honour; both
had suffered great losses; and had exhausted their own
eitates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons
were in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless but destructive quarrel.

A GREAT ItCp was taken towards this desirable event, by Articles of

the treaty.

the treaty concluded at Perth, between the regent on one t .trzy.
hand, and Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under
the mediation of Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador . The
chief articles in it were these ; that all the parties compre-
hended in the treaty hould declare their approbation of the
reformed religion, now etabliflhcd in the kingdom; that
they ihould submit to the king's government, and own Mor-
toll's authority as regent; that they flluld acknowledge
every thing done in opposition to the king, since his coro-
nation, to be illegal; that on both fides the prisoners who
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the estates which
had been forfeited hould be restored to their proper owners;
that the a of attainder passed against the queen's adherents
ihould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all the crimes
of which they had been guilty since the fifteenth of june one

VOL. I. Z thousand

Mclv. 235, &c. Sec Append. No. VI.

B o o K thousand five hundred and fixty-feven; and that the treaty

vi. should be ratified by the common consent of both parties in
^.v"-J parliament h.
i1573;3 KIRKALDY though abandoned by his associatess who nei-

caflt of ther discovered solicitude nor made provision for his fafetv,
Edinburgh. did not lose courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accom-

modation i. Though all Scotland had now submitted to the
king, he still resolved to defcnd the castle in the queen's
name, and to wait the arrival of the promised succours.
The regent was in want of every thing necessary for carrying
on a siege. But Elizabeth, who determined at any rate to
bring the dissensions in Scotland to a period, before the
French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon
afforded him sufficient supplics. Sir William Drury marched
into Scotland with fifteen hundred foot, and a considerable
April . train of artillery. The regent joined him with all his forces;

and trenches were opened, and approaches regularly carried
on against the castle. Kirkaldy though discouraged by the
loss of a great fum of money, remitted to him from France,
and which fell into the regent's hands through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the moftcorrupt man of that age,
defended himself with bravery, augmented bydefpair. Three-
and-thirty days he resifted all the efforts of the Scotch and
English, who pushed on their attacks with courage, andi
with emulation. Nor did he demand a parley, till the for-
tifications were battered down, and one of the wells in the
castle dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish. Even
then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he determined rather to
fall gloriously behind the last intrenchment, than to yield to
his inveterate enemies. But his garrison was not animated
with the fame heroic or desperate resolution, and, rising in
Aay 29. a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered him-

self to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mistress,
that he hould be favourably treated. Together with him,
James Kirdaldy his brother, lord Home, Maitland, fir Ro-

bert

h Crawf. Mem. 251.
' Melvil, whoie brother, fir Robert, was one of those whojoined with Kirk-

aldy in defence of the caalle, and who was himself ltrongly attached to their
party, aflerts that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reasonable terms of com-
poition, but that all his offers were rejecled by the regent. Mlelv. 240. But
as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of refRoring peace in Scot-
land, and her ambaflidor Killegrew, as well as the earl of Rothes, used their
utmost endeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it
seems more credible to impute the continuance of hostilities to Kirkaldy's ob-
ftinacv, his dillrufi of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other
cau!e.

That this was really the cafe is evident from the poitive testimony of

Spotw. 269, 2-c. Camd. 48. Johnl. Hil. 3, 4. Digges, 334. Craw'-
ford's account agrees, in the main, Witih theirs, iem. 263.

bert Mclvil, a few citizens of Edinburgh, and about one hun- B o o K
dlied and sixty soldiers, were made prisoners k. vr.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during .1vJ

the war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into s173.
the Low-countries, and entering into the service of the
States, added, by their gallant behaviour, to he reputation
for military virtue, which has always been the characteritic
of the Scottish nation.

T'i us by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and Review of

the charac.

the surrender of the cattle, the civil wars in Scotland were ter o botharac
brought to a period. When we review the fate of the na- parties.
tion, and compare the strength of the two faftions, Mary's
partisans among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers and in power. But these advan-
tages were more than counterbalanced by others, which their
antagonists enjoyed; Political abilities, military sWill, and
all the talents which times of aion form, or call forth,
appeared chiefly on the king's fide. Nor could their ene-
mies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of
Murray, tempered with wisdom ; the profound sagacity of
Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating address, of
Maitland ; or the successful valour ofKirkaldy; all of which
were, at first, employed in laying the foundations of the
king's authority. On the one fide, measures were concerted
with prudence, and executed with vigour; on the other,
their resolutions were rash, and their condu6t feeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted by
indignation against the queen, warmly supportei the king's
cause. The clergy threw the whole weight of their popu-
larity into the fame scale. By means of there, as well as
by the powerful interposition of England, !te king's go-
vernment was finally eftablified. Mary loft ever? that shadow
of sovereignty, which, amidst all her sufferings, she had
hitherto retained among part of her own fubjets. As she
was no longer permitted to have an ambassador at the court
of England, the only mark of dignity which the had, for
some time, enjoyed there, she must henceforth be confidered
as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and ttally deserted or
forgotten in the other.

KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Drury's cutlody, Kirkatd

and were treated by him with great humanity, until the putto
queen of England, whose prisoners they were, lhould deter-ath
mine their fate. Mortoh insisted that they fbould susser the

Z 2 punishment
Cald. ii. 408. Mely. 240. Craw. Men 265.

B o o K punifliment due to their rebellion and obstinacy; and de-

vi. dared that, so long as they were allowed to live, he did

not reckon his own person or authority secure; and Eliza-
i;73. beth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his promises in

her name, gave them up to the regent's disposal. He first
confined them to separate prisons; and soon after, with
A.gut 3. Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother,

to be hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did
not expect to be treated more favourably, prevented the ig-
nominy of a public execution, by a voluntary death, and

ended his days," fays Melvil, " after the old Roman
" fashion ."

WHILE the regent was wreaking his vengeance on the

remains of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of as-
fording them any relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the
solitude of her prison. At the fame time her health began
to be much impaired by confinement and want of exercise.
At the entreaty of the French ambafahdor, lord Shrewibury,
her keeper, was permitted to carry her to Buxton-wells,
not far from Tuthbury, the place of her imprisonment.
Cecil, who lately had been created baron of Burleigh, and
lord high treasurer of England, happened to be there at
the fame time. Though no miniiter ever entered more
warmly into the views of a sovereign, or gave stronger proofs
of his fidelity and attachment, than this great man, yet such
was Elizabeth's distrust of every person who approached the
queen of Scots, that her suspicions, in consequence of this
interview, seem to have etcended even to him; and, while
Blary juitly reckoned him her molt dangerous enemy, he
found some difficulty in persuading his own mistress that he
was not partial to that unhappy queen m"

THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from the govern-

ment of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppressive
administration roused a spirit, in attempting to subdue which,
Spain exhausted its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its
glory. Requefens, who succeedcd him, was of a milder
temper, and of a less enterprising genius. This event de-
livered Elizabeth from the perpetual disquietude, occalioned
by Alva's negotiations with the Scottiih queen, and his zeal
for her interest.

,5;4- THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace,

The re- many of the evils which accompany civil war were still felt.
gent's ad- The restraint3 of law, which, in times of public confusion,

mini are little regarded even by civilized nations, were totally

on becoar.s di i
cdious.

I Mele. 242. "Strype, ii. :43. 28S.

dcfpifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to a regular ad- B o o K
miniltration ofjuftice. The disorders in every corner of the vi.
kingdom were become intolerable; and, under the protec- kr w
tion of the one or the other faction, crimes of every kind 1x74.
were committed with impunity. The regent set himielf to
redress these, and by his industry and vigour, order and fe-
curity were re-eftablified in the kingdom. But he loft the
reputation due to this important service, by the avarice which
lie discovered in performing it; and his own exactions be-
came more pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities
which he restrained". Spies and informers were every
where employed; the remembrance of old offences was re-
vierl; imaginary crimes were invented petty trespasses
were aggravated; and delinquents were forced to compound
for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At the
fame time the urrent coin was debased ; licences were
fold for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce ; un-
usual taxes were imposed on commodities; and all the re-
finements in opprellion, from which nations so imperfeetly
polised as the Scots are usually exempted, were put in
practice. None of these were complained of more loudly,
or with greater reafonll than his injuitice towards the church.
The thirds of benefices, out of which the clergy received
their fubfiftellce, had always been slowly and irregularly paid
to collecors appointed by the general afiembly; and during
the civil wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts
of the kingdom. Under colour of redrelfing this grievance,
and upon a promise of assigning every minister a tlipend
within his own parifli, the regent extorted from the church
the thirds to which they had right by law. But the clergy,
instead of reaping any advantage from this alteration, found
that payments became more irregular and dilatory than ever.
One minister was commonly burdened with the care of four
or five parishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, ani the re-
gent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund P.

THE death of Charles iX. xrhich happened this year, was
a new misfortune to the Scottif queen. Henry III. who

succeeded

' ee Append. No. VII.
"The corruption of the coin, during Morton's. adminiftlation, Mas very

great. Although the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of
bullion, was gradually increased byfo: ner princes; the (tandard or finenei sus-
fcred little alteration, and the mixture of alloy was nearly t he far.e A ith v };at is
now used. But Morton mixed a fourth pait of alloy ith every pomun of fil-
ver, and funk, by consequence, the value of coin in proportion. In the ycar

t81, all the money coined by him was called in, and appointed to be rccoincd.
The landard was rcftorcd to the .Jime purity as formerly. Rui,.i,i. i'l-f. to
A. 'eri: Diplom. p. 74.

Cra.f Mem.z 27. Sp';;.'i. Cald. ii. 420. 427.

B K succeeded him, had not the fame attachment to her person;

vl. and his jealousy of the house of Guise, and obfcquioufnefs to
w\J< the queen mother, greatly alienated him from her interest.
1x75. THE death of the duke of Chatelherault must likewise be
Jan. :-. confidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had

frequently declared him next heir to the crown, this entitled
him to great refpet among his countrymen, and enabled
him, more than any other person in the kingdom, to counter-
balance the regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews between the

wardens of the Scottilh and Englifli marches, a fcufllc hap-
pened, in which the Englifi were worlted ; a few killed on
the spot; and fir James Forrester, the warden, with several
gentlemen, who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the regent were too sensible of the advantage
which resulted from the good understanding that subsisted
between the two kingdoms, to allow this flight accident to
interrupt it.

A-tempts THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in ome
of the cer- danger of being disturbed by another cause. Though the
the epico- persons raised to the dignity of biihops poffiffed very finall
iai order. revenues and a very moderate degree of power, the clergy,

to whom the regent and all his meafurcs were become ex-
tremely odious, began to be jealous of that order. Know-
ing that corruptions steal into the church gradually, under
honourable names, and upon decent pretences, they were
afraid that, from such small beginnings, the hierarchy might
grow in time to be as powerful and oppreflive as ever. The
chief author of these suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a
man distinguished by his uncommon erudition, by the feve-
rity of his manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But,
bred up in the retirement of a college, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life; and being more attentive to lie ends
which he pursued, than to the means which he employed
for promoting them, he often defeated laudable designs, by
the impetuosity and imprudence with which he carried them
on. A question was moved by him in the affcmbly, "whe-
ther the office of bishop, as now exercised in the kingdom,
were agreeable to the word of God ?" In the ecclesiastical
judicatories, continual complaints were made of the bishops
for neglec of duty, many of which their known remiflhefs
too well justified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused
of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty by the as-
fembly. The regent, instead of checking, connived at these
disputes about ecclesiastical government, as they diverted the

zeal

zeal of the clergy from attending to his daily encroachments B K
on the patrimony of the church q. vi.

THE weight of the regent's oppressive administration /J

had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower and 1576.
middle rank; but he began now to take such steps as con- tates some
vinced the nobles, that their dignity would not long exempt of the no-
them from feeling the effets of his power. An accident, bles.
which was a frequent cause of diflenfion among the Scot-
tifli nobles, cccafioned a difference between the earls of
Argyll and Athol. A vassal of the former had made some
depredationis on the lands of the latter. Athol took arms
to punish the offender i Argyll, to protect him ; and this
ignoble quarrel they were ready to decide in the field,
when the regent, by interposing his authority, obliged them
to disband their forces. Both of them had been guilty of
irregularities, which though common, were contrary to the
letter of the law. Of these the regent took advantage, and
resolved to found on them a charge of treason. This de-
sign was revealed to the two earls bv one of Mortonrs re-
tainers. The common danger, to which they were exposed,
compelled them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close
confederacy for their mutual defence. Their jundion ren-
dered them formidable; they despised the summons which
the regent gave them to appear before a court of justice;
and he was obliged to desist from any further prosecution.
But the injury he intended made a deep impreflion on their
minds, and drew upon him severe vengeance .

NoR was he more successful in an attempt which he

made, to load lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having
formed a conspiracy againit his life. Though those who
were supposed to be his accomplices, were seizcd and tor-
tured, no evidence of any thing criminal appeared; but,
on the contrary, many circumltances discovered his inno-
cence, as well as the regent's secret views, in imputing to
him such an odious design .

THE Scottish nobles, who were almost equal to their 157S.
monarchs in power, and treated by them with much dif- They turn

their eves

tintion, observed these arbitrary proceedings of a regent toxardsthe
with the tmoft indignation. The people, who, under a king.
form of government extremely simple, had been little ac-
customed to the burden of taxes, complained loudly of the
regent's rapacity. And all began to turn their eyes towards
the young king, from whom they expected the redress of all

their

, Cald. Assemblies, 157., &c. Johfti. I-lft. 15.
' Craf. Mem. 85. · Cra f. Men:. 8;.

B o o ; their grievances, and the return of a more gentle and more

vi. equal administration.

_'.v J JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The

I577' queen, oon after his birth, had committed him to the care

Jame.'s
education of the earl of lar, and during the civil wars he had resiled
anddiipoii- fecurelv in the cattle of Stirling. Alexander Erikine, that
to"s. nobleman's brother, had the chief direction of his education.

Under him, the famous Buchanan ated as preceptor, to-
gether with three other mailers,the molt eminent the naion
afforded for kill in those sciences which were deeimed ne-
cefiary for a prince. As the young king fhlewed'an uncom-
mon palLon for learning, and made great progres in it;
the Scots fancied that they already dicovered in him all
those virtues which the fondness or credulity of subjects
usually ascribe to princes during their minority. But as
James was fill far from that age at which the law permit-
ted him to assume the reins of government, the regent did
not ftiflicientl attend to the sentiments of the people, nor
reflect how naturally these prejudices in his favour might
encourage the king to anticipate that period. He not only
neglected to secure the friendship of those who were about
the king's person, and who polfefed his ear, but had even

He is fu- exasperated fonme of them by personal injuries. Their re-
p-c;nus of fentment concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing
tlhergent's into the king early suspicions of Morton's power and de-
po'r. signs. A king, they told him, had often reason to fear,

seldom to love, a regent. Prompted by ambition, and by
interest, he would endeavour to keep the prince in perpe-
tual infxacy, at a distance from his subjects, and unacquaint-
ed with bu;nefs. A small degree of vigour, however, ias
sufficient- to break the yoke. Subjects naturally reverence
their sovereign, and become impatient of the temporary and
delegated jurifdidcion of a regent. Morton had governed
with rigour unknown to the ancient monarchs of Scotland.
The nation groaned under his oppreflions, and would wel-
come the firit prospect of a milder administration. At pre-
lent the king's name was hardly mentioned in Scotland,
his friends v-ere without influence, and his favourites with-
out honour. But one effort v.ould discover Morton's power
to be as feeble as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would
put himself in pofieffion of his ju/t authority, and rescue
the nation from intolerable tyrannv. If he did not regard
his own rights as a king, let him liften, at least, to the cries
es his people.

THSE
Mel-. 249.

THirESE suggestions made a deep impreflion on the young B o o K

king, who was trained up in an opinion that e was born to vI.
command. His approbation of the design, however, was »
of fiall consequence, without the concurrence of the nobles. Is77.
The earls of Argyll and Athol, two of the mott powerful of A plot
that body, were animated with implacable rfentment against f°ormne
the regent. 'To them the cabal in Stirling-catle communi- reent.
.'ted the plot which was on foot ; and they entering warmly
ilto it, Alexander Erikinc, who, since the death of his
brother, and during the minority of his nephew, had the
command of that fort, and the cuitody of the king's person,
admitted them secretly into the king's lprefece. 'They gavi
him the fame account of the mifcry of iis fbjects, under
the regent's arbitrary adminiltration ; they complained loud-
lv of the injuitice with which themifelves had been treated,
and besought the king, as the only means for redrcfilng the
grievances of the nation, to call a council of all the nobles.
lames consented, and letters were iil n.ed in his name for that
purpose ; but the twsaearls took care that they hould be sent
only to such as were known to bear no good will to Morton?.

'I'mF mimlber of thele was, however, io coniderable, that

on the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles as-
feibled at Stirling; andJ so highly were they incensed againil
Morton, that, although, on receiving intelligence of Ar-
gyll and Athol's interview with the king, he had made a
feint as if he would resign the regency, they dvilted the 7,.
king, without regarding this offer, to !cprive him of his iMasah: ^.
office, and to take the adminiitration of government into
his own hands. Iord ;ianmis, the chancellor, and Herries,
were appointed to signify this reic:ition to Morton, who
was at that time in I)alkcith, lis utial place of refdlence.
Nothing could equ:.l the joy h. wii h

wllih this unexpcted re- He resigns

foluLion tilled the nniion, but the uirprife occasioned by the his oficc,
leeming alacrity witlh wh;ch the regent dlfcended from so ;ild retires
high a tation. IHe neither wanted iagacity to foresee the
danger of rcfigning, nor inclination to keep poflitlion of an
office, for the cxpirati(n of which the law had ixed so dif-
tant a term. IBut all the sources, whence tlhe fadion of
which he was head, derived their ttrcnlth, had cither
failcd, or now iupplied his adversarics v.ith the means of
humbling him. The co'mlnions, the city of Edinburgh, the
clergy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied
opprcflions. Eiizabeth, having lately bound herfclf by treaty,

Sots. 2.

o o to fend a considerable body of troops to the assistance of the
vi. inhabitants of the Netherlands, who were struggling for li-

jrv bertv, had little leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland;

ng. and as file had nothing to dread from France, in wvhofe
councils the princes of Lorrain had not at that time much
influence, lhe was not displeased, perhaps, at the birth of
new factions in the kingdom. Even those nobles, who
had long been joined with Morton in faction, or whom
he had attached to his prfon by benefits, Glamis, Lind-
ayv, Ruthven, Pitcairr the secretary, Murray of 'illi-
Dardin comptroller, all defrtted his falling fortunes, and ap-
peared in the council at Stirling. So many concurring
circumstances convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
-rki x:. d:etermined him to give way to a torrent, which was too im-

petuous to be refi;ted. He attended the chancellor and
Herres to Edinburgh; was present when the king's accept-
ance of the government was proclaimed; and, in the pre-
fence of the people, surrendered to the king all the autho-
rity to which he had any claim in virtue of his office. Tis
ceremony was accompanied with such excessive joy and ac-
clamations of the multitude, as added, no doubt, to the an-
guith which an ambitious spirit must feel, when compelled
to renounce supreme po-wer; and convinced Morton how
entirely he had loft the affet&ions of his countrymen. He
obtained, however, from the king an ad containing the ap-
probation of every thing (lone by him in the exercise of his
office, and a pardon in the most ample form that his fear or
caution could deviie, of all pall offences, crimes, and trea-
sons. The nobles, who adhered to the king, bound them-
selves under a great penalty, to procure. the ratification of
this act in the firit parliament .

Continues A COUNCIL of twelve peers was appointed to aflift the
ta w-ath king in the administration of affairs. Morton, deserted by
the m- his own party, and unable to struggle with the fadion
d-eri; -which governed abfolutelv at court, retired to one of his
party, feats, and seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occu-

pied only in the amnfements of a country life. His mind,
however, was deeply difquictcd with all the uneasy reflec-
tions which accompany disappointed ambition, and intent
an schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even in
this retreat, which the people alled the Lisn's-di'n, his
wealth and abilities rendered him formidable and the new
ccunfellors were so imprudent as to rouse him, by the pre-

cipitancy
Spots.£ z. Cra'Af. Meri. a89. Cald. i. 5.

cipitancy with which they hastened to strip him of all the u o o K
remains of power. They required him to surrender the vi.
callle of Edinburgh, which was itill in his poflfffion. He
Tiuifed at first to do so, and began to prepare for its defences 3578
but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms, and re-
pulsed part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard a
convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that import-
ant fortrcfs, without refiilance. This encouraged his ad-
verfaries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to
multiply tlher demands upon him, in such a manner, as con-
vinced him that nothing less than his utter ruin would fa-
tisfy their inveterate hatred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began already to
decline. The chancellor, the allcfi ad mot moderate man
in the party, having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental
rencounter between his follo-ers and those of the earl of
Crawford ; Atho!, who was appointed his successor in that
high office, the earls of Eglinton, Caithness, and lord Ogil-
vie, all the prime fvourites at court, were either avowed
papiffs, or fufpeced of leaning to the opinions of that sec.
In an age when the return of popery was so much and so
juitly dreaded, this gave univcrfl alarm. As Morton had
always treated the pa)ilfts with rigour, this unfafonable fa-
your to persons of that religion made all zealous protestants
remember that circumllance in his adminiltration with great
praise Y.

MORTON, to whom none of these pnrticulars verc un- Refumne

known, thought this the proper juicture for setting to work his former
the inftrunents which he had bein picparing. Having autlort''y.
gained the confidence of the earl of Mar, and of the counteis
hlis mother, he insinuated to tlem, that Alexander Erikne
had sorned a plot to deprive his neplew of the government
of Stirling-cafile, and t.c cultody of tle king's person and
easily induced an al ibitious womnan, and a youth of twenty,
to employ force to prevent this ifppefed injury. The earl
repairing suddenly to Srirling, alld being admitted as usual Api'l zi.
into the catle witl his attendants, seizcd the gates early in
the morning, and turned out his unicle, who dreaded no
danger from his hands. The foldlers of the garrison sub-
mitted to him as their governor, and, with little danger and
ilo efFusion of blood, he became master both of the kinlg'
person, and of the fortress z.

AN event so unexpeted occasioned great conlternation.
Though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he

" Sp3;ir 2j. ' Cald. ii. 53;

B O O K wa; univerdllly believed to be the author of the attempt.

Iv. The new couniellors saw it t be necelT.rv, for their own
',-ir fafetv, to change their meaftires, and, iltead of pursuing
1iS-. him with such implacable refJntment, to enter into ternis

of accommodation with an advcrfary, fill so capable of
creating them trouble. I,'oir were named, on each fide, to
adjuit the difference.. 'Tlhey met not far from Dalkeith;
and when they hd broi-;t.nmatcrs near a conclulion,
Morton, who was too fataciuls not to improve thc. advantage
which their fecuritv and their ttention to the treaty aord-
ed hin, fct out in the night-time for Stirling, and having
}71Y 24. gained Murray of Tiilibardin, lar's uncle, was admitted

by him into the cattle; and managing nutters there with
his usual dexterity, he soon had more entirely the command
of the fort, than the earl himself. He was likewise admittted
to a feat in the privy-council, and acquired as complete an
ifcendant in it .

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at

Edinburgh now approached, this gave him iome anxiety.
He was afraid of conducring the young king to a city whose
inhabitants were so much at the devotion of the adverse sac-
tion. ie was no less unwilling to leave James behind at
Stirling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he iflued a pro-
clamation in the king's name, changing the place of meet-
ing from Edinburgh to Stirling-caftle. This Athol and his
prarty represented as a ltep altogether unconstitutional. The
king, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended coun-
fellors are his slaves ; a parliament, to which all the nobles
may repair without fear, and where they may deliberate with
freedom, is abfolutelv necefliry for fettling the nation,
after disorders of such long continuance. But in an assembly
called contrary to all form, held within the walls of a garri-
ion, and overawed by armed men, what safety could mem-
bers expect ? what liberty could prevail in debate ? or what
July 2j. benefit result to the public ? The parliament met, however,

on the day appointed, and, notwithstanding the protestation
of the earl of Montrose and lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to bufilefs. The king's acceptance of the
government was confirmed; the at granted to Morton, for
his security, ratified ; fomc regulations, with regard to the
numbers and authority of the privy council,' were agreed
upo:n; and a pcnfion for life granted to the countess of

Mar,
Cld. ii. 536.

Mar. who had been so instrumental in bringing about the B o K
late revolution 1, vl.

MEANWAIiLE Argyll, Athol, and their followers, took

arms, upon the specious pretence of rescuing the king from 1578.
captivity, and the kingdom from oppreflion. James him- Argyll and
self, impatient of the servitude in which he was held, by a Atho a
man whom he had long been taught to hate, secretly en- again
couraged their enterprise ; though, at the fame time, he was him.
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but to levy
forces againlt them, and even to declare, by proclamation,
that he was perfetly free from any conftlaint, either upon
his person or his will. Both fides quickly took the field. Auao ii.
Argyll and Athol were at the head of seven thousand men;
the earl of Angus, Morton's nephew, met them with an
army five thousand strong; neither party, however, was
eager to engage. Morton diflrulled the fidelity of his own
troops. The two earls were sensible that a single vittory,
however complete, would not be decisive; and as they were
in no condition to undertake the liege of Stirling-caftle,
where the king was kept, their trength would soon be ex-
haulted, while Morton's own wealth, and the patronage of
the queen of England, might furnilh him with endless re-
sources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had Eaizabt
f;-nt into Scotland to negotiate an accommodation between negodatfc
the two factions, a treaty was concluded, in consequence of an aom-
which Argyll and Athol were admitted into the king's pre- between
fence; some of'their party were added to the privy council ; them.
and a convention of nobles called, in order to bring all re-
maining differences to an amicable iflue .

As soon as James aftumed the government into his own

hands, he difparched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform
Elizabeth of that event to oiler to renew the alliance be-
tween the two kingdoms; and to demand poflelionof the
eltate which had lately fallen to him by the death of his
grandmother the countess of Lennox. That lady's second
ion had left one daughter, Arabella Stewart, who was born
in England. And as the chief objedion against the preten-
sions of the Scottith line to the crown of England, was that
maxim of Englith law, which excludes aliens from any-
right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by
granting this demand, would have efablifhed a precedent in
James's favour, that might have been deemed decisive, with
regard toa point, which it had been her contlant care to keep
i;decided. Without fuiiering this delicate question to

be
* alw. il. 34?- Parl. J.arc. 6. Claws. Mtm. 307.

B O O R be tried, or allowing any lew light to be thrown on tat,

vr. which he confidered as the great mystery of her reign, she

~v'V commanded lord Burleigh, master of the wards, to sequester
1s57. the rent& of the efiate; and by this method of proceeding,

gave the Scottish king early warning how necessary it would
be to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success in claims
of greater importance, but equally liable to be controverted .
Ij7. AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the con-

tending nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But
it was followed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of
reconcilement, having invited the leaders of the opposite
party to a great entertainment, Athol the chancellor was soon
April 24. after taken ill, and died within a few days. The symptoms

and violence of the disease gave rife to trong suspicions of
his being poisoned ; and though the physicians, who opened
his body, differed in opinion as to the cause of the diftremper,
the chancellor's relations publicly accused Morton of that
odious crime. The advantage which visibly accrued to him,
by the removal of a man of great abilities, and averfc from
all his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the pec-
ple, who are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent
persons to extraordinary causes e

Moiton's THE office of chancellor was bestowed upon Argyll, whom
illegal pro- this preferment reconciled, in a great mcafure, to Morton's
cedings administration. He had now recovered all the authority he
.ainft the
famil of possessed during his regency, and had entirely broken, or
H-amnion. baffled, the power and cabals of his enemies. None of the

great families remained to be the objects of his jealous or
to obftrudc his designs, but that of Hamilton. The earl of
Arran, the eldest brother, had never recovered the shock
which he received from the ill success of his passion for the
qucen,and had now altcgether loft hisreafon. LordJohn, the
second brother, was in pofl:Efion of the family estate.
Lord Claud was commcndator of Paisley; both of them
young men, ambitious and enterprising. Morton dreaded
their influence in the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to fiare
their spoils ai.ong them; and as all princes naturally
view their fuccefTors with jealousy and hatred, it was easy
to infuse these passions into the mind of the young king.
A pretence was at hand to )uftify the most violent proceed-
ings. The pardon, ftipula:ed in the treaty of Perth, did
not extend to such as were acceflary to the murder of the
regents Murray or Lennox. Lord John and his brother

rwere
i Caed. 46i. ' Spotrw. 326.

were fufpceed of being the authors of both there crimes, o o
and had been included in a general ad of attainder on that vi.
account. Without summoning them to trial, or examining <-vr
a single witness to prove the charge, this attainder was now 179.
thought sufficient to subjed them to all the penalties which
they woull have incurred by being formally convicted. The
earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the
lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commifion
to size their persons and estates. On a few hours warning,
a considerable body of troops was ready, and marched to-
wards Hamilton in hoitile array. Happily the two brothers
made their efcapc, though with great diificulty. But their
lands were confiscated; the caltlcs of Hamilton and Di-affan
besieged; those who defended them punished. The earl of
Arran, though icapable, from his situation, of committing
any crime, was involved, by a shameful abuse of law, in the
common ruin of his family; and as if he, too, could have
been guilty of rebellion, he was confined a close prisoner.
These proceedings, so contrary to the fundamental principles
of jftice, were all ratified in the subsequent parliament .

About this time Mary sent, by Naue her secretary, a let-

ter to her fosi, together with ome jewels of value, and a velt
embroidered with her own hands. But as she gave him only
the title of prince of Scotland, the mefienger was difmifi!d
without lbeing admitted into his presence g.

THo'UGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular rea-

son to fear any attempt of the popilh princes in Mary's fa-
vour, flie fill continued to guard her with the fame anxious
care. The acquisition of Portugal, on the one hand, and the
defence of the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed
the councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces by
intestine commotions, and under a weak and capricious
prince, despiscd and distrusted by his own fubjets, was in
no condition to diflurb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long Negoca-
amused that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage with tons for
the duke of Alenqon, the king's brother. But whether, at t-.acne
the age of forty-five, ihe really intended to marry a prince Elizab;eth
O twenty; whether the pleasure of being flattered and and the
courted, made her liften to the addrefles of so young a lover, duke of
whom the allowed to visit her at two different times, and Alen'o°n
treated with the molt diltinguifiing refpeQd; or whether
considerations of interest predominated in this as well as in
every other tranfafion of.her reign, are problems in history
which we are not concerned to resolve. During the pro-

grefs
Cr'awf. Mem. 311. Spotfw. 306, C Crawf. Mem. 314-

B o K grefs of this negociation, which was drawn out to an extra-

vi. ordinary length, Mary could expect no affiltance from the

X_~ French court, and seems to have held little correspondence
1579. with it; and there was no period in her reign, wherein

Elizabeth enjoyed more perfect fecuritv.

Twofaou- MORTON seems at this time to have been equally secure;
ntes gin but his fecuritv was not so well founded. He had wea-
an aicend-
ant over thered out one ilorm, had cruihed his adversaries, and was
IJnes. again in pofltelion of the sole direction of affairs. But as the

king was now of an age when the character and dispositions
of the mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become vi-
fible, the fmalleit attention to there might have convinced
him, that there was reason to expect new and more dan-
gerous attacks on his power. James early discovered that
excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied him
through his whole life. This paflron, which naturally arises
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at
his age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be ex-
pected that the choice of the objects, on whom he placed
his affections, flould be made with great skill. The most
considerable of them was Efme Stewart, a native of France,
and son of a second brother of the earl of Lennox. He
was diitinguifhed by the title of lord D'Aubigne, an estate
in France, which descended to him from his ancestors, on
whom it had been conferred, in reward of their valour and
Sept. S. services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland about

this time, on purpose to demand the etate and title of
Lennox, to which he pretendel a legal right. He was re-
ceived at firit by the k:ng with the refpedt due to so near a
relation. The gracefulness of his person, the elegance of
his dress, and his courtly behaviour, made a great impref-
sion on James, who, even in his more mature years, was
little able to reilit these frivolous charms; and his affection
flowed with its usual rapidity and profusion. Within a few
days after Stewart's appearance at court, he was created
lord Aberbrothock, soon after earl, and then duke of Len-
nox, governor of Dunbarton castle, captain of the guard, firit
lord of the bed-chamber, and lord high chamberlain. At the
fame time, and without any of the envy or emulation which
is usual among candidates for favour, captain James Stewart,
the second son of lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence.
But notwithstanding this union, Lennox and captain Stew-
art were persons of very oppoite charaters. The former
was naturally gentle, humane, candid ; but unacquainted
with the state of the country, and misled or misinformed by
thlof whom he trusted ; not unwortJy to be the companion

of

of the young king in his amusements, but utterly disqualified B O 0 K
for acting as a minister in directing his affairs. The latter was vi.
remarkable for all the vices which ender a man formidable _
to his country, and a pernicious counsellor to his prince; nor 1579.
did he possess anyone virtue to counterbalance these vices, un-
less dexterity in conducting his own designs, and an enter-
prifing courage, superior to the sense of danger, may pass by
that name. Unrestrained by religion, regardless of decency,
and undismayed by opposition, he aimed at objects seemingly
unattainable; but under a prince void of experience, and
blind to all the defects of those who had gained his favour,
his audacity was successful;- and honours, wealth, and
power were the reward of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole Theylabour
address to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obftrut- to under-

mine Mor-

ed their full poffeflion of power. As James had been bred ton's au,
up with an aversion for that nobleman, who endeavoured thoilty.
rather to maintain the authority of a tutor, than to aft with
the obsequiousness of a minister, they found it no difficult
matter to accomplish theisdefign. Morton, who could no Oaober?;.
longer keep the king hut upwithini thewalls of Stirling-caftle,
having called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, brought
him thither. James made his entry into the capital with
great solemnity; the citizens received him with the loudest
acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, ac-
cording to the mode of that age. After a long period of
thirty seven years, during which Scotland had been subjed-
ed to the delegated power of regents, or to the feeble go-
vernment of a woman; after having suffered all the mi-
series of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign armies,
the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a king. Fond even of that hadow of authority, which a
prince of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered themselves,
that union, order, and tranquillity would now be eftored to
the kingdom. James opened the parliament with extraor-
dinary pomp, but nothing remarkable passed in it.

THESE demonstrations, however, of the people's love and xS8o

attachment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourites to
continue their insinuations against Morton; and as the king
now resided in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe, to which all
his fubjets had access, the cabal against the earl grew daily
stronger, and the intrigue, which occasioned his fall, ripened
gradually.

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavour- Mortonl-
ed to put a stop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by re- deavours to

prevent
presenting him as a formidable enemy to the reformed reli- tcem.

Vol. I. A a gion,

o o K gions a secret agent in favour of popery, and a known emilTary
vI. of the house of Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every ru-

mour of this kind, spread the alarm among the people. But
80o. Lennox, either out of complaisance to his maler, or con-

vinced by the arguments of some learned divines whom the
king appointed to instruct him in the principles of the pro-
tenant religion, publicly renounced the errors of popery, in
the church of St. Giles, and declared himfilf a member of
the church of Scotland, by signing her Confession of Faith.
This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence
some zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force
of the accusation .

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was

preparing to seize the king's person and to carry him into
England. Whether despair of maintaining his power by any
other means, had driven him to make any overture of that
kind to the English court, or whether it was a calumny in-
vented by his adversaries to render him odious, cannot now
be determined with certainty. As he declared at his death
that such a design had never entered into his thoughts, the
latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence,
however for reviving the office of lord chamberlain, which
had been for some time disused. That honour was confer-
red on Lennox. Alexander Erfline, Morton's apital ene-
my, was his deputy; they had under them a band of gentle-
men, who were appointed conflantly to attend the king, and
to guard his person .

Elizabeth MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended
interposes to insinuate by such usual precautions for the king's
n his bc- safety; and as his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose

protection had often stood him in stead in his greatest diffi-
culties. In consequence of this application, Bowes her
envoy, accused Lennox of practices against the peace of the
two kingdoms, and infifled, in her name, that he should
intantly be removed from the privy council. Such an un-
precedented demand was confidered by the counsellors as an
affiont to the king,and an encroachment on the independence
of the kingdom. They affected to call in question the envoy'*
powers, and upon that pretence refused him farther audience :
and he retiring in disgust, and without taking leave, fir
Alexander Home was sent to expostulate with Elizabeth on
the subjed. After the treatment which her envoy had re-
ceived, Elizabeth thought it below her dignity to admit
Home into her presence. Burleigh, to whom he was com-

manded
Crawf. Memc. 319. SpotL 30S. Crawf. Mem. 320.

manded to impart his commission, reproached him with his B o Q K
maller's ingratitude towards a benefadrefs who had placed vi.
the crown on his bead, and required him to advise the king to vc-
beware of sacrificing the friendship of so necessary an ally to fs8p.
the giddy humours of a young man, without experience,
and trongly fufpeced of principles and attachments incom-
patible with the happiness of the Scottish nation.

rTHI accusation of Lennox, hastened, in all probability, Morton ac-

Morton's fall. The a of indemnity, which he had ob- cufedofthe
tained when he resigned the regency, was worded with such murder of

the late

scrupulous exatnefs, as almost screened him from any legal king.
prosecution. The murder of the late king was the only
crime which could not, with decency, be inserted in a
pardon granted by his son. Here Morton still lay open to
the penalties of the law, and captain Stewart, who shunned
no acion, however desperate, if it led to power or to fa-
vour, entered the council-chamber while the king and nobles
warc assembled, and falling on his laees, accused Morton Decem. 30.
of being accessary, or, according to the language of the
Scottish law art and part, in the conspiracy against the life
of his majesty's father, and offered, under the usual penal-
ties, to verify this charge by legal evidence. Morton who
was prefcnt, heard this accusation with rmnefs; and re-
plied with a disdainful smile, proceeding either from con-
tempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known zeal in
punihjing thofc who were fufpeted of that detestable crime,
might well exempt himself from any suspicion of being ac-
ceflary to it; nevertheless, he would cheerfully submit to
a trial, either in that place or in any other court; and
doubted not but his own innocence, and the malice of his
enemies, would then appear in the clearet light." Stewart,
who was ill on his knees, began to inquire how he would
reconcile his bestowing so many honours on Archibald
Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be one of the murder-
ers, with his pretended zeal againit that crime. ' Morton was
ready to answer. But the king commanded both to be remov-
ed. The earl was confined, first of all to his own house, and
then committed to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alex- rs5r.
ander Erflkine was governor; nd as if it had not been a Jan. 2.
sufficient indignity to subjet him to the power of one of his
enemies, he was loon after carried to Dunbarton, of which
Lennox had the command. A warrant was likewise issued Jan. I8.
for apprehending Archibald Douglas; but he, having re-
ceived timely intelligence of the approaching danger, fled
into England k.

A a 2 TH
k Crawf. Mem. 23.

B O O K THE earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceed-

Vi. ings, not to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient

xv,~ 'enmity between the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and
xs81. who believed that a conspiracy was now formed for the de-

ftrution of all who bore that name, was ready to take arms
in order to rescue his kinsman. But Morton absolutely for-
bad any such attempt, and declared that he would rather
fnffer ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputation upon
his own character by seeming to decline a trial'.

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH did not fail to interpose, with warmth, in be-
measures in half of a man who had contributed so much to preserve her
rder tol influence over Scotland. The late tranfadcions in that king-

e fe
hi.m.

dom had given her great uneasiness. The power which
Lennox had acquired independent of her was dangerous;.
the treatment her ambafladors had met with differed greatly
from the refped with which the Scots were in use to receive
her minilters; and the attack now made on Morton fully
convinced her that tere was an intention to sow the feeds
of discord between the two nations, and to seduce James
into a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with
some popish princess. Full of these apprehensions, fie
ordered a considerable body of troops to be assembled on the
borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph as her am-
blafador into that kingdom. He addrefled himself not only
to James, and to his council, but to a convention of estates,
met at that time. He began with enumerating the extraor-
dinary benefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scot-
tifh nation: that without demanding a single foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the liberties of the king-
dom in the smallest article, fle had, at the expence of the
blood of her subjects and the treasures of her crown,
rescued the Scots from the dominion of France, established
among them true religion, and put them in possession of
their ancient rights: that from the beginning of civil diffen-
tions in the kingdom, she had proteced thof. who espoused
the king's cause, and by her afliftance alone, the crown had
been preserved on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
verse fation baffled; that an union, unknown to their an-
ceftors, but equally beneficial to both kingdoms, had subsisted
for a long period of years; and though so many popish
princes had combined to disturb this happy state of things,
her care, and their constancy, had hitherto defeated all these
efforts: that he had observed of late an unusual coldness,
distrust, and estrangement in the Scottish council, which file

could
'Johns. 64. Spotfw. 31.

could impute to none but to Lennox, a subjec of France, B o o K
a retainer to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of vI.
popery, and still fufpeced of favouring that superstition. _
Not satisfied with having mounted so fall to an uncommon x581.
height of power, which he exercised with all the rashness of
youth, and all the ignorance of a stranger not thinking it
enough to have deprived the earl of Morton of the authority
due to his abilities and experience, he had conspired the ruin
of that nobleman, who had often exposed his life in the
king's cause, who had contributed more than any other sub-
jed to place him on the throne, to rcfift the encroachments
of popery, and to preserve the union between the two king-
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among the nobles
in Scotland, if they wifled for the continuance of amity
with England, if they valued the privileges of their own
order, he called upon them, in the name of his mistress, to
remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox from the pre-
fence of the young king, to rescue Morton out of the hands
of his avowed enemy, and secure to'him the benefit of a
fair and impartial trial: and if force was ecefary towards
accompliflling a design so salutary to the king and kingdom,
he promised them the protecion of his mistress in the enter.
prifc, and whatever assistance they fliould demand either of
men or money m.

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accompanied

with such an unusual appeal from the king to his fubjets,
were not the only means employed by Elizabeth in fvour of
Morton, and against Lennox. She prfuaded the prince of
Orange to fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour which many
of his fubjeds had displayed in the service of tlie states, to
enter into a long detail of the reftleis enterprises of the
popish princes against the protestant religion; to beseech
him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England, the
only barrier which secured his kingdom against their dan-
gerous cabals; and, above all things, to diitruft the infinua-
tions of those who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that
union between the British nations, which all the protestants
in Europe beheld with so much ple.!fure ".

JAMEs'S counsellors were too intent upon the deftrucion James de-

of their enemy to liften to there remonltrances. The offi- termines to
cious interposition of the prince of Orange, the haughty proceed
tone of Elizabeth's message, and her avowed attempt
to excite fubjeEts to rebel againfl their fovereigh, were

confi-
" Cld. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 6zr. · Cald. iii. 9. See Append. No. VIII.

B OO K confidered as unexampled insults on the majesty and in-

vr. dependence of a crowned head. A general and evasive

x.-,. answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to assert
is58. his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpeded of favouring

Morton were turned out of office, some of them were re-
quired to surrender themfelvcs prisoners ; the men capable
of bearing arms throughout the kingdom were commanded
to be in readiness to take the field ; and troops were levied and
'poftd on the borders. The English ambassador, finding
that neither the public manifesto which he had delivered to
the convention, nor his private cabals with the nobles, could
excite them to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland,
where libels against him had been daily published, and even
attempts made upon his life. In both kingdoms every thing
wore an hostile afpe&. But Elizabeth, though she wiflled
to have intimidated the Scottish king by her preparations,
had no inclination to enter into a war with him, and the
troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage, were
soon dispersed .

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's

fafety,the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes
for his deftrucion. Captain Stewart, his accuser, was first
appointed tutor to the earl of Arran, and soon after both the
title and estate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
fonme frivolous claim, were conferred upon him. The new-
made peer was commanded to condut Morton from Dun-
barton to Edinburgh; and by that choice the earl was not
only warned what fate he might exped, but had the cruel
mortification of feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with
honours, in reward of the malice which he had contributed
to his ruin.

He tried THE records of the court of jfi;ciarv at this period are
and con- loft. The account which our historians give of Morton's
d"'nc4. trial is inaccurate and unfatisfatory. The proceedings

against him seem to have been carried on with violence.
During the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up
in different parts of the city. The jury was composed of
the earl's known enemies; and though he challenged several
of them, his objecions were over-ruled. After a short con-
fultation his peers found him guilty of concealing, and of
being art and part in the conspiracy against the life of the
late king. The first part of the verdi&t did not surprise
him, but he twice repeated the words art and part with some
vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not so." The

doom
*Craf. Mem. 328. Strype, ii. App. 138.

doom which the law decrees against a traitor, was pro- si o f
nounced. The king, however, remitted the cruel and ig- vI.
nominious part of the sentence, and appointed that he hould --v.J
susser death next day, by being beheaded P. I5t

DURING that awful interval, Morton poffiefed the utmost His death.

composure of mind. He fpped cheerfully; slept a part of
the night in his usual manner, and employed the reft of his
time in religious conferences, and in as of devotion with
some ministers of the city. The clergyman who attended
him, dealt freely with his conscience, and pressed his crimes
home upon hir. What he confessed with regard to the
crime for which he sufFered, is remarkable, and supplies, in
some measure, the imperfection of our records. He ac-
knowledged, that on his return from England after the
death of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the confpi-
racy against the king, which the queen, as he told him,
knew of and approved; that he solicited him to concur in
the execution of it, which at that time he absolutely declined;
that soon 'after, Bothwell hitnfelf, and Archibald Douglas,
in his name, renewing their solicitations to the fame purpose,
he had required a warrant under the queen's hand, autho-
rizing the attempt, and as that had never been produced,
lie had refused to be any farther concerned in the matter.
" But," continued he, " as I neither consented to this
" treasonable at, not assisted in the committing of it,
' so it was impossible for me to reveal, or to prevent it.
"To whom could I make the discovery ? The queen was
" the author of the enterprise. Darnly Was such a change-
" ling, that no secret could be safely communicated to him.
" Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief fwav in the
" kingdom, were themselves the perpetrators of the ctiffie."
These circumstances, it must be confessed, go some length
towards extenuating Morton's guilt; and though his apo-
logy for the favour he had hewn to Archibald Douglas,
whom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far less
fatisfadory, no uneasy refletions feemn to have disquieted
his own mind on that account q. When his keepets told
hinr that the guards were attending, and all things in readi-
ness, " I praie my God," said he, I am ready likewise."
Arran commanded these guards; and even in thofe.mo-
ments, when the most implacable hatred is apt to relent,
the malice of his enemies could not forbear this insult.

On

P Spots£. .14. Johnfl. 65. Craf. Mm. 332. Cald. iii. 45. Arnmo
trimin. Trials, 388.

Crawf. Mem. App. i.

B o o K On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his countenance

Vl. and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in devotion,

wsv he suffered death with the intrepidity which became the
1xI8. name of Douglas. His head was placed on the public

gaol of Edinburgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set
on the scaffold, covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried
by common porters to the usual burial-place of criminals.
None of his friends durst accompany it to the grave, or
discover their gratitude and refpe& by any symptoms of
sorrow r.

Odiouscon- ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious
durnof in his public conduCt, oon after drew the attention of

his countrymen, by his infamous marriage with the coun-
tefs of March. Before he grew into favopr at court, he
lhad been often entertained in her husband's house, and
without regarding the laws of hospitality or of gratitude,
carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his bene-
faclor, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to the
description of a cotemporary historian, " intolerable in all
" the imperfections incident to her sex." Impatient of
any restraint upon their mutual desires, they, with equal
ardour, wished to avow their union publicly, and to legiti-
mate, by a marriage, the offspring of their unlawful paflion.
The countess petitioned to be divorced from her husband,
for a reason which no modest women will ever plead.
The judges, over-awed by Arran, passed sentence without
6. delay. This infamous scene was concluded by a marriage,

solemnised with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of
men with the utmost horror'.
O:tob. 24. A PARLIAMENT was held this year, at the opening of

which some disputes arose between Arran and the earl now
created duke of Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and
puihed on by his wife's ambition, began to asset an equa-
lity with the duke, under whose protection he had hitherto
been contented to place himself. After various attempts
to form a party in the council agaitft Lennox, he found
him fixed so firmly in the king's affections, that it was im-
poflible to shake him; and rather than lose all interest at
court, from which he was banihed, he made the most
humble ubmiflions to the favourite, and again recovered
his former credit. This rupture contributed, however, to
render the duke still more odious to the nation. During
the continuance of it, Arran asseted to court the clergy,
Fretended an extraordinary zeal for the protestant religion,

and
; Crwf. Mec,. 334. PFOtfw.. 3r4 . Sptfw, 3 13.

and laboured to confirm the suspicions which were enter- B o o E
tained of his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, vi.
and a avourer of popery. As he was supposed to be ac- .v-'
quainted with the duke's molt secret designs, his calumnies S8xi.
were listened to with greater credit than was due to his cha-
racter. To this rivalfhip between Lennox and Arran, during
the continuance of which each endeavoured to conciliate the
good will of the clergy, we muff ascribe several ats of this
parliament uncommonly favourable to the church, particu-
larly one which abolished the practice introduced by Mor-
ton, of appointing but one minister to several parishes.

No notice hath been taken for several years of ecclefiafti- Ecclefiati.

cal affairs. While the civil government underwent so many calaffirs.
extraordinary revolutions, the church was not free from con-
vulfions. Two objeds chiefly engrossed the attention of the
clergy. The one was, the forming a system of discipline,
or ecclesiastical polity. After long labour, and many diffi-
culties, this system was at last brought to some degree of
perfedion. The assembly solemnly approved of it, and ap-
pointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to ob-
tain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, du-
ring his administration, and those who, after his fall, go-
verned the king, were equally unwilling to fee it carried in-
to execution; and by starting difficulties, and throwing in
objeEtions, prevented it from receiving a legal fanfion.
The other point in view was, the abolition of the episcopal
order. The bishops were so devoted to the king, to whom
they owed their promotion, that the function itself was by
some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a
feat in parliament, and distinguished by titles of honour,
these not only occasioned many avocations from their fpiri-
tual employments, but soon rendered their charater and
manners extremely different from those of the clergy in that
age. The nobles viewed their power with jealousy; the
populace confidered their lives as profane ; and both wiflfed
their downfal. with equal ardour. The personal emulation
between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, and emi-
nent for his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on the
death of Douglas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingle4
itself with the passions on each fide, and heightened them.
Attacks were made in every assembly on the order of bishops;
their privileges were gradually circumscribed; and at last
an ad was pasted, declaring the office of bishop, as it was
1ten exercised wirhin the realm, to have neither foundation.

nor

o t -ior i-rrant in the word of God; and requiring, undrt
tr. pain of excommunication, all who now poefeied that office,

k'.-vJ iniif:tlv to riign its and to .abiain from preaching*or ad-
1ajl. nriri{fterilg the facranmnts, until they should receive permif-

fen from the general a;lTefbly. The colrrt did not acqui-
eifee in tllis decree. A vacancy happening soon after in the
fee of Glasgow, Montgomery, minilier at Stirling, a man
/aIins fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the bletnifhes
in his charactcr, to iave alienated the people from an order
alteadv beloved, than to reconcile them to one which was
the objec of their hatred, made an infamous fimoniacal bar-
gain with Lennox, and on his recomncnkdation was chofcn
rTchbift'p. The preibytery of Stirling, of r.-hich he was a
member, thc prcfbytery of Glagow, whither he was to be
translated, the general aflemblv, vied with each other in
isI: prosecuting him on that accoun:. In order to screen Mont-

goner, lames made trial both of gentle and of rigorous
mea.sures, and both were equally ineffectual. 'The general
aflemblv was jnit ready to pronounce againit hinr the fen-
tence of excommunication, when an herald entered, and
c.rmmanrded them in the king's name, and under pain of re-
beiiion, to stop further proceedings. Even this injunction
they despised ; and tliough Montgomery, by his tears and
ieeming penitence, procured a short rcfpite, the sentence
w-:s at la'l iTued by their appointment, and published in all
the churches throughout the kingdom.

'fTH firmness of the clergy in a colletive body was not

;reCater than the boldncfs o some individuals, particularly
of the ministers of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily againll
the corruptions in the adminifhration; and, with the freedom
of fpeechl admitted into t pulpit in that age, named Len-
nox and Arran as the chief authors of the grietances under
wh;ch the church and kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in
their turn, compained to the king of the insolent and fedi-
tious firit of the clergy. In order to check the boldness of
their discourses, James issued a proclamation, commanding
Dury, one of tle moil popular ministers, not only t61leave
the town, but to abtaili from preaching in any other place.
Dury complained to the j:.dic;'tories of this encroachment
ulon the immrunities of his ofice. They approved of the
doArine which he had delivered; and he determined to dif-
regard the royal proclamatiol;. But the tnagiftrates being
d-errr.ined :l o compel him to leave the citys according to the
kin-'s orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, aftei
proteftini pblielv, at thl cross of ghiinburgh, against the

violence

violence which was put upon him. The people accompanied B o o K
him to the gates with tears and lamentations ; and the clergy vi.
denounced the vehgeance of Heaven against the authors of
this outrage'. I.

IN this perilous situation flood the church, the authority

of its judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the
pulpit restrained, when a sudden revolution of the civil go-
vernnment procured them uncxpeced relief.

THE two 'favourites, by their ascendant over the king, His favou.
nofleffed uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised ritesengage
it with the umoll wantonness. James usually resided at the knl *r
Dalkeith, or Kinneil, the feats of Lennox and of Arran, meafrs.
and was attended by such company, and employed in such
amusements, as did not suit his dignity. The services of
those who had contributed molt to place the crown on his
iarid were but little remembered. Many who had opposed
him with the greatcft virulence, enjoyed the rewards and
honours to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions
of rc.al prerogative, utterly inconfiitent with the conititution
of Scotland% being instilled by his favourites into the mind
of the young monarch, unfortunately made, at that early
age, a deep impression there, and became the source of al-
most all his subsequent errors in the government of both
kingdoms U. Courts of justice were held in almost every
county, the proprietors of land were cal'ed before therns and
upon the fighteft negle& of any of the numerous forms
which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with
unusual and intolerable rigour. 'The lord chamberlain re-
vived the obsolete jurifdicion of his office over tle boroughs,
and they were fubjeted to ations no less grievous. A de-
sign feemied likewise to have been formed to exasperate Eli-
zabeth, and to difiblve the alliance with her, which all good
protestants esteemed the chief security of their religion in
Scotland. A close correspondence was carried on between
the king and his mother, and considerable progress made
towards uniting their titles to the crown, by such a treaty
of association as Maitland had projeced; which could not
fail of endangering or dininifling his authority, and must
have proved fatal to those who had ated against her with
greatest vigour x

AI.L these circumstances irritated the impatient spirit of The noble

the Scottifil nobles, who resolved to tolerate no longer the conspire
insolence of the two minions, or to stand by, while their against

presumption them

'Cald. Afiemb. 1576-58z. Spotfrv. 277, &c. " Cild. iii. Ixz.
"Ibid. iii. 57.

B o O K prefuniption and inexperience ruined both the king and king.

vi. dom. Elizabeth, who, during the adminiifration of the four
_^vJ regents, had the enrire direction of the ailairs of Scotland, felt
isSi. herself deprived of all influence in that kingdom ever since

the death of Morton, and was ready to countenance any
attempt to rescue the king out of the hands of favourites who
were leading him into measures so repugnant to all her views.
The earls of Mar and Glencairn, lord Ruthven, lately cre-
ated earl of Gowrie, lord Lindsay, lord Boyd,' the tutor of
Glamis, the eldest on of lord Oliphant, with several barons
and gentlemen of diftindion, entered into a combination for
that purpose; and as changes in administration, which,
amcnz poliihed nations, are brought about slowly and ilently,
by artifice and intrigue, were in that rude age affedted fud-
denlv and by vioience, the king's situation, and the fecnrity
of te favourites, encouraged the conspirators to have im-
mediate rccourfe to force.

S&irethe JA.MES, after having resided some time in Athol, where
kig's per- he enjoyed his faveurite amusement of hunting, was now
i a'te. returning towards Edinburgh with a small train. He was

inv:ted to Ruthven caitle, which I iv in his way ; and as he
iufpecled no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther
fiort. The multitude of strangers whom he found there
?.ve him some uneafiiefs; and as those who were in the
secret arrived every moment from different parts, the appear-
ance of so many new faces increased his fears. He con-
cealed his urieafinefs, however, with the utmost care ; and
next morning prepared for the field, expecting to find there
some opportunity of making his escape. But juit as he was
ready to depart, the nobles entered his bedchamber in a body,
and presented a memorial againt the illegal and oppressive
actions of his two favourites, whom they represented as
most dangerous enemies to the religion andlibertiesof the na-
tion. ames, though lie received this remonfrance with the
cumplaifancc which was neceifary in his present situation,
;. is etremely impatient to be gone ; but as he approached
0.e door of his apartment, the tutor of Glamis rudely
flopped him. The king complained, expoftulated, threatened,
aild finding all these without effec, burlt into tears: " No
' matter," said Glarnis fiercely, " better children weep
" than bearded men." These words made a deep impression
ci the king's mind, and were never forgotten. The confpi-
ritors, without regarding his tears or indignation, dismissed
flich of his followers as they fufpeted; allowed none but
persons of their own party to have access to him; and,
ta.o:h they treated him with great refpet, guarded his

perfol

person with the utmost care. This enterprifc is usually called B o
by our historians, The raid of Ruthven Y. VI.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last degree at r

an event so unexpeced, and so fatal to their power. The 15s1
former endeavoured, but without success, to cxcite the in- Commit
habitants of Edinburgh to take arms in order to rcfcue their Ar"an t

prison.

sovereign from captivity. The latter, with his usual impe-
tuofity, mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the king, and with a few followers rode towards
Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable body of the confpira-
tors, under the command of the earl of Mar, lay in his way
ready to oppose him, he separated himself from his compa-
nions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
cattle. At the fight of a man so odious to his country, the
indignation of the conspirators rose, and inltant death nmft
have been the puniflment of his rashness, if the friendihip
of Gowrie, or ome other cause not explained by our hifto-
rians, had not saved a life so pernicious to the kingdom.
He was confinmd, however, to the castle of Stirling, without
being admited into the king's prefencc.

THE king, though really the prisoner of his own subje&s, Command
with whole conduct he could not help discovering many Lt:nno tD

'· ve tl

symptoms of disgust, was obliged to publish a proclamation, kingdm.
signifying his approbation of their enterprise, declaring that
he was at full liberty, without any rftraint or violence of-
sered to his person ; and forbidding any attempt againll those
concerned in the Raid of Ruth-ven, under pretence of refcu-
ing him out of their hands. At the fanie time, he com-
manded Lennox to leave Scotland before the twentieth of Aigul zS.
September z.

SOON after, fir George Carey and Robert Bowes arrived Thlt c-

as ambassadors from Elizabeth. The pretext of their em- fpirators
bafly was to inquire after the king's safety; to encourage a""ned f
and countenance the conspirators was the real motive of it. Elizabeth.
By their intercession, the earl of Angus, who, ever since
the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, obtained
leave to return. And the accefflon of a nobleman so power-
ful and so popular strengthened the fadion .

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured

him many friends, and who received private aflurances that
the king's favour towards him was in no degree abated, seem-
ed resolved, at first, to pay no regard to a command extorted
by violence, and no less disagreeable to James, than it was

rigorous

Y Cald.iii. 134. Spots. 320. Melv. 3.7.
Cald. iii. 35. 138. ' Ibid. iii. 52.

B o o K rigorous with regard to himself. But the power of his ene-

vi. mies, who were mafiers of the king's person, who were

V^-Wv secretly supportcd by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the
IS82. clergy, deterred him from any enterprile, the success of

which was dubious, anti the danger certain, both to him-
self and to his sovereign. He put off the time of his depar-
ture, however, by various artifices, in expedation either that
James might make his escape from the conspirators, or that
fortune might present some more favourable opportunity of
taking arms for his relief.

Their con- ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely soli-
dua ap- citous not only to secure the approbation of their countrymen,
proved by but to obtain some legal fancion of their enterprise. For
bly and a this purpose they publashed a long declaration, containing the
convcntion motives which had induced them to venture on such an ir-
fefiates. regular ftep, and endeavoured to heighten the public indig-

nation againlt the favourites, by representing, in the ftrongelt
colours, their inexperience and insolence, their contempt of
the nobles, their violation of the privileges of the churc;,
and their oppreflion of the people. They obliged the king,
who could not with safety refute any of their demands, to
grant them a remiflion in the most ample form ; ad not
Oaober ;. satisfied with that, they applied to the aflembly of the church,

and easily procured an act, declaring, " that they had done
" good and acceptable service to God, to their sovereign,
" and to their native country;" and requiring all sincere
protestants to concur with them in carrying forward fucl
a laudable enterprise. In order to ald the greater weight
to this act, every minister was enjoined to read it in his own
pulpit, and to inflic the ccnfures of the church on those
who set themselves in oppoftion to so good a cause. A con-
vention of ellates af.embled a few days after, passed an act
to the fame effct, and granted fuil indemnity to the con-
fpirators for every thing they had done b.

Lehnox's JAMES was conduced by them, first to Stirling, and as-
departure terwards to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; and though he
from Scot- was received every where with the external marks of refped

due to his dignity, his motions were carefully observed, and
he was under a restraint no less Cfrit than at the first mo-
ment when he was seized by the conspirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of the kingdom,
was at last obliged to begin his journey. He lingered, how-
ever, for some time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as
if he had fiill intended to make some effort towards reftor-

ing
k Ci. iii. 1:7. x87, 00o. Spotfrv. z:.

ing the king to liberty. B3ut either from the genienefs of his B o o .
own disposition, verse to bloodhed and the disorders of civil vs.
war, or from some other cause unknomwn to us, he abande _ld - v
the design, and set out for Frince, by the way of Engl;n d. i.s$-
The king iflued the order for his departire with no less re- I- 3?
luctance than the duke obeyed it; and both .mourned a fe-
paration, which neither of them had power to preyvet.
·Soon after his arrival in France, the fatigue of the journey,
or the anguiflh of his mind, threw him into a fever. In his
latt moments he discovercd such a firm adhereace to the
protestant faith, as fully vindl;ates his memory from the in-
putation of an attachment to popery, with which he leai
been uncharitably loaded in Scotland c. As he rwa the
earlieit, and best beloved, he was, perhaps, the moit lc-
ferviug, though not the molt able, of all James's favourites
The warmth and teudernefs of his mailer's iflecion for hiun
was not abated by death itself. By many as of kindness
and generofitv towards his ppfterity, the king wnt only did
great honour to the memory of Lennox, but set his own cli-
rader in one of its molt favourable points of \ liw.

THE success of the counpiracy which deprved James or MR-'s
liberty made great ncife over all.Europe, and at last rea.ch 1 nrxicty

. b aoul bel

the ears of iary in the prison to which ihe was con3nc,. ' .
As her own esxperience had taught her what injuries ai captive
prince is exposed to fuifer ; and as many of those hlio wcre
now concerned in the enterprise againit her on, --ere the
fame persons whom file confidered -a tlhe chief authors of
her own misfontunes, it was natural foi the tenderness of a
mother to apprehend that the fame calamities were rcad- .-
fall on hs- head; and such a prospect did not fail of adiilu,
to the distress and horror of her own fiauation. I 'th an-
guifll of her heart, flhe wrote to Eiizabeth, complaining ia
the bitterest terms of the unprecedented rigour with which
fi:e herself had been treated, and beseeching ler not to aban!:
don her son to the mercy of his rebellious ubjecs; -or per-
mit him to be involved in the fame misfcrtunes um!er which
lhe had so long groaned. The peculiar v urior and acriiornv
of style, for which this letter is remarkable, difcov r both the
high spirit of the Scottiih ijueen, unfubtuecd by her fnfctrin.s;,
and the violence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifi.c
and severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end fie had
in view, and accordingly it neither procured any mitigaticli
of the rigour of her own coninement, nor ;any interpofitiom
in favonr of the king d.

I-IENR4 l
'Sput: ,24. Cald. uii. 171. ·E' CwiSy.

B o O K HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated the princes

vI. of Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed
'o
-., with warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands
1583. of a party so entirely devoted to the Engliih interest. He

Ambafla- commanded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the
frm" , court of England, to repair to Edinburgh, and to contribute
Franc and his utmot endeavours towards placing James in a situation
England. more suitable to his dignity. As Elizabeth could not, with

decency, refuse him liberty to execute this commission, flie
appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as her envoy,
under colour of concurring with him in the negociation, but
in reality to be a spy upon his motions, and to obstruct his
success. James, whose title to the crown had not hitherto
been recognised by any of the princes on the continent, was
extremely fond of such an honourable embassy from the
French monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
fake of the errand on which he came, received Fenelon with
Janarr 7. great refpetd. The nobles, in whose power the king was,

did not relish this interposition of the French court, which
had long lol its ancient influence over the affairs of Scotland.
The clergy were alarmed at the danger to which religion
would be exposed, if the princes of Guise should recover any
ascendant over the public councils. Though the king tried
every method for restraining them within the bounds of de-
cency, they declaimed against the court of France, against
the princes of Guise, against the ambassador, against enter-
ing into any alliance with such notorious persecutors of the
church of God, with a vehemence which no regular govern-
ment would now tolerate, but which was then extremely
common. The ambassador, watched y Davison, distrusted
by the nobles, and exposed to the insults of the clergy and of
the people, returned into England without procuring any
change in the king's situation, or receiving any answer to a
proposal which he made, that the government hould be car-
ried on in the joint names of James and the queen his mo-
ther e.

James e- MEANWHILE James, though he diflembled with great art,
cpes out became every day more uneasy under his confinement; his
of the f uneasiness rendered him continually attentive to find out a
the confpi- proper opportunity for making his escape; and to this at-
siors. tention he at last owed his liberty, which the king of France

was not able, nor the queen of England willing, to procure
for him. As the conspirators had forced Lennox out of
the kingdom, and kept Arran at a distance from court, they

grew
* Cald. ii7. S. potfw. 34. Murdin, J71,&c. Sc Appendix, No. IX.

grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled the o o K
king to them, and to his situation, they watched him with vi.
little care. Some. occasions of discord had arisen among 3J
themselves; and the French ambaflidor, by fomenting these J58.
during the time of his residence in Scotland, had weakened
the union, in which alone their safety consisted . Colonel
William Stewart, the commander of the band of gentlemen
who guarded the king's person, being gained by James, had
the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his master to
liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit to the earl of June 27.
March, his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from
Falkland to St. Andrew's. That he might not create any
suspicion, he lodged at first in an open defenceless house in
the town, but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no
sooner was he entered with some of his attendants whom he
could trust, than colonel Stewart commanded the gates to
be fliut, and excluded all the reft of his train. Next morn-
ing the earls of Argyll, Huntly, Crawford, Montrose,
Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been commu-
nicated, entered the town with their followers ; and though
Mar, with several of the leaders of the faction, appeared in
arms, they found themselves so far outnumbered, that it was
in vain to think of recovering possession of the king's person,
which had been in their power somewhat longer than ten
months. James was naturally of so soft and ductile a temper,
that those who were near his person commonly made a deep
impression on his heart, which was formed to be under the
sway of favourites. As he remained implacable and unre-
conciled to the conspirators during o long a time, and at a
period of life when resentments are rather violent than last-
ing, they must either have improved the opportunities of in-
finuating themselves into favour with little dexterity, or the
indignation with which this first insult to his person and au-
thority filled him, must have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He re- ReToles,

solved, however, by the advice of fir James Melvil, and his however,
wisest counsellors, to at with the utmost moderation. Hav- to treat
ing called into his pretence the leaders of both factions, the modera-
neighbouring gentry, the deputies of the adjacent boroughs, tion.
the ministers, and the heads of colleges, he declared, that
although he had been held under restraint for ome time by
violence, he would not impute that as a crime. to any man,
but, without remembering the irregularities which had been
so frequent during his minority, would pass a general a of

B b oblivion,
f Cmd. 482.

o o K oblivicn, and govern a!i his fibjeds with undiftinguiflinu
vi. and equal affection. As an evidence of his sincerity, he
xv"> rifted the earl of (;owrie at Ruthven-cafile, and granted

I-S. him a full pardon of any guilt he had contradted, by the

crime committed in that very place g.

But Arran Bur James did not :.dhere long to this prudent and mo-
tegains his derate plan. His former favourite, the earl of Arran, had
alcrdant
*;er hnim; been permitted for ome time to rfide at Kinneil, one of his

country feats. As soon as the king felt himself at liberty,
his love for him began to revive, and he exprefled a trong
desire to ee him. The courtiers violently opposed the return
of a minion, whose insolent and overbearing temper they
dreaded, as much as the nation dctefted his crimes. James,
Ihowever, conti ued his importunity, and promiling that he
should continue .with him no longer than one day, they were
obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient afficion;
the king forgot hii promie ; Arran regained his ascendant
over him and v-i'in a few days resumed the exercise of
power, with all rhe arrogance of an undeferving favourite,
and all the raflnicfs peculiar to himsel fl.

a.- thc THE firlt etci of ilis influence was a proclamation with
kinL pur- regard to those concerned in the Raid f Ruthven. 'They were
'hc'r a3 required to acknowle ze their crime in the humblest manner;

and the king pronlifcd to grant them a full paidon, provided
their future conduct were such as did not oblige him to re-
member pall mifca:'ia.es. The tenour of this proclamation
w-as extrerr.e!v dirTrent from the a of oblivion which the
conspirators lhad bsen encouraged to expect. Nor did any
of them reckon it fr-. to rely on a promise clogged with
such an equivoca! co.';dition, arnd granted by a voung prince
under the doninion of a minister void of faith, regardless of
decencv, and tran.if:'rzed by the desire of revenge even be-
rond the u.:s! ferccitv of his temper. Many of the leaders,
who had at firit appeared openly at court, retired to their
own house ; and, forefeeint tle d:angerous ftorin which
was gah...r.ig, beg.:: to look out for a retreat in foreign
countries :.

.iizabeth's ELIZABETH, !who had all along proteced the conspirators,
;,i:.z;;ions was extremely difgnfed with measures which tended so
;, behalf vifibv to their destruction, and wrote to the king a harih
,. the con-
fpiratcr.- and haughty letter, reproaching him in a style very uncom-
Ai.c;: . mon among princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran

;o coiurt, and with imprudence.in proceeding so rigorously

againt

' Melv. 2 2. Ihibd. :74.
MIdv. 28. Spot. 3:6. Cd. iii30.

against his best and most faithful fubjeds. James, with a B o o K
becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted by violence, vi.
and conditions yielded out of fear, were no longer binding, -Yw
when thefc were removed; that it belonged to him alone to I583.
chufe what ministers he would employ in his service; and
that though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven
with the utmost clemency, it was ncceffary, for the support
of his authority, that such an insult on his peroll fliould not
pass altogether uncenfured k.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Walsingham Sept. 1.
her fecretarv, lwhom he appointed her ambassador to James, alGfng-

ham's m-

and who appeared at the Scottish court with a splendour and baffT intu
magnificence well calculated to please and dazzle a young Scotland.
prince. Walsingham was admitted to several conferences
with James himself, in which he insisted on the fame topics
contained in the letter, and the king repeated his former an-
fwers.

AFTER fuffering'feveral indignities from the arrogance of

Arran and his creatures, he returned to England, without
concluding any new treaty with the king. Walsingham was,
next to Burlcigh, the miniiter on whom the chief weight of
the Englifl adminiltration rfted ; and when a person of his
rank ftept so far out of the ordinary road of bulinefs, as to
undertake a long journey in his old age, and undr a declin-
ing fiate of health, some affair of consequence was supposed-
to be the cause, or ome important event was expeded to be
the effed, of this measure. But as nothing conspicuous ei-
ther occasioned or followed this embassy, it is probable that
Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this sagacious
minister, than to discover, with exadnefs, the capacity and
disposition of the Scottiih king, who was now arrived at a
time of life when, with tome degree of certainty, conjetures
might be formed concerning his character and future con-
duct. As James pofleffed talents of that kind, which make
a better figure in conversation than in ation, he gained a
great deal by this interview with the English secretary, who
notwithstanding the cold reception which he met with, gave
such an advantageous representation of his abilities, as de-
termined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward, with greater
-decency and refpet '.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protect the conspirators ren-

dered James more violent in his proceedings against them.
As they had all refused to accept of pardon upon the terms

which
Aclr-. 79. I Mclr. 293. Cald. iii. 58. Jebb. ii. 536.

B o o K which he had offered, they were required, by a new proclai

vi. mation, to surrender themselves prisoners. The earl of

'v_-J Angus alone complied; the reft either fled into England, or
1583- obtained the king's licence to retire into foreign parts. A

convention of estates was held, the members of which, de-
ceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, declared those
concerned in the Raid of Ruthven, to have been guilty of
high treason; appointed the at past last year approving of
their conduct to be expunged out of the records ; and en-
gaged to support the king in prosecuting the fugitives with
the utmost rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing

that was uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous
nobles, and under arrunfettled state of government, must
be acknowledged to have been guilty of an at of treason
against their sovereign; and James, who confidered their
conduc in this light, had good reason to boast of his cle-
mency, when he offered to pardonl them upon their consef-
sing their crime. But, on the other hand, it must be al-
lowed that, after the king's voluntary promise of a general
oblivion, they had ome reason to complain of breach of
faith, and, without the most unpardonable imprudence,
couM not have put their lives in Arran's power.

1584. THE i, reft of the church was considerably asseted by

The clegy these contrary revolutions. While the conspirators kept pof-
confirta- session of power, the clergy not only recovered, but extended,
tors, and their privileges. As they had formerly declared the hierarchy
irrtatethe to be unlawful, they toolk ome bold measures towards ex-
ing- terminating the episcopal order out of the church; and it

was owing more to Adamson's dexterity in perplexing and
lengthening out the process for that purpose,. than to their
own want of zeal, that they did not deprive, and perhaps
excommunicate, all the bishops in Scotland. When the king
recovered his liberty, things put on a very different aspet.
The favour bestowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing
decent and sacred, and the rigorous profecttion of those
nobles who had been the most zealous defenders of the pro-
teftant cause, were confidered as sure presages of the ap-
proaching ruin of the church. The clergy could not conceal
their apprehenions, nor view this impending danger in
silence. Drury, who had been restored to his office as one
of the ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the Raid of
Ruth',en in the pulpit, at which the king was so enraged,
that notwithstanding ome symptoms of his submission, he
comnmanded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. An-

drew

drew Melvil, being summoned before the privy council, to B o o
answer for the dotrine which he had uttered in a sermon at vI.
St. Andrew's, and accused of comparing the present griev- #-Y
ances of the nation with those under James III. and of inti- 1584.
mating obliquely that they ought to be redressed in the fame / 6 Ad
manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave with great / 9
firmness. He declined the jurifdition of a civil court, in a
cause which he maintained to be purely ecclesiastical; the
presbytery, of which he was a member, had, as he contend-
ed, the sole right to call him to account for words spoken in
the pulpit; and neither the king nor council could judge,
in the first instance, of the dotrine delivered by preachers,
without violating the immunities of the church. This ex-
emption from civil jurifdicion was a privilege which the
popish ecclesiastics, admirable judges of whatever contri-
buted to increase the lustre or power of their body, had long
struggled for, and had at last obtained: If the fame plea
had now been admitted, the protestant clergy would have
become independent on the civil magistrate; and an order
of men extremely useful to society while they inculcate those
duties which tend to promote its happiness and tranquillity,
might have become no less pernicious, by teaching, without
fear or control, the most dangerous principles, or by excit-
ing their hearers to the most desperate and lawless actions.
The king, jealous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmed
at this daring encroachment on it; and as Melvil, by his
learning and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority
of head of the party, he resolved to punish him with the ri-
gour which that pre-eminence rendered necessary, and to
discourage, by a timely severity, the revival of such a dan-
gerous claim. Melvil, however, avoided his rage, by flying
into England; and the pulpits resounded with complaints
that the king had extinguished the light of learning in the
kingdom, and deprived the church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline m.

THESE violent declamations of the clergy againit the mea-

fures of the court were extremely acceptable to the people.
The conspirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still
possessed great influence there; and as they had every thing
to fear from the resentment of'a young prince, irritated by
the furious counsels of Arran, they never ceased soliciting
their adherents to take arms in their defence. Gowrie, the
only person among them who had submitted to the king, and

accepted
Spotfw. 3So. Cld. iii 304.

o o K accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a ftep which lolt
vi. him the esteem of one party, without gaining the confidence

l...vJ of the other; and, after suffering many mortifications from
1584. the king's neglec and the haughtiness of Arran, he was at

last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark,
he was informed that the earls of Angus, Mar, and the tu-
tor of Glamis, had concerted a scheme for surprising the
castle of Stirling. In his situation, little persuasion was ne-
ceTfary to draw him to engage in it. Under various pretexts
he put off his voyage, and lay ready to take arms on the day
fixed by the conspirators for the execution of their enter-
prise. His lingering so long at Dundee, without any ap-
parent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court, proved
fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the con-
fpiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house
where he lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his
reliftance, took him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar,
and Glamis seized the castle of Stirling, and ereded their
flandard there, publifled a manifesto, declaring that they
took arms for no other reason but to remove from the king';
pretence a minion who had acquired power by the molt un-
worthy aions, and who exercised it with the most intole-
rable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to trea-
chery on his part, and fufpecRed, that as he had formerly
deserted, he had now betrayed them. At the fame time
Elizabeth having neglected to supply them in due time with a
fum of money, which he had promised to them, and their
friends and vailals coming in ilowly, they appeared irrefo-
lute and disheartened; and as the king, who aed with
great vigour, advanced towards them at the head of twenty
thousand men, they fled precipitately towards England, and
with difficulty made their escape ". This rash and feeble at-
tempt produced such effects as ufally follow disappointed
conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause for which it was
undertaken, but added strength and reputation to the king;
confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldness and greater success. Gowrie
was the first victim of their resentment. After a very infor-
mal trial, a jury of peers found him guilty of treason, and
he was publicly beheaded at Stirling.

To

Home's Hil. of Houfc of Dougl. 376. Spotfw. 330. Calderw. iii. 324,
&c.

To humble the church was the king's nrext ftep. But a B o o K

it became neceflary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of vi.
the legislative authority, a parliament was hastily summoned: rv
and while so many of the nobles were banished out of the 1584.

i eMay 22.

kingdom, or forbidden to appear in the king's presence, A parlia-
while Arran's haughtiness kept some at a distance, and intimi- ment held.
dated others; the meeting consisted only of those who were
absolutely at the devotion of the court. In order to conceal Severe
the laws which were framing from the knowledge of the laws against
clergy, the lords of the articles were sworn to secrecy ; and the church.
when some of the ministers, who either fufpeaed or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their number to de-
clare their apprehensions to the king, he was seized at the
palace-gate, and carried to a distant prison. Others at-
tempting to enter the parliament-houfe, were refused admit-
tance o; and such laws were pafied, as totally overturned the
conffitution and discipline of the church. The refusing to Mavy 2.
acknowledge the jurifdieion of the privy cuncil; the pre-
tending an exemption from the authority of the civil courts;
the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of any of
the three etates in parliament, were declared to be high
treason. The holding aemblics, whether civil or ecclesias-
tical, without the king's permiilion or appointment; the
uttering, either privately or publicly, in sermons or in de-
clamations, any faife and scandalous reports against the king,
his ancestors, or minilters, were pronounced capital crimes P.

WHEN these laws were publiflhed at the cross of Edin-

burgh, according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont,
miniiter of St. Cuthbert's, and one of the lords of session,
solemnly protefled againfi them, in the name of his bre-
thren, because they had been pafled without the knowledge
or content of the church. Ever since the Reformation, the
pulpits and ecclefiatical judicatories had both been eteemed
sacred. In the former, the clergy had been accutfomed to
censure and admonillih ith unbounded liberty. In the latter,
they exercised an uncontrolled and independent jurifdifion.
The blow was now aimed at both these privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render churchmen as incon-
fiderable as they were indigent: and as the avarice of the
nobles had stripped them of the wealth, the king's ambition
was about to deprive them of the power, which once be-
lonred to their order. No wonder the alarm was universal,
and the complaints loud. All the minitlers of Edinburgh

forsook
* Cal. iii. 365. P Parl. 2. Jac. VI.

o o forsook their charge and fled into England. The most emi.
vi. nent clergymen throughout the kingdom imitated their e.
I-vJ ample. Desolation and astonishment appeared in every part
ss4. of the Scottish church; the people bewailed the loss of pal.

tors whom they esteemed; and full of conftemation at an
event so unexpeced, openly expressed their rage against
Arran, and began to fufpea the king himself to be an eneml
to the reformed religion q.

v Spofw. 333.
END OF Vo,. .
