THE
HIST O R Y

F
AMERIC A.

1y WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OP THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURCG, HISTORIO-

GRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND

MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

VO L. II.
A NEW EDITION,

BASIL:
Printed for J. j. TOURNEISEN; and J. I,. LEGRAND.

rM D C X C.

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

BOOK IV.
View of America when first diScovered, and of the

manners and policy of its most uncivilized inhabit-
ants - Vast extent of America - Grandeur of
the objeas it presents to view - Its mountains -
rivers - lakes - Its form favorable to commerce
- Tenperature - predominance of cold - Causes
of this - uncultivated - unwbolefome - its animals
- foil - Inquiry boon America was peopled -
variotes theories -- wbat appears most probable -
Condition and character of the Americans -All, the
.Mexicans and Peruvians excepted, in the Jtate of
savages - Inquiry confined to the uncivilized tribes
- Difficulty of obtaining information - various t
calufes of this - Method observed in the inquiry-
I. The bodily condtitntion of the Americans cofnJdered
- I. The qualities of tbeir minds - II Their

domeflic. slate - IV. Their political Jtate Hltd
inflitutions - V. Their sy/3sem of war and public
security - VI. The arts with ,which they 'were
acquainted - VII. Their religious ideas and infti-
tutionr - ViII. tSucb-h ngtulr and detached -crotfoms
as are not reducible to any of the former heads --
IX. General review and eftitmate of atheir virtues
and defec7s. Page I

BOOK V.'

HiJifory of the conquefl of New Spain by Cortes 209

* , i, ,)

'

. .
.

* : ?
.-

-
. F /---

tHE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
AME RIC A.

BOOK IV.

TI WENTY-SIX years had elapsed since Co- n o o ic
irmbus conducted the people of Europe to the Iv.
New World. During that period the Spaniards Whatparts

of America

had made great progress in exploring its various were thesi
regions. They had visited all the islands scatter- known.
ed in different clusters through that part of the
ocean which flows in between North and South
America. They had failed along the eastern coast
of the continent from the river De la Plata to
the bottom of the Mlexican gulf, and had found
that it atretched without interruption through this
vast portion of the globe. "hey had discovered
the great Southern Ocean, which opened new
profpets in that quarter. They had acquired Tome
knowledge of the coast of Florida, which led-
them to observe the continent as it extended in an
opposite direction; and though they pulhed their
discoveries no farther towards the north, other
nations had visited those parts which they negled-
ed. The English, in a voyage, the motives and
fwccefs of which shall be related in another part

VOL. Il. B

donmflic. slate - IV. Their political slate and
inJfitutions - V. Their fyflem of war and public
security - VI. The arts with twhich they were
acquainted - VII. Their religions ideas and infti-
tutionr - VIIf. Succbh-fngfitar uad detached zftomxs
as are not reducible to any of the former heads -
IX. General review and eJiiiiate of .their virtues
and defecs. Page r

BOOK- V.:
Hiflory of the conquest of Neo Spain by Cortes 209

'.~'
' ~'7:Y . '1T-''

KH.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
AMERIC A.

BOOK IV.

TWENTY-SIX years had elapsed since Co- n o o K
luinbus conducded the people of Europe to the Iv.
New World. During that period the Spaniards Wiatparts

of America

had made great progress in exploring its various were thii
regions. They had visited all the islands scatter- known.
ed in different cluters through that part of the
ocean which flows in between North and South
America. They bad failed along the eaflern coast
of the continent from the river De la Plata to
the bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found
that it stretched without interruption through this
vast portion of the globe. -'hey had discovered
the great Southern Ocean, which opened new
profpeds in that quarter. They had acquired some
knowledge of the coast of Florida, which led-
them to observe the continent as it extended in an
opposite direction; and though they pushed their
discoveries no farther towards the north, other
nations had visited those parts which they neglet.
ed. The English, in a voyage, the motives and
fhccefs of which lhall be related in another part

VOL. II. B

B o o R of this Iltory, had failed along the coast of

iv. America from Labrador to the contfines. of Florida;

and the Portuguese, , in quest of a shorter p.ffage
to the East Indies, had ventured into the northern
feat, and viewed the fame regions '. Thus, at
the period where I have chosen to take a view of
the state of the New World, its extent was knowr
almost from its northern extremity to thirty-five
degrees south of the equator. 1 he countries which
firetch from thence to the southern boundary of
America, the great empire of Peru, and the in.
terior slate of the extenlive doiminions fubjedt to
the sovereigns of Ilexi'co, were still undifco-
vered.

thevatex. When we contemplate the New World, the
tent of the first circumstance that strikes us is its immense
Ncw World extent. It was not a small portion of the earth , so

inconsiderable that it might hlave escaped the ob.
servation or research of former ages which Co-
lumnbus discovered. He made known a new he-
mifphere, larger than either Europe, or Aia , or
Africa, the three noted divisions of the ancient
continent, and not rrilch inferior in dime'nsions to
a third part of the habitable globe.

America is remarkable not only for its magni-

tuile, but for its polition. It stretches from the
,orthcrn plolar circle to a high southern lati-
tudel, above liftccn hundred miles beyond the far-
tlheft extremity of the old continent on that iide o£
the line. A country of such extent passes through

' l1i:e era, dcc. i. lib. vi. c. 16.

all the climates capable of becoming the habitation u o o x
of man, and fit for yielding the various produc- iv.
tions peculiar either to the temperate or to the
torrid regions of the earth.

Next to the extent of the New World, the Grand db.

grandeur of the objedts which it presents to view jettsitPDt.
is molt apt to strike the eye of an observer. Na- few.t
ture fecms here to have carried on her operations
iuon a larger scale, and with a bolder hand, and
to have diflinguifhed the features of this country
by a peculiar magnificence. The mountains of ttsmouna
America are much superior in height to those in tains,
the other divisions of the globe. Even the plaih
of Quito, which may be confidered as the base of
the Andes, is elevated farther above the sea than
the top of the Pyrenees. This stupendous ridge of
the Andes, no less remarkable for extent than
elevation, rifes in different places more than one
third above the Pike of Teneriffe, the highest
land in the ancient hemisphere. The Andes may
literally be said to hide their heads in the clouds;
the ftorns often roll, and the thunder burfis be-
low their summits, which, though exposed to
the rays of the fun in the centre of the torrid zone,
are covered with everlasting snows '

From those lofty mountains descend rivers pro- rivers.

portionally l.irgc, with which the streams in the
ancient continent are not to be compared, either
for length of course, or the vast body of water
which they roll towards the ocean. The Ilarag-

See NOTE I.

B 3

B o o K non, the Orinoco, the Plata in South America,

IV. the Miffifippi and St. Laurence in North America ,

flow in such spacious channels, that, long before
they feel the influence of the tide, they resemble
arms of the sea rather than rivers of frefl water '.
lakes. The lakes of the New World are no less con-

fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and
rivers. There is nothing in other parts of the
globe which resembles the prodigious chain of
lakes in North America. They may properly be
termed inland seas of fre[h water; and even those
of the second or third class in magnitude, are of
larger circuit (the Caspian sea excepted) than the
greatest lake of the ancient continent.

Its form fa. The New World is of a form extremely favor-
vorableto able to commercial intercourse. When a continent,
<commierce.

like Africa, is composed of one vast solid mass,
unbroken by arms of the sea penetrating into its
interior parts, with few large rivers, and those at
a considerable diltance from each other, the great-
er part of it seems destined to remain for ever
uncivilized, and to be debarred fiom any active
or enlarged communication with the reft of man-
kind. When, like Europe, a continent is opened
by inlets of the ocean of vast extent, such as the
Mediterranean and Baltic; or when, like Asia,
its coast is broken by deep bays advancing far
into the country, such as the Black Sea, the gulfs
of Arabia, of Peria , of Bengal , of Si;m , and of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled

See NOTE II.

with large and fertile islands, and the continent B o o
itself watered with a variety of navigable rivers, Iv.
those regions may be said to possess whatever
can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants in
commerce and improvement. In all these refpets
America may bear a comparison with the other
quarters of the globe. The gulf of Mexico, which
flows in between North and South America, may
be confidered as a Mediterranean Tea, which
opens a maritime commerce with all the fertile
countries by which it is encircled. The islands
scattered in it are inferior only to those in the In-
dian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and
in value. As we stretch along the northern division
of the American hemisphere, the Bay of Chefapeak
presents a spacious inlet, which conducts the na.
vigator far into the interior parts of provinces no
lefs:fertile than extensive; and if ever theprogrefs
of culture and population ihall mitigate the ex.
treme rigor of the climate in the more northern dif-
tridts of America, Hudson's Bay may become as
subservient to commercial intercourse in that quar.
ter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Europe. The
other great portion of the New World is encom-
passed on every fide by the sea, except one narrow
neck, which separates the Atlantic from the Pacific
Ocean; and though it be not opened by spacious
bays or arms of the sea, its interior parts are ren-
dered accellible by a number of large rivers, fed
by so many auxiliary ftrcams, flowing in such
various directions, that, without any aid from the
hand of induflry and art, an inland navigation

B3

s o o i may be carried on through all the provinces from

TV. the river De la Plata to the gulf of Paria. Nor is

this bounty of Nature confined to the southern
division of America; its northern continent abounds
Io less in rivers which are navigable almost to.
their sources, and by its imnmenfe chain of lakes
provision is made for an inland communication,
more extensive and commodious than in any
quarter of the globe. The countries stretching
from the gulf of Darien on one fide, to that of
California on the other, which farm the chain
that binds the two parts of the American conti-
nent together, are not defsitute of peculiar advan-
tages. Their coast on one fide is washed by the
Atlantic Ocean, on the other by the Pacific. Some
of their rivers flow into the former, some into the
latter, and secure to them all the commercial be-
nefits that may result from a communication with
both.

Temperture But what most diftinguiflies America from other.
ofits Sli. parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature of
TUstc. its climate, and the different laws to which it is

subject with respeCt to the difIribution of heat and
cold. We cannot determine with precision the
portion of heat felt in any part of the globe,
nerely by measuring its diltance from the equator,
The climate of a country is asseted , in some de-
gree , by its elevation above the lea , by the extent
of continent, by the nature of the foil, the height
of adjacent mountains, and many other circun-
flances. The influence of these, however, is,
from various cauLcs , less considerable in the greater

part of the ancient continent; and from knowing n o oK
the position of any country there, we can pro- IV.
nounce with greater certainty, what will be the
warmth of its climate ,and the nature of its pro-
dudtions.

The maxims which are founded upon obferva- Predomi.

tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other. ""uIc ot
In the New World, cold predominates. The
rigor of the frigid zone extends over half of those
regions, which should be temperate by their pofi-
tion. Countries where the grape and the fig
fliould ripen, are buried under snow one half of
the year; and lands situated in the fame parallel
with the most fertile and belt cultivated provinces
in Europe, are chilled with perpetualfrofts, which
almost deflroy the power of vegetation'. As w.e
advance to those parts of America which lie in
the fame parallel with provinces of Asia and Africa,
-blessed with an uniform enjoyment of such genial
warmth as is most friendly to. life and to vegeta-
tion , the dominion of cold- continues to be felt,
and winter, though during a short period, often
r-eigns with extreme severity. If we proceed along
the American. continent into the torrid zone, we
fhiall find the cold prevalent in the New World
extending. itself also to this region of. the globe:,
and mitigating the excess of its fcrvor. Wbhie
the negro on the coafl of Africa is scorched with
unrcmitting heat, the inhanbitant of Peru breathes
an. ai\' equalJy mild aind tetmper'ate ad, is perpe-.

See NOTE 111.

B4

B o o K tually shaded under a canopy of gray clouds, which

Iv. intercepts the fierce beams of the fun, without

obftruding his friendly influence $. Along the
eastern coast of America, the climate, though
more similar to that of the torrid zone in other
parts of the earth , is nevertheless considerably
milder than in those countries of Asia and Africa
which lie in the fame latitude. If from the fou-
them tropic we continue our progress to the ex-
tremity of the American continent, we meet with
frozen seas, and countries horrid, barren, and
scarcely habitable for cold, much sooner than in
the north '.

callntsor Various causes combine in rendering the climate
this, of America so extremely different from that of the

ancient continent. Though the utmost extent of
America towards the north be not yet discovered,
we know that it advances much nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. Both these latter
have large seas to the north, which are open
during part of the year; and even when covered
with ice, the wind that blows over them is less
intensely cold than that which blows over land in
the fame high latitudes. But in America the land
itretches from the river St. Laurence towards the
pole, and spreads out immensely to the welft A
chain of enormous mountains, covered withfnow

Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage,
p. 184.

Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyage de Quiros, chez

Hilt. Gen. des Voyages, tom. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hit.
Natur. de I'Air, ii. 05, &c.

and ice, runs through all this dreary region. The B o i
wind, in pafling over such an extent of high and Iv.
frozen land, becomes so impregnated with cold,
that it acquires a piercing keenness, which it
retains in its progress through warmer climates,
and is not entirely mitigated until it reaches the
Gulf of Mexico. Over all the continent of North
America, a north-westerly wind and excefiive
cold are synonymous terms. Even in the mol
sultry weather, the moment that the wind veers
to that quarter, its penetrating influence is felt in
a transition from heat to cold, no less violent than
sudden. To this powerful cause we may ascribe
the extraordinary dominion of cold, and its vio-
lent inroads into the southern provinces in that
part of the globe '.

Other causes, no less remarkable, diminish the

adcive power of heat in those parts of the Ame-
rican continent which lie between the tropics.
In all that portion of the globe, the wind blows
in an invariable,diretion from east to welt. As
this wind holds its course across the ancient con-
tinent, it arrives at the countries which stretch
along the western shore of Africa, inflamed with
all the fiery particles which it hath collected from
the sultry plains of Asia, and the burning sands
in the African deserts. Tie coast of Africa is, ac.
cordingly, the region of the earth which feels the
inoft fervent heat, and is exposed to the unmiti.

' Charlevoix Hilt. deIaN ouv. Fr. iii. x6i. Hilt. Geniralc
des Voyages, tom. xv. s 5, &c.

s

B 0 o K gated ardor of the torrid zone. But this Came

IV. wind which brings filch an acceflion of warmth

to the countries lying between the river of Sene-
gal and Cafraria, travcrfes the Atlantic Ocean-,
before it reaches the American shore. It is cooled
in its passage over this vast body of water, and
is felt as a refreahing gale along the coalt of Brasil ,
and Guiana, rendering there countries, though
among the warmest in America, temperate, when
compared with those which hie opposite to them
in Africa '. As this wind advances in its course
across America, it meets with immense plains,
covered with impenetrable forefis, or occupied
by large rivers, marshes, and stagnating waters,
where it can recover no considerable degree of
heat. At length it arrives at the Andes, which
run from north to south through the whole con-
tinent. In palltng over their elevated and frozen
summits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them hardly
feel the ardor to which they seem exposed by
-their situation '. In the other provinces of Ame-
rica, from Tierra Ferme westward to the Vlexican
empire, the heat of the climate is tempered , in
some places, by the elevation of the land above
the sea, in others, by their extraordinary humidity,
and in all, by the cnormous mountains scattered

' See NOTE 1V. * See NOTE V.
0 Acola 1ll ft. Nuivi Orhis, lib. ii. c. i i. 3Buffon }lit.

.aturdl , &c. toim. ii. ; I2, &c. ix. 107, &c.. ..(born's
Colled of Voyages, ii. p. 868.

over this trad. The islands of Amerioa in the B o o K
Torrid Zone are either small or mountainous, Iv.
and are fanned alternately by refreshing sea and
land breezes.

The causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the southern limits of America, and in the seas
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner
equally satisfying. It was long supposed that a vast
continent, difltnguifhed by the name of Terra
Australis Incoqnita, lay between the southern extre-
mity of America and the Antartic pole. 'I he
fame principles which account for the extraordinary
degree of cold in the northern regions of America,
were employed in order to explain that which is
felt at Cape Horn and the adjacent countries.
The immense extent of the southern continent,
and the large rivers which it poured into the ocean.,
were mentioned and admitted by philosophers as
causes sufficient to occasion the unusual fenration
of cold, and the still more uncommon appearances
of frozen seas in that region of the globe. But.
the imaginary continent to which such influence
was ascribed, having been searched for in vainl,
and the space which it was supposed to occupy
having heen, found to be an open sea, new con-
jecures mufi be formed with refpet to the causes
of a temperature of climate, so extremely different
from that which we experience in countries re-
moved at the fame distance from the oppofiQt
pole ".

" Sec NOTE V!.

o or After contemplating those permanent and cha.
iv. raceriftic qualities of the American continent,

Condition which arise from the peculiarity of its situation,
when firRt
discovered. and the disposition of its parts, the next object

that merits attention is its condition when first
discovered, as far as that depended upon the in-
duftry and operations of man. The effects of
human ingenuity and labor are more extensive
and considerable, than even our own vanity is
apt at first to imagine. When we survey the
face of the habitable globe, no small part of that
fertility and beauty, which we ascribe to the hand
of nature, is the work of man. His efforts, when
continued through a fuccefflion of ages, change
the appearance and improve the qualities of the
earth. As a great part of the ancient continent
has long been occupied by nations far advanced
in arts and industry, our eye is accustomed to
view the earth in that form which it assumes
when rendered fit to be the residence of a numer-
ous race of men, and to supply them wish nou-
rifhment.
Rude aud But in the New World, the state of mankind was

cultivat. ruder, and the aspect of Nature extremely different.

Throughout all its vast regions, there were only
two monarchies remarkable for extent of territory,
or distinguished by any progress in improvement.
The reft of this continent was possessed by small
independent tribes, destitute of arts and indutfry,
and neither capable to correct the defects, nor
desirous to meliorate the condition of that part of
the earth allotted to them for their habitation.

Countries, occupied by such people, were almost n a o o
in the fame state as if they had been without in- Iv.
habitants. Immense forests covered a great part of
the uncultivated earth; and as the hand of induflry
had not taught the rivers to run in a proper chan-
nel, or drained off the stagnating water, many of
the most fertile plains were overflowed with inun-
dations, or converted into marlhes. In the fou.
them provinces, where the warmth of the fun,
the moisture of the climate, and the fertility of
the foil, combine in calling forth the most vigor-
ous powers of vegetation, the woods are so choked
with its rank luxuriance, as to be almost imper-
vious, and the surface of the ground is hid from
the eye under a thick covering of shrubs and herbs
and weeds. In this slate of wild unaffifled nature,
a great part of the large provinces in South Ame.
rica, which extend from the bottom of the Andes
to the sea, still remain. The European colonies
have cleared and cultivated a few spots along the
coast, but the original race of inhabitants as rude
and indolent as ever, have done nothing to open
or improve a country, polTeffing almost every ad-
vantage of situation and climate. As we advance
towards the northern provinces of America, Na-
ture continues to wear the fame uncultivated aspet,
and in proportion as the rigor of the climate in.
creases, appears more desolate and horrid. There
the forests, though not encumbered with the fame
exuberance of vegetation, are of immense extent;
prodigious marfies overspread the plains, and few
marks appear of human aftivity in any attempt to

R o O cultivate or embellish the earth. No wonder that

Iv. the colonies ient from Europe were alonifhed at

their firtP entrance into the New WVorld. It appear-
ed to them waste, solitary, and uninviting. When
the Englilh began to fettle in America, they term-
ed the countries of which they took possession,
The Wiidcrncfs. Nothing but their eager expecda-
tion of finding mines of gold, could have induced
the Spaniards to penetrate through the woods and
marlhes of America, where, at every ftep, they
observed the extreme difference between the un-
cultivated face of Nature, and that which it acquires
under the forming hand of industry and art ".

Unwhole- The labor and operations of man not only
taime. improve and embellih the earth, but render it

more wholesome, and friendly to life. When any
region lies negle&ed and destitute of cultivation,
the air flagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters; the surface of the earth,
loaded with rank vegetation, feels not the purify.
ing influence of the fun j the malignity of the
dillemnpers natural to the climate increases, and
new maladies no left noxious are engendered.
Accordingly, all the provinces of Ameiica, when
first discovered , were found to be remarkably
unhealthy. This the Spaniards experienced in
every expedition into the New W;orld, whether
dcefincd for conqucft or fettlernent. Ihough by
the natural conflitution of their bodies, their
habitual temperance, and the-pervevering vigor

t' See NOTE VII.

of their minds, they were as much formed as any B o o g
people in Europe for active service in a sultry ivY
climate, they felt fevcrely the fatal and pernicious
qualities of those uncultivated regions through
which they marched, or wihere they endeavoured
to plant colonies. Great numbers were cut off by
the unknown and violent diseases with which they
were inficted. Such as survived the destructive
rage of those maladies, were not exempted from
the noxious influence of the climate. 'They return-
ed to Europe' according to the dcfcription of the
carly Spaniflh historians, feeble, emaciated, with
languid looks, and complexions of such a sickly
yellow color, as indicated the unwholesome
temperature of the countries where they had
resided ".

The uncultivated state of the New World Its aninmai

affected not only the temperature of the air; but
the qualities of its prodlucions. The principle of
life seems to have been less adive and vigorous
there, than in the ancient continent. Notwith-
standing the vast extent of America, and the
variety of its climates, the different species of
animals peculiar to it are much fewer in propor-
tion, than those of the other hemisphere. In the
islands, there were only four kinds of quadrupeds
known, the largest of which did not exceed the
size of a rabbit. On the continent, the variety
was greater; and though the individuals of each

" Gomara Ilift. c. 20. 22. Oviedo His. lil. ii. c. j.
lib. v, cP. o. ar. L pit. 545. Dectd, p. 176,

1t o o i kind could not fail of multiplying exceedingly,

Iv. when almost unmolefled by men, who were

neither so numerous, nor so united in society, as
to be formidable enemies to the animal creation,
the number of diftind species mult still be confi-
dered as extremely small. Of two hundred differ-
ent kinds of animals spread over the face of the
earth, only about one third existed in America,
at the time of its discovery '. Nature was not
only less prolific in the New World, but fle ap-
pears likewise to have been less vigorous in her
productions. The animals originally belonging to
this quarter of the globe appear to be of an
inferior race, neither so robust, nor so fierce, as
those of the other continent. America gives birth
to no creature of such bulk as to be compared
with the elephant or rhinoceros, or that equals
the lion and tiger in strength and ferocity ".
The Tapyr of Brasil, the largest quadruped of
the ravenous tribe in the New Worlt, is not
larger than a calf of fix months old. The Puma
and Jaguar, its fiercest beafs of prey, which the
Europeans have inaccurately denominated lions
and tigers, possess neither the undaunted courage
of the former, nor the ravenous cruelty of the
latter ". They are inadtive and timid, hardly
formidable to man, and often turn their backs

' Buffon Hilf. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86.
" See NOTE VIII.
" Buffon Hist. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hist.
Nat. Bralil, p. 229.

upon

upon the lea[t appearance of resistance 7. The B o o -
fame qualities in the climate of America which iv.
stinted the growth, and enfeebled the spirit, of
its native animals, have proved pernicious to such
as have migrated into it voluntarily fiom the
other continent, or have been transported thither
by the Europeans 8". The bears, the wolves, the
deer of America, are not equal in size to those
of the Old World ". Most of the domefic
animals, with which the Europeans have stored
the provinces wherein they fettled, have degene.
rated with refpedc either to bulk or quality, in a
country whose temperature and foil seem to be
lcfs favorable to the strength and perfection of the
animal creation . -

The fame causes, which checked the growth Infects and

and the vigor of the more noble animals, were reptiles.
friendly to the propagation and increase of reptiles
and infeds. Though this is not peculiar to the
New World, and those odious tribes, nourished
by heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every
part of the torrid zone; they multiply faster, per.
haps, in America, and grow to a more monfirous

A7 Buffon Hist. Natur. ix. 1t. 20;. AcoltaHift. lib. iv.

c. 34. Pifonis Hilt. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. I.
lib. x. c. v;.

' Churchill, v. p. 69 r. Ovalle Relat. of Chili, Church.

iii. p. Io. Sunario de Oviedo, c. 14-22. Voyage dec
Des Marchais, iii. 299.

" Buffon, H it. Natur. ix. i o. Kalm's Travels, i. oa.
Iiet. Voy. de la France Equinox, p. 339.

'* See NO FE IX.
VOL. II. C

B o o i bulk. As this country is, on the whole, less culti

IV. vated, and less peopled, than the other quarters

of the earth, the active principle of life waftes
its force in productions of this inferior form. The
air is often darkened with clouds of insets , and
the ground covered with flocking and noxious
reptiles. The country around Porto-Bello fwarrms
with toads in such multitudes, as hide the surface
of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers are
hardly less numerous. Carthagena is infeRled with
numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not only
the cattle but the inhabitants 'l. In the islands,
legions of ants have, at different times, consumed
every vegetable production ", and left the earth
entirely bare, as if it had been burnt with fire.
The damp forests, and rank foil of the countries
on the banks of the Orinoco and 1\ara-gnon,
teem with almost every offensive and poisonous
creature , which the power of a sultry fun can
quicken into life '.
Birds. The birds of the Nevw World are not diftin,

guifhed by qualities so conspicuous and cha-
raderiftical, as those which we have obfcrved
in its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent
of man, and less affected by the changes which
his industry and labor make upon the Itate of the

"Voyage de Ulloa,tom. i.p. 89. Id. p. 147. lHerrera,
dec. Il. lib. iii. c. . 19. See NOTE X.

Voyage de Condamine, p. 167 Gumilla, iii. 120o

&c. Hifl. gcndr. dcs Voyages, xiv. 317. Dumont Md-
no: es fur la Louiliane, i. 1o8. Surnario de Oviedo,
c. 52-62.

nrth. They have a greater propensity to migrate n o o x
omr one country to another, and can gratify iv.
,is inffint of their nature without difficulty or
anger. Hence the number of birds common to
oth continents is much greater than that of
uadrupeds; and even such as are peculiar to
merica nearly resemble those with which man-
ind were acquainted in similar regions of the
ncient hemisphere. The American birds of the
rrid zone, like those of the fame climate in Asia
nd Africa, are decked in plumage, which dazzles
he eye with the beauty of its colors; but nature,
tisfied with clothing them in this gay dress, has
enied most of them that melody of found, and
ariety of notes, which catch and delight the
ar. The birds of the temperate climates there, in
e fame manner as in our continent, are less
lendid in their appearance, but, in compenfa-
on for that defect, they have voices of greater
ompals, and more melodious. In some diftridts
f America, the unwholesome temperature of the
ir seems to be unfavorable even to this part of
he creation. The number of birds is less than in
ther countries, and the traveller is struck with
e amazing solitude and silence of its forests .
tis remarkable, however, that America, where
he quadrupeds are so dwarfill and dastardly,

"* Bouguer Voy. au Perou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a

aMartinique, p. 96. Warren Defcript. Surinam. Osborn's
olledt. ii. 924. Lettres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlev.
lit. de la Nouv. France, ii. 1is.

C 3

B o o i should produce the Condor, which is entitled te

Iv. pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk,

in strength, and in courage I.
Soil. The foil, in a continent so extensive as Ame.

rica, must, of course, be extremely various. In
each of its provinces, we lhall find some diftin.
guifhing peculiarity , the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular history,
In general, we may observe, that the moisture
and cold, which predominate so remarkably in
all parts of America, mull have great influence
upon the nature of its foil; countries lying in the
fame parallel with those regions which never feel
the extreme rigor of winter in the ancient con.
tinent, are frozen over in America during a great
part of the year. Chilled by this intense cold,
the ground never acquires warmth sufficient to
ripen the fruits, which are found in the corresponding
parts of the other continent. If we xvill to rear il
America the productions which abound in any par.
ticular diftric of the ancient world, we nmuf advance
several degrees nearer to the line , than in the
other hemisphere, as it requires such an increase
of heat to counterbalance the natural frigidity
of the foil and climate '. At tlc Cape of Good Hope,
several of the plants, and fruits peculiar to the coun-
tries within the tropics, are cultivated with success;

i' Voyage de Ullna, i. 361. Voyage t ie U)(alminre,

I7?. Buflbn Ililt. Nat. xvi. 184.. ouyage de Des Mar.
chais, iii. 320o.

' See NOTE XI.

vhereas, atSt. Augustine, in Florida, and Charles- B o o K
Town, in South-Carolina, though considerably near- IV.
r the line, they cannot be brought to thrive.vith
qual certainty 7. But, if allowance be made -for
his diversity in the degree of heat, the foil of
America is naturally as rich and fertile as in any
)art of the earth. As the country was thinly in-
iabited, and by a people of little industry, who
ad none of the domestic animals, which civi-
ized nations rear in such vast numbers, the earth
was not exhausted by their consumption. TIe
vegetable productions, to which the fertility of
he foil gave birth, often remained untouched,
and being suffered to corrupt on its surface:.
eturned with increase into its bosom ". As trees
nd plants de'rive a great part of their nourishment
rom air and water, if.they were not deflroyed
y man and other animals, they would render
o the earth more, perhaps, than they take from
t, and feed rather than impoverish it. Thus the
noccupied foil of America may have gone on
nriching for many, ages. The vast number as
well as enormous size of. the trees in America,
indicate the extraordinary vigor of the foil in
its native flite. VWhen the Europeans first began
to cultivate the New World, they were astonished
t the luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin
mould; and in several places the ingenuity of
the planter is still employed in diminifling and

27 Sec NOTE XII.
" Bffion, Hill. Natur. i. 242. lalm, i. IS$.

C 3

B O o R lhould produce the Condor, which is entitled t(

Iv. pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk

in strength , and in courage :%.
Soil. The foil, in a continent so extensive as Arme

rica, must, of course, be extremely various. Ii
each of its provinces, we flall find some diftin
guifhing peculiarity, the description of whicl
belongs to those who write their particular history
In general, we may observe, that the moiflure
and cold, which predominate so remarkably ir
all parts of America, mult have great influence
upon the nature of its foil; countries lying in the
fame parallel with those regions which never fee
the extreme rigor of winter in the ancient con
tinent, are frozen over in America during a grea
part of the year. Chilled by this intense cold
the ground never acquires warmth sufficient tc
ripen the fruits, which are found in the correfpondini
parts of the other continent. If we with to rear ii
America the produdtions which abound in any par
ticular diftridt of tlhe ancient world, we must advance
several degrees nearer to the line , than in the
other hemirphere, as it requires fucl an increafc
of heat to counterbalance the natural frigidity
of thefoil and climate". At thc Capeof Good Hlope,
several of the plants , and fruits peculiar to the couni
tries within the tropics, are cultivated with success

S Voyage de Ullna, i.. o6v. oc de Utle)nlaimine,

17i. Buflbn Ililt. Nat. xvi. 184. Vouy)c de Des Muar
chais, iii. 32o.

" See NOTE XI.

vhereas, at St. Augustine, in Florida, and Charles- B o o K
own, in South-Carolina, though considerably near- Iv.
r the line, they cannot be brought to thrivewvith
qual certainty 7. But, if allowance be made for
his diversity in the degree of heat, the foil of
nmerica is naturally as rich and fertile as in any
)art of the earth. As the country was thinly in-
iabited, and by a people of little industry, who
ad none of the domestic animals, which civi-
ized nations rear in such vast numbers, the.earth
was not exhausted by their consumption. TIe
egetable productions, to which the fertility of
lhe foil gave birth, often remained untouched,
and being suffered to cqrrupt on its surface,
eturned with increase into its bosom ". As trees
nd plants derive a great part of their nourishment
om air and water, if.they were not destroyed
y man and other animals, they would render
o the earth more, perhaps, than they take from
t, and feed rather than impoverish it. Thus the
noccupied foil of America may have gone on
nriching for many, ages. The vaR number as
well as enormous size of.the trees in America,
indicate the extraordinary vigor of the foil in
its native slate. When the Europeans first began
to cultivate the New World, they were aftonihed
t the luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin
mould; and in several places the ingenuity of
the planter is still employed in diminishing and

7' Sec NOTE XII.
" Blfson, llillt Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. s,

C3

S 0 0 r wafting its superfluous fertility, in order to bring

Iv. it down to a state fit for useful culture ".

How was Having thus surveyed the state of the Ne
America World at the time of its discovery , and con
Peopled?

fidered the peculiar features and qualities which
distinguish and characterize it, the next inquiry
that merits attention is, How was America peo
pled? By what course did mankind migrate fron
the one continent to the other ? and in wha
quarter is it most probable that a communication
was opened between them ?

No tralditio We know, with infallible certainty, that al
concerning the human race spring from the fame source, an
itamong thellwAfivs, that the descendants of one man, under the pro

teCtion, as well as in obedience to the command
of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth. Bu
neither the annals nor the traditions of nations reach
back to those remote ages, in which they too
possession of the different countries, where the
are now fettled. We cannot trace the branches o
this first family, or point out with certainty th
time and manner in which they divided an
spread over the face of the globe. Even arnon
the most enlightened people, the period of authen
tic history is extremely short, and every thing
prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is no
surprising, then, that the unlettered inhabitants
of America, who have no solicitude about futurity,

'" Charlevoix, Hist. de la Nouv. Fran, iii. 4os. Voyage do

Des Marchais, iii. 229. Lery ap. de Bry, part iii. p.174
See NOTE XIII.

and little curiosity concerning whatis past, should s o o t
be altogether unacquainted with their own v;.
original. The Californians and Efkimaux, in par-
ticular, who occupy those countries in America
which approach nearest to the ancient continent,
are so remarkably rude, that it is altogether vai'
to search among them for such information as
might discover the place from whence they came,
or the ancestors of whom they are descended '.
Whatever light has been thrown on this subjea,.
is derived, not from the natives of America, but
from the inqtifitive genius of their conquerors.

When the people of Europe unexpedtedly dif- Various

covered a New World, removed at a vast distance thcoxei.
from every part of the ancient continent which
was then known, and filled with inhabitants
whose appearance and manners differed remarkably
from the reft of the human species, the question
concerning their original became naturalily an
objeC of curiosity and attention. The theories and
speculations of ingenious men with refped to this
subjet, would fill many volumes; but are often
so wild and chimerical, that I should offer an
insult to the understanding of my readers, if I
attempted either minutely to enumerate or ta
refute them. Some have prefilmptuoufly imagined,
that the people of America were not the offspring
of the fame common parent with the reft of
mankind , but that they formed a separate race
of men, diftinguifhablc by peculiar features in the

se Vonega's Hist. of Califbrifl, i. 6o.

C4

B O o K constitution of their bodies, as well as in the

IV. charaderiftic qualities of their minds. Others

contend, that they are descended from some rem.
nant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the earth,
who survived the deluge, which swept away the
greatest part of the human species in the days of
Noah; and preposterously suppose rude, uncivi-
lized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated conti-
nent, to be the most ancient race of people on the
earth. There is hardly any nation from the north
to the south pole, to which forne antiquary, in
the extravagance of conjecture, has not afcrib.
ed the honor of peopling America. The Jews,
the Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians,
the Greeks, the Scythians in ancient times, are
supposed to have fettled in this western world.
The Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwegians, the
Welsh , the Spaniards, are said to have sent
colonies thither in later ages, at different periods,
and on various occasions. Zealous advocates
stand forth to support the refpedtive claims of
those people; and though they reft upon no
better foundation than the casual resemblance of
some customs , or the supposed affinity between
a few words in their different languages, much
erudition and more zeal have been employed, to
little purpose, in defence of the opposite systems.
Those regions of conjecture and controversy
belong not to the historian. His is a more limited
province, confined to what is established by
certain or highly probable evidence. Beyond this
I ihall not venture, in offering a few observations,

which may contribute to throw some light upon B o o
this curious and much agitated question. Iv.

I. There are authors who have endeavoured ought not
by mere conjectures to account for the peopling to he found.

ed on mere

of America. Some have supposed that it was conjeaure,
originally united to the ancient continent, and
disjoined from it by the shock of an earthquake+
or the irruption of a deluge. Others have imagin-
ed, that some vessel being forced from its course
by the violence of a westerly wind, might be
driven by accident towards the American coast,
and have given a beginning to population in
that desolate continent `'. But with refped to all
those systems, it is vain either to reason or inquire,
because it is impoflible to come to any decision.
Such events as they fuippofe are barely possible,
and may have happened. That they ever did
happen, we have no evidence, either from the
clear testimony of history, or from the obfcurc
intimations of tradition.

2. Nothing can be more frivolous or uncertain oronrerem-

than the attempts to discover the original of the blanceoe
Americans, merely by tracing the resemblance
between their manners and those of any particular
people in the ancient continent. If we suppose
two tribes, though placed in the molt remote
regions of the globe, to be in the fame state of

" Parson's Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Un-.

verf. Hist. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Feyjoo Teatro Critico,
torn. v. p. 3o4, &c. Acofta Hilt, Moral. Novi Orbis,
lib. i. c. x6. 9.

. o o iK society, and to resemble each other in the degree

Iv. of their improvement , they muff feel the fame

wants and exert the fame endeavours to supply them.
The fame objeds will allure, the fame paflions will
animate thein, and the fame ideas and sentiments will
arise in their minds. The character and occupations
of the hunter in America mufft be litte different from
those of an Asiatic, who depends for subsistence
on the chafe. A tribe of savages on the banks
of the Danube mufft nearly resemble one upon
the plains washed by the Miffifippi. Instead then
of presuming from this similarity, that there is any
affinity between them, we should only conclude,
that the disposition and manners of men are formed
by their situation, and arise from the state of
society in which they live. The moment that
begins to vary, the character of a people must
change. In proportion as it advances in improve-
ment, their manners refine, their powers and
talents are called forth. In every part of the earth
the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,
and we can trace him in his career from the rude
simplicity of savage life, until he attains the
industry, the arts, and the elegance of polifled
society. There is nothing wonderful then in the
similitude between the Americans and the bar-
barous nations of our continent. Had Lafitau,
Garciaand many otherauthors, attended to this, they
would not have perplexed a fubjecd which they
pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endeavours
to eftablilh an affinity between various races of
people in the old and new continents, upon no

other evidence than such a resemblance in their n o o K
manners as necessarily arises from the similarity of Iv.
their condition. There are, it is true, among
every people, some customs, which, as they do
not flow from any natural want or desire peculiar
to their situation, may be denominated usages of
arbitrary institution. If between two nations fettled
in remote parts of the earth, a perfect agreement
with refped to any of these thould be discovered,
one might be led to fufpet that they were con-
nedted by some affinity. If, for example, a nation
were found in America that consecrated the
seventh day to religious worship and reft, we
might justly suppose that it had derived its know-
ledge of this usage,, which is of arbitrary inftitu-
tion, from the Jews. But, if in another nation,
the first appearance of every new moon was
celebrated with extraordinary feflivity, this month-
ly festival could be confidered as nothing more
than an expression of joy natural to man on the
return of the planet which guides and cheers him
in the night. The inflances of customs, merely
arbitrary, common to the inhabitants of both
hemispheres, are indeed, so few and so equivocal,
that no theory concerning the population of the
New World ought to be founded upon them.

3. The theories which have been formed with orofreligc

refped to the original of the Americans, from o"trites
observation of their religious rites and pradices,
are no less fanciful, and destitute of solid founda-
tion. When the religious opinions of any
people are neither the result of rational inquiry,

B o o K nor derived from the inftrudions of revelation,

Iv. they muff needs be wild and extravagant. Bar-

barous nations are incapable of the former, and
have not been blessed with the advantages arising
from the latter. Still, however, the human mind,
even where its operations appear most wild and
capricious, holds a course so regular, that in
every age and country the dominion of particular
passions will be attended with similar effeds. The
savage of Europe or America, when filled with
superstitious dread of invisible beings, or with
inquisitive solicitude to penetrate into the events
of futurity, trembles alike with fear, or glows
with impatience. He has recourse to rites and
practices of the fame kind, in order to avert the
vengeance which he fiuppofes to be impending
over him, or to divine the secret which is the
objet of his curiosity. Accordingly, the ritual of
superstition, in one continent, seems, in many
particulars, to be a transcript of that eftablifled in
the other, and both authorize similar institutions,
Sometimes so frivolous as to excite pity, fonietimes
so bloody and barbarous as to create horror. But
without supposing any consanguinity between
such distant nations , or imagining that their reli-
gious ceremonies were conveyed by tradition from
the one to the other, we may ascribe this unifor-
xmity, which in many instances seems very amaz-
ing, to the natural operation of superstition and
¢nthufiafin upon the weakness of the human
mind.

Not peopled 4. We may lay it down as a certain principle,
by any na.

in this inquiry, that America was not peopled by B o o i
any nation of the ancient continent, which had Iv.
made considerable progress in civilization. The tion highly
inhabitants of the New World were in a state of ivilied
society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted
with those arts which are the first essays of human
ingenuity in its advance towards improvement.
Even the most cultivated nations of America were
firangers to many of those simple inventions, which
were almost coeval with society in other parts of
the world, and were known in the earliest periods
of civil life with which we have any acquaintance.
From this it is manifest, that the tribes which
originally migrated to America, came off from
nations which inuft have been no lets barbarous
than their posterity, at the time when they were
firlt discovered by the Europeans. For, although
the elegant and refined arts may decline or perish,
amidst the violent flocks of those revolutions and
disasters to which nations are exposed, the necessary
arts of life, when once they have been introduced
among any people, are never loft. None of the
vicissitudes in human allnirs affedt these, and they
continue to be pradifcd as long as the race of
men exists. If ever the lfe of iron had been known
to the savages of America, or to their progenitors,
if ever they had employed a plough, a loom, or
a forge, the utility of those inventions would
have prcferved them, and it is impollible that
they nlould have been abandoned or forgotten. WVe
may conclude then, that the Americans sprung
from some people, who were thenmlflves in such

B o o K an early and unimproved flage of society, as to

Iv. be unacquainted with all those necessary arts,

which continued to be unknown among their
poflerity, when first visited by the Spaniards.

norfrom the 5. It appears no less evident, that America was
fouithern re- not peopled by any colony from the more southern
gions of our b Te
contcnent. nations of the ancient continent. None of the rude

tribes fettled in that part of our hemisphere can be
supposed to have visited a country so remote. They
poleffeed neither enterprise, nor ingenuity, nor
power, that could prompt them to undertake, or
enable them to perform, such a diflant voyage.
That the more civilized nations in Asia or Africa
are not the progenitors of the Americans is manifest,
not only from the observations which I have already
made concerning their ignorance of the most simple
and necessary arts, but from an additional circum-
fiance. Whenever any people have experienced the
advantages which men enjoy, by their dominion
over the inferior animals, they can neither subsist
without the nourishment which there afford, nor
carry on any considerable operation independent
of their ministry and labor. Accordingly, the
firlt care of the Spaniards, when they fettled in
America, was to flock it with all the domestic
animals of lEurope; and if prior to them, the
Tyrians, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any
other polished people, had taken pofeffion of that
continent, we should have found there the animals
peculiar to those regions of the globe where they
were originally feated. In all America, however,
there is not one animal, tame or wild, which

properly belongs to the warnm, or even the more n o o .R
temperate countries of the ancient' continent, The IV.
camer, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were
as much unknown in America, as the elephant
or the lion. From which it is obvious, that the
people who first fettled in the western world did
not issue from the countries where those animals
abound, and where men, from having been long
accustomed to their aid, would naturally confider
it, not only as beneficial, but as indispensably
necessary to the improvement, and even the
preservation, of civil society.

6. From confidering the animals with which The two
America is stored, we may conclude that the continen't

seem to ap.

nearest point of contad between the old and new proachnear.
continents is towards the northern extremity of erttoch
both , and that there the communication was wards the
opened, and the intercourse carried on between north.
them. All the extensive countries in America
which lie within the tropics, or approach near
to them, are filled with indigenous animals of
various kinds, entirely different from those in the
corresponding regions of the ancient continent.
But the northern provinces of the New World
abound with many of the wild animals which are
common in such parts of our hemisphere as lie in
a similar situation. The bear, the wolf, the fox,
the hare, the deer, the roebuck, the elk, and
several other species frequent the forests of North
America, no less than those in the north of
Europe and Asia ". It seems to be evident then,

' lBuffon, Hilt. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

n. o o l that the two continents approach each other in

iv. this quarter, and are either united, or so nearly

adjacent, that these animals might pass from the
one to the other.

Thisafcer- 7. The adual vicinity of the two continents is
tained by iC. so clearly eftablifled by modern discoveries, that
tovery.

the chief difficulty with refped to the peopling
of America is removed. While those immense
regions, which firetch eastward from the river
Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or
imperfectly explored, the north-east extremities of
our hemisphere were supposed to be so far distant
from any part of the New World, that it was not
easy to conceive how any communication should
have been carried on between them. But the
Ruffians, having fubjeded the western part of
Siberia to their empire, gradually extended their
knowledge of that vast country, by advancing
towards the east into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in their excursions
after game, or by soldiers employed in levying
the taxes, and the court of Ilofcow estimated
the importance of those countries only by the small
addition which they made to its revenue. At
length, Peter the Great arcended the Ruffian
throne. His enlightened, comprehensive mind, in-
tent upon every circumstance that could aggrandize
his empire, or render his reign illustrious, discerned
consequences of those discoveries, which had
escaped the obfcrvation of his ignorant predecefnbrs,
He perceived, that in proportion as the regions
of Asia extended towards the cast, they must

approachl

approach nearer to America; that the communi- B o o K
cation between the two continents, which had iv.
long been searched for in vain, would probably
be found in this quarter, and that. by opening, it,
fonie part of the wealth and commerce of the
weflern world might be. made to flow into his
dominions by a new channel. Such an objet suited
a genius that: delighted in grand schemes. Peter
drew up inftrudions with his own hand for prose-
cuting this deGign, and gave orders for carrying
it into execution

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued
his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employed in this service, had to struggle with so
many difficulties, that their progress was extremely
flow. E'ncouraged by some faint traditions among
the people of Siberia, concerning a successful
voyage in the year one tho.ofand fix hundred and
forty-eight, round the north.-ealt promontory of
Alri;,. they attempted to follow the fame courie.
Veffnls were fitted, out, with this view, at diffrcent
times, from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in
a frozen ocean, which nature seems not to have
(leftined for navigation, they were exposed to
many disasters,, without being able to accomplish
their purpose. No veflel fitted out by the Ruflian
courti ever doubled this formidable Cape 1; we
are indebted for what is known of those extreme
regions of Alia, to the discoveries made in excur.

'' Muller, Voyages et Decouvertes par les Ruffes, tom. i.
p. 4, . 141. .Sec NOTE XIV.

VOL. II. D

B o O IK sions by land. In all those provinces an opinion

It. prevails, that there are countries of great extent

and fertility, which lie at no considerable distance
from their own coafis. These the Ruffians imagined
to be part of America; and several circumstances
concurred not only in confirming them in this
belief, but in persuading them that some portion
of that continent could not be very remote. Trees
of various kinds, unknown in those naked regions
of Asia, are driven upon the coast by an eafteily
wind. By the fame wind, floating ice is brought
thither in a few days; flights of birds arrive
annually from the fame quarter; and a tradition
obtains among the inhabitants, of an intercourse
formerly carried on with some countries situated
to the Salt.

After weighing all these particulars, and compar-

ing the position of the countries in Asia which
had been discovered, with such parts in the north.
weft of Amierica as were already known, the
Ruffian court formed a plan, which would have
hardly occurred to any nation less accultomed.to
engage in arduous undertakings, and to contend
with great dificulties. Orders were issued to build
two venels at the frmall village of Ochotz, situated
pn the Sea of Kamchatka, to fail on a voyage of
difcovcry. Though that dreary uncultivated region
furnished nothing that could be of use in conftrudt-
ing them, but some larch trees; though not only
the iron, the cord.ge , the fails, and all the
numerous articles requisite for their equipment,
but the provisions for victualling' tlcm, wcre to

be cn cd through the immense deserts of Siberia, B o o IK
down rix crs of difi(i ult navigation., and along Iv.
roads alinolt impassable, the mandate of the fover-
eigl, trind the perseverance of the people, at last
surmounted every obstacle. Two vessels were 174t.
finished, and, under the command of the captains June4.
Behring and Tfchirikow, failed from Kamchatka,
in qulft of the New AWorld, in a quarter where
it had never been approached. They flaped their
course towards the east; and though a storm soon
separated the vessels, which never rejoined, and
many disasters besel them, the expecations from
the voyage were not altogether frustrated. Each
of the commanders discovercd land, which to them
appeared to be part of the American continent;
and, according to their observations, it seems to
be situated within a few degrees of the north-west
coast of California. Each set some of his people
ashore; but in one place the inhabitants fled as
the Ruffians approached; in another, they carried
off those who landed, and destroyed their boats.
The violence of the weather, and the distress of
their crews, obliged both captains to quit this
inhospitable coast. In their return they touched at
several islands , which stretch in a chain from east
to weft between the country which they had
discovered and the coast of Alia. They had some
intercourse with the natives, who feerned to them
to resemble the North Americans. They presented
to the Ruffians the cablumit, or pipe of peace, which
is a symbol of friendfnip universal among the people

B o O of North America, and an usage of arbitrary infli.

IV. tution, peculiar to them.

Though the illands of this New Archipelago

have been frequented fince'that time by the Ruflian
hunters, the court of St. Peterfburgh, during a
period of more than forty years, seems to have
relinquished every thought of prosecuting difcove-
ries in that quarter. But in the year one thousand
seven hundlred and fixty-eight, it was unexpectedly
resumed. The Sovereign, who had been lately
feated on the throne of Peter the Great, possessed
the genius and talents of her illustrious predecessor.
During the operations of the most arduous and
extensive war in which the Ruflian empire was
ever engaged, flle formed schemes and executed
undertakings , to which, more limited abilities
would have been incapable of attending but amidfl
the leisure of pacific times. A new voyage of
difcovcry from the eastern extremity of Alia was
planned , and captain ireniktzin and lieutenant
Levafheit were appointed to command the two
vessels fitted out for that purpose. In their voyage
outward they held nearly the fame course with
the former navigators, they touched at the fame
islands, obftreved their situation and prodcucdtions
rnore carefully, and discovered several new ilands,
with which 1cihriing and fchirikox' had not fallea
il. 'I hotigli they did not proceed so far to the
Cea;} as to revisit the countly which 1Belhring and
'1J 1hirikow fl)pl)olied to be pailt of the American
continent, yet, by returning in a courle conliderably
to the north of theirs, they colredtecd some capital

mistakes into which their predeceflors had fallen, B o o I-
nd have contributed to facilitate the progress of Iv.
future navigators in those seas "

Thus'the possibility of a communication between
he continents in this quarter refts no longer upon
ere conjeture, but is eftablifled by undoubted
evidence '. Some tribe, or some families of wander-
ng Tartars, from the reftles spirit peculiar to their
ace, might migrate to the nearest islands, and,
rude as their knowledge of navigation was, might,
by palling from one to the other, reach at length
he coast of America, and give a beginning to
population in that continent. The distance between
the Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land
n Asia, is greater than that between the part of
merica which the Ruffians discovered, and the
coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of
those islands are manifestly of Asiatic extrat. If,
notwithstanding their remote situation, we admit
that the Nlarian islands were peopled from our
continent, distance alone is no reason why we
flould hesitate about admitting that the Americans
may derive their original from the fame source. It
is probable that future navigators in those seas,
by (leering farther to the north, may find that the
continent of America approaches frill nearer to
Alia. According to the information of the barbar-
ous people, who inhabit the country about the
iorth-eaft promontory of Asia, there lies, off the

" See NOTE XV.

Ilullcr's Voyages, tom. i. 248, &ic. 267. 276.

D 3

n o o of North America, and an usage of arbitrary infli.

Iv, tution, peculiar to them.

Though the illands of this New Archipelago

have been frequented since that time by the Ruflian
hunters, the court of St. Peterfburgh, during a
period of more than forty years, seems to have
relinquished every thought of prosecuting difcove.
ries in that quarter. Uut in the year one thousand
seven hundred and fixty-eight, it was unexpectedly
resumed. The Sovereign, who had been lately
feated on the throne of Peter the Great, pofeffed
the genius and talents of her illustrious predecessor.
During the operations of the most arduous and
extensive war in which the Ruffian empire was
ever engaged, flie formed schemes and executed
undertakings, to which more limited abilities
would have been incapable of attending but amidst
the leisure of pacific times. A new voyage of
difcovcry from the eaRern extremity of Asia was
planned , and captain Krektzin and lieutenant
Levafhieft were appointed to command the two
vessels fitted out for that purpose. In their voyage
outward they held nearly the fame course with
the former navigators, they touched at the fame
islands, obfirved their situation and produdctions
rnore carefully, and discovered several new islands,
with which Be1hring and '1lfchiriko'W Ihad not fallen
inl. Though they did not proceed so far to the
eia} ;s. to revilit the countly which Behling and
'1 fchirikow fippofcd( to be pait of the Amnericill
*continent, yet, by returning in a courle conliderably
to tile north of theirs, they coireceld some capital

mistakes into which their predecessors had fallen, B o o Ir
and have contributed to facilitate the progress of Iv.
future navigators in those seas ".

Thus'the poflibility of a communication between

the continents in this quarter refts no longer upon
nicre conjedure, but is eftablinfed by undoubted
evidence 36. Some tribe, or some families of wander-
ing Tartars, from the restless spirit peculiar to their
race, might migrate to the nearest islands, and,
rude as their knowledge of navigation was, might,
by pafling from one to the other, reach at length
the coast of America, and give a beginning to
population in that continent. The distance betweei
the Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land
in Asia, is greater than that between the part of
America which the Ruffians discovered, and the
coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of
those islands are manifefily of Asiatic extract. If,
notwithstanding their remote situation, we admit
that the IVlarian islands were peopled from our
continent, distance alone is no reason why we
ihould hesitate about admitting that the Americans
may derive their original from the fame source. It
is probable that future navigators in those seas,
by fleering farther to the north, may find that the
continent of America approaches still nearer to
Asia. According to the information of the barbar.
ous people, who inhabit the country about the
north-caft promontory of Asia, there lies, off the

" See NOTE XV.

M luller's Voyages, tom. i. 248, i&. 267. 276.

D3

J o o g coast, a small island, to which they fail in left

Iv. than a day. From that, they can descry a large

continent, which, according to their description,
is covered with forells , and possessed by people
whose language they do not understand 7. By
them they are supplied with the skins of martens
an animal unknown in the northern parts of
Siberia, and which is never found but in countries
abounding with trees. If we could rely on this
account, we might conclu4e, that the Americal
continent is separated from ours only by a narrow
strait, and all the difficulties with rcfped to th
communication between them would vanifl. Wha
could be offered only as a conjedure when thi
Hillory was sirs published is now known to b
certain. l'he near approach of the two continent
to each other has been discovered and traced in
voyage undertaken upon principles so pure and f
liberal, and conducted with so much profefliona
skill, as reflectluftre upon the reign of the Sovereign
by whom it was planned, and do honor to th
officers intrudled with the execution of it ".

Another It is likewise evident from recent discoveries
ccmmunica- that an intercourse between our continent an
(non by the
nprth.weft. America Kmight be carried on with no less facility
A. D. 83o. from the north-west extremities of Europe. As earl

as the ninth century, the Norwegians difcovere
Greenland, and planted colonies there. The commu
nication with that country, after a long intcrrup

'/ Muller's Voyages et Decouv. 1. 166.
" See NOTE XVI.

tion, was renewed in the lft century. Some n o o0
Lutheran and Moravian missionaries, prompted by Iv.
zeal for propagating the ( hrifiian faith, have
ventured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated
region ". To them we are indebted for much
curious information with refped to its nature and
inhabitants. We learn, that the north-west coast
of Greenland is separated from America by a very
narrow firait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
vwhich this firait condulcs, it is highly probable
that they are united.4°; that the inhabitants of
the two countries have some intercourse with one
another; that the lfquimaux of America perfecdly
resemble the Gr.eenlanders in their aspet, dress,
and mode of living; that fore sailors, who had
acquired the knowledge of. a few words in the
Greenlandifh language, reported that tbefe were
underflood by the ltfquimaux; that, at length, a A.D.1764.
Aloravian mifionary, well acquainted with the
language of Greenland, having visited the country
of the hfquimaux, found, to his aflonilllment, that
they spoke the fame language with the Greenlhndcrs,
that they wxere in every refpedE the fame people,
and he was accordingly received and entertained
by them as a friend and a brother .

By tlefedecifive fads, not only the consanguinity;
of the lfquimaux andc Gieenlander.s is cflablinfled,

19 Crantz' I-lift, of Grecnl. i, 242. 244. Prevot Hist.
Gcn des Voyages, tomr. xv. ji, not. (96.)

' Eggede, p. 2, 1.

Crtnltz' -lift. of Greenl. p. 261, 242.

D. 4

s o o R but the pofibility of peopling America from the

Iv. north of Europe is demonstrated. If the Norwegians

in a barbarous age, when science had not begut
to dawn in the north of Europe, possessed fucel
naval skill as to open a communication with Green.
land, their ancestors, as much addidced to roving
by sea, as the Tartars are to wandering by land,
might, at some more remote period, accomplish
the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there, whose
descendants might, in progress of time, migrate
into America. But if, instead of venturing to fail
diretly from their own coast to Greenland, we
suppose that the Norwegians held a more cautious
course, and advanced from Shetland to the Feroe
Islands, and from them to Iceland, in all which
they had planted colonies, their progress may have
been so gradual, that this navigation cannot be
confidered as either longer or more hazardous, than
those voyages which that hardy and enterprising
race of men is known'to have performed in every
age.

Prohably 8. Though it be pofible that America may have
peoped from received its first inhabitants from our continent,
the north-
eaf. either by the north-welt of Europe or the north east

of Asia, there seems to be good reason for fuppof-
ing that the progenitors of all the American nations,
from Cape Horn to the southern confines of Labra.
dor, migrated from the latter rather than the
former. The EfIuimaux are the only people in
America, who, in their asped or character, bear
any refcmblance to the northern Europeans. They
are manifestly a race of men, diftind from all the

nations of the American continent, in language, in n o o K
disposition, and in habits of life. Their original, 1v.
then, may warrantably be traced up to that source,
which I have pointed out. But, among all the
other inhabitants of America, there is such a
riking similitude in the form of their bodies, and
ihe qualities of their minds, that, notwithfiand-
ng the diversities occasioned by the influence of
limate, or unequal progress in improvement, we
uft pronounce them to be descended from one
burce. There may be a variety in the Thades,
ut we can every where trace the fame original
olor. Each tribe has something peculiar which
iftinguilhes it, but in all of them we discern
ertain features common to the whole race. It is
emarkable, that in every peculiarity, whether in
heir persons or dispositions, which charadterize
he Americans, they have some resemblance to the
ude tribes scattered over the north-east of Afa, but
Imoft none to the nations fettled in the northern
xtremities of Europe. We may, therefore, refer
hem to the former origin, and conclude that their
fiatic progenitors, having fettled in those parts
f America, where the Ruffians have discovered
he proximity of the two continents, spread
radually over' its various regions. This account
f the progress of population in America, coincides
with the traditions of the Mexicans concerning
heir own origin, which, imperfect as they are,
vcre preserved with more accuracy, and merit
reater credit, than those of any people in the
ecw World. According to them, their ancestors

B a o I came fiom a remote country, situated to the north,

Iv. weft of Mexico. The 1Mexicans point out their

various fturioni as they advanced from this, into
the interior provinces, and it is precifelv the fame
roite which they mulR have held, if they had
been emigrants from Alia. T'he Nlexicans, in
dcfcribing the appearance of their progenitors,
their manners, and habits of life at that periad,
exatly delineate those of the rinde Tartars, from
whom I suppose them to have sprung '.

Thus have I finishe(l a difquilition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it
would have been improper to omit it in writing
the history of America. I have ventured to in
quire, but without prefLuming to d.ecide. Satisfied
with offering conjedures, I pretend not to eftab
lifh any fyltem. When an investigation is, from
its nature, so intricate and obscure, that it is
impofTible to arrive at conclusions which are cer,
tain, there nay be some merit in pointing out
such as are probable*'.

condition The condition and characer of the American
erhoftaea nations, at the time when they became known
Americans, to the Europeans, deserve more attentive cot.

fideration, than the inquiry concerning thcir
original. The lattcr is merely an objedt of cu
riority, the former is one of the molt important

*' Acofta Tlift. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c 2, &c. Garcia

Origen de los In:lis, lib. v. c. 3. Torquemada Mlonar.
Incl lib. i c: 2. &c. Iloturini Bcnaduci Idea de una Hist
de Li Aincr. Septc:tr. § xvii p. 127.

V' meinoircs fur la Louifiane, par Dumont, tom. i. p. 1 9

as well as inftrudive researches, which can oc- n o o
cupy the philosopher or hiflorian. In order to xV.
complete the history of the human mind, and
attain to a perfect knowledge of its nature and
operations, we must contemplate man in all those
various situations wherein he has been placed.
We must follow him in his progress through the
different stages of society, as he gradually advances
from the infant state of civil life towards its ma-
turity and decline. We must observe, at each
period, how the faculties of his understanding
unfold, we mufR attend to the efforts of his active
powers, watch the motions of affetion as they
rife in his brealt, and mark whither they tend,
and with what ardor they are exerted. The
philofophcrs and historians of ancient Greece and
Rome, our guides in this as well as every other
difquifitiori, had only a limited view of this sub,
je , as they had hardly any opportunity of
surveying man in his rudest and most early state.
In all those regions of the earth with which they
were well acquainted, civil society had made con,
fiderable advances, and nations had finiflhed a
good part of their career before they began to
observe them. The Scythians and Germans, the
rudest people of whom any ancient author has
transmitted to us an authentic account, possessed
flocks and herds, had acquired property of various
kinds, and, when compared with mankind in their
primitive slate, may be reckoned to have attained
to a great degree of civilization.

But the discovery of the New World enlarged

R O O J the sphere of contemplation, and presented na

iv. tions to our view, in flages of their progress

proved tran much less advanced than those wherein they have
in any part been observed in our continent. In America,
of theearth.nlan appears under the rudest form in which we

can conceive him to subsist. Te behold commu.
nitiesjuift beginning to unite, and may examine
the sentiments and actions of human beings in
the infancy of social life, while they feel but im.
perfectly the force of its ties, and have scarcely
relinquished their native liberty. That state of
primeval simplicity, which was known in our
continent only by the fanciful description of poets,
really existed in the other. The greater part of it;
inhabitants were firangers to industry and labor,
ignorant of arts., imperfectly acquainted with the
nature of property, and enjoying almost without
reftridion or control the bleflings which flowed
spontaneously from the bounty of nature. There
were only two nations in this vast continent which
had emerged from this rude slate, and had made
any considerable progress in acquiring the ideas,
and adopting the institutions, which belong to
polifled societies. Their government and manners
will fall naturally under our review in relating the
difcovcry and conquest of the Mexican and Peru-
vian empires; and we fliall have there an oppor-
tlnity of contemplating the Americans in the Itate
of highcft improvement to which they ever attained.

This in. At pretent, our attention and refearcles hfall
qiirycnn- be turned to the small independent tribes which
filne to the
rlidtll occupied every other part of America. Among
tribes.

these, though with some diversity in their cha- n o o K
racder, their manners, and institutions, the state -Iv.
of society was nearly similar, and so extremely
rude, that the denomination of Savage may be
applied to them all. In a general history of Ame-
ica, it would be highly improper to describe the
condition of each petty community, or to in-
vcftigate every minute circumstance which con-
tributes to form:the charater of its members. Such
an inquiry would lead to details of immeasurable
and tiresome extent. The qualities belonging to
the people of all the different tribes have such a
near resemblance, that they may be painted with
the fame features.- W'here any circumstances seem
to constitute a diversity in their charadcer and man-
ners worthy of attention, it will be sufficient to
point these out as they occur, and to inquire into
the causes of such peculiarities.

It is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and Difficulty of
authentic information concerning nations - while obtaini

informa-

tlhey remain uncivilized. To discover their true tion,
charader under this rude form, and to colled the
features by which they are diflinguifhed, requires
iln observer possessed of no less impartiality than
(lilccrnment. For, in every stage of society, the
faculties, the sentiments and desires of men are
so accommodated to their own state, that they
become standards of excellence to themselves, they
atTix the idea of perfection and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and wherever
the objects and enjoyments to which they have
been accustomcd are wantio1g,, confidently pro-

o o K nounce a people to be barbarous and miferibl(
Iv. Hence the mutual contempt with vhich the men

bers of communities, unequal in their degrees o
improvement, regard each other. Polished na
tions, conscious of the advantages which the!
derive from their knowledge and arts, are apt te
view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and, ii
the pride of superiority, will hardly allow eithel
their occupations, their feelings, or their pleasures,
to be worthy of men. It has seldom been the lot
.of communities, in their early and unpolifhed
state, to fall under the observation of persons
endowed with force of mind fuperi0r to vulgar
prejudices, and capable of contemplating man,
under whatever afpeft he appears, with a candid
,and discerning eye.

rom the , The Spaniards, who first visited America, and
incapacity Who had opportunity of beholding its various
bferver, tribes, while entire and unfubdued, were f.r

from poffelfing the qualities requisite for observing
the striking fpedacle presented to their view.
Neither the age in which they lived , nor the
nation to which they belonged, had made such
progrcfs in true fcieince, as inspires enlarged and
liberal sentiments. The conquerors of the New
WVorld were mostly illiterate adventurers, destitute
of all the ideas which flould have directed them
in contemplating objedts, so extremely different
from those with which they were acquainted. Sur-
rounded continually vith danger, or .ruigglinlg
with haidflhips, they had little leisure, and less
sapacity, for any speculative inquiry. Eager to

ake possession of a country of such extent and B o o K
pulence, and happy in finding it occupied by Iv.
nhabitants so incapable to defend it, they hastily
ronounced them, to be a wretched order of nien
ormed merely for servitude; and were more emn
loyed in compulting the profits of their labor, than
n inquiring into the operations of their minds,
r the reasons of their customs and institutions,
'he persons who penetrated at subsequent periods
nto the interior provinces, to which the knowv-
edge and devastations of the first conquerors did
ot reach, were generally of a similar character;
brave and enterprising in a high degree, but so
uninformed as to be little qualified either for ob-
erving or describing what they beheld.
Not only the incapacity, but the prejudices of andtheir

the Spaniards, render their accounts of the people ptej"di"cs*
of America extremely defective. Soon after they
planted colonies in their new conquests, a difference
in opinion arose with refped to the treatment of
the natives. One party, solicitous to render their
servitude perpetual, represented them as a brutish,
obstinate race, incapable either of acquiring reli-
gious knowledge, or of being trained to the
funtions of sociAl life. The other, full of pious
concern for their conversion, contended that',
though rude and ignorant, they were gentle,
affcdtionate, docile, and by proper inftrudtions
and regulations Inight be formed gradually into
good Chriflians andt useful citizens. This contro-
verfy, as I have already related, was carried on
witli all the .warmth which is natural, whel

B o O R attention to interest on the one hand, and religious

iv, zeal on the other, animate the disputants. Molt

of the laity espoused the former opinion, all the
ecclesiastics were advocates for the latter; and we
ihall uniformly find that accordingly as an author
belonged to either of these parties, he is apt to
magnify the virtues or aggravate the defects of the
Americans far beyond truth. Those repugnant
accounts increase the difficulty of attaining a per.
fed knowledge of their character, and render it
necessary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanish writers with distrust, and to receive their
information with some grains of allowance.

and from Almost two centuries elapsed after the discovery
the fyterls Of America, before the manners of its inhabitants
of philofo.
phers. attracted, in any considerable degree, the attention

of philosophers. At length, they discovered that
the contemplation of. the condition and charater
of the Americans in. their original state, tended
to ,omplete our knowledge of the human species,
might enable us to fill up a considerable chasm in
the history of its progrefs,,and lead to speculations
no less curious than important. They entered upon
this new field of study with great ardor; but,
instead of throwing light upon the fibjed , they
have contributed, in fonme degree, to involve it in
additional obscurity. Too impatient to inquire,
they hastened to decide; and began to eredt sys
tems , when they fliould have been searching for
fadts on which to eftablifl their foundations.
Struck with the appearance of degeneracy in the
human species throughout the New World, and

aflonifled

lonifhed at beholding a vafi continent occupied B o o i
y a naked, feeble, and ignorant race of men, Iv.
me authors of great narte have maintained,
at this part of the globe had but lately emerged
om the sea, and become fit for the residence of
an; that every thing in it bore marks of a recent
riginal; and that its inhabitapts, lately called into
xiftence, and still at the beginning of their career,
ere unworthy to be compared with the people
f a more ancient and improved continent 4*
thers have imagined, that, under the influence
f an unkindly climate, which checks and ener.
ates the principle of life, man never attained int
merica the perfection which belongs to his nature,
ut remained an animal of an inferior order, de-
clive in the vigor of his bodily frame, and
eflitute of sensibility, as wel as of force, in, the
perations of his mind". In opposition to both
efe, other philosophers have supposcd that man
rives at his highest dignity and excellence long
efore he reaches as tate of refinement; and, in
e rude simplicity of savage life, displays an
levation of sentiment, an independence of mind;
nd a warmth of attachment, for which it is vain
search among the members of polinled societies ',
hey seem to confider that as the moss perfect
ate of man which is the least civilized. They
escribe the manners of the rude Americans with

4 M. de tuffon, Hiss. Nat. . 494, &c. ;x. tot. t t4
*' M. de P. Recherches Philof. fur les Aineric. paflim,,
4° M. Rousseau.
VOL. 1I.

B O O K such rapture as if they proposed them for model

iv. to the reft of the species. These contradictor

theories have been proposed with equal confidence
and uncommon powers of genius and eloquence
have been exerted, in order to clothe them with
an appearance of truth.

As all those circumfiances concur in rendering

an inquiry into the state of the rude nations in
America intricate and obscure, it is necelTary to
carry it on with caution. When guided in ou
researches by the intelligent observations of th
few philosophers Who have visited this part o
the globe, we may venture to decide. When
obliged to have recourse to the superficial remark
of vulgar travellers, of sailors, traders, bu
caneers, and missionaries, we must often pause
and comparing detached fads endeavour to di
cover what they wanted sagacity to observe, With
out indulging conjecure ~ or betraying a propenfit
to either system, we must study with equal car
to avoid the extremes of extravagant admiration,
or of supercilious contempt for those manne
which we describe.

Mtinaob,. In order to condud this inquiry with greate
served in theaccuracy , it fliould be rendered as simple as
Inviry. possible. Mlan existed as an individual before he

became the member of a community; and th
qualities which belong to him under his formel
capacity fiould be known, before we proceed t
examine those which arise from the latter relation
This is peculiarly necessary in investigating the
manners of rude nations. Their political union i

b incomplete, their civil inffitutions and regula- B o o x
ions so few, so simple, and of such slender author- Iv,
ty, that men in this state ought to be viewed
ather as independent agents, than as members of
regular society. The characer of a savage results
ilnoft entirely from his sentiments or feelings as
in individual, and is but little influenced by his
mperfedc fubjedion to government and order.
lhall conduct my researches concerning the man-
ers of the Americans in this natural order, pro-
eeding gradually fiom what is simple to what is
ore complicated.
I illall confider, I. The bodily constitution of
he Americans in thofr regions now under review.
1. The qualities of their minds. III. Their domes.
ic state. IV. Their political state and institutions.
. Their system of war, and public security.
TI. The arts with which they were acquainted.
lI. Their religious ideas and inffitutions. VIII.
uch singular detached customs as are not reducible
o any of the former heads. IX. I shall conclude
ith a general review and estimate of their virtues
id defecs.
I. The bodily conffitution of the Americans. TheconRi;
-The human body is less asseted by climate tution of
han that of any other animal. Some animals are theirbodic4
onfined to a particular region of the globe, and
annot exif beyond it; others, though they may
e brought to bear the injuries of a climate foreign
o them, cease to multiply when carried out of
hat diftrid which Nature destined to be their
lanfion. liven such as fcem capable of being

E

.B o o K naturalized in various climates, feel the effect

IV. every remove from their proper station, an

gradually dwindle and degenerate from the vigo
and perfection peculiar to their species. Man
the only living creature whose frame is at once
hardy and so flexible, that he can spread over th
whole earth, become the inhabitant of every regio
and thrive and multiply under every climate. Sub
ject, however, to the general law of Nature
the human body is not entirely exempt from th
operation of climate; and when exposed to th
extremes either of heat or cold, its size or vigo
diminishes.

Complexion, ,The first appearance of the inhabitants of the
etc. New World, filled ;the discoverers with such afto

nilhment, that they were apt to imagine them
race of men different from those of the other
hiemifphere. Their complexion is of a reddif
brown, nearly resembling the color of copper"4
The hair of their heads is always black, long,
.coarse, and lank. They have no beard, and every
part of their body is perfectly smooth. Their per.
sons are of a full size, extremely strait, and well
proportioned `". Their features are regular, though
often distorted by absurd endeavours to improve
the beauty of their natural form, or to render

More their asped more dreadful to their enemies. In the
feeble. ilands, where four-footed animals were both few

and finall, and the earth yielded her productions

47 Oviedo Sumario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus,c.
24. " See NOTE XVII.

mnoft fpontaneoufy, the constitution of the Bn o o
atives, neither braced by the adive exercifes'of Iv.
ie chafe, nor invigorated by the labor of culti-
ation, was extremely feeble and languid. On the
ontinent, where the forests abound with game of
arious kinds, and the chief occupation of many
ribes was to pursue it, the human frame acquired
reater firmness. Still, however, the Americans
ere more remarkable for agility than strength.
hey resembled beasts of prey, rather than animals
ormed for labor 4. They were not only averse
o toil, but incapable of it; and when roused by
orce from their native indolence, and compelled
o work, they funk under talks which the people
f the other continent would have performed with
afe". This feebleness of constitution was univer-
l among the inhabitants of those regions in Ame.
ica which we are surveying, and may be confi-
ered as charaderiftic of the species there" .
The beardless countenance and smooth tkin of
he American seems to indicate a defet of vigor,
ccafioned by some vice in his frame. He is def-
itute of one sign of manhood and of Ifrength.
ihis peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the
ewv World arc distinguished from the people of
11 other nations, cannot be attributed, as some

4' See NOTE XVIII
'o Oviedo, Sum. P.

; r, C. Voy. de Correalii. x38.
Wafer's Description, p. 11z.

B. Las Cafis Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torquem. Monar.

l8o. Ovicdo, Sumario, p. 41. Hiftor. lib. iii. c. 6.
lerrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 41.

E 3

B o oK travellers have supposed, to their mode of sub.

Iv. fiftence". For though the food of many Americans

be extremely insipid, as they are altogether unaco
quainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in other
parts of the earth have subsisted on aliments equally
simple, without this mark of degradation, or any
apparent fvmp)tom of a diminution in their vigor.

Les appe. As the external form of the Americans leads us
tite' to fufped that there is some natural debility in

their frame, the finallnefs of their appetite for
food has been mentioned by many authors as a
confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity of
food which men consume varies according to the
temperature of the climate in which they live,
the degree of activity which they exert, and the
natural vigor of their conflitutions. Under the
enervating heat of the torrid zone, and when men
pass their days in indolence and ease, they require
less nourifhtnent than the adive inhabitants of
temperate or cold countries. But neither the warmth
of their climate , nor their extreme laziness, will ac.
count for the uncommcon defed of appetite among
the Americans. 'I he Spaniards were aftonified
with observing this, not only in the ifllnds, but
in several parts of the continent. The constitutional
temperance of the natives far exceeded, in their
opinion, the abltinence of the molt mortified her.
mits"; while, on the other hand, the appetite of
the Spaniards appeared to the Americans insatiably

"' Charlev. Hist. delaNouv. Fr. iii. to.
<' Ramurfo, iii. o04, F. ;o6, A. Simnon Conquifta, &,
p. 39. Hakluyt, iii. 468. (o8(

oracious; and they affirmed, that one Spaniard B o o x
evoured more food in a day than was sufficient Iv.
or ten Americans .
A proof of some feebleness in their frame still Lefsveh.

more striking, is the insensibility of the Americans Idne.efC
to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.
That passion which was deffined to perpetuate
life, to be the bond of social union, and the
source of tenderness and joy," is the most ardent
in the human breast. Though the perils and hard-
ships of the savage state, though excessive fatigue,
on some occasions, and the difficulty at all times
of procuring fubfifience, may feemr to be adverse
to this passion, and to have a tendency to abate
its vigor, yet the rudefl nations in every other
part of the globe seem to feel its influence more
powerfully than the inhabitants of the New World.
The negro glows with all the warmth of desire
natural to his climate; and the most uncultivated
Asiatics discover that sensibility, which, from
their situation on the globe, we should expe&
them to have felt. But the Americans are, in an
amazing. degree, strangers to the force of this first
inftind of nature. In every part of the New World
the natives treat their women with coldness anSl
indifference. They are neither the objeds of that
tender attachment xvhich takes place. in civilized
society, nor of that ardent desire conspicuous
among rude nations. Even in climates where this.
passion usually acquires its greatest vigor, the

" IIerrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 16.

E4

B o o I savage of America views his female with disdain:

Iv. as an animal of a less noble species. He is at nc

pains to win her favor by the assiduity of court.
ihip , and still less solicitous to preserve it by in,
dulgence and gentleness ". MIiffionaries themselves,
notwithstanding the austerity of monastic ideas,
cannot refrain from exprefling their astonishment
at the difpaflionate coldness of the American young
men in their intercourse with the other sex '. Nor
is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which
they entertain with refped to the merit'of female
chastity. That is an idea too refined for a savage,
and fuggefled by a delicacy of sentiment and
affection to which he is a stranger.

ntfleaios But in inquiries concerning either the bodily or
xfphre- mental qualities of particular races of men, there
thefr. is not a more common or more seducing error,

than that of ascribing to a single cause, those
charaderiftic peculiarities, which are the effec
of the combined operation of many causes. The
climate and- foil of America differ , in so many
refpeds., from those of the other hemisphere, and
this difference is so obvious and striking, that

" Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, 3;, &c. Rochefort

Hist. des Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage dc Correal, ii.
14r. Ramufio, iii. 309. F. Lozano, Defcr. del Gran
Chaco, 71. Falkner's Defer. ol' Pad;gon. p. i2s. Let-
tere di P. Cataneo ap. Muratori, II Christian. Felice, i,

Chanalon. Lettr. Edi to. xxiv.

"' Chanvalon. p. ';i. Lettr. Edif. tom. xxiv. 318.

Tertre, ii. ; 7. Venegds, i. 8 . Ribas, Hist. de los
Triumf. p. 11,

hilofophers of great eminence have laid hold on B o o K
his as fifficient to account for what is peculiar Iv.
n the constitution of its inhabitants. They reft
n physical causes alone, and confider the feeble
rame and languid desire of the Americans, as
consequences of the temperament of that portion
of the globe which they occupy. But the influence
of political and moral causes ought not to have
been overlooked. These operate with no less
effed than that on which many philosophers reft
as a full explanation of the singular appearances
which have been mentioned. Wherever the state
of society is such as to create many wants and
desires, which cannot be fatlsfied without regular
exertions of industry, the body accustomed to
labor becomes robust and patient of fatigue. In
amore simple ifate, where the demands of men are
o few and so moderate, that they may be gratified,
almost without any effort, by the spontaneous
productions of nature, the powers of the body
are not called forth, nor can they attain their
)roper strength. The natives of Chili and of
North-America, the two temperate regions in the
New World, who live by hunting, may be deemed
an active and vigorous race, when compared with
the inhabitants of the isles, or of those parts of
the continent where hardly any labor is requisite
to procure subsistence. The exertions of a hunter
are not, however, so regular, or so continued,
as those of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs, his

B o o I savage of America views his female with disdain

iv. as an animal of a less noble species. He is at nc

pains to win her favor by the assiduity of court
Ihip, and still less solicitous to preserve it by in
dulgence and gentleness". Missionaries themselves,
notwithstanding the austerity of monastic ideas,
cannot refrain from expressing their afloniflmeni
at the difpafionate coldness of the American young
men in their intercourse with the other sex `'. No1
is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which
they entertain with refped to the merit'of female
chastity. That is an idea too refined for a savage,
and suggested by a delicacy of sentiment and
affection to which he is a stranger.

Refleaiou, But in inquiries concerning either the bodily or
fpe: th mental qualities of particular races of men, there
thefr. is not a more common or more seducing error,

than that of ascribing to a single cause, those
charaderiftic peculiarities, which are the effed
of the combined operation of many causes. The
climate and foil of America differ , in so many
refpecs, from those of the other hemisphere, and
this difference is so obvious and friking, that

Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, 3i, &c. Rochefort

Hist. des iles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Correal, ii.
i4r. Ramufio, iii. o09. F. Lozano, Defcr. del Gran
Chaco, 7'. Fallkner's Defcr. of Padagon. p. Isc. Let-
tere di P. Cataneo ap. Muratori, 11 Christian. Felice, i.
305.

" Chanvalon. p 5i. Lettr. Edif. tom. xxiv. ;18.

Tertre, ii. 3-7. Veneg4s, i. 81. Ribas, Hist. de Ips
Trium. p. 11.

philosophers of great eminence have laid hold on B o o K
this as fuficient to account for what is peculiar iv.
in the confiitution of its inhabitants. They reft
on physical causes alone, and confider the feeble
frame and languid desire of the Americans, as
consequences of the temperament of that portion
of the globe which they occupy. But the influence
of political and moral causes ought not to have
been overlooked. These operate with no less
effec than that on which many philosophers reft
as a full explanation of the singular appearances
which have been mentioned. Wherever the state
of society is such as to create many wants and
desires, which cannot be satisfied without regular
exertions of industry, the body accuflomed to
labor becomes robust and patient of fatigue. In
a more simple (late, where the demands of men are
so few and so moderate, that they may be gratified,
almost without any effort, by the spontaneous
productions of nature, the powers of the body
are not called forth, nor can they attain their
proper strength. The natives of Chili and of
North-America, the two temperate regions in the
New World, who live by hunting, may be deemed
an active and vigorous race, when compared with
the inhabitants of the ifes, or of those parts of
the continent where hardly any labor is requisite
to procure subsistence. The exertions of a hunter
are not, however, so regular, or so continued,
as those of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs, his

B o o K strength is on the whole inferior. If another

iv. direction were given to the active powers of man

in the New World, and his force augmented
by exercise, he might acquire a degree of vigor
which he does not in his present slate possess. The
truth of this is confirmed by experience. Wherever
the Americans have been gradually accuf orned to
hard labor, their constitutions become robuit, and
they have been found capable of performing such
tasks, as seemed not only to exceed the powers
of such a feeble frame as has been deemed peculiar
to their country, but to equal any effort of the
natives, either of Africa or of Europe "

The fame reasoning will apply to what has

been observed concerning their slender demand
for food. As a proof that this should be ascribed
as much to their extreme indolence, and often
total want of occupition, as to any thing peculiar
in the phyficat flruture of their bodies, it has
been observed, that in those diltridts, where the
people of America are obliged to exert any unusual
effort of activity, in order to procure subsistence,
or wherever they are employer in severe labor,
their appetite is not inferior to that of other men,
and, in some places, it has struck observers as
remarkably voracious "'

The operation of political and moral causes is
still more conspicuous, in modifying the degree

" See NOTE XIX.

Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 217. Lafitau, i. SiC. Ovalle
Church. iii. 3. 1Auracori, i. 295.

of attachment between the sexes. In a state of i o o it
high civilization, this passion, inflamed by restraint, iv.
refined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion,
occupies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer
a simple inftindt of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardor of desire, and the most tender emotions of
which our frame is susceptible, sooth and agitate
the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted
from the cares and labors of life. Among persons
of inferior order, who are doomed by their con-
dition to incessant toil, the dominion of this paflion
is less violent; their solicitude to procure fibfiftence,
and to provide for the first demand of nature,
leaves little leisure for attending to its second call.
But if the nature of the intercourse between the
sexes varies so much in persons of different rank
in polished societies, the condition of man, while
he remains uncivilized, muff occasion a variation
still more apparent. We may well suppose, that
amidst the hardships, the dangers, and the fim.
plicity of ravage life, where subsistence is always
precarious, and often scanty, where men are almost
continually engaged in the pursuit of their enemies,
or in guarding against their attacks, and where
neither dress nor reserve are employed as arts of
female allurement, that the attention of the Ame-
ricans to their women would be extremely feeble,
without imputing this solely to any physical defed
or degradation in their frame.

It is accordingly observed, that in those countries,
of America, where, from the fertility of the foil,

n o o 1c the mildness of the climate, or some farther advan.

IV. ces which the natives have made in improvement,

the means of subsistence are more abundant, and
the hardships of savage life are less severely felt,
the animal passion of the sexes becomes more ardent,
Striking examples of this occur among some tribes
feated on the banks of great rivers well stored with
food, among others who are masters of hunting.
grounds abounding so much with game, that they
have a regular and plentiful supply of nourilhment
with little labor. The superior degree of security
and influence which these tribes enjoy, is followed
by their natural effects. The palfions implanted
in the human frame by the hand of nature acquire
additional force; new taftes and desires are formed;
the women, as they are more valued and admired,
become more attentive to dress and ornament;
the men, beginning to feel how much of their
own happiness depends upon them, no longer
disdain the arts of winning their favor and
affedion. The intercourse of the sexes becomes
very different from that which takes place among
their ruder countrymen; and as hardly any restraint
is imposed on the gratification of desire, either by
religion, or laws, or decency, the dissolution of
their manners is excefiive ".

None of Notwithtanding the feeble make of the Ameri-
them d". cans, hardly any of them are deformed, or mutilated,

or defecive in any of their senses. All travellers

Biet. 389. Charlev. iii. 42z. Dumont, Mem. fur
la LouiGiane, i. l i.

have been struck with this circumstance, and have B O o R
celebrated the uniform symmetry and perfection Iv.
of their external figure. Some authors search for
the cause of this appearance in their physical con-
dition. As the parents are not exhausted or over-
fatigued with hard labor, they suppose that their
children are born vigorous and found. They
imagine, that in the liberty of savage life, the
human body, naked and unconfined from its
earliest age, preserves its natural form; and that
all its limbs and members acquire a juster propor-
tion, than when fettered with artificial restraints,
which stint its growth, and distort its shape '
Something, without doubt, may be ascribed to
the operation of these causes; but the true reasons
of this apparent advantage, which is common to
all savage nations, lie deeper, and are closely
interwoven with the nature and genius of that
state. The infancy of man is so long and so help-
less, that it is extremely difficult to rear children
among rude nations. Their means of subsistence
are not only scanty, but precarious. Such as live
by hunting must range over extensive countries,
and flift often from place to place. The care of
children, as well as every other laborious task,
is devolved upon the women. The distresses and
hardflips of the savage life, which are often such
as can hardly be supported by persons in full
vigor, must be fatal to those of more tender age.
Afraid of undertaking a talk so laborious, and

'd Pifo, p. 6.

o o o of such long duration, as that of rearing thei
IV. offspring, the women, in some parts of America

procure frequent abortions by the use of certail
herbs, and extinguish the first sparks of that lifi
which they are unable to cherish ". Sensible tha
only flout and well formed children have force o
constitution to firuggle through such a hard in
fancy, other nations abandon or destroy such of their
progeny as appear feeble or defective , as un
worthy of attention ". Even when they endeavoui
to rear all their children without diftindion , f
great a proportion of the whole number perimle!
under the rigorous treatment which mufft be theii
lot in the savage state, that few of those whc
labored under any original frailty attain the age
of manhood". Thus, in polished societies, where
the means of subsistence are secured with certainty.
and acquired with ease; where the talents of the
mind are often of more importance than the
powers of the body; children are preserved not.
withstanding their defeds or deformity, and grow
up to be useful citizens. In rude nations, such
persons are either cut off as soon as they are born,
or becoming a burden to themselves and to the
community, cannot long protradt their lives. But
in those provirces of the New World where, by
the eflabliflment of the Europeans, more regular

' Ellis's Voyage to Hudron's Bay, I98. Herrera, dec.
7. lib. ix. c. 4.

Gumilla, -Hist. ii. 2;4. Techo's Hilt. of Paraguay,
&c. Churchill's Colled. vi. 1o8

'' Creuxii Hist. Canad. p. 57.

provision has been made for the subsistence of its B o o K
inhabitants, and they are restrained from laying Iv.
violent hands on their children, the Americans are
so far from being eminent for any superior per-
fcdtion in their form, that one should rather
fufped some peculiar imbecilJity in the race, from
the extraordinary number jos individuals who are
deformed, dwartifl, mutlated, blind, or deaf`.

How feeble soever the conflitution of the Uniformity

Americans may be, it is remarkable, that there otthir ap.
is less variety in the human form throughout the petra""
New World , than in the ancient continent. When
Columbus and the other discoverers first visited
the different countries of America which lie within
the torrid zone , they naturally expected to find
people of the fame complexion with those in the
corresponding regions of the other hemisphere. To
their amazement, however, they discovered that
America contained no negroes " ; and the cause
of this singular appearance became as much the
object of curiosity, as the fad itself was of wonder.
In what part or membrane of the body that humor
resides which tinges the complexion of the negro
with a deep black, it is the business of anatomists
to inquire and describe. The powerful operation
of heat appears manifeflly to be the cause which
produces this striking variety in the human species.
All Europe, almost the whole of Asia, and the
temperate parts of Africa, are occupied by men
of a fair complexion. All the torrid zone in Africa,

' Voyage de Ulloa, i. 2 :. " P, Martyr, dec. p. 7 1.

a o o K some of the warmer regions adjacent to it, and a

Iv. few countries in Asia, are filled with people of a

deep black color. If we trace the nations of our
continent, making our progress from cold and
temperate countries towards those parts which are
exposed to the influence of vehement and unre.
mitting heat, we shall find, that the extreme white.
ness of their skin soon begins to diminish ; that
its color deepens gradually as we advance, and
after passing through all the successive gradations
offhade, terminates in an uniform unvarying black.
But in America , where the agency of heat is
checked and abated by various causes, which I
have already explained , the climate seems to be
destitute of that force which produces such won.
derful effects on the human frame. The color of
the natives of the torrid zone, in America, is hardly
of a deeper hue than that of the people in the more
temperate parts of their continent. Accurate obfer.
vers, who had an opportunity of viewing the
Americans in very different climates, and in pro-
vinces far removed from each other, have been
firuck with the amazing similarity of their figure
and aspect '.

But though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in fashioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that were
current in the ancient continent , have been revived
with refpedt to the New World, and America too

" See NOTEl XX.

las

has been peopled with human beings of monflrous B o o
and fantaltic appearance. The inhabitants of certain IV.
provinces were described to be pigmies of three
feet high ; those of others to be giants of an enor-
mous lize. Some travellers published acounts of
people with only one eye, others pretended to
have discovered men without heads, whose eyes
anid mouths were planted in their breasts. The
variety of Nature in her productions is, indeed , so
great, that it is presumptuous to set bounds to her
fertility, and to reject indiscriminately every relation
that does not perfecly accord with our ownlimited
observation and experience. But the other extreme,
of yielding a hasty assent, on the slightest evidence,
to whatever has the appearance of being strange
and marvellous, is no less unbecoming a philofo-
phical inquirer, as, in every period, men are
more apt to be betrayed into error, by their weak-
ness in believing too much, than by their arrogance
ill believing too little. In proportion as science
extends, and nature is examined with a discerning
eye, the wonders which amused ages of ignorance
disappear. The tales of credulous travellers con-
cerning America areforgotten; the monsters which
they describe have been searched for in vain; and
those provinces where they pretend to have found
inhabitants of singular forms, are now known to
be possessed by people no wife different from the
other Americans.

Though those relations may, without discus-

sion, be rejected as fabulous, there are other
accounts of varieties in_ the human species in some

VOL. 11. F

o o parts of the New World , which reft upon better
Iv. evidence, and merit more attentive examination

This variety has been particularly observed in threi
different diftrics. The first of these is situated ir
the isthmus of Darien, near the centre of America,
Lionel Wafer, a traveller poffelfed of more curiofit)
and intelligence than we should have expected tc
find in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there
a race of men few in number, but of a fingulai
make. They are of low flature, according to hil
description, of a feeble frame, incapable of endurint
fatigue. Their color is a dead milk white; not
resembling that of fair people among Europeans
but without any tincture of a blush or fanguinm
complexion. Their skin is covered with a fine
hairy down of a chalky white , the hair of their
heads, their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are ol
the fame hue. Their eyes are of a singular form,
and so weak, that they can hardly bear the light
of the fun ; but they fee clearly by moon - light,
and are most ative and gay in the night 67. No
race similar to this has been discovered in any
other part of America. Cortes, indeed, found some
persons exactly resembling the white people ol
Darien, among the rare and monstrous animals
which Montczuma had colleded `". But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the
provinces bordering on the iflhmus of Darien,
they were probably brought from thence. Singulai

Wafer,Defcript. of Ifth. ap. Dampier, iii. p. 346,
Cortes,ap. Ramul. iii. p. 241, E.

s the appearance of those people may be, they B o o K
annot be confidered as conffituting a diflind Iv.
pecies. Among the negroes of Africa, as well as
he natives of the Indian islands, nature sometimes
roduces a small number of individuals, with all
he charaderiftic features and qualities of the white
eople of Darien. The former are called Albinos
y the Portuguese, the latter Kackerlakes by the
)utch. In Darien the parents of those Whzites are
f the farne color with the other natives of the
ountry; and this observation applies equally to
e anomalous progeny of the negroes and Indians.
he fame mother who produces some children of a
lor that does not belong to the race, brings
rth the reft of the complexion peculiar to her
ountry ". One conclusion may then be formed
ith refpe& to the people described by Wafer,
he Albinos and the Kackerlakes; they are a degene-
ated breed, not a separate class of men; and from
me disease or defect of their parents, the peculiar
olor and debility which mark their degradation
re tranfmnitted to them. As a decisive proof of this,
has been observed, that neither the white people
Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa, propagate
eir race : their children are of the color and tem-
erament peculiar to the natives of their refpedive
olntries 7.
The second diftric that is occupied by inhabit-
nts differing in appearance from the other people

Margrav. lift. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. e. 4.

7 Wiser, p. 348. Deinanet, Hill. de l'Afrique, ii. 2a4.
%cherch. Philf. fur lei Amer. ii. , &c. NOTE XXI.

F

B o o K of America, is situated in a high northern latitude

iv. extending from the coast of Labrador towards t

pole, as far as the country is habitable. The peop
scattered over those dreary regions, are known
the Europeans by the name of EfJuirmaux. The
themselves, with that idea of their own superiority
which consoles the rudefl and molf wretche
nations, afTume the'natne of Keralit or Men. They a
of a middle size, and robust, with heads of a difpr
portioned bulk, and feet as remarkably small. The
complexion, though swarthy, by being continua
exposed to the rigor of a cold climate, inclines
the European white, rather than to the copp
color of America, and the men have beards whic
are sometimes bushy and long 7'. From these mar
of diftinltion, as well as from one still less equ
vocal, the affinity of their language to that of t
Greenlanders, which I have already mentioned
we may conclude, with some degree of confidenct
that the Efquimaux are a race different from t
reft of the Americans.

Ve cannot decide with equal certainty co

cerning the inhabitants of the third diftrid, fituat
at the southern extremity of America. These a
the famous Patagonians, who, during two centuri
and a half, have afforded a subject of controvcr
to the learned , and an objed of wonder to t
vulgar. They are supposed to be one of
wandering tribes, which occupy that vast, hut lc

7' Ellis,Voy. to ludf. Bay, p. 1it. i y. De la

therie, tom. i. p. 79. Wales' Journ. of a Voy. to Chur
ill. River. Phil. Tranl. vol. Ix. 109.

nown region of America ,which extends from the B o o X
ver De la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their Iv.
roper station is in that part of the interior country
rlich lies on the banks of the river Negro; but
the hunting season they often roam as far as the
raits which separate Tierra del Fuego from the
ain-land. The first accounts of this people were
rought to Europe by the companions of Mlagel-
n' , who described them as a gigantic race,
bove eight feet high, and of strength in proportion
their enormous size. Among several tribes of
nillals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable, may
e observed. Some large breeds of horses and
ogs exceed the more diminutive races in stature
nd strength, as far as the Patagonian is supposed
rife above the usual standard of the human body.
ut animals attain the highest perfection of their
ecies, only in mild climates, or where they find
e most nutritive food in greatest abundance.
t is not then in the uncultivated waste of the
aLgellanic regions, and among a tribe of impro-
ident savages, that we flould expet to find man,
,ofleling the highest honors of his race, and
ilfinguiflied by a superiority of size and vigor,
ir beyond what he has reached in any other
art of the earth. The most explicit and unex,
eptionable evidence is requisite, in order to eflab-
ill a fad , repugnant to those general principles
(l laws, which seem to affeCt the human frame in
very other instance, and to decide with refped

Fallkner's Dcfcription of Patagonia, p. xo2.

F 3

1 o o K to its nature and qualities. Such evidence has not

IV. hitherto been produced. Though several persons,

towhofe testimony great refpet is due, have visiter
this part of America since the time of Magellan,
and have had interviews with the natives, though
some have affirmed, that such as they saw were o
gigantic flature, and others have formed the far
conclusion from measuring their footsteps, or from
viewing the skeletons of their dead; yet thei
accounts vary from each other in so many effenti
points, and are mingled with so many circumstance
manifestly false or fabulous, as detrad much fro
their credit. On the other hand, some navigators
and those among the most eminent of their order f
discernment and accuracy, have asserted that th
natives of Patagonia, with whom they had inte
courfc, though flout and well-made, are note
such extraordinary size as to be distinguished fron
the reft of the human species". The existence o
this gigantic race of men seems, then, to be on
of those points in natural history, with refpe t
which a cautious inquirer will hesitate, and wi
chufe to suspend his assent until more complet
evidence shall decide, whether he ought to admi
a fadt, seemingly inconsistent with what reason
and experience have discovered concerning th
structure and condition of man, in all the variou
situations in which he has been observed.
Their hate In order to form a complete idea with refpe

ohealth to the constitution of the inhabitants of this and

'' See NOTE XXII.

the other hemisphere, we should attend not only B o o M
to the make and vigor of their bodies, but con- Iv.
fider what degree of health they enjoy, and to
what period of longevity they usually arrive. In
the simplicity of the savage fate, when man is
not oppressed with labor, or enervated by luxury,
or disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine
that his life will flow on almost untroubled by
disease or suffering, until his days be terminated,
in extreme old age, by the gradual decays of
nature. lWe find, accordingly, among the Ame-
ricans, as well as among other rude people, per.
ifns,-whofe decrepit and flrivelled form seems
to indicate an extraordinary length of life. But
as most of them are unacquainted with the art of
numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what
is past, as they are improvident for what is to
come, it is impossible to ascertain their age, with
any degree of precision 7. It is evident, that
the period of their longevity mufft vary confider-
ably, according to the diversity of climates, and
their different modes of subsistence. They seem,
however, to be every where exempt from many
of the distempers which afflict polished nations.
None of the maladies, which are the immediate
otspring of luxury, ever visited them; and they
have no names in their languages by which to
dliftllgiffh this numerous train of adventitious
evils.

" Ulloa, Notic. Americ. 321. Bancroft, Nat. Hiss. of
(;ji uli, 3 334.

F 4

B O o K But, whatever be the situation in which man is

iv. placed, he is born to susser; and his diseases, in
Direaes. the savage state, though fewer in number, are,

like those of the animals whom he nearly resembles
in his mode of life, more violent, and more fatal.
If luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of
one species, the rigor and distresses of savage life
bring on those of another. As men, in this state,
are wonderfully improvident, and their means of
subsistence precarious, they often pass from ex.
treme want to exuberant plenty, according to
the vicissitudes of fortune in the chafe, or in con.
sequence of the various degree of abundance
with which the earth affords to them its produc.
tions, in different seasons. Their inconsiderate
gluttony in the one situation, and their severe
abstinence in the other, are equally pernicious.
For, though the human constitution may be accufP
tomed by habit, like that of animals of prey, to
tolerate long famine, and then to gorge vora.
cioufly, it is not a little affeced by such sudden
and violent transitions. The strength and vigor
of savages are, at some seasons, impaired by
what they susser from scarcity of food; at others,
they are afflidted with disorders arising from in.
digestion and a superfluity of gross aliment. These
are so common, that they may be confidered
as the unavoidable consequence of their mode
of subsisting, and cut off considerable numbers in
the prime of life. They are likewise extremely
subjet to consumptions, to pleuritic, aflhmatic,

and paralytic disorders ', brought on by the im- B o o x
moderate hardships and fatigue which they endure iv.
in bunting and in war; or owing to the incle-
mency of the seasons to which they are continually
exposed. In the savage state, hardships and fatigue
violently afTault the constitution. In polished so.
cieties, intemperance undermines it. It is not easy
to determine which of them operates with mofi
fatal effelc, or tends most to abridge human life.
The influence of the former is certainly most
extensive. The pernicious consequences of luxury
reach only a few members in any community,
the distresses of savage life are felt by all. As far
as I can judge, after very minute inquiry, the
general period of human life is shorter among
savages, than in well-regulated and industrious
societies.

One dreadful malady, the severest scourge,
with which , in this life, offended Heaven chastens
the indulgence of criminal desire , seems to have
been peculiar to the Americans. By communicat-
ing it to their conquerors, they have not only
amply avenged their own wrongs, but by adding
this calamity to those which formerly embittered
humnan life, they have, perhaps, more than coun-
terbalanced all the benefits which Europe has
derived from the discovery of the New AVorld.
T'his distemper, from the country in which it first
raged, or from, the people by whom it wVas

" Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 36o. De la
Potherie, ii. 3 7.

I o o mI supposed to have been spread over Europe, has

IV. been sometimes called the Neapolitan, and some.

times the French disease. At its first appearance,
the infecion was so malignant, its symptoms so
violent, its operation so rapid and fatal, as to
baffle all the efforts of medical skill. Aftonilhment
and terror accompanied this unknown afflition
in its progress, and men began to dread the ex.
tindion of the human race by such a cruel vifita.
tion. Experience, and the ingenuity of physicians,
gradually discovered remedies of such virtue as to
cure or to mitigate the evil. During the course
of two centuries and a half, its virulence seems
to have abated considerably. At length, in the
fame manner with the leprosy, which raged in
Europe for some centuries, it may waste its force
and disappear; and in some happier age, this
western infection, like that from the East, may
be known only by description "

Powerand II. After confidering what appears to be pecu.
qualitiesof liar in the bodily conflitution of the Americans,
their minds.

our attention is naturally turned towards the pow.
ers and qualities of their minds. As the indivi.
dual advances from the ignorance and imbecillity
of the infant state, to vigor and maturity of under.
sanding, something similar to this may be ob-
served in the progress of the species. With refped
to it, too, there is a period of infancy, during
which several powers of the mind are not unfolded
and all are feeble and defecive in their operation

" See NOTE XXIII.

In the early ages of society , while the condition B o O K
of man is simple and rude, his reason is but little IV.
exercised, and his. desires move within a very
narrow fpheie. Hence arise two remarkable cha-
radEeriftics of the human mind in this state. Its
intelletual powers are extremely limited; its emo-
tions and efforts are few and languid. Both these
distinctions are conspicuous among the rudest
and most unimproved of the American tribes, and
constitute a striking part of their description.

What, among polished nations, is called fpecu- Tntelleual

lative reasoning or research, is altogether unknown faculties
in the rude state of society, and never becomes v
the occupation or amusement of the human facul-
ties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty the means of subsistence,
as well as the possession of leisure and tranquil-
lity. The thoughts and attention of a savage
are confined within the small circle of objects, im-
mediately conducive to his preservation or en-
joyment. Every thing beyond that, escapes his
observation, or is perfectly indifferent to him.
Like a mere animal, what is before his eyes inter-
efts and affects him; what is out of fight, or at
a distance, makes little imprellion ". There are
several people in America whose limited under-
flandings seem not to be capable of forming an
arrangement for futurity; neither their solicitude
nor their foresight extend so far. They follow
blindly the ilnpulfe of the appetite which they feel,

"Ulloa, Noticias Americ. 222.

n o o K but are entirely regardless of difRant consequences,

Iv. and even of those removed in the least degree

from immediate apprehension.. While they highly
prize such things as serve for present use, or mi.
nifter to present enjoyment, they set no value
upon those which are not the object of some im.
mediate want". When, on the approach of
the evening, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to
go to reft, no consideration will tempt him to
fell his hammoc. But, in thelmorning, when he
is sallying out to the business or paltime of the
day, he will part with it for the slightest toy that
catches his fancy ". At the close of winter, while
the impression of what he has suffered from the
rigor of the climate is fresh in the mind of the
North American, he sets himself with vigor to
prepare materials for ereding a comfortable hut
to protect him against the inclemency of the fuc-
ceeding season; but as soon as the weather be.
comes mild, he forgets what is pafl, abandons his
work, and never thinks of it more, until the re.
turn of cold compels him, when too late, to re.
fume it .

If in concerns the most interefling, and seem.

ingly the most simple, the reason of man , while
rude and deffitute of culture, differs so little from
the thoughtless levity of children, or the improvi-
dent inflind of animals, its exertions in other

7' Venegas, -lift. of Calif. i. 66. Supp. Church. Coll.

v. 69;. Borde, Defcr. des Caraibes, p. r6. Ellis Voy.
194. 7 Libat, Voyages. ii. 114, its. Tertre,
ii. 3 8 . ' Adair's flift. of Amer. Indians, 417.

diredcions cannot be very considerable. The objeds n o o ic
towards which reason turns, and the disquisitions Iv.
in which it engages, must depend upon the state
in which man is placed, and are suggested by his
necessities and desires. Disquisitions, which appear
the most necessary and important to men in one
state of society, never occur to those in another.
Among civilized nations, arithmetic, or the art
of numbering, is deemed an essential and element-
ary science, and in our continent, the invention
and use of it reaches back to a period so remote
as is beyond the knowledge of history. But among
savages, who have no property to estimate, no
hoarded treasures to count, no variety of objects
or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic
is a superfluous and useless art. Accordingly,
among some tribes in America it seems to be quite
unknown. There are many who cannot reckon
farther than three; and have no denomination to
distinguish any number above it ". Several can
proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When
they would convey an idea of any number beyond
these, they point to the hair of their head, inti-
mating that it is equal to them, or with wonder
declare it to be so great that it cannot be reckon-
ed ". Not only the Americans , but all nations,
while extremely rude, seem to be unacquainted

" Condam. p. 67. Stadius, ap. de Bry, ix. 128.
Lery. ibid, 2i1. Biet. 362. Lettr. Edif. 3. 314.

" )umont Louil i. 87. Herrera, dec. i. lib, iii. c.
3. Biet. 396. Bdde, 6.

N o o with the art of computation ". As soon, however,

Iv. as they acquire such acquaintance or connexion

with a variety of objects, that there is frequent
occasion to combine or divide them, their know.
ledge of numbers increases, so that the state of this
art among any people may be confidered as one
standard, by which to estimate the degree of their
improvement. The Iroquois, in North America,
as they are much more civilized than the rude in.
habitants of Brasil, Paraguay , or Guiana, have
likewise made greater advances in this refpeft;
though even their arithmetic does not extend
beyond a thousand, as in their petty transactions
they have no occasion for any higher number'.
The Cherokee , a less considerable nation on the
fame continent, can reckon only as far as a hun.
dred, and to that extent have names for the fe-
veral numbers; the smaller tribes in their neigh.
bourhood can rife no higher than ten '.

o abllract In other refpeds, the exercise of the understand.
ideas. ing among rude nations is flill more limited. The

first ideas of every human being must be such as
he receives by the senses. But, in the mind of
man, while in the savage state, there seem to be
hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue.
The objeas around him are presented to his eye.
Such as may be subservient to his use, or can

" This is the cafe with the Greenlanders, Crantz. t. 22 .
and isith Kamchatkadales, M. 1'Abbe Chappe, iii. 17.

" Charlev. Nouv. Franc. iii. 402.
" Adair's Hllift oF Amer. Indians, 77. See. NOTE
XXIV.

ratify any of his appetites, attrad his notice; he n o o K
jews the reft without curiosity or attention. Satis- Iv.
ed with confidering them under that simple
ode, in which they appear to him, as separate
nd detached, he neither combines them so as to
rrn general classes, nor contemplates their quali-
es apart from the subjed in which they inhere,
or bestows a thought upon the operations of his
wn mind concerning them. Thus, he is unac-
uainted with all the ideas which have been denQ-
inated universal, or ab/raAl, or of refleaion. The
ange of his understanding must, of course, be
ery confined, and his reasoning powers be em-
loyed merely on what is sensible. This is so
emarkably the cafe with the ruder nations of
merica, that their languages (as we shall after-
ards find) have not a word to express any thing
ut what is material or corporeal. Time, space,
uflaance , and a thousand other terms which
cprefent abftraft and universal ideas, are altoge-
er unknown to them '. A naked savage,
owering near the fire in his miserable cabbin, or
retched under a few branches which afford him
temporary shelter, has as little inclination as
apacity for useless speculation. His thoughts
xtend not beyond what relates to animal life;
nd when they are not directed towards some of
s concerns, his mind is totally inacdive. In
itations where no extraordinary effort either of
,gcnLity or labor is requisite, in order to satisfy

" Condam. p. 54.

i o o K the simple demands of nature, the powers of tb

IV. mind are so seldom routed to any exertion th

the rational faculties continue almost dormant a
unexercifed. The numerous tribes scattered ov
the rich plains of South America, the inhabit
of some of the islands, and of several ser
regions on the continent, come under this
scription. Their vacant countenance, their ftari
unexpressive eye, their lifeless inattention, a
total ignorance of fubjeds , which seem to be
first which should occupy the thoughts of ratio
beings, made such impression upon the Spaniar
when they first beheld those rude people, t
they confidered them as animals of an inferi
order, and could not believe that they belong
to the human species 7. It required the authori
of a papal bull to counterad this opinion, and
convince them that the Americans were capa
of the functions, and entitled to the pr.ivile
of humanity ". Since that time, persons no
enlightened and impartial than the discover
or conquerors of America, have had an opp
tunity of contemplating the most savage of
inhabitants, and they have been astonished a
humbled, with observing how nearly man,
this condition, approaches to the brute creatio
Buit in feverer climates, where subsistence ca
not be procured with the fame ease, where m
must unite more closely, and act with grea

" Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. iz.
" Tuiquem. Mun. Ind. iii. 198.

concert

oncert, necessity calls forth their talents , and B o o X
harpens their invention, so that the intellectual Iv.
owers are more exercised and improved. The
orth-Americans and natives of Chili, who in-
abit the temperate regions in the two great
iRfrids of'America, are people of cultivated
nd enlarged underliandings, when viewed in
omparifon with some of those feated in the
andls, or on the banks of the Maragnon and
rinoco. 'heir occupations are more various,
eir fyfrem of policy, as well as of war, more
omplex, their arts more numerous. But, even
mnong them, the intellectual powers are extremely
i-nited in their operations, and unless when turned
iredsly to those objeCts which interest a savage,
c held in no estimation. Botl the North-Ameri-
ns and Chilefe, when not engaged in some of
ie fundions belonging to a warrior or hunter,
iter away their time in thoughtless indolence,
inicquainted with any other subjed worthy of
eir attention, or capable of occupying their
inds ". If even among them, reason is so much
rcumfcribed in its exertions, and never arrives,
its highest attainments, at the knowledge of
ofe general principles and maxims, which
rve as the foundation of science, we may
)iclude, that the intellectual powers of man in
ec savage state are deflitute of their proper objet,
id cannot acquire any conliderable degree of
gor and enlargement.

" Lafitau, ii. '.
VOL. 11. G

B o o K From the fame causes, the adive efforts of

Iv. the mind are few , and, on most occasions

Actve es. languid. If we examine into the motives whic
forts ofthe
mind few rouse men to activity in civilized life, and promp
andlanguid them to persevere in fatiguing exertions of thei

ingenuity or strength, we shall find that the
arise chiefly from acquired wants and appetites
These are numerous and importunate; they kee
the mind in perpetual agitation, and, in orde
to gratify them, invention must be always on th
firetch, and industry must be incessantly employ
ed. But the desires of simple nature are few, and
where a favorable climate yields almost fpontane.
oufly what suffices to gratify them, they fcarcel
fir the foul, or excite any violent emotion
Hence the people of several tribes in America
wvaLte their life in a listless indolence. To be free
from occupation, seems to be all the enjoyment
towards which they aspire. They will continue
whole days firetched out in their hammocs, or
feated on the earth, in perfed idleness, without
changing their posture, or raising their eyes from
the ground, or uttering a tingle word *.

tmprovi. Such is their aversion to labor, that neither
dent. the hope of future good , nor the apprehension

of future evil, can surmount it. They appear
equally indifferent to both, discovering little
solicitude, and taking no precautions to avoid
the one, or to secure the other. The cravings 01
lhunger may route them; but as they devour,

" Bougucr, Voy. au Perou, 102. Borde, I$.

ith little diftindion, whatever will appease its B o.s
Itintive demands, the exertions which these v.
ccarion are of hlort duration. Deffitute of ardor,
s well as variety of desire, they feel not the
rce of those powerful springs which give vigor
the movements of the mind, and urge the
tient hand of industry to persevere in its efforts.
lan, in some parts of America, appears in a form
rude, that we can discover no effeds of his
ivity, and the principle of understanding which
ould diredt it, seems hardly to be unfolded.
ike the other animals, he has no fixed residence;
e has ereded no habitation to Ihelter him from
e inclemency of the weather; he has taken
o measures for securing certain fubfifence; he
either sows nor reaps; but roams about as led
1 search of the plants and fruits which the earth
rings forth in fuccefion ; ardd in quest of the
ame which he kills in the forests, or of the tifh
hich he catches in the rivers.
This description, however, applies only to Some variety
me tribes. Man cannot continue long in this withrefptct
ate of feeble and uninformed infancy. He was toallther'
iade for induflry and adtion, and the powers
f his nature, as well as the necefity of his con.
ition, urge him to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly,
mong molt of the American nations, cfpecially
hose feated in rigorous climates, some efforts are
Inploycd , and some previous precautions are
aken , for securing filbfrftelce. The career of
egular industry is begun, and the laborious arm
*1a made the first essays of its power. Stillp

G· p

x O O K however, the improvident and slothful genius

iv. the faxage state predominates. Even among tho

more improved tribes, labor is deemed ignomini
ous and degrading. It is only to work of a certai
kind that a man will deign to put his hand
The greater part is devolved entirely upon th
women. One half of the community remain
inadcive, while the other is oppressed with th
multitude and variety of its occupations. Thu
their industry is partial, and the foresight whici
regulates it, is no less limited. A remarkabl
inflance of this occurs in the chief arrangenmen
with refped to their manner of living. They
depend for their subsistence , during one pan
of the year, on fiffing; during another, oi
hunting; during a third, on the produce of thei
agriculture. Though experience has taught thei
to foresee the return of those various seasons,
and to make some provision for the refpedive
exigencies of each , they either want sagacity to
proportion this provision to their consumption,
or are so incapable of any command over their
appetites, that, from their inconsiderate waste
they often feel the calamities of famine as feverel
as the rudest of the favge tribes. hat the
susser one year does not augment their industry,
or render thein more provident to prevent similar
difLtrcfTs ". This inconsiderate thoughtleffncf

9 Charlev. N. Fr. iii. ;8. Lcttr. Edif. 2;. 29S.

Dercript. of N. France, Osborne's Collet. ii. 880. De
Potherie, ii. 63.

out futurity, the effed of ignorance and the B o o K
alfe of sloth, accompanies and charadterizes man IV.

every state of savage life "; and, by a capri-
ous singularity in his operations, he is then leaIt
licitous about supplying his wants, when the
eans of satisfying them are mofR precarious, and
rocured with the greatest difficulty ".

1IT. After viewing the bodily constitution of Their ocial
e Americans, and contemplating the powers of fiate.
eir minds, we are led, in the natural order of
quiry, to confider them as united together in
ciety. Hitherto our researches have been eonfiri-
d to the operations of understanding refpeding
emfelves, as individuals, now they will extend
the degree of their sensibility and affedtion
wards their species.
The domestic state is the first and most simple Domellic
rm of human association. The union of the sexes, union.
ong different animals, is of longer or shorter
uration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
aring their offspring. Among those tribes where
ie season of infancy is lhort, and the young soon
quire vigor or agility, no permanent union is
rned. Nature commits the care of training up
e offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
cf, without any other assistance, is equal to the
ilk. But where the slate of infancy is long and
clplefs, and the joint assiduity of both parents is
qiiifite in tending their feeble progeny, there a

Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 3 z6. ;R.
See NOTE XXV.

G3

o o m ore intimate connexion takes place, and co
iv. tinues until the purpose of nature be accorplifhel

and the new race grow up to full maturity. P
the infancy of man is more feeble and helple
than that of any other animal, and he is depen1
ent, duri:)g a much longer period(, on the cal
and foresight of his parents, the union betwee
ihtuliand and vwie came early to be confidered
not only as a folermn, but as a permanent contrad
A general state of promifcuons intercourse betwe
the sexes never exlited but in the imaginati
of poets. In the infancy of society, when men
xeftitute of arts and industry, lead a hard pr
carious life, the rearing of their progeny deman
the attention and eflors of both parents; and
their union had not been formed and continue
.with thi, view, the race could not have bet
preserved. Accordingly, in America, even amo
the rudelt tribes, a regular union between hufban
and wife was universal, and the rights of marria
.were understood and recognised. In those diflri
where subsistence was scanty, andthe difficul
of maintaining a family was great, the man co
fined himself to one wife. In warmer and mo
fertile provinces, the facility of procuring soo
.concurred with the influence of climate, in indu
ing the inhabitants tor increase the number of the
wives ". In some countries, the marriage -unio

'* Lettr. Edif. 2. t18. Lafitau, Moeurs, i. 5 54. Ler

ap. de Bry, iii. 234. Journal de Grillet et Bcchanic
p. 88.

ubfilted during life; in others, the impatience of B o o X
he Americans under restraint of any species, Iv.
ogether with their natural levity and caprice,
rompted them to dissolve it on very flight
retexts, and often without assigning any cause '.
But in whatever light the Americans confidered Condition
he obligation of this contrad, either as perpetual, ofwomen
r only as temporary, the condition of women
vas equally humiliating and miserable. Whether
an has been improved by the progress of arts
nd civilization in society, is a question, which,
n the wantonness of disputation, has been agitated
mong philosophers. That women are indebted. to.
the refinements of polished manners for a happy
change in their state, is a point which can admit
of no doubt. To despise and to degrade the female
ex, is the charatleriftic of the savage state in
very part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling
n strength and in courage, the, chief marks of
pre-eminence among rude people., treats woman,
s an inferior, with disdain. The Americans,
perhaps from that coldness and insensibility which?
has been confidered as peculiar to their conftitu-
tion, add neglect and harilhnefs to contempt. The
most intelligent travellers have been itruck with.
this inattention of the Americans to their women,
It is not, as I have already observed, by a ftldied
display of tenderness and: attachment, that the

Lafitau., i; 8o0. Joutel, Journ. Hiltor. ;4q. Lozano,

Dercr. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hennepin, MArutrs des Sau
vages, p. 3o. 3I.

G 4

B o o K American endeavours to gain the heart of the

iv. woman whom he wifies to marry. Mlarriage

itself, instead of being an union of affeCtion and
interests between equals, becomes, among them,
the unnatural conjuntion of a master with his
slave. It is the observation of an author, whose
opinions are deservedly of great weight, that
wherever wives are purchased, their condition is
extremely depressed '. They become the pro
perty and the slaves of those who buy them. In
whatever part of the globe this custom prevails,
the observation holds. In countries where re.
finement has made some progress, women, when
purchased, are excluded from society, shut up in
sequestered apartments, and kept under the vigi.
lant guard of their masters. In ruder nations, they
are degraded to the meanest functions. Among
many people of America, the marriage-contrat is
properly a purchase. The man buys his wife of
her parents. Though unacquainted with the use
of money, or with such commercial tranfadtions
as take place in more improved society, he
knows how to give an equivalent for any objed
which he desires to possess. In some places, the
suitor devotes his service for a certain time to
the parents of the maid whom he courts; in
others, he hunts for them occasionally, or assists
-in cultivating their fields, and forming their ca.
noes; in others, he offers presents of such things
as are deemed molt valuable on account of their

" Sketches of the Hist. of Man, i. 184.

lfefulnefs or rarity ". In return for these, he B o o K
eceives his wife; and this circumstance, added to Iv.
he low eflimation of women among savages, leads
iim to confider her as a female servant whom he
has purchased, and whom he has a title to treat as
n inferior. In all unpolished nations, it is true,
he funtdions in domestic ceconomy, which fall
aturally to the share of women, are so many,
hat they are fubjeded to hard labor, and muff
ear more than their full portion of the common
urden. But in America their condition is so
eculiarly grievous, and their depression so
omplete, that servitude is a name too mild to
escribe their wretched state. A wife, among most
ribes, is no better than a beast of burden,
eftined to every office of labor and fatigue.
Vhile the men loiter out the day in sloth, or
pend it in amusement, the women are condemned
o incessant toil. Talks are imposed upon them
vithout pity, and services are received without
omplacency or gratitude ". Every circumrtance
minds women of this mortifying inferiority.
hey muff approach their lords with reverence;
hey muff regard them as more exalted beings,
nd are not permitted to eat in their presence '.

Lafitau, IVIoeurs, &c. i. 56o, &c. Charlev. iii. 28g.
c. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumont, ii. I 6.

' Tertre, ii. 382. Borde, Relat. des Moeurs des C,-

aibes, p. 21, Biet. 357. Condamine, p. io. Fermin;
79.

" Gumilla, i. x;. Barrere, x64. Labat, Voy. ii;
78. Chanvalon, 5i. Tortre, ii. 300.

o o K There are diftrids in America where this dominiog
Iv. is so grievous, and so sensibly felt, that font

women, in a wild emotion of maternal tendernef
have destroyed their female children in theil
infancy, in order to deliver them from thal
intolerable bondage to which they knew the
were doomed "". Thus the finft institution
social life is perverted. That state of domefti:
union towards which nature leads the human
species, in order to soften the heart to gentlene
and humanity , is rendered so unequal, as
establish a cruel diftindion between the sexes
which forms the one to be harsh and unfeeling
and humbles the other to servility and fubjetion,

Their It is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to th

Their wo.
men not fate of depression, that women in rude nation
proliic. are far from being prolific'°'. The vigor of thei

constitution is exhausted by excessive fatigue, an
the wants and distresses of savage life are so nu
merous, as to force them to take various precautio
in order to prevent too rapid an increafeof their pro
geny. Among wandering tribes, or such as depen
chiefly upon hunting for fubliflence, the mothe
cannot attempt to rear a second child, until the fir
hlas attained fulch a degree of vigor as to be in
some measure independent of her care. From this
motive, it is the universal practice of the American
women to suckle their children during fevera
years"'; and as they seldom marry early, the

Gumilla, ii. 2 3. 21 8. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. ix. c4

'' Lafitau, i. s9o. Charlevoix, iii. 304.
o' Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4.

period of their fertility is over, before they can B o o X
finilh the long but necessary attendance upon two Iv.
or three children '". Among some of the least
polished tribes, whose industry and foresight do
not extend so far as to make any regular provision
for their own subsistence, it is a maxim not to
burden themselves with rearing more than two
children "1; and no such numerous families, as
are frequent in civilized societies, are to be
found among men in the savage state '`. When
twins are horn, one of them'commonly is aban-
doned, because the mother is not equal to the
talk of educating both '"", WMhen a mother dies
while she is nursing a child, all hope of pre-
serving its life fails, and it is buried together
with her in the fame grave7. As the parents are
frequently exposed to want by their own impro.
vident indolence, the difficulty of sustaining thei-r
children becomes so great, that it is not uncommon
to abandon or destroy them '0. Thus their expe.
rience of the difficulty of training up an infant to
rr.,turity, amidlt the hardlhips of lavage life,

'" Charley. iii. ; o. Dumont, Mlm. furla .ouifiane, ii

270. Dnys., Hist. Natur. de l'Amerique, &c. ii. 36S.
Charlev. Hist. du Parag. ii. 422.

"1 Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Collec,
vi. ioa. Lett. Edif. 24. 200. Lozano Dercr. 92.

/ Maccleur's Journal, 6;.

"' Lett. Edif. x. 200. See NOTE XXVI.
"' Charlev. iii. : 68. Lett. Edif. x. 20o. . Melch.

lecrnandez, Memor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, Collect. Orig.
Pap. i. '*' Venegas, Hist. of Californ. i. 82.

B o o Ir often stifles the voice of nature among the Ame.

Iv. ricans , and suppresses the firong emotions of pa.

rental tenderness.

Paren alas- But, though neceflity compels the inhabitants
feaio l and of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

filialduty. their families, they are not deficient in affedtion

and attachment to their offspring. They feel the
power of this infiint in its full force, and as long
as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no
people exceed them in tenderness and care '. But
in rude nations, the dependence of children upon
their parents is of shorter continuance than in
polished societies. When men must be trained to
the various functions of civil life by previous
discipline and education, when the knowledge of
abstruse sciences muff be taught, and dexterity in
intricate arts must be acquired, before a young
man is prepared to begin his career of action, the
attentive feelings of a parent are not confined to
the years of infancy, but extend to what is more
remote, the establishment of his child in the world.
Even then, his solicitude does not terminate. His
protection may still be requisite, and his wisdom
and experience still prove useful guides. Thus a
permanent connexion is formed; parental tenderness
is exercised, and filial rcfped returned, throughout
the whole course of life. But in the simplicity
of the savage state, the affection of parents, like
the inftindtive fondness of animals, ceases almolt
entirely as soon as their offspring attain maturity.

'" Gumilla, i. 21i. Biet. 390.

Little inftrudion fits them for that mode of life B o o ic
o which they are destined. The parents, as if . v.
teir duty were accomplished, when they have con-
duted their children through the helpless years of
nfancy, leave them afterwards at entire liberty.
ven in their tender age, they seldom advise or
rnonifh, they never chide or chaltife them. They
lffer them to be absolute masters of their own
dions ". In an American hut, a father, a mother,
,nd their posterity, live together like persons
I[fembled by accident, without seeming to feel
he obligation of the duties mutually arising from
lhis connexion '1. As filial love is not cherished
y the continuance of attention or good offices,
he recollection of benefits received in early infancy
s too faint to excite it. Conscious of their own
iberty, and impatient of restraint, the youth of
America are accustomed to ad as if they were
otally independent. Their parents are not objeds
f greater regard than other persons. They treat
hemn always with negled, and often with such
arsiness and infolcnce, as to fill those who have
cen witnesses of their conduct with horror "'
lbus the ideas which seem to be natural to man

Charlev. iii. 272. Biet. 390, Gumilla, i. 212,

afitau, i. 602. Creuxii -lilt. Canad. p, 71. Fernandez,
elac. Hlift. de los Chequit. 33.

"' Charlev. lilt. N. Fr. iii. 273.

"Gumilla, i. z1 .Tcrtre, ii. 376. Charlev. Hill. de la

. France, iii. 309. Charlev. lilt. du Parag. i. i S.
(zano, Defrrip. del GranChaco, p. 68. ioo, io1. Ser.
nd. Relac. Iliitor. de los Chequit. 426.

B o o Kr in his savage state, as they result from his dr.

IV. cumflances and condition in that period of his

progress, affect the two capital relations in dome.
tic life. They render the union between hus.
band and wife unequal. They shorten the duration,
and weaken the force, of the connexion between
parents and children.

Plitical in. IV. From the domestic Rtate of the Americans,
fitUtions. the transition to the consideration of their civil

government and political institutions is natural. In
every inquiry concerning the operations of men
when united together in society, the first objec
of attention should be their mode of fubfiflence,
Accordingly as that varies, their laws and policy
must be different. The institutions suited to the
ideas and exigencies of tribes, which fiibfifl chiefly
by fishing or hunting and which have hardly formed
a conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which must take
place when the earth is cultivated with regular
industry, and a right of property not only in
its productions, but in the foil itself, is completely
ascertained.

Mode o All the people of America, now under review,
fubfiilence, belong to the former class. But though they may

all be comprehended under the general deno.
mination of savage, the advances which they had
made in the art of procuring to themselves a
certain and plentiful subsistence, were very unequal
On the vast plains of South-America, man appears
in one of the rudest states in which he has been
ever observed, or , perhaps, can exist. Several

ribes depend entirely upon the bounty of nature B o o K
or subsistence. They discover no solicitude, they Iv.
mploy little foresight, they scarcely exert any in-
uftry, to secure what is necessary for their support.
he Topayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros ofTierra-Firme,
he Caiquas5 the Moxos, and several other people
f Paraguay, are unacquainted with every species
f cultivation. They neither sow nor plant. Even
he culture of the manioc, of which caffada-bread
smade, is an art too intricate for their ingenuity,
r too fatiguing to their indolence. The roots
vhich the earth produces spontaneously, the
mits, the berries, and the feeds, which they
ather in the woods, together with lizards and
ther reptiles, which multiply amazingly with the
eat of the climate in a fat foil, moistened by
equent rains, supply them with food during some
art of the year "' At other times they subsist Byfishint
y fishing; and nature seems to have indulged the
azinefs of the South-American tribes by the liberality
ith which she ministers, in this way, to their
ants. The vast rivers of that region in America
bound with an infinite variety of the most deli-
ate fish. The lakes and marshes, formed by
he annual overflowing of the Waters, are filled
ith all the different species, where they remain
tut up, as in natural reservoirs, for the use of

"' Nieuhoff, 1tift. of Brasil. Church. Call. ii. I 4.

imon, Conquiftla de Tierra Firme , p. 166. Techo, Ac-
ount'of Paraguay , &c. Church. vi. -8. Lettr. Edif,

38. 84. go. x9. Lo.ano, Dcfcrip. del Gran Chaci,
' 8. Ribas, Hiltor. de los Tritnfbos, &c. p. 7.

0 o oc the inhabitants. They swarm in such shoals, tha
IV. in some places they are catched without art 01

industry "'. In others, the natives have discovered
a method of infeding the water with the juice o|
certain plants, by which the fish are so intoxicated,
that they float on the surface, and are taken with
the hand'". Some tribes have ingenuity enough
to preserve them without salt, by drying or smoking
them upon hurdles over a flow fire ". The prolific
quality of the rivers in South-A merica induces many
of the natives to resort to their banks, and to
depend almost entirely for nourishment on what
their waters supply with such profusion 7. In
this part of the globe, hunting seems not to have
been the first employment of men, or the fir
effort of their invention and labor to obtain food.
They were fiffers before they became hunters;
and as the occupations of the former do not call
for equal exertions of activity, or talents, with
those of the latter, people in that state appear to
possess neither the fame degree of enterprise nor
of ingenuity. The petty nations , adjacent to
the Maragnon and Orinoco, are manifestly the
most inactive and least intelligent of all the
Americans.
.y hunting. None but tribes contiguous to great rivers can

fiuflain themselves in this manner. The greater part
of the American nations, dispersed over the forefi

"1 See NOTE XXVII. ri See NOTE XXVII1

" Condlam. 9. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lcttr. Edif. 14
199. 23. t 2. Acugna, Relat. de la Riv. dcs Amaz. 138

B"' arrcre , Relat. de la Fr. Equin. p. i .

with

jith which their country is covered, do not n o o K
rocure subsistence with the fame facility. For IV.
though these forests, especially in the southern
ontincnt of America, are flored plentifully with
ame " , considerable efforts of activity and
genuity are requisite in pursuit of it. Necessity
cited the natives to the one, and taught them
e other. Hunting became their principal occupa-
on; and as it called forth strenuous exertions of
ourage, of force, and of invention, it was deemed
o leIs honorable than necessary. This occupation
as peculiar to the men. They were trained to it
amo their earliest youth. A bold and dextrous
unter ranked next in fame to the distinguished
arnior, and an alliance with the former is often
ourted in preference to one with the latter ''.
ardly any device, which the ingenuity of man
is discovered for ensnaring or defiroying wild
ilnials, was unknown to the Americans. While
ngaged in this favorite exercise , they shake off
ie indolence peculiar to their nature, the latent
owers and vigor of their minds are roused, and
ey become active, persevering, and indefatigable.
heir sagacity in finding their prey, and their
ldrcfs in killing it, are equal. Their reason and
eir senses being constantly directed towards this
ne object, the former displays such fertility of
cention, and the latter acquire such a degree of

"" P. Martyr, Decad. p. 324. Guniilla, ii. 4, &c,
lugna, i. 1;6.

"' (harlev. Hifloire de la N. France, iii. i i;.
VOL. 11, It

o o o It acutenes, as appear almost incredible. They difce

iv. the footsteps of a wild beafl, which escape eve,

other eye, and can follow them with certaini
through the pathless forest. If they attack the
game openlv, their arrow seldom errs from td
mark "I; if they endeavour to circumvent it b
art, it is almost impossible to avoid their toil
Among several tribes, their young men were n
permitted to marry, until they had given fu
proofs of their skill in hunting as put it beyo
doubt that they were capable of providing for
family. Their ingenuity always on the ftretd
and sharpened by emulation, as well as necefli
has firuck out many inventions, which great
facilitate success in the chafe. The most fingu
of these is the discovery of a poison in which th
dip the arrows employed in hunting. The flight
wound with those envenomed shafts is mortal.
they only pierce the lkin, the blood fixes a
congeals in a moment, and the strongest animal fa
motionless to the ground. Nor does this poifo
notwithstanding its violence and subtilty, infe
the flesh of the animal which it kills. That may
eaten with perfect safety, and retains its nativ
relifl and qualitics. All the nations situated upo
the banks of the Maragnon and Orinoco a
acquainted with this compoGftion, the chief ingr
dient in which is the juice extracted from the ro
of the curare, a species of withe "'. In other par

"' Biet. Voy. de la France Fquin. ;?7. Davies'Difco
of the River of \nmaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287.

"' Gumill;, ii. i, &c. Condaim. 208. Recherch. Pi
los. ii. 239. Bancroft's Nat. Hill, o(f Guiana, 281 , &.

America, they employ the juice of the manchenille B o o K
r the fame purpose, and it operates with no Iefs Iv.
tal adivity. To people possessed of those secrets,
e bow is a more deftrutive weapon than the
ufket, and, in their (kilful hands, does great execu-
on among the birds and beasts which abound in
e forests of America.
But the life of a hunter gradually leads man to By agricul-
Itate more advanced. The chafe, even where ture.
ey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
uch improved, affords but an uncertain main-
nance, and at some seasons it must be suspended
together. If a savage trusts to his bow alone for
od, he and his family will be often reduced to
treme distress "'. Hardly any region of the earth
rnifhes man spontaneously with what his wants
quire. In the mildest climates, and molt fertile
ils, his own industry and foresight must be
erted, in some degree, to secure a regular supply
food. Their experience of this surmounts the
horrence of labor natural to savage nations, and
mpels them to have recourse to culture, as
bfidiary to hunting. In particular situations, some
all tribes may subsist by sithing, independent of
y production of the earth, raised by their own
dutiry. But throughout all America, we scarcely
eet with any nation of hunters, which does not
radife some species of cultivation.
The agriculture of the Americans, however, is The va1tou
either cxtenfive nor laborious. As game and fish their cu.

"' So NOTE XXIX.

H z

1 o o i are their principal food, all they aim at by culti

tv. tion, is to supply any occalional defect of tlh

In the southern continent of America, the nativ
confined their indultry to rearing a few planu
which, in a rich foil and warm climate, xve
easily trained to maturity. The chief of these
Mlaize, well known in Europe by the name
Turkey or Indian wheat, a grain extreme
prolific, of simple culture, agreeable to the tal
and affording a strong hearty nourishment. T
second is the Manioc, which: grows to the size
a large shrub, or small tree, and produces ro
somewhat resembling parsnips. After carefll
squeezing out the juice, these roots are grat
down to a fine powder, and formed into tb
cakes, called Ca ladla-bread, which, though infi
to the taste, proves no contemptible food ".
the juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, so
authors have celebrated the ingenuity of
Americans, in converting a noxious plant in
wholesome nourishment. But it flould rather
confidered as one of the derperate expedients
procuring fubfifltence, to which necelfity reduc
rude nations; or, perhaps, nen were led to
use of it by a progress, in which there is nothi
marvellous. One species of manioc is altogcth
free of any poisonous quality, and may be eat

'l' Sloane , lift. of Jain. Introcl. p. i . Labat, i. 1

Acolta, Ililt. Ind. Occidl.. Natur. lib. iv. c, ,It. Ulloa,
6z. Aublct, lm i. ilr le Magniuoc. llilt. de.s I'antes, tu!
ii. p. 65 , &c.

ithout any preparation but that of roafling it in I o o K
e embers. This, it is probable, was firit used Iv.
the Americans as food; and necessity having
adually taught them the art of separating its
rnicious juice from the other species, they have
experience found it to be more prolific as well
more nourishing '`. The third is the plantain,
hich though it rifes to the height of a tree, is
such quick growth, that in less than a year it
wards the induffry of the cultivator, with its
it. This, when roasted, supplies the place of
ead, and is both palatable and nourishing '2.
he fourth is the potatoe, whose culture and
alities are too well known to need any defcripa
,n. The fifth is the pimento, a small tree, yielding

,rong aromatic spice. The Americans, who, like

her inhabitants of warm climates, delight in
hatever is hot and of poignant flavor, deem,
is seasoning a necessary of life, and mingle it
piously with every kind of food they take "'
Such are the various productions, which were
e chief objec of culture among the hunting
bes on the continent of America, and with a
oderate exertion of active and provident industry,
efe might have yielded a full supply to the wants
a numerous people. But men, accustomed to.
e free and vagrant life of hunters, are incapable

'' lartyr, Decad. 0ol. Labat, 1.411. Gumilla, iii.

1. Machucha, Milic. Indiana, 164. SeeNOTEXXXX.
." See NOTE XXXI.

' Gumilla, iii. 171. Acofta , lib. iv. c. o0.

H3

B o o i of regular application to labor; and confider ag

IV. culture as a secondary and inferior occupatio

Accordingly, the provision for fubfitence, arifi
from cultivation, was so limited and scanty amon
the Americans, that, upon any accidental failu
of their usual success in hunting, they were oftl
reduced to extreme distress.

In the islands, the mode of fubrifting was con

derably different. None of the large animals whi
abound on the continent were known there. On
four species of quadrupeds, besides a kind of fm
dumb dog, existed in the ifl.nds, the biggest
vwhich did not exceed the size of a rabbit'. "
hunt such diminutive prey, was an occupatio
which required no effort either of activity
courage. The chief employment of a hunter
the isles was to kill birds, which on the contine
are deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to t
pursuit of boys ''. This want of animals, as well
their peculiar situation, led the islanders to depen
principally upon fishing for their subsistence"'. The
rivers, and the Lea with which they are furrounde
supplied them with this species of food. At for
particular seasons, turtle, crabs, and other fhellfi
abounded in such numbers, that the natives coul
support themselves with a facility in which the
indolence delighted "'. At other times, they a

"' Oviedo, lib. xii. in proem.
"' Rihass, I-1lt de los Triumph. p. 3. De la Potheric
ii. 3 . iii. 20.

'Oviedo, lib.xiii. c. . Goniara, ift. Gcner.c. 2
' Gumara, Hilt. Gencr. c. 9. Labat, ii, 231,

zards, and various reptiles of odious formss"'. B o o
o filhing, the inhabitants of the islands added Iv.
;ne degree of agriculture. Maize ", manioc, and
ther plants, were cultivated in the fame manner
s on the continent. But all the fruits of their Their ari.
dulftry, together with what their foil and climate C dil. v.ry
[ro(uced spontaneously , afforded them but a t
anty maintenance. Though their demands for
odv were very sparing, they hardly raifid what
as sufficient for their own consumption. If a few
paniards fettled in any diftrid, such a fnall
ddition of supernumerary mouths soon exhausted
heir scanty stores, and brought on a famine.
Two circumstances, common to all the savage Twocaures
ations of America, concurred with those which ofitsiimper-
have already mentioned , not only in rendering
heir agriculture imperfed, but in circumscribing
eir power in all their operations. They had no.
ane animals; and they were unacquainted with
he useful metals.
In other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest The wantof
ate, appears as lord of the creation, giving lawx tameean
o various tribes of animals, which he has tamed
n(l reduced to sub fecdion. The Tartar follows his
rey on the horse which he has reared; or tends.
is numerous herds, which furnish him both with
nod and clothing; the Arab has rendered the
amecl docile, and avails himself of its persevering
rength; the Laplander has formed the rein-deer
o be subservient to his will; and even the people

,tg Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. . " See NOTE XXXl.

H 4

n o o I of Kamchatka have trained their dogs to labor,

iv. This command over the inferior creatures is one

of the noblest prerogatives of man, and amonQ
the greateit efforts of his wisdom and power,
Without this, his dominion is incomplete. He is
a monarch, who has no fubjedcs; a master, without
servants, and muff perform every operation by
the strength of his own arm. Such was the condi.
tion of all the rude nations in America. Their
reason was so little improved, or their union so
incomplete, that they seem not to have been
conscious of the superiority of their nature, and
suffered all the animal creation to retain its liberty,
without establishing their own authority over any
one species. Most of the animals, indeed, which
have been rendered domestic in our continent, do
not exist in the New World; but those pecular
to it are neither so fierce, nor so formidable, as
to have exempted them from servitude. There arc
some animals of the fame species in both continents.
But the rein-deer, which has been tamed and
broken to the yoke in the one hemisphere, runs
wild in the other. The bijbn of America is
manifestly of the fame species with the horned
cattle of the other hemisphere "'. The latter
even among the rudest nations in our continent,
have been rendered domestic; and, in confequencc
of his dominion over them, man can accompliih
works of labor with greater facility, and has made
a vat addition to his means of subsistence. The

'" Buffon, Artic. Bison.

nhabitants of many regions of the New World, B o o r
here the bison abounds, might have derived Iv.
he fame advantages fiom it. It is not of a nature
oindocile, but that it might have been trained
obe as subservient to man as our cattle "'. But
savage, in that uncultivated state wherein the
mericans were discovered, is the enemy of the
ther animals, not their superior. He waftes and
eltroys, but knows not how to multiply or'to
overn them".
This, perhaps, is the molt notable diftinclion
etween the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
orlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized
en above such as continue rude. The greatest
perations of man in changing and improving the
ace of nature, as well as his molt considerable
forts in cultivating the earth, are accomplished
y means of the aid which he receives from the
nimals whom he has tamed and employs in labor.
t is by their strength that he subdues the flubborn
il, and converts the desert or marsh into a fruitful
eld. But man, in his civilized state, is so
ccuftomed to the service of the domestic animals,
hat he seldom reflets upon the vast benefits
hich he derives from it. If we were to suppose
im, even when most improved, to be deprived
f their useful ministry, his empire over nature

"* Nouv. Decouverte par Hennepin, p. 192. Kaln, i.
07.

"' Buffon, Hist. Nat. ix. 8;. Hist. Philof. et Polit. des
tabliffcm. des Europ. dmns les deux Indes, vi, 364. '

B o o Kr must in some measure cease, and he would remain

IV. a feeble animal, at a loss how to subsist, and

incapable of attempting suc:h arduous undertak,
ings as their affila:,ce enables him to execute with
ease.

Want ofthe It is a doubtful point, whether the dominion
tfeul me- of man over the animal creation , or his acquiring

the use of metals, has contributed inoft to extend
his power. 'I he aera of this important'difcovery is
unknown, and in our hemisphere very remote.
It is only by tradition, or by digging up some
rude instruments of our forefathers, that we learn
that mankind were originally unacquainted with
the use of metals, and endeavoured to supply the
want of them by employing flints, shells, bones,
and other hard substances, for the fame purposes
which metals serve among polifhed.nations. Nature
completes the formation of some metals. Gold,
silver, and copper, are found in their perfect state,
in the clefts of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or
the channels of rivers. These were accordingly the
metals first known, and first applied to use. But
iron, the most serviceable of all, and to which
man is most indebted, is never discovered in its
perfect form; its gross and stubborn ore muff feel
twice the force of fire, and go through two
laborious processes, before it become fit for ure.
Man was long acquainted with the other metals,
before he acquired the art of fabricating iron, or
attained such ingenuity as to perfed an invention,
to which he wats indebted for those instruments
wherewith he fubducs the earth, and commands

all its inhabitants. But in this, as well as in many B o o K
other refpeds, the inferiority of the Americans was Iv.
conspicuous. All the savage tribes, scattered over
the continent and islands, were totally unacquainted
vith the metals which their foil produces in great
abundance, if we except some trifling quantity of
gold, which they picked up in the torrents that
descended from their mountains, and formed into
ornaments. Their devices to supply this want of
the serviceable metals, were extremely rude and
awkward. The most simple operation was to them
an undertaking of immense difficulty and labor.
To fell a tree with no other instruments than
hatchets of stone, was employment for a month "',
To form a canoe into shape, and to hollow it,
consumed years; and it frequently began to rot
before they were able to finish it"'. Their opera-
tions in agriculture were equally flow and defective.
In a country covered with woods of the hardest
timber, the clearing of a small field destined for
culture required the united efforts of a tribe, and
was a work of much time and great toil. This was
the business of the men, and their indolence was
satisfied with performing it in a very slovenly
manner. The labor of cultivation was left to the
women, who, after digging, or rather stirring the
field, with wooden mattocks, and flakes hardened
in the fire, sowed or planted it; but they were

Gumilla , iii. I96.
Bordc, Rclat. des Caraibes, p. z:.

B o o iK more indebted for the increase to the fertility of

Iv. the foil, than to their own rude industry `".

Agricultur'e, even when the firength of man is

seconded by that of the animals which he has
filbjeded to the yoke, and his power augmented
by the use of the various instruments with which
the discovery of metals has furniThed him, is still
a work of great labor; and it is with the sweat
of his brow that he renders the earth fertile. It is
not wonderful, then, that people destitute of both
these advantages flould have made so little progress
in cultivation, that they rmul be confidered as
depending for subsistence on fishing and hunting,
rather than on the fruits of their own labor.

political in. From this description of the mode of subsisting
ftitutions among the rude American tribes, the form and
arising from
this state. genius of their political institutions may be deduced,

and we are enabled to trace various circumstances
of diftindion between them and more civilized
nations.

. divided I. They were divided into finall independent
into frall communities. While hunting is the chief source of
corinouni.
tielu. subsistence, a vast extent of territory is requisite for

supporting a small number of people. In proportion
as men multiply and unite, the wild animals, on
which they depend for food, diminish, or fly at
a greater distance from the haunts of their enemy.
The increase of a society in this state is limited
by its own nature, and the members of it mull
either disperse , like the game which they pursue,

'' Gumilla , iii. I66 , &c. Lettr. Edif. xii. Io.

or fall upon some better method of procuring food, B o o K
than by hunting. Beasts of prey are by nature IV.
solitary and unsocial, they go not forth to the
chafe in herds, but delight in those recesses of the
forest where they can roam and destroy undif-
turbed. A nation of hunters resembles them both
in occupation and in genius. They cannot form
into large communities, because it would be
impoflible to find subsistence; and they mull drive
to a diflance every rival who may encroach on
those domains, which they confider as their own.
This was the state of all the American tribes, the
numbers in each were inconsiderable, though
scattered over vast countries; they were far re-
moved from one another, and engaged in perpe-
tual hostilities or rivalfhip '". In America, the
word nation is not of the fame import as in
other parts of the globe. It is applied to
small societies, not exceeding, perhaps, two or
three hundred persons, but occupying provinces
larger than some kingdoms in Europe. The coun-
try of Guiana, though of larger extent than the
kingdom of France, and divided among a great
number of nations, did not contain above twenty-
five thousand inhabitants "`. In the provinces
which border on the Orinoco, one may travel
several hundred miles in different (liredions, with-
out finding a tingle hut, or observing the footsteps

"' Lozano, DeCcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 62. Fertrandez,
Relac. lilt. de los Chiquit. 162.

'* Voyages da Des Marchais, iv. 3 53

B o o r of a human creature "'. In North-America, where

iv. the climate is more rigorous, and the foil lefi

fertile, the desolation is still greater. There, vas
journeys of some hundred leagues have been made
through uninhabited plains and forests "`. As long
as hunting continues to be the chief employment
of man to which he trusts for subsistence, he can
hardly be said to have occupied the earth 1.

Unacquaint. 2. Nations which depend upon hunting are, in
ed with ile a great measure, strangers to the idea of property.
idea of pro.
perty. As the animals on which the hunter feeds are not

bred under his infped6ion, nor nourished by his care,
he can claim no right to them, while they run
wild in the forest. Where game is so plentiful that
it may be catched with little trouble, men never
dream of appropriating what is of small value, or
of easy acquisition. Where it is so rare, that the
labor or danger of the chafe requires the united
efforts of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a
common flock, belonging equally to all, who, by
their skill or their courage, have contributed to the
success of the excursion. The forest, or hunting.
grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe,
from which it has a title to exclude every rival
nation. But no individual arrogates a right to any
diftrid of these, in preference to his fellow-citizens.
They belong alike to all; and thither, as to a general

'" Gumilla , ii. 10o.
"' M. Fabry, quoted by Huffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 779.

Boifu, Travels through Louifiina, i. i . Sec NOTi
XXX11I.

At" See NOTE XXXIV.

and undivided llore, all repair in quest of sustenance. B o o K
The fame principles by which they regulate their Iv.
chief occupation, extend to that which is fubor.
dinate. Even agriculture has not introduced among
them a complete idea of property. As the men hunt,
the women labor together, and after they have
shared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy the
harvest in common '". Among some tribes, the
ncreafe of their cultivated lands is deposited in
apublic granary, and divided among them, at
ated times, according to their wants "'. Among
others, though they lay up separate stores, they
o not acquire such an exclusive right of property,
hat they can enjoy superfluity, while those around
hem susser want "'. Thus the diftindcions arising
rom the inequality of poffeltions are unknown.
he terms rich or poor enter not into their language,
nd being firangers to property, they are unac-
uainted with what is the great object of laws and
olicy, as well as the chief motive which induced
ankind to establish the various arrangements of
egular government 1"
3. People in this state retain a high fenCe of High fenr
quality and independence. Wherever the idea of of equality
roperty is not eftablinled , there can be no andine,.
illindion among men, but what aries from

"' Dr. Ferguson's Eflay, 126.
"' Gumill, i. 26S. Brickel, Hilt. of N.Carol. 327.See
OTF XXXV.

1" Denys, Hilt. Natur. ii. 392, 39*.
47 P. Martyr, Decad. p. 4 -. Yencg. Hist. QfCaliforn. i.
6. Lery, Navig. id Brasld, c. 17.

B o o K personal qualities. These can be conspicuous onlt

IV. on such occasions as call them forth into exertion

In times of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, tht
wisdom and experience of age are consulted, and
prescribe the measures which ought to be pursued,
When a tribe of savages takes the field against the
enemies of their country, the warrior of mo
approved courage leads the youth to the combat'"
If they go forth in a body to the chafe, the mo
expert and adventurous hunter is foremost, an
directs their motions. But during seasons of tra
quillity and inadion, when there is no occafiont
.display those talents, all pre-eminence ceases
Every circumstance indicates, that all the mem
bers of the community are on a level. They a
clothed in the fame simple garb. They feed onth
.fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture ar
*exactly similar. No diflindion can arise from th
inequality ofpoffeffions. Whatever forms dependenc
on one part , or conflitutes foperiority on the
other, is unknown. All are freemen, all feel them
selves to be such , and assert with firmness the rigb
which belongto that condition "'. This fentimento
independence is imprinted so deeply in their nature
that no change of conlition can eradicate it, and ben
their minds to servitude. Accuftomed-to be abfolut
masters of their own condud, they disdain to execut
the orders of another; and having never know

14' Acolia, I lift. ib. v?. c. 19. Stadius , Hilt. Brasil, lib.
c. I. De Br3'. iii. p. Ilo. Biert. 6 1.

"' Lbat, vi 124. Brickedl, Jiilt. of Carol. 310o.

control,

ontrol, will not submit to correcion 1'. Many n o o K
fthe Americans, when they found that they were Iv.
rcated as slaves by the Spaniards, died of grief;
nany destroyed themselves in despair '.

4. Among people in this state, government can Senrenfrub-
fTulme little authority, and the sense of civil sub- ordtintion

imperftct.

rdination must remain very imperfect. While the
dea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-
eived; while the spontaneous produdions of the
artl , as well as the fruits of industry, are confi-
lcred as belonging to the public stock, there can
lardly be any such fubjedt of difference or discus-
on among the members of the fame community,
s will require the hand of authority to interpose in
rder to adjust it. Where the right 6f separate and
xclufive poffeflioon is not introduced , the great
abje of law and jurifdidlion does not exist. When
lie members of a tribe are called into the field, either
o iinvade the territories of their enemies, or to
epel their attacks, when they are engaged together
i the toil and dangers of the chafe, they then per.
eive that they are part of a political body. They
reconfcious of their own connexion with the corn
inions in conjunction with whom they ad; and
hey follow and reverence such as excel in condudt
nd valor. But, during the intervals between fich

nmmon efforts, they fLem scarcely to feel the

"' See NOTE XXXVI.
"' Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquift. de la Flo.

ill;l, i. o. ii. 4 16. Labat, ii. 3 8. Benzu, h1l. Nov. Orb.
i, iv. c. 2S.

VOL. IL. 1

a o o 1 ties of political union '5. No visible form ol

l., government is established. The names of magiflratt

and Jtbi(ca arc not in use. Every one seems to en.
joy his natural independence almofi entire. If a
scheme of public utility be proposed, the members
of the community are left at liberty to chufe whe.
ther they will assist or not in carrying it into execu.
tion. No statute imposes any service as a duty, no
compulsory laws oblige them to perform it. All
their resolutions are voluntary, and flow from the
impulse of their own minds '. The first ftep to.
wards establishing a public jurisdiction has not been
taken in those rude societies. The right of revenge
is left in private hands "'': If violence is committed,
or blood is Ihed, the community does not assume the
power either of infliting or of moderating the
punishment. It belongs to the family and friends of
the person injured or slain to avenge the wrong, or
to accept of the reparation offered by the aggressor,
If the elders interpose, it is to advise, not to decide,
and it is seldom their counsels are listened to ; for as
it is deemed pusillanimous to susser an offender to
escape with impunity , resentment is implacable and
everlasting "'. '[ he objed of government among
savages is rather foreign than domellic. They do
notaim at maintaining interior order and police by

'" Lozano, Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 9 . Melendez, Teforoi
Vcrdaderos , ii. 2 . See N() 1'i XXXVII

"' Chanlev. IlilL de la Nouv. France, iii. 266. 268

Herrera, (dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.

'Chairlev. Hilt de la N. France, iii. 2' , 272. Lafi
i. 486. Cailani, Hilt. dcl Nuevo Kcino de Granadn, 226.

public regulations, or the exertions of any perma- a o o a
nent authority, but labor to preserve such union Iv.
among the members of their tribe, that they may
watch the motions of their enemies, and ad against
them with concert and vigor.

Such was the form of political order established Tnwhat
among the greater part of the American nations. In people thorf

b*deicrip tiont

this state were almost all the tribes, spread over apply.
the vaSt provinces extending eastward of the Mif-
filippi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence to
the confines of Florida. In a similar condition were
the people of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, feve.
ral tribes in Paraguay and Guiana , and in the coun.
tries which stretch from the mouth of the Orinoco
to the peninsula of Yucatan. Among such an in-
finite number of petty associations, there may be pe.
culiarities which constitute a diftindion, and mark
the various degrees of their civilization and improve-
ment. But an attempt to trace and enumerate these
would be vain, as they have not been observed by
persons capable of discerning the minute and deli-
cate circumstances, which serve to discriminate na-
tions resembling one another in their general charac-
ter and features. The description which I have
given will apply, with little variation, to the policy
of every people in America , which has advanced
no farther in civilization, than to add rome slender
degree of agriculture to sithing and hunting.

Rude and imnperfed as thofc institutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trusted for fubliftence entirely to filling

\ j

i o o K and hunting without any species of cultivation, the

iv. union was so incomplete, and their sense of mutual

dependence so feeble, that hardly any appearance
of government or order can be discerned in their
proceedings. Their wants are few, their objects of
pursuit simple, they form into separate tribes, and
a& together, from instinct, habit, or conveniency,
rather than from any formal concert and aflociation.
To this class belong the Californians , several of the
finall nations in the extenlive country of Paraguay,
some of the people on the banks of the Orinoco,
and on the river St. Magdalene, in the new
4kingdom of Granada 1".

Some irregu- But though among these las - mentioned tribes
lar appear- there was hardly any lhadow of regular government,
ance s. and even among those which I fir[l described, its

authority is slender and confined within narrow
bounds, there were, however, some places in
America where government was carried far beyond
the degree of perfection which seems natural to rude
nations. In furseying the political operations of
man, either in his savage or civilized state, we dif.
cover lingular and eccentric institutions, which start
as it were from their station, and fly off so wide,
that we labor in vain to bring them within the general
laws of any fyfiem, or to account for them by those
principles which influence other communities in a
similar situation. Some inlsances of this occur
among those people of America, whom I have

"6 Venegas, i.68. Lettr Edif.ii. 176. Techo,Hllif. o
pirag. Churchill, vi. 78. Hlilt. (Gn. des Voyages, xiv. 74

included under the common denomination of savage. B o o ic
These are so curious and important that I shall Iv.
describe them, and attempt to explain their
origiln.

In the New World, as well as in other parts of Particultrly
the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to be in Tome of

i)s; appear t

the warmer

the favorite feat of freedom and independence. regions.
There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigor-
ous. There men, conscious of their own dignity,
and capable of the greatest efforts in alerting it,
alpirc to independence, and their stubborn spirits
stoop with reluctance to the yoke of servitude. In
warmer climates, by whose influence the whole
frame is so much enervated, that present pleasure
is the supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoy-
ment, men acquiesce, almost without a struggle,
in the dominion of a superior. Accordingly, if
we proceed from north to south along the conti-
nent of America, we fllall find the power of those
yeited with authority gradually increasing, and
the spirit of the people becoming more tame and
passive. In Florida, the authority of the sachems,
caziques, or chiefs, was not only permanent, but
hereditary. They were diflinguifhed by peculiar
ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives of various
kinds, and were treated by their fubjec's with
that reverence, which people accuftored to sub-
edlion pay to a maRter"7. Among the Natchez, Among the

Natchez.

1'7 Cardenas y Cano, Enfayo Chronol.a la Hidf. de Florida,
46. L.e Moyne de Morgues, cones Florida. Ap. de Bry,
1. 4, &c, Charlev. Hill. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

13

a o o K a powerful tribe now extind, formerly situated

IV. on the banks of the Mliffifippi, a difference of

rank took place, with which the northern tribes
were altogether unacquainted. Some families were
reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary dignity,I
The body of the people was confidered as vile,
and formed only for fubjedtion. This diftindion
was marked by appellations which intimated the
high elevation of the one state, and the igno-
minious depression of the other. The former were
called Rfpeieable; the latter, the Stinkaids. The
great Chief, in whom the supreme authority was
vested, is reputed to be a being of superior na-
ture, the brother of the Sun, the sole objec of their
worship. They approach this great Chief with re-
ligious veneration, and honor him as the repre,
tentative of their deity. His will is a law, to which
all submit with implicit obedience. The lives of
his fubjeds are so absolutely at his disposal, that if
any one has incurred his displeasure, the offender
comes with profound humility and offers him his
head. Nor does the dominion of the Chiefs end
with their lives; their principal officers, their fa.
vorite wives, together with many domestics of in.
ferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that they
may be attended in the next world by the fame per.
sons who served them in this; and such is the reve.
rence in which they are held, that those victims
'welcome death with exultation, deeming it a
recompence of their fidelity, and a mark of di
tindtion, to be feleded to accompany their decease

master'". Thus a perfect despotism, with its full n 0 o0

0

train of superstition, arrogance, and cruelty, is Iv.
eltabliflhed among the Natchez, and by a singular
fatality, that people has tafted of the worfl cala-
mities incident to polished nations, though they
themselves are not far advanced beyond the tribes
around them in civility and improvement. In In the
Hispaniola, Cuba, and the larger islands, their 'iands"
caziques or chiefs possesed extensive power. The
dignity was transmitted by hereditary right from
father to son. Its honors and prerogatives were
considerable. Their fubjetds paid great refpecd to
the caziques, and executed their orders without
hesitation or reserve I'. They were distinguished
by peculiar ornaments, and in order to preserve
or augment the veneration of the people, they
had the address to call in the aid of superstition
to uphold their authority. They delivered their
mandates as the oracles of heaven, and pretended
to possess the power of regulating the, seasons
and of dispensing rain or sunshine, according as
their fubjeds flood in need of them.

In some parts of the continent, the power of the In Bogta.
caziques seems to have been as extensive as in the
ifes. In Bogota, which is now a province of the
new kingdom of Granada, there was fettled a
nation, more considerable in number and more
improved in the various arts of life, than any in

'" Dumont, Mem. Hilr. fur la Louifiane, i. 1 7s. Charlev.
lilt. N. France, iii. '19, &c. Lettr. Edif. 20. 0o6. i I.

'" H-errera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 1 6. lib. iii. c. 44. p. 88. Lifo
ol Columnb. ch. 3Z.

I 4

B o o K America except the Mexicans and Peruvians.

iv, The people of Bogota subsisted chiefly by agricul.

ture. The idea of property was introduced among
them, and its rights, secured by laws, handed
down by tradition, and observed with great care "'
They lived in large towns. They were clothed
in a decent manner, and their houses may be
termed commodious, when compared with thole
of the small tribes around them. The effects of
this uncommon civilization were conspicuous.
Government had assumed a regular form. A jurid.
diction was eflablifhed, which took cognizance
of different crimes, and punifled them with rigor.
A diftincion of ranks was known; their chief, to
whom the Spaniards gave the title of monarch,
and who merited that name on account of his
splendor as well as power, reigned with absolute
authority. He was attended by officers of various
conditions; he never appeared in public without
a numerous retinue; he was carried in a fort of
palanquin with much pomp, and harbingers went
before him to sweep the road and stre,w it with
flowers. This uncommon pomp was supported
by presents or taxes received from his fubjeds,
to whom their prince was such an object of
veneration, that none of them presumed to look
him diredcly in the face, or ever approached him
but with an averted countenance ". There were

'60 Pieirahitai, lift. de las Conquift del N. Reino de Gran.
P1 46.

llerrcra , dec. 6. lib, i. c. 2. lib. v, c. s6. Piedrahita,
c. r. p , .'e. Goinara, 1-ift. c. 7o.

other tribes on the fame continent, among which, n o o
though far less advanced than the people of Bogota Iv.
in their progress towards refinement, the freedom
and independence, natural to man in his savage
tate, was much abridged, and their caziques had
assumed extensive authority.

It is not easy to point out the circumstances, or cauresof
o discover the causes which contributed to introduce those irregu

lar appeRr-

nd establish among each of those people a form of ances.
overnment so different from that of the tribes
round them, and so repugnant to the genius of
ude nations. If the persons who had an opportu-
it)' of observing them in their original state, had
een more attentive and more discerning, we might
ave received information from their conquerors
ufficient to guide us in this inquiry. If the tranfac.
ions of people, unacquainted with the use of let.
ers, were not involved in impenetrable obscurity,
·e might have derived some information from this
omeffic source. But as nothing fatisfadory cal
e gathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-
iards, or from their own traditions, we must have
ecourfe to conjectures, in order to explain the irre-

rlar appearances in the political state of the people
lioin 1 have mentioned. As all thole tribes which
3td loft their native liberty and independence were
cated in the Torrid Zone, or in countries approach-
ng to it, the climate may be supposed to have had
me influence in forming their minds to that fervi-
ude, which seems to be the defliny of man in
hofc regions of the globe. But though the in-
uen)ce of climate, more powerful than that of

B 0 0 K any other natural cause, is not to be overlooked;

IV. that alone cannot be admitted as a solution of the

point in question. The operations of men are so
complex, that we mull not attribute the form
which they assume, to the force of a single prin.
ciple or cause. Although despotism be confined
in America to the Torrid Zone, and to the warm
regions bordering upon it, I have already observed
that these countries contain various tribes, foirn
of which possess a high degree of freedom, and
others are altogether unacquainted with the re.
itraints of government. The indolence and tirn
dity peculiar to the inhabitants of the islands,
rendered them so incapable of the fentimeats oi
efforts necessary for maintaining independence, thal
there is no occasion to search for any other cauf
of their tame fubmiflion to the-will of a superior
The fubjedcion of the Natchez, and of the peopll
of Bogota, seems to have been the confequenci
of a difference in their state from that of the othe
Americans. They were fettled nations, refidin!
constantly in one place. IHunting was not thi
chief occupation of the former, and the latte
seem hardly to have trusted to it for any part o
their subsistence. Both had made such progress ii
agriculture and arts, that the idea of propert
was introduced in some degree in the one con
munity, and fully eflablifhed in the other. Amon
people in this slate, avarice and ambition have a(
quired objets, and have begun to exert thei
power; views of intcreft allure the felfilh; the di
fire of pre-eminence excites the cnterprifine

ominion is courted by both; and paftions unknownt B o

O

man in his savage state prompt the interested Iv.
d ambitious to encroach on the rights of their
llow-citizens. Motives, with which rude nations
e equally unacquainted, induce the people to
bmit tamely to the ufirped authority of their
periors. But even among nations in this state ;
e spirit of fubjedts could not have been render-
so obsequious, or the power of rulers so unt
ounded, without the intervention of superstition,
y its fatal influence, the human mind, in every
age of its progress, is deprclfed, and its native
igor and independence subdued. Whoever can
quire the diredion of this formidable engine, is
cure of dominion over his species. Unfortunately
r the people whose inflitutions are the subjed
finquiry, this power was in the hands of their
iefs. The caziques of the isles could put what
fponfes they' pleased into the mouths of their
emis or gods; and it was by their interposition
d in their name, that they imposed any tribute
rburden on their people"'. The fame power
d prerogative was exercised by the great chief
the Natchez as the principal minister as well as
e representative of the Sun, their deity. The
sped which the people of Bogota paid to their
onarchs, was likewise inspired by religion, and
e heir apparent of the kingdom was educated in
icinnermoft recess of their principal temple , under
ch austere discipline, and with such peculiar

I Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii c. a.

R o Oi rites, as tended to fill his fubjeds with high ser

IV. timents concerning the fandity of his character

and the dignity of his station '. Thus fuperltition
which, in the rudest period of society, is eithe
altogether unknown, or waftes its force in child
ifl unmeaning practices, had acquired such ac
ascendant over those people of America, who had
made some little progress towards refinement, th
it became the chief instrument of bending the
minds to an untimely servitude, and fubjedte
them, in the beginning of their political career
to a despotism hardly less rigorous, than that whic
awaits nations in the last stage of their corruptio
and decline.

'Their art of V. After examining the political inflitutions o
war. )the rude nations in America, the next objet o

attention is their art of war, or their provifio
for public security and defence. The small trib
dispersed over America are not only independen
and unconneded, but engaged in perpetual host
lities with one another '". Though mostly Itranger
to the idea of separate property vested in any i
dividual, the rudest of the American nations ar
well acquainted with the rights of each comm
nity to its own domains. 'This right they hold t
be perfed and exclusive, entitling the pofeffort
oppose the encroachment of neighbouring tribes
As it is of the utmost consequence to prevent them
from destroying or disturbing the game in thei

"' Piedrahita, p. 27.

'" ibas, Hlt. ie los Triuin. p. 9.

Inting grounds, they guard this national pro- n o o
rty with a jealous attention. But as their terri- Iv.
ries are extensive, and the boundaries of them
t exadtly ascertained, innumerable subjects of
fpute arise, which seldom terminate without
oodfied. Even in this simple and primitive
teof society, interest is a source of discord, and
ten prompts savage tribes to take arms, in order
repel or punish such as encroach on the forests
rplains, to which they trust for subsistence.
But interest is not either the most frequent or Their mo.
e most powerful motive of the incessant hostilities tives fore.
nong rude nations. These muff be imputed to gag,."gin
e passion of revenge ,' which rages with such
iolence in the breast of savages that eagerness to
ratify it may be confidered as the distinguishing
arateriftic of men in their uncivilized state.
ircumtances of powerful influence, both in the
terior government of rude tribes, and in their
ternal operations against foreign enemies, concur
cherishing and adding strength to a paflion
tal to the general tranquillity. When the right
frcdrefling his own wrongs is left in the hands
fevery individual, injuries are felt with exquisite
nfibility, and vengeance exercised with unrelenting
ncor. No time can obliterate the memory of
1 offence, and it is seldom that it can be expiated
it by the blood of the offender. In carrying on Fromntlh
ieir public wars, savage nations are influenced rpiritof
y the fame ideas, and animated with the fame Vulgeane".
rit, as in prosecuting private vengeance. In
Iall communities, every man is touched With the

B O O lt injury or affront offered to thelbody of which

lv. is a member as if it were a personal attack upe

his own honor or fifety. The desire of revenm
is communicated from breast to breast, and soo
kindles into rage. As feeble societies can take ti
field only in small parties, each warrior is confciot
of the importance of his own arm, and feels th
to it is committed a considerable portion of tl
public vengeance. War, which between extenfi
kingdoms, is carried on with little animosity,
prolecuted by finall tribes, with all the rancor
a private quarrel. The rcfentment of nations]

Hleneethe aS implacable as that of individuals. It may
ferocity of dissembled orfuppreffed, but is never extinguished

and often, when least exped6ed or dreaded,i
bursts out with redoubled fury " . When polilht
nations have obtained the glory of victory, t
have acquired an- addition of territory, they mz
terminate a war with honor. But savages are ne
satisfied until they extirpate the community whic
is the object of their rage. They fight not
conquer, but to deltroy. If they engage i
hostilities, it is with a resolution never to fee tl
face of the enemy in peace, but to prosecute tl
quarrel with immortal enmity "'. The defi
of vengeance is the firfi , and almolt, the onl

'* Boucher, [lift. Nat. de N. France, p. 9;. Charlev. Hi

de. N. France, iii. 2 1 . 2 1. Lry, ap. de lry, iii. 204. Crcu
Hilt. Canad. p. 72. Lozano, Defcr, dcl Gran Chaco, 9
Hennep. Aloeurs dcs Sauv. 40.

"' Charlev. llilt. N. Fr. iii. 2 5 i. Colden , i. x o8. ii. u
Barrcre, p. 170. 17 .

rinciple, which a fivage instils into the minds of Bo o .
is children '". 7 his grows up with him as he Iv,
dvances in life; and as his attention is directed

few objeds , it acquires a degree of force
known among men, whose passions are dissipated
nd weakened by the variety of their occupations
d pursuits, ' he desire of vengeance, which
kes possession of the heart of savages, resembles
e infindcive rage of an animal, rather than the
aflion of a man. It turns, with undifcerning fury,
ven against inanimate objeds. If hurt accidentally
y a stone, they often seize it in a transport of
ger, and endeavour to wreak their vengeance
on it"'. If struck with an arrow in battle, they
ill tear it from the wound, break and bite it with
eir teeth, and dash it on the ground "'. With
fpet to their enemies, the rage of vengeance
nows no bounds. When under the dominion
fthis passion, man becomes the most cruel of
I animals. He neither pities, nor forgives, nor
ares.
The force of this passion is so well, understood
the Americans theinfelves, that they always
ply to it, in order to excite their people to take
rms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to roufd
eir youth from sloth, if a chief wilies to allure
band of warriors to follow him in invading an

"' Charlev. Hilf. N. Fr. iii. 3 6. Lery, ap. de Bry, iii. 236.
ozano, I-lift. de I'arng. i. 144.

Lcry, ap. de Brv, iii. 190.
° Lery, ap. de Bry, iii. o . -lcrrera, dec. I. lib. L c. g.

p o o K enemy's country, the most persuasive topics

IV. their martial eloquence are drawn from reveng

" The bones of our countrymen", fay they, "I
uncovered; their bloody bed has not been wafhe
clean. Their spirits ciy against us; they multi
appeared. Let us go and devour the people b
whom they were slain. Sit no longer inadtive upG
your mats; lift the hatchet, console the fpiri
of the dead, and tell them that they ihall L
avenged '.

and their Animated with such exhortations, the youi
perpetuity. snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise tt

song of war, and burn with impatience to embru
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Prival
chiefs often assemble fiall parties, and invade
hostile tribe, without consulting the rulers of t
community. A single warrior, prompted by capri(
or revenge, will take the field alone, and marc
several hundred miles to surprise and cut off
firaggling enemy "'. The exploits of a note
warrior, in such solitary excursions, often son
the chief part in the history of an American can
paign "'; and their elders connive at such irreguL
sallies, as they tend to cherifi a martial spirit, an
accustom their people to enterprise and danger"
But when a war is national, and undertaken t
public authority, the deliberations are formal ar

170 Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. z i6, 217. Lery, ap. deBr
iii. 204.

"' See NOTE XXXVIII. 7

e
Sec NOTE XXXI

'7" Bolili, i. 140. Lcry, ap. de Bry, 2 i 5. Hennepin, Mlcc
des Sauv. 41. Lafitau, ii. 169.

flow

ow. The elders assemble, they deliver their B o o S
pinions in solemn speeches, they weigh with Iv.
aturity the nature of the enterprise, and balance
beneficial or disadvantageous consequences with
o inconsiderable portion of political discernment
r sagacity. Their priefis and soothsayers are con.
Ited, and sometimes they alk the advice even of
eir women '7. If the determination be for war,
ey prepare for it with much ceremony. A leader
frrs to conduct the expedition, and is accepted.
ut no man tis constrained to follow him; the
solution of the community to commence hoflilities,
poses no obligation upon any member to take
rt in the war. Each individual is still master of
own condudt, and his engagement in the service
perfecly voluntary ".
The maxims by which they regulate their Mode of
ilitary operations, though extremely different from ay,,ring04
ofe which take place among more civilized and
pulous nations, are well suited to their own
litical state, and the nature of the country in
ich they aft. They never take the field in
merous bodies, as it would require a greater
rt of foresight and industry, than is usual among
ages, to provide for their fubfiflence, during a
rch of some hundred miles through dreary forelis,
during a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.
eir armies are not encumbered with baggage or
litary flores. Each warrior, besides his arms,

'" Charlev. Iift. dela. N. Fr.. iii. 2 68. Bict. 367.

" Charles,. Hiit. de la N. Fr. z7, ir 8.
VOL . K

S o o I carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize,

.Iv. and with these is completely equipped for an)

service. While at a difance from the enernie
frontier, they disperse through the woods, an
support themselves with the game which they kill
or the fifll which they catch. As they approaci
nearer to the territories of the nation which the)
intend to attack, they colled their troops, and
advance with greater caution. Even in their hottef
and most acive wars, they proceed wholly by
stratagem and ambuscade. They place not thei
glory in attacking their enemies with open force
To surprise and destroy is the greatest merit of
commander, and the highest pride of his followers
War and hunting are their only occupations, and
they conduct both with the fame spirit and the
fame arts. They follow the track of their eneipie
through the forest. They endeavour to difcovs
their haunts, they lurk in some thicket near t
these, and, with the patience of a sportsman lyinj
in wait for game, will continue in their station da]
after day, until they can rufl upon their prey whei
rnoft secure, and least able to refifl them. If the
meet no fraggling party of the enemy, they advanc
towards their villages, but with such folicitudet
conceal their own approach, that they often cree
on their hands and feet through the woods, an
paint their kins of the fame color with the withere
leaves, in order to avoid deteLtion '7v. Iffo fortunal

7' Chailev. lift. de laN. Fr. iii. 2 7,' 2;8. Hennet
MIcurs des Sauv. p. '9.

i to remain unobserved, they set on fire the enemies B o o K
tits in the dead of night, and massacre the iiihabit- IV.
I:ts, as they fly naked and defenceless from the
nmes. If they hope to effedt a retreat without
e',g pursued, they carry off some prisoners, whom
hey reserve for a more dreadful fate. But if,
otwithftanding all their address and precautions,
hey find that their motions are discovered, that
he enemy has taken the alarm, and is prepared
o oppose them, they usually deem it most prudent
o retire. They regard it as extreme folly to
eeet an enemy. who is on his guard, upon equal
Irms, or to give battle in an open field. The
oft diftinguifhled success is a disgrace to a leader,
it has been purchased with any considerable loss
f his followers I7"; and they never boast of a
ic'ory, if tained with the blood of their own
ountrymein '7. To fall in battle, instead of being
eckoned an honorable death, is a misfortune which
bjeds the memory of a warrior to the imputation
f rashness or imprudence'7.
I'his fyflem of war was universal in America, Not owing
*nd the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed through of'n,,agec
11 its different regions and climates, display more
raft than boldness in carrying on their hostilities.
truck with this condut, so opposite to the ideas
Hd maxims of Europeans, several autlors contend

17S See NOTE XL.

Chailev. Hist. de la N. Fr iii. 2;8. 307. Biet. 38r.
lit.lml, l1.eurs des Sauv. ii. 248.

i' Charlcv. iii. 376. Sce NOTE. X[A.

K C

B o o x that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pc.

IV. culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any

generous or manly exertion "". But when we reflect
that many of these tribes, on occasions which call
for extraordinary efforts, not only defend themselves
with obstinate resolution, but attack their enemies
with the mofi daring courage, and that they
possess fortitude of mind superior to the sense of
danger or the fear of death, we must ascribe
their habitual caution to some other cause than
constitutional timidity ". T'he number of men in
each tribe is so finall, the difficulty of rearing new
members, amidst the hardships and dangers of
savage life, so great, that the life of a citizen is
extremely precious, and the preservation of it
becomes a capital objeEt in their policy. Had the
point of honor been the fame among the feeble
American tribes as among the powerful nations
of Europe, had they been taught to court fame
or vi6tory in contempt of danger and death, they
must have been ruined by maxims so ill adapted
to their condition. But wherever their communities
are more populous, so that they can ad with
considerable force, and can fultain the loss of
several of their members, without being sensibly
weakened, the military operations of the Americans
more nearly rcfemble those of other nations. The

"' Rcchcrchcs Philof. fur Ies Americ. i. i x !. Voyage de
Dcs March. iv. 410.

"' Lafitau, locurs des Sauv. . l48, 249. Charlev. N.Ft
iii. 307.

Brafilians, as well as the tribes situated upon the n o o K
bnnks of the river De la Plata, often take the field IV.
in such numerous bodies, as deserve the name of
armies "'. They defy their enemies to the combat,
engage in regular battles, and maintain the conflict
witl that desperate ferocity, which is natural to
men, who, having no idea of war but that of
exterminating their enemies, never give or take
quarter '". In the powerful empires of Mexico
and Peru, great armies were assembled, frequent
battles were fought, and the theory as well as
practice of war were different from what took place
in those petty Societies which assume the name of
nations.

But though vigilance and attention are the qua- Incapable of
lities chiefly requisite, where the objec of war is nr`e ordi(
to deceive and to surprise; and though the Ame-
ricans, when adting singly, display an amazing de-
gree of address in concealing their own motions,
and in discovering those of an enemy, yet it is re-
markable that, when they take the field in parties,
they can seldom be brought to observe the pre-
cautions most essential to their own security. Such
is the difficulty of accustoming savages to fubor-
dination, or to ad in concert; such is their impa-
tience under rcftraint, and such their caprice and
prefumrption, that it is rarely they can be brought
to conform themselves to the counsels and di-
recions of their leaders. They never sta.tion

Fabri Veri'. Dercrip. India:, ap. de Bry, vii.. p. 4e.
' See NOTE XLII.

K s

o o K centinels around the place where they reft at night
Iv. and after marching some hundred miles to furprif

an enemy, are often surprised thenfelves, and cut
off, while funk in as profound sleep as if they were
not within reach of danger".

If, notwithstanding this negligence and fecu,

rity, which often frustrate their molt artful schemes,
they catch the enemy unprepared , they rush upon
them with the utmost ferocity, and tearing off the
scalps of all those who fall victims to their rage'",
they carry home those frrange trophies in triumph,
These they preserve as monuments, not onlyof
their own prowefi, but of the vengeance which
their arm has inflided upon the people who wer
objets of public resentment'". They are fil
more solicitous to seize prisoners. During thei
retreat, if they hope to effect it unmolested, th(
prisoners are commonly exempt from any insult,
and treated with some degree of humanity, though
guarded with the most ftrid attention.

But after this temporary fufperfion, the rage
es prisoners. the conquerors rekindles with new fury. As soon a

they approach their own frdntier, some of the
number are dispatched to inform their countrymen
with refpecd to the fuiccefs of the expedition. Then
the prisoners begin to feel the wretchedness o
their condition. The women of the village, togethc
with the youth who have not attained to the ag

"' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. t6, 2 7. Lettr. Edif. 7. ;8.20
Ixo. Lafit. AMleurs, ii. 247. Lahontan, ii. 176.

" See NOTE XLIII. '" Lafitau, Moeurs, ii. 256

fbearing arms, assemble, and forming themselves B o o It
to two lines through which the prisoners must Iv.
ass, beat and bruise them with fIicks or flones in
cruel manner '. After this first gratification of
heir rage against their enemies, follow lamenta-
ions for the loss of such of their own countrymen
s have fallen in the service, accompanied with
ords and adions which seem to express the ut-
oft anguish and grief. But, in a moment, upon
signal given, their tears cease; they pass, with a
udden and unaccountable transition, from the
epths of sorrow to transports of joy ; and begin
o celebrate their victory with all the wild exulta-
ion of a barbarous triumph''. The fate of the
rifoners remains still undecided. The old men
liberate concerning it. Some are destined to be
ortured to death, in- order to satiate the revenge
f the conquerors; some to replace the members
hich the community has loft in that or former
ars. They who are reserved for this milder fate,
re led to the huts of those whose friends have
een killed. The women meet them at the door,
nd if they receive them, their sufferings are at an
n(d. They are adopted into the family , acnd , ac-
ording to their phrase, are feated upon the mat
f the deceased. They assume his name, they
old the fame rank, and are treated thenceforward
ith all the tcndernefs due to a father, a brother,
hulifbnd, or a friend. But if, either from

Lalnmtan, ii. 184.

"' Charlev. Ilift. de la N. Fr. iii. 241. Lafitau, Mccurs
i.64.

K 4

I; o o x caprice, or an unrelenting desire of revenge, tt

Jv. women of any family refute to accept of tl

prisoner who is offered to them, his doom is fixe
No power can then save him from torture an
death.

Their in. While their lot is in suspense, the prifone
difference themselves appear altogether unconcerned abou
concerning
their fae, what may befal them. They talk, they eat, th(

sleep , as if they were perfectly at cafe, and
danger impending. When the fatal sentence isii
timated to them, they receive it with an unaltert
countenance, raise their death-fong, and prepai

and forti. to susser like men. Their conquerors assemble
tord,,eide to a solemn festival, resolved to put the fortitu

of the captive to the utmost proof. A scene en
sues, the bare description of which is enoughti
chill the heart with horror, wherever men hay
been accustomed, by milder institutions, to refpet
their species, and to melt into tenderness at tb
fight of human sufferings. The prisoners are tie
naked to a stake, but so as to be at liberty ti
move around it. All who are present , men, wv
men, and children, rulh upon them like furie
Every species of torture is applied that the ranco
of revenge can invent. Some burn their limb
with red-hot irons, some mangle their bodies wil
knives, others tear their flelh from their bones
pluck out their nails by the roots, and rend anl
twist their sinews. They vie with one anotheri
refinements of torture. Nothing sets bounds t
their rage but the dread of abridging the duratio
of their vengeance by hastening the death of th

fIfferers; and such is their cruel ingenuity in tor- n o o K
eenting, that by avoiding industriously to hurt IV,
ny vital part, they often prolong this scene of
ngimfh for several days. In spite of all that they
uffer, the victims continue to chant their death-
fng with a firm voice, they boast of their own
xploits, they insult their tormentors for their
vant of IkiJl in avenging their friends and rela-
ions, they warn them of the vengeance which
waits them on account of what they are now
doing, and excite their ferocity by the most pro-
oking reproaches and threats. To display un-
aunted fortitude in such dreadful situations, is
he noblest triumph of a warrior. To avoid the
rial by a voluntary death, or to ihrink under it,
s deemed infamous and cowardly. If any one
betray symptoms of timidity, his tormentors often
dispatch him at once with contempt, as unworthy
of being treated like a man "'. Animated with
those ideas, they endure, without a groan, what
itfeems almost impoflible that human nature should
sustain. They appear to be not only insensible of
pain, but to court it. "Forbear," said an aged
chief of the Iroquois, when his insults had pro-
voked one of his tormentors to wound him with
a knife, "forbear these flabs of your knife, and
rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your
allies, from beyond the sea, may learn by my
example to susser like men "." This magnanimity,

'" De la Potherie, ii. 2t7. iii. 4R.
" Colden, Ilift. of Five Nations, i. aoo.

B o o K of which there are frequent inflances among the

Iv. American warriors, instead of exciting admiration

or calling forth sympathy, exasperates the fierce
spirits of their torturers to fresh ads of cruelty "'
Weary at length of contending with men, whole
constancy of mind they cannot vanquish, fkme
chief in a rage puts a period to their sufferings,
by dispatching them with his dagger or club"'.

nometimes This barbarous scene is often succeeded by ont
,.tttXheir no less shocking. As it is impossible to appeafl

the fell spirit of revenge which rages in the hean
of a savage, this frequently prompts the Ameri.
cans to devour 'those unhappy persons, who have
been the victims of their cruelty. In the ancient
world, tradition has preserved the memory of bar.
barous nations of cannibals, who fed on human
fleflh. But in every part of the New World there
were people to whom this custom was familiar,
It prevailed in the southern continent"', in several
of the islands " , and in various difirids of North.
America ". Even in those parts, where circus.

' Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
'*I Charlcv. Hlift. de la N. Fr. iii. 24;, &c. g .. Lafitau,

leurs, ii. 2 6. CreuxiiHlift Canad. p. 7 . Hennep. Mleun
dcs Sauv. p. 64, &c. Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tertre, ii. 40o1
De la Potherie, ii. 22, &c.

'19 Stadius np. de Bry, iii. 121 Lery, ibid. 210. Biet. 1R4

Lcttr. Edif. 23. t4'. Pifo, 8. Condain. 84. 97. Ribas, Hi,
de log Triumph. 47;.

'"' Li'e ofColunb. ;29. Mart. Dec. p. i8.. Tertre, ii. 40,
'19 Duniot, Pllcm, i. 2 2 4. Charlev. Hist. de la N. Fr. i
29. ii., i4 iii. 21 . De la Potheric, iii. 5o.

ances, with which we are unacquainted, had in n o o 0
great measure aboliflsed this practice, it seems Iv.
0rmerly to have been so well known, that it is
ncorporated into the idiom of their language.
imong the Iroquois, the phrase by which they
xprefs their resolution of making war against an
nemy is, "Let us go and eat that nation." If
hey solicit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they
nvite it to " eat broth made of the flesh of their
nemies"'." Nor was the practice peculiar to rude
npolifhed tribes; the principle from which it
ook rife is so deeply rooted in the minds of the
mericans, that it subsisted in Mexico, one of
he civilized empires in the New World, and relics
f it may be discovered among the more mild
nhabitants of Peru. It was not scarcity of food',
s fonme authors imagine, and the importunate
ravings of hunger, which forced the Americans
o those horrid repasts on their fellow-creatures.
uman flesh was never used as common food in
ny country, and the various relations concerning
cople who reckoned it among the flated means
f subsistence, flow from the credulity and mi-
ekes of travellers. The rancor of revenge first
roinpted men to this barbarous acdion "'. The
erceft tribes devoured none but prifoncrs taken
war, or such as they regarded as enemies'".

Charlev. Hist. de ia N. Fr. iii. 208, 2 9. Lettr. Edif. z .

7.
2 Dela Potherie, ii. 29X. Sec NOTE XLIV.

17 Bict. 38;. Blanco, Converlion de Piritu, p. 28.
iacrnft, N;t. [ift. of Guiana, p. 259, &c.

'1' See wNOTE XLV.

B o o K Women and children who were not the objects 0

IV. enmity, if not cut off in the fury of their firffin,

road into a hoflile country, feldor suffered by
the deliberate effects of their revenge"'

' he people of South-America gratify their r

Venge in a maoner romewhat different, but wit
no less unrelenting rancor. There prisoners
after meeting at their first entrance with the fam
Tough reception as among the North-Americans'
are not only exempt from injury, but treated wit
the greatest kindness. They are feasted and c
reffed, and some beautiful young women are a
pointed to attend and solace them. It is not ea
to account for this part of their condud, unl
we impute it to a refinement in cruelty. For
while they seem studious to attach the captives
life, by supplying them with every enjoyme
that can render it agreeable, their doom is irrev
cably fixed. On a day appointed, the victoriou
tribe assembles, the prisoner is brought forth wit
great solemnity, he views the preparations for thl
sacrifice with as much indifference as if be himfell
were not the victim, and meeting his fate with un
daunted firmness, is dispatched with a single blow
The moment he falls, the women seize the body,
and dress it for the feafl. They besmear their chil
dren with the blood, in order to kindle in thei
bosoms a hatred of their enemies, which is neve
extinguished, and all join in feeding upon tbi

"' Biet. ;82. Bandini, Vita di Americo, 84. Tertre, 405
Fermin. Defcrip. de Surin. i. <4.

" Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii. p. 40. 123.

elh with amazing greediness and exultation''. To n o o
evour the body of a slaughtered enemy, they iv.
eem the molt complete and exquisite gratification
f revenge. Wherever this practice prevails, cap.
ves never escape death , but they are not tor-
red with the fame cruelty as among tribes which
elefs accustomed to fich horrid feasts"'.
As the constancy of every American warrior may
e put to such severe proof, the great objet of mi.
tary education and discipline in the New World
to form the mind to fultain it. When nations
rry on war with open force, defy their enemies
the combat, and vanquish them by the fupe-
ority of their skill or courage, soldiers are trained
be active, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
merica, where the genius and maxims of war
e extremely different, paflive fortitude is the
uality in highest estimation. Accordingly, it is
rly the fiudy of tie Americans to acquire senti-
ents and habits, which will enable them to behave
ke men, when their resolution shall be put to the
roof. As the youth of other nations exercise them-
Ives in feats of activity and force, those of Ame-
cavie with one another in exhibitions of their pa-
ence under sufferings. They harden their nerves
y thoe voluntary trials, and gradualiy accustom
emfelves to endure the fh;rpeft pain, without
omplaining. A boy and girl will bind their naked
r'ms together, and place a burning coal between

Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii. i 28, &c. Lery, ibid. 2 o.
*" See NOTE XLVI.

g o o It them, in order to try who firfl discovers such impa,

iv. tience as to (hake it off '. All the trials, custom.

a'ry in America, when a youth is admitted into tht
class of warriors, or when a warrior is promoted
to the dignity of captain or chief, are accomro
dated to this idea of manliness. They are not dif
plays of valor, but of patience; they are not ex
hibitions of their ability to offend, but of their ca
pacity to susser. Among the tribes on the bank
of the Orinoco, if a warrior aspires to the ranko
captain, his probation begins with a long fast, mor
rigid than any ever observed by the most abfe
mious hermit. At the close of this, the chiefs at
femble, each givcs him three lafles with a large
whip, applied so vigorously, that his body isal
most flayed, and if he betrays the least fympton
of impatience or even sensibility, he is disgraced so
ever, and rejeted as unworthy of the honor
which he aspires. After some interval, the co
Rtancy of'the candidate is proved by a more excru
tiating trial. He is laid in a hammoc with hi
hands bound fast, and an innumerable multitudeo
venomous ants, vhofc bite occasions cxquifite pain
and produces a violent inflammation, are thrown
itpon him. The judges of his merit stand aroun
the hammoc, and , while these cruel infects fafte
upon the molt sensible parts of his body, a figlhr
groan, an involuntary motion exprcflive of wvha
he suffers, would exclude him for ever from th
rank of captain. Even after this evidence of hi

:3; Charlev. lit. dclaN. Fr. iii. 307..

ortitude, it is not deemed to be completely afcer- B o o
ained, but muff stand another test more dreadful Iv.
han ally he has hitherto undergone. He is again
ufpended in his hammoc, and oovered with leaves
f the palmetto. A fire of itinking herbs is kin^
led underneath, so as he may feel its heat, and be
nvolved in its fimoke. Though scorched and al-
oft suffocated, he mufl continue to endure with
he fame patient insensibility. Many perifl in this
ude essay of their firmness and courage, but such
sgo through it with applause, receive the ensigns
f their new dignity with much solemnity, and are
ver after regarded as leaders of approved refolu-
ion, whose behaviour, in the most trying fitua-
ions, will do honor to their country '. In North-
inerica, the previous trial of a warrior is neither
b formal, nor so severe. Though even there, be.
ore a youth is permitted to bear arms, his patience
nd fortitude are proved by blows, by fire, and by.
nfults, more intolerable to a haughty spirit than
oth ''.
The amazing fleadinefs with which the Ame-
icans endure the most exquisite torments, has in-
uced some authors to suppose that, from the pe-
uliar feebleness of their frame, their sensibility is
ot so acute as that of other people; as women,
nd persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be
ess assaded with pain than robult men, whose
cives are more firmly braced. But the constitution

' Guniilla, ii. 286, &c. Bict. 176, &c.
' C arlev. Ilift. de la N; Ft. iii. 219.

B o o Ir of the Americans is not so 'different, in iW

iv. texture, from that of the reft of the human fpe.

cies, as to account for this diversity in their beha.
viour. It flows from a principle of honor, in.
stilled early and cultivated with such care, as to
inspire man in his rudest state with a heroic mag.
nanimity, to which philosophy hath endeavoured,
in vain, to form him, when more highly improved
and polished. This invincible constancy he has
been taught to confider as the chief diftintion of
a man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his conduct, and the
paflions which take possession of his heart, are
few. They operate of course with more decisive
effect, than when the mind is crowded with a mul.
tiplicity of objects, or distracted by the variety of
its pursuits; and when every motive that ads
with any force in forming the sentiments of a fa.
vage, prompts him to susser with dignity, he will
bear what might seem to be impossible for human
patience to sustain. But wherever the fortitude of
the Americans is not roused to exertion by their
ideas of honor, their feelings of pain are the
fame with those of the reft of mankind ''. Nor
is that patience under sufferings for which the
Americans have been so justly celebrated, an uni.
versal attainment. The constancy of many of the
victims is overcome by the agonies of torture
Their weakness and lamentations complete the

'" See NOTE XLVII.

triumph

iumph of their enemies, and reflec disgrace upon B o O K
eir own country . Iv;
The perpetual hostilities carried on among the Waftedby
merican tribes are produdive of very fatal es- theawarP
as. Even in seasons of public tranquillity, their
perfed industry does not supply them with any
perfluous store of provisions ; but when the irrup-
n of an enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or
lurbs them in their hunting excursions, such a
amity reduces a community, naturally unpro-
dent and destitute ofrefources, to extreme want.
11 the people of the diftrid that is invaded, are
equently forced to take refuge in woods or moun-
ins, which can afford them no subsistence, and
here many of them perifl. Notwithstanding
eir excessive caution in conducting their mili-
ry operations, and the solicitude of every leader
prcferve the lives of his followers, as the rude
bes in America seldom enjoy any interval of
ace, the loss of men among them is considerable
proportion to the degree of population. Thus
nine and the sword combine in thinning their
mbers. All their communities are feeble, and
thing now remains of several nations, which
re once considerable, but the name ".
Scnfible of this continual decay, there are tribes Recruit their
ich endeavour to recruit their national force nu"bers by
en exhaufled, by adopting prifonrers taken prisoPers.

Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. z48. ; 8. Dela Potherie, iii,

' Charlev, Ilit. N. Fr. iii. aoz, ao3. 429. Gumilla, ii
O, &c.
VOL. IL -,

B o o i in war, and by this expedient prevent their tot

Iv. extinction. The pratice, however, is not un

verfally received. Resentment operates moi
powerfully among savages, than considerations
policy. Far the greater part of their captive
was anciently facriiiced to their vengeance, and
is only tince their numbers began to declinesad
that they have generally adopted milder maxi
But such as they do naturalize, renounce for ec
their native tribe, and assume the manners as w
as passions of the people by whom they a
adopted "' so entirely, that they often join th
in expeditions against their own countrynid
Such a sudden transition, and so repugnant
one of the most powerful inftinds implanted b
nature, would be deemed firange among man
people; but, among the members of small co
nunities, where national enmity is violent an
deep-rooted, it has the appearance of being si
more unaccountable. It seems, however, to refa
naturally from the principles upon which war
carried on in America. WYhen nations aim at
terminating their enemies, no exchange of p
loners can ever take place. From the moment 01
is made a prisoner, his country and his friec
confider him as dead `'° He has incurred indeli
disgrace by suffering himself to be surprised or
be taken by an enemy; and were he to ret
home, after such a stain upon his honor,

'09 Charlcv. H-ilt. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lalit. ii, 3
' See NOTE XLVIll.

areft relations would not receive or even acknow- n o o i
ge that they knew him`". Some tribes were Iv,
I more rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the
amy which he had brought on his country was
piated, by putting him inltantly to death21.
the unfortunate captive is thus an outcast from
own country, and the ties which bound him
it are irreparably broken, he feels less reluctance
forming a new connexion with people, who,
an evidence of their friendly sentiments, not
ly deliver him from a cruel death, but offer to
mit him to all the rights of a fellow- citizen.
e perfect similarity of manners among savage
tions facilitates and completes the union, and
uces a captive to transfer not only his allegiance,
t his affedtion, to the community into the bosom
which he is received.
But though war be the chief occupation of men Their infe.
their rude fate, and to excel in it their highest rioriyin

war to po.

inction and pride, their inferiority is always lishedna.
nifeft when they engage in competition with tions.
illicd nations. Delfitute of that foresight which
cerns and provides for remote events, strangers
the union and mutual confidence requisite in form-

lany extensive plan of operations, and incapable
the lubordination no less requisite in carrying such
ns into execution, savage nations may aftonilh
dilciplined enemy by their valor, but seldom
we formidable to him by their conduct; and

Laiont. ii. i85, i86.
lierrcra, dec, 3. lib. iv. c. 16. p. 17;.

L z

J o o r whenever the contest is of long continuana

IV. mluf yield to superior art '. The empires of Pa

and Mexico, though their progress in civilizatilo
when measured by the European or Asiatic tfan
ards, was inconsiderable, acquired such an afceD
ancy over the rude tribes around them, that thl
fuhjecded mofl of them with great facility to tht
power. When the people of Europe over-rand
various provinces of America, this fuperiorityw,
still more conspicuous. Neither the couragen;
number of the natives could repel a handful ofi
vaders. The alienation and enmity, prevalq
among barbarians, prevented them from uniti
in any common scheme of defence, and while
t'ibe fought separately , all were subdued.
Their arts- VI. The arts of rude nations unacquainted wil

the use of metals, hardly merit any attentions
their own account , but are worthy of soo
notice, as far as they serve to display the gen
and manners of a people. The first distress a
vage mult feel, will arise from the manner
.which his body is affeded, by the heat, or col
or moisture, of the climate under which he livl
and his first care will be, to provide some coveri

Drers and for his own defence. In the warmer and in
ornaincts. mild climates of America , none of the rude tril

were clothed. To molf of them Nature hadi
even fuggctcd any idea of impropriety in be
altogether uncovered "'. As under a mild clim

I" Sec NOTE XL1X.
'4 Lcry, Navigat. ap. de Bry, iii. p. 416. Lis
Columbus, c. 24. Vencgis, Hlilt. of Calilbrl. p, 70.

re was little need of any defence from the inju. n o o K
of the air, and their extreme indolence shun- Iv.
every species of labor to which it was not
ed by absolute necessity, all the inhabitants of
i/Des, and a considerable part of the people on
continent, remained in this slate of naked firn-
cits. Others were fatified with tonie flight
eriig, such as decency required. But though
ed, they were not unadorned. Tlhey dressed
ir hair in many different forms. They faltened
of gold , or shells, or flining flones, in their
s, their noses, and cheeks ". They fained their
ns with a great variety of figures ; and they
ntmuch time, and finbmitted to great pain, in
lamenting their persons in this fantastic manner.
nity, however, which finds endless occupation
ingenuity and invention, in nations where
fs lins become a complex and intricate art,
circtmfcribed within so narrow bounds, and
Iined to so few articles among naked savages, that
are not satisfied with those firnple decorations,
have a wonderful propenitcy to alter the natural
n of their bodies, in order to render it more beats
i. This practice was universal among the rudest
tle American tribes. Their operations for that
rpofc begin as soon as an infant is born. By coni-
lning the bones of the sk1ull, while still soft and
ible, some flatten the crown of their heads ; foine
ccze them into the flape of a cone; others
uld them as much as poflible into a square

. Lcry, ap. de Bry, iii. z6S. Lettr. Edifiantes, zo. 2z3..

L 3

t o o-K figure'"; and they often endanger the lives

iv. their posterity by their violent and abfirde

forts to derange the plan of Nature, or to in
prove upon her designs. But in all their attemp
either to adorn or to new-model their persons,
seems to have been less the object of the American
to please, or to appear beautiful, than to givea
air of dignity and terror to their asped. Theira
tention to dress had more reference to war thant
gallantry. The difference in rank and estimation bi
tween the two sexes was so great, as seems to hay
extingui(hed , in some measure, their folicitudet
appedr mutually amiable. The man deemed itbi
neath him to adorn his person, for the fake of on
on whom he was accustomed to look down as a flai
It was when the warrior had in view to enterth
council of his nation, or to take the field again
its enemies, that he afumed his choicest orn;
ments, and decked his person with the nice
care '. The decorations of the women werefce
and simple; whatever was precious or fplendidvis
reserved for the men. In several tribes the womt
were obliged to spend a considerable part of the
time every day in adorning and painting their hu
bands, and could bellow little attention upon o
namenting themselves. Among a race of men I

"' Oviedo, Hist. lib. iii. c. c. Ulloa, i. 329. Voya

de lahat, ii. 72. Charlevoix, iii. ;23. Gumilla,
197, &c. Acugna, Rclat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. S
Lawlon's Voy. to Carolina, p. 31.

V' Wafer's Voyage, p. 142. Lery, ap. de Bry,
167. Charlev. Hist. N. Fran. iii. 216. 22g.

haiughty as to despise, or so cold as to neglet n o o K
them, the women naturally became careless and IV.
ovenly, and the love of finery and show, which
has been deemed their favorite paflion, was con-
ined chiefly to the other sex '. To deck his person
was the diflindlion of a warrior, as well as one of
is molt serious occupations 9. In one part of their
refs, which, at first fight, appears the mofl fin-
ular and capricious, the Americans have disco-
vered considerable sagacity in providing against
the chief inconveniencies of their climate, which is
ftcn sultry and moilf to excess. All the different
ribes, which remain unelothed, are accustomed to
noint and rub their bodies with the grease of ani-
als, with viscous gums, and with oils of different
in(is. By this they check that profuse perfpira-
ion, which, in the torrid zbne, wafles the vigor
f the frame, and abridges the period of human
ife. By this too, they provide a defence against
he extreme moisture during the rainy season 220.
Ihey likewise, at certain seasons, temper paint of
licierent colors with those unduous fubflances,
:d bedaub themselves plentifully with that compo-
tion. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnill,
hcir' skins are not only proteced from the pene-
rIting heat of the fun, but, as all the innumer-
blc tribes of infeds have an antipathy to the

"Charlev.liift de la Nouv.France, iii. 278.3 27.Lafitau,

.1 . Kalil's Voyage, iii. z 7 L. Lery, ap. de Bry, iii. 69,
7o. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. lRibas, llil. dc los Triumph.
.C. 4-2.

"p See NOTE L. 1' Sec NOTE LT.

L 4

B o O r smell or tafle of that mixture, they are delivered

Iv. from their teazing persecution , which amidst so

relts and marflies, cfpecially in the warmer regions
would have been altogether intolerable in a liatt
of perfect nakedness"'.
Iabitations, 'lTe next objec to dress that will engage tht

attention ot a fa. ag e, is to prepare some habitation
which may afford him flielter by day, and a retreat
at night. Whatever is connedted with his ideas o
perlonal dignity, whatever bears any referenceto
his military character, the savage warrior deemsao
object of importance. Whatever relates only to
peaceable and inactive life, he views with indiffe.
ence. Hence, though finically attentive to dress,
he is little solicitous about the elegance or difpG
fition of his habitation. Savage nations, far from
that slate of improvement, in which the mode of
living is confidered as a mark of dillindlion, and
unacquainted with those wants, which require
variety of accommodation, regulate the conflrudion
of their houses according to their limited ideas ol
necessity. Some of the American tribes were fc
extremely rude, and had advanced so little beyond
the primeval simplicity of nature, that they hai
no houses at all. During the day, they take fhelte
from the scorching rays of the fun under thick trees
at night they form a shed with their branches an(
leatvcs '2. In the rainy fcafon they retire int(

'' Lahat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190. 202. Bancroft
Nat. ilift. of Guiana, i8. 280.

1'' See NOTE iLI.

oves, formed by the hand of Nature, or hollowed n o o t
iut by their own industry 2" Others, who have Iv.
o fixed abode, and roam through the forest in quest
fgame, sojourn in temporary huts, which they
reCt with little labor, and abandon without any
oncern. The inhabitants of those vast plains,
vhich are deluged by the overflowing of rivers
uring the heavy rains that fall periodically between
he tropics , raise houses upon piles faflened in the
round, or place them among the boughs of trees,
nrl nre thus safe amidst that wide extended
nundation which surrounds them "'. Such were
he firll essays of the rudest Americans towards
roviding themselves with habitations. But even
mong tribes which are more improved, and whose
efidence is become altogether fixed, the ftrudture
f their houses is extremely mean and simple. They
re wretched huts, sometimes of an oblong and
rmetimes of a circular form, intended merely for
elter, with no view to elegance, and little
ttention to conveniency. The doors are so low,
hat it is necessary to bend or to creep on the hands
nd feet in order to enter them. They are without
indows , and have a large hole in the middle of
he roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow
ravellers in other minute circumstances of their
cfcription , is not only beneath the dignity of

"' Lcttres Edif. v. 27?. Venegas, Hiflt. of Califor. i. 76.

ozanc, Defcrip. del Gran. Chaco, p. SS. Lettres Edif.. ii.
'6. (;umilla, i. 8g;. Bancroft, Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 277.

:' Guniilli, i. 22z. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 6.
vicedo, Sumar, p. 53. C.

B o O i history, but would be foreign to the object of my

IV. researches. One circumstance merits attention, as

it is singular, and illustrates the character of the
people. Some of their houses are so large as to
contain accommodation for fourscore or a hundred
persons. These are built for the reception of dif.
ferent families, which dwell together under the
fame roof '1, and often around a common fire,
without separate apartments , or any kind of screen
or partition between the spaces which they refpec.
tively occupy. As soon as men have acquired
distinct ideas of property; or when they are so
much attached to their females, as to watch them
with care and jealousy ; farmilies of course divide
and fettle in separate houses, where they can secure
and guard whatever they wiflI to preserve. This
singular mode of habitation among several people
of America, may therefore be confidered not only
as the effec of their imperfect notions concerning
property , but as a proof of inattention and indif.
ference towards their women. If they had not
been accustomed to perfect equality, such an arrange-
ment could not have taken place. If their sensibility
had been apt to have taken alarm, they would not
have trusted the virtue of their women amidst the
temptations and opportunities of such a promif.
cuous intercourse. At the fame time, the perpetual
concord which reigns in habitations where so many
families ire crowded together, is surprising , and
affords a striking evidence that they must be people

"' See NOTE LIII.

of either a very gentle, or of a very phlegmatic n o o K
temper, who,.in such a situation, are unacquainted Iv.
with animosity, brawling, and discord ".

After making some provision for his dress and Theirarns

habitation, a favlge will perceive the neceflity of
prcparing proper arms with which to afault or
repel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early exer-
cifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude nations.
The first offensive weapons were doubtless such
as chance presented , and the firlt efforts of art to
improve upon there, were extremely awkward and
simple. Clubs made of some heavy wood, stakes
hardened in the fire, lances whose heads were
armed with flint or the bones of some animal, are
weapons known to the rudest nations. All these,
however, were of use only in close encounter.
But men wished to annoy their enemies while at a
distance, and the bow and arrow is the moRt
early invention for this purpose. This weapon is
in the hands of people , whose advances in im-
provement are extremely inconsiderable, and is
familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of the
globe. It is remarkable, however, that some tribes
in America were so destitute of art and ingenuity,
that they had not attained to the discovery of
this simple invention ", and seem to have been
unacquainted with the use of any missive weapon.

Journ. de Crillet. & Blechamel dans la Guyanc,

p. 6;. Lafitau, AMoeurs, ii. 4. Torquem. Monarq. i. 4+7.
.ournal, llift. de Joutal, 217. Lery, Hist. Bralil. ap. de
iry, iii. 238. Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco, 67.

P iedrahita, Conq. del Nuevo Reino, ix. Iz.

B o o The fling, though in its conltrudtion not more

IV. complex than the bow, and among many nations of

equal antiquity , was little known to the people
of North America 8, or the islands, but appears
to have been used by a few tribes in the southern
continent 2'. The people, in some provinces of
Chili, and those of Patagonia, towards the fou.
them extremity of America, use a weapon peculiar
to themselves. They fasten flones, about the size
of a lift, to each end of a leather thong of eight
feet in length , and swinging these round their
heads, throw them with fiich dexterity, that they
feldon miss the objed at which they aim *.

Theirdno. Among people who had h::rdly any occupation
melfic uten. but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their

invention 2r, as well as induRtry, were naturally
directed towards these objects. With refped to
every thing else, their wants and desires were so
limited, that their invention was not upon the
firetch. As their food and habitations are perfectly
simple, their domestic utensils are few and rude.
Some of the southern tribes had discovered the
art of forming vcffels of earthen ware, and baking
them in the fun, so as they could endure the fire.
In Northl-America , they hollowed a piece of hard
wood into the form of a kettle, and filling it
with water, brought it to boil by putting red.hot

2 Nauf. de Alv. Nun. Caheca de vaca, c. x p. . .
"* Piedrah. p. 16. See NOTE L1V.

()Ovilll's Relation of Chili. Church. Colledc. iii.
82. Fallkner's )efcript. of Patagon. p. 130.

"a' See NOTE LV.

sones into it ". These vessels they used in pre- B o o. :
paring part of their provisions; and this may be v.
confidered as a ftep towards refinement and luxury, Dressing

their food.

for men in their rudest state were not acquainted
with any method of dressing their victuals, but
by roafling them on the fire; and among several
tribes in America, this is the only species of
cookery yet known B". But the maIler-piece of confmtru.
art, among the savages of America is the con- ton oftheir
ftiruLion of their canoes. An Efquimaux, slut up
in his boat of whalebone, covered with the skins
of feals , can brave that stormy ocean , on
which the barrenness of his country compels him
to depend for the chief part of his fubfiflence "'
The people of Canada venture upon their rivers
and lakes, in boats made of the bark of trees,
and so light that two men can carry them,
wherever liallows or catarads obflruc the navi-
gation 2:. In these frail vessels they undertake
and accomplish long voyages `' . The inhabitants
of the isles and of the southern continent form
their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large
tree, with infinite labor, and though in appearance
they are extremely awkward and unwieldy , they
paddle and fleer them with fiich dexterity, that
Europeans, well acquainted with all the improve-
ments in the science of navigation, have been
afloniflied at the rapidity of their motion, and

21) Charlcv. -lilt. N. Fr. iii. 332.
" See NOTE LVI.
+" Ellis, Voy. i1;. 2" See NOTE LVII.
". Lt ; iu, Moeurs., 1.. .

B 6 xK the quickness of their evolutions. Their pirogues;

IV, or war-boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty

men; their canoes employed in fifling and in
Jhort voyages are less capacious=7. The form, as
well as materials of all these various kinds of vef.
fels, is well adapted to the service for which they
are destined; and the more minutely they are exa.
mined, the mechanism of their ftrudure, as well
as neatness of their fabric , will appear the more
surprising.

Lifteieers But, in every attempt towards induflry among
with hich the Americans , one striking quality in their cha.
thiey apply
to labor. radcer is conspicuous. They apply to work with.

out ardor, carry it on with little activity, and,
like childern, are easily diverted from it. Even in
operations which seem the most interesting, and
where the molt powerful motives urge them to
vigorous exertions, they labor with a languid
listlessness. Their work advances under their hand
with such slowness, that an eye-witness compares
it to the imperceptible progress of vegetation '".
They will spend so many years in forming a
canoe, that it often begins to rot with age before
they finish it. They will susser one part of a roof
to decay and perish , before they complete the
other '. The slightest manual operation consumes
a vast length of time, and what in polished nations
would hardly be an efolrt of inlduftry, is among
savages an arduous undertaking, This slowness of
the Americans in executing works of every kind

Labat, Voyages, ii. 9)r, &c. it.
" CGumnilla, ii. 297. ' Borde, Rtlt. das Caraibes,pz: .

ay be imputed to various causes. Among fa- B o 0 it
ages, who do not depend for fubfifterce upon Iv.
he efforts of regular industry, time is of so little
mportance, that they set no value upon it; and
rovided they can finish a design, they never
cgard how long they are employed about it. The
ools which they employ are so awkward and
efedive, that every work in which they engage
nft necessarily be tedious. The hand of the most
nduftrious and skilful artif , were it furnished
vith no better instrument than a ftone-hatchet, a
iell, or the bone of some animal , would find it
ifficult to perfect the molt fi-nple work. It is by
ength of labor, that he muff endeavour to
upply his defed of power. But above all, the cold
hlegmatic temper peculiar to the Americans ren-
ers their operations, languid. It is alrnoft im*
ollible to rouse them from that habitual indo-
ence in which they are funk ; and unless when
ngaged in war or hunting , they seem incapable of
xerting any vigorous effort. Their ardor of ap-
lication is not so great as to call forth that in-
entive spirit which suggests expedients for facili-
ating and abridging labor. They will return to
atalk day after day, but all their methods of exe,
Cuting it are tedious and operose '4. Even'fince
the Europeans have communicated to them the
kllowledge of their infirurments, and taught them
to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of the
Americans is conspicuous. in every attempt they

40 See NOTE LVllf.

B o o K make. They may be patient and assiduous i

IV. labor, they can copy with a servile and minut

accuracy , but discover little invention , and n
talents for dispatch. In spite of inflrucion an(
example, the spirit of the race predominates
their motions are naturally tardy, and it is vainto
urge them to quicken their pace. Among tht
Spaniards in America , the work of an Indian isl
phrase by which they describe any thing , in th(
execution of which an immense time has been emn
ployed, and much labor walled `.

Thleirreli. VII. No circumstance refpeding rude nations
gion. has been the object of greater curiosity than their

religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been so imperfectly understood, or represented

Peculiar with so little fidelity. Priests and miflionaries are
difficulties in the persons who have had the :best opportunitie
this inquir. of carrying on this inquiry, almong the most un.

civilized of the American tribes. Their minds,
engrossed by the doctrines of their own religion,
and habituated to its inltitutions, are apt todifcoi
ver something which resembles those objedts o
their veneration, in the opinions and rites of every
people. Whatever they contemplate, they view
through one medium, and draw and accommo.
date it to their own fyltem. They fludy to recoil
cile the inftiturions , which fall under their ob
servation, to their own creed, not to explain then
according to the rude notions of the people them'
selves. They ascribe to them ideas which they

'" Voyages de Ulloa, i. 1s. Lettr. Edif. . &c. 3l. 48

arc

re incapable of forming, and suppose them to be B o o it
cquainted with principles and sadis, which it is Iv.
poflible that they flould know. Hence, some
jilflioaries have been induced to believe, that
yen among the inoft barbarous nations in Ame-
ca, they had discovered traces , no less diftind
in amazing , of their acquaintance with the fu-
lime nyfteries and peculiar ifltitutions of Chris-
aiity. From their own interpretation of certain
preiflons and ceremonies, they have concluded
at there people had some knowledge of the doc-
ine of the Trinity , of the incarnation of the Son
God, of his expiatory facrffice, of the virtue of
ecrofs , and of the efficacy of the sacraments `.
such unintelligent and credulous guides, we can
ace little confidence.
But, even when we make our choice of con-
tdors, with the greatest care, we must not follow

nen with implicit faith. An inquiry into the reli-
ious notions of rude nations is involved in pecu-
ar intricacies , and we mut often pause in order
frparate the fads which our informers relte,
om the reasonings with which they are accompa.
cd, or the theories which they build upon them.
everal pious writers, more attentive to the im-
rtance of the subjed than to the condition of
c people whose sentiments they were endcavour-

4 Venegas, i. 88. 92. Torquemada, ii, 44q. Carcia,

rigCn. 122. Herrera, dcc. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. $.lib.
* c, 7.

VOL. II. M

B O o I ing to discover, have bestowed much unprofitable

iv. labor in researches of this nature '.

c,, fi!e' to There are two fundamental doctrines, upon
twlo rlruclc. vhich the whole system of religion, as far as it can

be discovered by the light of nature, is eftablifled,
The one refpedes the being of a God, the othei
the immortality of the foul. To discover the ideas
of the uncultivated nations under our review with
regnrd to those important points, is not only an
objed of curiosity, but may afford inftrucion. Te
thcfe two articles I shall confine my researches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail ol
local fuperfitions , to more minute inquirers,

ThebeingofS Whoever has had any opportunity of examining
Gua. into the religious opinions of persons in the in

ferior ranks of life , even in the most enlightened
and civilized nations, will find that their fyflle
of belief is derived from inftrudion , not disco
vered by inquiry. That numerous part of thi
human species, whose lot is labor, wvRofe prin
cipal and almoPt sole occupation is to secure sub
fiftence, views the arrangement and operations o
nature with little reflection, and has neitherleifilr
nor capacity for entering into that path of resinec
and intricate speculation which conduts to th
knowledge of the principles of natural religior
In the early and molt rude periods of savage life
such difqcuilicions are altogether unknown. Whe
the intelledlual powers are just beginning to ur
fold, and their first feeble exertions arc direde

'" See NOTE LIX.

towards a few objets of primary necessity and use ; o o K
vwhen the faculties of the mind are so limited , as IV.
not to have sor;ied abflrat or general ideas; when
language i; so barren, as to be deRitute of names to
distinguish any thing that is not perceived by frme
ofthe senses ; it Is prepo'lerous to expec that man
fliould be capable of tracing with accuracy the
relation between cause and effect; or to suppose that
lie fiould rife from the contemplation of the one
to the knowledge of the other, and form just
conceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Governor
of the universe. The idea of creation is so fami-
liar wherever the mind is enlarged by science, and
illuminated with revelation, that we seldom reflect
how profound and abstruse this idea is, or confider
what progress man must have made in observation
and research, before he could arrive at any know-
ledge of this elementary principle in religion.
Accordingly, several tribes have been discovered
in America , which have no idea whatever of a
Supreme Being, and no rites of religious worflip.
Inattentive to that magnificent fpedacle of beauty
!and order presented to their view, unaccustomed
to reflect either upon what they themselves are,
or to inquire who is the author of their exist-
elnce, men , in their savage state, paTs their days
like the animals round tlhem, without knowledge or
vencration of any fiiperior power. Some rude tribes
have not in their language any name for the Deity,
nor have the most accurate observers been able to
discover any pratice or inflitution which feenned
to inmply that they rccognifed his authority, or

M %

I 0 o K were solicitous to obtain his favor "+. It is

IV. howevei only among men in the mots uncultivated

state of nature, and while their intellectual faculties
are so feeble and limited as hardly to elevate them
above the irrational creation , that we discover this
total insensibility to the imprefflons of any invisible
power.

But the human mind, formed for religion,i

soon opens to the reception of ideas, which are
destined, when correted and refined, to be the
great source of consolation amidst the calamities of
life. Among some of the American tribes, still
in the infancy of improvement, we discern appre.
henfions of some invisible and powerful beings.
These apprehensions are originally indiftindt and!
perplexed, and seem to be suggested rather by
the dread of impending evils, than to flow from
gratitude for blessings received. While Nature
holds on her course with uniform and undisturbed
regularity, men eljoy the benefits resulting from
it, without inquiring concerning its cause. But
every deviation from this regular course rouses
and astonishes them. When they behold evenu

"* Biec, ; 9. Lery,ap. de Bry, iii. 22 1. Nieuhoff. Church.

Coll. ii. 1 2. Lettr. Edif 2. . 77 Id. 12, x3. Venegas, i
8'. Lozano,Defcript. del Grand Chaco, i 9. Ferdinand. Mission,
de Chiquit. 19. Gumilla, ii. t 6. Rochefort, Hist. des An
tilles, p. 468. Margrave, Ilift. in Append. de Chilienfibus
296. Ulloa, Notic. Americ. iti,- &c Barrere, z18, e19.
Harcourt, Voy. to Guiana. Purch. Pilgr. iv. p. 1273. Ac
count of Brasil, by a Portuguese. Ibid. p. 1289. Jones'
Journal, P. 59. See NOTE LX.

to which they are not accustomed, they search n o O
for the reasons of them with eager curiosity. Their 1v.
underfianding is unable to penetrate into these;
but imagination, a more forward and ardent
faculty of the mind , decides without hesitation.
It ascribes the extraordinary occurrences in nature
to the influence of invisible beings, and supposes
that the thunder, the hurricane, and the earth-
quake, are effets of their interposition. Some
such confused notion of spiritual or invisible power,
ftperintending over those natural calamities which
frequently desolate the earth, and terrify its inha-
bitants, may be traced among many rude nations 45.
But besides this, the disasters and dangers of
savage life are so many, and men often find them-
selves in situations so formidable, that the m.ind,
sensible of its own weakness, has no resource but
in the guidance and protecion of wiflom and
power superior to what is human. Dejeded with
calamities which oppress him, and exposed to
dangers which he cannot repel, the savage no
longer relies upon himself; he feels his own im-
potence, and fees no profpedt of beingextricated,
hut by the interposition of some unseen arm.
Hence, in all unenlightened nations, the first
rites or pracdices which bear any resemblance
to acds of religion, have it for their objeA to
avert evils which men susser or dread, The
Manitous or Okkis of the North-Americans were
amulets or charms , which they imagined to be of

h" See NOTE LXL.

Ma

B o o ix such virtue , as to preserve the persons who reposed

IV, confidence in them from every disastrous event,

or they were confidered as tutelary spirits', whose aid
they might implore in circumstances of diltrefs ".
The Cermis of the islanders were reputed by them to
be the authors of every calamity that affliets the
human race; they were represented under the molt
frightfLl forms , and religious homage was paid
to them wvith no other view than to appease these
furious deities l'. Even among those tribes whose
religious system was more enlarged, and who had
formed some conception of benevolent beings,which
delighted in conferring benefits, as well as of ma.
licious powers prone, to inflict evil; fuperltition
still appears as the offspring of fear, and all its
efforts were employed to avert calamities. They
were persuaded that their good deities, prompted
by the beneficence of their nature, would beftosv
every blessing in their power, without solicitation
or acknowledgment; and their only anxiety was
to soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers
whom they regarded as the enemies of mankind"'.

Such were the imperfect conceptions of the

greater part of the Americans with refped to the
interpositions of invisible agents, and such, almolt

' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 34t, &c. Creuxii Hist. Canad,
p. 82, &C.

"7 Oviedo, lib. iii c. i. p. ixi. P. Martyr, decad
p. 102 , SC.

'* Tertrc, ii6. 6. Borde, p. 14. State of Virginii

by a Native, book iii. p. 3 . Duont, ti. 16
Bancroft, Nat. llift. of Guiana, 309.

iiniverfally , was the mean and illiberal' object of B o o E
their fuperfjitions. Were we to trace back the iv,
ideas of other nations to that rude state in,which
hiflory first presents them to our view:,;we Ihould
discover a surprising resemblance in.,t heir, tenets
anid practices; and should be convinced.,lkbat, in
similar circumstances, the faculties of the human
mind hold nearly the fame course in their pyogrefs,
and arrive at almost the fame conclusions. 1 he
iinpreflions of fear are conspicuous in ,all .the sys-
terns of fuperflition formed in this situation. The
oft exalted notions of men rife no highcr than to
a perplexed apprehenfionof certain beings, whose
power , though supernatural, is limited as well,as
partial. '

But, among other tribes, which have been Remarkable
longer united, or have made greater progress in divelfityin
improvement, we discern some feeble pointing to- gious no.
wards more just and adequate conceptions of the tions.
power that presides in nature. They fem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by some of their expreflions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power to be the
maker of the world , and the disposer of all events.
They denominate him the Gicat Spirit "'. But
these ideas are faint and confused , and when they
attempt to explain them, it is manifest, thart
among them the word spirit has a meaning .very

'"' Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays
des Ilurons, zz6.

M 4

a o o K different from that in which we employ it, and

Iv. that they have no conception of any deity but

what is corporeal. ' hey believed their gods to
be of the human form, though of a nature more
excellent- than man, and retail such wild incohe.
rent fables concerning their functions and ope.
rations, as are altogether unworthy of a place in
history. Even among these tribes, there is no
eftablifbed form of public worship; there are no
temples 'erected in honor of their deities; and
no ministers peculiarly consecrated to their service,
They have the knowledge , however, of fevera
superstitious ceremonies and pratices handed down
to them by tradition, and to these they have re.
course with a childish credulity, when routed by
any'emergency from their usual insensibility, and
excited to acknowledge the power , and to implore
the protecion of superior beings "t.

Sftemi oF The tribe of the Natchez, and the people of
theNatcbez. Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti.

vated nations of America in their ideas of religion,
as well as in their political institutions; and il
is no less difficult to explain the cause of thi
diflindion than- of that which we have alread)
confidered. The Sun was the chief object of re
ligious worship among the Natchez. In tbei
temples, which were conftrueted with sorn
magnificence, and decorated with various orn;
rnents, according to their mode of architecture
they preservcd a perpetual fire, as the purest emblei

"" Charlev. N. Fr. iii, 34g. Golden, 1. I?.

ftheir divinity. Ministers were appointed to watch B o o it
nd feed this sacred flame. The first funtion of Iv.
e great chief of the nation, every morning, was
n ad of obeisance to the Sun; and festivals re-
rned at stated seasons, which were celebrated by
e whole community with solemn but unbloody
ites ". This is the most refined species of super-
ition known in America, and, perhaps, one of
ie most natural as well as most seducing. The
un is the apparent source of the joy, fertility,
nd life , diffused through nature; and while the
uman mind, in its early essays towards inquiry,
onteimplates and admires his universal and ani-
ating energy, its admiration is apt to flop fliort
what is visible, without reaching to the unseen
aufe; and pays that adoration to the most glo-
ous and beneficial work of God, which is due
nly to him who formed it. As fire is the purest
nd most acive of the elements, and in some of
squalities and effecs resembles the Sun, it was,
ot improperly, chosen to be the emblem of his
owerful operation. The ancient Persians, a
cople far superior, in every refpedt, to that rude
ibe whose rites I am describing, founded their
ligious system on similar principles, and eftab-
lhed a form of public worship, less grofsand
xceptionable than that of any people destitute of
uidance from revelation. This surprising co-in-
deiice in sentiment between two nations, in such

"' Dumont, i, 1 8, &c, Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 417,
C 429. Lafitau, i. z67.

i a o o different itates of improvement, is one of th

IV, many singular and unaccountable circumstance

which occur in the history of human affairs.

Among the people of Bogota, the Sun an

Moon were, likewise, the chief objects of vent
ration. Their system of religion was more regula
and complete , though less pure, than that of th
Natchez. They had temples , altars, priests, f2
crifices, and that long train of ceremonies, whic
fuperitition introduces wherever she has fully eftat
lifhed her dominion over the minds of men. Bu
the rites of their worship were cruel and blood)
'I hey offered human vidtims to their deities , an
many of their practices nearly resembled the bai
barous institutions of the Mexicans, the genius(
which we shall have an opportunity of confiderin
more attentively in its proper place '.

Theirideas With refpef to the other great dodcrine of
concering ligion , concerning the immortality of the foul, t
the immor-
talit of tle sentiments of the Americans were more united
foul, the human mind, even when least improved al

invigorated by culture, shrinks from the though
of dissolution, and looks forward with hope ar
expedation to a state of future exiflence. Tb
sentiment, resulting from a secret confcioufiefs
its own dignity, from an inflinclive longing aft
immortality , is universal, and may be deemed r
tural. Upon this, are founded the most exalt
hopes of man in his highest state of improvemer

"' Piedrahita, Comp. del N. Reino, p. 17. Herrera, d
. lib. v. c. 6.

or has nature withheld from him this soothing R o o K
onfolation, in the most early and rude period of iv.
isprogrefs. We can trace this opinion from one
tremity of America to the other. In some re'
ions more faint and obscure, in others more per-
tdly developed, but nowhere unknown. The
oft uncivilized of its savage tribes do no appre-
nd death as the extintion of being. All enter-
in hopes of a future and more happy slate, where
ey shall be for ever exempt from the calamities
hich embitter human life in its present condition.
his future state they conceive to be a delightful
iuntry, blessed with perpetual spring, whose so-
fts abound with game, whose rivers swarm with
fn, where famine is never felt, and uninterrupted
lenty shall be enjoyed without labor or toil,
ut as men, in forming their first imperfect ideas
ncerning the invisible world, suppose that there
ey flall continue to feel the fame desires, and to,
engaged in the fame occupations, as in the
resent world; they naturally ascribe eminence
id diftinclion , in that state, to the fame quali-
es and talents which are here the object of their
eem. The Americans, accordingly, allotted
e highest place, in their country of spirits, to
e Ikilful hunter, to the adventurous and fine-
efsful warrior, and to such as had .tortured the
rcatcft number of captives, and devoured their
cnl ". Thcf notions were so prevalent ,that they

Lery, ap. de ry, iii. 222. Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 3,1
c. De la Potheric, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5.

b o o K gave rife to an universal custom, which is,

iv. once, the strongest evidence that the America

induce them believe in a future state, and the best illuifration,
to bury what they exped there. As they imagine, th
arms , etc,
with th< departed spirits begin their career anew in the wor
'ded. whither they are gone, that their friends may n

enter upon it defenceless and unprovided, theybui
together with the bodies of the dead their bow, thi
arrows, and other weapons used in hunting or w
they deposit in their tombs the skins or stuffs
which they make garments, Indian corn, manic
venison, domestic utensils, and whatever is recko
ed among the necessaries in their simple mode
life "+. In some provinces, upon the decease ol
cazique or chief, a certain number of his wive
of his favorites, and of his slaves, were put
death, and interred together with him, that
might appear with the fame dignity in his futt
flation, and be waited upon by the fame attendants

his persuasion is so deep-rooted , that many

the deceased person's retainers offer themselves
voluntary victims, and court the privilege of
companying their ,departed rnafter, as a hi

"' Chronica de Ciecade Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288. Crc

Hist. Canad. p. 9 . Rochefort, Hist. des Antilles, i
Biet, ;91. Dela Potherie, ii. 44. iii. g. Blanco, Conv
de Piritu, p. ! .

"' Dumont, Louifiane, i. 2og. &c. Oviedo, lib.v. c

Gomara, Hilt. Gen. o. 28. P. Mart. decad. o04. Chai
N. Fr. iii. 421. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P. IVelc
Hcrnandez, Mlemor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. Papers,
Chron. de Cieca de Leon c. t;.

:intion. It has been found difficult, on some B o o x
,cafons, to set bounds to this enthusiasm of as- Iv.
ionate duty, and to reduce the train of a favor-
leader to such a number as the tribe could
rd to spare. '".
mrong the Americans, as well as other unci- Superfttioe
ized nations, many of the rites and observances connected

-1 1 '

c i i r, r r * with devo*

ich bear some resemblance to ads of religion, tion.
e no connexion with devotion, but proceed
m a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
man mind is most apt to feel, and to discover
s vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
ble and uninformed. Astonished with occur.
ces, of which it is unable to comprehend the
fe,it naturally fancies that there is something
terious and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed
events of which it cannot discern the issue or
consequences, it has recourse to other means
discovering them, than the exercise of its own
acity. Wherever fuperflition is so established
to form a regular fyfltem, this desire of penetrating
o the secrets of futurity is connceed with it.
vination becomes a religious ad. Priests, as the
nifters of Heaven, pretend to deliver its oracles
men. They are the only soothsayers, augurs,
dmagicians, who profess the sacred and import-
tart of disclosing what is hid from other eyes. This depart
ut, among rude nations, who pay no venera- Inent be-

longs to their

n to any superintending power, and who have phbyfcian.
established rites or ministers of religion, their
riofity to discover what is future and unknown

'" See NOTE LXTI.

a o o ir is cherilhed by a different principle , and derii

IV. strength from another alliance. As the diseases

men, in the savage state, are (as has been alrea
obfcrved) like those of the animal creation, f
but extremely violent, their impatience underw
they susser, and solicitude for the recovery
health, soon inspired them with extraordina
reverence for such as pretended to understand
nature of their maladies , or to preserve th
from their sudden and fatal effects. These ignor
pretenders, however, were such utter strangers
the ftrutdure of the human frame, as to be equa
unacquainted with the causes of its disorders, a
the manner in which they will terminate. Super
tion, mingled frequently with some portion
craft, supplied what they wanted in science. Th
imputed the origin of diseases to fupernaturali
fluence, and prescribed or performed a variety
mysterious rites, which they gave out to be
power sufficient to remove the most dangero
and inveterate maladies. The credulity and lo
of the marvellous, natural to uninformed me
favored the deception , and prepared them to
the dupes of those impostors. Among favnge
their first physicians are a kind of conjurers
wizards, who boast that they know what is pa
and can foretel what is to come. Incantation
forccry, and mummerics of diverle kinds, noI
(trange than frivolous, are the means which th
employ to expel tlhe imaginary causes of malig

'1s; and relying upon the efficacy of these, n o K
ey predict with confidence what will be the fate iwV
their deluded patients. Thus superstition, in
earliest form, flowed from the solicitude of
an to be delivered from present distress , not
om his dread of evils awaiting him in a future
e,aand was originally ingrafted on medicine, not
l religion. One of the first, and most intelligent
torians of America, was struck with this alliance
etween the art of divination and that of phyfice
ong the people of Hispaniola '". But this was
t peculiar to them. The Alexis, the Pinyas, the
tmoins, or whatever was the distinguishing name
their diviners and charmers in other parts of
merica, were all the physicians of their refpedive
ibes, in the fame manner as the Buhitos of His-
niola. As their function led them to apply to
e human mind when enfeebled by sickness, and
they found it, in that season of dejection prone
be alarmed with imaginary fears, or amurfed
ith vain hopes, they easily induced it to rely
ith implicit confidence on the virtue of their
ells, and the certainty of their predictions ".
Whenever men acknowledge the reality of fu- Gradually
rnatural power and discernment in one instance, extends.
ey have a propensity to admit it in others. The

2 ' P. Melch. Hernandcz, Memorial de Chiriqui. Collet.
rig P;p. i. 5it Oviedo, lib. v. c i.

llerrera, dec. i. lib. iii c 4. Osborne, Col. ii.

l)Dumont , i. 169, &c. Clharlev. N. Fr. iii. 361.

I, &c. Lawson, N. Carol 214. Ribas, Triumph p. i..
et, 386. Dc la Pothcric, ii. ; &;c.

B o o ic Americans did not long suppose the efficacy

IV. conjuration to be confined to one subjed. The

had recourse to it in every situation of danger
distress. When the events of war were peculiar
difaiftrous, sl hen they met with unforeseen difa
pointments in hunting, when inundations or droug
threatened their crops with deftrutdon, they calle
upon their conjurers to begin their incantation
in order to discover the causes of those calarnitie
or to foretel what would be their issue 2'. Th
confidence in this delusive art gradually increase
and manifested itself in all the occurrences of li
XVhen involved in any difficulty, or about
enter upon any tranfadion of moment, eve
individual regularly consulted the forcerer, an
depended upon his inftrudions to extricate hi
from the former, as well as to direct his condu
in the latter. Even among the rudest tribes
America, superstition appears in this form, a
divination is an art in high esteem. Long befo
man had acquired such knowledge of a deity
inspires reverence, and leads to adoration, ,1
observe him stretching out a presumptuous hands
draw aside that veil with which providence kind
conceals its purposes from hun;an knowledge; ni
we find him laboring, with frultlefs anxiety,
penetrate into the mytferies of the divine adiLninill
tion. To discern, and to worflip a fuperintendli

"' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. . Dumont, i. t 7 . Fernand. 1
lac. de los Chiquit. p. 40. Lozano, 84. Margravc, 2

power,

ower, is an evidence of the enlargement and B o o Ks
aturity of the human underfianding; a vain desire Iv.
f prying into futurity, is the error of its infancy,
id a proof of its wcaknefs.
From this weakners proceeded likewise the faith
f the Americans in dreams, their observation of
mens, their attention to the chirping of birds,
nd the cries of animals, all which they suppose to
e indications of future events, and if any one
f these prognostics is deemed unfavorable, they
ftantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on
hich they are most eagerly bent'".
VIII. But if we would form a complete idea of Detached
e uncultivated nations of America, we tmuft not CURfto
ass unobserved some singular cufomss, which,
ough universal and charaderiftic, could not be
duced, with propriety, to any of the articles
to which I have divided myinquiry concerning
eir manners.
Among savages, in every part of the globe, the toveor
ve of dancing is a favorite palTion. As, during dancing"
great part of their time, they languish in a slate
inactivity and indolence, without any occupation
rouse or interest them, they delight univerflly
a pafime which calls forth the adtive powers
their nature into exercise. The Spaniards, when
cy first visited America, were astonished at the
ddnefs of the natives for dancing, and beheld

Carlev. N. Fr. iii. 262, ; l. Stadius, ar, de Pry,

I0o. Creuxii iift. Canad. 84. Techo, Hist. of Para.g
urch. Coll. vi. 37. )De la Potherie iii. 6,
VOL. 1. N

B o o I with wonder a people, cold and unanimated in mo

iv. of their other pursuits, kindle into life, and exe

themselves with ardor, as often as this favori
amusement recurred. Among them, indeed, dan
ing ought not to be denominated an anufemen
It is a serious and important occupation, whi
mingles in every occurrence of public or priva
life. If any intercourse be necessary between to
American tribes, the ambassadors of the on
approach in a solemn dance, and present t
calumet or emblem of peace, the sachems of t
other receive it with the fame ceremony 1".
war is denounced against an enemy, it is by
dance, exprelfive o\f the resentment which they fee
and of the vengeance which they meditate 1".
the wrath of their gods is to be appeafed,i
their beneficence to be celebrated; if they rejoicel
the birth of a child, or mourn the death of
friend "*, they have dances appropriated to eat
of these situations , and suited to the differe
sentiments with which they are then animated.
a person is indisposed, a dance is prescribed ast'
molt cffctual means of restoring him to healt
and if he himself cannot endure the fatigue of fu
an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs
in his name, as if the virtue of his activity coi
be transferred to his patient'.

26' De la Potherie, lli(.ii. 7,&Cc. Charlev. N.Fr. iii.
297. La Hontan. . 0oo. 137. Hennepin, Decou. 149,

" Charlev. N. Fr iii. 298. I,afitau, i. 523.
'' .loutel, 34. Gomaral, eill. Gen. c. 196.
26 Denys, Hlift. Nat. 189. Brickell, 372. '
Pothcrie, ii. 3 6.

All their dances are imitations of some adcion; B o
ad though the music by which they are regulated iv,
extremely simple and tirefore to the ear by
ts dull monotony, some of their dances appear
wonderfully expressive and animated. The war-
ance is, perhaps, the most striking. It is the
eprefentation of a complete American campaign.
he departure of the warriors from their village,
heir march into the enemy's country, the caution
ith which they encamp, the address with which
hey Ration some of their party in ambush, the
anner of surprising the enemy, the noise and
erocity of the combat, the scalping of those who
re slain, the seizing of prisoners, the triumphant
eturn of the conquerors, and the torture of the
icrims, are successively exhibited. The performers
nter with such enthusiastic ardor into their several
arts, their gestures, their countenance, their voice,
re so wild and so well adapted to their various
tuations, that Europeans can hardly believe it to
a mimic scene, or view it without emotions of
ar and horror ".
But however expressive some of the American
ances may be, there is one circumstance in them
markable, and connected with the character of
e race. The songs, the dances, the amusements
fother nations, expressive of the fentiinents which
nimate their hearts, are often adapted to display
excite that sensibility which mutually attaches

"° De la Potherie, ii. xI6. Charley. N. Fr. iil.
7. Lafitau, i. 523.

N 3,

B 0 o R the sexes. Among some people, such is the ard

.Iv. of this passion, that love is almost the sole objea

of feflivity and joy, and as rude nations are strange
to delicacy, and unaccustomed to disguise an
emotion of their minds, their dances are oft
extremely wanton and indecent. Such is
Calenda , of which the natives of Africa are
passionately fond "'; and such the feats of t
dancing girls, which the Asiatics contemplate wi
so much avidity of desire. But, among the Ame
cans, more cold and indifferent to their femal
from causes which I have already explained, i
passion of love mingles but little with their feftiva
and pastimes. Their songs and dances are most
folernn and martial, they are connected with so
of the serious and important affairs of life "', a
having no relation to love or gallantry, are feldI
common to the two sexes, but executed by
men and women apart'". If, on some occasion
the women are permitted to join in the feftiv
the character of the entertainment is still the fan
and no movement or geflure is expressive
rattachment, or encourages familiarity'".

2S7 Adanfon, Voy. to Senegal, p. iii. 287. Labal

Voyages, iv. 463. Sloane, Hist. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p.
,Fermin. Defcript. de Surin. i. p. 139.

"' Defcript. of N. France Osborne, Coll. ii. 81
Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 84.

'" Wafer's Account oflfthmus, &C. ,69. Lery, ap

Bry, iii. 177. Lozano, Hist. de Parag. i. r49. -Herre
dlec. 2. lib. vii. c. 8. dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See NOTE LX

a
7 Barrere, Fr. Equia p. g91.

An immoderate love of play, especially at games n o o r
f hazard, which seems to be natural to all people iv.
naccultomed to the occupations of regular indus. PaRion for
ry, is likewise universal among the Americans. gnangs
he fame causes, which so often prompt persons
n civilized life, who are at their ease, to have
course to this pastime, render it the delight of the
vage. The former are independent of labor, the
atter do not feel the neceflity of it; and as both
re unemployed, they run with transport to what.
ver is interesting enough to stir and to agitate
heir minds. Hence the Americans, who at other
imes are so indifferent, so phlegmatic, so silent,
id animated with so few desires, as soon as
hey engage in play become rapacious, impatient,
oify, and almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs,
heir domeflic utensils, their clothes, their arms,
re taked at the gaming-table, and when all is loft,
igh as their sense of independence is, in a wild.
motion of despair or of hope, they will often riflk
beir personal liberty upon a single caRt "'. Among
everal tribes, such gaming parties frequently recur,
nd become their most acceptable entertainment at
very great festival. Superstition, which is apt to
ake hold of those paflions which are molt vigorous,
equently lends its aid to confirm and strengthea
his favorite inclination. Their conjurers are ,
ccufomed to prescribe a solemn iatch at
lay, as one of the most efficacious methods of

"' Charlev. N. Fr. li. 6 . 318. Lafitau, ii. 3)8, &Q
ibas, Trium. 1 ;, Brickell, 3 5.

N 3

1 o O l appeasing their gods, or of restoring the tick to

Tv. health 27

and for From causes similar to those which render them
drinking, fond of play, the Americans are extremely addided

to drunkenness. It seems to have been one of the
firlt exertions of human ingenuity to discover sorn
composition of an intoxicating quality; and there
is hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute o
invention, as not to have succeeded in this fata
research. The molt barbarous of the America
tribes have been so unfortunate as to attain thi
art; and even those which are so deficient in
knowledge, as to be unacquainted with the method
of giving an inebriating strength to liquors by
fermentation, can accomplish the fame end byothe
means. The people of the islands, of North
America, and of California, used, for this purpose
the smoke of tobacco,.drawn up with a certai
inftrurent into the nostrils, the fumes of whic
ascending to the brain, they felt all the tranfpor
and frenzy of intoxication "'. In almost ever
other part of the New World, the natives pofeffei
the art of extracting an intoxicating liquor fro
maize or the manioc root, the fame substance
which they convert into bread. The operatio
by which they effect this, nearly resembles th
common one of brewing, but with this difference
that in place of yeft, they use a nauseous infuflo

"' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262.
"7 Oviedo, Hist, ap. Ramus iii. x ;, Venegas, i. 69
Naufrag de Cabeqa de Vaca, cap, 26. See NOTE LXI

fa certain quantity of maize or manioc chewed B o o
y their women. The saliva excites a vigorous iv.
rmentation, and in a few days the liquor becomes
tfor drinking. It is not disagreeable to the taste,
nd when swallowed in large quantities, is of an
toxicating quality '. This is the general bever-
e of the Americans, which they diflinguifh by
arious names, and for which they feel, such a
iolent and insatiable desire, as it is not easy
ither to conceive or describe. Among polished
ations, where a succession of various functions
nd amusements keeps the mind in continual
ccupation, the desire for strong drink is regulated,
a great measure, by the climate, and increases
rdiminifhes according to the variations of its.
mperature. In warm regions, the delicate and
nfible frame of the inhabitants does not require
e stimulation of fermented liquors. In colder
untries, tWe conflitution of the natives, more
bus and more sluggish, stands in need of generous
quors to quicken and animate it. But among
vages, the desire of something that is of power to
toxicate, is in every situation the fame. All the
eople of America , if we except some small tribes
car the Straits of Magellan, whether natives of the
rrid zone,or inhabitants of its nore temperate re-
ions, or placed by a harder fate in the severe climates
owards its northern or southern extremity, appear
o be equally under the dominion of this appetite'".

Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii. I X x. Lery, ibid. 17?.

7 (Guniilla, i. 2 7. Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, c 4
o0. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais, iv. 436

N 4

1 o o It Such a similarity of taste, among people in fuc

iv. different situations, must be ascribed to the influence

of some moral cause, an4 cannot be confidered a
the effect of any physical or constitutional want,
While engaged in war or in the chafe, the savage
is often in the most interesting situations, and al
the powers of his nature are routed to the inof
vigorous exertions. But those animating scenes are
fLicceeclcd by long intervals of repose, during
which the warrior meets with nothing that he deems
of sufficient dignity or importance to merit his
attention. He languishes and mopes in this season
of indolence. The posture of his body is an emblem
of the state of his mind. In one climate, cowering
over the fire in his cabin ; in another, stretched
under the slade of some tree, he doses away his
time in sleep, or in an unthinking joyless inacivity,
not far removed from it. As strong liquors awake
him from this torpid state, give a brisker motion
to his spirits, and enliven him more thoroughly
than either dancing or' gaming, his love of them
is excessive, A savage, when not engaged in
acion, is a pensive melancholy animal; but as
soon as he taftes, or has a profped of tafting, the
intoxicating draught, he becomes gay and frolick-
some"'. Whatever be the occaflon or pretext on
which the Americans arremble, the meeting always
terminates in a debauch, IMany of their feltivals

Fernande7, Miflion. de las Chiquet. ;5. Barlere, p. 20°
]lanco Conveir de Piritu, tr.

Molendez, Teforos Verdad. iii. 369.

ave no other object, and they welcome the u o o R
turn of them with transports of joy. As they Iv.
re not accustomed to restrain any appetite, they
t no bounds to this. The riot often continues
ithout intermission several days; and whatever
ay be the fatal effecs of their excess, they never
afe from drinking as long as one drop of
quor remains. The persons of greatest eminence,
e most distinguished warriors, and the chiefs
oft renowned for their wisdom, have no greater
ommand of themselves than the molf obscure
ember of the community. Their eagerness for
resent enjoyment renders them blind to its fatal
onfequences; and those very men, who, in other
tuations, seem to possess a force of mind more
an human, are in this instance inferior to children
foresight, as well as consideration, and mere
aves of brutal appetite2". When their passions,
turally strong, are heightened and inflamed by
ink, they are guilty of the most enormous
trages, and the festivity seldom concludes without
eds of violence, or bloodshed1'.
But, amidst this wild debauch, there is one
rcumftance remarkable; the women, in most of
e American tribes, are not permitted to partake
it"'. Their province is to prepare the liquor,
serve it about to the guests, and to take care
their husbands and friends, when their reason is

Ribas, 9. Ulloa, i. 1;8.

1 Letfr. Edif. ii. 178. Torquemada, Mund. Ind. ;. 3 3
'7: See NOTE LXV.

B o o I; Such a similarity of taste, among people in fucl

IV, different situations, muit be ascribed to the influenc

offome moral cause, an4 cannot be confidered a
the effedt of any physical or constitutional want
While engaged in war or in the chafe, the favag
is often in the most intercfting situations, and al
the powers of his nature are routed to the rmof
vigorous exertions. But those animating scenes ar
fucceelded by long intervals of repose, during
which the warrior meets with nothing that he deems
of sufficient dignity or importance to merit his
attention. He languishes and mopes in this feafor
of indolence. The posture of his body is an emblem
of the state of his mind. In one climate, cowering
over the fire in his cabin; in another, stretched
under the shade of some tree, he doses away his
time in sleep, or in an unthinking joyless inactivity,
not far removed from it. As strong liquors awake
him from this torpid state, give a brfker motion
to his spirits, and enliven him more thoroughly
than either dancing or' gaming, his love of them
is exceflive, A savage, when not engaged in
action, is a pensive melancholy animal; but as
soon as he taftes, or has a profped of tafting, the
intoxicating draught, he becomes gay and frolick-
some'7 . Whatever be the occasion or pretext on
which the Americans assemble, the meeting always
terminates in a debauch, Many of tieir festivals

Fernandez, Miflion. de Ins Chiquet. 35. Bartere, p. 2031
]lanco Convcr. do Piritu, 3r.

7 Mlelendez, Tcforos Verdad. ii. 369.

ave no other objec , and they welcome the B o o I
eturn of them with transports of joy. As they Iv.
re not accustomed to restrain any appetite, they
et no bounds to this. The iiot often continues
ithout intermission several days; and whatever
ay be the fatal effecs of their excess, they never
ease from drinking as long as one drop of
quor remains. The persons of greatest eminence,
he molt distinguished warriors, and the chiefs
oft renowned for their wisdom, have no greater
ommand of themselves than the molt obscure
ember of the community. Their eagerness for
resent enjoyment renders them blind to its fatal
onfequences; and those very men, who, in other
tuations, seem to possess a force of mind more
an human, are in this instance inferior to children
foresight, as well as consideration, and mere
aves of brutal appetite "7. When their passions,
aturally strong, are heightened and inflamed by
rink, they are guilty of the most enormous
utrages, and the festivity seldom concludes without
eeds of violence, or bloodhied 7.
But, amidst this wild debauch, there is one
ircumftance remarkable; the women, in molt of
eAmerican tribes, are not permitted to partake
it"'. Their province is to prepare the liquor,
serve it about to the guests, and to take care
their husbands and friends, when their reason is

" Ribas, 9. Ulloa, i. 1t8.
I" Lettr. Edif .
ii. 78. Torquemada, Mund. Ind. i. 313

Sec NOTE LXV.

n o o r( overpowered. This exclusion of t'e women from

Iv.. an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, maybe

justly confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and
as an additional evidence of that; contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The
people of North -America, when first discovered,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their interel
to supply them with spirituous liquors, drunkenness
soon became as universal among them as amon
their countrymen to the south; and their wome
having acquired this new taste, indulge it with
little decency and moderation as the men'"

Puttodeath It were endless to enumerate all the detacli
the agedand customs which have excited the wonder of traveller
iacurable..

in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly a
singular as any that has been mentioned. Wh
their parents and other relations become old, o
labor under any distemper which their flende
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove, th
Americans cut (hort their days with a violent hand
in order to be relieved from the burden of supporting
and tending them. This practice prevailed amon0
the ruder tribes in every part of the continent
from Hudson's Bay to the river De la Plata; an
however flocking it may be to those sentiment
of tenderness and attachment, which, in civilize'
life, we are apt to confider as congenial with 01
frame, the condition of man in the savage ftat

'0 Hutohinfon, Hist, of MaffTchuf. 469. Lafitau, ti.I2'
Sngard, X46.

ads and reconciles him to it. The fame hardships B o o Rt
d difficulty of procuring subsistence, which deter Iv.
vages, in some cafes, from rearing their children,
rompt them to destroy the aged and infirm. The
elining state of the one is as helplcfs as the
fancy of the other. The former are no less
nable than the latter to perform the functions
at belong to a warrior or hunter, or to endure
ofe various distresses in which savages are so
ften involved, by their own want of foresight
nd indultry, Their relations feel this , and,
capable of attending to the wants or weaknesses
others, their impatience under an additional
urden prompts them to extinguish thatlife which
ey find it difficult to fuflain. This is not regarded
a deed of cruelty, but as an ad of mercy. An
merican, broken with years and infirmities,
onfcious that he can no longer depend on the
idofthofe around him, places himself contentedly
his grave; and it is by the hands of his children
rnearer relations that the thong is pulled, or
e blow inflicted, which releases him for ever
om the sorrows of life'".
IX. After contemplating the rude American Generalefi.
ibes in such various lights, after taking a view mwte octhek
ftheir customs and manners from so many dif-
erent stations, nothing remains but to form a
cneral estimate of their charadcer, compared with
,at of more polished nations. A human being,

Caftani, Hiflor. de N. Reino de Gran. p. 300. PiTo,
6, Ellis, Voy. s91. Gumilla, i. 3 3.

i o o as he comes originally from the hand of nature, i

IV. every where the fame. At his first appearance i

the state of infancy, whether it be among the rudel
savages, or in the most civilized nation, we ca
discern no quality which marks any diftindion o
superiority. The capacity of improvement seem
to be the fame; and the talents he may afterward
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendere
capable of exercising, depend, in a great meafur
upon the state of society in which he is placed
To this state his mind naturally accommodate
itself, and from it receives discipline and cultur(
In proportion to the wants which it accustoms
human being to feel, and the funcions in whic!
these engage him, his intellectual powers are calle
forth. According to the connexions which.
establishes between him and the reft of his fpi
cies, the affedions of his heart are exerted. Iti
only by attending to this great principle, that sv
can discover what is the character of man in ever
different period of his progress.

Intelleaual If we apply it to savage life, and measure t}
powers. attainments of the human mind in that state b

this standard, we fllall find, according to an ol
servation which I have already made, that thei
telledual powers of man must be extremely limit(
in their operations. They are confined within tl
narrow sphere of what he deems necessary for fu
plying his own wants. Whatever has not so"
relation to there, neither attracts his'attentior
nor is the object of his inquiries. But howev
narrow the bounds may be within which t

nowledge of a savage is circumscribed , he B o o K
offeffes thoroughly that small portion which he Iv.
as attained. It was not communicated to him by
rmal inftrution; he does not attend to it as a
atter of mere speculation and curiosity; it is the
iult of his own observation, the fruit of his own
xperience, and accommodated to his condition
d exigencies. While employed in the acdive
cupations of war or of hunting , he often finds
mfelf in difficult and perilous situations, from
hich the efforts of his own sagacity muff extricate
m. He is frequently engaged in measures, where
very fep depends upon his own ability to decide,
here he must rely solely upon his own penetra-
on to discern the dangers to which he is exposed,
nd upon his own wisdom in providing against
hem. In consequence of this, he feels the know-
dge which he possesses, and the efforts which
e makes, and either in deliberation or action
ts on himself alone.
As the talents of individuals are exercised and Politicaltao
proved by such exertions, much political wis- le'nt
m is said to be displayed in conducting the
irs of their small communities. The council of
Id men in an American tribe, deliberating upon
tsinterefts, and determining with refpedt to peace
war, has been compared to the senate in more
Olifhed republics. The proceedings of the for-
er, we are told, are often no less formal and fa-
aious than those of the latter. Great political
ifdom is exhibited in pondering the various
easures proposed, and in balancing their probable

I o o Iz advantages, against the evils of which they ma

lv. be produdive. Much address and eloquence ai

employed by the leaders,'who aspire at acquirin
such confidence with their countrymen, as to ha
an ascendant in those assemblies "'. But, amon
savage tribes, the field for displaying politic
talents cannot be extensive. Where the idea
private property is incomplete, and no crimin
jurifdidion is eflablifhed, there is hardly any ftn,
tion of internal government to exercise. WVhe
there is no commerce, and scarcely any intercour
among separate tribes ; where enmity is implacabl
and hostilities are carried on alrhoft without inte
mission; there will be few points of public concer
to adjust with their neighbours; and that depar
ment of their affairs which may be denominate
foreign, callnot be so intricate as to requir
any refined policy in condudting it. Wher
individuals are so thoughtless and improvider
as seldom to take effectual precautions for fel
prefervatiol , it is vain to expedt that publi
measures and deliberations will be regulated b
the contemplation of remote events. It is tl
genius of savages to ad from the impulse
present paflion. They have neither forefiglt no
temper to form complicated arrangements tii]
refped to their futilre condud. The confultatioi
of the A tnericans, indeed, are so fiequent, 11
their negociations are so anyy '", and so lor

"' Charlev. N. Fr, iii. 269, &c.
"' See NOTE LXVI.

rotracted, as to give their proceedings an extra- B o o 0l
rdinary aspet of wisdom. But this is not owing Iv.
o mnch to the depth of their schemes, as to the
o1ldefs and phlegm of their temper, which renders
hem flow in determining '+. If we except the
elebrated league, that united the Five Nations in
anada into a federal republic, which fiall be
onfidered in its proper place, we can discern
ew such traces of political wisdom, among the
tde American tribes , as discover any great degree
foresight or extent of intellectual abilities. Even
mong them, we lhall find public meaflures more
requently directed by the impetuous ferocity of
heir youth, than regulated by the experience and
ifdom of their old men.
As the condition of man in the savage state is Degree of
nfavorable to the progress of the underRianding, affecio0'
has a tendency likewise, in some refpets, to
ieck the exercise of affetion , and to render the
cart contraced. The itrongeft feeling in the mind
f a savage is a sense of his own independence.
e has sacrificed so small a portion of his natural
iberty by becoming a member of society, that he
emains, in a g great egree, the sole master of his
Wni acions "'.' He often takes his resolutions
onlc, without consulting, or feeling any connec-
iOl with the persons aroui(d him. In many of his
Operations, he stands as inuch detached from the
tll of his species , as if he had sorned no union

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 27f.
"' :ern;indez, MlliJn. de los Chiquit. 3.

B o o K with them. Conscious how little he depends upoi

IV. other men, he is apt to view them with a carelel

indiffere.nce. Even the force of his mind contri
butes to increase this unconcern, and as he look
not beyond himself in' deliberating with refpei
to the part which he should ad, his solicitude aboi
the consequences of it seldom extends farthei
He pursues his own career, and indulges his ow
fancy, without inquiring or regarding wheth
what he does be agreeable or offensive to others
whether they may derive benefit, or receive bu
from it. Hence the ungovernable caprice of savage
their impatience under any species of restraint
their inability to suppress or moderate any inclin
tion, the scorn or neglect with which they receiv
advice, their high estimation of themselves, an
their contempt of other men. Among them, th
pride of independence produces almost the fam
effeds with intereftednefs in a more advanced fat
of society, it refers every thing to a man himfell
it leads him to be indifferent about the manner
which his adtions may assed other men , anj
renders the gratification of his own willies thi
measure and end of condut.

Hardnersof To the fame cause may be imputed the hardnel
heart. of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all favag

nations. Their minds, roused only by fironl
emotions, are little fnfceptible of gentle, delicate
or tender affections `". Their union is so incom
plete, that each individual adts as if he retainel

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309

all

Ihis natural rights entire and undiminished. If E o O
favor is conferred upon him, or any beneficial Iv.
rvice is performed on his account, he receives
with much fatisfation, because it contributes
his enjoyment; but this sentiment extends not
yond himself, it excites no sense of obligation,
neither feels gratitude, nor thinks of making
yreturn '7 Even among persons the most closely
nedted, the exchange of those good offices
hich strengthen attachment, mollify the heart,
d sweeten the intercourse of life, is not frequent.
he high ideas of independence among the
mericans nourish a fullen reserve, which keeps
em at a distance from each other. The nearest
ations are mutually afraid to make any demand,
to solicit any service "", left it flould be confi.
red by the other as imposing a burden, or
ing a restraint upon his will.
Ihave already remarked the influence of this Inrenfbility.
d unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with
peet to the connexion between hufbalnd and
ie, as well as that between parents and children.
effects are no less conspicuous, in the perform-
ce of those mutual offices of tenderness which

infirmities of our nature frequently exad.
ong some tribes, when any of their number
seized with any vinlent disease , they are
ernlly abandoned by all around them, who,
relefs of their recovery, fly in the utmost

,) Oviedo, Hilt. lib. xvi. c. 2, See NOTE LXVII.

De la Pothlrie, iii. aS.
VOL. II. 0

uo o o consternation from the supposed danger of infe

Iv. tion ". But even where they are not thus deferte

the cold indifference with which they are attende
can afford them little consolation. No look
sympathy, no soothing expressions, no officio
services, contribute to alleviate the distress of th
sufferers , or to make them forget what the
endure "°. Their nearest relations will often refu
to submit to the smallest inconveniency , or t
part with the least trifle, however much it ma
tend to their accommodation or relief "'. So Jitd
is the breast of a savage susceptible of tho
Sentiments which prompt men to that feelin
attention which mitigates the calamities of huma
life, that, in some provinces of America, t
Spaniards have found it necessary to inforce td
common duties of humanity by positive laws
and to oblige hulbands and wives, parents an
children, under severe penalties, to take care
each other during their sickness '. The fan
harshness of temper is still more confpicuousi
their treatment of the animal creation. Prior
their intercourse with the people of Europe,
North-Americans had some tame dogs, wlic
accompanied them in their hunting-excurfion
and served them with all the ardor and fidelit

" Lettre de P. Cataneo, ap. Muratori, Chriftiall, i. °0

Tertre, ii. . o. Lozano, ioo. Herrcra, dec. 4. lib. viii. c.
dec. ;. lib. iv. c. z. Falkner's Dcecript. of Patagonia, 9

290 Cumilla, i. ;29. Lozano, ioo.
2I Garcia, Origen, &c.. 9o. errera, dec 4. lib.viii. c
:02 Cogulludo, Hilt. de Yucatan, p. .oo.

culiar to the species. But, instead of that fond B o o It
tachment which the hunter naturally feels towards Iv.
ofe useful companions of his toils, they requite
eir services with neglet, seldom feed, and never
res them `". In other provinces, the Americans
rse become acquainted with the domestic animals
Europe, and avail themselves of their service;
itt is universally observed that they always
eat them harfily "', and never employ any
ethod either for breaking or managing them,
t force and cruelty. In every part of the
portment of man in his savage state, whether
wards his equals of the human species, or
wards the animals below him, we recognise the
me charadter, and trace the operations of a mind
tent on its own gratifications, and regulated by
own caprice, with little attention or sensibility
the sentiments and feelings of the beings around
In.
After explaining how unfavorable the savage Taciturnity.
teis to the cultivation of the undcrftanding, and
the improvement of the heart, I should not
vethought it necessary to mention what may be
emed its lesser defets, if the charader of na-
ns, as well as of individuals, were not often more
indtly marked by circumntances apparently tri-
l, than by those of greater moment. A fa-
e, frequently placed in situations of danger and
refs, depending on himself alone, and wrapt

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. ri9. 3;7,
Ulloa, Notic. Aimerican. 312.

0

B o O 1 up in his own thoughts and schemes, is a ferio0

IV. melancholy animal. His attention to others j

finall. The range of his own ideas is narro
Hence that taciturnity which is so d(ifgulting to n
accustomed to the open intercourse of social co
verfation. \When they are not engaged in adiou
the Americans often fit whole days in one pofur
without opening their lips '"'. When they gofort
to war, or to the chafe, they usually march in alin
at some distance from one another, and withou
exchanging a word. The fame profound fitence
observed when they row together in a canoe"
It is only when they are animated by intoxicati,
liquors, or roused by the jollity of the feftivalan
dance , that they become gay and converfible.
Cunning. To the fame causes may be imputed the

fined cunning with which they form and execul
their schemes. Men, who are not habituated to
liberal communication of their own sentiments an
-wifies, are apt to be so difliruftfnl, as to plac
little confidence in others , and to have recourfet
an insidious craft in accomplifl)ing their own pu
poses. In civilized life, those persons, who,b
their situation, have but a few objeds of purfil
on which their minds incessantly dwell, are no
remarkable for low artifice in carrying on tle
little projeds. Among favagcs, whose views a
equally confined , and their attention no less Ilcf
vcring, thole circumfiances must operate lill o01

Vy Voyagec de louiUtCer, 102.
Clhailcev. iii. 340.

werfully, and gradually accustom them to a dif- B o o
einluous flubtilty in all their tranfaftions. '1 he IV.
ce of this is increased by habits which they ac-
ire in carrying on the two most interesting ope-
tions wherein they are engaged. ith th em
r is a fyflem of craft, in which they trust for
ccefs to firatagem more than to open force, and
ve their invention continually on the firetch to
cuinvent and surprise their enemies. As hunt-
,it is their constant object to ensnare, in order
t they may deifroy. Accordingly, art and cun-
g have been universally observed as distinguish-
charadtcriftics of all savages. The people of
e rude tribes of America are remarkable for their
fice and duplicity. Impenetrably secret in form-
their measures, they pursue them with a patient
deviating attention, and there is no refinement of
limulation which they cannot employ, in order to
fre filccefs. The natives of Peru were engaged
ovc thirty years, in concerting the plan of that
urrcdion which took place under the vice-royalty
the marquis de Villa-Garcia; and though it was
mmunicated to a great number of persons in
diffeirent ranks , no indication of it ever tranf-
ed during that long period ; no man betrayed his
I, or by an unguarded look, or rash word,
vc rife to any fulpicion of what was intended "7
i (lifflmulation and craft of individuals is no
remarkable than that of nations. WVhen set
o01 deceiving, they wrap themselves up so arti.

'Voyage de Ullon, ii. 309.

03

i o o I ficially, that it is impoflible to penetrate into the

IV. intentions, or to detect their designs"'.
Virtues. But if there be defecs or vices peculiar to th

savage fate, there are likewise virtues which
inspires, and good qualities, to the exercise

Independent which it is friendly. The bonds of society fit
spirit. loose upon the members of the more rude Am

rican tribes, that they hardly feel any reftrai
Hence the spirit of independence, which is
pride of a savage, and which he confiders as
unalienable prerogative of man. Incapable ofc
trol, and disdaining to acknowledge any fuperi
his mind, though limited in its powers, and erri
in many of its pursuits, acquires such elevati
by the consciousness of its own freedom, that
ads on some occasions with aflonifling force,
perseverance, and dignity.
Fortitude. As independence nourishes this high fpi

among savages, the perpetual wars in which th
are engaged call it forth into adion. Such lo
intervals of tranquillity as are frequent in polis
societies, are unknown in the savage state. Th
enmities as-I have observed, are implacable ai
immortal. The valor of the young men is nev
allowed to ruff in inaction. The hatchet is alwa
in their hand, either for attack or defence. Ev
in their hunting-excurfions, they must be on th
guard against surprise from the hostile tribes,
which they are surrounded. Accustomed to cl
tinual alarms, they grow familiar with dal1g

Gumilla, i. x62. Charlev. iii. xog.

ourage becomes a habitual virtue, resulting na- B o o R
urally from their situation, and strengthened by Iv.
onlant exertions. The mode of displaying forti-
ude may not be the fame in small and rude cotn-
nnities, as in more powerful and civilized states.
heir system of war, and standard of valor, may
e formed upon different principles, but in no situ-
tion does the human mind rife more superior to
hefeufe of danger, or the dread of death, than in
ts most simple and uncultivated state.
Another virtue remarkable among savages, is Attachment
ttachment to the community of which they are totheir

X, =-, . ..............r..... . com m uaity.

embers. From the nature of their political union,
ne might expect this tie to be extremely feeble.
utthere are circumfrances which render the in-
uence, even of their Joofe mode of association,
ery powerful. The American tribes are small;
ombined against their neighbours, in prosecution
f ancient enmities, or in avenging recent injuries,
heir interests and operations are neither numerous
or complex. These are objeds, which the un-
ultivated understanding of a savage can compre-
end. His heart is capable of forming connexions,
which are so little diffused. He assents with warmth
o public measures, dicated by pafions similar
o those which direct his own conduct. Hence
he ardor with which individuals undertake the most
erilous service, when the community deems it
eceffTry. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted an-
ipathly to the public enemies. Hence their zeal
or the honor of their tribe, and that love of their
COuntry, which prompts them to brave danger

04

n O O If that it may triumph, and to endure the mot ex.

Iv. quifite torments, without a groan, that it may

not be disgraced.

Satisfa tion Thus, in every situation where a human being
with thri ca be

b placed, even the most unfavorable, there

own condi-
tion. are virtues which peculiarly belong to it; there

are affections which it calls forth; there is a species
of happilefs which it yields. Nature, with mo0
beneficent intention, conciliates and forms the
mind to its condition; the ideas and wiflles of
man extend not beyond that state of society to
which he is habituated. What it presents as ob.
jets of contemplation or enjoyment, fills and fa.
tisfies his mind, and he can hardly conceive any
other mode of life to be pleasant, or even to.
lerable. The Tartar, accustomed to roam over
extensive plains, and to subsist on the produ of
his herds, imprecates upon his enemy, as the
greatell of all curses, that he may be condemned
to reside in one place, and to be nourifled with
the top of a weed. The rude Americans, fondof
their own pursuits, and satisfied with their own
lot, are equally unable to comprehend the inten.
titn or utility of the various accommodations,
which, in more polished focicty, are deemedeffen.
tial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own situation, or viewing that of men in
a more improved (late with admiration or envyi
they legard tlemfelves as the flandard of excel.
lence, as beings the best entitled, as well as the
mofl perfectly qualified, to enjoy real happinfs
Unaccuflomed to any restraint upon their will 0o

eir ations, they behold with amazement the in- B o o K
luality of rank, and the flbordination which Iv.
ke place in civilized life, and confider the volun-
ry fubmiflion of one man to another, as a renun-
ation, no less base than unaccountable, of the
rt diflindion of humanity. Void of foresight, as
ell as free from care themselves, and delighted
ith that state of indolent security, they wonder
the anxious precautions, the unceasing indultry,
d complicated arrangements of Europeans, in
narding again{t distant evils, or providing for
ture wants; and they often exclaim against their
epofterous folly, in thus multiplying the troubles,
d increasing the labor of life ". This preference
their own manners is conspicuous on every oc-
sion. Even the names, by which the various
ations wish to be diffinguiflhed, are assumed from
is idea of their own pre-eminence. The appel-
tion which the Iroquois give to themselves is,

Chief of' men20. Caraibe, the original name of
efierce inhabitants of the Windward Islands,,
gifies the woarlike people l . The Cherokee, from
idea of their own fuiperiority, call the Euro-
ans jNothitngs, or the accursed race, and assume
themselves the name of the beloved people'".
The fame principle regulated the notions of the
ther Americans concerning the Europeans; for
though, at first, they were filled with astonish.

Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 30o. Lahontan, ii. 97.
'Colde, i. 3. '"' Rochefort, Hilt. des Antilles, 45s.
Adlir, I-lift. of .mer. Indians, p. 32.

B o o I ment at their arts, and with dread of their power,

iv. they soon came to abate their estimation of men,

whose maxims of life were so different from thei
own. Hence they called them the froth of the
sea, men without father or mother. They fu
posed, that either they had no country of thei
own, and therefore invaded that which belonge
to others 3"'; or that, being deflitute of the nece
saries of life at home, they were obliged to roa
over the ocean, in order to rob such as were mo
amply provided.

Men, thus satisfied with their condition, arefa

from any inclination to relinquilh their own la
bits, or to adopt those of civilized life. Th
transition is too violent to be suddenly made
Even where endeavours have been used to wean
savage from his own customs, and to render th
accommodations of polillied society familiar t
him; even where he has been allowed to taR
of those pleasures, and has been honored wit
those diftindions, which are the chief objects 0
our desire, he droops and languishes under ther
firaint of laws and forms, he seizes the first oppo
tunity of breaking loose from them, and return
with transport to the forest or the wild, where h
can enjoy a careless and uncontroled freedom'

Thus I have finifled a laborious delineation 0

the charater and manners of the uncivilized tribe
Scattered over the vast continent of America. I

"' Benzon. Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2r.

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 322.

is, I aspire not at rivalling the great malters who B o o K
ave painted and adorned savage life, either in IV.
oldncfs of design, or in the glow and beauty of
eir coloring. 1 am satisfied with the more humble
erit of having persisted with patient industry,
viewing my subject in many various lights, and
collecting from the most accurate observers such
etached, and often minute features, as might
nable me to exhibit a portrait that resembles the
riginal.

Before I close this part of my work, one General ca,.
bfervation more is necessary, in order to justify tionwith

avsrmdo tpre respect to

he conclusions which I have formed, or tq prevent this inquiry.
e mifiakes into which such as examine them
ay fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a
nuntry so widely extended as America, great
ttention should be paid to the diversity of climates
nder which they are placed. The influence of
is I have pointed out with refped to several
portant particulars, which have been the objet
research; but even where it has not been
entioned, it ought not to be overlooked. The
rovinces of America are of such different tempera-
ent, that this alone is sufficient to conflitute a
ifindcion between their inhabitants. In every
art of the earth where man exilfs, the power of
limate operates, with decisive influence, upon
iis condition and character. In those countries
hich approach near to the extremes of heat or
od, this influence is so conspicuous as to firike
very eye. Whether we confider man merely as
1" animal, or as being endowed with rational

n o o K powers which fit him for ativity and fpeculatio

Iv. we shall find that he has uniformly attained th

greatest perfection of which his nature is capabl
in the temperate regions of the globe. There hi
constitution is most vigorous , his organs mo
acute, and his form most beautiful. There, too
he possesses a superior extent of capacity, greate
fertility of imagination, more enterprising courag
and a sensibility of heart which gives birth
paflions, not only ardent, but persevering. I
this favorite situation he has displayed the utmo
efforts of his genius, in literature, in policy,
commerce, in war, and in all the arts whic
improve or embellish life 'o.

This powerful operation of climate is felt mo

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greate
effects than in societies more improved. The talent
of civilized men are continually exerted in rende
ing their own condition more comfortable; an
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, i1
a great measure, supply the defecs, and guarl
against the inconveniences of any climate. Bul
the' improvident savage is affected by every cir,
cumftance peculiar to his situation. He takes no
precaution either to mitigate or to improve it
Like a plant, or an animal, he is formed by thl
climate under which he is placed, and feels thb
full force of its influence.

In surveying the rude nations of America, thi

°"' Dr. Fcrgufon's Essay on the His. of Civil Socicty, pIt
iii. c. 1.

atural diftindcion between the inhabitants of the B o o
,mperate and torrid zones is very remarkable. Iv.
hey may, accordingly, be divided into two
reat classes. The one comprehends all the North-
mericans, from the river St. Laurence to the
ulf of Mexico, together with the people of Chili,
d a few small tribes towards the extremity of
e southern continent. To the other belong all
e inhabitants of the ifiands, and those fettled in
e various provinces which extend from the
hmus of Darien almost to the southern confines
Brasil, along the east fide of the Andes. In the
rmer, which comprehends all the regions of the
nperate zone that in America are inhabited, the
uman species appears manifestly to be more
erfed. The natives are more robust, more active,
ore intelligent, and more courageous. They
ofefs, in the most eminent degree, that force of
ind, and love of independence, which I have
ointed out as the chief virtues of man in his
vage state. They have defended their liberty
ith persevering fortitude against the Europeans,
ho subdued the other rude nations of America
ith the greatest cafe. The natives of the temperate
nc are the only people in the New WVorld who
e indebted for their freedom to their own valor.
he North-Americans, though long clcompanfed
three formidable European powers, still retain
rt of their original poffelrions, and continue to
ift as independent nations5. The people of Clili,
1ugh early invaded , till maintain a gallant
'ntcft with the Spaniards, and have set bounds

Bl o o K powers which fit him for aCtivity and speculation

Iv. we shall find that he has uniformly attained th

greatest perfection of which his nature is capable
in the temperate regions of the globe. There his
constitution is most vigorous , his organs mo
acute, and his form most beautiful. There, too
he possesses a superior extent of capacity, greate
fertility of imagination, more enterprising courage
and a sensibility of heart which gives birth to
paflions, not only ardent, but persevering. I
this favorite situation he has displayed the utrno
efforts of his genius, in literature, in policy,
commerce, in war, and in all the arts whic
improve or embellish life'"'

This powerful operation of climate is felt mo

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greate
effects than in societies more improved. The talent
of civilized men are continually exerted in render
ing their own condition more comfortable; an
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can,
a great measure, supply the defedts, and guar
against the inconveniences of any climate. Bui
the improvident savage is affected by every cir
cumftance peculiar to his situation. He 'takes nc
precaution either to mitigate or to improve it
Like a plant, or an animal, he is formed by thi
climate under which he is placed, and feels thi
full force of its influence.

In surveying the rude nations of America, thi

'" Dr. Fcrgufon's Essay on the Hilt. of Civil Socict-, pa
iii. c. i.

atural diftindcion between the inhabitants of the B O O
enperate and torrid zones is very remarkable. v
hey may, accordingly, be divided into two
reat classes. The one comprehends all the North-
mericans, from the river St. Laurence to the
Iif of Mexico, together with the people of Chili,
nd a few small tribes towards the extremity of
e southern continent. To the other belong all
e inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in
e various provinces which extend from the
hmus of Darien almost to the southern confines
Brasil, along the east fide of the Andes. In the
rmer, which comprehends all the regions of the
niperate zone that in America are inhabited, the
iiman species appears manifestly to be more
erfed. The natives are more robust, more active,
ore intelligent, and more courageous. They
ffefs, in the most eminent degree, that force of
Md, and love of independence, which I have
1inted out as the chief virtues of man in his
vage state. They have defended their liberty
ith persevering fortitude against the Europeans,
ho subdued the other rude nations of America
ith the greatest ease. The natives of the temperate
ne are the only people in the New World who
e indebted for their freedom to their own valor.
he North-Americans, though long encompalfed
three formidable European powers, still retain
rt of their original poffellions, and continue to
ift as independent nations. The people of Chili,
ough early invaded , flill maintain a gallant
ntclt with the Spaniards, and have set bounds

B o o K to their encroachments; whereas, in the warme

Iv. regions, men are more feeble in their frame, le

vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of a gentl
but dastardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure, an
more funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is in th
torrid zone that the Europeans have most cor
pletely established their dominion over America
the most fertile and desirable provinces in it ar
fubjeted to their yoke; and if several tribes ther
still enjoy independence, it is either because the
have never been attacked by an enemy alread
satiated with conquest, and possessed of large
territories than he was able to occupy, or becau
they had been saved from oppression by thei
remote and inaccessible situation.

Conspicuous as this diftintion may appea

between the inhabitants of those different regions
it is not, however, universal. Moral and politica
causes, as I have formerly observed, assec tb
disposition and characer of individuals as wella
nations, still more powerfully than the influenc
of climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes
in various parts of the torrid zone, possessed ol
courage, high spirit, and the love of independence,
in a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little acquaintec
with the history of those people, to be ablet
trace the several circumstances in their progref
and situation, to which they are indebted for thi
remarkable pre.eminence. The fact, neverthelefs,i
certain. As early as the first voyage of Columbu!
he received information that several of the infand

ere inhabited by the Caribbces, a fierce race of B o o t:
en, nowise resembling their feeble and timid Iv.
eighbours. In his second expedition to the New
rorld, he found this information to be just, and
as himself a witness of their intrepid valor '30.
he fame characer they have maintained invari-
ly in all subsequent contests with the people of
urope ; and, even in our own times, we have
en them make a gallant stand in defence of the
t territory which the rapacity of their invaders
ad left in their poffeflion "'. Some nations in
rafil were no less eminent for vigor of mind, and
ravery in war "09. The people of the isthmus of
arien boldly met the Spaniards in the field, and
quently repelled those formidable invaders '.
ther instances might be produced. It is not by
tending to any tingle cause or principle, how
owerful and extensive soever its influence may
pear, that we can explain the acions, or account
r the character, of men. Even the law of climate,
ore universal, perhaps, in its operation than
y that affects the human species, cannot be
plied, in judging of theii conduct, without
any exceptions.

30 Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. See NOTE LXVIII.
3.7 Rochefort, Hist. des Antilles, 5 3 i.
'3 See NOTE LXIX.

oLerv, ap. de Bry, iii. 207, &c.
0 llerera, dec. i. lib. x. c. i 5, &c.; dec. 2. passim.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V.

THE
H IS TO R Y

F
ME R I C A.

BOOK V.

VHEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B o o K
earmament defined to attempt the conquest of v.
at rich country which he had discovered, almost 1i8g

No l'Ti

r * i Preparations

mplete. Not only ambition, but avarice, had of Velarquei
ed Velasquez to halten his preparations; and Forinvading
ving such a profped of gratifying both, he had New Spain.
vanccd considerable funms out of his private
rtune towards defraying the expense. At the'
me time, he exerted his influence as governor,
engaging the molt diftinguiflied persons in the
lony to undertake the service'. At a time when
e[pirit of the Spanifi nation was adventurous to
cess, a number of soldiers, eager to embark in
y daring enterprise, soon appeared. But it was
tso easy to find a person qualified to take the
mmand in an expedition of so much importance;
d the charader of Velasquez, who had the right
nomination, greatly increased the difficulty of

'See NOTE LXX.
VOL. II. P

B o o x the choice. Though of most aspiring ambition, and

v. not deflitute of talents for government, he poffeffe
15is. neither such courage, nor such vigor and acivity

of mind, as to undertake in person the conduct
of the armament which he was preparing. In this
embarrassing situation, he formed the chimeric
fcherne, not only of achieving great exploits b
a deputy, but of securing to himself the glory o
conquests which were to be made by another.
the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed a
reconciling contradicions. He was solicitous
chufe a commander of intrepid resolution, and
superior abilities, because he knew these to b
requisite in order to ensure success; but, at th
fame time, from the jealousy natural to litt
minds, he wifled this person to be of a spirit
tame and obsequious, as to be entirely depende
on his will. But when he came to apply tho
ideas in forming an opinion concerning the fever
officers who occurred to his thoughts as worth
of being intrusted with the command, he soo
perceived that it was impoflible to find such incof
patible qualities united in one character. Such a
were distinguished for courage and talents ver
too high-fpirited to be pallive instruments in hi
hand. Those who appeared more gentle and tra
able, were deftitutc of capacity, and unequal
the charge. 'his augmented his perplexity a
his fears. He deliberated long, and with mu
folicitudc, al d was still wavering in his choicc
wvhen Am;ador de Lares , the royal treasurer ii
Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own fccretary, tl

vo persons in whom he chiefly confided, were n a o x
ncouraged by this irresolution to propose a new v.
:mdidate, and they supported their recommenda- sl8-
ion with such afiduity and address, that, no less
tally for Velasquez than happily for their coun-
, ic proved successful '.
The man whom they pointed out to him was He appoints
ernando Cortes. He was born at MVedellin, a Cortes com.
all town in Estremadura, in the year one thou- a
ndfour hundred and eighty-five, and descended
om a family of noble blood, but of very mode-
te fortune. Being originally destined by his
arents to the study of law, as the most likely
ethod of bettering his condition, he was sent
rly to the university of Salamanca, where he
bibed some tincture of learning. But he was soon
ifgfuted with al academic life, which did not
it his ardent and refllefs genius, and retired to
edellin, where he gave himself up entirely to
ive sports and martial exercises. At this period
life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing, and
dissipated, that his father was glad to comply
ith his inclirtion , and fend him abroad as an
venturer in arms. There were in that age two
infpicuous theatres, on which filch of the Spanish
uth as courted military glory might display their
lor; one in Italy, under the command of the
re;it Captain ; the other in the New World.
ortes preferred the former, but was prevented

B. Dia7. .

c. 19. Gomara, Chron. c. 7. Herrera, dec, 2.
i ii . C .

P 3

B o i by indisposition from embarking with a reinfor

v. ment of troops sent to Naples. Upon this dif
isi8. pointment he turned his views towards Americ

whither he was allured by the profpedt of t
advantages which he might derive from the patro
age of Ovando ', the governor of Hispaniola, wv
was his kinsman. When he landed at St. Doming
in one thousand five hundred and four, his receptio
was such as equalled his most sanguine hopes, a
he was employed by the governor in feve
honorable and lucrative fiations. These, howeve
did not satisfy his ambition; and in the year 0
thousand five hundred and eleven, he obtain
permiflion to accompany Diego Velasquez in
expedition to Cuba. In this service he diftinguifl
himself so much , that, notwithfanding some viole
contests with Velasquez, occasioned by triv
events, unworthy of remembrance, he was
length taken into favor, and received an am
concession of lands and of Indians, the recompen
usually bestowed upon adventurers in the N
World .

Though Cortes had not hitherto ated in hi

command, he had displayed such qualities in fever
scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised univeri
expectation , and turned the eyes of his countrymi
towards him , as one capable of performing gre
things. The turbulence of youth, as soon as
found objects and occupations suited to the ard

' See NOTE LXXI.

Gomara, Chron. c. , 2, 3.

his mind, gradually subsided, and fettled into n o o it
habit of regular indefatigable adivity. The v
petuofity of his temper, when he came to atd I'8'
ith his equals , insensibly abated, by being kept
der refiraint, and mellowed into a cordial fol-
erly frankness. These qualities were accompanied
ith calm prudence in concerting his schemes,
ith persevering vigor in executing them, and-
ith what is peculiar to superior genius, the art
gaining the confidence and governing the minds
men. To all which were added the inferior
complilhments that firike the vulgar, and comr.
and their refped ; a graceful person, a winning
ecl , extraordinary address in martial exercises,
da constitution of such vigor as -to be capable
enduring any fatigue.
As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez
his two confidents, he flattered himself that 'he
d at length found what he had hitherto fought
vain, a man with talents for command, but
t an objec of jealousy. Neither the rank nor
e fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such
at he could aspire at independence. He had
afon to believe , that by his own readiness to
ury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as his
berality in conferring several recent favors, he
ad already gained the good -will of Cortes , and
pcd , by this new and uniexpeted mark of
onihdcnce, that he might attach him for ever to
is interef.

Cortes , receiving his commiflion with the Soonbe.
armneft xpreflions of refped and gratitude to the comes ia.

P 3

B o o i governor, immediately ereded his standard befo

v. his own house , appeared in a military dress, an
o5m8. assumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. H

lons of him.
OUober:3. utmost influence and adcivity were exerted in pe

fuading many of his friends to engage in the fe
vice, and in urging forward the preparations f
the voyage. All his own funds , together wi
what money he could raise by mortgaging hi
lands and Indians, were expended in purchain
military stores and provisions, or in supplying th
wants of such of his officers as were unable t
equip themselves in a manner suited to their rank'
Inoffensive , and even laudable as this condu
was, his disappointed competitors were maliciou
eii6ugh to give it a turn to his disadvantage. Th
represented him as aiming already, with litt
disguise, at establishing an independent autbori
over his troops, and endeavouring to secure th
refped or love by his ostentatious and intereRe
liberality. They reminded Velasquez of his forme
dissensions with the man in whom he now repose
so much confidence, and foretold that Cort
would be more apt to avail himself of the power
which the governor was inconsiderately puttingi
his hands, to avenge pat injuries, than to requit
recent obligations. These insinuations made fuc
impression upon the suspicious mind of Velasquez
that Cortes soon obfcrved some symptoms of
growing alienation and distrust in his behaviour
and was advised by Lares and Duero, to hate

' Sec NOTE LXXII.

is departure, before these' should become so Bn o x
onfirmed , as to break out 'with open violence; v.
ully sensible of this danger, he urged forward Isx
is preparations with such rapidity, that he set
il from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth of
Tovember, Velasquez accompanying him to thl
lore, and taking leave of him with an appearance
f perfect friendship and confidence, though he
ad secretly given it in charge to fpme .of Cortes's
fficers, to keep a watchful eye upon' every part
f their commander's conduct 6.

Cortes proceeded to Trinidad, a frall fettle- Endeavours
ent on the fame fide of the island, where he was to deprive

him of his

oined by several adventurers, and received a supply conninion,
f provisions and military. flores , of which his
ock was till very incomplete. -ie had!!hardly
eft St. Jago, when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez , grew si
'iolent, that.it was impossible to fdpprefseit. The
rmament was no longer under his;ownh ey'eiand
irection; and he felt, thatas his':power over it
eased, that of Cortes would become mose'abfolute,
magination now aggravqated every circuhfliance',
which had formerly excited suspicion :-the rivals
f Cortes induftrioufy threw in refletions which
increased his fears ; and with no less art than malice
they called fuperflition to their aid, employing
the predidions of an astrologer. in order to corn
pcte the alarm. All these, by their united opera-
tion, produced the desired .effect. Velafquen

.."' .: , . q
Coniara, Chron. c. 7. 1B.Dihz. c. 20.

P 4

o a o R repented bitterly of his own imprudence, in having
v. committed a trult of so much importance to a person
,zss, whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and haflily

dispatched inftrudions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magistrate there , to deprive
*Cortes of his commission. But Cortes had already
.mnade.fuch progress in gaining the efleem and con,
fidence of his troops, that, finding officers as wellas
soldiers equally zealous to support his authority,
lie soothed: or intimidated Verdugo, and vas
permitted to depart from Trinidad without no.
ieftation.

and to ny

I From Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana,
rmuter. in order to raise more soldiers, and to complete

the victualling, of his fleet. There. several person?
of d.iiridcion ehtered into the service, and engaged
to supply what provisions were. fill wanting; but
as it was necessary to allow them.fome time for
performing what they had promised, Velasquez,
fe'nible that he. ought no longer to rely on a man
Of whom he had so openly discovered his diltrufl,
availed himself of the interval, which this un.
avoidible delay afforded, in order to make one
attempt:more to wrest the command out of the
hands of Cortes. He. loudly complained of Ver,
dugo's conduct , accusing him either of childif
facility, or of manifest treachery, in suffering
Cortes to escape from Trinidad. Anxious to guard
against a second disappointment, he sent a person
of confidence to the Havana, with peremptory
injunndions to Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor
in that colony, instantly to arrest Cortes, to fend

im prisoner to St. Jago under a trong guarld, and o K
countermand the failing of the armament until v.
Ie ould receive farther orders. He wrote likewise Is81
the principal officers, requiring them to assist
arba in executing what he had given him in
large. But before the arrival of his messenger, a
ancifcan friar of St. Jago had secretly conveyed
account of this interefling tranfadion to Bartho.
mew de Olmedo, a monk of the fame order,
ho aded as chaplain to the expedition.
Cortes, forewarned of the danger, had time Cortesde.
take precautions for his own safety. His first feats his

schernes, and

p was to find some pretext for removing from continues hi
Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great prepara-
rit, but in whom, on account of his known tios"'
tachment to Velasquez, he could not confide in
is trying and delicate juncture. He gave him
e command of a vessel , destined to take on
ard some provisions in a small harbour beyond
peAntonio, and thus made sure of his absence,
ithout seeming to fufped his fidelity. When he
s gone, Cortes no longer concealed the intentions
Vclafquez from his troops ; arid as officers and
Idiers were equally impatient to set out on an
edition, in preparing for which most of them
dexpended all their fortunes, they expressed
eir afonifiment and indignation at that illiberal
doufy, to which the governor was about to
rifce, not only the honor of their general, but
their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth. With
cvoice they entreated that he would ipot abandon
important station to which he had such a good

B o o I title. They conjured him not to deprive them ofi

v. leader whom they followed with such well-founds
5184. confidence, and offered to shed the lafl drop

their blood in maintaining his authority. Cort
was easily induced to comply with what hehimf
so ardently desired. He swore that he would ne
desert soldiers who had given him such a sign
proof of their attachment, and promised inflant
to conduct them to that rich country , which ha
been so long the object of their thoughts a
wilhes. This declaration was received with trai
ports of military applause, accompanied with thre
and imprecations against all who should prefu
to call in question the jurisdiction of their genera
or to oblrudt the execution of his designs.

The amount Every thing was now ready for their departur
ofiisforces. but though this expedition was fitted out by

united effort of the Spanifli power in Cu
though every settlement had contributed its quo
of men and provisions; though the governor h
laid out considerable fums, and each adventur
had exlhufted his flock, or firained his credit, t
poverty of the preparations was such as muftaR
nifl the present age, and bore, indeed, no refe
hlance to an armnament destined for the conqu
of a great empire. The fleet consisted of elev
vessels; the largest of a hundred tons, which v
dignified with the name of Admiral ; three of
venty or eighty tons, and the reft fnall op
barks. On board of these were fix hundred a
seventeen men; of which five hundred and eig
belonged to the land service, and a hundred a

ine were seamen or artificers. The soldiers were B o o lr
vided into eleven companies, according to the v.
umber of the ships; to each of which Cortes ap-
ointed a captain, and committed to him the com-
and of the vessel while at sea, and of the men
hen on shore'. As the use of fire-arms among
e nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
w battalions of regularly disciplined infantry,
nly thirteen soldiers were armed with muskets,
irty-two were crofs-bow-men, and the reft had
words and spears. Instead of the usual defensive
rmor, which must have been cumbersome in a
ot climate, the soldiers wore jackets quilted
ith cotton, which experience had taught the Spa-
ards to be a sufficient protection against the wea-
ons of the Americans. They had only sixteen
orfes, ten small field-pieces, and four falconets'.
With this slender and ill-provided train did Feb.io,,1ig.
ortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch His depar-

ture from

hose dominions were more extensive than all the Cuba.
ingdoms subjed to the Spanish crown. As reli-
ious enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of
dventure in the New World, and, by ,a combina-
on fill more strange, united with avarice, in
rompting the'Spaniards to all their enterprises, a
rge cross was displayed in their standards, with
is inscription, Let us fullow the cross, for under
is sign we shaU conquer.
So powerfully were Cortes and his followers
nimated with both these passions, that no less

' See NOTE LXXIII. ' B. Diaz. c. c. .

B o o eager to plunder the opulent country whither the

v. were bound, than zealous to propagate the Chri
'I'9* tian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, no

with the solicitude natural to men going upon dan
gerous services, but with that confidence whicl
arises fiom security of success, and certainty ofthi
divine protection.

Touches at As Cortes had determined to touch at ever
Cozumel; place which Grijalva had visited, he steered d

reety towards the island of Cozumel; there
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Ag
lar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a p
soner among the Indians. This man was perfedl
acquainted with a dialect of their language, unde
flood through a large extent of country, and po
fessing besides a considerable Ihare of pruden
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inte

March 4. preter. From Cozumel, Cortes proceeded toth
andatTa river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception
bafco.

friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and
finding gold in the fame abundance; but the d
position of the natives, from some unknown cauf
was totally changed. After repeated endeavou
to conciliate their good-will, he was constrained
have recourse to violence. Though the forces
the enemy were numerous, and advanced with e
traordinary courage, they were routed, with gre
fliughtcr, in several successive acions. The lo
which they fuflained, and still more the aftoni
Wncnt. and terror excited by the deflrudive cffe
of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance
the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, an

nduced them to fuie for peace. They acknow- B o o K
dged the king of Caflile as their sovereign, and v.
ranted Cortes a supply of provisions, with a pre- 1519
nt of cotton garments, some gold, and twenty
emale saves'.
Cortes continued his course to the westward , Arrives at
eeping as near the shore as poflible, in order to ST'Juandt
bferve the country; but could discover no pro-
er place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
e Ulua'°. As he entered this harbour, a large Aprilz.
anoe, full of people, among whom were two
vho seemed to be persons of diftintion, approach-
d his ship, with signs of peace and amity. They
ame on board without fear or distrust, and ad-
refTed him in a most refpedful manner, but in a
anguage altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes
as in the utmost perplexity and distress, at an
vent of which he instantly foresaw all the confe-
uences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer-
ainty with which he should carry on the great
hemes which he meditated, if, in his tranf-
dions with the natives, he must depend entirely
pon fuich an imperfect, ambiguous, and conjec-
ural mode of communication, as the use of signs.
ut he did not remain long in this embarralfing
tuation: a fortunate accident extricated him,
hen his own sagacity could have contributed
ittle towards his relief. One of the femal slaves,

'See NOTE LXXIV.

IB. Diaz. c. 3 --36. Gomara, Chron. c. 18-23.
errcra, dec 2. lib. iv. c. 1 I, &c.

B O O l{ whom he had received from the cazique of Ti

v. bafco, happened to be present at the first intet
i51 . view between Cortes and his new guests. She per

ceived his distress, as well as the confusion o
Aguilar; and as file perfectly underltood thb
Alexican language, she explained what they ha
said in the Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilarwv
acquainted. This woman, known afterwards b)
the name of Donna Marina, and who makes a con
fpicuous figure in the history of the New World,
where great revolutions were brought about by
small causes and inconsiderable instruments, was
born in one of the provinces of the Mexican em.
pire. Having been fold as a slave in the early par
of her life, after a variety of adventures fhefe
into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had reside
long enough among them to acquire their la
guage, without lofingthe use of her own. Thoug
it was both tedious and troublesome to converf
by the intervention of two different interpreters,
Cortes was so highly pleased with having disco
vered this method of carrying on some inter
course with the people of a country into which h
was determined to penetrate, that in the transports
of his joy he confidered it as' a visible interposition
of Providence in his favor".

Lands his -lHe now learned, that the two persons whom he
troops. had received on board of his flip were deputies

from Teutile and Pilpatoe, two officers intrusted

" B. Diaz. c. 37, 8, 39. Gomara, Chron. c. 22
llcrrera , dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

th the government of that province, by a great B o o x
narch, whom they called Montezuma; and that v.
y were sent to inquire what his intentions were '519'
visiting their coast, and to offer him what as-
ance he might need, in order to continue his
yage. Cortes, struck with the appearance of
fe people, as well as the tenor of the message,
ured them, in refpetful terms, that he approach.
their country with most friendly sentiments, and
me to propose matters of great importance to the
fare of their prince and his kingdom, which he
uld unfold more fully, in person, to the go.
nor and the general. Next morning, without
iting for any answer, he landed his troops, his
rses, and artillery; and having chosen proper
ound, began to eret huts for his men, and to
tify his camp. The natives, instead of oppof-
the entrance of those fatal guests into their
untry, aflifted them in all their operations, with
alacrity of which they had ere long good reason
repent.
Next day, Teutile and Pilpatoe entered the Hisrfifin.
anifli camp with a numerous retinue, and Cortes terview with-
nfidering them as the ministers of a great cans.
onarch, entitled to a degree of attention very
ferent from that which the Spaniards were ac.
fomed to pay to the petty Caziques, with
orn they had intercourse in the isles, received
em with much formal ceremony. He informed
em, that he came as ambassador from Don
rlos of Austria, king of Caflile, the greatest
onarch of the Eafl, and was intrusted with

B o o ic propositions offuch moment, that he could impar

v. them to none but the emperor Montezuma him
i9U. self, and therefore required them to conduct him

without loss of time, into the presence of thei
master. The Mexican officers could not conce
their uneasiness at a request, which they knew woul
be disagreeable, and which they foresaw migh
prove extremely enmbarrafling to their sovereign
whose mind had been filled with many difquietin
apprehensions, ever since the former appearance
the Spaniards on his coasts. But before they a
tempted to dissuade Cortes from insisting on th
demand, they endeavoured to conciliate his goo
will, by entreating him to accept of certain pr
sents, which, as humble slaves of Montezuma
they laid at his feet. They were introduced wit
great parade, and consisted of fine cotton cloth,
plumes of various colors, and of ornaments
gold and silver, to a considerable value; t
workmanship of which appeared to be as curio
as the materials were rich. The display of the
produced an effect very different from what tl
Vlexicans intended. Inftcad of satisfying , it
creased the avidity of the Spaniards, and rendere
them so eager and impatient to become masters
a country which abounded with such precious prd
dudions, that Cortes could hardly lifen with pi
tience to the arguments which Pilpatoe and Tell
tile employed to dissuade him fiom visiting tl
capital, and in a haughty dlctermined tone he ii
sifted on his demand , of being admitted to a pc
fonal audience of their fov;reign. During th

in terv jev,

nterview, some painters, in the train of the Mexi- n o o
can chiefs, had been diligently employed in deli- v.
eating, upon white cotton cloths, figures of the I'19
ips, the horses, the artillery, the soldiers , and
whetcver else attraAded their eyes, as singular.
When Cortes observed this, and was informed
hat these pictures were to be sent to Montezuma,
i order to convey to him a more lively idea of
he strange and wonderful objeds now presented
otheir view, than any words could communicate,
erefolved to render the representation still more
nimated and interefling, by exhibiting such a
eclacle as might give both them and their
onarch an awful impression of the extraordinary
rowess of his followers, and the irresistible force
f their arms. The trumpets, by his order,
ounded an alarm; the. troops, in a moment,
ormed in order of battle, the infantry performed
uch martial exercises as were best suited to display
he efftt of their different weapons; the horse, in
arious evolutions, gave a specimen of their agility
id strength ; the artillery pointed towards the
hick woods which surrounded the camp, were fired,
nd made dreadful havoc among the trees. The
Mexicans looked on with that filcut amazement,
which is natural when the mind is itruck with ob-
cis, which are both awful and above its compre-
cnfion. But, at the explosion of the cannon,
iany of them fled, some fell to the ground, and
il were so much confounded at the fight of men
hose power so nearly resembled that of the gods,
hat Cortes found it difficult to compose and

VOL. II. Q

B o o K reassure them. The painters had now many new

v. objeds on which to exercise their art, and they put
I1s9. their fancy on the firetch in order to invent figures

and symbols to represent the extraordinary thing!
which they had seen.

\Tegocia. IMleffengers were immediately dispatched tc
tonte-ith Montezuma with those pictures, and a full accouni
moa. of every thing that had passed since the arrival o

the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent a prefen
of some European curiosities to Montezuma, which
though of no great value, he believed would bi
acceptable on account of their novelty. Thi
Miexican monarchs, in order to obtain early in
formation of every occurrence in all the cornerso
their extensive empire, had introduced a refinemen
in police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. The)
had couriers posted at proper stations along th
principal roads; and as these were trained to agi
lity by a regular education, and relieved one an
other at moderate distances, they conveyed intel
ligence with surprising rapidity. Though the ca
pital in which Montezuma resided was above,
hundred and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua
Cortes's presents were carried thither, and a ar
fwer to his demands was received in a few day;
The fame officers who had hitherto treated wit
the Spaniards, were employed to deliver this a
fwer; but as they knew how repugnant the dete
mination of their malter was to all the schemes an
wvifics of the Spanifhl commander, they would n
venture to make it known until they had pr
vioully endeavoured to sooth and mollify hit

For this purpose , they renewed the negociation, B o o s
v introducing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded v.
vith presents sent to him by Montezuma. The 1519.

Hit prefenli

naglnilicence of these was such as became a great H
1onarch, and far exceeded any idea which the
Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
hey were placed upon mats spread on the ground,
n such order, as showed them to the greatest ad-
antage. Cortes and his officers viewed, with ad-
iration , the various manufacures of the country,
cotton stuffs so tine, and of such delicate texture,
a; to resemble silk; pictures of animals , trees, and
ther natural objects, formed with feathers of dif-
erent colors, disposed and mingled with such
kill and elegance, as to rival the works of the
pencil in truth and beauty of imitation. But
what chiefly attracted their eyes, were two large
lates of a circular form, one of massive gold re-
resenting the fun, the other of silver, an emblem
of the moon' . These were accompanied with
racelets, collars, rings, and other trinkets of
gold; ,and that nothing might be wanting which
could give the Spaniards a complete idea of what
the country afforded, with some boxes filled with
pearls, precious stones, and grains of gold un-
wrougllt, as they had been found in the mines
or rivers. Cortes received all these with an
appearcance of profound veneration for the mo-
narch by whom they were beflowed. But when ForbidsCor.
the Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed hin, tes to ap

proach his
capital.
I' See NOTE LXXV.

0"

n o o K that their master, though he desired him to accept

v. of what he had sent as a token of his regard for the
5sl9. monarch whom Cortes represented, would not give

his consent that foreign troops flould approach
nearer to his capita], or even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, the Spanish general de.
cared in a manner more resolute and peremptory
than formerly, that he mufft insist on his first de.
mand, as he could not, without diflonor, return
to his own country, until he was admitted into the
presence of the prince whom he was appointed to
visit in the name of his fovercign. The Mexicans,
aftoniLhed at feeing any man dare to oppose tha
will, which they were accuflomed to confiders
supreme and irresistible, yet afraid of precipitating
their country into an open rupture with such for
midable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to promise,
that he would not move from his present camp,
until the return of a messenger, whom they fentto
Montezuma for farther inftrudtions '

State ofthe The firmness with which Cortes adhered to his
Mexican original proposal, flould naturally have brought
empire at
thatperiod the negociation between him and Montezuma to a

speedy issue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with
confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly
as an enemy. The latter was what might have
been expeced from a haughty prince in poffeflion
of extensive power. The Mexican empire, at this

1s B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara, Chron. c. 27. Herrera,dec.
2. lib. v. c. 5, 6.

period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no so- B o o Ic
ciety ever attained in so flort a period. Though v.
it had subsisted, according to their own traditions, Isl
only a hundred and thirty years, its dominion ex-
tended from the North to the South-Sea, over terri-
tories firetching, with some small interruption, above
fivc hundred leagues from east to weft, and more
than two hundred from north to south, comprehend-
il:, provinces not inferiorin fertility, population, and
opulence, to any in the torrid zone. The people were
warlike and enterprising; the authority of the mo-
narch unbounded , and his revenues considerable.
If, with the forces which might have been fud-
denly assembled in such an empire, Montezuma
had fallen upon the Spaniards while encamped
on a barren unhealthy coast, unsupported by any
ally, without a place of retreat, and destitute of
provisions, it seems to be impossible, even with all
the advantages of their superior discipline and arms,
that they could have Rlood the flock, and they
muff either have perilhed in such an unequal con-
test, or have abandoned the enterprise.

As the power of Montezuma enabled him to Character ol
take this spirited part, his own dispositions were themO,
such as seemed naturally to prompt him to it.
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican
sceptre, he was the most haughty, the most
violent, and the most impatient of control. His
fubjeds looked up to him with awe, and his
enemies with terror. The former he governed
with unexampled rigor, but they were impressed
with such an opinion of his capacity, as con-

Q 3

n o o K manded their refped ; and, by many vitories ov.e

v. the latter, he had spread far the dread of his arms,
is19. and had added fextril considerable provinces to

his dominions. But though his talents might be
suited to the tranfaclions of a state so imperfecdly
polished as the Ilexican empire, and fufficientto
condud them while in their accustomed course,
they were altogether inadequate to a conjundurefo
extraordinary, andi did not qualify him either to
judge with the (discernment, or to ad with the
decision, requilite in such a trying emergency.

His perplex- From the moment that the Spaniards appeared
ity and ter- on his coast, he discovered symptoms of timidity
tor upon the
arrival ofthe and embarraffTii t Inltcad of taking such refo.
SpanJards. lutions as the c(lfcioufilefs of his own power, or

the mtmtoiy of hi.s former exploits, might have in.
spircd , he deliberated with an anxiety and hefita.
tion which did not escape the notice of his meanet
courtiers. ' he perplexity and discomposure of
MVontezuma's mind upon this occasion, as well as
the general dismay of his fubjedts, were not owing
wholly to the impression which the Spaniards had
made by the novelty of their appearance alnd the
terror of their arms. Its origin may be traced tip
to a more remote source. There was an opinion,
if we may believe the earliefc and most authentic
Spanish hiflorians, almost univerlifl among the
Americans , that some dreadful calamity was in-
pending over their heads , from a race of formin
dable invaders who flould come from regions to
wards the ri , ng fun, to overrun and desolate their
country. \'hcther this difquicting apprehenfio

sowed from the memory of some natural calamity n o o R
which had afflided that part of the globe, and im- v.
pressed the minds of the inhabitants with fuperfti- 1s9,
tious fears and forebodings, or whether it was an
imagination accidentally suggested by the aftonilh-
nmcnt which the firlt fight of a. new race of mlen
occasioned, it is impossible to determine. But as
the Mexicans were more prone to superstition than
any people in the New World, they were more
deeply affected with the appearance of the Spa-
niards, whom their credulity instantly represented
as the instruments destined to bring about this fa-
tal revolution which they dreaded. Under those --
circumstances, it ceases to be incredible that a
handful of adventurers should alarm the monarch
of a great empire , and all his fubjeds'l.

Notwithstanding the influence of this impref- Continues to

sion, when the messenger arrived from the Spanish negociate.
camp with an account that the leader of the ftrang-
ers, adhering to his original demand, refused to obey
the order enjoining him to leave the country, Monte-
zuma assumed some degree of resolution, and in
a transport of rage natural to a fierce prince un-
accustomed to meet with any opposition to his
will, he threatened to sacrifice those presumptuous
men to his gods. But his doubts and fears
quickly returned, and inftecad of issuing orders to
carry his threats into execution, he again called his

"Cortes, Rclazione Scconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 2;5.

lerrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. lib. v. c. x . lib. vii. c. 6,
(on;ira , Chron. c. 66. 92. 144.

Q4

B o IO ministers to confer and offer their advice. Feebli

v. and temporizing measures will always be the refuli
'5'A when men assemble to deliberate in a situation

where they ought to ac. The Mexican counsel,
lors took no effecual measure for expelling such
troublesome intruders, and were satisfied with if.
suing a more positive injunction , requiring them
to leave the country; but this they preposterously
accompanied with a present of such value, as
proved a fresh inducement to remain there.

Anxiety and Meanwhile, the Spaniards were not withou
apprehen. solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in delibe.
sinns of the
Spaniards. rating concerning their own future conduc. Fron

what they had already seen, many of them formed
such extravagant ideas concerning the opulence
of the country, that, despising danger or hard.
ships, when they had in view treasures which ap.
peared to be inexhaustible, they were eager to at.
tempt the conquest. Others, estimating the power
of the Mexican empire by its wealth, and enu.
merating the various proofs which had occurred of
its being under a well-regulated administration,
contended, that it would be an ad of the wildest
frenzy to attack such a Itate with a small body of
men, in want of provisions, unconneded withany
ally, and already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar
to the climate, and the loss of several of their num-
ber ". Cortes secretly applauded the advocates
for bold measures, and cherinfled their romantic
hopes, as such ideas corresponded with his own,

" B. Diaz, c. 4Q.

d favored the execution of the schemes which B o o K
had formed. From the time that the suspicions v.
Velasquez broke out with open violence in the I1S19
tempts to deprive him of the command, Cortes Schemes of
w the necessity of dissolving a connexion which C"tes
ould obftrud and embarrass all his operations,
id watched for a proper opportunity of coming
a final rupture with him. Having this in
ew, he had labored by every art to secure the
eem and affeEtion of his soldiers. With his
pilities for command, it was easy to gain their
eem;. and his followers were quickly satisfied
at they might rely, with perfect confidence, on
c Conduct and courage of their leader. Nor was
more difficult to acquire their affection. Among
venturers, nearly of the fame rank, and serving
their own expense, the dignity of command did
ot elevate a general above mingling with those
ho acted under him. Cortes availed himself of
is freedom of intercourse, to insinuate himself
to their favor, and by his affable manners, by.
ell timed acds of liberality to some, by inspiring
with vast hopes, and by allowing them to trade
rivntely with the natives '', he attached the greater
art of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that they
most forgot that the armament had been fitted
it by the authority, and at the expense, of
nother.
During those intrigues, Teutile arrived with His itdref
e prcfent from Montezuma, and, together with carrYing

is See NOTE LXXVI.

B o o i it, delivered the ultimate order of that monai

v. to depart inflantly out of his dominions; a
519. vwhen Cortes, inflead of complying, renewedl

request of an audience, the Mexican turned fre
him abruptly, and quitted the camp with loo
and gestures which firongly expressed his furpr
and resentment. Next morning, none of the nativi
who used to frequent the camp in great numbe
in order to barter with the soldiers, and to brit
in provisions, appeared. All friendly correspondei
feerned now to be at an end, and it was expect
every moinent that hostilities would commenc
This, though an event that might have bee
foreseen, occasioned a fuddcn consternation amo
the Spaniards, which emboldened the adherents
Velasquez not only to murmur and cabal agai
their general, but to appoint one of their numr
to remonflrate openly against his imprudence
attempting the conquest of a mighty empire vi
such inadequate force, and to urge the necefi
of returning to Cuba, in order to refit theft
and augment the army. Diego de Ordaz, one
his principal officers, whom the maleconte
charged with this corrmiflion, delivered it Wi
a soldierly freedomn and bluntness, assuring Cor
that he spoke the sentiments of the whole ari
He listencd to this rcmonflrance without a
appearance of emotion, and as he well knew
temper and wifvies of his soldiers , and fore
how they would receive a proposition fat;ll
once to all the fplcndid hopes and fchcmes Vhi
they had been forming with fiuch complaccnc

carried his dissimulation so far as to seem to B o o i
;linquifh his own measures in compliance with v.
e request of Ordaz, and issued orders that the 1519-
my should be in readiness next clay to reimbark
r Cuba. As soon as this was known, the difap-
oint.ed ad(venturers exclaimed and threatened; the
mifarics of Cortes, mingling with them, inflamed
cir rage; the ferment became general; the whole
mp was almost in open mutiny; all demanding
ilh eagerness to fee their commander. Cortes
ns not flow in appearing; when, with one voice,
ficers and soldiers exprelfed their aflonifhment
id indignation at the orders whic-h they had
ceived. It was unworthy, they cried, of the
alilian courage, to be daunted at the first asped
danger, and infamous to fly before any enemy
ppeared. For their parts, they were determined
ot to relinquish an enterprise, that had hitherto
een successful, and which tended so visibly to
read the knowledge of true religion, and to
Ivance the glory and interest of their country.
lappy under his command , they would follow
im with alacrity through every danger, in qucfl
tlofe settlements and treasures which he had so
ong held out to their view; but if he chore
tlher to return to Cuba , and tamcly give up all
is hopes of difninction and opulence to an envious
Val, they would inLantly chufe another general
codl(lct them in that path of glory, which he
;1l not fpiiit to enter.
((ortes, delighted with their ardor, took no
£sicec at the boldness with which it vwas uttered.

n o o K The sentiments were what he himself had inspire

v. and the warmth of expreflion satisfied him th
''9*. his followers had imbibed them thoroughly.

affected, however, to be surprised at what
heard, declaring that his orders to prepare
embarking were issued from a persuasion that
was agreeable to his troops; that, from deferen
to what he had been informed was their incli
tion, he had sacrificed his own private opinio
which was firmly bent on establishing immediate
a settlement on the fea-coafl, and then on end
vouring to penetrate into the interior part oft
country; that now he was convinced of his err
and as he perceived that they were animated vi
the generous spirit which breathed in every t
Spaniard, he would refunie, with fresh ardo
his original plan of operation, and doubted n
to conduct them, in the career of victory, to fu
independent fortunes as their valor merited. Lp
this declaration, shouts of applause testified
excess of their joy. The measure seemed to
taken with unanimous consent; such as secret
condemned it being obliged to join in theacc
mations, partly to conceal their difaffedion fro
their general, and partly to avoid the imputati
of cowardice from their fellow-foldiers .

Eftablishesa Without allowing his men time to cool or
form ocivil reflect, Cortes set about cl!rying his design il
government.

execution. In order to give a beginning to a colon
he assembled the principal persons in his army, a

" B. Diaz. c. 40, 41, 4Z. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c 6,

their suffrage elected a council and magistrates B o o il
whom the government was to be vested. As v.
In naturally transplant the inflitutions and forms 1519.
the mother-country into their new settlements,

was framed upon the model of a Spanish
rporation. The magifirates were distinguished by
e fame names and ensigns of office, and were
exercise a similar jurifdition. All the persons
ofen were most firmly devoted to Cortes, and
instrument of their eledion was framed in the
g's name, without any mention of their depend-
ce on Velasquez. The two principles of avarice
d enthusiasm, which prompted the Spaniards to
their enterprises in the New World, seem to
ve concurred in fuggelting the name which
rtes bestowed on his infant settlement. He called
The rich town of tile true Cross s.
The first meeting of the new council was Resigns his
linguifhed by a tranfadion of great moment. co"mifion,.
soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave
enter; and approaching with many marks of
ofound refped, which added dignity to the
bunal, and set an example of reverence for its
thority, he began a long harangue, in which,
ith much art, and in terms extremely flattering
persons just entering upon their new fundion,
observed, that as the supreme jurifdicdion over
c colony which they had planted was now
ied in this court, he confidered them as clothed
ith the authority, and reprcfenting the perfoa

z Villa rica de la vera Cruz.

x o o K of their sovereign; that accordingly he 'voul

v. communicate to them what he deemed essential t
1519. the public safety, with the fame dutiful fidelit,

as if he were addrefling his royal master; that th
security of a colony fettled in a great empire
whose sovereign had already discovered his hoblj
intentions, depended upon arms, and the efficao
of these upon the subordination and difcipli
preserved among the troops; that his right
command was derived from a commillion grante
by the governor of Cuba; and as that had bee
long since revoked, the lawfulness of his jurifdi
tion might well be queflioned; that he might
thought to act upon a defective, or even
dubious title; nor could they trust an army whi
might dispute the powers of its general, at
juncure when it ought implicitly to obey
orders; that, moved by these considerations,
now resigned all his authority to them, that the
having both right to chufe, and power to con
full jurisdiction , might appoint one, in the kin
name, to command the army in its future oper
tions; and, as for his own part, such was
zeal for the service in which they were engage
that he would mons cheerfully take up a pi
with the fame hand that laid down the genera
truncheon, and convince his fellow-foldiers, th
though accustomed to command, he had not forg
ten how to obey. Ilavilng finilled his difcourf
he laid the commiflion from Velasquez upon
tahle, and, after killing his truncheon, dclivcl
it to the chief magiltrate, and withdrew.

The deliberations of the council were not long, B o o I
Cortes had concerted this important measure v.
th his confidents, and had prepared the other 1519.
inbers, with greataddrefs, for the part which he ahlefs chOire
(ied them to take. His resignation was accepted; and captaiun
d as the uninterrupted tenor of their prosperity gsneral.
der his condudt afforded the most latisfying
idence of his abilities for command, they, by
ir unanimous suffrage, elected him chief justice
the colony, and captain-general of its army,
d appointed his commission to be made out in
eking's name, with most ample powers, which
re to continue in force until the royal pleasure
uld be farther known. That this deed might
t be deemed the machination of a junto, the
uncil called together the troops, and acquainted
em with what had been' resolved. The soldiers,
ith eager applause, ratified the cloice which
council had made; the air resounded with the
me of Cortes, and all vowed to iled their
ood in support of his authority.
Cortes having now brought his intrigues to Aflerts his
e deired iflue, and fliaken off his mortifying althority

'i i r ^ L~~~~~~ w' ith vigor.

pndence on the governor of Cuba, accepted
the commifioon, which vested in him supreme
rifdidCion , civil as well as military, over the
olny, with many profeflions of refpcct to the
lncil, and gratitude to the army. Tt)gether with
snewv comrmand, he afll'me(l greater diglnity, and
gnn to cxcrcife more extenlive powers. Formerly
hlid felt himfin f to be only the (eputy of a
bjct; now he acted as the rcprcfcllt.tive of his

B o o it sovereign. The adherents of Velasquez, fully awaj

v. of what would be the effeA of this change in th
59S' situation of Cortes , could no longer continu

silent and paHlive fpeclators of his atdions. Tb
exclaimed openly againfl the proceedings of
council as illegal, and against those of the ar
as mutinous. Cortes, inllantly perceiving t
necessity of giving a timely check to such feditio
discourse by some vigorous measure, arrested Ord
Efcudero, and Velasquez de Leon, the ringlead
of this faction, and sent them prisoners aboa
the fleet, loaded with chains. Their dependen
aftonifled and overawed, remained quiet,
Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than to pun
his prisoners, who were officers of great me
courted their friendflip with such afliduity a
address, that the reconciliation was perse
cordial; and, on the molf trying occasions, nei
their connexion with the governor of Cuba,
the memory of the indignity with which t
had been treated, tempted them to swerve fr
an inviolable attachment to his interest". In t
as well as his other negociations at this criti
conjunture, which decided with refped to
future fame and fortune, Cortes owed much
his success to the Vlexican gold, which he di
buted with a liberal hand both among his frie
and his opponents'°.

1 B. Diaz.. c. 42, 4;. Gomara, Chron. c. 30,
IIcrrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 7.

' B. Diaz. c. 44.

Corte.s

Cortem, having thus rendered the union between B o o a
Imfelf and his army indissoluble, by engaging it v.
o oin him in difclaimilng any dependence on M9s.

His friend.

e governor of Cuba, and in repeated ads of ship coutted
ifobedience to his authority, thought he might by the Zemt
vow venture to quit the camp in which he had POaIans""
itherto remained, and advance into the country.
o this he was encouraged by an event no less
rtunate than seasonable. Some Indians having
pproached his camp in a mysterious manner, were
trodtced into his presence. He found that they
ere sent with a proffer of friendlhip from the
zique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no
eat distance; and from their answers to a variety
queflions which he put to them, according to
s usual pradcice in every interview with the
ople of the country, he gathered, that their
aer, though subjed to the Mexican empire,
a impatient of the yoke, and filled with such
a(d and hatred of Montezuma, that nothing
uld be more acceptable to him than any prospect
deliverance from the opprefion under which he
aned. On hearing this, a ray of light and hope
oke in upon the mind of Cortes. He saw that
egreat empire which he intended to attack was
tunited, nor its sovereign beloved. He concluded,
at the causes ofdifaffedcion could not be confined
one province, but that in other corners there
Ut be malecontents, so weary of fubjedtion, or
defrous of change, as to be ready to follow
ftanlldad of any protedor. Full of those ideas,
whvich he began to form a scheme, that time,
VOL. II. R

B o o It and more perfet: information concerning the Rai

v. of the country, enabled him to mature, he gav
S'19. a most gracious reception to the Zempoallans, an

promised soon to visit their cazique".

Marches to In order to perform this promise, it was n(
Zempoalla. necessary to vary the route which he had alrea

fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he h
employed to survey the coast, having discover
a village named Quiabiflan, about forty miles
the northward, which, both on account of
fertility of the foil, and commodiousness of
harbour, seemed to be a more proper station
a settlement than that where he was encamp
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoa
lay in his way, where the cazique received h
in the manner which he had reason to expe
with gifts and caresses, like a man solicitous
gain his good-will; with refpet approaching alm
to adoration, like one who looked up to him
a deliverer. From him he learned many particul
with refpedt to the character of Montezuma, a
the circumstances which rendered his domini
odious. He was a tyrant, as the cazique told
with tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious; w
treated his own fubjeds with arrogance, rili
the conquered provinces by excessive exadioa
and often tore their sons and daughters from th
by violence; the former to be offered as viei
to his ,ods; the latter, to be reserved as con
bines for himself or favorites. Cortcs, in reply

i
' ',. Di)i. c. 41. Comara, Chron. c. 28.

in, artfully insinuated, that one great object of B o K
eSpaniards in visiting a country so remote from v.
eir own , was to redress grievances, and to )rI9.
lieve the oppressed; and having encouraged him
hope for this interposition in due time, he
ntinued his march to (uiabiflan.
The spot which his officers had recommended Buildsa fort.
a proper situation, appeared to him to be so
11 chosen, that he immediately marked out
ound for a town. The houses to be erected
ere only huts; but these were to be surrounded
ith fortifications, of sufficient strength to resist
eaffaults of an Indian army. As the finishing of
ofe fortifications was essential to the existence of
colony, and of no less importance in prosecuting
e designs which the leader and his followers
editated, both in order to secure a place of
treat, and to preserve their communication with
sea, every man in the army, officers as well
soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes
mfelf setting them an example of adivity and
rfeverance in labor. The Indians of Zempoalla
d Quiabiflan lent their aid; and this petty
tion, the parent of so many mighty settlements,
s soon in a state of defence ".
While engaged in this necessary work, Cortes had Concludes ,
'cral interviews with the caziques of Zempoalla formal al-

liance with

uiabiflan ; and availing himself of their wonder several ca
d afonifhment at the new objecs which they ziques.

B. Diaz. c. 4 ó, 4.6. 4. Comara, Chron. c. 32, 33. 37.
rera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 8, 9.

R z

X o o X daily beheld, he gradually inspired them wit

v. such a high opinion of the Spaniards, as being

of a superior order, and irresistible in arms, tha
Belying on their proteCtion , they ventured
inlfult the Mlscican power, at the very name
which they were accustomed to tremble. Some
IVIontezLma's officers having appeared to levy t
usual tribute, and to demand a certain number
human vidims., as an expiation for their guilt
presuming to hold inrercourfe with those firange
whom the emperor had commanded to leave
dominions, inflead of obeying the order, t
caziques made them prisoners, treated them wi
great indignity, and, as their fuperflition was
kIfs barbarous than that of the Mexicans, th
prepared to sacrifice them to their gods. From th
fft danger they were delivered by the interpo
t'on of Cortes, who manifefled the utmost horr
at the mention of fich a deed. The two caziqu
having now been pushed to an ac of such op
rebellion, as left them no hope of safety but
attaching themselves inviolably to the Spaniard
they soon completed their union with them,
formally acknowledging themselves to be vas
of the fame monarch. Their example was follow
by the Totonaques, a fierce people who inhabit
the mountainouq part of the country. They willing
fubjecAed themselves to the crown of Castile, a
offered to accompany Cortes, with all their forc
in his march towards Mexico ".

B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara, Chron. 3, 36. Herr3
dec..2.lib. v. c. 9, o1, li.

Cortes had now been above three nmonths in o K
ew Spain; and though this period had not beei v.
linguified by martial exploits, every mnmen Hi "`r
d been employed in operations, which, though to procure a
f splendid, were more important. By his address confirma-
conncuding his intrigues with his own army, as authority by
ell as his sagacity in carrying on his negociations the king.
ith the natives, he had already laid the founda-
ns of his future success. But whatever cdnfidertce
might place in the plan which he had formed,
could not but perceive, that as his title to
mmand was derived from a doubtful authority,
held it by a precarious tenure. The injuries
hich Velasquez had received, were such a;
mid naturally prompt him to apply for redress
their common sovereign; and such a reprefentaa
n, he foresaw, might be given of his contdu&c
at he had reason to apprehend, not only that
might be degraded from his present rank, Abil
bjefted to punishment. Before he began .-hi
arch, it was necessary to take the most effedual
cautions against this impending danger. With
is view he persuaded the magistrates of the
lony at Vera Cruz to address a letter t9 the
ng, the chief object of which was to justify
eir own condud in establishing a colony independ-
t on the jurifdition of Velasquez. In order to
complifh this, they endeavoured to detract from,
merit, in fitting out,the two former armaments
der Cordova and Grijalva, affirming that these
d been equipped by the adventurers who engaged
the expeditions, and not by the governor. They

R 3

B ° o o daily beheld, he gradually inspired them wit

v. such a high opinion of the Spaniards, as bein
'5'9 of a superior order, and irrefitible in arms, th

ielying on their protedion, they ventured
ilfult the Nl'I4ican power, at the very name
which they were accustomed to tremble. Some
.Montezuma's officers having appeared to levy
usual tribute, and to demand a certain number
human vicims, as an expiation for their guilt
presuming to hold intercourse with those strange
whom the emperor had commanded to leave
dominions, instead of obeying the order, t
caziques made them prisoners, treated them wi
great indignity, and, as their superstition was
kss barbarous than that of the Mexicans, th
prepared to sacrifice them to their gods. Fromt
hft danger they were delivered by the interpo
tion of Cortes, who manifested the utmost horr
at the mention of such a deed. The two caziqu
having now been pushed to an ad of such op
rebellion, as left them no hope of safety but
attaching themselves inviolably to the Spaniar
they soon completed their union with them,
formally acknowledging themselves to be vas
of the fame monarch. Their example was follow
by the Totonaques, a fierce people who inhabit
the mountainous part of the country. They willin
fubjeded themselves to the crown of Castile, a
offered to accompany Cortes, with all their forc
in his march towards Mexico ".

B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara, Chron. 3 , 36. Herrd
dec. 2. lib. v. c. 9, 10, i.

Cortes had now been above three nionths in si 6 K
ew Spain; and though this period had not beeri v.
iftinguifled by martial exploits, every niomen6 Hit

't'ngul 1 Hismeafitres

d been employed in operations, which, though to procure a
splendid, were more important. By his address confirma-

tion ofhis

conducting his intrigues with his own army, as authority by
li as his sagacity in carrying on his negociations the king.
ith the natives, he had already laid the founda-
ns of his future success. But whatever confidence
might place in the plan which he had formed ,
could not but perceive, that as his title td
mmand was derived from a doubtful authority,
held it by a precarious tenure. The injuries
hich Velasquez had received, were' such ao
ould naturally prompt him to apply for redress
their common sovereign; and such a reprefenta.
n, he foresaw, might be given of his :conduitt
at he had reason to apprehend, not only that
might be degraded from his present rank, bu't
bjeded to puniffment. Before he began - hi
arch, it was necessary to take the most effedual
cautions against this impending danger. With
is view he persuaded the magiltrates of the
lony at Vera Cruz to a:ddress a letter tp the
ng, the chief obje&t of which was to justify'
eir own conduct in eftablifling a colony independ.
ton the jurifdidion of Velasquez. In order to
omplifl this, they endeavoured to detraft from,
smerit, in fitting out,the two former armaments
der Cordova and Grijalva, affirming that these
been equipped by the adventurers who engaged
the expeditions, and not by the governor. They

R 3

B O O K contend that the sole object of Velasquez was |

v. trade or barter with the natives, not to attemr
'1'19 the conquest of New. Spain, *r to fettle a colon

there. They assert that Cortes and the officers wh
served under him had defrayed the greater parti
the expense in fitting out the armament. On th
account, they humbly requested their sovereign t
ratify what they had done in his name, and t
confirm Cortes in the supreme command by h
royal commission. That Charles might be induce
to grant more readily what they demanded, the
give him a pompous description of the countr
*which they had discovered; of its riches, th
number of its inhabitants, their civilization an
arts; they relate the progress which they had alread
made in annexing some parts of the country situate
on the sea -coast to the crown of Castile; ai
mention the schemes which they had formed, i
well as the hopes which they entertained,
reducing the whole to fubjecion ". Cortes himfl

2' In this letter it is asserted, that though a coifiderab

number of Spaniards had been wounded in their variousq
counters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them di
and all had recovered in a very short time. This seems
confirm what I observe in p. 25 s, concerning the imperfd
tion of the offcnfive weapons used by the Americans. Inlt
letter, the human sacrifices offered by the Mexicanstothe
deities are described minutely, and with great horror; tome
the Spaniards, it is said, had been eye.witnesses of those br
barous rites. To the letter is subjoined a catalogue and d
scription of the presents sent to the emperor. That publifil
bry Gomara, Chron. c. 29. seems to have been copied Ito
it. Pet. Martyr describes many of the articles in his treat
De infulis nuper invcntis, p. 3s54 &c.

rote in a similar firain; and as he knew that the n o o K
panifl court, accustomed to the exaggerated repre- v.
ntations of every new country by its discoverers, I5'9
Would give little credit to their splendid accounts
fNew Spain, if these were not accompanied with
uch a specimen of what it contained, as would
xcite a high idea of its opulence, he solicited
is soldiers to relinquilh what they might claim as
heir part of the treasures which had hitherto been
olleed, in order that the whole might be sent
o the king. Such was the ascendant which he
ad acquired over their minds, and such their own
omantic expectations of future wealth, that an
rmy of indigent and rapacious adventurers was
apable of this generous effort, and offered to their
overeign the richest present that had hitherto been
transmitted from the New 'World" . Portocarrero
and Montejo, the chief magistrates of the colony,
were appointed to carry this present to Castile,
with express orders not to touch at Cuba in their
paUlige thither ".
While a vessel was preparing for their departure, A corrpi-
an unexpected event occasioned a general alarm. racy gainft
Sonic soldiers and sailors , secretly attached to
Ielafquez, or intimidated at the profped of the
dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate into
the icart of a great empire with such unequal
force, formed the dcfign of fcizing one of the
brigantines, and making their escape to Cuba,

5 See NOTE LXXVIT.

B. Uiaz. c. . 4. (omiara, Chron. c. 40.

R 4

. o a K in order to give the governor such intelligenc

v. as might enable him to intercept the ship whic
Ir9». was to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain

This conspiracy, though formed by persons o
low rank, was conduced with profound secrecy
but at the moment when every thing was read
for execution, they were betrayed by one of the
associates.

Hedeftroys Though the good fortune of Cortes interpose
}is fleet. so seasonably on this occasion, the detecion

this conspiracy filled his mind with most difquie
ing apprehensions, and prompted him to execute
scheme which he had long revolved. He perceive
that the spirit of disaffec'tion frill lurked among hi
troops; that though hitherto checked by th
uniform success of his schemes, or suppressed b
the hand of authority, various events might occu
which would encourage and call it forth. H
observed, that many of his men, weary of th
fatigue of service, longed to revisit their fettl
ments in Cuba; and that upon any appearance
extraordinary danger, or any reveYfe of fortune
it would be impossible to restrain them fro
returning thither. He was sensible that his forces
already too feeble, could bear no diminution, an
that a very small defecion of his followers woul
oblige him to abandon the enterprise. After rumnin
ating often, and with much solicitude, upon tho
particulars, he saw no hope of success, but
cutting off all poflibility of retreat, and reducih
his men to the necessity of adopting the fanl
resolution with which he himself was animated

ther to conquer or to perish. WTith this view, B o o Jt
e determined to destroy his fleet; but as he durst v.
ot venture to execute such a bold resolution by I't9
is single authority, he labored to bring his soldiers
o adopt his ideas with refped to the propriety of
his measure. His address in accomplishing this was
ot inferior to the arduous occasion in which it
as employed. He persuaded some, that the ships
ad suffered so much by having been long at sea,
to be altogether unfit for service; to others he
inted out what a seasonable reinforcement of
rength they would derive from the junction of
hundred men, now unprofitably employed as
ilors; and to all, he represented the necessity of
iing their eyes and wishes upon what was before
hem, without allowing the idea of a retreat once
o enter their thoughts. With universal consent
e flips were drawn ashore, and after tripping
hem of their fails, rigging, iron works, and
vhatever else might be of use, they were broke
pieces. Thus, from an effort of magnanimity,
owhich there is nothing parallel in history, five
!undred men voluntarily consented to be shut up
a hoflile country, filled with powerful and
nknown nations; and having precluded every
eans of escape, left themselves without any
source but their own valor and perfever-
lice ".

Nothing now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of

2' Relaz. di Cortes, Ramus iii. 22 . B. Diaz. c. 57, 58.
rrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14.

; o o R his troops and the disposition of his allies were

v. equally favorable. All the advantages, however,
519. derived from the latter, though procured by muc

assiduity and address, were well nigh loft in
moment by an indiscreet sally of religious zeal
which, on many occasions, precipitated Cort
into acions inconsistent with the prudence tha
distinguishes his characer. Though hitherto h
had neither time nor opportunity to explain t
the natives the errors of their own superstition
or to inflru&t them in the principles of the Chriftia
faith, he commanded his soldiers to overturn th
altars and to destroy the idols in the chief templ
of Zempoalla, and in their place to ered a crucifi
and an image of the Virgin Mary. The peopl
beheld this with astonishment and horror ; t
priefis excited them to arms; but such was th
authority of Cortes, and so great the afcendan
which the Spaniards had acquired, that the con
motion was appeared without bloodshed , and co
cord perfectly re.established. ".

Aulvinces Cortes began his march from Zempoallaonth
iuntothy sixteenth of August, with five hundred men

fifteen horse , and fix field-pieces. The reft
his troops, conrifting chiefly of such as from ag
or infirmity were less fit for acive service, he le
as a garrison in Villa Rica, under the comman
of Efcalantc, an officer of merit, and warm!
attached to his interest. The cazique of Zempoal
supplied him with provisions, and with two hu

' . Diaz. c. 41, 42. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 3,

red of those Indians called Tamemes, whose office, B o o K
in a country where tame animals were unknown, v.
was to carry burdens, and perform all servile labor. 1't'
They were a great relief to the Spanish soldiers,
who hitherto had been obliged, not only to carry
teir own baggage, but to drag along the artillery
ymain force. He offered likewise a considerable
body of his troops, but Cortes was satisfied with
our hundred; taking care, however, to chufe
persons of such note as might prove hostages for
he fidelity of their master. Nothing memorable
lappened in his progress, until he arrived on the
confines of Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that pro-
.ince, a warlike people, were implacable enemies
of the Mexicans, and had been united in an ancient
alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla. Though
less civilized than the fubjedls of Montezuma,
they were advanced in improvement far beyond
the rude nations of America, whose manners we
ave described. They had made considerable pro-
grefs in agriculture ; they dwelt in large towns;
hey were not strangers to some species of com-
merce; and in the imperfec accounts of their
inlitutions and laws, transmitted to us by the
early Spanish writers, we discern traces both of
diRributive justice and of criminal jurifdidion, in
heir interior police. But frill, as the degree of
heir civilization was incomplete, and as they
epended for subsistence not on agriculture alone,
but trufled for it, in a great measure, to hunting,
they retained many of the qualities natural to men
1 tills tate. Like them, they were fierce and

B o o ic revengeful; like them , too , they were high

v. spirited and independent. In consequence of th
'1"9- former, they were involved in perpetual hostilities

and had but a slender and occasional intercourf
with neighbouring fiates. The latter inspired the
with such detestation of servitude, that they no
only refused to stoop to a foreign yoke, and main
tained an obstinate and successful contest in defenc
of their liberty against the superior power of t
Mexican empire , but they guarded with equa
solicitude against domestic tyranny ; and difdainin
to acknowledge any master, they lived under th
mild and limited jurifdidtion of a council eleted b
their several tribes.

Hs war Cortes, though he had received informatio
with the concerning the martial character of this people
Tiafcalans. people

flattered himself that his professions of deliverin
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma
their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and th
example of their ancient allies the Zempoallans
might induce the Tlafcalans to grant him a friendl
reception. In order to dispose them to this, fou
Zempoallans of great eminence were sent amba
fadors, to request, in his name, and in that
their cazique, that they would permit the Sp
niards to pass through the territories of the r
public in their way to Mexico. But instead of t
favorable answer which was expected, the Tla
calans seized the ambassadors, and, without an
regard to their public character, made prepal
tions for sacrificing them to their gods. At th
fame time , they assembled their troops, in ord

o oppose those unknown invaders, if they should B o o K
ttenpt to make their passage good by force of v.
rms, Various motives concurred in precipitating 1sI9.
he Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce people,
hut up within its own narrow precincts, and little
ccuflomed to any intercourse with foreigners,
apt to confider every stranger as an enemy, and
easily excited to arms. They concluded, from
tortes's proposal of visiting Montezuma in his
capital, that, notwithstanding all his professions,
e courted the friendlhip of a monarch whom they
oth hated and feared. The imprudent zeal of
Cortes in violating the temples in Zempoalla,
lied the Tlafcalans with horror ; and as they
ere no less attached to their superstition than the
other nations of New Spain, they were impatient
oavenge their injured gods, and to acquire the
erit of offering up to them, as victims, those
mpious men who had dared to profane their altars;
he Spaniards, from the smallness of their number,
were objeds of contempt; they had not yet mea-
red their own firength with those new enemies,
nd had no idea of the superiority which they
erived from their arms and discipline.

Cortes, after waiting some days, in vain, for Aug. 3o.

te return of his ambaifadors, advanced into the Succefsofit,
lafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed with no less
roinptitude than they are formed, he found
troops in the field ready to oppose him. They
attacked him with great intrepidity, and, in the
irRt encounter, wounded some of the Spaniards,,

u o o K and killed two horses; a loss, in their situation

v. of great moment, because it was irreparable. Fron

I this specimen of their courage, Cortes saw th

necessity of proceeding with caution. His armn
marched in close order; he chose the stations
where he halted , with attention, and fortifiec
every camp with extraordinary care. During four
teen days he was exposed to almost uninterruptec
a[aults , the Tlafcalans advancing with numerou
armies, and renewing the attack in various forms
with a degree of valor and perseverance to whic
the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in theNe
World. The Spanish historians describe tho
successive battles with great pomp, and enter int
a minute detail of particulars, mingling many e
aggerated and incredible circumstances ', withfuc
as are real and marvellous. But no power
words can render the recital of a combat intere
ing, where there is no equality of danger; an
when the narrative closes with an account
thousands slain on the one fide, while not a sing
person falls on the other, the most labored defcri
tions of the previous disposition of the troops, o
of the various vicissitudes in the engagement
command no attention.

Some fiagu. There are some circumstances, however,
larcirciimn- this war, which are memorable, and merit notice

as they throw light upon the character both ofth
people of New Spain , and of their conqueror
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field fuc

" Sec NOTE LXXVIII.

aft armies as appear fifficient to have overwhelmed B o o X
he Spaniards, they were never able to make any v.
mpreffion upon their finall battalion. Singular Is'9.
s this may seem, it is not inexplicable. The
lafcalans, though addicted to war , were, like
l unpolifhed nations, strangers to military order
nd discipline , and loft in a great measure the ad-
rantage which they might have derived from their
umbers , and the impetuosity of their attack, by
eir constant solicitude to carry off the dead and
runded. This point of honor , founded on a
ntiment of tenderness natural to the human mind,
nd frengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies
their countrymen from being devoured by their
nemies, was universal among the people of New
pain. Attention to this pious office occupied
hem, even during the heat of combat 30, broke
heir union, and diminished the force of the im-
reffion which they might have made by a joint
fort.

Not only was their superiority in number of
ittle avail, but the imperfection of their military
reapons rendered their valor in a great measure
offensive. After three battles, and many lkir-
illies and assaults , not one Spaniard was killed
athe field. Arrows and spears , headed with
int or the bones of fifles, stakes hardened in the
re, and wooden swords, though deflrudive wea-.
'ns among naked Indians , were easily turned
ide by the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly

.* B, Diaz. c. 65.

B O o K penetrate the efcaupiles, or quilted jackets, whic

v. the soldiers wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldl
I1si. to the charge, and often fought hand to han,

IMany of the Spaniards were wounded, though a
slightly, which cannot be imputed to any wantn
courage or strength in their enemies, but to the d
feet of the arms with which they assailed them.

Notwithstanding the fury with which

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem
have conducted their hostilities with some degr
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniar
warning of their hostile intentions, and as th
knew that their invaders wanted provisions, a
imagined, perhaps, like the other Americans, tb
they had left their own country because it did n
afford them subsistence, they sent to their cam
large supply of poultry and maize, desiring the
to eat plentifully , because they scorned to atta
an enemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would
an affront to their Gods to offer them famifled v
tims, as well as disagreeable to themselves to fe
on such emaciated prey ".

When they were taught by the firfi encoun

with their new enemies, that it was not easy
execute this threat; when they perceived, in
subsequent engagements, that notwithstanding
the efforts of their own valor, of which they h
a very high opinion , not one of the Spaniardsx
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to
a superior order of beings, against whom hum

' Hcrrera , dec 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, Chron. c.

power

wer could not avail. In this extremity;',they B o o K
d recourse to their priests, requiring them t6 re, v
al the mysterious causes of such extraordinary 'i9.
rents, and to declare what new means they should
nploy in order to repulse those formidable iri'
aders. The priests, after many ficrifioe . and
ncantations, delivered this response: That. hefe
rangers were the offspring of the fun ,'procreated

his animating energy in the regions of the
ft; that, by day , while cherilhed with the iri.
uence of his parental beams, they Were' invin-
ble; but by night, when his reviving heattwas
ithdrawn , their vigor declined and faded like
herbs in the field , and they dwindled down
o mortal men 1. Theories less plauffble have
iined credit with more enlightened nations, and
'e influenced their conducd. In consequence of
is, the Tlafcalans , with the implicit confidence
men who fancy themselves to be under the
idance of Heaven , adted in contradiction to one
their most eftablilhed maxims in war, and ven-
red to attack the enemy , with a strong body, in
night-time, in hopes of destroying them when
febled and fuFprifed. But Cortes had greater
ilance and discernment than to be deceived by
rude stratagems of an Indian army. The cen-
eis at his out- pols , observing some extraordi-
ly movement among the Tlafcalans, gave the
rm. In a moment the troops were under arms,
rallying out , dispersed the party with great

B. Diaz. c. 66.
VOL. 2I. S

B o o K slaughter, without allowing it to approach the

v. camp. The Tlafcalans , convinced , by fad expe.

9 rience , that their priests had deluded them, and

satisfied that they attempted in vain, either tc
deceive orto vanquish their enemies, their fierceness
abated, and they began to incline feriounfy to
peace.

The Tlafca. They were at a loss, however, in what mannei
'las disposed to addrcfs the firangers , what idea to form of theu
to peace.

character, and whether to confider them as being!
of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There wen
circumstances in their conduct which seemed to
favor each opinion. On the one hand, as thl
Span'iards conflantly dismissed the prisoners whoa
they took, not only without injury, but ofter
with presents of European toys, and renewed their
offers of peace after every victory; this lenitj
amazed people, who, according to the exterminat
ing systen of war known in America, were accul
tomed to sacrifice and devour without mercy all thi
captives taken in battle, and disposed them to en
t,ertain favorable sentiments of the humanity of thei
new enemies. But, on the other hand, as Corce
had fcizcd fifty of their countrymen who brough
provisions to his camp, and supposing them to b
spies, had cut off their hands "; this bloody fpel
tacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fir
arms and horses , filled them with dreadful in
prllions of the ferocity of their invaders ". Tb

" Cortes,Relaz. Ramus. iii. 228.C.Gomara;,Chron. c.4!
"' See NOTE LXXIX.

certainty was apparent in the mode of addref. o o x;
tg the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are divini- v.
es of a cruel and savage nature, we present to you 1S19
eflaves, that you may drink their blood, and eat
eir flesh. If you are mild deities, accept an offer-
g of incense and variegated plumes. If you are
en, here is meat, and bread and fruit to nourish
u ". The peace which both parties now desired
ith equal ardor, was soon concluded. TheTlaf- Concluiode
lans yielded themselves as vassals to the crown of
aftle, and engaged to assist Cortes in all his
ture operations. He took the republic under his
otedion, and promised to defend their persons
d possessions from injury or violence.
'Ihis treaty was concluded at a feafdnablejunc- Advantages
re for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service ofittothe
ong a small body of men, surrounded by such
multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the
my was on duty every night i and even they
hofeturn it was to reft, slept always upon their
ms, that they might be ready to run to their
is on a moment's warning. Many of them
erewounded, a good number, and among these
ortes himself, labored under the distempers pre-
leint in hot climates, and several had died since
cy let out from Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding
c fpplies which they received from the 'lal'ca-
ns, they were often in want of provisions, and
deflitute of the necessaries most requisite in

13. Diaz7 c. 70. Gomara, Chron; c. 47; Herrera, dec.
ib, vi. c. 7.

Si 9

B o o K dangerous service, that they had no salve to dress thei

v. wounds , but what was composed with the fat o
1is9. the Indians whom they had slain '. X'orn out wit

such intolerable toil and hardships , many of th
soldiers began to nurmnur, and, when they reflede
on the multitude and boldness of their enemies
more were ready to despair. It required the u
most exertion of Cortes's authority and address
check this spirit of despondency in its progre
and to reanimate his followers with their wont
sense of their own superiority over the enemies wi
whom they had to contend '7. The submission
the Tlafcalans , and their own triumphant ent
into the capital city , where they were recciv
with the reverence paid to beings of a fuperi
order, banished, at once, from the minds of t
Spaniards, all memory of pall fuffcrings, difpell
every anxious thought with respeCt to their futu
operations, and fully satisfied them that there
not now any power in America able to withfta
their arms `.

Cortesfoli- Cortes remained twenty days in Tlafcala,
citousto order to allow his troops a flort interval of rep
gafidn he. after such hard service. During that time , he

employed in tranfadions and inquiries of gr
moment with refpedl to his future schemes.
his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs,
received information concerning every partic

" B. Diaz. c. 62. 6S.
17 Cortes, Relaz. RamuC iii. 229. B. Diaz. c.69. Gom
Chron. c. i.

" Cortes, Relaz. Ramus. iii. 23o. B. Diaz. c, 72.

eative to the fbte of the'Mexican empire, or to n o, o R
he qualities of its sovereign , wlich could be of v.
fe in regulating his condud , whether 'he fiotld 5i19.
cobliged to ,acd as a friend or as an enemy. As
efouind that' th antipathy of his new allies to the
lexican nation was no less implacable ,than bad
een represented, and peroeived what benefit be
ihht derive fiom the aid of::fuch powerful con'
derates, he employed all his powers of infinua-
i0 in order to gain their confidence. Nor: xvas
y extraordinary exertion of these necefTry.-. The
Ijfcalans, with the levity of mind riatuiraltoaun-
oilhed men, w.ere, of their own.accord i difpofea
orun from the extreme of ,hatred to. that odf fond-
ess. Every thing in' the appearance and:'cohdud&
their guests , was to. them iniatter-of won:derx'
hey gazed 'wth admirationrr at :whatever the'Spa
iards did, and fancying them to: be, of heavenly
rigin, were eager not only. tbo.onrply: wrtlh their
emands , but 'to anticipate itheir. wiihes&: TIhey
iered, accordingly, to. acompany CorLes in :his
arch to Mexico, with all the forces. of the. -
ublic, under the command of-their most exper-
ced captiins. ' ; .'
But , after beftowing.fo mucht pains on cement- which ihe
gthis uniod, all the ben:eficial firuits of it were oi had lmt
e point of being Joft, bv a now cffulion of that rash zeal.
emperate religious, zeal with which Cortes was
nimated , no less than the other adventurers of
e age. They all colfidered themselves as inlftru,
"See NOTE LXXX.

S3

n o o ments employed by Heaven to propagate tl

v. Chriflian faith ,,nd the less they were qualifie(
A 9-. either by their knowledge or morals for such

function, they were more eager to difchardge
The profound veneration of the Tlafcalans for tl
Spaniards, having encouraged Cortes to expla
to forne .f their chiefs the doctrines of the Chriftii
religion, ;-and to insist that they should abandc
their own superstitions , and embrace the fai
of .their new friends, they, according to an id
universal, among barbarous nations, readily a
knrowledged the truth and excellence of what I
taiiught , but contended, that the Teules of Tlafca
-were divinities no less than the God in whom tl
Spaniards believed ; and as that Being was entitle
i6 the homage of Europeans, so they'were bout
to revere the fame powers which their ancefto
had worshipped. Cortes continued, neverthelef
to urge his.demand in; a tone of authority, mi
gling threats with his arguments, until the Tlaf
lans could bear it. no. longer, and conjured hi
-never to; mention this again, left the gods fhou
avenge.on their heads the guilt of having liten,
to such a proporition. Cortes, astonishcd and e

': taged at their. obftinacyi, prepared to execute i

.,, ,; . force, what he could not accomplish by perfuafio
*'· ': and was gointg to, overturn their altars, and c;

down their idols with the fame violent hand as
Zempoalla, if father Bartholemew de Olmedi
chaplain to the expedition, had not checked 1
inconsiderate impetuosity. tie represented t
imprudence of fuich an attempt in a large city new

econciled, and filled with people no less fuperfi.- BO OK'
tious than warlike; he declared, that the proceed- v.
ing at Zempoalla had always appeared'to him li
precipitate and unjust; that religion was not to
be propagated by the sword , or infidels 'to be
onverted by violence, that other weapons were
to be employed in this ministry; patient inftrudion
must enlighten the understanding, and pious ex-
ample captivate the heart, before men could be
induced to abandon error, and embrace the truth:*.
Amidst scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry
appears in such close union with oppression and
cruelty, sentiments so liberal and humane sooth
the mind with unexpected pleasure; and at a time
when the rights of conscience were little unde'r-
lood in the Christian world, and the idea of tolera-
tion unknown, one is altonifled to find a Spanish
monk of the sixteenth century among the first ad-
vocates againfl persecution , and in be:half of reli-
gious liberty. The remonstrances of an ecclesias-
tic, no less refpedable for wisdom than virtue,
had their proper weight with Cortes. He left the
Tlafcalans in the undisturbed exercise of their own
rites, requiring only that they should desist from
their horrid practice of offering human victims in
sacrifice.

Cortes , as soon as his troops 'were fit for Advances to

service, resolved to continue his march towards cholulL
Mexico, notwithltanding the earn'est dissuasives
of the Tlafcalans , who represented his deftrudion

B. Diaz, c. 77. p. 54. c.'83. p. 6r.

S4

o a 4 as unavoidable, if he put himself in the powerol
v, a.prince so faithless and cruel as V'Iontezuna,
s9?- As he was accompanied by fix thousand T'afcalans

he had, now the, command of forces which refem,
Ca. X3. bled a regular army. tIhey direced their course

towards Cholula ; Montezuma , who had at
length consented to admit the Spaniards into his
presence., having informed Cortes , that he had
.given. orders for his friendly reception there,
CholuJa was a considerable town , and though
only five leagues difant from Tlafcala, was
formerly an independent slate , but had been lately
fubjeded to the Mexican empire. This was
confidered by all the people of New Spain asa
holy place, the fanduary and chief feat of thei
gods, to which pilgrims resorted from every pro
vince, and a greater number of human vidtim
.were offered in its principal temple than even in
that of Mexico ". Montezuma seems to have in
vited the Spaniards thithler, either from fom
fuperfitious hope that the gods would not sus
ser this,facred nanfion to be defiled, withou
pouritig down their wrath upon tlofe impiou
firangers, who ventured to insult their poweri
the place of its peculiar residence; or from
belief that he himself might there attempt to cu
them off ,with more certain success, under th
immediate protection of his divinities.

The everity Cortes had been warned by the Tlafcalans
efhis proce.
dure there.

"Torquemada, Monar. Ind. i.S r, 282. ii.29 I. Gomara

Chron. c. si.
* lerrera, deQ, 3. lib. viio c. 2.

ore he set out on his march, to keep a watchful B o o r
eover the Cholulans. He himself, though receiv- v.
into the town with much seeming refped and iss9.
rdiality, observed several circumltances in their
ndud which excited suspicion. Two of the
lafcalans, who were encamped at some distance
om the town, as the Cholulans refused to admit
ir ancient enemies within its precindts, having
nd means to enter in disguise, acquainted Cortes,
at they observed the women and children of
principal citizens retiring in great hurry every
hlt; and that fix children had been sacrificed in
chief temple, a rite which indicated the exe-
tion of some warlike enterprise to be approaching.
the fame time, Marina the interpreter received
ormation from an Indian woman of diftindtion,
hose confidence she had gained, that the deftruc-
n.of her friends was concerted; that a body of
exican troops lay concealed near the town;
at some of the streets were barricaded, and in
hers, pits or deep trenches were dug, and slightly
vered over, as traps into which the horses might
1; that flones and missive weapons were colledced
the tops of the temples, with which to. over-
helm the infantry; that the fatal hour was now at
nd, and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three
the chief priests, and extorted from them a
nfelci-n, that confirmed the intelligence which
had received. As not a moment was to be
I, he instantly resolved to prevent his enemies,
to inflidt on them such dreadful vengeance as

B o o K might strike Montezuma and his fubjeas wi

v. terror. For this purpose, the Spaniards and Ze
1519. poallans were drawn up in a large court, whi

had been allotted for their quarters, near the cen
of the town; the Tlafcalans had orders to advan
the magiflrates, and several of the chief citize
were sent for, under various pretexts, and feiz
On a signal given, the troops rulhed out, and
upon the multitude, destitute of leaders, and
much astonished, that the weapons dropping fr
their hands , they flood motionless, and incapa
of defence. While the Spaniards pressed them
front, the Tlafcalans attacked them in the re
The fireets were filled with bloodshed and dea
The temples, which afforded a retreat to the pri
and some of the leading men, were set on si
and ;they periffed in the flames. This scene
horror continued two days; during which,
wretched inhabitants suffered all that the
trutjlve rage of the Spaniards , or the implaca
revenge of their Indian allies, could inflit.
length the carnage ceased, after the slaughter
fix thousand Cholulans, without the loss of a fin
Spaniard. Cortes then released the magiftrat
and reproaching them bitterly for their inten
treachery, declared, that as jufice was now
peased, he forgave the offence, but required th
to recal the citizens, who had fled, and re-eftab
order in the town. Such was the ascendant wh
the Spaniards had acquired over- this fuperltiti
race of men, and so deeply were they impre
with an opinion of their ftiperior difcernmcnt,

ell as power, that, in obedience to this command, B o o
ecity was in a few days filled again with people, v.
ho, amidst the ruins of their sacred buildings, 'ISi9
ielded refpedful service to men, whose hands
re stained with the blood of their relations and
dlow- citizens .
From Cholula, Cortes advanced directly towards Ad2n e
lexico, which was only twenty leagues distant. towards
every place through which he passed, he was Mlexico
eived as a person possessed of finfficient power
deliver the empire from the oppreflion under
lhich it groaned; and the caziques or governors
ommunicated to him all the grievances which they
Iitunder the tyrannical government of Montezuma,
ith that unreserved confidence which men naturally
pose in superior beings. When Cortes first ob-
rved the feeds of discontent in the remote pro-
inces of the empire, hope dawned upon his mind;
ut when he now discovered such symptoms of
lienation from their monarch near the feat of
overnment, he concluded that the vital parts of
heconftitution were asseted, and conceived the
oft sanguine expectations of overturning a
ate, whose natural strength was thus divided and
paired. While those reflections encouraged the
eneral to perrift in his arduous undertaking, the
odiers were no less animated by observations more
vious to their capacity. In dcfcending from the
ountains of Chalco, accrofs which the road lay,

Cortes,Relaz. RamuC. iii. 2 i. B. Diaz. c. 8 ;. Gomara,

on. c. 64. Ielrcra , dec. z. lib. vii. c. i. 3. Sec NOTI
XXXI.

n o o ;c the vafi plain of Mexico opened gradually to th

v. view. When they first beheld this profpea, c
"19g. of thd most firiking and beautiful on the face

Firit view
ofit.w tthe earth; when they observed fertile and cultivat

fields, stretching farther than the eye could reac
when they saw a lake resembling the sea in extei
encompassed with large towns, and discovered I
capital city rising upon an island in the midd
adorned with its temples and turrets; the scene
far exceeded their imagination, that some believ
the fanciful descriptions of romance were realize
and that its enchanted palaces and gilded don
were presented to their fight; others could har
persuade themselves that this wonderful fpeda
was any thing more than a dream . As th
advanced, their doubts were removed, but th
amazement increased. They were now fully fatisfi
that the country was rich beyond any concepti
which they had formed of it, and flattered the
selves that at length they should obtain an amn
recompence for all their services and sufferings.

The irrerolu. Hitherto they had met with no enemy to opp
ionof Mon. their progress, though several circumstances oct
tezuma.

red which led them to fufpedt that some de
was formed to surprise and cut them off. M
rneffengers arrived successively from MontezuA
permitting them one day to advance, requir
them on the next to retire, as his hopes or fe
alternately prevailed; and so wonderful was
infatuation, which seems to be unaccountable

4' Sec NOTE LXXXII.

y supposition but that of a fuperflitious dread B o o K
the Spaniards, as beings of a superior nature, v.
t Cortes was almost at the gates of the capital, 11i9.
ore the monarch had determined whether to
ive him as a friend, or to oppose him as an
emy. But as no sign of open hostility appeared,
Spaniiards, without regarding the flucuations
,loiitezuma's sentiments, continued their march
ng the causeway which led to Mexico through
bLke, with great circumspec'tion and the ftric'efl
cipline, though without seeming to fufped the
nce whom they were about to visit.
When they drew near the city, about a thou- Hisfirflin-
dperfons, who appeared to be of diftindion, terview ith

the Spa..

me forth to meet them, adorned with plumes, niards,
clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each of these,
his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted him
cording to the mode deemed moftrefpedful and
blniffive in their country. They announced the
proach of Nlontezuma himself, and soon after
harbingers came in fight. There appeared firfl
hundred persons in an uniform dress, with
eplumes of feathers, alike in fashion, marching
and two, in deep silence, bare-footed, with
ir eyes fixed on the ground. These were
lwed by a company of higher rank , in their
ft showy apparel, in the midst of whom was
Ontezuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented
1i gold, and feathers of various colors. Four
his principal favorites carried him on their
tlders, others fuipported a canopy of curious
rkmanflip over his head. Before him marched

n o o K three officers with rods of gold in their han

v. which they lifted up on high at certain interva
is9. and at that signal all the people bowed'their hea

and hid their faces, as unworthy to look on
great a monarch. When he drew near, Cor
dismounted, advancing towards him with officia
haste, and in a refpedful posture. At the fa
time lloittezuma alighted from his chair,
leaning on the arms of two of his near relatio
approached with a flow and Rfately pace, his
tcndants covering the fireet with cotton clot
that he might not touch the ground. Cortes
colted him with profound reverence, after
European fafllion. He returned the falutatio
according to the mode of his country, by touch
the earth with his hand, and then kifing it. T
ceremony, the customary expreflion of venerat
from inferiors towards those who were above th
in rank, appeared such amazing condescension
a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to c
fider the reft of mankind as of the fame fpei
with himself, that all his fubjeds firmly belie'
those persons, before whom he humbled himsel
tlis manner, to be something more than hImi
Accordingly, as they marched through the cros
the Spaniards frelquently, and with much satis
tion , beard themselves denominated Teules, or
vinitics. Nothing material passed in tlis first
tcrview. Ilontezuma conduded Cortes to
quarters which he had prepared for his reccpti
amd immediately took leave of him, with a polite,
not unworthy of a court more relined. " Yotu

'," fays he, " with your brothers in your own B o a K
use; refresh yourselves after your fatigue, and v.
happy until I return . " The place allotted to 1519.
Spaniards for their lodging was a house built
the father of Montezuma. It was surrounded
a stone-wall, with towers at proper diflances,
ich served for defence as well as for ornament,
its apartments and courts were so large, as to
mmodate both the Spaniards and their Indian
s. The first care of Cortes was to take pre-
ions for his security, by planting the artillery
as to command the different avenues which
to it, by appointing a large division of his
ps to be always on guard, and by posting cen-
sat proper stations, with injundions to observe
fame vigilant discipline as if they were within
tof an enemy's camp.
the evening, Montezuma returned to visit his His idea of
Rs with the fame pomp as in their first inter- the Spa
, and brought presents of such value, not
to Cortes and to his officers, but even to the
ate men, as proved the liberality of the mo-
h to be suitable to the opulence of his king-
A long conference ensued, in which Cortes
ed what was the opinion of Montezuma with
tt to the Spaniards. It was an established
ition, he told him, among the Mexicans, that
r ancetors came originally from a remote re-
and conquered the provinces now subjcd to

Cortes,Relaz. Ram. iii. 2 2-if . . B. rial. c.8 3--y.
ra, Chron c. 64, 65. ilerrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 3, 4, s.

n o o his dominion; that after they were fettled the

v. the great captain who conduded this colony
'l'9 turned to his own country, promising, that,

some future period his descendants should v
them, afflme the government, and reform th
constitution and laws, that, from what he h
heard and seen of Cortes and his followers,
was convinced that they were the very perf(
whose appearance the Mexican traditions andp
phecies taught them to expeCt; that accordint
he had received them, not as firangers, but as
lations of the fame blood and parentage, and i
fired that they might confider themselves as malti
in his dominions, for both himself and his fibje
should be ready to comply with their will, a
even to prevent their wifies. Cortes made a re
in his usual style, with refpedt to the dignity a
power of his sovereign, and his intention in fe
ing him into that country; artfully endeavouri
so to frame his difcourle, that it might coincide
much as poflible with the idea which Vlontezui
had formed concerning the origin of the Spaniar
Next morning, Cortes and some of his princi
attendants were admitted to a public audience
the emperor. The three subsequent days v
employed in viewing the city; the appearance
which, so far superior in the order of its bui
ings and the number of its inhabitant.s to
place the Spaniards had beheld in America,
yet so little refenbling the flrullure of an Hlurop
city, filled them with surprise and admiration.

Mexico, or Tenuchtitlan, as it was ancien

called

alled by the natives, is situated in a large plain, n o o IQ
envilroied by mountains of such height, that, v.
thouli within the torrid zone, the temperature of 'S19.
s cliirnite is mild and healthful. All the moisture
hich dcfcenda from the high grounds is colledced
n several lakes, the two largefl of which , of
bout ninety miles in circuit, communicate with
acha other. The waters of the one are frefhi, those
f the other brackish. Oh the banks of the latter,
(l on some fmnall islands adjoining to them, the
apital of Mlontezuma's empire was built. The
ccefs to the city was by artificial caufewavs or
reets formed of stones and earth, about thirty
eet in breadth. As the waters of the lake during
he rainy season overflowed the flat country, these
aufeways were of confiderabie length. That of
acuba, on the weft, extended a mile and a half,
hat ofTepeaca ', on the northwest, three miles;
hat of Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix miles.
n the east there was no causeway, and the city
ould be approached only by canoes '. In each
these causeways were openings at proper inter-
als, through which the waters flowed; and over
hefe beams of timber were laid, which being

I am indebted to M. Clavigero for correding an error

importance in my description of Mexico. From the east,
here Tezeuco was situated, there was no ctAueway, as I have
lerved, and yet by some inattention oh myn part, or on that
the printer, in all the former editions one of the causeways
S f;lil to lead to Tezeuco. M. Clavigero's megfurement
the length of these causeways differs somewhat from ntha:
hihl have adopted from F. Torribio. Clavig. ii. . 7i.

F. Torribio. IV1S
VoL. U.' T

o o r covered with earth, the causeway or freethad ever
v. where an uniform appearance. As the approach
'519* to the city were singular, its conftruclion was r

markable. Not only the temples of their gods
but the houses belonging to the monarch, and
persons of diftinuion , were of such dimensions
that, in comparison with any other buildings whic
had been hitherto discovered in America, they migh
be termed magnificent. The habitations of th
common people were mean, resembling the hu
of other indians. But they were all placed in
regular manner, on the banks of the canals whic
pasled through the city, in some of its diftrics,
on the fides of the (freets which interfecled it i
other quarters. In several places were large ope
ings or squares, one of which, allotted for the gre
market, is said to have been so spacious, that fort
or fifty thousand persons carried on traffic there. I
this city, the pride of the New World, and t
noblest monument of the indultry and art of ma
while unacquainted with the use of iron, and de
tute of aid from any domestic animal, the Spaniard
who are most moderate in their computation
reckon that there were at leat sixty thousand
habitants 7.

Tl'eirdan- But how much foevei the novelty of those o
gcrouslitu- jeds might amuse or astonish the Spaniards, tlh
atl'"l felt the utmofi solicitude with refpec to their o

47 Cortes,Rcla7. Ram. iii. 2 9. D. Relaz. della gran. Ci

i-lehxic.o, per un (;entiluonoa. dplia Corte Rain. ibid. ;o4.
lierreia, dec. 2;. lib. Vii. c. I+. &'.,

_."~ >~.-~

situation. From a concurrence of circurnflances, B o o KI
no less unexpeded than favorable to their pro- v.
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the Is59'
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now
lodged in its capital, without having once met
with open opposition from its monarch. The
Tlafcalans, however, had earnestly dissuaded them
from placing fTch confidence in M'lontezuma, as to
enter a city of such a peculiar situation as Mexico,
where that prince would have them at mercy, shut
up as it were in a snare, from which it was impof-
fible to escape. They assured him that the Nlexi-
can priests had, in the name of the Gods, coun-
felled their sovereign to admit the Spaniards into
the capital, that he might cut them off there
at one blow with perfect security ". They now
perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of
their allies were not detfitute of foundation; that,
by breaking the bridges placed at certain inter-
valson the causeways, or by defroying part of the
causeways themselves, their retreat would be ren-
dered impracticable, and they mufft remain cooped
up in the centre of a hoflile city, surrounded by
multitudes fiufficient to overwhelm them , and
Without a poflibility of receiving aid from their
illies. Mlontezuma had, indeed, received them with
diltingLifned refpedt. But ought they to reckoni
Upon this as real, or to confider it as feigned?
Even if it were sincere, could they promise on its
coitinuance? Their safety depended upon the

4 13. Diaz. c. s8. 86.

B o o K will of a monarch in whose attachment they had

v. no reason to confide; and an order flowing from
I119' his caprice, or a word uttered by him in passion,

might decide irrevocably concerning their fate".

Solicitude These rcflections, so obvious as to occur to the
ld, peirf mea-nest soldier, did not escape the vigilant saga.
plexihy of
Cortes. city of their general. Before he set out from

Cholula, Cortes had received advice from Villa
Rica ", that Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican
generals on the frontiers, having assembled an
army in order to attack some of the peopl
whom the Spaniards had encouraged to throw o
the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched ou
-with part of the garrison to support his allies; tha
an engagement had ensued, in which, though t
Spaniards were victorious, Efcalante, with feve
of his men, had been mortally wounded, hi
.horse killed, and one Spaniard had been fur
rounded by the enemy, and taken alive; thatth
head of this unfortunate captive, after being car
tied in triumph to different cities, in order to con
vince the people that their invaders were no
immortal, had been font to Mexico ". Cortes
though alarlmed with this intelligence, as an indi
cation of IMlontezuima's holtile intentions, had con
tinned( his march. Bus as soon as he entere
Mexico, he became sensible, that, from an exce
of confidence in the fiperior valor and difciplil

40 B. Bian. c. 94.

Cortes, Relaz. Ram. iii. 23 . C.
13. Dia?. c. 93, 94. Herrera, dec. g. lib. viii. c.

of his troops, as well as from the disadvantage of R o o c
having nothing to guide him in an unknown v.
cou0ntry, but the defective intelligence which he rsig.
had received from people with whom his mode of
communication was very imperfec, he had puffed
forward into a situation, where it was difficult to
continue, and from which it was dangerous to re-
tire. Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain
consequence of attempting the latter. The fuc-
cess of his enterprise depended upon fiupporting
the high 6pinion which the people of New Spain
had formed with refped to the irresistible power
of his arms. Upon the first symptom of timi-
dity on his part, their veneration would cease, and
lontczuma, whom fear alone restrained at pre-
sent, would let loose upon him the whole force
of his empire. At the fame time, he knew that
the countenance of his own sovereign was to be
obtained only by a series of victories, and that no-
thing but the merit of extraordinary success could
screen his conduct from the cenfuire of irregular-
it.. From all these considerations, it was necbf-
fary to maintain his station, and to extricate him-
self out of the difficulties in which one bold ftep
had involved him, by venturing upon another
till bolder. The situation was trying, but his
mind was equal to it; and after revolving the
matter with deep attentioni, he fixed upon a plan
no less extraordinary than daring. He determined eefolves to
to seize Montezuma in his palace , and to carry fetzeMa
him as a prisoner to the Spanifl quarters. From
the fuperflitious veneration of the Mexicans for

T3

r o o ic the person of their monarch, as well as their im.

v. plicit fubmiltlon to his will, he hoped, by having
Ist9. Montezuma in his power, to acquire the supreme

diredion of their affairs; or, at least, with such a
sacred pledge in his hands, he made no doubt of
being secure from any effort of their violence.

Isis manner This he immediately proposed to his officers,
of exctuting The timid startled at a measure so audacious, and
this.

railHd objedions. The more intelligent and refo.
lute , conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any profped of safety,
warmly approved of it, and brought over their
companions so cordially to the fame opinion, that
it was agreed instantly to make the attempt. A
his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Corte
went to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado
Sandoval, Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila
five of his principal officers, and as many trufi
soldiers. Thirty chosen men followed, not in re
gular order, but sauntering at some distance, asi
they had no object but curiosity; small partie
were polted at proper intervals, in all the street
leading from the Spanill quarters to the court
and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlafca
lan allies, were under arms, ready to sally out 0
the first alarm. Cortes and his attendants wer
admitted without suspicion; the Mexicans retirin
as usual, out of refpet. He addressed the mn
narch in a tone very different from that which h
had employed in former conferences, reproachin
him bitterly as the author ol the violent affau
made upon the Spatniards by one of his officer

nd demanded public reparation for the loss which n o o K
hey had sustained by the death of some of their v.
companions, as well as for the insult offered to I519.
the great prince whose servants they were. Mon.
tezuma, confounded at this unexpected accusation,
ind changing color, either from consciousness of
uilt, or from feeling the indignity with which
was treated, asserted his own innocence with

great earnestness, and , as a proof of it, gave
orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca and his
ccomplices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied,
with seeming complaifancc, that a declaration so
efpeclable left no doubt remaining in his own
mind, but that something more was requisite to
atisfy his followers, who would never be con-
inced that Montezuma did not harbour hoflile
ntentions against them, unless, as an evidence of
is confidence and attachment, he removed from
isown palace, and took up his residence in the
Spanish quarters, where he should be served and
onored as became a great monarch. The first
ention of so strange a proposal bereaved Monte-
uma of speech, and almost of motion. At length,
ndignation gave him utterance, and he haughtily
answered, " That persons of his rank were. not
Iccuftomed voluntarily to give up themselves as
rifoners; and were he mean enough to do so, his
fbjccls would not permit such an affront to be
lierccd to their fovercign." Cortes, unwilling to
employ force, endeavoured alternately to sooth
iad to intimidate him. The altercation became
airm; and having continued above three hours,

T4

B o o K Velatquez de Leon, an impetuous and gallan

v. young nian, exclaimed with impatience, "Wh
1i. 1 vwafle more time in vain ? Let us either seize hi

instantly, or stab him to the heart." The threa
ening voice and fierce gestures with which the
words were uttered, struck Montezuma. Tb
Spaniards, he was sensible, had now proceeded
far, as left him no hope that they would recede
His own danger was imminent, the necessity una
voidable. He saw both, and abandoning himself
his fate, complied with their request.

locntezuma His officers were called. He communicated
caried to them his resolution. Though aftonifbed an
the Spanish
:uarters afflided, they presumed not to question the wil

of their master, but carried him in silent pomp
all bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. Whe
it was known that the strangers were conveyin
away the emperor, the people broke out into th
wildest transports of grief and rage, threacenin
the Spaniards with immediate deftrudion, as th
punishment justly due to their impious audacity
But as soon as Montezuma appeared with a seer
ing gaiety of countenance, and waved his hand
the tumult was hushed, and upon his declaring
to be of his own choice that he went to reftie so
some time among his new friends, the multittde
taught to revere every intimation of their sovereign'
plefifure, quietly dispersed 'l.

Thus was a powerful prince seized by a fe

' B. Diaz. c. 9 ;. Gomara, Chron. c. 8 . Cortes, Re!a2
Ram. iii. p. 3 5, 236. Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. . z,

rangers, in the midst of his capital, at noonday, B o o It
nd carried off as a prisoner without opposition v.
bloodshed. History contains nothing parallel to 1519.
is event, either with refped to the temerity of
he attempt, or the success of the execution; and
ere not all the circumstances of this extraordinary
rafadltion authenticated by the molt unqueftion-
ble evidence, they would appear so wild and ex-
avaant, as to go far beyond the bounds of
hat probability which must be preserved even in
citious narrations.
Montezuma was received in the Spanish quarters Received
rith all the ceremonious respeCt which Cortes with l'ap
ad promnifed. He was attended by his own do-
eftics, and served with his ufial slate. His
rincipal officers had free access to him, and he
arried on every funcion of government as if he
ad been at perfect liberty. The Spaniards, how-
ver, watched him with the scrupulous vigilance
hich was natural in guarding such an important
rize , endeavouring at the fame time to sooth
d reconcile him to his situation, by every exter-
l demonstration of regard and attachment. But
om captive princes the hour of humiliation and
fering is never far distant. Qualpopoca, his subieaed to
n, and five of the principal officers who served tcrel indig-

'

, . i i *r * , 'nities.

lder him, were brought prisoners to the capital,
1 confcqcence of the orders which Montezuma Dec. 4.
ad ilrued. The emperor gave them up to Cortes,
hat he might inquire into the nature of their

' See NOTE LXXXII.

n o o io crime, and determine their punishment. The

v. were formally tried by a Spanilh court-martial
159- and though they had adted no other part than wh

became loyal fubjetds and brave men, in obeyi
the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in opp
ing the invaders of their country, they we
condemned to be burnt alive. The execution
such atrocious deeds is seldom long fufpende
'The unhappy victims were instantly led fort
The pile on which they were laid was compos
of the weapons collected in the royal magazi
for the public defence. An innumerable multitu
of Mexicans beheld, in silent astonishment, t
double insult offered to the majesty of th
empire, an officer of diftindion committed to
flames by the authority of strangers, for havi
done what he owed in duty to his natural fov
reign; and the arms provided by the foresight
their ancestors for avenging public wrong
consumed before their eyes.

But these were not the most Ihocking indignit

which the Mexicans had to bear. 1 he Spaniard
convinced that Qua.lpopoca would not have v
tured to attack Efcalante without orders from
master , wverc not fattsfied with inflicting venl
ance on the innfrumcnt employed in committit
that crime, while the author of it escaped wi
impunity. Just before Qualpopoca was led 01
to fulfer, Cortes entered the apartment of Mont

nlima, followed by some of his officers, and

soldier carrying a pair of fetters; and approachil
the monarch with a stern countenance, told r1

tas the persons who were now to undergo the i o o n
niflment which they merited, had charged him v.
the cause of the outrage committed, it was 1'
cefary that he likewise nfould make atonement

that gtilt; then turning away abruptly,
thout waiting for a reply, commanded the
dier to clap the fetters on his legs. The orders
re instantly execLuted. The disconsolate monarch,
ined up with an idea that his person was sacred
dinviolable, ald confidering this profanation
it as the prelude of immediate death, broke out
oloud lamentations and complaints. His attend-
ts, speechless with horror, fell at his feet,
thing them with their tears; and bearing up the
ters in their hands, endeavoured with officious
dernefs to lighten their pressure. Nor did their
es and despondency abate, until Cortes returned
m the execution, and with a cheerful counte.
nce ordered the fetters to be taken off. As
ontezuma's spirits had funk with unmanly
ection, they-now rose into indecent joy ; and
h an unbecoming transition , he passed at once
m the anguifl of despair to transports of
ititude and exprcfflons of fondness towards his
liverer.
In those tranfadions, as reprefcnted by the earoiis of
anifh hintorians, we search in vain for the (ertcs's
alities which diftinguilh other parts of Cortes's co"id"lt.
(ludt. To usurp a juriiditcion which could
t belong to a llranger, who afflumed no higher
lradcr tlan tihat of an amlbaflnador from a
f'il priilce, and1, under color of it, to inflit

B o o K a capital punifhmenton men'whofe condut entitli

v. them to efteern, appears an act of barbaro
1'19. cruelty. To put the monarch of a great kingdo

in irons, and, after such ignominious treatmen
suddenly to release him, seems to be a display
power no less inconsiderate than wanton. AccoI
ing to the common relation, no account can
given either of the one action or the other,
that Cortes, intoxicated with ficcefs, and prefu
ing on the ascendant which he had acquir
over the minds of the Mexicans, thought nothi
too bold for him to undertake, or too dangero
to execute. But, in one view, these proceedin
however repugnant to justice and humanity,
have flowed from that artful policy which regula
every part of Cortes's behaviour towards
Nexicans. They had conceived the Spaniards
be an order of beings superior to men. It was
the utmost consequence to cherish this illufio
and to keep up the veneration which it infpirq
Cortes wiihed that shedding the blood of
Spaniard should be deemed the most heinous
all crimes; and nothing appeared better calculat
to establish this opinion, than to condemn t
first Mexicans who had ventured to commit
to a cruel death, and to oblige. their monar
himself to submit to a mortifying indignity,
an expiation for being accessary to a deed
atrocious .

Thepowtr The rigor with which Cortes punifle t
which Cor.

" See NOTE LXXXIV.

happy persons who first presumed to lay i o o lx
lent hands upon his followers, seems accord- v.
ly to have made all the impression that he tesacquired
fred. The spirit of Montezuma was not only
erawed, but subdued. During fix months that
rtes remained in Mexico, the monarch conti-
ed in the Spanifl quarters, with an appearance
as entire fatisfadtion and tranquillity, as if he
d resided there, not from constraint, but
rough choice. His ministers and officers attended

as usual. He took cognizance of all affairs;
ery order was issued in his name. The external
ec of government appearing the fame, and all
ancient forms being scrupulously observed, the
ople were so little sensible of any change, that
y obeyed the mandates of their monarch with
efane submissive reverence as ever. Such was
edread which both Montezuma and his-fubjects
dof the Spaniards, or such the veneration in
hich they held them, that no attempt was made
deliver their sovereign from confinement; and
ough Cortes, relying on this ascendant which
!had acquired over their m'inds, permitted him
t only to visit his temples, but to make hunting-
curhons beyond the lake, a guard of a few
iiiards carried with it such a terror as to
ntiimidate the multitude, and secure the captive
OIIU'CI) h.
Thus, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in
izig Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured

Cortes, Relaz. p. .

z3 .
E. . Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.

t o o K to themflves more extensive authority in

v. Mexican empire than it was possible to h
i2to acquired in a long course of time by open for

and they exercised more absolute sway in thena
of another than they could have done in tt
own. The arts of poliflied nations, in fubjeft
such as are less improved, have been nearly
fame in every period. The system of fcreeninj
foreign usurpation , under the fantion of authoi
derived from the natural rulers of a country,
device of employing the magistrates and foi
already eftablifled as instruments to introduc
new dominion, of which we are apt to boat
sublime refinements in policy peculiar to
present age, were inventions of a more ed
period, and had been tried with success in
Weft, long before they were pradifed in
East.

Tre which Cortes availed hilnfelf to the utmost of
le mlkes of power which he possessel by means of this.

sent fore Spaniards, whom he judged belt qt
sied for such commissions, into different parts
the empire, accompanied by persons of diftindi
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them b
as guides and protedors. They visited mofl
the plo\inces , viewed their foil and producdi
surveycd witb particular care the diflrids wl
yiclded gold or silver, pitched upon fev
places as proper flations for future colonies,
endeavoured to prepare the minds of the peC
for fubmittinl to the Spaniiih yoke. Vhile t
wcre thus employed Cortes, in the name

the authority of Montezuma, degraded some a o o' t
the principal officers in the empire, whose v.
iities or independent spirit excited his jealousy, 'v0*
d fubfituted in their place persons less capable
more obsequious.
One thing still was wanting to complete his sec
rity. He wised to have such command of.the
ke as might ensure a retreat, if, either from le+
tor disgust, the Mexicans flould take arms
aint him, and break down the bridges or cause-
ys. This, too, his own address, and the faci-
yof Montezuma, enabled him to accomplish.
aving frequently entertained his prisoner with
mpous accounts of the European marine and art
navigation, he awakened his curiosity to fee
ofe moving palaces which made their wad
rough the water without oars. Under pretext
gratifying this desire, Cortes perfuaded'Mon-
uma to appoint some of his fubjeds to fetch part
the naval frores which the Spaniards had de'pofitZ
at Vera Cruz to Mlexico, and to employ others
cutting down and preparing timber. Witli-theit
stance, the Spanish carpenters soon conmpleted
o brigantines, which afforded a frivolous amui-:
ent to the monarch, and were confidered by
rtes as a certain resource, if he should be obliged
retire.
[ncouraged by so many inflances of the mon Atonrczllna
rchs tame fubmiflion to his wvill, Cortes ve'ntured ackIlow-

Ietleg himn.

put it to a proof flill more trying. He urged rs jt,,v:ir,
ontezuma to,acknowle(lge himelf a vassal of the otSpain,
ng of Caftilb, to hold his croWhi of hinim 'as fu

B o o K rior, and to subjed his dominions to the payme

v. of an annual tribute. With this requisition, tl
Is5o. ]aft and moit humbling that can be made too

pofeffed of sovereign authority, Montezuma sv
so obsequious as to comply. He called togeth
the chief men of his empire, and in a folenin
rangue, reminding them of the traditions and pi
phecies which led them to expedt the arrival of
people sprung from the fame flock with themfelvl
in order to take pofTeflion of the supreme powe
he declared his belief that the Spaniards were tl
promised race; that therefore he recognised t
right of their monarch to govern the Mexic
empire; that he would lay his crown at his fee
and obey him as a tributary. WVhile uttering the
yrords, Montezuma discovered how deeply he w
affedcd in making such a sacrifice. Tears ai
groans frequently interrupted his discourse.. Ovi
awed and broken as his spirit was, it still retain
such .a sense of dignity, as to feel that pang whi
pierces the heart of princes when constrained
resign independent power. The first mention
such a resolution struck the affcmbly dumb vw
aftonilhment. This was followed by a fullen mi
nmur of sorrow, mingled with indignation, whi
indicated some violen.t eruption of rage to be ni
at hand. r his Cortes foresaw, and seasonably
terpofed to prevent it, by declaring that his mal
had no intention to deprive Montezuma oft
royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon
conltitution and laws of the Mexican empi
This assurance, added. to their dread of the Span

power

wer, and to the authority of their monarch's ex- B o o It
ple, extorted a reludant consent from the afTein- V.
y'. The ad of fubmiridon and homage was exe- 1s20-
ted with all the formalities which the Spaniards
ere pleased to prescribe".
Montezuma, at the desire of Cortes, accom- 'he amount
nied this profession of fealty and homage with a ofthetrea-

uir e collect.

gnificent present to his new sovereign; and, as- ed, ly th,
rhis example, his fibjecls brought in very libe- Spaniards

contributions. The Spaniards now collected
the treasure which had been either voluntarily
lowed upon them at different times by Monte-
ma, or had been extorted from his people under
rious pretexts; and having melted the gold and
ver, the value of these, without including jewels
dornaments of various kinds, which were pre-
ved on account of their curious woirkmanihip,
ounted to fix hundred thousand pesos. The tirvsfionna
diers were impatient to have it divided , and itna: tite
ortes .complied with their desire. A fifth of the occafio,, .
hole was first set apart as the tax due to the
g. Another fifth was allotted to Cortes, as
mmander in chief. The rums advanced by Ve-
quz, by Cortes, and by some of the officers,
wards jdefraying the expense of fitting out the
ament .were then deducted. The remainder
Sdivided among the army, including the garri-
of Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different

See NOTE LXXXV.
Cortes*Relaz. 2; . D. B. Diaz, o. tel. Gomara,Chron.

?. lIerrera , dec. v.

lib. x. c, 4.
VOL It. vl

n o o K ranks. After so many defalcations, the fliare

v. a private man did not exceed a hundred pet
15 s. This fum fell so far below their sanguine expet

tions, that some soldiers rejected it with fcor
and others murmured so loudly at this cruel
appointment of their hopes, that it required allt
address of Cortes , and no finall exertion of]
liberality, to appease them. The complaints
the army were not altogether destitute of fount
tion. As the crown had contributed nothing
wards the equipment or success of the armamei
it was not without regret that the soldiers behelc
fwcep away so great a proportion of the treafi
purchased by their blood and toil. What fell
the share of their general appeared, according
the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth century,
enormous fum. Some of Cortes's favorites hi
secretly appropriated to their own use several or
ments of gold, which neither paid the royal fifl
nor were brouglt into account as part of the cc
mon stock. It was, however, so manifetlly 1
interest of Cortes at this period to make a la
remittance to the king, that it is highly proba
those concealments were not of great corifequen

Rearont The total fum amalfed by the Spaniards be
.IlY goltt no proportion to the ideas which might be fora
was toultld
ia rlh either by reflecting on the descriptions given
fmallquan hiflorians of the ancient splendor of Mexico,
lilies. by confidering the productions of its mines

modern times. But, among the ancient NI
cans, gold and filvcr were not the standards
vhich the worth of other commodities Was

ated; and destitute of the artificial value derived B o o It
m this circumltance, were no farther in request v.
an as they furnished materials for ornaments and snso,
ikets. These were either consecrated to the
ds in their temples, or were worn as markl of
linclion by tlheir princes and some of theii most
inent chiefs. As the consumption of the pie-
0us metals was inconsiderable, the demand for
em was not such as to put either the ingenuity
industry of the lXlexicans on the stretch, in or-
r to augment their store. They were altogether
acquainted with the art of working the rich
nes with which their country abounded. ,What
Id they had was gathered in the beds of rivers,
tive, and ripened into a pure metallic tfate '.
e utmost effort of their labor in search of it
to wafi the earth carried down by torrents
the mountains, and to pick out the grains of
d which subsided; and even this simple opera-
, according to the report of the persons whom
rtes appointed to survey. the provinces where
ere was a profped of finding mines, they per-
med very unlkilfully ". From all those causes,
whole mass of gold in poffelfion of the Mexi.
ns was not great. As silver is rarely found pure,
dthe Mexican art was too rude to conduct the
cess for refining it in a proper manner, the
antity of this metal was Itill less considerable ".

Cortes, Relaz. p. z6;. F. B. Diaz. . 12o, 103. Go
a, Chron, c. 90. " B. Diaz. c. 10;.

Jlirrera , dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 4.

V

n o o Kr Thus, though the Spaniiards had exerted all

v. power which they pofleffed in Mexico, and oft
t^2O. with indecent rapacity, in order to gratify th

predominant paflion, and though MIontezuma h
fondly exhausted his treasures , -ih hopes of
tiating their thirst for gold, the ptodudt of bot
'which probably included a great part of the
lion in the empire, did not rife in value abo
what has been mentioned `.

hbonttzmnia But however pliant Montezuma might be
ins,^ rxiect other matters, with refped to one point he wasi
to religion. flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, vi

the importunate zeal of a miflionary, to renoun
his faife gods, and to embrace the Christian fai
*he always rejected the proposition with iorr
Superstition, among the 'lexicans, was form
into such a regular and complete fyrtem, that
institutions naturally took fart hold of'the mir
and while the rude tribes in other parts of A
'rica. were easily induced to relinqtiifl a few
tions and rites, so loose and arbitrary as har
to merit the name of a public religion, the MV
·cans adhered tenaciously to their mode'of worfl
which, however barbarous, was accompanied v
such order and solemnity as to render it the ob
of veneration. Cortes, finding all his attempts
cffecual to flake the conflancy of Mlontezu
was so much enraged at his obflinacy, that 1
transport of zeal he led out his soldiers to thr
down the idols in the great temple by force.

" See NOTE LXXXVI.

ie pliets taking arms in defence of their altars, B o o K
nd the people crowding; with great ardor to fir p-
ort tlicn, Cortes's prudence overruledl his zeal, Is-°
id induccd him to desist from his irtnh attempt,
ter dislodging the idols from one of the flrines,
nd placing in their llead an image of the Virgin
liary '.
From that moment the Mexicans, who had Schemes of

the M eKi-

ernitted the imprisonment of their sovereign, cans io d,,
nd ffflered the exactions of strangers without a flroy th
ruggle, began to meditate how they might expel Spani;ards.
destroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
lled upon to avenge their insulted deities. The
iefts and leading men held frequent consultation,
vith Montezuma for this purpose. But as it
ight prove fatal to the captive monarch to
ttempt either the one or the other by violence,
e was willing to try more gentle means. H-aving
alled Cortes into his preftnce, he observed , that
ow, as all the purposes of his embassy were fully
ccomplifhed, the gods had declared their will,
nd the people signified their desire that be and
is followers fmould inflantly depart out of the
mpire. With this he required them to comply,
r unavoidable deflrution would fall suddenly; oli
hir heads. The tenor of this unexpeCted requifl
ion, as well as the determined tone in which

twas uttered, left Cortes no room to doubt that
wvns the result of some deep scheme concerted
twccen Montezunma and his fubjees. He quickly

: Sec NOTE LXXXVIL

V3

n o o rK perceived that he might derive more advantag

v. from a seeming compliance with the monarch's in
^Qo. clination, than from an ill-timed attempt to chan

or to oppose it; and replicd, with great comp
sure, that he had already begun to prepare for r
turning to his own country; but as he had d
stroycd the vessels in which he arrived, fore ti
was requisite for building other ships. This a
peared reasonable. A number of Mexicans wet
sent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and so
Spanifl carpenters were appointed to fuperinten
the work. Cortes flattered himfclf, that durin
this interval he might either find means to ave
the threatened danger, or receive such reinforc
ments as would enable him to despise it,

Anxiety and Almost nine months were elapsed since Port
aort e, carrero and lMontejo had failed with his difpatcli

to Spain; and he daily expedted their return wit
a confirmation of his authority from the kin
W ithout this, his condition was insecure a
precarious, and after all the great things whi
he had done, it might he his doom to be
the name and susser the punishment of a tra
tor. Rapid and extensive as his progress h
been, he could not hope to complete the rcdi
tion of a great empire with so finall a body of me
which by this time the diceafes of the clima
had considerably thinned; nor could he apply
recruits to the Spanish settlements in the iflan
until he received the royal approbation of 1
proceedings.

The arrival XWhile he remained in this cruel situation, nn
of'i Ilerv ll.
n:ninr, . OLlS about whait was pelt, uncertain with rcfpc

the future, and, by the late declaration of a o o Ke
lontezuma, opprefTed with a new addition of v.
res, a Mexican courier arrived with an account Is2o.
f some flips having appeared on the coafl. Cortes,
ith fond credulity, imagining that his messengers
ere returned from Spain, and that the completion
f all his wishes and hopes-was at hand, imparted
the glad tidings to his compianions, who received
hem with transports of mutual gratulation. Their
y was not of long continuance. A courier from
Sandoval, whom Cortes had appointed to succeed
fcalante in command at Vera Cruz, brought cer-
ain information that the armament was fitted out
y Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and instead of
ringing the aid which they expeced, threatened
tem with immediate deltrution.
The motives which prompted Velasquez to this fittedoutby
violent measure are obvious. From the circum- velafrqgz.
ances of Cortes's departure, it was impossible not
tofupecd his intention of throwing off all depend-
nce upon him. His neglecting to transmit any
account of his operations to Cuba, fIrengthened
his suspicion, which was at last confirmed, be-
Yond doubt, by the indiscretion of the officers
whom Cortes sent to Spain. They, from some
motive which is not clearly explained by the con-
temporary hiflorians, touched at the island of
Cuba, contrary to the peremptory orders of their
neral "'. By this means Velasquez not only

" 1. niaz. c. s 4, ; . I-Ierrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14. Go-
aira, Chron. c. 96.

V4

B o a K learned that Cortes and his followers, after for

v. mally renouncing all connexion with him, ha(
15 0 established an independent colony in New Spain

and were soliciting the king to confirm their pr
ceedings by his authority; but he obtained part
cular information concerning'the opulence of th
country, the valuabbl presents which Cortes ha
received, and the inviting profpeds of fticefs th
opened to his view. Every paflion which ca
agitate an ambitious mind; shame, at having bee
so grossly overreached; indignation, at beingb
trayed by the man whom he had feledted as th
object of his favor and confidence; grief, f
having wafted his fortune to aggrandize an en
my; and despair of recovering so fair an opport
nity of eflablifhing his fame and extending h
power, now raged in the bosom of Velasquez, A
these, with united force, excited him to make a
extraordinary effort in order to be avenged on th
author of his wrongs, and to wrest from him hi
usurped authority and conquests. Nor did he wa
the appearance of a good title to justify such a
attempt. The agent whom he sent to Spain wit
an account of Grijalva's voyage, had met with
most favorable reception; and from the spec
mens which he produced, such high expectation
vwere formed concerning the opulence of Ne,
Spain, that Velasquez was authorized to profecut
the discovery of the country, and appointed g
xvernor of it during life, with more extensive powe
and privileges than had been granted to all

adventurerfromthetime of Columbus '. Elated by B o o r
this diflinguifhing mark of favor, and warranted v.
to confider Cortes not only as intruding upon his is2o.
urifdition, but as disobedient to the royal man-
date, he determined to vindicate his own rights
and the honor of his sovereign by force of arms .
His ardor in carrying on his preparations, was Underthe
such as might have been expected from the vio. NOrMvaent E
liece of the paflions with which he was animated;
and in a flort time an armament was completed,
onfifting of eighteen flips, which had on board
furfcore horsemen, eight hundred foot-foldiers,
f which eighty were musketeers, and a hundred
and twenty crofs-bow-men, together with a train
of twelve pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's expe-
ience of the fatal consequence of committing to
nother what he ought to have executed himself,
ad not rendered him more enterprising, he vested
he command of this formidable body, which, in
he infancy of the Spanilh power in America, me-
its the appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de
Tarvaez, with inftrudtions to seize Cortes and his
rincipal officers, to fend them prisoners to him,
nd then to complete the discovery and conquest
f the country in his name.
After a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed his The pro.
en without opposition near St. Juan de Ullua. eedigo
hree soldiers, whom Cortes had sent to search April.
r mines in that distriCt, immediately joined him.

Tlerrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 1I.
I Sec NOTE LXXXVIII.

u o o K By this accident, he not only receivedinformation

v. concerning the progress and situation of Cortes

0 but as these soldiers had made some progress i

the knowledge of the Mexican language, he at
quired interpreters, by whose means he was en
abled to hold some intcrcourfe with the people o
the country. But, according to the low cunnin
of deserters, they framed their intelligence wit
more attention to what they thought would
agreeable, than to what they knew to be true
and Icprefcnted the situation of Cortes to be
desperate, and the difaffedion of his followers
be so general, as increased the natural confiden
and presumption of Narvaez. His first operation
however, might have taught him not to rely
their partial accounts. Having sent to fummo
the governor of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara
a priest whom he employed in that service, mad
the requisition with such insolence, that Sandova
an officer of high spirit, and zealously attached
Cortes, instead of complying with his demand
seized him and his attendants, and sent them
chains to Mexico.

Cort- deep. Cortes received them not like enemies, but
ly alarmed. friends, and condemning the fcverity of Sandov

set them immediately at liberty. By this .wel
timed clemency, seconded by caresses and pr
fonts, he gained their confidence, and drew fro
them such particulars concerning the force and
tentions of Narvaez, as gave him a view of
impending danger in its full extent. Ile had Xi
to contend now with half-naked Indians, no mate

for him in war, and still more inferior in the arts B o o I
of policy, but to take the field against an army in v.
courage and martial discipline equal to his own, in '15'
number far superior, ading under the fanetion of
royal authority, and commandedby an officer of
known bravery. He was informed that Narvaez,
more solicitous to gratify the resentment of Velaf-
quez, than attentive to the honor or interest of
his country, had begun his intercourse with the
natives, by representing him and his followers as
fugitives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against
their own sovereign, and of injustice in invading
the Mlexican empire; and had declared that his
chief objed in visiting the country was to punifl
the Spaniards who had committed these crimes,
and to rescue the Nlexicans from oppression. He
oon perceived that the fame unfavorable repre-
entations of his charadter and adions had been con-
weyed to Montezuma, and thatNarvaez had found
means to assure him, that as the conduct of those
who kept him under restraint was highly displeasing
to the king his master, he had it in charge not only
to rescue an injured monarch from confinement,
ut to rcinftate him in the possession of his ancient
o\vwr and independence. Animated with this
rofpcdl of being set free from fubjedion to firan-
els, the Mexicans in several provinces began open-
y to revolt from Cortes, and to regardNarvaez as
deliverer no less able than willing to save them.
Inntczuma himself kept up a secret intercourse
with the new commander, and seemed to court
4n' as a person superior in power and dignity to

n o o K those Spaniards whom he had hitherto revered as

v. the first of men `.
Ilco. Such were the various afpeds of danger and

tis dcl"bera- difficulty which presented themselves to the view
ceininghis of Cortes. No situation can be conceived more
dua1. trying to the capacity and firmness of a general,

or where the choice of the plan which ought to be
adopted was more difficult. If he flould wait the
approach of Narvacz in Mexico, deftrucion seem.
ed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
pressed him from without, the inhabitants, whose
turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on
such a favorable opportunity of avenging all their
wrongs. If he flould abandon the capital, set the
captive monarch at liberty, and march out to meet
the enemy; he must at once forego the fruits ol
all his toils and victories, and relinquish advanta,
ges which could rot be recovered without ex
traordinary efforts, and infinite danger. If, in
stead of employing force, he should have recourfi
to conciliating measures, and attempt an accom
modation with Narvaez; the natural haughtinef
of that officer, augmented by consciousness of hi!
present superiority, sorbad him to cherish any fan
guine hope of success. After revolving ever)
scheme with deep attention, Cortes fixed upoi
that which in execution was most hazardous, but
if fuccelsful, would prove most beneficial to hi
country; and with the decisive intrepidity suitel

" See NOTE LXXXIX.

to desperate situations, determined to make one n o o K
bold effort for vidcory under every disadvantage v.
rather than sacrifice his own conquests and the 15s'
Spanifi interest in Mexico.

But though he foresaw that the conteflemuf be Hisneocia-
terminated finally by arms, it would have been tnfo'l wit
not only indecent, but criminal, to have marched ofNarvaez.
against his countrymen, without attempting to
idjuft matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whose cha¥raider the function was well suited, and
who possessed, besides, such prudence and address,
as qualified him to' carry on the secret intrigues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narvaet
rejeded, with scorn, every scheme of accommo-
dation that Olmedo proposed, :and was with diffi-
culty restrained from laying violent hands on hinr
and his attendants. He met, however, with a
more favorable reception among the followers of
Narvaez, to' many of whom he delivered letters,
either from Cortes or his officers, their ancient
friends and companions. Cortes artfully accom-
panied these with presents of rings, chains of gold,
and other trinkets of value which inspired those
needy adventurers with high ideas of the wealth
that he had acquired, and with envy of their good
fortune who Were engaged in his service. Some,
from hopes of becoming (farers in those rich spoils,
declared for an immediate -accommodation with
(:ortes. Others, from public spirit, labored to
prevent a civil war, which, vwhatever party should
prevail, rault liake, and perhaps subvert the Spa.

o xO nifh power, in a country where it was so irnper,

v. fetly eflablifhed, Narvaez disregarded both, and
50ao. by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and his

adherents rebels and enemies to their country,
Cortes, it is probable, was not minch surprised at
the untradable arrogance of Nartaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific dif.
position as might justify his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an eremy whori
he had labored in vain to appease.. 3

Marches He left a hundred and fifty men: jin the capital,
agaiit lhim under the command of Pedro de-Alvarado, anof.

sicer of diftinguifled courage, for whom the MAexi
cans had conceived a fingul.r degree of refped.
To the custody of this slender garrison he commit
ted a great city, with all the wealth he had ama
fed, and, what was still of greater importance, th
person of the imprisoned monarch. His utmot
art was employed in concealing from Monteztlma
the real cause of his march. He labpred. to peri
fuade him, that the strangers who had lately ar.
rived were his friends and ftllow-fubjets,; and that,
after a flort interview with them, they would de-
part together, and. return to their own country,
The captive prince , unable to comprehend the
designs of the Spaniards, or to reconcile what he
now heard with the declarations of Narvaez, and
afraid to difcovcr any symptom of fifpicion or dif-
trust of Cortes, promised to remain quietly in the
Spanifi quarters, and to cultivate the fame friend-
flip with Alvarato wliicli he had uniformly mtail.
tained.with him. Cortes, with Iccn:ing confidcncC

n this promise, but relying principally upon the n o o R
njuncions which he had given Alvarado to guard v.
is prisoner with the most scrupulous vigilance, set Io52
ut from Mexico.
His strength, even after it was reinforced by Numberof
he jundtion of Sandoval and the garrison of his trooP'
era Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and
sty men. As he hoped for success chiefly from
e rapidity of his motions, his troops were not
ncumbered either with baggage or artillery. But
she dreaded extremely the impression which the
nemy might make with their cavalry, he had
rovided against this danger with the foresight
nd sagacity which distinguish a great commander.
aving observed that the Indians in the province
Chinaritla used spears of extraordinary length
nd force , he armed his soldiers with these, and
ccuftomed them to that deep and compact arrange-
ent which the use of this formidable weapon,
he best perhaps that ever was invented for defence,
nabled them to assume.
With this small but firm battalion, Cortes ad. Continves
anced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaezhad to egciatq

as he ad-

aken pofeflion. During his march, he made vanced.
peated attempts towards some accommodation
ith his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that
ortes and his followers should instantly recognise
is title to be governor of New Spain, in virtue
the powers which he derived from Velasquez;
d Cortes refusing to submit to any authority'
hich was not founded on a commillion from the'
"peror himself, under wlofe immediate protcdion

t o o he and his adherents had placed their infant colony

v. all these attempts proved fruitless. The intercourse
12zo. however, which this occasioned between the twc

parties, proved of no small advantage to Cortes
as it afforded him an opportunity of gaining fomi
of Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of soften
ing'others by a semblance of moderation ; and o
dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among hi
troops, most of his soldiers having converted theil
fliare of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelet
and other ornaments, which they displayed with
military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto o0
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned toward
an accommodation with their countrymen. Thi
discovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almost to madness. In a transport of rage
he set a prize upon the head of Cortes, apdo
his principal officers; and having learned that h(
was now advanced within a league of Zempoalli
with his small body of men, he confidered this ai
an insult which merited immediate chastisement
and marched out with all his troops to offer hir
battle.

Attacks But Cortes was a leader of greater abilities an(
Narvaez in experience than, on equal ground, to fight an enem)
the night,

so fr fuiperior in number, and to much bettel
appointed. Having taken his station on the oppO
fitc bank of the river de Canoas, where he kne¢
that he could not be attacked , he beheld the ap
proach of the enemy without concern, and difrc
gardcd this vain bravade. It was then the begil1nil

cf

of the wet season '7, and the rain had poured n o o K
(lown, during a great part of the day, with the v.
violence pectliar to the torrid zone. The follow- ~1.
ers of Narvaez, unaccuflomed to the hardlhips of
military service, murmured so much at being thus
fruitlessly exposed, that, from their unfoldier-like
impatience, as well as his own contempt of his
adversary, their general permitted them to retire
toZempoalla. The very circumstance which induced
them to quit the field, encouraged Cortes to form
a scheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate
the war. He observed, that his hardy veterans,
though flanding under,the torrents, which conti-
nued to fall , without a tingle tent or any shelter
vhatfoever to cover them, were so far' from repi.
ning at hardships which were become familiar to
them, that they were still fresh and alert for ser-
vice. He foresaw that the enemy would naturally
give thernfelves up to repose after their fatigue,
and that, judging of the conduct of others by their
own effeminacy, they would deem themselves per.
felly secure at a season so unfit for action. He
resolved , therefore, to fall upon them in the dead
of night, when the surprise and terror of this un.
txpected attack might more than compensate the
nferiority of his numbers. His foldicrs, sensible
that no resource remained but in some desperate
ort of courage , approved of the measure with
Iuc warmth, that Cortes, in a military oration
hich he addressed to them before they began their

7 H-ackluyt,vol. iii. 467. De Laet, Defcr. Ind, Occid. a2 r.
VOL. LL X

n o o i march, was more solicitous to temper than to in.

v flame their ardor. He divided them into three
1s5o. parties. At the head of the first he placed Sando

val; intruding this gallant officer with the mo
dangerous and important service, that of seizin
the enemy's artillery, which was planted befor
the principal tower of the temple, where Narvae
had fixed his head-quarters. Chriftoval de O1i
commanded the second, with orders to assault th
tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes him
self conduted the third and smallest division
which was to ad as a body of reserve, and t
support the other two as there Ihould be occasion
Having passed the river de Canoas, which w
much swelled with the rains, not without dif
culty, the water reaching almofl to their chins, the
advanced in profound silence, without beat
drum, or found of any warlike instrument; eac
man armed with his fwdrd, his dagger, and h
Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, remiss in proporti
to his security, had potled only two centinels
watch the motions of an enemy whom he hadfu
good cause to dread. One of these was seized
the advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the oth
made his efcapc, and hurrying to the town wi
all the precipitation of fear and zeal, gave fu
timely notice of the enemy's approach, that the
was full leisure to have prepared for their rece
tion. But, through the arrogance and infatuati
of Narvaez, this important interval was loft.
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the ce
nel, and treated with dcrifion the idea of bci

tacked by forces so unequal to his own. The B o o K
outs of Cortes's soldiers, rulhing on to the as- v.
ult, convinced him at last, that the danger which lio.
e despised was real. The rapidity with which
iey advanced was such, that only one cannon
uld be fired, before Sandoval's party closed with
e enemy, drove them from their guns, and began
force their way up the steps of the tower. Nar-
aez, no less brave in action than presumptuous
nconduct, armed himself in haste, and by his
ice and example animated his men to the com-
at. Olid advanced to sustain his companions;
nd Cortes himself, rushing to the front, couduCt-
dand added new vigor to the attack. The com-
acl order in which this small body pressed on,
nd the impenetrable front which they presented
ith their long spears, bore down all opposition
fore it. They had now reached the gate, and andover-
ere struggling to burst it open, when a soldier come him.
aving set fire to the reeds with which the tower
as covered, compelled Narvaez to sally out. In
efirlt encounter he was wounded in the eye with
fpcar, and falling to the ground, was dragged
own the steps, and in a moment clapt in fetters.
he cry of victory resounded among the troops of
rtes. Those who had sallied out with their
ader now maintained the conflict feebly, and be-
in to surrender. Among the remainder of his
Iliers, flationed in two finaller towers of the
mpl, terror and confusion prevailed. The
arknlef was so great, that they could not dil'in.
ii between their friends and foes. Their own

X z

o o K artillery was pointed against them. Wherevel
v. they turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleamine
is°-. through the obscurity of night, which, though

proceeding only from a variety of shining infecs
that abound in moist and sultry climates, theira
frighted imaginations represented as numerou
bands of mulketeers advancing with kindled matche
to the attack. After a short resistance, the soldier
compelled their officers to capitulate, and befor
morning all laid down their arms, and fubmitte
quietly to their conquerors.

The effes This complete vitory proved more acceptable
f thisvie. as it was gained almost without bloodshed, on,

two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes, an
two officers, with fifteen private men, of the a
Verse fadion. Cortes treated the vanquilhed n
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, an
offered either to fend them back direcly to Cub
or to take them into his service as partners in h
fortune, on equal terms with his own foldie
This latter propoftion, seconded by a feafonab
distribution of some presents from Cortes, and
beral promises of more, opened profpets so agre
able to the romantic expecations which had invit
them to engage in this service, that all, a fewp
tifans of Narvaez excepted, closed with it, a
vied with each other in professions of fidelity a
attachment to a general, whose recent success h
given them such a striking proof of his abilities
command. Thus, by a series of events no I
fortunate than uncommon, Cortes not only efca
from perdition which seemed inevitable, but, wl

e had least reason to expect it, was placed at the n o o K
ead of a thousand Spaniards, ready to follow v.
vhercver he should lead them. Whoever reflects 10o.
on the facility with which this victory was ob.
ained, or confiders with what sudden and unani-
ous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged
hemfelves under the standard of his rival, vill be
it to ascribe both events as much to the intrigues
sto the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufpeC
hat the ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less
y the treachery of his own followers, than by
he valor of his enemy ".
But, in one point, the prudent conduct and TheMexi-
ood fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous. canstake
f, by the rapidity of his operations after he began athe St a
is march, he had not brought matters to such niards.
speedy issue, even this decisive vicory would have
ome too late to have saved his companions whom
e left in Mexico. A few days after the dif-
ornfiture of Narvaez , a courier arrived with an
ccount that the Mexicans had taken arms, and
aving seized and dcftroyed the two brigantines,
hich Cortes had built in order to secure the corn
and of the lake, and attacked the Spaniards in
heir quarters, had killed several of them, and
ounded more, had reduced to ashes their maga-
ne of provisions, and carried on hostilities with
ch fury, that, though Alvarado and his men de-
nded themselves with undaunted resolution, they

Cortes, Relaz. 242. D. B. Diaz. c. i lo- .Iz . Herrera.
c. . lib. ix. c. 18, &c. Gomara, Chron. c. 97, &c.

X 3

B o O K must either be soon cut off by famine, or finl

v. under the multitude of their enemies. This revol
1520. was excited by motives which rendered it fil

more alarming. On the departure of Cortesfo
Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered themselves
that the long expected opportunity of reftorinI
their sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating thei
country from the odious dominion of strangers
was at length arrived ; that while the forces of thei
oppressors were divided, and the arms of one part:
turned against the other, they might triumph wit
greater facility over both. Consultations were hel
and schemes formed with this intention. The Sp
niards in Mexico, conscious of their own feebl
ness, fifpedted and dreaded those machination
Alvarado, though a gallant officer, possessed ne
ther that extent of capacity, nor dignity of ma
ners, by which Cortes had acquired such an afcen
ant over the minds of the Mexicans, as never
lowed them to form ajuft efimate of his weakn
or of their own strength. Alvarado knew no mo
of supporting his authority but force. Instead
employing address to disconcert the plans or
sooth the spirits of the IVlexicans, he waited
return of one of their folern festivals, when t
principal persons in the empire were dancing, a
cording to custom, in the court of the great te
pie; he seized all the avenues which led to it, an
allured partly by the rich ornaments which tlh
wore in honor of their gods, and partly by
facility of cutting off at once the authors of tl
conspiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon the

narmed and unfufpicious of any danger, and maf- n o o
cred a great number, none escaping but such as v
ade their way over the battlements of the temple. I5
a action so cruel and treacherous filled not only
e city, but the whole empire, with indignation
nd rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and
gardlefs of the safety of their monarch, whose
fe was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their
wn danger in assaulting an enemy who had been
long the objed of their terror, they committed
I those ads of violence of which Cortes received

n account.
To him the danger appeared so imminent, as Hemarches
admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set back to the
utinlfantly with all his forces, and returned from
empoalla with no less rapidity than he had ad-
anced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two
oufand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexi-
an territories he found that difaffedion to the
paniards was not confined to the capital. The
rincipal inhabitants had deserted the towns through
hich he passed; no person of note appearing to
eet him with the usual rsfpect; no provision was
ade for the subsistence of his troops; and though
w as permitted to advance without opposition,
e solitude and silence which reigned in every
Ice, and the horror with which the people avoid-
all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-
oted antipathy, that excited the molt just alarm.
ut, implacable as the enmity of the Mexicans
as, they were so unacquainted with the science
war, that they knew not how to take the

X4

l; o o proper measures, either for their own safety or the

v. deftrudion of the Spaniards. Uninftruded by their
i^oi former error in admitting a formidable enemy into

their capital , instead of breaking down the cause,
ways and bridges, by which they might havein
closed Alvarado and his party, and have effedtu
june s4. ally ftopt the career of Cortes, they again fuffere

him to march into the city without molestation
and to take quiet possession of his ancient flation

Improper The transports of joy with which Alvarado an
:on(luu of his soldiers received their companions cannot b
lCrt^' expressed. Both parties were so much elated, th

one with their seasonable deliverance, and the othe
with the great exploits which they had achieved
that this intoxication of success seems to hav
reached Cortes himself; and he behaved on thi
occasion neither with his usual sagacity nor atten
tion. He not only neglected to visit Montezuma
but embittered the insult by expreflions full o
contempt for that unfortunate prince and his pe
pie. The forces of which he had now the co
mand, appeared to him so irresistible, that he migh
assume a higher tone, and lay aside the mask
moderation, under which he had hitherto concea
ed his designs. Some Mexicans who underftoo
the Spanish language , heard the contemptuo
words which Cortes uttered, and reporting the
to their countrymen, kindled their rage ane
They were now convinced that the intentions
the general were equally bloody with those of Alv
rado , and that his original purpose in visiting the
country, had not been, as he pretended , to cou

the alliance of their sovereign, but to attempt the n o o K
conquest of his dominions. They rcfumed their v.
ains with the additional fury which this discovery '120

The violent

ilfpired , attacked a considerable body of Spaniards hofility of
who were marching towards the great square in theMexi.
which the public market was held, and compelled can.'
them to retire with some loss. Emboldened by
this success, and delighted to find that their op-
prefors were not invincible, they advanced'next
day with extraordinary martial pomp to assault the
Spaniards in their quarters. Their number was
rmidable, and their undaunted courage frill more
o, Though the artillery pointed against their nu-
merous battalions , crowded together in narrow
Ireets, swept off multitudes at every discharge;
hough every blow of the Spanish weapons fell
with mortal effect upon their naked bodies, the
mpetuofity of the assault did not abate. Fresh
men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
lain, and meeting with the fame fate, were fuc-
ceded by others no less intrepid and eager for
vengeance. The utmost effort of Cortes's abilities
ad experience, seconded by the disciplined valor
f his troops, were hardly sufficient to defend the
fortiications, that surrounded the port where the
paniards were flationed, into which the enemy
Were more than once on the point of forcing their
way.
Cortes beheld, with wonder, the implacable Dinfrers o
rocity of a people, who {eemed at firfl to sub- t'espa.

niards.

it tamely to the yoke, and had continued so nia
ong palfive under it. The soldiers of Narvaez,

B o o IK who fondly imagined that they followed Corte

v. to fliare in the spoils of a conquered empire, wer
5o20. altonifhed to find that they were involved in adan

gerous war, with an enemy whose vigor was iil
unbroken, and loudly execrated their own weakness
in giving such easy credit to the delusive prornifei
of their new leader ". But surprise and complain
-were of no avail. Some immediate and extraord
nary effort was requisite to extricate themfelv
out of their present situation. As soon as thea
proach of evening induced the Mexicans to r
tire, in compliance with their national cufto
of ceasing from hostilitics with the setting fun
Cortes began to prepare for a sally, next day, wit
such a considerable force, as might either drive th
enemy out of the city, or compel them toliftent
terms of accommodation.

Cortes at. le conduced, in person, the troops defsine
tacks them for this important service. Every invention know
\ ithout 'tiC. .

c
c(5s. in the European art of war, as well as everypr

caution, fuggefled by his long acquaintance wit
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepare
and determined to oppose him. The force of th
'Mexicans was greatly augmented by freff troops
which poured in continually from the country, an
their animosity was in no degree abated. The
wvere led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhort
tions of their priests, and fought in defence
their temples and families, under the eye of the

" B. Diaz. c. 126.

ods, and in presence of their wives and children. n o o iK
rotwithflanding their numbers, and enthufiatic v.
ontempt of danger and death, wherever the 's0
paniards could close with them, the superiority
f their discipline and arms obliged the Mexi-
ans to give way. But in narrow fireets, and
here many of the bridges of communication
ere broken down, the Spaniards could seldom
ome to a fair rencounter with the enemy, and as
hey advanced, were exposed to showers of arrows
nd stones from the tops of the houses. After
day of incessant exertion, though vast numbers
fthe Mexicans fell, and part of the city was
urnt, the Spaniards, weary with the slaughter,
d harassed by multitudes which 'successively re-
eved each other, were obliged at length to retire,
ith the mortification of having accomplished no-
ing so decisive as to compensate the unusual cala-
ity of having twelve soldiers killed, and above
xty wounded. Another sally, made with greater
rce, was not more effectual, and in it the general
imfeif was wounded in the hand.
Cortes now perceived, too late, the fatal er- MIontezumii
or into which he had been betrayed by his own flnin.
ontempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that
could neither maintain his present station in the
'ntre of a hofltile city, nor retire from it without
he molt imminent danger. One resource still re-
';icd, to try what effet the interposition of
lontezuma might have to sooth or overawe his
ubjels. When the Mexicans approached next
O'ring to renew the assault, that unfortunate

n o o l; prince, at the mercy of the Spaniards , and reduce(

v. to the fad necessity of becoming the instrument o
leo0. his own disgrace, and of the slavery of his people'

advanced to the battlements in his royal robes, an
with all the pomp in which he used to appear
solemn occasions. At fight of their sovereign
whom they had long been accustomed to honor
and almost to revere as a god, the weapons dro
from their hands, every tongue was silent, a
bowed their heads, and many prostrated themfelv
on the ground. Montezuma addressed them wi
every argument that could mitigate their rage,
persuade them to cease from hostilities. When
.ended his discourse, a fullen murmur of difappr
bation run through the ranks; to this fucceede
reproaches and threats; and the fury of the mu
titude rising in a moment above every restraint
decency or refpecl, flights of arrows and volleys
stones poured in so violently upon the ramparts
that before the Spanish soldiers, appointed to c
ver Montezuma with their bucklers, had time
lift them in his defence, two arrows wound
the unhappy monarch, and the blow of a Itone
his temple struck him to the ground. On feeinghi
fall, the Mexicans were so much astonished, tha
with a transition not uncommon in popular
mults, they passed in a moment from one extre
to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and th
fled with horror, as if the vengeance of He
ven were pursuing the crime which they h

7 See NOTE XC.

ommitted. The Spaniards, without moletfation, B o K
rried Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes v.
afened thither to console him under his misfor- 150.
ne. But the unhappy monarch now perceived
ow low he was funk, and the haughty spirit
ich seemed to have been so long extinct, re-
rning, he scorned to survive this lafthumiliation,
nd to protract an ignominious life, not only as
e prisoner and tool of his enemies, but as the
bjet of contempt or detestation among his sub-
ds. In a transport of rage he tore the bandages
om his wounds, and refused, with such obfti-
cy, to take any nourishment, that he soon ended
is wretched days, rejecting with disdain all the
icitations of the Spaniards to embrace the Chris-
an faith.
Upon the death of Montezuma, Cortes having Newcon.
I all hope of bringing the Mexicans to an ac- flicts.
ommodation, saw no profped of safety but in at-
mpting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
ut a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged
im in new conflicts. They took possession of a
igh tower in the great temple which overlooked

Spanish quarters, and placing there a garrison
their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could
irwithout being exposed to their misfile weapons.
rm this pof it was necefTary to dislodge them
any risk ; and Juan de Efcobar, with a nume-
us detachment of chosen soldiers, was ordered to
ke the attack. But Efcobar, though a gallant
icer, and at the head of troops accustomed
conquer, and who now fought under the eyes

B O O Ic of their countrymen, was thrice repulsed. Cortes

v. sensible that not only the reputation, but the fafet
^o-. of his army depended on the success of this affaul

ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, ash
could not manage it with his wounded hand, an
rushed with his drawn sword into the thickest
the combatants. Encouraged by the presence
their general, the Spaniards returned to the char
with such vigor, that they gradually forced the
way up the steps, and drove the Mexicans to th
platform at the top of the tower. 1 here a drea
ful carnage began, when two young Mexicans
high rank, observing Cortes as he animated h
soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to f
crifice their own lives in order to cut off the a
thor of all the calamities which desolated the
country. They approached him in a fupplica
poature, as if they had intended to lay down the
arms, and seizing him in a moment, hurried hi
towards the battlements, over which they thre
themselves headlong, in hopes of dragging hi
along to be dashed in pieces by the fame fall. B
Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke loose fr
their grasp , and the gallant youths perished in t
generous, ,though unsuccessful, attempt to fa
their country ". As soon as the Spaniards beca

7' IL. Clavigero has censured me with asperity for relati

this gallant acion of the two Mexicans , and for fuppoi'
that there were battlements round the temple of Mexico.
rclatcd the attempt to deltroy Cortes on the authority ofl1
dec. 2. lib. x. c. 9. and of Torquenlada, lib. iv. 69.
followed them likewise in supposing the uppermoftplntforin
the tl:mple to be encompaircd by a battlement or rail.

alers of the tower, they set fire to it, and, with- B o o K
ut farther molestation , continued the preparations v.
r their retreat. 152o.
Thiskbecame the more necessary, as the Mexi- TheSpa.
nswere so much astonished at the last effort of the niardsaban.
anifh valor, that they began to change their cit.te
hole system of hostility, and instead of incessant
ttacks, endeavoured, by barricading the streets,
nd breaking down the causeways, to*,cut off the
ommunication of the Spaniards with the continent,
d thus to starve an enemy whom they could not
bdue. The first point to be determined by Cor-
and his followers, was, whether they flould
arch out openly in the face of day, when they
uld discern every danger, and fee how to regu-
te their own motions, as well as how to resist the
aults of the enemy; or, whether they should en-
eavour to retire secretly in the night ? The latter
aspreferred, partly from hopes that their national
perftition would restrain the Mexicans from ven-
ring to attack them in the night, and partly
m their own fond belief in the predictions of a
ivate soldier, who having acquired universal
edit by a smattering of learning, and his preten-
ons to astrology, boldly assured his countrymen
fucccfs, if they made their retreat in this man-
tr. They began to move, towards midnight, in
ree divisions. Sandoval led the van; Pedro Al-
arado, and Velasquez de Leon, had the conducd
the rear; and Cortes commanded in the centre,
re lie placed the prisoners, among whom were
on and two daughters of Montezuma, together

B o o K with several Mexicans of diftindion, the artiller

v the baggage, and a portable bridge of timber, ir
1520. tended to be laid over the breaches in the cauferwa

They marched in profound silence along the caufl
way which led to lacuba, because it was fliort
than any of the reft, and lying most remote fror
the road towards Tlafcala and the sea-coast, had bee
left more entire by the Mexicans. They reache
the first broach in it without molestation, hopin1
that their retreat was undiscovered.

Attacked But the Mexicans, unperceived, had notonl
bythe watched all their motions with attention, but ha
Mexicans.

made proper dispositions for a molt formidable
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon p
uing their bridge in the breach, and occupied
conduding their horses and artillery along it, th
were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous fou
of warlike instruments, and a general shout fro
an innumerable multitude of enemies ; the lake w
covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and flOa
ers of stones poured in upon them from eve
quarter; the Mexicans rushing forward to
charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they hop
in that moment to be avenged for all their wron
Unfortunately the wooden - bridge, by the wei
of the artillery, was wedged so faR into the Ron
and mu(d, that it was impossible to remove
Dismayed at this accident, the Spaniarls advanc
with precipitation towa rds the lecond brea
The Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide, ad
though they defended themselves with their ufu
courage, yet crowded together as they were on

narrowv

narrow causeway, their discipline and military skill B o o x
were of little avail, nor did the obscurity of the v.
night permit them to derive great advantage from ieo.
their fire-arms, or the superiority of their other
weapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and so
eager were the people on the deftrution of their,
oppressors, ;that they who were not near enough
to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,
preled forward with such ardor, as drove on their
countrymen in the front with irresistible violence.
Freh warriors instantly filled the place of such as
fel. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and
unable to sustain the weight of the torrent that
poured in upon them, began to give way. In a mo.
ment the confusion was uni'ial ; horse and foot,
oicers and soldiers, friends and enemies, were
mingled together; and while all fought, and many
ell, they could hardly diftinguilh from what hand
te blow came.
Cortes, with about a hundred foot-foldiers and Their di.
few horse, forced his way over the two remain- aters,
ing breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the
ead serving to fill up the charms, and reached the
ain land. Having formed them as soon as they
rrived, he returned with such as were yet capa-
leoffervice, to assist his friends in their retreat,
nd to encourage them, by his presence and ex-
mple, to persevere in the efforts requisite to effec
t He met with part of his soldiers, who had
roke through the enemy, but found many more
verwhelmed by the multitude of their aggressors,
perifling in the lake; and heard the piteous
VOL. II. Y

B O O It lamentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having

v. taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be
izo. sacrificed to the god of war. Before day, all who

had escaped assembled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned , and discovered to the view of
Cortes his shattered battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors dejeced, and moR
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had suffered, and the remembrance of
so many faithful friends and gallant followers who
had fallen in that night of sorrow7', pierced his
foul with such anguilh, that while he was form.
ing their ranks, and issuing some necessary orders,
his soldiers observed the tears trickling from his
eyes, and remarkei'with much fatisfaftion, that
while attentive to the duties of a general, he was
not insensible to the feelings of a man.
and lofi. In this fatal retreat many officers of diftindio

perihed ", and among these Velasquez de Leon
who having forsaken the party of his kinsman, th
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of hi
companions, was, on that account, as well as so
his superior merit, refpeded by them as the fecon
person in the army. All the artillery, ammuni
tion, and baggage, were loft; the greater part
the horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans
were killed, and only a very small portion ofth
treasure which they had amafTed was saved. This
which had been always their chief object, prove

71 Noche Tri-fe is the name by which it is fill dilli
guilhed in New Spain. See NOTE XCI.

a great cause of their calamity; for many of the n o o K
soldiers having so overloaded themselves with bars v.
of gold as rendered them unfit for adtion, and re- 1S2O.
tarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the victims
of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so
many disasters, it was some consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose function as interpreters
was of such essential importance, had made their
escape .

The first care of Cortes was to find some shelter Difficultre,
for his wearied troops; for as the Mexicans infest- "treats he
ed them on every fide, and the people of Tacuba
began to take arms, he could not continue in his
present station. He directed his march towards
the rising ground, and having fortunately disco-
vered a temple situated on an eminence, took pof-
felfion of it. There he found not only the shelter
for which he willed, but, what was no less wanted,
some provisions to refresh his men; and though
the enemy did not intermit their attacks through-
out the day, they were with less difficulty prevent-
ed from making any impreflion. During this time
Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with his
officers, concerning the route which they ought to
take in their retreat. They were now on the weft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where
they could hope for a friendly reception, lay about
fixty-four miles to the east of Mexico7; so that

7 Cortes, Rclaz. p. 248. B. Diaz. c. *28. Gomara, Chron.'

109. Ilerrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. i , 12.
"Villa Segnor, Thcatro Americano, lib. ii. c. 1i.

Y2

B o o K they were obliged to go round the north end of the

v. lake before they could fall into the road which
1510. led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be

their guide, and conducted them through a coun.
try in some places marshy, in others mountainous,
in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They
marched for fix days with little respite, and under
continual alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexi.
cans hovering around them, sometimes harafing
them at a distance with their miflile weapons, and
fometinies attacking them closely in front, in rear,
in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew
that they were not invincible. Nor were the far
tigue and danger of those incessant conflicts the
worst evils to which they were exposed. As the
barren country through which they passed afforded
hardly any provisions, they were reduced to feed
on berries, roots, and the stalks of green maize;
and at the very time that famine was depressing
their spirits and wafting their firength, their fitua.
tion required the most vigorous and unremitting
exertions of courage and activity. Amidst those
complicated distresses, one circumstance supported
and animated the Spaniards. Their commander
fultained this fad reverse of fortune with unshaken
magnanimity. His presence of mind never forsook
him; his sagacity foresaw every event, and his vi.
gilance provided for it. He was foremost in every
danger, and endured every hardship with cheer.
fulness. The difficulties with .which he was fur.
rounded seemed to call forth new talents; and his
soldiers, though despairing themfelvos, continued

to follow him with increasing confidence in his B o o x
abilities. v.

On the sixth day they arrived near to OtUmba, 1Be20
not far from the road between Mexico and Tlaf- Otumbs.
cala. Early next morning they began to advance
towards it,. flying parties of the enemy still hang-
ing on their rear; and, amidst the insults with which
they accompanied their hostilities, Marina remark-
ed that they often exclaimed with exultation, "Go
on, robbers; go to the place where you shall
quickly meet the vengeance due to your crimes."
The meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not
comprehend, until they reached the summit of
an eminence before them. There a spacious valley
opened to their view, covered with a vast army,
extending as far as the eye could reach. The
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harassed the Spaniards in their retreat, had
alfembled their principal force on the other fide of
the lake; and marching along the road which led
diretly to Tlafcala, ported it in the plain ofOtum-
ba, through which they knew Cortes must pass.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could survey at once from the rising ground,
the Spaniards were aftonilhed, and even the boldest
began to despair. But Cortes, without allowing
leisure for their fears to acquire strength by reflec-
tion, after warning them briefly that no alternative
now remained but to conquer or to die, led them
instantly to the charge. The Mexicans waited
their approach with unusual fortitude. Such,
however, was the superiority of the Spanidh

Y 3

B O O K discipline and arms, that the impression of this fmail

v body was irrerfitible; and whichever way its force
1520. was directed, it penetrated and dispersed the mor

numerous battalions. But while these gave way
in one quarter, new combatans advanced from
another, and the Spaniards, though successful in
every attack, were ready to fink under those re.
peated efforts, without feeing any end of their toil,
or any hope of vicory. At that time Cortes ob.
served the great flandard of the empire, which was
carried before the Mlexican general, advancing,
and fortunately recolleding to have heard, that on
the fate of it depended the event of every battle,
he assembled a few of his bravest officers, whose
horses were still capable of service, and placing
himself ac their head, pufled forward towards the
itandard with an impetuosity which bore down
every thing before it. A chosen body of nobles,
who guarded the standard, made some refifance,
but were soon broken. Cortes, with a stroke of
his lance, wounded the IViexican general, and
threw him to the ground. One of the Spanish of-
ficers alighting, put an end to his life, and laid
hold of the imperial standard. The moment that
their leader fell, and the standard, towards which
all directed their eyes, disappeared, an universal
panic struck the Mexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away
his weapons, and all fled with precipitation to the
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to purfuc them
far, returned to colledt the spoils of the field,

which were so valuable, as to be some compensation B o o z
for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for v.
in the enemy's army were most of their principal io.
warriors, dressed out in their richest ornaments, as
if they had been marching to assured vidory. Next
day, to their great joy, they entered the Tlafcalan

July 3.
territories". July

But, amidst their fatisfadion in having got Reception
beyond the precincts of a hostile country, they ofthes.pa
could not look forward without solicitude, as Tlarcala.
they were ffill uncertain what reception they might
meet with from allies, to whom they returned in
a condition very different from that in which they
had lately set out from their dominions. Happily
for them, the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the
Mexican name was so inveterate, their desire to
avenge the death of their countrymen so vehement,
and the ascendant which Cortes had acquired over
the chiefs of the republic so complete, that, far
from entertaining a thought of taking any advan-
tage of the distressed situation in which they beheld
the Spaniards, they received them with a tender-
ness and cordiality which quickly dissipated all
their suspicions.

Some interval of tranquillity and indulgence New del.
was now absolutely necefTary; not only that the betrtiona of
Spaniards might give attention to the cure of their
vounds, which had been too long neglected, but
in order to recruit their ftreigth, exhausted by

Cortes, Relaz. p. 2 9. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara, Chron;
c. lo. Herrera, dec. ^. lib. x. c. 12, 13.

Y4

o o K such a long succession of fatigue and hardflips,
v. During this, Cortes learned that he and his
110°q companions were not the only Spaniards who had

felt the effects of the Mexican enmity. A confi.
derable detachment, which was marching from
Zempoalla towards the capital, had been cut
off by the people of Tepeaca. A smaller party,
returning from Tlafcala to. Vera Cruz, with the
(hare of the. Mexican gold allotted to the garrison,
had been surprised and destroyed in the mountains,
At a juncture when the life of every Spaniard was
of importance, such losses were deeply felt. The
fchernes which Cortes was meditating rendered them
peculiarly afflictive to him. While his enemies, and
even many of his own followers, confidered the
disasters which had befallen him as fatal to the
progress of his arms., and imagined that nothing
now remained but speedily to abandon a country
which he had invaded with unequal force, his
mind, as eminent for perseverance as for enterprise,
was still bent on accomplithing his original purpose,
of fubjeding the Mexican empire to the crown of
Castile. Severe and unexpected as the check was
which he had received, it did not appear to him
a sufficient reason for relinquishing the conquests
which he had already made, or against resuming
his operations with better hopes of success. She
colony at Vera Cruz was not only safe, but had
remained unmolested. The people of Zempoalla
and the adjacent diflrids had discovered no fymp-
toms of defection. The Tlafcalans continued faithful
to their alliance. On their martial spirit, easily

outed to arms, and inflamed with implacable B o o K
atred of the Mexicans, Cortes depended for v.
werfuli aid. He had fill the command of a body '15-
Spaniards, equal in number to that with which
had opened his way into the centre of the
pire, and had taken possession of the capital,
that with the benefit of greater experience, as
ell as more perfeCt knowledge of the country,
did not despair of quickly recovering all that
had been deprived of by untoward events.
Full of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan Themea.
iefs with such attention, and distributed among sureer h
m so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that
was secure of obtaining whatever he should
uire of the republic. He drew a small fiupply
ammunition, and two or three field-pieces, \
m his itores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an
cer of confidence with four ships of Narvaez's
etto Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adven-
ers, and to purchase horses, gunpowder, and
er military stores. As he knew that it would
vain to attempt the reduction of Mexico,
ess he could secure the command of the lake,
gave orders to prepare, in the mountains of
afcala, materials for building twelve brigantines,
as they might be carried thither in pieces ready
be put together, and launched when he stood
need of their service 7.
But while, with provident attention, he was Mutinous
ng those necessary fleps towards the execution rpiritofhis

troops.
" Cortes, Relaz. p. 2 , E. Gomara, Chron. c. 117.

I o o ic of his measures, an obstacle arose in a quar

v. where it was least expeced, but most formidab
xs20. The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out

his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers we
planters rather than soldiers, and had accompani
him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of oba
ing settlements, but with little inclination to eng
in the hardships and dangers of war. As the
motives had induced them to enter into their n
engagements with Cortes, they no sooner beca
acquainted with the nature of the service,
they bitterly repented of their choice. Such oft
as had the good fortune to survive the peril
adventures in which their own imprudence
involved them, happy in having made their efca
trembled at the thoughts of being exposed a sec
time to similar calamities. As soon as they difcove
the intention of Cortes, they began secretly
murmur and cabal, and waxing gradually m
audacious, they, in a body, offered a remonfa
to their general againlf the imprudence of attac
a powerful empire with his hbattered forces,
formally required him to lead them back dire
to Cuba. Though Cortes, long pradifed in
arts of command, employed arguments, intrea
and presents, to convince or to sooth them; tho
his own soldiers, animated with the spirit oft
leader, warmly seconded his endeavours; he so
their fears too violent and deep- rooted to
removed, and the utmolt he could effect W'
prevail with them to defcr their departure for

me, on a promise that he would, at a more E o o K
oper jundure, dismiss such as should desire it. v.
That the malecontents might have no leisure 12o.

Means he

brood over the causes of their difaffedion, employs to
resolved instantly to call forth his troops into revive their
ion. He proposed to chaffife the people of coien
epeaca for the outrage which they had committed,
d as the detachment which they had cut off
ppened to be composed moRly of soldiers who
d served under Narvaez, their companions, from
e desire of vengeance, engaged more willingly
this war. He took the command in person, Augult,
companied by a numerous body of Tlafcalans,
d in the space of a few weeks, after various
counters, with great slaughter of the Tepeacans,
duced that province to fubjedion. During several
onths, while he waited for the supplies of men
d ammunition which he expected, and was carry-
gon his preparations for conftrucding the brigan-
es, he kept his troops constantly employed in
rious expeditions against the adjacent provinces,
of which were conducted with an uniform tenor
success. By these, his men became again'accuf-
med to vidory, and resumed their wonted sense
superiority; the Mexican power was weakened;
e Tlafcalan warriors acquired the habit of adling
conjunction with the Spaniards; and the chiefs
the republic delighted to fee their country
riched with the spoils of all the people around
cm, and afloniflled every day with frefll discoveries
the irrcfiflible prowess of their allies, declined
0 effort requisite to support them.

B o o K All those preparatory arrangements, howevej

v. though the molt prudent and efficacious which ti
'Iela situation of Cortes allowed him to make, woul

Strengthen.
ed by evral have been of little avail, without a reinforceme!
reinforce- of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply fenfibl
enta' that it was the chief object of his thoughts a

wishes; and yet his only profpet of obtaining
from the return of the officer whom he hadfe
to the isles to solicit aid, was both distant a
uncertain. But what neither his own sagacity n
power could have procured, be owed to a ser
of fortunate and unforeseen incidents. The govern
of Cuba, to whom the success of Narvae -appear
an event of infallible certainty, having sent t,
small ships after him with new inftruciions, and
supply of men and military stores, the offi
whom Cortes had appointed to command on
coast, artfully decoyed them into the harbour
Vera Cruz, seized the veflels, and easily perfuad
the soldiers to follow the standard of a rn
able leader than him whom they were destined
join ". Soon after, three ships of more confidera
force came into the harbour separately. Th
belonged to an armament fitted out by Francis
de Garay , governor of Jamaica, who, bei
possessed with the rage of discovery and conqu
which animated every Spaniard fettled in Aeril
had long aimed at intruding into some diftrid
New Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glo1
and gain of annexing that empire to the crown

' B. Diaz. c. 11r.

Rile. They unadvisedly made their attempt on a o o0-
enorthern provinces, where the country was v.
r, and the people fierce and warlike; and, 10.
r a cruel succession of disasters, famine corn.
lied them to venture into Vera Cruz, and cast
emfelves upon the mercy of their countrymen.
eir fidelity was not proof against the splendid Oaobe 2.
pes and promises which had seduced other
venturers, and as if the spirit of revolt had
n contagious in New Spain, they likewise
ndoned the master whom they were bound to
e, and inlifted under Cortes ". Nor was it
erica alone that furnished such unexpected aid.
khip arrived from Spain, freighted by some
vate merchants with military stores, in hopes
a profitable market in a country, the fame of
ofe opulence began to spread over Europe.
rtes eagerly purchased a cargo which to him

invaluable , and the crew, following the

neral example, joined him at Tlafcala '
rom those various quarters, the army of Cortes
augmented with a hundred and eighty men,
twenty horses, a reinforcement too inconfider-
e to produce any consequence which would
itle it to have been mentioned in the history of
er parts of the globe. But in that of America,
ere great revolutions were brought about by
es which feenied to bear no proportion to their
es, such small events rife into importance,
; Cortes, Relaz. 253, F. B. Diaz. c. . .

Ibid. c. z;6.

B o o i because they were sufficient to decide with refpe

v. to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the least remarl
ix:o. able instance of the singular felicity conspicuous i

many passages of Cortes's story, that the two perfot
chiefly inftrurental in furnishing him with thoi
seasonable supplies, should be an avowed enem
who aimed at his deftrudion, and an envious riv;
who wished to supplant him.

Number of The first effed of the junction with his ne,
his forcs. followers was to enable him to dismiss such

Narvaez'sfoldiers as remained with reludance inh
service. After their departure, he still mufteredfiR
hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourfcol
were armed with muskets or cross-bows, fort
horsemen, and a train of nine field -pieces". p
the head of these, accompanied by ten thoufan
Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians, Corti
began his march towards Mexico, on the twent,
eighth of December, fix months after his difaftrot
retreat from that city `.

Preparations Nor did he advance to attack an enemy unpr
of theMexi- pared to receive him. Upon the death of Mont
cans for their
defence. zuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right

eleding the emperor was vested, had infant
raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. H
avowed and inveterate enmity to the Spaniar
would have been sufficient to gain their fuffrag
although he had been less diflinguifhed for coura:
and capacity. He had an immediate opportuni

Cortes, Relaz. 2 s , E.

" Relaz. 2z6, A. B. Diaz. .
c. 137.

Showing that he was worthy of their choice, by n o o it
ndufting, in person, those fierce attacks which v.
mpelled the Spaniards to abandon his capital; 1520.
d as soon as their retreat afforded him any respite
m adion, he took measures for preventing their
urn to Mexico, with prudence equal to the
irit which he had displayed in driving them out
it. As from the vicinity of Tlafcala, he could
tbe unacquainted with the motions and inten-
ns of Cortes, he observed the florm that was
thering, and began early to provide against it.
repaired what the Spaniards had ruined in the
y, and strengthened it with such new fortifica-
ns as the skill of his fubjeds was capable of
eding. Betide filling his magazines with the usual
capons of war, he gave directions to make long
ears headed with the swords and daggers taken
m the Spaniards, in order to annoy the cavalry.
summoned the people in every province of the
pire to take arms againfi their oppressors, and
an encouragement to exert themselves with
gor, he promised them exemption from all the
xes which his predecessors had imposed ". But
hat he libored with the greatest earnestness was,
deprive the Spaniards of the advantages which
ey derived from the friendship of the Tlafcalans,
endeavouring to persuade that people to
nounce all connexion with men, who were not
Iy avowed enemies of the gods whom they
rflipped, but who would not fail to subjec
It Cortes, Relaz, p. 5l, E. 354 , A. B. Oiuz, c. 4 o.

B O O K them at last to the fame yoke, which they we

v. now inconsiderately lending their aid to imnp
"Izo. upon others. These representations, no less ftriki

/ than well founded, were urged so forcibly by

ambassadors, that it required all the address
Cortes to prevent their making a dangero
impression ".

But while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan

defence, with a degree of foresight uncommon
an American, his days were cut short by t
small - pox. This distemper, which raged at
time in New Spain with fatal malignity,
unknown in that quarter of the globe, until
was introduced by the Europeans, and may
reckoned among the greateRt calamities brou
upon them by their invaders. In his fiead
Mexicans raised to the throne Guatimozin, neph
and fon-in-law of Montezuma, a young man
such high reputation for abilities and valor,
in this dangerous crisis, his countrymen,
one voice, called him to the supreme co
mand ".

Irx:. As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's terri
Corte ad. ries, he discovered various preparations to obft
vances to.
wardsMexi. his progress. But his troops forced their way
**. little difficulty, and took possession of Tezeu

the second city of the empire, situated on
banks of the lake about twenty miles
Mexico ". Here he determined to eftablilh

" B. Diaz. c. 129. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 14.
" B. Diaz. c. i;o.
' Villa Segnor, Thcatro Americano, i. r(6.

head- quarters

lead-quarters, as the most proper station for B o o K
iunching his brigantines, as well as for making v.
is approaches to the capital. In order to render is5r.
is relidence there more secure, he deposed the
aziqie or chief, who was at the head of that
ommntnity, under pretext of some defedt in his
tic, and substituted in his place a person whom
faction of the nobles pointed out as the right
eir of that dignity. Attached to him by this
lnefit, the new cazique and his adherents served
be Spaniards with inviolable fidelity '.
As the preparations for conftruding the brigan- His opera.
nes advanced slowly under the unskilful hands of ti""nf(w
tdiers and Indians, whom Cortes was obliged to tiou.a
mploy in allilsing three or four carpenters who
ippened fortunately to be in his service, and as
ihad not yet received the reinforcement which
expeced from Hispaniola, he was not in a
ondition to turn his arms directly againfl the
pital. To have attacked, at this period, a city
populous, so well prepared for defence, and in
lituation of fuCch peculiar ftrelgth , muff have
xpofcd his troops to inevitable dcltruction. Three
nitlis clapsed before the materials for the briganl
nes were finilbed, and before he heard any thing
ith refpedt to the Lfccefs of the officer whom
hid sent to Hilfpaiola. This, however, was
ot a season ot inadtioil to Cortes. fle attacked
ccellively several of the towns situated around

Cortes, Relaz. 2-6, &c. 1. nia7, c. 1 7. Guoara,

10 c. 12, i lerrera, dec. 3, c, 1.
VOL. II, Z

B O o K the lake; and though all the Mexican power wi

v. exerted to obftrud his operations, he either cor
s12r. pelled them to submit to the Spanilh crown, o

reduced them to ruins. Other towns he endeavoure
to conciliate by more gentle means, and thou
he could not hold any intercourse with the inh
bitans but by the intervention of interpreters, ye
under all the disadvantage of that tedious an
imperfed mode of communication, he had acquire
such thorough knowledge of the Rate of t
country, as well as of the dispositions of t
people, that he conducted his negociations an
intrigues' with aftonilhing dexterity and fucce
Most of the cities adjacent to Mexico wer
originally the capitals of small independent lfte
and some of them having been but lately annexe
to the Mexican empire, still retained the reme
brance of their ancient liberty , and bore wit
impatience the rigorous yoke of their new mailer
Cortes having early observed symptoms of the
difaffedion, availed himself of this knowledge
gain their confidence and friendlhip. By offerin
with confidence, to deliver them from the odio
dominion of the Mexicans, and by liberal promi
of more indulgent treatment, if they would uni
with him against their oppre(fors, he prevailed
the people of several considerable diftrits, n
only to acknowledge the king of Castile as the
sovereign, but to supply the Spanilh camp w
provisions, and to strengthen his army with au
liary troops. Guatimozin, on the first appearan
of defection among his subjects, exerted hims

ith vigor to prevent or to punilh their revolt; B o o it
t in spite of his efforts, the spirit continued to v.
ead. The Spaniards gradually acquired new stzr.
ies, and with deep concern he beheld Cortes
ming against his empire those very hands which
ght to have been active in its defence; and
ady to advance againlt the capital. at the head
a numerous body of his own fubjeds ".
While, by those various methods, Cortes was
dually circumscribing the Mexican power within
ch narrow limits that his profpet of overturning
teemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
schemes were well nigh defeated, by a conspiracy
less unexpected than dangerous. The soldiers
Narvaez had never united perfedly with the
ginal companions of Cortes, nor did they enter
to his measures with the fame cordial zeal. Upon
cry occasion that required any extraordinary
rt of courage or of patience, their spirits were
to fink; and now, on a near view of what
ty had to encounter, in attempting to reduce a
y so inaccessible as Mexico, and defended by a
merous army, the resolution even of those among
em who had adhered to Cortes when he was
ferted by their associates, began to fail. Their
rs led them to presumptuous and unfoldier-like
cullions concerning the propriety of their gene-
's measures, and the improbability of their
cess. From these they proceeded to censure and

Cortes, Relaz. 256-260. B. Diaz. c. 137--4o,
I rra, Chron.c. .12 , 123. Herrera,dec. i. lib.i. c, z2.

7Z 3

B o o I invedives, and at last began to deliberate how tlhe

v. might provide for their own safety, of which the)

deemed their commander to be totally negligent
Antonio Villefagna, a private soldier, but bold
intriguing, and firongly attached to Velasquez{
artfully fomented this growing spirit of difaffe
tion. His quarters became the rendezvous of th
malecontents, where, after many consultation
they could discover no method of checking Cort
in his career, but by affaflinating him and his mo
considerable officers, and conferring the comma
upon some person who would relinquish his wi
plans, and adopt measures more consistent vi
the general security. Despair inspired them wi
courage. The hour for perpetrating the crime,
persons whom they destined as victims, the offic
to succeed them in command, were all named; a
the conspirators signed an association, by whi
they bound themselves with most solemn oaths
mutual fidelity. But on the evening before
appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient follove
who had been seduced into the conspiracy, touch
with compunction at the imminent danger o
ruan whoi lie had long been accultomed to revc
or struck with horior at lis own treachery, w
privately to Iiis general, and revealed to him
that he knew. Cortes, though deeply alarme
(liiferned at once what condu(l was proper ii
situation so critical. lHe repaired instantly to Vi
f.lil:'s quarters, accompani(ed by some of his m
tiulty officers. l'he afloniflimcnt and confulion
the maan at this uncxpedted vilit anticipated

onfeffion of his guilt. Cortes, while his attendants B o o Iu
izedl the traitor, snatched from his bosom a paper v.
oncaining the association, signed by the confpira- I5ir
ors. inpatient to know how far the defection
xtended, he retired to read it, and found there
ames which filled him with surprise and sorrow.
ut, aware how dangerous a firict scrutiny might
rove at such a junCture, he confined his judicial
quiries to Villefagna alone. As the proofs of his
uit were manifet , he was condemned after a
ort trial, and next morning he was seen hanging
fore the door of the house in which he had
odged. Cortes called his troops together, and
aving explained to them the atrocious purpose
f the conspirators, as well as the justice of the
unilhment inflided on Villefagna, he added, with
n appearance of fatisfadion, that he was entirely
norant with refped to all the circumstances of
is dark tranfadion, as the traitor, when arrested,
ad suddenly torn and fwallowc(l a paper, which
robably contained an account of it, and under
ie fcvcrefl tortures possessed such constancy as
o conceal the names of his accomplices. This
rtful declaration restorcd tranquillity to many a
raft that was throbbing, while he spoke, with
onfcioufilefs of guilt and dread of detection; and
y this prudent moderation, Cortes had the advan-
igc of having discovered, and of being able to
hlervc such of his followers as were difaffecded;
'hile they, flattering thcnifclves that their past
ii111n was unlknown , endeavoured to avert any

7 3

B O o K suspicion of it, bv redoubling their activity ani

v. zeal in his service ".
Irn-. Cortes did not allow them leisure to ruminat
ipsirat lar on what had happened; and as the most effect
for building means of preventing the return of a mutinous f
brigaltiies. rit, he determined to call forth his troops imme

diately to action. Fortunately, a proper occafi
for this occurred without his seeming to court
He received intelligence that the materials for buil
ing the brigantines were at length completel
finished, and waited only for a body of Spaniar
to conduct them to Tezeuco. The command
this convoy, consisting of two hundred foot-fo
diers, fifteen horsemen, and two field-pieces,h
gave to Sandoval , who by the vigilance, adivily
and courage which he manifested on every occ
sion, was growing daily in his confidence, and
the eflirnation of his feilow-foldiers. The fervic
was no less finguilar than important; the beams
the planks, the malts, the cordage, the fail,, th
iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articl
requisite for the confirudion of thirteen brigantines
were to be carried sixty miles over land , through
mountainous country, by people who were una
quainted with the minitfry of domefic animals,
the aid of machines to facilitate any work
labor. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thoulfin
Tamenrs', an infeiior order of men destined for fe
vile tasks, to carry the materials on their floulders

" Cortes, Rcuaz. 283, C. B. Diaz. c. 146. Hirelr
dc(. 3. li . . .

and appointed fifteen thousand warriors to ac- u o o r
company and defend them. Sandoval made the v.
disposition for their progress with great propriety, I'
lacing the Tamenes in the centre , one body of
warriors in the front, another in the rear, with
considerable parties to cover the flanks. To each
of there he joined some Spaniards, not only to
ffft them in danger, but to accustom them to
rgularity and subordination. A body so numerous,
nd so much encumbered , advanced leisurely , but
n excellent order ; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the line
f march extended above fix miles. Parties of
exicans frequently appeared hovering around
hem on the high grounds; but perceiving no
rofpedc of success in attacking an enemy conti-
nually on his guard, and prepared to receive them,
hey did not venture to moles him; and Sandoval
had the glory of conduting safely to Tezeuco, a
tonvoy 6n which all the future operations of his
countrymen depended '.

This was followed by another event of no less Receive

a new rein-

bment. Four sips arrived at Vera Cruz from forctmett,
ifpaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty
Olrfs, two battering cannon, and a considerable
pply of ammunition and arms. ". Elevated with
brerving that all his preparatory fchernes, either
r recruiting his own army, or impair ing the force
f the enemy, had now produced their full effed,

Cortes, Rela7. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 14o.
Cortes, RclItz. 259, F. 262,JD. Gomara, Chron.c. r2.

Z4

B O O t Cortes , impatient to begin the siege in form, hl

v. tened the launching of the brigantines. To sac
'Ic- litate this, he had employed a vast number

Indians for two months in deepening the fnall
vulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake, an
in forming it into a canal near two miles in length'
and though the Mexicans , aware of his intentions
as well as of the danger which threatened them
endeavoured frequently to interrupt the laborer
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at la

The brigan. completed ". On the twenty-eighth of April, a
tineslaunch- the Spanish troops, together with the auxiliary I

dians, were drawn up on the banks of the canal
and with extraordinary military pomp, heightene
and rendered more solemn by the celebration
the most sacred rites of religion , the brigantine
were launched. As they fell down the canali
order, Father Olmedo blessed them, and gav
each its name. Every eye followed them wit
wonder and hope, until they entered the lake
when they hoisted their fails, and bore away befor
the wind. A general shout of joy was raised; a
admiring that bold inventive genius, which, b
means so extraordinary that their success almo
exceeded belief, had acquired the command of
fleet, without the aid of which Mexico woul
have continued to set the Spanish power and arm
at defiance 9'

9' See NOTE XCII. ' B. Diaz. c. 140.
" Cortes, Relaz. 266, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i.c.

Gomara, Chron .
c. 129.

Cortes determined to attack the city from B o O K

three different quarters; from Tepeaca on the v.
north-tfile of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft, S21.
and from Cuyocan towards the south. Those Tnipofitiong
towns were situated on the principal causeways
vwlich led to the capital, and intended for their
defcnce. He appointed Sandoval to command in
the first , Pedro de Alvarado in the second, and
Chriltoval de Olid in the third ; allotting to each
a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries, together
with an equal division of Spaniards, who, by the
junction of the troops from Hispaniola, amounted
now to eighty-fix horsemen, and eight hundred
and eighteen foot-foldiers; of whom one hundred
and eighteen were armed with muskets or cross-
bows. The train of artillery consisted of three bat-
tering cannon, and fifteen field- pieces 9. He re-
served for himself, as the station ofgreateft import-
ance and danger, the condudt of the brigantines,
each armed with one of his finall cannon, and man-
ned with twenty-five Spaniards.

As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the May o;

pofls assigned them, they broke down the aque-
dutds which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had
ereded for conveying water into the capital, and by
the diRtrefs to which this reduced the inhabitants,
gave a beginning to the calamities which they were
decfined to susser `'. Alvarado and Olid found the

, Cortes, Relaz. 266, C.

Cortes, Relaz. 267, B. J. Diaz. c.i o. Herrera,dec.t.
lib. i . . 1 .

a., o K towns of which they were ordered to take prffeffion

v. deserted by their inhabitants, who had fled for safe.
Ixsi. ty to the capital, where Guatimozin had collected

the chief force of his empire , as there alone he
could hope to make a successful stand against the
formidable enemies who were approaching to
assault him.

Mexicans The first effort of the Mexicans was to delroy
attack the the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effecs of whos
brigaotiees.

operations they foresaw and dreaded. Thoug
the brigantines , after all the labor and merit o
Cortes in forming them, were of inconfiderabl
bulk, rudely conftrucled, and manned chiefly wit
landmen, hardly possessed of Ikill enough to con
dud them, they muff have been objets of terro
to a people unacquainted with any navigation bu
that of their lake, and possessed of no vessel large
than a canoe. Neceflity, however, urged Guati
mozin to hazard the attack; and hoping to suppl
by numbers what he wanted in force , he affemblee
such a multitude of canoes as covered the face o
the lake. They rowed on boldly to the charge
while the brigantines , retarded by a dead calm
Repuled. could scarcely advance to meet them. But as th

enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly sprung up
in a moment the fails were spread, the brigantines
with the utmost enfe , broke throtugh their feebl
opponents , overset many canoes, and dissipate
the whole armament with such fnluhter, as con
vinced the Mexicans, that the progrcfs of the ElI
yopeans in knowledge and .irts rendered their flup

riority greater on this new element, than they had n o o
hitherto found it by land 9. v.

From that time Cortes remained mafler of the 1-.r.

lake, and the brigantines not only preserved a planofcon.
communication between the Spaniards in their dif- duaingthe
ferent flations , though at considerable distance flene
from each other, but were employed to cover the
causeways on each fide, and keep off the canoes,
when they attempted to annoy the troops as they
advanced towards the city. Cortes formed the bri-
gantines in three divisions, appointing one to cover
each of the stations from which an attack was to be
carried on against the city , with orders to second the
operations of the officer who commanded there.
From all the three fiations he pushed on the attack
against the city with equal vigor; but in a manner
so very different from the conduct of sieges in regu-
larwar, that he himself seems afraid it would appear
no less improper than singular, to persons unac-
quainted with his situation ". Each morning his
troops assaulted the barricades which the enemy had
erected on the causeways , forced their way over
the trenches which they had dug, and through the
canals where the bridges were broken down, and
endeavoured to penetrate into the heart of the city,
in hopes of obtaining some decisive advantage,
which might force the enemy to surrender, and
terminate the war at once ; but when the obstinate

t Cortes, Relaz. 267, C. B. Diaz, c. i o. Gomara,Chroa.
t. Iar. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i c. 17.

Cortes, Relaz. 270, F.

i o o ;K valor of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the

v. day ineffetual , the Spaniards retired in the even

r. ing to their former quarters. Thus their toil an

danger were, in some measure, continually renew
ed; the Mexicans repairing in the night whatth
Spaniards had destroyed through the day, and re
covering the posts from which they had drive
them. But necessity prescribed this flow and un
toward mode of operation. The number of hi
troops was so small , that Cortes durst not, with
handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in
city where he might be surrounded and annoye
by such a multitude of enemies. The remem
brance of what he had already suffered by the il
judged confidence with which he had ventured int
such a dangerous situation, was frill fresh in hi
mind. Tie Spaniards , exhausted with fatigue
were unable to guard the various posts which the
daily gained; and though their camp was fille
with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve thi
charge upon them, because they were so little a
cuflomed to discipline , that no confidence coul
be placed in their vigilance. Besides this, Cort{
was extremely solicitous to preserve the city a
much as possible from being destroyed, both b(
cause he deflined it to be the capital of his cor
quelts, and wished that it might remain as a me
nument of his glory. From all there confider;
tions, he adhered obstinately, for a month afte
the siege was opencd , to the system which he ha
adopted. The Mexicans, in their own defence
displayed valor which was hardly inferior to til;

with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land, o o I,
on water , by night and day, one furious con- v.
fliRC ficceeded to another. Several Spaniards were s21.
killed, more wounded, and all were ready to fink
under the toils of unintermitting service, which
were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of
the season, the periodical rains being now set in
with their usual violence ".

Aflonifhed and disconcerted with the length Endeavours

and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to totakethe
make one great effort to get possession of the city, ctyby torm
before he relinquilhed the plan which he had hi-
therto followed, and had recourse to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he sent inftruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with
their divisions to a general assault, and took the
command in person of that posted on the causeway
of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the July 3.
expectation of fotne decisive event, the Spaniards
pushed forward with irresistible impetuosity. They
broke through one barricade after another, forced
their way over the ditches and canals, and having
entered the city , gained ground incessantly, in
spite of the multitude and ferocity of their oppo-
neuts. Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity
of his progress, did not forget that he might (ill
ind it necelfary to retreat; and in order to secure
t, appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of
chief note in the troops which lie had received from
Hiljianiola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the

" B. Diaz. c. 151.

B O O K causeway as the main body advanced. That offi.

v. cer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
s:2. while his companions were in the heat of acion and

the career of vidtory, negleCted the important
charge committed to him, and hurried on, incon.
fiderately, to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were
daily improving, no sooner observed this, than
they carried an account of it to their monarch.
zepulfed Guatimbzin instantly discerned the confe.

quences of the error which the Spaniards had com-
mitted, and, with admirable presence of mind,
prepared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops posted in the front to flaken their es-
forts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push for.
ward, while he dispatched a large body of chosen
warriors through different streets, some by land,
and others by water, towards the great breach in
the causeway, which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the prielts in the principal
temple struck the great drum consecrated to the
god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans hear its
doleful solemn found , calculated to inspire them
with contempt of death and enthusiastic ardor,
than they ruffled upon the enemy with frantic rage.
The Spaniards, unable to resist men urged on no
less by religious fury than hope of success, began
to retire, at first leisurely, and with a good coun-
tenance ; but as the enemy pressed on , and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror and
confusion became so general, that when they arf
rived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards anl

Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged in n o o it
romifcuoufly, while the Mexicans rushed upon v.
em fiercely from every fide, their light canoes ; 1
rrying them through ihoals which the brigan.
nes could not approach. In vain did Cortes at-
empt to stop and rally his flying troops; fear
ndered them regardless of his intreaties or corm
ands. Finding all his endeavours to renew the
mbat fruitless, his next care was to save some of
ofe who had thrown themselves into the water;
ut while thus employed , with more attention to
eir situation than to his own, fix Mexican cap.
ins suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurry-
ghim off in triumph; and though two of his of-
cers rescued him at the expense of their own lives,
received several dangerous wounds before he
uld break loose. Above sixty Spaniards perished with con.i-
the rout ; and what rendered the disaster more d"eable lofas
fiding, forty of these fell alive into the hands
an enemy never known to show mercy to a
ptive x**.
The approach of night, though it delivered the Thorewho
eedted Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, werfietak
lered in, what was hardly less grievous, the thegodie
ife of their barbarous triumph, and of the hor- w"
festival with which they celebrated their vic-
y. Every quarter of the city was illuminated;
great temple flone with such peculiar fplen-
r, that the Spaniards could plainly fee the

Cortes, Relaz. p. 2 7 . B. Diaz. c. r 2. Go1ara,
on. c. i3S . lerrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. zo

L o o is people in motion, and the priests bury in hafenine

v. the preparations for the death of the prisoners
1521. Through the gloom, they fancied that they dif

cerned their companions by the whiteness oftheii
fkins,as they were stript naked, and compelled t(
dance before the image of the god to whom the)
were to be offered. They heard the shrieks o
those who were sacrificed , and thought that the:
could diflinguilh each unhappy victim , by thi
well-known found of his voice. Imagination adde
to what they really saw or heard, and augmente
its horror. The molt unfeeling melted into tearso
compassion, and the stoutet heart trembled at th
dreadful fpedacle which they beheld `1.

Newfchemes Cortes, who, betides all that he felt in con
nda eforts of mon with his soldiers , was oppreflsed with. the ac
cans. ditional load of anxious refleCtions natural to

general on such an unexpected calamity, could not
like them, relieve his mind by giving vent toi
anguith. He was. obliged to assume an air of trai
quillity, in order to revive the spirit and hopesi
his followers. The juncture , indeed, required
extraordinary exertion of fortitude. The VMe
cans, elated with their victory , sallied out ne
morning to attack him in his quarters. But thi
didinot rely on the efforts of their own arms alor
They sent the heads of the Spaniards whom th'
had sacrificed, to the leading men in the adjace
provinces, and assured them that the god of wa
appeased by the blood of their invaders , hi

'a See NOTE XC11I.

had

had been sied so. plentifilly on his altars, jad de. B o o ,iK
cared with an audible voice , that in eight days v.
time those hated enemies should be finally destroy- '-zi.
d, and peace and prosperity re-eftabiifhed in tb,e
empire.

A predisdion uttered with such confidence, and tortes de-
nterms so void of ambiguity , gained universal r fl'lf,,s
redit among a people prone to fuperltition. Thp Indian allie
Cal of the provinces, which had already declared
gainft the Spaniards, augmented; and several,
hich had hitherto remained inactive, took arms,
ith enthufiaitic ardor, to execute the decree of
he gods. The Indian auxiliaries who had joined
rtes , accustomed to venerate the fame deities
ith the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
heir priests with the fame implicit faith , abandoned
he Spaniards as a race of men devoted to cer-
in deftrudion. Even the fidelity of the Tiafca-
ns was fhlaken, and the Spanish troops were left
ImoR alone in their flations. Cortes , finding that
eattempted in vain to dispel the fiperftitious fears
his confederates by argument, took advantage,
m the imprudence of those who had framed the
rophecy, in fixing its accomplifliment so near at
and, to give a firiking demonstration of its alfity.
e furpended all military operations during the
riod marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
ebrigantines, which kept the enemy at a diflance,
is troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired
thout any disaster '".

' B. Diaz. c. 5 . Gortiara, Chron. c. t 13
VOL. 1. A a

B o o R His allies, afhlamed of their own credulity, X

v. turned to their station. Other tribes, judging th
lS.r. the gods who had now deceived the Mexicans, ha

lie regains
their friend. decreed finally to withdraw their protection froi
ship, them, joined his standard; and such was thelevit

of a simple people, moved by every flight impre
sion, that, in a short time after such a gener
d(efetion of his confederates, Cortes saw himself,
we may believe his own account, at the head of

andadoptsa hundred and fifty thousand Indians. Even wil
fnew Fitten such a numerous army he found it necessary c
of attack.

adopt a new and more wary system of operation
Instead of renewing his attempts to become mari
of the city at once, by such bold but dangerot
efforts of valor as he had already tried, he mat
his advances gradually, and with every poffib
precaution against exposing his men to any cal
mity similar to that which they still bewailed. A
the Spaniards pushed forward, the Indians reg
larly repaired the causeways behind them. 2
soon as they got poffeflion of any part of the towi
the houses were inflanly levelled with the groul
Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to retire
their enemies gained ground, were hemmed
within more narrow limits Guatimozin, thout
unable to flop the career of the enemy, continul
to defend his capital with obstinate resolution, al
disputed every inch of ground. The Spaniar
not only varied their mode of attack, but, by
dcrs of Cortes , changed the weapons with xvhi
they fought. They were again armed with t
long Chinantlan spears, which they had employ

vithlfuch success againltNarvaez; and, by the firm B o o r
rray in which this enabled them to range them- v.
hles, they repelled, with little danger, the loose lt
liult of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of th, m
1i in the conflicts which they renewed every day '
bhile war wafied without, famine began to con-
nne them within, the city. The Spaninf brigan-
nes, having the entire command of the lake, ren-
ered it almost impossible to convey to the besieged
ny supply of provisions by water. The vafl num-
er of his Indian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to slut
p the avenues to the city by land. The stores
hich Guatimozin had laid up were exhausted by
he multitudes which had crowded into the capital,
odefend their sovereign and the temples of their
ods. Not only the people , but persons of the
igheft rank, felt the utmost difreffes of famine.
'hat they suffered , brought on infectious and
ortal distempers, the last calamity that visits be-
leged cities , and which filled up the measure of
heir woes °
Rut, under the pressure of so many and such Courageanii
arious evils, the spirit of Guatimrozin remained C-Onsiaiy of

Guatimozin

nm and unfubdued. He rejected, with scorn,
cery overture of peace from Cortes; and, disdain-
g the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his
ountry, determined not to survive its ruin. The

/°' Cortes, Rclaz. p. 275, C. 276, F. B. Diaz c. rc .'
/"' Cortes, Klclaz. 276, E. 277, F. B. Diaz. iS. Gona,
hronl. c. 141.

A a

n o o x Spaniards continued their progress. At length all
' v. the three divisions penetrated into the great square
I-'.s* in the centre of the city, and made a secure lodge.
July Z7. ment there. Three-fourths of the city were no

reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar
ter was so closely pressed, that it could not Ion
withstand assailants, who attacked it from their net
station with superior advantage, and more assure
expectation' of success. The Mexican nobles, fol
citous to save the life of a monarch whom the
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from
place where refiflance was now vain, that he migh
rouse the more distant provinces of the empire
arms, and maintain there a more successful firugg
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate th
execution of this measure, they endeavoured t
amuse Cortes with overtures of submission, tha
while his attention was employed in adjuRing th
articles of pacification, Guatimozin might efcap
unperceived. But they made this attempt upon
leader of greater sagacity and difcernrnent thanti
be deceived by their arts. Cortes fufpeding thei
intention, -and aware of what moment it was to di
feat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer on whol
vigilance he could molt perfectly rely, to taketb
command of the brigantines, with strict injull
tions to watch every motion of the enemy. Sa
doval, attentive to the charge, obfcrving son
large canoes crowded with people rowing acre
the lake with extraordinary rapidity, instantly ga'
the.fignal to chafe. Garcia Holguin, who co0
mianded the swiftest failing brigantine, soon ovi
took them, and was preparing to fire on the for

most canoe, which seemed to carry some person E o o
whom all the reft followed and obeyed. At once v.
te rowers dropt their oars, and all on board, ''21.

He is taken

throwing down their arms, conjured him with cries prisoner.
nd tears to forbear, as the emperor was there.
olguin eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin,
with a dignified composure, gave himself up into
is hands, requesting only that no insult might be
sered to the empress or his children. When con-
uifed to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
llen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the de-
etion of a supplicant. " I have done," said he,
ddrefling himself to the Spanilh general, 'I what
ecame a monarch. I have defended my people
othe last extremity. Nothing now remains but
o die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on
e which Cortes wore, " plant it in my breast,
nd put an end to a life which can no longer be
f use '".

As soon as the fate of their sovereign was Aug. rs.
nown, the refitance of the Mexicans ceased; Thecity.
nd Cortes took poffeflion of that small part of
ie capital which. yet remained undeftroyed. Thus
erminated the siege of Mexico, the most me-
orable event in the conquest of America. It
ontinued feventy-five days, hardly one of which
ased without some extraordinary effort of one
arty in the attack, or of the other in the defence
fa city, on the fate of which both knew.that the

' Cortes, Relaz. 27 9. B. Diaz. c. i 5 6. Gomara, Chron.
14z. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 7.

Aa3

u o o R fortune of the empire depended. As the firuggle

v. here was more obstinate, it was likewise more
12', equal . than any between the inhabitants of the Oi

and Nevw ¥Wiorlds. The great abilities of Guati
mozin, the number of his troops, the peculia
situation of hi., capital, so far counterbalanced th
fnpe;ioritv of the Spaniarids in arms and discipline
that thev musts hl\ve r.'linquifhed the enterprise,
thev had truftltd for success to themselves alone
But il exico was overturned by the jealousy o
neighbours who dreaded its power, and by the re
volt of fubjeds impatient to fIake off its yoke
By their effedual aid, Cortes was enabled to ac
complifh what, without such support, he woul
hardly have ventured to attempt. How muc
soever this account of the redudtion of Inexic
may detract, on the one hand, from the marvel
lous relations of some Spanish writers, by afcribin
that to simple and obvious causes which they at
tribute to the romantic valor of their country
men, it adds, on the other, to the merit and abi
lities of Cortes, who, under every disadvantage,
acquired such an ascendant over unknown nations1
as to render them inflruments towards carrying
his schemes into execution"".

Smnall'nf of The exultation of the Spaniards, on accorm
the booty plifbing this arduous enterprise, was at firt ex.
aln dialrip
pointmentof cclive. But this was quickly damped by the cruel
thie Sp. dilfppointment of those sanguine hopes, wxhicl

had animated them amidst so many hardflips and

"' Sec NOTE XCIV.

angers. Instead of the inexhauflible wealth which n o o K
hey expected from becoming maiters of Monte- v.
uma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many Iszr.
emples, their rapaciousness could colled only an
nconfiderable booty amidst ruins and desolation'.
,latimozin, aware of his 'impending fate, had
rdered what remained of the riches amassed by
is anceltors to be thrown into the lake. The
udian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were en-
aged in conflict with the enemy, had carried off
he most valuable part of the spoil. The fum to
edivided among the conquerors was so small,
hat many of them disdained to accept of the pit.
ance which fell to their share, and all murmured
nd exclaimed; some, against Cortes and his con-
dents, whom they fiufpeded of having secretly
ppropriated to their own use a large portion of
he riches which should have been brought into
he common frock ; others, against Guatimozin,
horn they accused of obstinacy, in refuting to
ifcover the place where he had hidden his treasure.
Arguments, intreaties, and promises were em- Guatinmozi,
oyed in order to sooth them, but with so little to'rt"ed.
set, that Cortes, from solicitude to check this
rowing spirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
hich stains the glory of all his great actions.
Tithout regarding the former dignity of Guati-
nozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues

7 The gold and silver, according to Cortes, amounted

nlyto 20o,ooo pelbs , Rela,. 2so, A. a fiim much inflirior to
,tt which the Spaniards had formerly divided in Mexico.

A a 4

3 o o g wviich he had displayed, he subjected the unhapp

v. nbonarch, together with his chief favorite, to
I(%,X torture , in order to force from them a discover

of the royal treasures, which it was fippofed they
had concealed. Guatimozin bore whatever th
refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflidt, with
the invincible fortitude of an American warrior
His fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence o
the anguish, turned a dejeded eye towards hi
master, which seemed to implore his permiffiont
reveal all that he knew. But the high-fpirite
prince, darting on him a look of authority mingle
-ith scorn, checked his weakness by asking, "An
I now reposing on a bed of flowers?" Overawed
by the reproach, the favorite persevered in his da
tiful silence, and expired. Cortes, ashamed of a
scene so horrid, rescued the' royal vidcim from the
hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life refervet
for new indignities and suffer'ings'".

AI the pro- The fate of the capital, as both parties hat
viacesof^he foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro
empire fuih-
mit. vinces submitted one after another to the con

querors. Small detachments of Spaniards march
ing through them without interruption, penetrate
in different quarters to the great Southern Ocean
which, according to the ideas of Columbus, the'
imagined would open a (hort as well as easy paflag
to the 1'aft Indies, and secure to the crown of Ca
tile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions"

'°* B. Diaz, c. 1 7, Gomara, Chron. c. 146. Herrer
dec. 1 lib. ii. c. 8. Torquem, Mun. Ind i, 74..

'°l Cortes, Relaz. ,8o, D, &c, B, Diaz. c, 157.

nd the adtive mind of Cortes began already to B o o rt
rm schemes for attempting this important dif. v.
overy . Ia .
He did not know, that during the progress of Cortesforms

'n - *

i~si * i r i r schemes of

is vidorious arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of new disco-
hich he began to form some idea, had been un- veries,
rtaken and accomplished. As this is one of the wcmplred
oft splendid events in the history of the Spanifl byMagellan.
ifcoveries, and has been productive of effects pe-
uliarly interesting to those extensive provinces
Thich Cortes had now fubjeded to the crown of
Catile, the account of its rife and progress merits
particular detail.
Ferdinand Magalhaens, or Magellan, a Portu-
uefe gentleman of honorable birth, having served
everal years in the East Indies, with distinguished
valor, under the famous Albuquerque, demanded
the recompence which he thought due to his ser.
vices, with the boldness natural to a high-fpirited
soldier. But as his general would not grant his
suit, and he expected greater justice from his
sovereign, whom he knew to be a good judge and
a generous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
abruptly, and returned to Lisbon. In order to
induce Emanuel to liften more favorably to his
claim, he not only stated his paR services, but of-
sered to add to them by conducting his country-
men to the Molucca or Spice Islands, by holding a
westerly course; which he contended would be both
florter and less hazardous than that which the Por-

H lerrera, dec. 3. lib. ii c. 17. Gomara, Chron. c. 149.

3 o o K tuguefe now followed by the Cape of Good Hope,

v. through the immense extent of the Eastern Ocean.

-5r. This was the original and a favorite project of Co.

lumbus, and Magellan founded his hopes of success
on the ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by
many observations, the result of his own naval ex.
perience, as well as that of his countrymen in their
intercourse with the Eiaft. But though the Portu.
guefe Monarchs had the merit of having firt
awakened and encouraged the spirit of discovery in
that age, it was their destiny, in the course of a
few years, to rejed two grand schemes for this
purpose, the execution of which would have been
attended with a great accession of glory to their
reigns and of power to their kingdom. In confe.
quence of some ill-founded prejudice against Ma,
gellan, or of some dark intrigue which contempo.
rary historians have not explained, Emanuel would
neither belltow the recompence which he demanded,
nor approve of the scheme which he proposed; and
dismissed him with a disdainful coldness intolerable
to a man conscious of what he deserved, and ani-
mated with the sanguine hopes of success peculiar
to those who are capable of forming or of conductA
ing new and great undertakings. In a transport of
Ii17. rcfentment, Magellan formally renounced his alle

giance to an utngrateful rafter, and fled to the
court of Callile , where he cxpected that his talents
would be more juflly ef[imatcd. IHe endeavoured
to recommlend himself by offering to execute, tin
(der the patronage of Spain , that scheme, which he
had laid before the court of Portugal, the

ccomplilhment of which, he knew, would wound n o O
he monarch againfl whom he was exasperated in v.
he most tender part. In order to eftablifl the Ii'
ftnefs of his theory, he produced the fame ar-
uments which he had employed at Lisbon ; ac.
nowledging, at the fame time, that the undertaking
as both arduous and expeufive, as it could not
e attempted but with a squadron of considerable
rce, and vidualled for at least two years. For-
unately, he applied to a minister who was not
pt to be deterred, either by the boldness of a de-
gn, or the expense of carrying it into execution.
ardinal Ximenes, who at that time directed the
firs of Spain, discerning at once what an in.
reafe of wealth and glory would accrue to his
ountry by the success of Magellan's proposal,
ifened to it with a most favorable ear. Charles V.
n his arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered
nto the measure with no less ardor, and orders
ere issued for equipping a proper squadron at the
ublic charge, of which the command was given
o Magellan, whom the king honored with the
abit of St. Jago and the title of Captain-
encral ".
On the tenth of'Auguft one thousand five hun- His voyage.
red and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
vith five flips, which, according to the ideas of
he age, were deemed to be of considerable force,,

lerrera , dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gonmara,

it c. 9r. Dallymplle's Collct.:. of Voyagcs to the South.
aciic Ocean, vol. i. p. 1, &c.

B o o K though the burden of the largeR did not exceed

v. one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of thq
str. whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four

men, among whom were some of the most fkilfu
pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors,
whose experience, as more extensive, Magella
placed still greater confidence. After touchin
at the Canaries, he stood diredly south toward
the equinoCtial line along the coast of America
but was so long retarded by tedious calms, an
spent so much time in searching every bay andin
let for that communication. with the Souther
Ocean which he wifled to discover, that he di
not reach the river De la Plata till the twelfth o
S~O. January. That spacious opening through whic

its valt body of water pours into.. the Atlantic
allured him to enter; but after failing: up it foi
some days, he concluded, from the shallowness of
the stream and the freshness of the water, that the
yifhed-for strait was not situated there, and con<
tinued his course towards the south. On the
thirty - first of March he arrived in the port of St.
Julian, about forty - eight degrees south of the
line, where he resolved to winter. In this un
comfortable station he lot one of his squadron, and
the Spaniards suffered so much from the exceflivt
rigor of the climate, that the crews of three ol
his ships, headed by their officers, rose in oper
mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing the vifionar)
projed of a desperate adventurer, and returninl
direCtly to Spain. This dangerous infurredior
Magellan suppressed, by an effort of courage n(

ess prompt than intrepid, and infliced exemplary B o o x
nilhment on the ringleaders. With the re- v.
ainder of his followers, overawed but not recon- 15zI.
led to his scheme, he continued his voyage to-
wards the south, and at length discovered, near
e fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a
rait, int6 which he entered, notwithstanding the
urmurs and' remonstrances of the people under
is command. After failing twenty days in that
inding dangerous channel, to which'he gave his
wn name, and where one of his ships deserted
im, the great Southern Ocean opened to his
iew, and with tears of joy he returned thanks to
eaven for having thus far crowned his endea-
ours with success"'.
But he was frill at a greater distance than he
magined from the object of his wilhes. He failed
uring three months and twenty days in an uni-
orm direction towards the north-west, without
ifcovering land. In this voyage, the longest that
ad ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he
uffered incredible distress. His flock of provi-
ons was almost exhausted, the water became
utrid, the men were reduced to the shortest al-
wance with which it was possible to fuftlin life,
nd the scurvy, the most dreadful of all the mala-
is with which sea-faring people are afflicted, be-
an to spread among the crew. One circumftancc

a' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 1o. lib. ix. c. xo, &c. Go.

lara, Hit. c. 92. Pigafetta, Viaggio, ap. Ramur. ii. p. 3 $.
c. ,

B o o K alone afforded them some consolation; they en

v. joyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, with
I=¶-. such favorable winds, that IMagellan beltowed on

that ocean the name of Pacific, which it still retains.
When reduced to such extremity that they mu
have funk under their fuffcrings they fell in with
a cluster of small but fertile islands, which afford
,Iarch 6. ed them refreshments in such abundance, that thei

health was soon re-eftablilfed. From these isles
which he called De Los Ladrones, he proceeded on
his voyage, and soon made a more important dif
covery of the islands now known by the name o
the Philippines. In one of these he got into a
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who at
tacked him with a numerous body of troops wel
armed; and wNhile he fought at the head of his
April26. men with his hual valor, he fell by the hands o

those barbarians, together with several of his pri
cipal officers.

The expedition was prosecuted under othe

commanders. After visiting many of the fmalle
ifies scattered in the ealtern part of the Indian
ocean, they touched at the great island of Borneo,
xov. a. and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Mo-

luccas, to the aftoniflment of the Portuguese
who could not comprehend how the Spaniards, by
holding a wefierly course, had arrived at that fe.
questered feat of their most valuable commerce,
which they themfclves had discovered by failing
in an opposite diredtion. There, and in the ad.
jacent isles, the Spaniards found a people ac-
quainted with the benefits of cxtcnfive trade, auti

willing to open an intercourse with a new nation. B o o IK
They took in a cargo of the precious spices, which v.
are the distinguished production of those islands;
and with that, as well as with specimens of the
rich commodities yielded by the other countries
which they had visited , the Vic7or!, which, of the Jan. is=s.
two fllips that remained of the fqiuadron, was most
ft for a long voyage, set fail for Europe, under
the command of Juan Sebastian del Cano. He
followed the course of the Portuguese by the
Cape of Good Hope, and, after many disasters
and sufferings, he arrived at St. Lucar on the
feenth of September one thousand five hundred
and twenty-two, having failed round the globe,
in the space of three years and twenty - eight
days ".

Though an untimely fate deprived Magellan
f the fatisfadion of accomplifling this great un-
ertaking, his contemporaries, jufl to his memory
nd talents, ascribed to him not only the honor
f having formed the plan, but of having fur-
ounted almost every obltacle to the completion
fit; and in the present age his name is fill
anked among the higlielt in the roll of eminent

id( successful navigators. The naval glory of
ain now eclipscd that of every other nation;
(nd by a singular felicity file had the merit, in
ie course of a few years, of difcovcrilln a new
ontinent almost as large as that part of the earth

I enera , dec. ;. lib. i. c. ;. 9 lib. iv. c. i. Gomara,
Iron. c. 93, &c. P'igfctta, ap. Ramui ii. p. 36x, &c.

. o o I which was formerly known, and of ascertaining b

v. experience the form and extent of the whol
15x2. terraqueous globe.

The Spaniards were not satisfied with the glor

of having firfl encompafT-d the earth; they e,
peeled to derive great commercial advantages fror
this new and boldest effort of their maritime fkil
The men of science among them contended, th;
the fpice-iflands, and several of the richest cour
tries in the Eat, were so situated as to belong(
right to the crown of Castile, in consequence
the partition made by Alexander VI. The me
chants, without attending to this difcuflion, ei
gaged eagerly in that lucrative and alluring con
merce, which was now opened to them. Tk
Portuguese, alarmed at the intrusion of such so
midable rivals, remonstrated and negociated
Europe, while in Asia they obftruced the tradei
the Spaniards by force of arms. Charles V. ni
sufficiently inftrudced with refped to the impol
ance of this valuable branch of commerce, i
diftraded by the multiplicity of his schemes at
operations, did not afford his fubjeds proper pr
tedion. At last, the low state of his finances, e
haufted by the efforts of his arms in every part
Europe, together with the dread of adding a ne
war with Portugal to those in which he was alreat
engaged, induced him to make over his claim
the Moluccas to the Portuguese for three hundr
and fifty thousand ducats. He reserved, howeve
to the crown of Castile the right of rcviving
pretensions on repayment of that fum; but oth

objects

bjeas engrossed his attention and that of his fuc- B o o K
cifors; and Spain was finally excluded from a v.
ranch of commerce in which it was engaging with Is
aingune expectations of profit ".
Though the trade with the Moluccas was relin.
uified, the voyage of Magellan was followed
ycommercial effects of great moment to Spain.
hilip II. in the year one thousand five hundred
(d fixty-four, reduced those islands which he dif-
overcd in the Eastern Ocean to fubjedion , and
Itablifhed settlements there; between which and
le kingdom of New Spain, a regular intercourse,
he nature of which shall be explained in its proper
lace, is till carried on. I return now to the tranf-
tions in New Spain.
At the time that Cortes was acquiring such vast Anorderto
rritories for his native country, and preparing uper'de
e way for future conquests, it was his singular
te not only to be dellitute of any commiflion or
uthority from the sovereign whom he was serving
ith lifuh fuccefsfll zeal, but to be regarded as

undutiful and seditious subjed. By the in-
Ience of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, his condudc
1 alliming the government of New Spain was
eclared to be an irregular usurpation, in contempt
the royal authority; and Chrifloval de Tapia
eived a commilfion, impowering him to super-
e Cortes, to seize his person, to confiscate his
as, to make a ftrid scrutiny into his proceed,

I' Herrera, dec. 3 . vib .

vi. c , c. dec. 4. lib, t. o, 7.
VOL. II. B b

'g o o ri ings, and to transmit the result of all the inquiries

v. carried on in New Spain to the council of the In.
'S2:- dies, of which the biffop of Burgos was president.

A few weeks after the redudion of Mexico, Tapia
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to
strip its conqueror of his power, and to treat him
as a criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very
improper infrurnent to wreal his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor the
talents that suited the high command to which he

which he was appointed. Cortes, while he publicly ex
eluies. pressed the moat refpeaful veneration for the em

peror's authority, secretly took measures to defea
the effect of his commission; and having involve
Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of nego
ciations and conferences, in which he sometime
had recourse to threats, but more frequently em
ployed bribes and promises, he at length prevails
on that weak man to abandon a province which h
was unworthy of governing "'.

Applits But notwithlftanding the fortunate dexteri
agail ro with which he had eluded this danger, Corte
the court,
ra;y xI5. was so sensible of the precarious tenure by whic

be held his power, that he dispatched deputiesti
Spain, with a pompous account of the success o
his arms, with farther fpecirnens of the prodLu
tions of the country, and with rich presents to th
emperor, as the earnest of future contribution
from his new conquest; requesting, in recompenc

" Ilerrera , dec. i. lib. iii. c. i6. dec. iv. c. I. Cortt¢

Relaz. a81 , E. B. Diaz .
c. Ig

for all his services, the approbation of his pro- B o o It
ceMeings, and that he might be intrufed with v.
the government of those territories, which his con- ^
duCi, and the valor of his followers, had added
to the crown of Caflile. The juncture in which
his deputies reached the court was favorable.
The internal commotions in Spain, which had dif-
quieted the beginning of Charles's reign, were just
appeased "'. The ministers had leisure to turn their
attention towards foreign affairs. The account of
Cortes's victories filled his countrymen with ad.
miration. The extent and value of his conquelts
became the objed of vast and interesting 'hopes.
Whatever stain he might have contraced, by the
irregularity of the fleps which he took in order to
attain power, was so fully effaced by the splendor
and merit of the great adionS which this had
enabled him to perform, that every heart revolted
atthe thought of inflicting any censure on a man,
whose services entitled him to the highest marks
f diltindion. The public voice declared warmly
n favor of his pretensions, and Charles arriving
in Spain about this time, adopted the sentiments
of his fubjecdts with a youthful ardor. Notwith- and isapt
tanditg the claims of Velasquez , and the partial cponted
eprefentations of the bifliop of Burgos, the em- General and
eror appointed Cortes captain-general and go- tover'or.of

l. New $?ain.

ernor of New Spain judging that no person was
ocapable of maintaining the royal authority, or of
ItblifLing good order both among his Spanish and

Hilt. of Charles V. vol. ii. b. iii.

Bb

B O O K Indian fubjeds, as the victorious leader whom the

v. former had long been accuflomed to obey, and the
'''"* latter had been taught to fear and to refpeat 7.
His rchemes Even before his jurifdicion received this lega
and arrange. fandion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the power
menu.

of a governor, and by various arrangements
endeavoured to render his conquest a secure an
beneficial acquilitioi' to his country. He deter
mined to eftablifl the feat of government in it
ancient flation, and to raise Mexico again froi
its ruins; and having conceived high ideas con
cerning the future grandeur of the state of whic
he was laying the foundation, he began to re
build its capital on a plan which has gradual
formed the rnoft magnificent city in the Ne
'World. At the fame time, he employed Ikilfu
persons to search for mines in different parts o
the country, and opened some which were foun
to be richer than any which the Spaniards had hi
therto discovered in America. He detached hi
principal officers into the remote provinces, an
encouraged them to fettle there, not only by be
flowing upon them large tracts of land, but b)
granting them the fame dominion over the Indians
and the fame right to their service, which the Spa
niards had alfumed in the islands.

Inrirreqions It was not, howevcvr, without difficulty th1
Or theMex.ll the Mexican empire could be entirely reducc
Caillf, anti .
cruelty orthe into the form of a Spanfilh colony. Enraged alE
Spaniardt.

"7 HIcrerra, dcc. 3. lib. iv. c .

3. Comara, Chron. c. I64

I6_ . ..
. Di . 167, .S.

rendered desperate by opprefTion, the natives often B o o lC
forgot the superiority of their enemies, and ran v.
to arms in defence of their liberties. In every US;2
contest , however , the European valor and
discipline prevailed. But fatally for the honor of
their country, the Spaniards sullied the glory
redounding from these repeated victories by their
mode of treating the vanquished people. After
taking Guatimozin, and becoming masters of his
capital, they supposed that the king of Castile
entered on poffeflion of all the rights of the
captive monarch, and affected to confider every
effort of the Mexicans to assert their own inde-
lendence, as the rebellion of vassals against their
overeign, or the mutiny of slaves against their
master. Under the fandion of those ill-founded
axims, they violated every right that flofild be
eld sacred between hostile nations. After each
infirredlion, they reduced the common people in
the provinces which they subdued, to the most
umilliating of all conditions, that of personal
civitudc. Their chiefs, supposed to be more
criminal, were puniffied with greater severity,
lid put to death in the most ignominiotus or the
not excruciating mode, that the insolence or
he cruelty of their conquerors could devise. In
lmoft every diftrid of tie Mexican empire, the
rogrefs of the Spanifi arms is marked with blood,
l'd with deeds f. atrocious, as disgrace the
nltcir)ifing valor that condudted them to success.
1 the country of 'anuco, sixty caziques, or
eadcrs, and four liundrcd nobles, wvere burnt at

B b 3

B O O I one time. Nor was this shocking barbarity perpe

v. trated in any sudden rally of rage, or by a
1S:2. commander of inferior note. It was the as of

Sandoval, an officer whose name is entitled ta
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, and
executed after a solemn consultation with Cortes;
and to complete the horror of the scene, the
children and relations of the wretched vic'ims
were assembled, and compelled to be speCtator
of their dying. agonies `'. It seems hardly possible
to exceed in horror this dreadful example o!
severity; but it was followed by another, whic
affected the Mexicans still more sensibly, as i
gave them a most feeling proof of their owi
degradation, and of the small regard which thei
haughty masters retained for the ancient dignitI
and splendor of their fiate. On a flight suspicion
confirmed by very imperfed evidence , tha
Guatimozin had formed a scheme to shake off th
yoke, and to excite his former fubjeds to tak
arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial
ordered the unhappy monarch, together with th
caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the tw
persons of greatest eminence in the empire, to t
hanged; and the Mexicans, with aftonifhrme
and horror, beheld this disgraceful punifinme
infliced upon persons, to whom they were acci
tomed to look up with reverence, hardly infcri
to that which they paid to the gods thcmfelvcs

Cortes, Relat. 29r, C. Gomara, Chron. c. I

" Gomara , Chron. c. 170. B. I)iaz. c. i77.Htuirre
dec. 3. lib. vii. ii c. 9. See NOTE XCV.

The example of Cortes and his principal officers n a o o
encouraged and justified persons of subordinate v.
rank to venture upon committing greater excesses. 2
Nuno de Guzmian, in particular, stained an
ilutrious name by deeds of peculiar enormity
and rigor, in various expeditions which he
conducted 1"2

One circumstance, however, saved the Mexi- Firfiobjeft
cans from farther confunmption , perhaps from one finlgthe
as complete, as that which had depopulated the caQnuerars.
ifands. The first conquerors did not attempt to
arch for the precious metals in the bowels of
the earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy
to carry on the expensive works, which are requi-
te for opening those deep recesses where Nature
as concealed the veins of gold and silver, nor
ufficiently skilful to perform the ingenious opera-
ions by which those precious metals are separated
om their refpedive ores. They were satisfied with
he more simple method, pradlifed by the In-
ians, of wafling the earth carried town by rivers
nd torrents from the mountains, and collecting
he grains of native metal deposited there. The
ich mines of New Spain, which have poured forth
heir treasures with such profusion on every quarter
fthe globe, were not discovered for several years i< et,
ter the conquest "'. By that time, a more orderly
vecrnment and police were introduced into the
olony; experience, derived from former errors,

Tlerrera, dec. 4 and ; passim.
Hcrrcra, dec. 8. lib. x.. c . x.

Bb 4

n p o u one time. Nor was this shocking barbarity perpe,

v. trated in any sudden sally of rage, or by a
1*=. commander of inferior note. It was the ad of

Sandoval, an officer whose name is entitled ta
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, and
executed after a solemn consultation with Cortes;
and to complete the horror of the scene, the
children and relations of the wretched vicims
were assembled, and compelled to be fpetators
of their dying. agonies `'. It seems hardly possible
to exceed in horror this dreadful example of
severity; but it was followed by another, which
affected the Mexicans fill more sensibly, as it
gave them a molt feeling proof of their own
degradation, and of the small regard which their
haughty masters retained for the ancient dignity
and splendor of their state. On a flight suspicion,
confirmed by very imperfec evidence, that
Guatimozin had formed a scheme to shake off the
yoke, and to excite his former fubjedts to take
arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial,
ordered the unhappy monarch, together with the
caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two
persons of greatest eminence in the empire, to be
hanged; and the Mexicans, with aftonifhmelne
and horror, beheld this disgraceful puniflmeni
inflidced upon persons, to whom they were acctlf
tomed to look up with reverence, hardly infcrio
to that which they paid to the gods themfelvcs'

"' Cortes, Relat. 291, C. Comara, Chron.c. is5.

' Gonmara , Chron. c. 70o. B. Diaz. c. . f17.rrera,
dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 9. See NOTE XCV.

The example of Cortes and his principal officers B o o
encouraged and justified persons of subordinate v.
rank to venture upon committing greater excesses. s152
Nuno de Guzinan, in particular, stained an
iluftrious name by deeds of peculiar enormity
and rigor, in various expeditions which he
conducted 1.
One circumstance, however, saved the Mexi- Firt objea
cans from farther consumption, perhaps from one ,finduftry
as complete, as that which had depopulated the co.Inuerrs.
islands. The firlt conquerors did not attempt to
search for the precious metals in the bowels of
the earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy
to carry on the expensive works, which are requi.
site for opening those deep recesses where Nature
has concealed the veins of gold and silver, nor
sufficiently skilful to perform the ingenious opera-
tions by which those precious metals are separated
from their refpedive ores. They were satisfied with
the more simple method, pradifed by the In-
dians, of waffling the earth carried town by rivers
and torrents from the mountains, and collecting
the grains of native metal deposited there. The
rich mines of New Spain, which have poured forth
their treasures with such profusion on every quarter
of the globe, were not discovered for several years Is st e.
after the conquest ". By that time, a more orderly
government and police were introduced into the
colony; experience, derived from former errors,

' lerrera, dec. 4 and q paffiin,
l Hcrrcra, dec 8. lib. x. c. zI.

Bb4

B o o K had fuggefled many useful and humane regulations

v. for the protection and prefcrvation of the Indians;
=:-. and though it then became necessary to increase

the number of those employed in the mines, and
they were engaged in a ipecies of labor more per.
nicious to the human constitution , they suffered
less hardflip or diminution than from the ill.
judged, but less extensive, schemes of the first
conquerors.

Their p- WVhile it was the lot of the Indians to susser,
'erty. their new masters seem not to have derived any

considerable wealth from their ill-condudted re-
searches. According to the ufilal fate of first set.
tiers in new colonies, it was their lot to encounter
danger, and to struggle with difficulties; the fruits
of their viEtories and toils were reserved for times
of tranquillity, and reaped by successors of greater
industry, but of inferior merit. The early hifto.
rians of America abound with accounts of the
sufferings and of the poverty of its conquerors '
In New Spain, their condition was rendered mor
grievous by a peculiar arrangement. When Charles
V. advanced Cortes to the government of tha
country, he at the fame time appointed certain
commissioners to receive and adminifler the roya
revenue there, with independent jurifdidion '"
These men, chosen from inferior stations in variou
departments of public business at Madrid, were f
iuch elevated with their promotion, that the

'Cortes, Relaz. 28 , F. 13. Diaz. c.,209.

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. t.

thought they were called to ad a part of the first o o i
consequence. But being accuRtomed to the mi- v.
nute formalities of office, and having contraded IS2.
the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which
they had hitherto moved, they were aftonifled, on
arriving in Mlexico, at the high authority which 1f24.
Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of administration, in a country recently sub-
dued and fettled , muf be different from what
took place in one where tranquillity and regular
government had been long eftabliflbed. In their
letters they represented Cortes as an ambitious
tyrant, who having usurped a jurifdicion superior
to law, aspired at independence, and by his ex-
orbitant wealth and extensive influence, might ac-
complifh those disloyal schemes which he appa-
rently meditated "'. These insinuations made stich
deep impression upon the Spanish ministers, most
of whom had been formed to business under the
jealous and rigid administration of Ferdinand, that,
unmindful of all Cortes's pafl services, and re-
gardlefs of what he was then suffering in conduct-
ing that extraordinary expedition , in which he
idvanced from the lake of Mexico to the western
extremities of Honduras ", they infused the fame
flfpicions into the mind of their master, and pre-
vailed on him to order a solemn inquest to be
malde into his conduct, with powers to the licen-
tiate Ponce de Leon, intrufded with that commis- ist.

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. v. c. 14.
"' See NOTE XCVI.

p o o is sion, to seize his person, if he should find that

v. expedient, and fend him prisoner to Spain ".
,i:-. The sudden death of Ponca de Leon, a few days
trns to after his arrival in New Spain, prevented the exe.
pgaiq. cution of this commiflion. But as the object of

his appointment was known, the mind of Cortes
was deeply wounded with this unexpeced return
for services, which far exceeded whatever any sub.
jed of Spain had rendered to his sovereign. He
endeavoured, however, to maintain his station,
and to recover the confidence of the court. But
every person in office, who had arrived from Spain
since the conquest, was a spy upon his condudt,
and with malicious ingenuity gave an unfavorable
representation of all his actions. The apprehen.
528a. sions of Charles and his ministers increased. A

new commission of inquiry was issued, with more
extepfive powers, and various precautions were
taken in order to prevent or to punish him, if he
should be so presumptuous as to attempt what was
inconsistent with the fidelity of a subjed "'. Cortes
beheld the approaching crisis of his fortune with
all the violent emotions natural to a haughty mind,
conscious of high desert, and receiving unworthy
treatment. But though some of his desperate fol1
lowers urged him to assert his own rights againfl
his ungrateful country, and with a bold hand tQ
seize that power which the courtiers meanly accuse(

II* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. x4, zI.

1" Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. i g. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. l. lib
iv.c. 9, o. B. Diaz. c, 172, 196. Gonara, Chron. c. 166

him of coveting '", he retained such felf-com- B o o Kc
,iand, or was actuated with such sentiments of v.
loyalty, as to rejet their dangerous counsels, and 28
to chufe the only course in which lie could secure
his own dignity, without departing from his duty,
He resolved not to expose himself to the ignominy
of a trial, in that country which had been the scene
of his triumphs; but without waiting for the ar-
rival of his judges, to repair directly to Castile,
and commit himself and his cause to the justice and
generosity of his sovereign `.

Cortes appeared in his native country with the Hisrecep.
splendor that suited the conqueror of a mighty tionthere
kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great
value, several curious produCtions of the country I",
and was attended by some Mexicans of the first
rank, as well as by the most considerable of his
own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at once
every fufpiciory and fear that had been entertained
with refped to his intentions. The emperor, hav-
ing now nothing to apprehend from the designs of
Cortes, received him like a person whom confci,
oufnefs of his own innocence had brought into the
presence of his master, and who was entitled, by
the eminence of his services, to the highest marks
of diftindion and refped. The order of St. Jago,
the title of Vlarquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the
grant of a vast territory in New Spain, were fuc.
ccllively beltowed upon him; and as his manners

"' B. Diaz. c. 194.

1 -' lerrera, dec. a. lib. iv. c. 8.
"* Sec NOTE XCVII.

n o o It were corret and elegant, although he had pafled

v. the greater part of his life among rough adven.
is28. turers, the emperor admitted him to the fame fa.

miliar intercourse with himself, that was enjoyed
by noblemen of the first rank ".

Settlement But, amidst those external proofs of regard,
ofthe go- symptoms of remaining difiruft appeared. Though
vernment in a
New Spain. Cortes earnefly solicited to be reinstated ji the go.

vernment of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious
to commit such an important charge to-a man
whom le had once fufpeded, peremptorily refused
to invert him again with powers which he might
3130. find it impossible to control. Cortes, though

dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico with
diminished authority. The military department,
with powers to attempt new discoveries, was left
in his hands; but the supreme direcion of civil
affairs was placed in a board, called T/he Audience
of New Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion o
authority more united and extensive became necef
fary, Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of higl
rank, was sent thither as Iiceroy, to take the go
vernment into his hands.

wew This division of power in New Spain proved
fChernes, as was unavoidable , the foulce of perpetual differ

sion , which embittered the life of Cortes , an
thwarted all his schemes. As he had now no op
portunity to difplav his active talents but in at
tempting new discoveries, he formed variou
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear imprel

" HI-lerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i. lib. vi. c. 4. B. Diaz
c. 196. Gom. Chron. c. i82.

sions of a genius that delighted in what was bold n o o x
and splendid. He early entertained an idea, that, v.
either by fleering through the gulph of Florida 1530.
along the eaft-coaft of North-America, some firait
would be found that communicated with the weft-
ern ocean; or that, by examining the isthmus of
Darien, some paflage would be discovered between
the North and South-Seas "'. But having been dif-
appointed in his expectations with refped to both,
he now confined his views to such voyages of dif-
covery as he could make from the ports of New
Spain in the South-Sea. There he fitted out fuc-
ceflively several small squadrons, which either pe.
rilled in the attempt, or returned without making
any discovery of moment. Cortes, weary ofintruft- 1S36.
ing the conduct of his operations to others, took
the command of a New armament in person, and,
after enduring incredible hardships, and encoun-
tering dangers of every species, he discovered the
arge peninsula oifCalifornia, and surveyed the
greater part of the gulph which separates it from
New Spain. The discovery of a country of such
txtent would have reflected credit on a common
adventurer; but it could add little new honor to
the name of Cortes, and was far from satisfying
he fnguine expectations which he had formed'".
Dfgufted with ill fucccfs, to which he had not
been accustome(d, and weary of contesting with
dvcrfaries to whom he confidered it as a disgrace

'Cortes, Relaz. Rain. iii 294, B.

I-Icrrera,dec. s. lib. viii. c. 9, so. dec. 8. lib. vi. c. I4.
eneg;as, lift. of Californ. i. 1 2 . Lorenzana, Hilt p. 3 2, &Q.

n o o r to be oppored, he once more fought for redress it

v. his native country.
ao40. But his reception there was very different from
His death.

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have secured for him. The merit of his ancient
exploits was already, in a great measure, forgot.
ten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more
valuable conquests in another quarter of America.
No service of moment was now expected from a
man of declining years, and who began to be un.
fortunate. The emperor behaved to him with
cold civility; his ministers treated him, sometimes
with neglect, sometimes with insolence. Hi
grievances received no redress; his claims wer
urged without effect; and after several years fpen
in fruitless application to miniflers and judges, a
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to
man of high spirit, who had moved in a fpher
where he was more accultomed to command tha
to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the second o
December one thousand five hundred and forty
seven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. Hi
fate was the fame with that of all the persons wh
distinguished themselves in the discovery or con
quelt of the New World. Envied by his contem
poraries, and ill requited by the court which Ii
served, he has been admired and celebrated b
succeeding ages. Which has formed the molf juU
eltimatc of his charadcer, an impartial confideratio
of his adcions mult determine.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

O T E S
O A N TES

AND
iLLUSTRATIONS,

NOTE I. p. 3*

HE height of the most elevated point in the Pyrenees

is, according to M. Cassini fix thousand fix hundred and
forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain Gemini, in the
canton of Berne, is ten thousand one hundred and ten feet.
The height of the Peak of Teneriffe, according to the
measurement of P. Feuille, is thirteen thousand one hundred
and feventy-eight feet. The height of Chimborazzo, the
most elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand two
hundred and eighty feet; no less than seven thousand one
lundred and two feet above the highest mountain in the
ncient continent. Voyage de D. Juan Ulloa, Observations
Altron. et Phyfiq. tomn. ii. p. 1I4. The line of congelation
on Chimborazzo, or that part of the mountain which is
covered perpetually with snow, is no less than two thousand
four hundred feet from its summit. Prevot. Hilt. Gener.
des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 4.

AS a particular description makes a stronger impression
tan general assertions, I shall give one of Rio de la Plata
by an eye-witness, P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe Jesuit, who
Inded at Buenos Ayres in I749, and thus represents what
be felt when such new objects were first presented to his
view. "While I resided in Europe, and read in books of
uiory or geography that the mouth of the river De la
]a was a hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I cenfidered

it as an exaggeration, because in this hemisphere we hav
no example of such vtaf rivers. \When I approached it
mouth, I had the most vehement delire to ascertain th
truth with my own eyes; and I have found the matter t
be exactly as it was represented. This I deduce particularl
from one circumlrtance: When we took o',. departure fror
IMonte-Video, a fort situated more than a hundred mile
from the mouth of the river , and where its breadth i
conliderably diminiihed, we failed a complete day befor
We discovered the land on the opposite bank of the river
and when we were in the middle of the channel, we couli
not discern land on either fide, and saw nothing but thi
sky and water, as if we had been in some great ocean
Indeed, we ihould have taken it to be sea, if the fred
water of the river, which was turbid like the Po, had n
satisfied us that it was a river. lIoreover, at Buen
Ayres,- another hundred miles up the river, and where
is frill much narrower, it is not only impossible to dice
the opposite coast, *hich is indeed very low and flat; b
one cannot perceive the houses or the tops of the fteepi
in the Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other fide
the river." Lettera prima, publilhed by Pluratoi,
Criftianefimo Felice, &zc. i. p. 2 7.

NOTE III. p. 7.

N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Canad
are the countries which lie in the fatme parallel of latitu
with the kingdom of France; and in every part of the
the water of the rivers is frozen during winter to
thickness. of fcveral feet; the earth is covered with fno
as deep; almoil all the birds fly, during that season, fro
a climate where they could not live. The country of t
Efquimaux, part of Labrador, and the countries on t
south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fime parallel wi
Great Britain; and yet in all there the cold is so intense
that even the indultry of Europeans has not attempt
cultivation.

NOTE

NOTE IV. p. Io.

A COSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who
endeavoured to account for the different degrees of heat
is the old and new continents, by the agency of the winds
shich blow in each. Hist. Moral. &c. lib. ii. and iii.
I. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not only improved
itby new observations, but has employed his amazing
powers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing and placing
iin the most striking light. Some remarks may be added,
which tend to illustrate more fully a dodtrine of much
iportance in every inquiry concerning the temperature of
nrious climates.

\hen a cold wind blows over land, it must in its pas-
ge rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
is, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it continue
blov in the fame direction , it will come, by degrees,
paps over a surface already cooled, and will susser no
nger any abatement of its own keenneis. Thus as it
ainces over a large trad of land, it brings on all tho
verity of intense frofs.
Let the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep sea;
e superficial water must be immediately cooled to a certain
tgree, and the wind proportionally warmed. But the
prficial and colder water becoming specifically heavier than
|swarutler water below it, descends; what is warmer supplies
place, which , as it comes to be cooled in its turn,
inues to warm the air which passes over it, or to
nilh its cold. This change of the superficial water,
l fucceflive ascent of that which is warmer, and the
nfiquent fuccellive abatement oF coldnels in the air, is
ed by the agitation caulefd in the lea by the mechanical
on of' the wind, and also by the motion of the tides.
iswill go on , and the rigor of the wind will continue
diiniith until the whole water is lo far cooled , that
Wlater on the furfaict is no longer removed fiom the
oii of the wind., fft enoufh to kinder it frotn bDing
VOL. I. C c

arrelted by frost. \Vhenever the surface freezes, the wind
is no longer warmed by the' water fomn 'below, and it goes
on with undiminiflaed cold.

From those principles may be explained the severity o

Winter-frofts in extensive continents; their mildness in mall
islands; and the superior rigor of winter in those parts o
North - America with which we are belt acquainted. In the
north-wefl parts of Europe, the severity of winter is mitigate
by the weft winds, which usually blow in the months o
November, December, and part of January.

On the other hand, when a warm wind blows oe

land, it heats the surface, which murf therefore cease t
abate the fervor of the wind. :But the fane wind blow
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water fron
below , and thus is continually loling somewhat of its owl
heat.

But the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat o

the wind or air palling over it, proceeds from the followin
circumstance, that on account of the transparency of th
sea, its surface cannot be heated to a great degree by th
fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjeded to their influenc
very soon acquires great heat. When, therefore, the win
blows over a torrid continent, it is Coon raised to a he
almost intolerable; but during its passage over an extensi
ocean, it is gradually cooled; so that on its arrival at th
farthest shore, it is again fit for respiration.

Those principles will account for the sultry heats of lar

continents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate of illan
in the fame latitude; and for the superior warmth in fumm
which large continents, lituated in the temperate or col
zones of the earth, enjoy, when comnared with that
islands. The heat of a climate depends not only upon t
immediate effcdt of the fun's rays, but on their continu
operation, on the efffRt which they have formerly produc
and which remains for some time in the ground. This
the reason why the clay is warmelt about two in t
afternoon, the fuimcer warnielt about the middle of Jul
and the winter coldcfl about the middle of January.

The forests which cover America, and hin"der the fun-
beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the
temperate climate in the equatorial parts. The'ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the ground, have
not a maits of matter sufficient to abfbrb heit enough for
this purpose. Belides, it is a known fadt, that the vege-
tative power of a plant occaflons a perlpiration from the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are exposed;
and, from the nature of evaporation, thi. perspiration
produces a cold in the leaf proportional to the perspiration.
Thus the effect of the leaf in heating the air in contact
with it, is prodigiously diminished. For those observations,
which throw much additional light on this curious fubjedt,
I am indebted to ny ingenious friend, Mlr. Robifon.
profefTor of natural philosophy in the university of Edin-
burgh.

NOTE V. p. io.

THE climate of Brasil has been described by two emi-
nent naturalitis, Pifo and Margrave, who observed it with
a philosophical accuracy, for which we search in vain in
the accounts of many other provinces in imcrica. Both
represent it as temperate and miltl, when compared with
the climate of Africa They ascribe this chiefly to the
refrclhing wind which blows continually from the sea. The
air is not only cool, but chilly through the night, in so
much, that the natives kindle fires every cvening in their
huts. Pifo, de iledicini Brailieili, lib. i. p. , &c.
Mailgrravius, I-liltor. Rerum. Natural. nralil ia, lib. viii. c.
1. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who relired long in hIralil, confirms
their des'cription. Churchill's Collection , vol. ii. p. 26.
;aireiilli, who was a missionary many years am;ncI lie
ntlians, upon the river Oronoco, gives a (imilar delcription
Ofthe temperature of the climate there. Hlift. de l'Orenoquc,
tl, i. p. 26. P. Aciugna felt a very conliderable degree

Cc z

of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Amazons.
Relat. vol. ii. p. 6. M. Biet, who lived a considerable tifme
in Cayenne, gives a similar account of the temperature of
that climate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage
de la France Equinox, p. 330o Nothing can be more
different from these descriptions than that of the burning
heat of the African coast given by M. Adanfon. Voyage
to Senegal, passim.

NOTE VL p. xi.

T WO French frigates were sent upon a voyage of
discovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44' south, they
began to feel a considerable degree of cold. in latitude
48 , they met with illands of floating ice. Hiftoire des
Navigations aux Terres Aultrales, tom. ii. 2 6, &c.' Dr.
Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59'. Id. tom. i. p. 47.
Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Patagonia, latitude
So0 33 south, on the fifteenth of December, which is
midsummer in that part of the globe, the twentyl-firft of
December being the loilgefl day there, compares the climate
to that of England in the middle of winter. Voyages by
Hawkefworth, i. 2:. Mr. Banks having landed on Terra
del Fuego, in the Bay of Good Success, latitude s , on
the sixteenth of January, which corresponds to the month
of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants died ill
one night of extreme cold, and all the party were in the
moos imminent danger of perishing. Id. ii. ' i, s2. lB
the fourteenth of Alarch , corresponding to September in!
our hemisphere, winter was set in awith rigor, and the|
mountains were covered with snow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cookil
in his voyage towards the South-pole, furnihes new and
firiling instances of the extraordinary predominance of cold
in this region of the globe. " Who would have thought
( lays he) that an island , of no greater extent than fcvcnt)
leagues in circuit, situated between the latitude of s4
and 55', flmould in the very height of Summer be, in

manner, wholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen
sow ; but more especially the S. W. coast? The very
i'mmits of the lofty mountains were cased with snow and
ie; but the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible;
anl at the bottom of the bays, the coast was terminated by
a wall of ice of conliderable height. " Vol. ii. p. 217.

In some places of the ancient continent, an extraordinary
degrec of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mr. Bogle,
in his iembalfy to the court of the Delai Lama, passed the
winter of the year 1774 at Chammanning, in latitude li;
;9' N. He often found the thermometer in his room
twenty-nine degrees under the freezing point by Fahren.
heir's scale; and in the middle of April the standing waters
'ire all frozen, and heavy showers of snow frequently fell.
ihe extraordinary elevation of the country seems to be the cause
of this excessive cold. In travelling from Indoltan to Thibet,
the ascent to the fumiit of the Boutan Mountains is very great,
hbu the deCcent on the other lide is not in equal proportion.
The kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely
bre and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart,
ead in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary cold
i low latitudes in America cannot be accounted for
bi' tie fhlme cause. Those regions are not remarkable for
I';itarion. Some of them are countries deprefled and

TIhie noft obvious and probable cause of the superior
tderee of cold , towards the southern extremity of America,
ict:n; to be the form of the continent there. Its breadth
;:li:illy decreases as it stretches from St. Antonio south-
1arids, and from the bay of St. Julian to the Straits of Magellan
i-s dienlions are much contiacled. On the east and weft

, it is wafited by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

:;'a its southern point it is probable that a great extent
Fc;:l, without any considerable tradt of land, reaches to

ie lltArcctic pole. In whichever of these directions the

i Hl blows , it is cooled before it approachcs the Ilagellanic
l?.i, by pailing over a valt body of water, nor is the
':l there o(' ilch extent that it can recover any conliderablo

Cc 3

of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Amazons.
Relat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who lived a considerable title
in Cayenne, gives a similar account of the temperature of
that climate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage
de la France Equinox, p. 33o. Nothing can be more
different from these descriptions than that of the burning
heat of the African coast given by M. Adanfon. Voyage
to Senegal, passim.

NOTE V. p. xi.

T WO French frigates were sent upon a voyage of
discovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44' south, theyl
began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In latitude
48 , they met with illands of floating ice. Hiftoire les
Navigations aux Terres Aultrales, tom. ii. 2 6, &c.' Dr.
Halley fell in with ice in latitude S9 . Id. tom. i. p. 47.
Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Patagonia, latitude
o50 33' south, on the fifteenth of December, which is
midsummer in that part of the globe, the twenty-firfl of
December being the loigeft day there, compares the climate
to that of England in the middle of winter. Voyages by
ilawkefworth, i. 2;. Mr. Banks having landed on Terra
del Fuego, in the Bay of Good Success, latitude s', on
the sixteenth of January, which corresponds to the month
of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants died in
one night of extreme cold, and all the party were in th
most imminent danger of perishing. Id. ii. g i, 52. 1
the fourteenth of Mlarch , corresponding to September
our hemisphere, winter was set in xvith rigor, and th
mountains were covered with filow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cook
in his voyage towards the South-pole, furnihes new ant
Driking instances of the extraordinary predominance of col
in this region of the globe. "Who would have though
( fivs he) that an island, of no greater extent than fecvnt
leagues in circuit, situated between the latitude of 54
and 5 ', flould in the very height of Summer be, in

manner, wholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen
low ; but more especially the S. W. coast? The very
lunmmits of the lofty mountains were cased with snow and
iLc; but the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible;
and at the bottom of the bays, the coast was terminated by
a wall of ice of conliderable height. " Vol. ii. p. 217.

In some places of the ancient continent, an extraordinary
degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mir. Bogle,
in his elnbalfy to the court of the Delai Lama, passed the
;rinter of the year 1774 at Chammanning, in latitude tI
39' N. He often found the thermometer in his room
tw'enty-nine degrees under the freezing point by Fahren-
hcir's scale; and in the middle of April the standing waters
were all frozen, and heavy showers of snow frequently fell.
The extraordinary elevation of the country seems to be the caufa
of this excelfive cold. In travelling from Indoitan to Thibet,
the ascent to the fummnit of the Boutan Mountains is very great,
tbrJ the descent on the other fide is not in equal proportion.
The kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely
:ire and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart,
-ead in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary cold
ii low latitudes in Amterica cannot be accounted for
i! tle fame caufc. Those regions are not remarkable for
Ievation. Some of them are countries deprefled and

The nmof obvious and probable cause of the superior
decree of cold , towards the southern extremity of America,
iccn: to be the form of the continent there. Its breadth
g;liu;tlly decreases as it firetches from St. Antonio south-
!ar,1s, and from the bay of St. Julian to the Straits of Magellan
:li ilenfions are much contracted. On the east and weft

it is waffced by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

:;'; its tfuthern point it is probable that a great extent
l Ic;, without any considerable tradc of land, reaches to
c Anitrc'tic pole. In whichever of thefie directions the
,I bhlows, it is cooled before it approaches the Alagellanic
'iuns, by pafling over a vant body of water, nor is the
'1 there of' iich extent that it can recover any confiderablo

Cc ;

degree of heat in its progress over it. These circumiftances
concur in rendering the temperature of the air in this diftrid
of America, more similar to that of an insular, than to
that of a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring
the fame degree of summer - heat with places in Europe and
Asia, in a corrcCponLding northern latitude. The north-wind
is the only one that reaches this part of America, after
blowing over a great continent. But from an attentive
furvev of its position, this will be found to have a
te:dency , r.ther to dimiirfh than augment the degree of
heat. The fouthein extremity of America is properly tle
termination of the immense ridge of the Andes, which
itretches nearly in a d-re6t line from north to south,
through the whole extent of the continent. The molt sultry
regions in South-America, Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and
Tucuman, lie many degrees to the' ceft of the tlagellanic
regions., The level country of Peru , which enjoys the
tro:ical heats, is situated considerably to the weft of them.
The north-wind then, though it blows over land, does
not bring to the bsuthern extremity of America, an increase
of heat collected in its panthge over torrid regions; hut
before it arrives there , it mult have swept along the summits
of the Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold of
tant frozen region.

Though it be now demonstrated that there is no fouthb

ern continent in that region of the globe which it waa
supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain from Captani
Cook's difcovcries, that there is a large tract of land neat
the fouth-pole, which is the source of nlolt of the ici
spread over the valt southern ocean. Vol. ii. p. 20o. 239
&c. X htther the influence of this remote fiozen con
tinent may reach the southern extremity of America
and affct its climate, is an inquiry not unworthy Qs att
tion.

NOTE VII . . 4.

M 1. CONDAMINE is one of the latest and mofl accurate
obfcrvers of the interior slate of South-America. " After
defccndilng from the Andes ( fiys he), one beholds a vast
and uniform profped of water and verdure, and nothing
more. One treads upon the earth, but does not fee it,
as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant plants, weeds,
and shrubs, that it would require a considerable degree of
labor to clear it', for the space of a foot. " Relation abrsCgee
d'un Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the singularities in the
fIrefis is a fort of osiers, or withs, called bejicos by the
Spaniards, lianes by the French, and inibbees by the Indians,
which are usually employed as ropes in America. This is
one of the parasitical plants, which twists about the trees
it meets with, and rising above their highest branches , its
tendrils descend perpendicularly, strike into the ground,
take root, rife up around another tree, and thus mount
and descend alternate!y. Other tendrils are carried obliquely
by the wind, or tonme accident, and form a confulion of
interwoven cordage , which refemblcs the rigging of a ship.
Balncroft, Nat. ilift. of Guiana, 99. These withs are
often as thick as the arm of a man. lb. p. 75. M. Bouguer's,
account of the forests in Peru perfectly resembles this.
description. Voyage au Peru, p. i6.0viedo gives a fimilal
description of the forells in other parts of America. Hill
lib. ix. p. 144. D. The country of the l'soxos is lb much
overflowed, that they arc obliged to reside on the summit
oF fbme riling ground during some part of the year, anct
have no communlication witl their countrymen at any distance.
l.ttres Edlifialncs, tuonll. X . 187. Garcia gives a full
ind jult dclefription of the rivers, lakes, woods, anct
m.lllhes in those countries of America uhich lie betweent
the tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii. c. t. § 4, g.
lThe incredible hardlhips to which Gonzalez Pizarro wa.
cxpof(rc in attempting to march into the country Io. thai
ealt of the Andes, convey a very itriking idea of that part

Cc 4

of America in its original uncultivated Rtate. Garcil. de
la Vega, Royal. Comment. of Peru, part ii. book iii,
c. 2-5.

NOTE VIIL. p. I6.

T HE animals of America seem not to have been always
of .a size inferior to those in other quarters of the globe.
From antlers of the moofe-deer which have been found
in America, it appears to have been an animal of great
size. Near the banks of the Ohio, a considerable number
of bones of an immense magnitude have been fount. The
place where this discovery has been made lies about one
hundred and ninety miles below the junction of the river
Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles distant from
the banks of the latter, on the fide of the marsh called
the Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quantities about five
or fix feet under ground , and the itratum is visible in the
bank on the edge of the Lick. Journal of Colonel George
Croglan, MS. penes me. This spot seems to be accurately
laid down by Evans in his map. These bones must have
belonged to animals of enormous bulk; but naturalists
being acquainted with no living creature of such size, were
at first inclined to think that they were mineral substances.
Upon receiving a greater number of specimens, and after
infpedting them more narrowly, they are now allowed to
be the hones of an animal. As the elephant is the largest
known quadruped, and the tusks which were found nearly
resembled, both in form and quality, the tusks of an
elephant, it was concluded that the carcases deposited on
the Ohio were of that species. But Dr. Hunter, one of
the persons of our age best qualified to decide with refpet
to this point, having accurately examined several parcels
of tusks, and grinders, and jaw-bones, font from the Ohio
to London, gives it as his opinion, that they did not belong
to an elephant, but to some huge carnivorous animal of an
unknown species. Phil. Transact. vol. lviii. p. 34. Bones
of the fame kind, and as remarkable for their size, have

teen found near the mouths of the great rivers Oby,
Jkii;?, and Lena , in Siberia. Strahlen;berg, Defcript.
o .;:t, and east Pts of Elurope and AJa, p. 402, &c.
Tlhe eIlphant teems to be confined in his range to the torrid
lor:c, and never multiplies beyond it. In such cold regions
, those bordering on the frozen sea, he could not live.
The exifence of such large animals in America might open
Iaide field for conjecture. The more we contemplate the
cc of nature, and confider the variety of herproductions,
tremore we must be satisfied that astonishing changes have
ben made in the terraqueous globe by convulsions and
evolutions, of which no account its preserved in hiflory.

NOTE IX. p. 17.

IlIS degeneracy of the domestic European animals in

merica ought to be imputed partly to each of these causes.
ithe Spanish settlements, which are situated either within
e torrid zone, or in countries bordering upon it, the
icreae of heat, and diversity of food , prevent sheep and
orned cattle from attaining the fame size as in Europe.
hey seldom become so fat, and their flesh is not so juicy,
of such delicate flavor. In North-America, where
the climate is more favorable , and similar to that of Europe,
e quality of the grafels which spring up naturally in their
aRure-grounds is not good. Alitchell, p. X s1. Agriculture
ill so much in its infancy, that artificial food for cattle
not raised in any quantity. During a winter, long in many
rvinces, ant rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of their
tttlc. The general treatment of their horses and horned
tle is injudicious and harfi in all the English colonies.
hefe circumltalces contribute more, perhaps, than any
ing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to the degeneracy
breed in the horses, cows, and sheep, of many of the
rth. A mcrican provinces.

NOTE X. p. 18.

IN the year ij 8i, the island of Hispaniola was afflkic
*with a dreadful vilitation of thore delhuctive insets, th
particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions
singular infiance of the furerfhition of the Spanish planters
After trying various methods of exterminating the ants
they resolved to implore proteetion of the faints; but a
the calamity was new, they were at a lots to find out thi
faint who could give them the most effetual aid. The
cast lots in order to discover the patron whonl they flioul[
invoke. The lots decided in favor of St. Saturninus. The'
celebrated his festival with greatfolemnity , and immediately
adds the hiltorian, the calamity began to abate. He:reda
dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 15. p. o107

NOTE XL p. 0o.

T HE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Am
ricains supposes this difference in heat to be equal
twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from t
equator in the old continent, is as warm as one situate
eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i. p. 11. D
1litchell, after observations carried on during thirty year
contends that the diflerence is equal to fourteen or filte
degrees of latitude. Present State &c. p. 257.

NO.TE X11. p. 21.

JANUARY 3d, 176 , AMr. Bertram, near the head
St. John's river in Eall Florida, observed a fioft so intenf
that in one night the ground wias frozen an inch tbi
upon the banks of the river. The limes, citrons, a
hanana- trees, at St. Auguftin , were deflroyed. Bertram
Journal, p. o. Other inltanccs of the cxeraurdin\ '

operations of cold in the southern provinces of Nort'
America are collected by Dr. Alitchell. Present Statr,
p. 2o6, &c. February 7th, 1747, the froll at Charle--
wowrn was so intense, that a person having carried two
quart-bottles of hot water to bed, in the morning they
Iwere split to pieces, and the water converted into solid
lumps of ice In a kitchen, where there was a fire, tile
i:tcer in a jar, in which there was a large live eel, was
osoen to the bottom. Almost all the orange and olive-
trecs were destroyed. Description of South-Carolina, 8vq.
pond. 1761.

NOTE XIII. p. 2z.

A REMARK BLE infance of this occurs in Dutch
Guiana, a country every where level, and so low, that
during the rainy seasons it is usually covered with water
ne'r two feet in height. This renders the foil so rich
tLt, on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a
ftraruni of perfect manure, and as such has been transported
to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo, thirty crops
of ranun canes have been raied fucceflively, whereas in the
\el:-cf Indian - islands not more than two is ever expeCted
fiorn the richest land. The expedients by which the planters
enrucavour to diminish this exceflive fertility of foil are
various. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. 1o, &c.

NOTE XIV. p. 33.

N'1 ULLER seems to have believed, without sufficient
tvidence, that the Cape had been doubled, torn. i. p,
I , &c ; and the Imperial Academy of St. Petersburgh
Fie itome countenance to it, by the manner in which
'. 'Inotslkoi-noJs is laid down in their charts. But I am
nililrcd, from undoubted authority , that no Ruffian vclcl

hts ever ftiled round that cape, and as the country o
IJchittki is not subject to the Ruffian empire, it is very
imperfectly known.

NOTE XV. p. 37.

W ERE this the place for entering into a long and intri.
cate geographical disquisition, many curious obfervatiuns might
arie from comparing the accounts of the two Ruffian voyages
and the charts of their refpecrive navigations. One remark is
applicable to both. We cannot rely with absolute certainty
on the position which they assign to several of the places
which they visited. The weather was so extremely foggy,
that they seldom saw the fun or stars, and the position of the
islands and supposed continents was commonly determined by
reckoning,not by observation. Behringand Tfchirikow proceed.
ed much farther towards the east than Krenitzin. Theland
discovered by Behring, which he imagined to be part of the
American continent, is in the 2.6th degree of longitude
from the filft meridian in the isle of Ferro , and in O8
2S" of latitude. Tfchirikow came upon the fame coast in
long. 241°, lat. 56°; luller. i. 249, 249. The former
mult have advanced 60 degrees from the port of Petro-
pawlowfki, from which he took his departure, and the
laiter 6g degrees. But from the chart of [renitzin's voy-
age, it appears that he did not fail farther towards the east
than the 2o8th degree, and only iz degrees from Petro-
pakwlox ski. In 1741, liehring and Tfchirikow , both in
going and returning, held a course which was molily to
the south of that chain of ifl.inds, which they discovercd
and observing the mountainous and rugged afpcct of the
head-lands vwhich they dcfcricd towards the north, thle
fulj)pofld them to be pronmontories belonging to some parl
of the American continent, which as they fancied
tl'ctchcd as fir south as the latitude ,6. In this mannc
they are laid down in the chart publifhled by Muller, an
likcwife in a manuscript chart drawn by a mate

Behring's ihip, communicated to me by Mr. Professor Robifon.
But in 1769, Krenitzin, after wintering in the illand
Alaxa, Rfood so far towards the north in his return, that
his course lay through the middle of what Behring and
Tl'hirikow had supposed to be a continent, which he
found to be an open sea, and that they had miflaken rocky
ifes for the head-lands of a continent. It is probable, that
the countries discovered in 74 r , towards the east, do n6t
belong to the American continent, but are only a conti-
nuation of the chain of islands. The number of volcanoes in
this region of the globe is remarkable. There are several
hi Kamchatka, and not one of the islands, great or finall,
s far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is without theni.
lany are adtually burning, and the mountains in all bear
iarks of having been once in a slate of eruption. Were I
Ufpofed to admit such conjedtures as have found place
inother inquiries concerning the peopling of America, I
might suppose that this part of the earth,' having manifeltly
fffered violent convulsions from earthquakes and volcanoes,
ar ilthmus, which may have formerly united Asia to
Pnerica, has been broken, and formed into a clufler of
ilands by the shock.
It is singular, that at the very time the Ruilian naviga-
trs were attempting to make discoveries in the north-west
tiAmerica the Spaniards were prosecuting the fame design
ni another qUarter. In 1769, two finall veftels failed
onl Loretto in California to explore the coalls of the
Ountry to the north of that peninsula. They advanced
to rther than the port of Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
c'veral fucceflive expeditions fitted out From the port of
t.Bas in New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as
as the latitude 8. Gaceta de Madrid, Mlarch 19, and
Iy 14, 1776. But as the journals of tholf voyages
we not yet been publihed, I cannot compare their
rogrcls with that of' the Ruffians, or Jhow how near

navigators of the two nations have approached
eail other. It is to be hoped, that the enlightenel

minister, who has now the diredion of Anierictf
affairs in Spain, will not withhold this information from
the public.

NOTE XVI. p. 38.

O UR knowledge of the vicinity of the two continents ol
Aia and Itmerica, which was very imperfeLd when I
published the hiltory of America in the year r777, is now
complete. Mlr. Coxe's Account of the Rulfian Difcovcriei
between Asia and America, printed in the year f1 go
contains many curious and important fads with refped tc
the various attempts of the Rufflians to open a communica.
tion with the New World. The history of the great Voy
age of discovery , bei:un by Captain Cook in I776, and
completed by Captains Clerk and Gore, published in th\
yeir 780 , communicates all the information that th!
curiosity of manklind could desire with regard to thi
subject.

At my requefR, my friend lMr Playfair, Professor o

Ma;thematicks in the University of bdinbhugh, has comparei
the narrative and charts of those illultrious navigators
with the more imperfect relations and maps of tih
IRuilians. The refuli of tlis comparison I coinmunicat|
in his own words, with much greater confidence in hi
fcicntific accuracy than I could have ventured to place il
any observations which I myself might have made upon th
1fuject.

" The discoverics of Captain Cook in his last voyag

h;ave confirmed the conclulions which Dr. Robertson ha
drawn, and have connected together the facts from whic!
t.. y were deduced. They have now rendered it certai
l!,it llehiring and Tfchiril;ow touched on the coast ol' Ame
1Ki.:in 1741. 'he frnrmir discovered land iai lat. i58 2R
;;,11 ahout 2z6° eilt frion l-'crro. lie has given such adi

.;!,linoin of the hay in which he anchored, and the lli;
11i:,. tain to tile vcltward of it , which lie calls St. Elias

that though the account of his voyage is much abridged
in the English translation, Captain Cook recognised the
place as he failed along the weltern coast of America in
the year 1778. The ille of St. Hermogenes, near the
mouth of Cook's river, Schumagin's Isles on the coast of
Alafhka, and Foggy Ife, retain in Captain Cook's chart the
names which they had received from the Ruffian navigator;
Cook's Voy. vol. ii. p. 347.

" Tschirikow came upon the fame coast about 2° 30o
farther south than Behring, near the Mount Edgecumbd
of Captain Cook.

" With regard to Irenitzirii we learn from Coxe's
Account of the Ruffian Discoveries, that he failed front
the mouth of the Kamtfchatka river with two ships in the
year 1768. With his own ship he reached the island
Oonolahka, in which there had been a Ruflian fettlenient
lince the year 1762, where he wintered, probably in the
fame harbour or bay where Captain Cook afterwards an-
chored. The other ship wintered at Alafhka, which was
supposed to be an island, though it be in face a part of the
American continent. Krenitzin , accordingly , returned
without knowing that either of his ships had been on the
coast of America; and this is the more surprising, because
Captain Cook has informed us that Alafhka is understood to
be a great continent both by the Rulfians and the natives
at Oonolafhka.

According to Krenitzin, the ship which had wintered at
Al;fhlka had hardly failed 32z to the eastward of the harbour of
St. Peter and St. Paul in Kamtchatka; but, according to the
more accurate charts of Captain Cook, it had failed no lets than
17' 17' to the eastward of that harbour. There is nearly
the fame miltake of ' in the longitude which Krenitzinr
alfigns to Oonoliafhka. It is remarkable enough, that in
the chart of those leas, put into the hands of Captain
Cook by the Rulfians on that illand , there was an error
of the fame kind, and very nearly of the fame. extent.

" But what is of molt consequence to be remarked on
this lubjcct is, that the difroverics of Captain Cook have

fully verified Dr. Robertson's conjecture, " that it is prbbable
that future navigators in those seas, by steering farther, to
the north than Behring and Tfchirikow or Krenitzin had
done, may find that the continent of America approaches
fill nearer to that of Alia. " Vol. ii. p. 44. It has
accordingly been found that these two continents, which
in the parallel of S°, or that of the southern extremity
of Alaflka, are about four hundred leagues asunder, ap.
proach continually to one another as they tretch together
toward the north, until, within less than a degree from
the polar circle, they are terminated by two capes, only
thirteen leagues distant. The east cape of Asia is in lati.
tude 66° 61, and in longitude 9go° 22' east from Green.
which; the western extremity of America or Prince o
Wales Cape, is in latitude 65° 46', and in longitude 191
4S/. Nearly in the middle of the narrow strait (Behring'
Strait) which separates these capes, are the two islands o
St. Diomede, from which both continents may be teen
Captain King informs us, that as he was failing throug
this itrait July S , 1779, the fog having cleared away, h
enjoyed the pleasure of feeing from the ship the continent
of Asia and America at the fame moment, together witl
the islands of St. Diomede lying between them. Cook'
Voy. vol. iii. p. 244.

" Beyond this point the strait opens towards the Ardi

Sea, and the coasts of Asia and America diverge so fa
from one another, that in the parallel of 69' they are mor
than one hundred leagues asunder. Ib. p. 277. To th
south of the strait there are a number of islands
Clerke's, King's, Anderson's, &c. which, as well a
thole of St. Dioniede, may have facilitated the migration
of the natives from the one continent to the other. Captai
Cook, however, on the authority of the Ruffians at Oono
lalfha, and for other good reasons, has diminished th
number of islands which had been inserted in form
charts of the northern Archipelago. He has also place
Alafhka, or the promontory which stretches from th
continent of America S. W, towards lanltchatka, at th

diltance

difance of five degrees of longitude farther From the
coalt of Asia than it was reckoned by the Ruffian navi-
gators.

' The geography of the Old and the New World is

therefore equally indebted to the discoveries made in this
memorable voyage; and as many errors have been corrected,
nnd many deficiencies supplied by means ofthefe discoveries,
so the accuracy of tome former observations has been
clsablilhed. The basis of the map of the Ruffian Empire,
as far as regarded Kamtfchatka, and the country of the
Tfchutzki, was the position of four places, Yakutlh,
Ochotz, Bolcherefk, and Petropawlofki which had been
determined by the astronomer Kraffilnicow in the year i744.
Nov. Coment. Petrop. vol. iii. p. 46 , &c. But the
accuracy of his observations was contested by M. Engel,
and M. Robert de Vaugondy; Coxe, Append. i. No. 2I
p. 267, 27 ;' and the former oftheCe geographers ventured
to take away no less' than 28 degrees from the longitude,
which, on the faith of Kraffilnicow's observations, was
assigned to the eastern boundary of the Ruffian empire.
With how little reason this was done, will appear from
to:fidering that our British navigators, having determined
the position of Petropawlofki by a great number of very
accurate observations. found the longitude of that port . g 8
43' F. from Greenwich, and its latitude s53 i'; agreeing,
the firfl to less than seven minutes, and the second to
leSs than half a minute, with the calculations of the
Ruflian astronomer: a coindence which, in the situation of
so remote a place, does not leave an uncertainty of more
than four English miles, and which, for the credit of
science, deserves to be particularly remarked. The chief
error in the Runifan maps has been in not extending' the
boundaries of that empire sufficiently towards the east For
as there was nothing to connedt the land of the Tfchutzkl
and the north-east point of Asia with those places whereo
fthe position had been carefully ascertained, except tho'
Perfedt accounts of Behring's and Synd's voyages, confi.

VOL. I, D d

derable errors could not fail to be introduced, and that point
waslaid down as not more than 21' 21 ear of the meridian
of Petropawlofki. Coxe, App. i. No. 2. By the observations
of Captain King, the difference of longitude between Petro.
pawlofki and the East Cape is ; t 91; that is 8' 7' greater
than it was supposed to be by the Ruffian geographers. -
It is probable that this interesting portion of geographical
knowlcdge Sill, in the course of a few years, receive
sartier improvement. Soon after the publication of
Car.tain Cook's last voyage, the great and enlightened
Sovereign of Rullia, attentive to every thing. that may
contribute to extend the bounds of science, or to render
it more accurate, formed the plan of a new voyage of
discovery, in order to explore those parts of the ocean
lying between Asia and America, which Captain Cook
did not visit, to examine more accurately the islands
which firetch from one continent almost to the other, to
survey the north-east coast of the Ruffian empire, from
the mouth of the Kovyma, or Kolyma, to the North-
Cape, and to fettle, by astronomical observations, the
position of each place worth notice. The .condut of this
important enterprise is committed to Captain Billings, an
English officer in the Ruffian service, of whose abilities
for that station it will be deemed the best evidence, that
he accompanied Captain Cook in his last voyage. To
render the expedition more extensively useful, an eminent
naturalist is appointed to -attend Captain Billings. Six,
years will be requisite for accomplishing the purposes of
the voyage. Coxe, Supplement to Ruffian Discoveries, p.
7 , &c.

NOTE XVII. p. 52.

FEW travellers have had such opportunity of observing
the natives of America, in its various ditrids, as Don
Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately published by him, he
thus dclicribcs the charadcriftical features of the race:

a very filall forehead, covered with hair towards its

extieieities, as f;r as the miiille of the eye-browvs; little
eyes; a thin nose , rmall and bending towards the upper
lip; the countenance broad; the ears large; the hair very
black, lank, and coarse; the limbs well turned, the feet
finall, the body of jut2 proportion; and ait.tether finooth
and free from hair, until old age, when they acquire
some beard, but never on the checks " Noticias .imericanls,
&c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier de Pinto, who relided f-veral
years in a part of \merica which Ulloa never vifired, gives
a /ketch of the general aspect of the Indians there. " They
are all of copper color, with unme diversity of ,ade, not
in proportion to their diltance from the e¢jor, but
according to the degree of elevation of the terfry which
they inhabit. Those who live in a high country are fairer
than those in the marshy low lands on the coast. Their
face is round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any
people from an oval shape. Their forehead is fniall, the
extremity of their ears far from the face, their lips thick,
their nose flat, their eyes black, or of a.chefiut color,
finall, hut capable of discerning objects at a great distance.
Their hair is always thick and leek, and without any
tendency to curl. They have no hair on any part of their
body but the head. \t the firftafpedC, a southern American
appears to be mild and innocent, but, on a more attentive
view, one discovers in his countenance something wild,
diarultfu!l, and fullen. " hI.S. pesses ie. The two
portraits drawn by hands very different firom those ofcommoa
travellers, have a near resemblance.

NOTE XVIIL p. s;.

A IAAZING accounts are given ,of the persevering speed
of the Americans. Adair relates the adventures of a Chilikalaht
wairrior, who run through woods and over mountains , three
hundred computed miles, in a day and a half and two
nights. Hilt. of Amer. Ind. 96. '
.

Dd

NOTE XIX. p. 58.

M . GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years
among the Indians of Peru and Ouito, and twenty years in
the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a constant
intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes on the Orinoco,
observes, that the vigor of conflitution among the Americans
is exacly in proportion to their habits of labor. The Indians,
in warm climates, such as those on the coasts of the
South- Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river Orinoco,
are not to, be compared for strength with those in cold
countries id yet, fays he, boats daily set out from Para,
a Portugue e'fettlement on the river of Amazons, to ascend
that river against the rapidity of the itream, and with the
fame crew they proceed to San Pablo, -which is eight
hundred leagues distant. No crew of white people, or
even of negroes, would he found equal to a talk of such
persevering fatigue, as the Portuguese have experienced,
and yet the Indians, being accustomed to this labor from
their infancy, perform it. MS. penes me.

NOTE XX. p. 64.

D ON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of
Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and several
of the provinces bordering on the Mexican gulf, while
employed in the fame service with the French mathematicians
during the space of ten years, and who afterwards had an
opportunity of viewing the North-Americans, alferts, "that
if we have fecn one American, we may be said to have
seen them all, their color and make are so nearly the
Came." Notic. Americanas, p. o08. A more early observer,
Pedro de Cieca de Leon, one of the conquerors of Peru,
who had likewise traversed many provinces of America,
affirms, that the people, men ard women, although there
is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to be almoA

Innumerable, and such diverity of climates, appear never-
thelels like the children of one father and mother. Chronica
del Peru, parte i. c. 19. There is, no doubt, a certain
combination of features, and peculiarity of afpedt, which
forms what may be called a European or Asiatic countenance.
There must likewise be one that may be denominated
American, common to the whole race. This may be
supposed to strike the traveller at first fight, while not
only the various shades, which distinguish people of different
regions , but the peculiar features which discriminate
individuals, escape his observation. But when persons who
had resided so long among the Americans concur in bearing
~eftimony to the similarity of their appearance in every
climate, we may conclude that it is more remarkable than
that of any other race. See likewise Garcia, Origen de los
Indios, p. 54. 242. Torquemada, IMonarch. Indiana,

7. S71.

NOTE XXI. p. 67.

M . LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in the
interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that some
persons resembling the white people of Darien have been
found; but that the breed did not continue, and their
children became like other Americans. This race, how.
ever, is very imperfectly known. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXII. p. 70.

THE teflimonies of different travellers, concerning the
Patagonians, have been collected and stated with a confi-
derable degree of accuracy by the author of Recherches
Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 28 1, &c. iii. i8 r, &c.
Since the publication of his work, several navigators have
viited the Magellanic regions, and, like their predeceflbrs,
differ very widely in their accounts of its inhabitants. By

Dd;

Commodore Byron and his crew, who failed through the
Straits in 1764, the common size of the Patagonians wal
estimated to 1he ciglt feet, and many of them much taller.
Phil. Transact. v, 1. lvii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and
C;. ceret, x ho actually measured them in 1766, they were
found to be from fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches
in height. P'.l Tr:;f. vol. lx. p. 22. These, however,
see.n to l;ave been the very people whose size had been
rated so high in the ye.lr i"64; for several of them had
beads and red baize of the fame kind with what had been
put aboard Captain Wallis's ship, and he naturally concluded
that they had got these from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In
1767 they were again measured by M. Bougainville, whose
account agrees nearly with that of Captain Wallis. Voy.
129. To these I flall add a testimony of great weight:
In the year i76z, Don Bernardo lbagnez de Echavarri
accompanied the Miarquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres,,
and resided there several years. He is a very intelligent
author, and his reputation for veracity unimpeached among
his countrymen. In speaking of the country towards the
southern extremity of America, c" By what Indians, " fays
lie c is it possessed ? Not certainly by the fabulous
Patagonians, who are supposed to occupy this difiridt. I
have from many eye-witnefles, who have lived among
those Indians, and traded much with them, a true and
accurate description of their persons. They are of the fume
stature with Spaniards. 1 never saw one who rose in height
two varns and two or three inches, " i. e. about So or
8 1. 3 2 inches Englif , if Echavarri malkes his computation
according to the varr us ladricld. This agrees nearly with
the mealurclme it of Captain 'Wallis, Reino Jefuitico, 238.
·Alr. Falkner, who resided as a millionary forty years in
the {buthern parts of America, fays, that " the Patagoni;lns,
or luelches, are a large-bodied people; but 1 never heard
of that gigantic race which others have mentioned, thouIgh
I have sIen perlfns of all the dift'rent tribes of southern
Indians." Introd. p. 26. A1. Dobri,.hoHl'cr, a .efuit, whlc
rclided eightccn ycars in Paraguay , anld who had seen grcl'

numbers of the various tribes which inhabit the countries
situated upon the Straits of Magellan, confirms, in every
point, the testimony of his brother miflionary Falkner.
Dubrizhoffer enters into fime detail with refped to the
opinions of several authors concerning the stature of the
Patagonians. Having mentioned the reports of tome early
travellers with regard to the extraordinary size of some
bones found on that coast, which were supposed to be
human; and having endeavoured to show that these bones
belonged to some large marine or land animal, he concludes,
"d e hifce offibus crede quicquid libuerit, dummodo, me
funfore, Patagones pro gigantibus definas habere. " Hiltoriax
de Abiponibus, vol. ii. p. 19, &c.

NOTE XXIIT p. 74.

ANTON SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and ingenious
physician, published a dissertation in the year 1765, in
which he endeavours to prove, that this disease was not
introduced from America, but took its rife in Europe,
and was brought on by an epidemical and malignant
disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a disquisition on this
fubjedt, which I should not have mentioned, if it had not
been intimately connected with this part of my inquiries,
it would not be difficult to point out some mistakes with
rcfpect to the fads upon which he founds, as well as some
errors in the consequences which he draws from them. The
rapid communication of this disease fiom Spain over
Europe, seems however to resemble the progrcfs of an
epidemic, rather than that of a disease tranfinittcd by
inffction. The first mention of it is in the year r49l ,
anl before the year 1497 it had lmade its aipearancc in
Inult countries of Europe, with such ;l;rniing fympronls
as rendered it neceffury for the civil maglHitr.te to interpose,
in order to check its career. - Since the publication of
thlis work, a second edition of Dr. Sanclez's Diftrtation
has been communicated to me. It contains several '

Dd 4

additional fiats in confirmation of his opinion, which i
supported m ith such plausible arguments, as render it
fubiect of inquiry well deserving the attentio.u of learned
physicians.

NOTE XXIV. p. 78.

J] Tl people of Otaheite have no denomination for any
number above two hundred, which is sufficient for their
transaCtions. Voyages, by iawklefworth, ii. z28.

NOTE XXV. p. 8;.

As the view which I have given of rude nations ih
extremely different from that exhibited by very refpeclabie
authors, it may be proper to produce tome of the many
authorities on which I found my description. The manner,
of tl.e savage tribes in Atmerica have never been viewed by
persons nore capable of observing them with discernment,
than the philofi!phers employed bh France and Spain, in the
year ii , to determine de figure of the earth. M.
Bouguer, D. Antonio de Ulloa, and D. Jorge Juan, resided
log among the natives of the leIf civilized provinces in
Peru. M. de la Condamine had nut only the fame advantages
with them for observation , but, in his voyage down the
V1aragnlon, he had an opportunity of infi)caing the state
of the various nations fcreted on its banks, in its val
course across the continent of South-.\meica. There is a
wonderful resemblance in their rcprefcntation of the
chara;'er of the Americans. " They ;.rc all extremel)
ilnolert, " fa;is M. Bougucr, " they ,re ilupid, they pa's
wlhole days fitting in the fane place, without moving, o
fpclainig a tingle word. It is noc easy to defcribc tho
degree of their indifference for wealth, and all its advantages
One does not well know what. motive to propose to them
when one would perfuiadc them to perfrnm any service

It is vain to offer them money; they answer, that they
are not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. o12. " If one
confiders theil as men, the narrowness of their understand-
ing seems to be incompatible with the excellence of the
foul. Their imbecility is so visible, that one can hardly
frnm an idea of them different from what one has of the
brutes. Nothing. ditlurbs the tranquillity of their fouls,
equally infenlible to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-
r.ied, they are as contented as a monarch in his mofc splendid
array. Riches do not attract them in the fmalleff degree,
and the authority or dignities to which they may aspire
are so little the objects of their ambition, that an Indian
will receive with the fame indifference the office of a judge
(Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the former
and appointed to the latter. Nothing can move or change
them. Interest has no power over them, and they often
refuse to, perform a fmnall service, though certain of a
great recompence. Fear makes no impreflion upon them ,
and relpect as little. Their disposition is so singular, that
there is no method of influencing them, no means of rous-
ing them from that indifference, which is proof against all
the endeavours of the wifefi 'persons; no expedient which
can induce them to abandon that gross ignorance, or lay
aide that careless negligence, which disconcert the prudence
and disappoint the care of such as are attentive to their
welfAre " Voyage de Ulloa, tom, i. 3; , ;S6. Of those
singular qualities he produces many extraordinary instances,
P. ;6-3 47. " Infenlibility, " fays M. de la Condamine,
"is the basis of the American charadter. I leave others
to determine , whether this should be dignified with the
lnme of apathy, or disgraced with that of ffupidity. It
aries, without doubt, from the finall number of their
idecs, which do not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons
t'en to voracity, when they have wherewithal to satisfy
heir appetite. Temperate, when necessity obliges them,

such a degree, that they can endure want without
neling to desire any thing. Pulillanimous and cowardly
0 xcef s, unleis when they are rendered desperate* by

drunkenness. Averse to labor, indifferent to every motive
of glory , honor, or gratitude; occupied entirely by the
object that is present; and always determined by it alone,
without any solicitude about futurity; incapable of foresight
or of reflecion; abandoning themselves, when under no
restraint, to a puerile joy, which they express by frilking
about, and immoderate fits of laughter; without object or
delign, they pass their life without thinking, and grow
old without advancing beyond childhood, of which they
retain all the defects. If this description were applicable
only to the Indians in rome provinces of Peru, who are
slaves in every rcfpect but the name, one might believe,
that this degree of degeneracy was occasioned by the servile
dependence to which they are reduced; the example of
the modern Greeks being proof how far servitude may
degrade the human species. But the Indians in the missions
of the Jesuits, and the savages who still enjoy unimpaired
liberty, being as limited in their faculties, not to fay as
stupid as the other , one cannot observe, without humiliation,
that man, when abandoned to simple nature, and deprived
of the advantages resulting firom education and society , differs
but little from the brute creation. " Voyage de la Riv. des

manz. 2, 5 . MI. de Chanvalon, an intelligent and
philosophic21 observer, who visited Martinico in r17t , and
relidcd there fix years, gives the following description 0o
the Caraibs " It is not the red color of their complexion
it is not the singularity of their features, which conflitute!
the chief difference between them and us. It is their excefliv
slimplicity; it is the limited degree of their faculties. Thei
reason is not more enlightened or more provident than thi
infliiut of brutes. The reason of Lhe most gross peasants, tha
of the negroes brought up in the parts of Africa most remoti
from intercourse with Europetans , is such that we difcove
:i|pcara;nc's of intelligence , which, though imperfect,
ca.pable of incrcfi. iBut of this the underltanding c
C .rlibs seems to be hardly flifceptible. If found philofolh
and religion didl not aiford us their light, if we ,ter
tu decide according to the first imprellion which the vie'

of that people makes upon the mind, we should be disposed
to believe that they do not belong to the fame species with
us. Their Itupid eyes are the true mirror of their fouls;
it appears to be without funtions. Their indolence is extreme;
thev have never the least solicitude about the moment which
is to fuceed that which is present. " Voyage a la Martinique,
p. 44, 45;. r. MM. de la Borde, Tertre. and Rochefort,
confirm this description. " The charateriftics of the
Californians, " fays P. Venegas, " as well as of all other
Indians, are stupidity and insensibility ; want of knowledge and
reReceion; inconstancy, impetuolity, and blindness of appetite;
anexceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labor and fatigue;
an excelfive love of pleasure and amusement of every kind,
how0ever trifling or brutal; pusillanimity, and, .in fine, a
nolt wretched want of every thing which conflitutes the
real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tracdable,
and useful to himself and society. It is not easy for
Europeans, who never were out of their own country, to
conceive an adequate idea of those people: for, even in
the least frequented corners of the globe, there is not a
nation so ltupid, of such contracded ideas, and so weak
both in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians.
Their understanding comprehends little more than what
they fee; abftrat ideas, and much less a chain of reasoning,
being far beyond their power ; so that they scarce ever
improve their first ideas, and these are in general false, or
at leall inadequate. It is in vain to represent to them
any future advantages which will result to them from doing
or abltaining from this or that particular immediately
present ; the relation of means and ends being beyond
tlie llretch of their faculties. Nor have they the least
r(tion of'purfuing such intentions as wiill procure themselves
f0imc future good, or guard them againIt future evils.
Their will is proportional to their facultics, and all their
Pallions move in a very narrow fplherc. Ambition they
h,15e none, and arc more desirous of being accounted strong
t11a vailiant. The objects of ambition with us, honor,
Ih'ne, reputation, titles , polts , and diflinicions of

superiority, are unknown among them; so that this powerfu
spring of action, the cause of so much seeming good and
real evil in the world, has no power here. This disposition
of mind, as it gives them up to an amazing languor and
laflitudc, their lives fleeting away in a perpetual inacivit)
-and detestation of labor, so it likewise induces them to he
attracted by the first objed which their own fancy, or the
persuasion of another, places before them; and at the fame
time renders them as prone to alter their resolutions with
the fame facility. They look with indifference upon any
'kindness done them nor is even the bare remembrance ol
it to be expeded from them. In a word, the unhappy
mortals may be compared to childred, in whom the
developement of reason is not completed. They may
indeed be called a nation who never arrive at manhood."
Hilt. of Californ. Engl. Tranfi. i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives
a similar account of the want of forelight and inconsiderate
disposition of the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage,
p. I94, 19~.

The incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa ar
observed to be more capable of improving by instruction
They acquire the knowledge of several particulars whic
the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the negroes
though slaves, value themfclves as a superior order of be
ings, and look down upon the Americans with contempt
as void of capacity and of rational discernment. Ulioi
Notic. Americ. 3 2 , 323.

NOTE XXVI. p. 9r.

D OBRIZHOFFER, the last traveller, I know, whI
has resided among any tribe of the ruder Americans, ha
explained so fully the various reasons which have induce
their women to suckle their children long, and never
undertake such as were feeble or distorted, and even
dcftroy a considerable number of their offspring, as to thloa

great light on the observations I have made, p. 72, 7t.
Hist. de Abiponibus, vol. li. p. 107. 22r. So deeply
were these ideas imprinted in the mind of the Americans ,
that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when compared
wxith the barbarous tribes, whose manners I am describing,
retained them; and even their intercourse with the Spaniards
has not been able to root them out. When twins are
born in any family, it is fiill confidered as an ominous
event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous acts of
mortification, in order to avert the calamities with which
they are threatened. When a child is born with any'
deformity, they will not, if they can pobfibly avoid it,
bring it to be baptized, and it is with difficulty they canr
be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. del
Peru. p. 3 2, 33.

NOTE XXVII. p. 96.

HE number of the fish in the rivers of South - America
so extraordinary, as to merit particular notice. " In the'
laragnon (fays P. Acugna) fish are so plentiful, that,'
ithout any art, they may take them with the hands. J',
P. 18. " In the Orinoco (fays P. Gumilla), betides an.
finite variety of other fish, tortoise or turtle abound inr
ch numbers, that I cannot find words to express it. I
uht not but that such as read my account will accdfe
eos exaggeration: but I can affirm, that it is as
iffcult to count them, as to count the sands on the
anks of that river. One may judge of their number by
e amazing consumption of them; for all the nations

otiguous to the river, and even many who are at a

liance, flock thither at the season of breeding, and not,
Iy find fuRe'nance during that time, but carry offvai
antities both of the turtles and of their eggs, &c." Hist.
l'Orenoque, ii .

c. p2 . . 59 . M. de la Condajnin
nfirms their accounts, p, 159.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 96.

PISO describes two of these plants, the Curtruape, and
the Guj,;a-7Tiimb . It is remarkable, that though they
have this fatal effect upon fishes , they are so far from.
being noxious to the human fpccies, that they are used in
medicine with success. PiFo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft
mentions another, the Hi.arree, a finall quantity of which
is sufficient to inebriate all the filh to a considerable distance,
so that in a few minutes they float motionless on the surface
of the water, and are taken with cafe. Nat. Hist. of Guiana,
p, io6.

NOTE XXIX. p. 99.

R EMARI(ABLE .instances occur of the calamities which
rude nations susser by famine. Alvar. Nugnez Cabeca de
Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtuous of' the Spanish
adventurers, relided almost nine years among the savages
of Florida. They were unacquainted with every species
of agriculture Their subsistence was poor and precarious.
"' They live chiefly (fays he) upon roots of different
plants, which they procure with great difficulty, wandering
from place to place in search of them. Sometimes they
hill game, sometimes they catch fiil , but in such small
quantities, that their hunger is so extreme as compels
them to eat spiders, the eggs of ants, worms, lizards,
serpents, a kind of undtuous earth, and I am pcrfuaded,
that if in this country there were any ,loncs, they would
swallow these. They preserve the bones of filles and
serpents, which they grind into powder, and eat. The
only season when they do not fiifitr much from famine,
is when a certain fruit, which he calls Tunzar, is ripe.
This is the fame with the OpUintia, or prickly pear, ,f
a reddish and. yellow color, 'with a f\veot inlipid tafl.
They are fomctimes obliged to travcl filr from their ulilal

place of residence , in order to find them. " Naufragios ,
C. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. Jn another place, heobferves
that they are frequently reduced to pass two or three days
without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE XXX. p. rox.

MVI. FERMIN has given an accurate description of the
two species of manioc, with an account of its culture,
to which he has added some experiments, in order to
fcertain the poisonous qualities of the juice extraced from.
fat species which he calls the bitter cassava. Among the
Spaniards it is known by the name of ticabrava. Defer.
de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXXI. p. Ios.

1HE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as
n America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-
digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
to the island of IHifpaniola, in the year i 16, by
ther Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
om the Canary flands, whither the original flips had
been brought from the Eaft-Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii.

Ic. But the opinion of Acofta and other naturalists,
'ho reckon it an American plant, seems to be better
unded. Acofta, Hist. Nat. lib. iv. 21. It was cultivated
y rude tribes in America, who had little intercourfc
ith the Spaniards, and who were deftitutc of that inge-
Uity which disposes men to borrow what is useful from
reign nations. Gunil. iii. z 86. Wafer's Voyage,
87.

NOTE XXXII. p. 103.

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the moR accurat
and belt-informed . rirers concerning the \\'e!-Indies,
affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the continent,
.v:.s not known in the iflinds, the inhabitants of whicl
hid none but cafnada- bread. Hist. Nat. lib. iv. c. x6. But
P. Alartyr, in the firfl book of his first Decad, which was
written in the year 1491, upon the return of Columbus
from his tirft voyage, esprefsly mentions maize as a plant
which the islanders cultivated, and of which they made
bread. p. 7. Gomara likewise asserts, that they were
acquainted with the culture of maize. Hiftor. Gener. cap.

8g. Oviedo describes maize without any intimation of
its being a plant that was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib,
vii. c. 1.

NOTE XXXIIT. p. Io.

N EW HOLLAND, a country which fornierly was onl
known, has lately been visited by intelligent observers. Il
lies in a region of the globe where it must enjoy a very
favorable climate, as it stretches from the loth to the
38th degree of northern latitude. It is of great extent,
and from its square form must be much more than
equal to all Furope. The people who inhabit the various
parts of it appear to be of one race. 'hey are evidcntly
ruder than nmolt of the Americans, and have made still less
progress in improvement and the arts of life. ' here is not
the least appearance of cultivation in any part of this vail
region. The inhabit:lnts are extremely few, so that the
country appears a.lnio!t dlefblate. Their tribes are (till more
inconliderablc than those of Anmerica. 'They depend foi
fubbficcncc, almost entirely, on fishing. They do not fettle
in one place, but roam about in quest of food. Bo'l'
fcxcs go Itarknaked. Their habitations , utcnlils, &c

;irC

are more simple and rude than those of the Americans.
V oyages, by Hawkefworth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps,
is the country where man has been discovered in the
earliest stage of his progress, and it exhibits a miserable
specimen of his condition and powers in that uncultivated
fiate. If this country shall be more fully explored by
future navigators, the comparison of the manners of
its inhabitants with those of the Americans will
prove an inftrutive article in the hiltory of the human
species.

NOTE XXXIV. p. xIo.

r. GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his flation
among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes the
Ice of the country: " We have marched twelve days
without meeting a single human creature. Sometimes we
found ourselves in vast meadows, of which we could not
fee the boundaries, through which there flowed many
brooks and rivers, but without any path to conduct us.
Sometimes we were obliged to open a passage across thick
fores, through bushes, and underwood filled with briars
d thorns. Sometimes we had to pars through deep
arfles, in which we funk up to the middle. After being
tigued through the day, we had the earth for our bed,
a few leaves, exposed to the wind, the rain, and all
einjuries of the air. Lettr. Edifiantes, ii, 360. Dr.
rickell, in an excursion from North-Carolina towards
e mountains, A. D. 1730o, travelled fifteen days without
eting with a human creature. Nat. Hist, of North-
arulina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make
settlement in South-America, A. D. isz2, marched
tY days through a country without one inhabitant.
errera, dec. S. lib. i. c. 1l.

VroL. I, E e

NOTE XXXV. p. iix.

I STRONGLY fufpeA that a community of goods, anc
an undivided store, are known only among the rudel
tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of agri
culture or regular induitry is known, the idea of at
exclusive right of property to the fruits of them is introduced
I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which I hay
received concerning the state of property among the Indian
in very different regions of America. " The idea of th
natives of Brasil concerning property is, that if any perfo
cultivate a field, he alone ought to enjoy the produce c
it, and no other has a title to pretend to it. If a
individual or family go a hunting or fishing, what
caught belongs to the individual or to the family, and the
communicate no part of it to any but to their cazique
or to such of their kindred as happen to be indisposed.
any person in the village come to their hut, he may
down freely, and eat without asking liberty. But this
the consequence of their general principle of hofpitalitO
for I never observed any partition of the increase of the
fields, or the produce of the chafe, which I could consid
as the result of any idea concerning a community of goo
On the contrary, they are so much attached to what th
deem to be their property, that it would be extreme
dangerous to encroach upon it. As far as I have fee
or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians in Sou
America, among whom that community of goods wh
has been so highly extolled is known. The circumstance
the government of the Jesuits, mopt irksome to the Indi
of Paraguay, was the community of goods which th
fathers introduced. This was repugnant to the orig!
ideas of the Indians. They were acquainted with the ril
of private exclusive property, and they submitted 5
impatience to regulations which destroyed them." "
cheval. de Pinto, MS. pcnesr me. "( Adual poffelfion (
a millionary who relided several years among the Indian

the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but whenever
a pofleffor fees fit to quit it, another has as good right
to take it as he who left it. This law, or custom, refpets
not only the particular spot on which he erects his house,
but also his planting-ground. If a man has prepared a
particular spot of ground , on which he designs in future to
build or plant, no man has a right to incommode him,
much less to the fruit of his labors, until it appears that
he voluntarily gives up his views. But I never heard of
any formal conveyance from one Indian to another in their
natural fiate. The limits of every canton are circumscribed;
that is, they are allowed to hunt as far as such a river
on this hand, and such a mountain on the other. This
area is occupied and improved by individuals and their
families. Individuals, not the community, have the use
and profit of their own labors, or success in hunting. '!
IS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley, penes me.

NOTE XXXVI, p. xI3.

1HIS difference of temper between the Americans and
egroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial faying in
e French islands, "Regarder un fauvage de travers, c'eft
battre; le battre, c'eft le tuer; battre un negre, c'cft
nourrir." Tertre, ii. 490.

NOTE XXXVII. p. I14.

1HE dercription of the political slate of the people of
inaloa perfectly resembles that of the inhabitants of North.
merica. "They have neither laws nor kings (fays a
ilionary who resided long among them ) to punish any
ime. Nor is there among them any species of authority,
political government, to refhrain them in any part of
cir conduct. It is true, that they acknowledge certain
ziquess who are heads of their fainilies or villages, but

Ee z

their authority appears chiefly in war, and the expeditions
againit their enemies. This authority the Caziques obtain
not by hereditary right, but by their valor in war , or by the
power and number of their families and relations. Sometimes
they owe their pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying
their own exploits. " Ribas, Hiftor. de los Triumph. &c, p. ii.
The Itate of the Chiquitos in South - America is nearly the
fame. " They have no regular form of government, or
civil life, but in matters of public concern they liften to
the advice of their old men, and usually follow it. Th
dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred accordin
to merit, as the reward of valor in war. The union amon
them is imperfect. Their society resembles a republi
without any head , in which every man is mailer of himsel
and, upon the least disgust, separates from those wit
whom he seemed to be connected " Relacion Hiftorica de la
MIiffiones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernandez, p
32 , 3 3. Thus, under very different climates, when nation
are in a similar state of society, their institutions andciv
government assume the fame form.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. x2g.

;" I HAVE known the Indians (fays a perfonr well a
quainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand mil
for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over hil
and mountains, through huge cane swamps, exposed to t
extremities of heat and cold, the vicissitude of seasons,
hunger and thirst. Such is their overboiling revenge
temper, that they utterly contemn all those things
imaginary trifles, if they are so happy as to get the fc
of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the craving gho
of their deccafed relations. " Adair's Hist of Amer. India
1.? ISo.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 128.

IN the account of the great war between the Algonquins
and Iroquois, the achievements of Pifkaret, a famous
chief of the Algonquins, performed inoftly by himself
alone, or with one or two companions, make a capital
figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's Hist. of
Five Nations x I25 , &c.

NOTE XL. p. 13.

THE life -of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,
and he is always degraded from the rank which he had
acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 3818.

NOTE XLI. p. 13I.

AS ile ideas of the North-Atmericans, with refcpe to the
ode of carrying on- war, are generally known; I have
ounded my observations chiefly upon the testimony of the
uthors who describe them. But the fame maxims took
ace among other nations in the New World. A judicious'
ifflonary has given a view of the military operations op
e people in Gran Chaco, in. South-America, perfectly
milar to those of the Iroquois. " They are much addicted
a'ar (fays he), which they carry on frequently among
henfelves, but perpetually against the Spaniards. But
ey may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they
ever make head againfi the Spaniards, unless when they

afflult them by itealth, or have guarded againff any
ifchance by .spies, who may be called indefatigable; they
ill watch the settlements of the Spaniards for one, two,
three years, observing by night every thing that pa(sec
ith the utmost solicitude , whether they may exped
clalce or not, and until they are perfectly secure of the

Eel

event, they will not venture upon an attack; so that
when they do give the alTault, they are certain of success,
and frce from all danger. These spies, in order that they
may not be .bfLcrved, will creep on all-four like cats in
the night; but if they are discovered, make their escape
with much dexterity. But, although they never chufe to
face the Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any place,
whence they cannot escape, they will fight with desperate
valor, and fell their lives very dear." Lozano, Defcrip. del
Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLII. p. 13;.

LERY , who was an eye-witness of the proceedings ol
the Toutpinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war againfit
powerful nation of their enemies, describes their courage anc
ferocity in very ftrikingterms. Ego cum Gallo altero, paulk
curiofius, magno noftro periculo (si enim ab hoftibus capt
aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi fuiffemus devoti), barbaro:
noftros in militiam euntes comitari volui. Hi, numere
4000 capita, cum hoftibus ad littus decertarunt, tant;
ferocitate, ut vel rabidos et furiosos quofque fuperarent
Cum primum hostes confpexere, in magnos atque edito
ululatus perruperunt Haec gens adeo sera eft & truculenta
ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum reftat , continu
dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant; quod a natur
illis inditum effe reor. Teftor interea me, qui no
femel, turn peditum turn equitum copias ingente
in aciem inftructas hic confpexi, tanta nunquam v(
luptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgentibus
quanta turn pugnantibus iftis percuffum suisse. Lery, His
Navigat, in BrasiL ap. de Bry, iii. 207 , o,20 209

NOTE XLIII. p. 134.

THE Americans, like other fierce nations, originally
cut off the heads of the enemies whom they flew in war,
and carried them away as trophies. But, as they found
there cumbersome in their retreat, which they always make
very rapidly, and often through a vast extent of country,
they became satisfied with tearing off their fdalps.
This custom, though most prevalent in North-America, was
not unknown among the Southern tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLlV. p. 139.

THE terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by the
fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to revenge
the death of my brothers; I shall kill; I shall extermpinate;
I fliall burn my enemies; I shall bring away saves; I shall
devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink their blood; I
hfall tear off their scalps, and make cups of their skulls. "
loffu's Travels through Louisiana, vol. i. p. 102. I am
informed, by persons on whose testimony I can rely, that
as the number of people in the Indian tribes has decreased
so much, almost none of their prisoners are now put to
death. It is confidered as better policy to spare and to
adopt them. -Those dreadful scenes which I have described
occur now so rarely, that missionaries and traders who have
resided long among the Indians, never were witnesses to
them.

NOTE XLV. p. r19.

ALL the travellers who have visited the most uncivilized
(o the American tribes, agree in this. It is confirmed
by two remarkable circumflances, which occurred in the
(onquclt of difflrent provinces. In tlc expedition of

Ec 4

Narvaez into Florida in the year IxzS, the Spaniards
were reduced to such extreme' distr'ess by famine, that, in
order to preserve their own lives, they eat such of their
companions as happened to die; This appeared so shocking
to the natives, who were accuflomed to devour none but
prisoners, that it filled them with horror. and indignation
against the Spaniards. Torquemad. Monarch. Ind. ii.
p. 84, Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeqa de Vaca, c.
xiv. p. iS. During the siege of Mexico , though the
Mlexicans devoured .with greediness the Spaniards and
Tlafcaans, whlom they oogk prisoners, the utmost rigor of
the' famihe which they suffered could not induce them to
touch the dead bodies of their own countrymen. Bern.
Diaz. del Castillo ;Cohqnilt; de la N. Efpagna , p. 1 6.

NOT E XLVI. p; 141.

M ANY singular circumn ances concerning the treatment
of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are contained in
the narrative of Stadius, a German officer in the service
of the Portuguese, published in the year i5 6. He was
taken prisoner by the Toupinambos, and remained in
captivity nine years. He was often present at those horrid
festivals which he describes, and was destined himself to
the fame cruel fate with other prisoners. But he saved his
life by extraordinary efforts of courage and addrels. De
Bry, iii p. 4, &c. M.. De Lery, who accompanied M.
De Villegagnon in his expedition to Brasil, in the year iSs6,
and who resided some time in that country, agrees with
Stadius in every circunftance of importance. He was frequently
an eye-witness of the manner in which the Brafilians treated
their prisoners. De Bry:, iii. 2 0. Several ftriling particulars
omitted by them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author.
Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

N.OTE XLIVII. p. I44.

THOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning the
apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me moit rational,
and supported by the authority of the most refpedable
authors, other theories have been formed with regard to
it, by writers of great eminence. D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late
work, contends, that the texture of the skin and bodily
habit of the Americans is such, that they are less fenfibie
of pain than the reft of mankind. He produces several
proofs of this,. from the manner in which they endure the
most cruel chirurgical operations, &c. Noticias Americanas,
p. 33 , r4,. The fame observation has been made by
surgeons in BrasiL An Indian, they fay, never complains
under pain, and will bear the amputation of a leg or arm-
without uttering a tingle groan. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 1.6.

THIS is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among the
Romans, in the early periods of their commonwealth, it
was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn decelfiffe videtur cum
captus eft. " Digest. lib. xlix. tit. xS. c. 8i. And after-
wards, when the progress of refinement rendered them
more indulgent with refpedt to this article, they were
obliged to emplby two fidtions of law to secure the property,
and permit the return of a captive, the one by the Lex
Cornelia, and the other by the Jus Pofrliminii, Heinec.
Elcm. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294. Among the
negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom was ever
accepted for a prisoner. As soon as one is taken in war,
he is reputed to be dead; and he is so in effect to his
Country and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des Mardhais
i.p. 369.

NOTE XLIX. p. 148.

T HE people of Chili, the most gallant and high-fpirited
of all the Americans, are the only exception to this
observation. They attack their enemies in the open field;
their troops are ranged in regular order; their battalions advance
to the charge not only with courage, but with discipline.
The North-Americans , though many of them have sub'stituted
the European fire-arms in place of their own bows and
arrows , fill adhere to their ancient maxims of war, and
carry it on according to their own peculiar system. But
the Chilefe nearly resemble the warlike nations of Europe
and Asia in their military operations. Ovalle's Relation of
Chili. Church. Coll. iii. p. 71. Lozano's Hist. Parag. i
144, 145.

NOTE L. p. I1x.

H ERRER A gives a remarkable proof of this. In Yucatan,
the men are so solicitous about their dress, that they carry
about with them mirrors, probably made of stone, like
those of the Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. in which
they delight to view themselves; but the women never use
them. Dec. iv lib. x. c. 3. He. takes notice, that
among the fierce tribe of the Pancbes, in the new
kingdom of Granada, none but distinguished warriors were
permitted either to pierce their lips, and to wear green
flones in them, or to adorn their heads with plumes of
feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In forme provinces of
Peru, though that empire had made considerable progress
in civilization, the slate of women was little improved.
All the toil of cultivation and domestic work was devolved
upon them, and they were not permitted to wear bracelets,
or other ornaments, with which the men were fond of
decking themselves. Zarate, Hist. de Peru, i. p. 1 , 16.

NOTE LI. p. 1z2.

I HAVE ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the dress of the Americans. This is
agreeable to their own idiom. As they never stir abroad
if they are not completely anointed; they excuse them-
selves when in this situation, by faying, that they cannot
appear because they are naked. Gumilla, Hist. de 1'Ore-
noque , p. 9 1.

NOTE LII. p. Iz3.

SOME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf of
California, seem to be among the rudest people of Ame-
rica united in the social state. They neither cultivate nor
sow; they have no houses in which they reside. Those
in the inland country subsist by hunting; those on the sea-
coast chiefly by fishing. Both depend upon the spontaneous
productions of the earth, fruits, plants, and roots of
various kinds. In the rainy season, as they have no
habitations to afford them shelter, they gather bundles of
reeds, or strong grass, and binding them together at one
end, they open them at the other, and fitting them to
their heads, 'they are covered as with a large cap, which
like a pent-house throws off the rain, and will keep them
dry for several hours. During the warm season, they form
a flhed with the branches of trees, which protects them
from the sultry rays of the fun. When exposed to cold
they make large fires, round which they sleep in the open
air. Hiftoria de los Triumphos de Nueftra Santa Fe entre
Gentes las mas barbaras, ó&c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas,
P. 7 &c.

NOTE LtII p. i 4.

T HESE houses fefemble barns. " We have measured
some which were a hundred andc fifty paces long, 'and
twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons: irefde in
some of them. " Wilson's Account of Guiana. Puich. Pilgr.
vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291. " The Indian hoires, "
shys Mr. Barrere, " have a most wretched appearance,
and are a firiking image of the rudeness of early times.
Their huts are commonly built on some rising ground,
or on the banks of a river, huddled sometimes together,
Sometimes traggling, and always with6ut any order. Their
aspect is melancholy and disagreeable. One fees nothing
but what is hideous and savage. The uncultivated fields
have no gaiety. The silence which reigns there; ,'unless
when interrupted by the difiagreeable notes of birds', or
dries of wild beasts, is extremely dinital. " Relat. de la
France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIV. p. irS6,

SOME tribes in South-America can fend their atrows to
a great distance, and wiith,cbonfiderable force, without'
the aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called' a'
Sarbacane. In it they lodge a fniall arrow, with some'
unfpun cotton wound about its great end; this d6crfiies the'
air, so that they can blow it with astonishing rapidity', and
a sure aim, to the dillance of above a hundred paces.
These finall arrows are always poisoned. Fcrmin, Defer. de
Surin. i. l . Iancroft's lift. of Guiana, p. 281; &c.
The Sarbacane is much used by the East Indians;

N.OTE LV. p. is6.

I MIGHT produce many inflances of this , but shall
satisfy 'myself with one, taken from the Efquimaux.
" Their greatest ingenuity ( fays Mr. Ellis) is shown in the
firudure of their bows, made commonly of three pieces of
wood, each making part of the fame arch, very nicely and
exaaly joined together. They are commonly of fir or
larch; and as this wants strength and elasticity, they sup-
ply both by bracing the back of the bow, with a kind of
thread, or line, made of the sinews of their deer, and
the bow-firing of the fame materials. To make them draw
more fliffly, they dip them into water, which causes both
the back of the bow and the firing to contract, and con.
fequently gives it the greater force; and as they practise
from their youth, they sloot with very great dexterity. "
Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. z38.

NOTE LVI. p. 157.

N ECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of
mankind in their inventions. There is, however, such
inequality in some parts of their progress, and some nations
get so far the start of others in circumstances nearly
limilar, that we must ascribe this to some events in their
story, or to some peculiarity in their situation with which
we are unacquainted. The people in the island of Otaheite,
lately discovered in the South- Sea, far excel most of the
Americans in the knowledge and pratice of the arts of
ingenuity, and yet they had not invented any method of
boiling water; and having no vessels that would bear the
fire, they had no more idea that water could be made hot,
than that it could be made fulid. Voyages by Hawkef-
worth, i. 466. 484.

NOTE LVII. p. 1x7.

ONE of these boats, which could carry nine men, weigh.
ed only sixty pounds Gofnol. Relat. des Voy. a la Virgin.
Rec. des Voy. au Nord, tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LVIII. p. i9.

A REMI \RKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa. In
weaving hammocks, coverlets , and the [other coarse
cloths, which they are accuflomed to manufacture, their
industry has discovered no more expeditious method, than
to take up thread after thread, and after counting and forting
them each time, to pass the woof between them , so that in
finishing a small piece of those fluffs, they frequently
spend more than two years. Voyage, i. 3 36. Bancroft
gives the fame description of the Indians of Guiana,
p. 2g . According to Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch
of the North-American Indians are not greater, p. 422.
From one of the engravings of the Mexican paintings in
Purchas, vol. iii. p. xio6. I think it probable that the
people of Mexico were unacquainted with any better or
more expeditious mode of weaving. A loom was an invention
beyond the ingenuity of the most improved Anericans.
In all their works they advance so slowly , that one of their
artists is two months at a tobacco-pipe with his knife,
before he finithes it. Adair, p. 42t.

NOTE LIX. p. 162.

THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Alocurs des
Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LX. p. i64.

I HAVE referred the reader to several of the authors
who describe the most uncivilized nations in America.
Their testimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas concerning
the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the reft. " I was
extremely attentive (fays he), during the years I resided
among them, to ascertain whether they were to be confi-
dered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the most
perfect exadnefs, that though among some of them there
may be traces of idolatry, yet others have not the least
knowledge of God, or even of any false deity, not pay
any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who e-xercises
dominion over the world; nor have they any conception
of the providence of a creator or governor, from whom
they expedt in the next life the reward of their good, or
the punishment of their evil deeds. Neither do they pub-
licly join in any act of divine worship. " Ribas Triumphos,
&Cc. p. I6.

NOTE LXI. p. x65.

T HE people of Brasil were so much affrighted by thun.
der, which is frequent and awful in their country, as
well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it was not
only the objet of religious reverence; but the most
expressive name in their language for the Deity, was
Toupan, the fame by which they dillinguifhed thunder.
Pifo, de Medic. Bralil, p. 8. Nieuhoff Church. Coll. ii. p. 32.

NOTE LXII. p. 173.

BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness, gives
of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it
appears, that the feelings of the perfuns who fufi:red on

that occasion were very different. Some solicited the
honor with eagerness; others labored to avoid tl:eir doom,
and several saved their, lives by flying to the woods. AS
the Indian Branins give an intoxicating draught to the
women who are to be burnt together with the bodies of
their husbands, which renders them insensible of their
approaching fate, the Natchez obliged their vicims to
swallow several large pills of tobacco, which produce a
similar effect. Mem. de la LouiL i. 227.

NOTE LXIII. p. 180.

0 N some occasions, particularly in dances instituted for
the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they are
extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hit.
&c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. p. 3r9. But the
nature of their dances is commonly such as I have de.
fcribed.

NOTE LXIV. p. x82.

T HE Otbomnacoar, a tribe feated on the banks of the
Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
which they call 7?tpa. It is formed of the feeds of an un
known plant, reduced to powder, and certain shells burnt
and pulverized. The effects of this when drawn up into
the nostrils are so violent, that they resemble madness ra-
ther than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE LXV. p. i8S.

T HOUGH this obrervation holds true among the greater
part of the southern tribes, there are some in which the
intemperance of the women is as excelfive as that of the
mnen; Bancroft's Nat, Hillt. of Guiana, p. 275.

NOTE

NOTE LXVI ps. 190.

EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerning the
manners of the Amnericans, one meets with inconsistent
and inexplicable circumstances. The Jesuit Charlevoix,
who, in consequence of the controversy between his order
and that of the Franciscans, with refped to the talents and
abilities of the North-Americans, is disposed to represent their
intellectual as well as moral qualities in the most favorable
light, afterts, that they are engaged in continual negocia-
tions with their neighbours, and condudt there with the
most refined address. At the fame time he adds, " that it
behoves their envoys or plenipotentiaries to exert their
abilities and eloquence, for if the terms which they offer
are not accepted of, they had need to stand on their
guard. It frequently happens, that a blow with a hatchet
is the only return given to their propositions. The envoy
js not out of danger even if he is so fortunate as to avoid
the lhoke , he may expect to be pursued, and if taken,
tu be burnt. " Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 2 5 . What occurs vol. ii.
p. 277. concerning the manner in which the Tlafcalans
treated the ambafhidors from Zempoalla, corresponds with
the fadt related by Charlevoix. Men capable of such
ads of violence, seem to be unacquainted with' the
first principles upon which the inrercourfe between nations
is founded; and instead of the perpetual negociations
uhich Charlevoix mentions, it seems almost impossible
th;t there should be any correspondence whatever among
them.

NOTE LXVI. p. 19a.

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
" (;udent munerihus, fed nec data imputant, nec acccptis
,bligantur. " C. 2 . An author who had a good oppor-
tunity of obfcrving the principle which leads faivagcs neither

VTO. I1. Fs

to express gratitude for favors which they had received,
nor to expect any return for such as they beltowed, thus
explains their ideas: " If, fay they, you give me this, it
is because you have no need of it yourself; and as for me,
I never part with that which I think necessary to me. "
liemoire fur le Galibis; Hist. des Plantes de la Guiane Frangoife
par M. Aublet, tom. ii. p. Ilo.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 207.

A ND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of
Columbus, has preserved some circumstances concerning
the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not mentioned by
Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other historians of that
period, whose works have been published. A Caribbean
canoe with four men, two women, and a boy, fell in
unexpecedly with the fleet of Columbus in his fecund
voyage, as it was steering through their islands. At first,
they were firuck almost stupid with astonishment at such a
strange fpedacle, and hardly moved from the spot for
above an hour. A Spanish bark, with twenty-five men,
advanced towards them, and the fleet gradually surrounded
them, so as to cut off their communication with the shore.
"( When they saw that it was impof(ible to escape (fays
the historian), they seized their arms with undaunted re.
solution, and began the attack I use the expreflion,
.with undaunted r efo/ltion, for they were few, and
beheld a vast number ready to affiult them. They wounded
several of the Spaniards, although they had targets, as
well as other defensive armor; and even after their canoe
was overset, it was with no little difficulty and danger thai
part of them were taken, as they continued to defeni
themselves, and to use their bows with great dexterit!
while swimming in the sea. " Hilt. de D. Fern. y Yfab
AVSS. W. 1ig.

NOTE LXIX. p. 207.

A PROBABLE conjecture may be formed with refped
to the cause of the diftindtion in character between the
Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The
former appear manifestly to be a separate race. Their lan.
guage is totally different from that of their neighbours in
the large islands. They themselves have a tradition, that
their anceflors came originally from some part of the
continent, and having conquered and exterminated the
ancient inhabitants, took pofleffion of their lands, and of
their women. Rochefort, 384. Tertre, 60. Hence
they call themselves Banaree, which signifies a man come
from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 11. Accordingly, the
Caribbees itill use two diflind languages, one peculiar to
the men, and the other to the women. Tertre, ;36. The
language of the men has nothing common with that spoken
in the large islands. The dialect of the women confider-
ably resembles it. Labat. z9. This strongly confirms
the tradition which I have mentioned. The Caribbees
themnelves imagine, that they were a colony from the
Galibis, a powerful nation of Guiana, in South-.merica.
Tertre, 36i. Rochefort, 348. Butastheir fierce manners
approach nearer to those of the people in the northern
continent, than to those of the natives of South-America;
and as their language has likewise some affinity to that
spoken in Florida, their origin should be deduced rather
from the former than from the latter. Labat. i 2, &c.
Hlerrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they till
observe their ancient practice of destroying all the males,
and preserving the women either for servitude or for
breeding.

F f z

NOTE LXX. p. 209.

O UR knowledge of the events which happened in the
conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of
information more original and authentic than that of any
transaCtion in the history of America. The letters of
Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are a historical
monument, not only first in order of time, but of the
greatest authenticity and value. As Cortes early affumned
a command independent of Velasquez, it became necessary
to convey such an account of his operations to Madrid,
as might procure him the approbation of his fuvereign.

The first of his dispatches has never been made public.

It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July i6th, ir19. As I
imagined that it might not reach the Emperor, until he
arrived in Germany, for which he set out early in the year
, 2o, in order to receive the Imperial crown; I made
diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain
and in Germany, but without success. This, however, is
of less consequence, as it could not contain any thing very
material, being written so soon after Cortes arrived in New
Spain. But, in searching for the letter from Cortes, a
copy of one from the colony of Vera-Cruz to the Emperor
has been discovered in the Imperial library at Vienna. Of
this I have subjoined some account at the close of the Notes
to the third volume. The second dispatch, dated Odober
o3th, 1520, was published at Seville, A. D. 1522, anti
the third and fourth soon after they were received. A
Latin translation of them appeared in Germany, A. D.
15 2. Ramulio soon after made them more generally
known, by inserting them in his valuable collection. They
contain a regular andi minute history of the expedition,
with many curious pa;rticulars concerning the policy and
nanners of the lMcxicaLs; . The work does honor to Cortes;
the flyle is (imple and perspicuous; but as it was maniteftl)
his interest to represent his own actions in the fiircft light,
his victories are probably exagcrated, his lofIcs dinm-

nifihed, and s adts of rigor and violence somewhat
Softened.

The next in order is the Chronica de la Nueva EfpagnR,

by Francisco Lopez de (;omara, published A. D. 1 54.
Gomara's historical merit is considerable. His mode of
narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and sometimes
elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and credulous;
and as he was the domestic chaplain of Cortes after his
return from New Spain, and probably composed his work
at his delire, it is manifest that he labors to magnify the
merit of his hero, and to conceal or extenuate such
tranfadtions as were unfavorable to his character. Of this
jlerrera accuses him in one instance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2.
all it is not once only that this is conspicuous. He
writes, however, with so much freedom concerning several
r/.eafures of the Spaniih court, that the copies both of his
Hiltoria de las Indias, and of his Chronica, were called in
by a decree of the council of the Indies, and they were
long confidered as prohibited books in Spain; it is only of
late that licence to print them has been granted. Pinelo
Biblioth. s 89.

The Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz dol

CafRillo to compose his Hiftoria Verdadera de la Conquifta
de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an adventurer in each
of the expeditions to New Spain, and was the companion
of Cortes in all his battles and perils. When he found
that neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers,
were once mentioned by Gomara, but that the faime of all
their exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant veteran
laid hold of his pen with indignation, and composed his
true hiltory. It contains a prolix, minute, confured
narrative of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgkr
Itylc as might be expected from an illiterate soldier. But
as he relates tranfachions of which he was witness, and in
1 hich he performed a considerable part, his account bears
all the marls of authenticity, and is accompanied with such
a plcuafalt naivetd, with such interesting details, with fucL
ilmuling vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old foldicr wh9

Fs ;

had been (as he boasts) in a hundred an ineteen battles,
as renders his book one of the mot singular that is to be
found in any language.

Pet. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatise de Infulis nuper

inventis, added to his Decades de Rebus Oceanicis & Novo
Orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition. But he
proceeds no farther than to relate what happened after his
.firit landing. This work, which is brief and flight, seems
to contain the information transmitted by Cortes in his
firit dispatches, embellished with several particulars com-
municated to the author by the officers who brought the
letters from Cortes.

But the book to which the greater part of modern hit.

torians have had recourse for information concerning the
conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la Conquifta de
Mexico, por D. Antonio de Solis, first publithed A. D.
1684. I know no author in any language whose literary
fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De Solis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest writers in
the Castilian tongue; and if a foreigner may venture to
give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards
alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to that praise.
But, though his language be correct, his taste in compofi-
tion is far from being just His periods are so much
labored as to be often stiff, and sometimes tumid; the
figures which he emplolys by way of ornament, are trite
or improper, and his observations superficial. These
blemishes, however, might easily be overlooked, if he were
not defeeive with refpest to all the great qualities of a
historian. Destitute of that patient industry in research,
which conducts to the knowledge of truth; a stranger to
that impartiality which weighs evidence with cool attention
and ever eager to establish his favorite system of exalting
the character of Cortes into that of a perfec hero, exempt
from error, and adorned with every virtue; he is less
Solicitous to discover what was true, than to relate what
might appear splendid. When he attempts any critical
difcuflion, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon

an imperfec vicv of fadrs. Though he sometimes quotes
the diJpatches of Cortes, he seems not to have consulted
them; and though he sets out with some censure on
Gomara, he frequently prefers his authority, the molt
doubtful of any, to that of the other contemporary
historians.

But of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and moit accurate information concerning the conquest
of Mexico, as well as every other tranfadion of America.
The industry and attention with which he consulted not
only the books, but the original papers and public records,
which tended to throw any light upon the subjed of his
inquiries, were so great, and he usually judges of the
evidence before him with so much impartiality and candor,
that his decads may be ranked among the most judicious
and useful historical collections. If, by attempting to
relate the various occurrences in the New World in a
firid chronological order, the arrangement of events in
his work had not been rendered so perplexed, difconneded,
and obscure, that it is an umpleafant talk to collet from
different parts of his book, and piece together the detached
shreds of a sTory, he might justly have been ranked among
the most eminent historians of his country. He gives an
account of the materials from which he composed his work,
Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTE LXXI. p. zlz.

CORTES purposed to have gone in the train of Ovando
when he set out for his government in the year t0o2,
but was detained by an accident. As he was attempting
in a dark night to scramble up to the window of a lady's
bed-chamber, with whom he carried on an intrigue, an
old wall, on the top of which he had mounted, gave
way, and he was so much bruised by the fall as to be
unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Chronica de la Nueva
Efpagna, cap. i.

Fs4

NOTE LXXII. p. 24.'

C ORTES had two thousand pesos in the hands of
Andrew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. Thece
furns are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
sterling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when
applied towards the equipment of a military expedition.
llerrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B. Diaz. c. 20.

NOTE LXXIII . p219.

T HE names of those gallant officers which will often
occur in the fubfcquent ilory, were Juan Velasquez
de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo, Chrifloval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante, Fran.
cisco de Morla , Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salceda,
Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself com.
manded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de Orozco,
an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had the command
of the artillery. The experienced Alaminos aded as chief
pilot.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 22I,

N those different conflics, the Spaniards loft only two

men , but had a confidcrable number wounded. Though
there be no occasion for recourse to any supernatural cause
to account either for the greatness of their victories, or the
fimallnefs of their loss; the Spanish historians fail not to
ascribe b:nth to the patronage of St. Jago, the tutelar
Saint of their country, who , as they relate, fought at the
head of their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn
to the fate of the battle. Gomara is the firlt who men.
tions this apparition of St. James. It is amusing to obfervo

the embarraflirent of B. Diaz de Castillo, occasioned by
the itruggle between his fuperflition and his veracity. The
former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter re.
strained him from attesting it. " I acknowledge, fays he,
that all our exploits and victories are owing to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in this battle there was such a num.
ber of Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown
a handful of earth they imight have buried us, if by the
great mercy of God we had not been protected. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having ap.
peared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle
Signor San Jago or Signor San Pedro; and that I, as
being a finner, was not worthy to fee him. This I know,
that I saw Francifca de Morla on such a horse, but as an
unworthy transgressor, did not deserve to fee any of the
holy apostles. It may have been the will of God, that it
was so as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I
never heard among any of the conquerors that such a thing
had happened. " Cap. ;4.

NOTE LXXV. p. 227.

SEVERAL Spanish historians relate this occurrence in
such terms, as if they wished it should be believed, that
the Indians, loaded with the presents, had carried them
from the capital in the fame short space of time that the
couriers performed that journey. This is incredible, and
Comara mentions a circumtlance which shows, that nothing
extraordinary happened on this occasion. This rich present
had been prepared for Crijalva, when he touched at the
fime place tome months before, and was now ready to
be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent orders for that
purpose. Gomara, Chron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

According to B. )iaz del Caflillo, the value of the
ilver plate representing the moon, was alone above twenty
lhoufind pesos, about five thoufanud pounds Sterling.

NOTE LXXVI p. 233.

THIS private traffic was directly contrary to the in.
ftructions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever was
acquired by trade should be thrown into the common flock.
But it appears , that the soldiers had each a private assortment
of toys, and other goods proper for the Indian trade, and
Cortes gained their favor by encouraging this under-hand
barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE LXXVIL p. 247.

GOOMARA has published a catalogue of the various ar.
tides of which this present consisted. Chron. c. 49. P.
Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were brought
to Spain, and who seems to have examined them with
great attention, gives a description of each, which is curious,
as it conveys Come idea of the progress which the Mexicans
had made in several arts of elegance. De Infulis nuper
inventis Liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. z4.

T HERE is no circumstance in the history of the conquest
of America, which is more questionable than the account
of the numerous armies brought into the field against the
Spaniards. As the war with the Tlafcalans, though of
short duration, was one of the most considerable which the
Spaniards waged in America, the account given of the forces
of their enemies merits some attention. The only authentic
information concerning this is derived from three authors.
Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, dated at
Segura de la Frontera, Odtober 0 , i s2o, thus eftimateo
the number of their troops; in the first battle 6ooo; in
the second battle loo,ooo; in the third battle x$o,ooo-

Relaz. ap. Ramus. iii. 236. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, who
was an eye-witness, and engaged in all the actions of this
war, thus reckons their numbers; in the first battle
0ooo, p. 43; in the second battle, 6000 ibid. in the
third battle So,ooo , p. 45. Gomara , who was
Cortes's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published
his Chronica in x 5 2, follows the computation of Cortes,
except in the second battle, where he reckons the Tlafcalans
at 80,000, p. 49. It was manifefily the interest of Cortes
to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it was only
by the merit of extraordinary services, that he could hope
toatone for his irregular condut, in assuming an independ-
ent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly disposed
to place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-conquerors,
in the most advantageous point of light, had not the fame
temptation to exaggerate; and, it is probable, that his
account of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth.
The assembling of an army of I o,ooo men requires marn
previous arrangements, and such provision for their
subsistence as seems to be beyond the foresight of Americans.
The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala does not seem to
have been so great, as to have furniflled such a vast
army with provisions. Though this province was so much better
cultivated than other regions of New Spain , that it was
called the country of bread; yet the Spaniards in their
march suffered such want, that they were obliged to subsist
upon Tunas, a species of fruit which grows wild in the
fields. Ilerrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. S. p. 182.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 2z8.

TIIESE unhappy victims are said to be persons of
diftintion. It seems improbable that so great a number
as fifty should be employed as spies. So many prisoners
had been taken and dismissed, and the Tlafcalans had
sent so many meflages to the Spanish quarters, that there
appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of so many

considerable people, in order to procure information about
the position and itate of their camp. The barbarous manner
in which Cortes treated a people unacquainted with the laws
of war eltablifhed among polished nations, appears so
flocking to the later Spanish writers, that they diminish
the number of those whom he punished Cb cruelly. Herrera
fays, that he cut off the hands of seven, and thumbs of
some more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that
the hands of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the
thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes himself,
Relaz. p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, c. 48, affirm,
that the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOTE LXXX. p. 261.

THE horses were objects of the greteft aifonifhment to
all the people of New Spain. At first they imagined the
horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the ancients, to
be some monstrous animal of a terrible form; and fuppoting,
that their food was the fame as that of men, brought
flesh and bread to nourish them. Even after they discovered
their mistake, they believed the horses devoured men in
battle, and when they neighed, thought that they were
demanding their prey. It was not the interest of the
Spaniards to undeceive them. Herrcra, dec. ii. lib. vi.
C. 11.

NOTE LXXX. p. 267.

A CCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no reafnn
for this ma;tacre, and it was an aOt of wanton cruelty,
perpetrated merely to strike terror into the people of Ne't
Spain. Relaz. de la Deftrucc. p. 17, &c. But the zeal
of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate. In oppolitior
to him Bern. Diaz, c. 8 , asserts , that the first miilionaric'
sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a judicial inquirl

into this tranfadtion; and having examined the priests and
elders of Cholula, found that there was a real conspiracy
to cut off the Spaniards, and that the account given by
Cortes was exactly true. As it was the object of Cortes
at that time, and manifestly his interest, to gain the good.
will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that he should have
taken a ftep which tended so visibly to alienate him from
the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to be necessary
for his own preservation. At the fame time, the Spaniards
who served in America had such contempt for the natives,
and thought them lb little entitled to the common rights of
men, that Cortes might hold the Cholulans to be guilty
upon flight and imperfect evidence. The severity of the
puniflunent was certainly excessive and atrocious.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 268.

THIS description is taken almost literally from Bernal
Diaz del Castillo, who was so unacquainted with the art of
composition, as to be incapable ofembellifling his narrative.
lie relates in a simple and rude style what passed in his
own mind, and that of his fellow-foldiers, on that
ocation; "c And let it not be thought firange, fays he,
that I should write in this manner of what then hap-
pened, for it ought to be confidered, that it is one thing
to relate, another to have beheld things that were never
before seen, or heard, or spoken of among men." Cap. 86.
p. 64., b.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 281.

B. Diaz del Castillo gives us some idea of the fatigue
and hardflips they underwent in performing this, and
other parts of duty. During the nine months that they
rinained in Mexico, every man, without any diltindion
betwven officers and foldicrs, lept on his arms , in his

quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or firawl
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself
as alert as if he had been on guard. "This, adds he,
became so habitual to me, that even now in my advanced
age, I always sleep in my clothes, and never in any bed.
'XWhen I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it suitable to my
rank, to have a bed carried along with my. other baggage,
but I never go into it; but, according to custom, I lie in
my clothes, and walk frequently during the night into the
open air, to view the stars as I was wont when in service."
Cap. loS.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 284.

CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the emperor,
does not explain the motives which induced him either to
condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put Montezuma
in irons. Ramus. iii. 2 6. B. Diaz is silent with refpee
to his reasons for the former; and the only cause he assigns
for the latter was, that he might meet with no interruption
in executing the sentence pronounced against Qualpopoca,
c. xcv. p. 7s. But as lontezuma was his prisoner, and
absolutely in his power, he had no reason to dread him,
aid the insult offered to that monarch could have no effed
but to irritate him unnecessarily. Gomara supposes, that
Cortes had no other objet than to occupy Montezuma
*with his own distress and sufferings, that he might give less
attention to what besel Qualpopoca. Chron. c. 89. Herreri
adopts the fame opinion. Dec. ii, lib. viii. c. 9. But i{
seems an odd expedient, in order to make a persons beat
one injury, to load him with another that is greater. De
Solis imagines , that Cortes had nothing else in view than
to intimidate Montezuma, so that he might make nO
attempt to rescue the victims from their fate; but thd
spirit of that monarch was fTo fuhmifrive, and he had so tameCl
given up the prisoners to the difpoall of Cortes, that he
had no cause to apprehend any opporitioi from him. II

the explanation which I have attempted to give of Cortes's
proceedings on this occasion be not admitted, it appears
to me, that they must be reckoned among the wanton
and barbarous ads of opprefion which occur too often in
the history of the conquest of America.

X NOTE LXXXV. p. 289.

D E Solis afTerts, lib. iv. c. 7. that the proposition of
doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Mlontezuma
]imfelf, and was made in order to induce the Spaniards to
depart out of his dominions. He describes his condud on
this occasion, as if it had been founded upon a scheme of
profound policy, and executed with such refined address,
as to deceive Cortes himself. But there is no hint or
circumstance in the contemporary historians, Cortes, Diaz,
or Gomara, to justify this theory. sMontezuma, on other
occasions, discovered no such extent of art and abilities.
The anguish which he felt in performing this humbling
ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to have been
involuntary. But, according to the theory of De Solis,
which supposes that Montezuma was executing what he
himself had proposed, to have assumed an appearance of
sorrow, would have been preposterous and inconfiflent with his
ewn design of deceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 292.

IN several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their
industry and influence, could colled no gold. In others,
they procured only a few trinkets offmall value. IAlontezuma
allured Cortes, that the present which he offered
to the King of Caffile, after doirng homage, conlriled of all
the treasure amafTed by his father; and told him, that
he had already difrributed the reft of his gold and jewels
atong the Spaniards.. B. Diaz, c. 104. Comara relates,

that all the silver collected amounted to soo marks. Chron;
c. 9;. This agrees with the account given by Cortes,
that the royal fifth of silver was oo marks. Relaz. 2 9, B.
So that the fum total of silver was only 4000 ounces, at
the rate of eight ounces a mark, which demonfirates
the proportion of silver to gold to have been exceedingly
finall.

NOTE LXXXVII p. 29.

D E Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in queltion the truth of
this tranfation, from no better reafun than that it was
inconsistent with that prudence which dillinguifhes the
character of Cortes. But he ought to have recolledted
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no less
imprudent. He aflerts, that the evidence for it refts upon
the tellimony of B. Diaz del Caflillo, of Gomara, and of
Herrera. They all concur, indeed, in mentioning this
inconliderahle ftep which Cortes took; and they had good
reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates this exploit in
his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to glory in
it. Cort. Relaz. Ramus. iii. 40o, D. This is one instance,
among many, of De Solis's having consulted with little
attention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which
the imolt authentic information with respect to his operations
must be derived.

NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 297.

H ERRERA and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez wa
encouraged to equip this armament againt Cortes, by the
accounts which he received from Spain concerning the
reception of the agents sent by the colony of Vera Cruz,
and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop of Burgos hlad
espoused his interest, and condemned the proceedings ol
Cortcs. Ierrera , dec. ii, lib, ix. ig. De Solis, lib. iv'

c. 5.

c; ;. But the chronological order of events refutes this
supposition. Portocarrero and Montejo failed from Vera
Cruz, July 26, I 19. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4,
They landed at St. Lucar in OCtober, according to Herrera,
ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court at that
time, and communicated every occurrence of moment to
his correspondents day by day, mentions the arrival of
there agents, for the first time, in December, and speaks
of it as a recent event. Epift. 6;o. All the hifturians
agree, that the agents of Cortes had their firit audience of
the Emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to that tpwn
to vift his mother in his way to St. Jago de Compoftella.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis , lib. iv. c. a.
But the emperor set out from Valladolid for Tordefillas,
on the i th of March 120o; and P. Martyr mentions his
having seen at that time the presents made to Charles,
lpift. 166 ^ The armament under Narvaez failed from
Cuba in April i52o. It is manifest then, that Velasquez
could not receive any account of what passed in this
interview at Tordefillas, previous to his hofrile preparations
againit Cortes. His real motives seem to be those which I
have mentioned. The patent appointing him Adelnzttado
of New Spain, with such extenlive powers, bears date
November r , j I 9. Herrera, dec. ii. lib, iii. c. rr.
lie might receive it about the beginning of January Gomara
takes notice, that as soon as this patent was delivered to
him, he began to equip a fleet and levy forces. Chron. c. 69.

NOTE LXXXIX p. 3 oo,

D ES Solis contends that as Narvaez had no interpreters,
he could hold no intercoutrfe with the people of thle
prUvinces , nor converse with them in any way but by signs,
and that it was equally impollible for him to carry on aill
Crlnlnunication with AIontezunma. Iih. iv. c. 7. ;ut it is
Upon the authority of Cortes himself that 1 relate all the
PUrticulars of Narvaez's correspondence, both with Mon-

Vol. II. G

te-/uma and with hig fubjetts in the maritime provinces.
Relaz. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there
was a mode of intcrcourfe between Narvaez and the
.iMexican°, but does not explain how it was carried on.
Bernal Diaz supplies this defect, and informs us, that the
three deCertcrs u ho joined Narvaez acted as interpreters,
having acquired a competent knowledge of the language,
c. t o. Y\'ich his usual minuteners, he mentions their
nanes a-d character s, and relates, in chapter 122,
liow they were punished for their perfidy. The Spaniards
had now relicd above a year among the MAexicans; and it
is not furpriiing, that several among them should have made
Ibme proficiency in speaking their language. This seems
to have been the cafe. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. r.
1Both B. Diaz, who was present, and Herrera, the molf
accurate and best informed of all the Spanish writers, agree
with Cortes in his account of the secret correspondence
carried on with Montezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8,
19. De Solis seems to confider it as a discredit to Cortes,
his hero, that Montezuma should have been ready to
engage in a correfpondencc with Narvaez. lie supposes
that monarch to have contracted such a wonderful
affection for the Spaniards, that he iwas not solicitous to
be delivered from them. After the indignity with which
he had been treated, such an affecion is incredible; and
even De Solis is obliged to acknowledge, that it must be
looked upon as one of the miracles which God had
wurought to facilitate the conquest, lib. iv. c. 7. The
truth is, Mlonte7uma, however much overawed by his
dread ,f the Spaniards, was extremely impatient to recover
his libcity.

NOTE XC. p. 316.

T IIESE worlds I have borrowed from the anonymous
AcLount of the European Settlements in America, publifled
by Dulllcy, in two volunics, 8vo. a work of so much

merit, that I should think there is hardly any writer in
the age who ought to be ashamed of acknowledging himself
to be the author of it.

NOTE XCI. p. 3z.

1 THE contemporary historians differ considerably with
relpict to the lot's of the Spaniards on this occasion.
Cortes, in his second dirpatch to the emperor, maklcs the
number only rio. Rclaz. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 249, A.
But it was manifestly iis interest, at that juncure, to
conceal from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss
which he had sustained. De Solis, always studious to
diminifil every misobrtune that bcfel his countrymenn,
rates their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19.
B. Diaz affirms, that they loft 87o men , and that only
440 escaped from Mexico, c. 128. p. Io8, B. Palafox,
binflop of Los Angeles, who feenms to have inquired into
the early tranSaftions of his countrymen in New Spain,
with great attention, confirms the account of B. Diaz,
with refped to the extent of their lots. Virtudes del In-
dio, p. 22. Goniara ftatcs their loss at 45o men. Chron.
c. 109. Some months afterwards, when CortLs had received
several reinforc'ements, he mustered his troops, and
found them to be only v9o. Rela7. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 2z,
E. Now, as Narvaez brought S8o men into New Spain,
antd abotl 400 of Cortes's fiklicrs were then alive, it is
evident, that his loss, in the retreat from illexico, mult
havc been much more conliderable than what he mentions.
B. )Diaz, solicitous to magnify the dangers and fuiH.rings
to lhiil lie and his Ic'll,'-conltierors were exporfe , may
have cxal!. e"irate( their luls ; but, in imy opinion ic cann(o
well be cltiiiitcd at Ices than 600 ien.

(; g 2

NOTE XCII. p. 344.

SOMF. remains of this great work are still visible, and
the spot where the brigantines were built and launched,
is still pointed out to firangers. Torquemada viewed them.
Monarq. Indiana , vol. i. p. 3 r.

NOTE XCIII. p. 352.

T HE Rfation of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba
was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that there
they could diltinctly observe what paired when their
countrymen were sacrificed Relaz. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 273,
E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's division, relates
what he beheld with his own eyes. C. i;2. p. 148. b.
149, a. Like a man whose courage was so clear as to be
above suspicion, he describes with his usual simplicity the
impression which this fpedacle made upon him. " Before,
fays he, I saw the breasts of my companions opened,
their hearts, yet fluttering, offered to an accursed idol,
and their flesh devoured by their exulting enemies; I was
accustomed to enter a battle not only without fear, but
with high spirit. But from that time I never advanced to
fight the Alexicans without a fccret horror and anxiety;
my heart trembled at the thoughts of the death which I
had seen them fulTer." He takes care to add, that
as soon as the combat began, his terror went off; and,
indeed, his adventurous bravery on every occasion is full
evidence of this. B. Diaz, c. 1 6. p. 17, a.

NOTE XCIV. p. ;S8.

O JE circumrtance in this siege merits particular notice.
The account which the Spanish writers give of the numerous
armics elnployed in the attack or defence of Mexico,

seems to be incredible. According to Cortes himself, he
had at one time i o,ooo auxiliary Indians in his service.
Relaz Ramus. iii. 27 , E. Gomara aflerts, that they were
above 200,000. Chron. c. 136. Herrera, an author of
higher authority, fays, they were about 20oo,ooo. Dec. iii.
lib. i. c. 19. None of the contemporary writers ascertain
explicirly the number of persons in Mexico during the siege.
But Cortes on several occasions mentions the number of
Mexicans who were slain, or who perished for want of
food; and, if we may rely on those circumltances, it is
probable, that above two hundred thousand muff have
been shut up in the town. But the quantity of provisions
necessary for the subsistence of such vast multitudes assembled
in one place during three months, is so great, and it
requires so much forelight and arrangement to collect there,
and lay them up in magazines, tb as to be certain of a
regular supply, that one can hardly believe that this could
be accomplified in a country where agriculture was so
imperfect as in the Mexican empire, where there were no
tame animals, and by a people naturally so improvident,
and so incapable of executing a complicated plan as the
most improved Americans. The Spaniards, with all their
care and attention, fared very poorly, and were often
reduced to extreme distress for want of provilions. B. Diaz,
p. 142. Cortes, Relaz. 271, D. Cortes on one occasion
mentions slightly the fubliftence of his army; and after
acknowledging, that they were often in great want, adds,
that they received supplies from the people of the country,
of fiif , and of some fruit, which he calls the cherries of
the country. Ibid. 13. )iaz fays , that they had cakes of
nlai/c, and cerafas de la tierra; and when the season of
there was over, another fruit, which he calls 7Titas; but
their most comfortable fubliitence was a root which the
Indians life as food, to which he gives the name of Quilites,
p. 142. The Indian auxiliaries had one means of fubfittence
more than the Spaniards, They fed upon the bodies of tie
lmexicans whom they killed in battle. Cort. Relaz. 176, C.
B. Diaz confirms his relation, and adds, that when the

Indians returned from Mexico to their own country, they
carried with them large quantities of the flesh of the
Mexicans salted or dried, as a mos acceptable present to
their friends , that they might have the pleasure of feeding
upon the bodies of their enemies in their feltivals. P. i17.
I)e Solis, who seems to confider it as an imputation of
discredit to his countrymen, that they fllould ad in concert
with auxiliaries who fed upon human fleh , is solicitous
to prove, that the Spaniards endeavoured to prevent their
affocintcs from eating the bodies of the Alexicans, lib. v.
24. But he has no authority fur this from the original
historians. Neither Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz, seem to
have had any such scruple; and, on many occasions,
mention the Indian repass , which were become familiar
to them, without any mark of abhorrence. Even with this
additional stock of food for the Indians, it was hardly
pollible to procure subsistence for armies amounting to such
numbers as we find in the Spanish writers. Perhaps the
bcft solution of the difficulty is, to adopt the opinion of
B. Diaz del Castillo; the mofl artless of all the Hifioridores
primitivol. " When Gomara (fays he), on some occasions,
relates, that there were so many thousand Indians our
auxiliaries, and on others, that there were so many
thousand houses in this or that town , no regard is to be
paid to his enumeration, as he has no authority for it, the
numbers not being in reality the fifth of what he relates.
If we add together the different numbers which he men-
tions, that country would contain more millions than there
are In Cafie. " C. 129. But though some considerable
deduction ihould certainly be made from the Spanish
accounts of the Mexican forces, they must have been very
numerous; for nothing but an immense superiority in
number could have'enabled them to withstand a body of
nine hundred Spaniards, conduced by a leader of such
abilities as Curtes.

NOTE XCV. p. 374.

IN relating the opprefflve and cruel proceedings of the
conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de las
Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relac. de la
)eftrucc. p. iS , &c. is manifefily exaggerated. It is from
the teltimony of Cortes himself and of Gomara, who wrote
under his eye, that I have taken my account of the
punifliment of the Panucans, and they relate it without
any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his usual cullom,
mentions it only in general terms, c. 62. Herrera,
solicitous to extenuate this barbarous aAion of his country-
men, though he mentions 60 caziques, and 400 men of
note, as being condemned to the flames, alferts, that
thirty only were burnt, and the reft pardoned. Dec. iii.
lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to the testimony of the
original historians, particularly of Gomara, whom it appears
he had consulted, as he adopts several of his exprellions
in this passage. The punifshment of Guatimozin is related
by the molt authentic of the Spanish writers. Torquemada
has extracted from a hiflory of Tezeuco, compored in the
Mexican tongue, an account of this tranfadtion, more
favorable to Guatimozin than that of the Spanish authors.
M1n. Indiana, i. 7a. According to the Mexican account,
Cortes had scarcely a shadow of evidence to justify such a
vanton act of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin
and his fellow-fufllerers afterted their innocence with their
last breatll, and that many of the Spanill soldiers condemn-
ed this atlion of Cortes as equally unneceil:ry and unjult,
p. 2oo00, b. 201o, a.

NOTE XCVI. p. 377.

Tti E motive for undertaking this expedition sias, to
punifl Chriftoval de Olid , one of his officers, who hadt
revolted againfi himn and aimed ia cltahlilhing an ii.depeild-

ent jurifdidiion. Cortes regarded this infurrecion as of
such dangerous example, and dreaded ol much the abilities
and popularity of its author, that in person he led the
body of troops deltined to fupprefR it. He marched,
according to Gomara, three thousand miles, through a
country abounding with thick forefis, rugged mountains,
deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated only in a few
places. W\hat he fulfered from famine, from the hostility of
the natives, from the climate, and from hardships of every
species, has nothing in history parallel to it, but what occurs
in the adventures of the other discoverers and conquerors
of the New World. Cortes was employed in this dreadful
service above two years, and though it was not distinguished
by any splendid event, he exhibited, during the course of
it, greater personal courage, more fortitude of mind, more
perseverance and patience, than in any other period or
scene in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix.
Gomara Chron. c. 163-177. B. Diaz, I74-I9o . Cortes,
MS. penes mle. Were o.e to write a life of Cortes, the
account of this expedition flould occuly a splendid place
in it. In a general history of America, as the expedition
was productive of no great event, the mention of it is
fuflicient.

NOTE XCVII. p. 99.

A CCORDING to Ilerrera, the treasure which Cortes
brought with him, coniflted of fifteen hundred marlts
of wrought plate, two hundred thousand pesos of
fine gold, and ten thoufhnd of inferior standard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thoufcnd
pesos, and fevcral trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec.
iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. i. He afterwards cng;!ged to
give a portion with his daughter of a hundred thousand
pesos. Gomara, Chron. c. 2 7. The fortune which he left
his Tons was very confidcrable. But, as we have before
relatel, the film divided among the conquerors on the first
reduction of Mexico was very finall. There appears then

to he some reason for furpeLting that the accusations of
Cortes's enemies were not altogether deflitute of foundation.
They charged him with- having applied to his own use a
disproportionate share of the Mlexican spoils; with having
concealed the royal treasures of Montezumra and Guatimozin;
with defrauding the king of his fifth; and robbing his
followers of what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii.
lib. viii. c. I . dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the
conquerors themselves entertained suspicions of the fame
kind. B. Diaz, c. 157.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
Vor,. I;. iH
