THE
H I

S T O R

O F

I C
V O L. II.

Y
A

M

E

R

Ae

THE
T O

R Y

O F
A

M

E

R

I C
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON,

A.

D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTORIOGRAPHER

to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

L, ON D O N:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand; and

J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh,

MDCCLXXVI I
H I

S

# BOOK V.

THE
H S T O R Y

F
A M E R IC A.

BOOK V.

HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found the arma- B o o K
ment destined to attempt the conquest of that rich v.
country which he had discovered, almost complete. i' 8'

Preparations
Not only ambition, but avarice, had urged Velasquez to haften of Velasquez

for invading

his preparations; and having such a profpet of gratifying both, New Spain.
he had advanced considerable fums out of his private fortune
towards defraying the expence. At the fame time, he exerted
his influence as governor, in engaging the mofi distinguished
persons in the colony to undertake the service . At a time
when the spirit of the Spanifll nation was adventurous to ex-
cess, a number of soldiers, eager to embark in any daring en-
terprife, oon appeared. But it was not so easy to find a person
qualified to take the command in an expedition of so much im-
portance; and the character of Velasquez, who had the right
of nomination, greatly increascd the difficulty of the choice.

a See NOTE I.
VOL. II. B Though

B o K Though of most aspiring ambition, and not destitute of talents.
L ---.- for government, he possessed neither such courage, nor such.

vigour and ativity of mind, as to undertake in person the con-
duct of the armament which he was preparing. In this embar-
raffing situation, he formed the chimerical scheme not only of at-
chieving great exploits by a deputy, but offecuring to himself the
glory of conquests which were to be made by another. In the
execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at reconciling contradic-
tions. He was solicitous to chute a commander of intrepid
resolution, and of superior abilities, because he knew these to
be requisite in order to ensure success; but, at the fame time,
from the jealousy natural to little minds, he wished him to be
of a spirit so tame and obsequious, as to be entirely dependant
on his will. But when he came to apply those ideas in form-
ing an opinion concerning the several officers who occurred to
his thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with the command,
he oon perceived that it was impoflible to find such incom-
patible qualities united in one character. Such as were dillin-
guifhed for courage and talents were too high-fpirited to be
patfive inflruments in his hand. Those who appeared more
gentle and tractable, were destitute of capacity, and unequal to
the charge. This augmented his perplexity and his fears. He
deliberated long, and with much solicitude, and was still waver-
ing in his choice, when Amador de Lares, the royal treasurer
in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own secretary, the two per-
sons in whom he chiefly confided, were encouraged by this ir-
relblution to propose a new candidate, and supported their re-
commendation with such assiduity and address, that, no less
fatally for Velasquez than happily for their country, it proved
successful

B. Diaz, c . 9. Gomara Cron. c. . Ilerrcra, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. rI.

T1
2

THE man whom they pointed out to him was Fernando B 0 K
Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a small town in Eftrema- ---

[518.

dura, in the year one thousand four hundred and eighty-five, il aIpp'oits,
and descended from a family of noble blood, but of very mo- Crtes cont)

mantler.

derate fortune. Being originally defined by his parents to the
fludy of law, as the most likely method of bettering his con-
dition, he was ent early to the university of Salamanca, where
he imbibed some tincure of learning. But he was ibon dif-
gufled with an academic life, which did not suit his ardent and
restless genius, and retired to Medellin, where he gave himself
up entirely to aive sports and martial exercises. At this pe-
riod of life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing, and so diffi-
pated, that his father was glad to comply with his inclination,
and fend him abroad as an adventurer in arms. There were
in that age two conspicuous theatres, on which such of the
Spanish youth as courted military glory might display their va-
lour; one in Italy, under the command of the Great Captain;
the other in the New World. Cortes preferred the former,
but was prevented by indisposition from embarking with a re-
inforcement of troops ent to Naples. Upon this disappoint-
ment he turned his views towards America, whither he was
allured by the profped of the advantages which he might de-
rive from the patronage of Ovando , the governor of Hifpa-
niola, who was his kinfinan. When he landed at St. Domingo
in one thousand five hundred and four, his reception was such
as equalled his most sanguine hopes, and he was employed by
the governor in several honourable and lucrative flations.
These, howevcr, did not satisfy his ambition; and in the year
one thousand five hundred and eleven, lie obtained pcrmiflion
to accompany Diego Vclafijuez in his expedition to Cuba. In

c See NOTE 11.

B 2 this

B 0o0 K this service he distinguished himself so mucl, that, notwith-
<-Nv standing some violent contests with Velafqucz, occasioned by

trivial events, unworthy of remembrance, he was at length
taken into favour, and received an ample conceiflon of lands
and of Indians, the recompence uually bellowed upon adven-
turers in the New World d

THOuc;H Cortes had not hitherto aed in high command,

he had displayed such qualities in several scenes of difficulty
and danger, as raised universal expectation, and turned the eyes
of his countrymen towards him, as one capable of performing
great things. The turbulence of youth, as oon as he found
objects and occupations suited to the ardour of his mind, gra-
dually subsided, and fettled into a habit of regular indefatigable
activity. The impetuosity of his temper, when he came to at
with his equals, insensibly abated, by being kept under re-
firaint, and mellowed into a cordial soldierly frankness. These
qualities were accompanied with calm prudence in concerting
his schemes, with persevering vigour in executing them, and
with what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of gaining the
confidence and governing the minds of men. To all which
were added the inferior accomplishments that firike the vulgar,
and command their rcfpedt; a graceful person, a winning as-
fpc, extraordinary address in martial exercises, and a confli-
tution of such vigour as to be capable of enduring any fatigue.

As oon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez by his two

confidents, he flattered himself that he had at length found
what he had hitherto fought in vain, a man with talents for
command, but not an objct ofjealouy. Neither the rank nor

d Gomara Cron. c. , 2, .

the
4

the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such that he could B o o K

Vj

aspire at independence. He had reason to believe, that by his -
own rcadinefs to bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well 1518.
as his liberality in conferring several recent favours, he had al-
ready gained the good-will of Cortes, and hoped, by this new
and unexpeaed mark of confidence, that he might attach him
for ever to his interest.

CORTES receiving his commission with the warmest expref- Soon become;

sions of refpea and gratitude to the governor, immediately i,,m"5 o
ereaed his standard before his own houle, appeared in a mili- Oaober z.-
tary dress, and assumed all the ensigns of his new dignity.
-lis utmost influence and ativity were exerted in persuading
many of his friends to engage in the service, and in urging
forward the preparations for the voyage. All his own funds,
together with what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchasing military ftorcs
and provisions, or in supplying the wants of such of his officers
as were unable to equip therfilves in a manner suited to their
rank . Inoffensive, and even laudable as this conduct was,
his disappointed competitors were malicious enough to give it a
turn to his disadvantage: They represented him as aiming al-
ready, with little disguise, at cfltalifhing an independent au-
thority over his troops, and endcavouriog to fccure their
refpca or love by his oftcntatious and interefled liberality.
They reminded Velasquez of his former difienfions with the
man in whom he now reposed so much confidence, and fore-
told that Cortes would be more apt to avail hiinfelf of the
power, which he was inconsiderately putting in his hands, to,

See N 0 T E 111.

avcng.c

B OO K avenge palt injuries, than to requite late obligations. These

V.
'--.--' insinuations made such impression upon the suspicious mind of

Velasquez, that Cortes soon observed some symptoms of a
growing alienation and difiruft in his behaviour, and was ad-
vised by his friends, Lares and Duero, to haflen his departure,
before these should become so confirmed, as to break out with
open violence. Fully sensible of this danger, he urged forward
his preparations with such rapidity, that he set fail from St.
Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth of November, Velasquez ac-
companying him to the hore, and taking leave of him with an
appearance of perfect friendlhip and confidence, though he had
secretly given it in charge to some of his officers, to keep a
watchful eye upon every part of their commander's condua f.

ndieanvours CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small settlement on the
to dcplive
him o his fame fide o the island, where he was joined by several ad-
conlfIon, venturers, and received a supply of provisions and military

stores, of which his flock was still very incomplete. He had
hardly left St. Jago when the jealousy which had been work-
ing in the breast of Velasquez, grew so violent that it was im-
possible to suppress it. The armament was no longer under
his own eye and direcion; and he felt that as his power over
it ceased, that of Cortes became more absolute. Imagination
now aggravated every circumstance, which had formerly ex-
cited fufti cion: the rivals of Cortes indutlrioufly threw in re-
flc-iions which increased his fears; and with no less art than
malice they called fuperflition to their aid, employing the pre-
dilions of an afirologer in order to complete the alarm. All
thee, by their united operation, produced the desired cffect.

Gomara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

Vclafquez
6

-

Velasquez repented bitterly of his own imprudence, in having 1 째o째 K
committed a trust of so much importance to a person whose ,----
fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily dispatched instruCtions
to Trinidad, empowering Verdugo, the chief magiflrate there,
to deprive Cortes of his commission. But Cortes had already
made such progress in gaining the esteem and confidence of his
troops, that, finding officers as well as soldiers equally zealous
to support his authority, he oothed or intimidated Verdugo,
and was permitted to depart from Trinidad without mo-
leftation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for Havana, in order to raise and to lay

him under

more soldiers, and to complete the victualling of his fleet. arrest.
There several persons of diflintion entered into the service,
and engaged to supply what provisions were flill wanting; but
as it was ncceflary to allow them ome time for performing
what they had promised, Velasquez, sensible that he ought no
longer to rely on a man of whom he had so openly dicfovered
his difiruit, availed himself of the interval, which this un-
avoidable delay afforded, in order to make one attempt more to
wrefl the command out of the hands of Cortes. He loudly
complained of Verdugo's conduct, accusing him either of
childilh facility, or of manifest treachery, in fuflcring Cortes
to escape from Trinidad. Anxious to guard against a second
(lifappointment, he sent a pcrlbn of confidence to the Hlava-
na, with peremptory injuntions to Pedro Barba, his licutc-
nant-govcrnor in that colony, inflantly to arrefi Cortes, to
find him prisoner to St. Jago under a firong guard, and to.
countermand the departure of the armament until lie flould
receive farther orders : He wrote likewise to the principal offi-
ccrs, requiring them to assist Barba in executing what he had

givca

7

B 째,0 K given him in charge. But before the arrival of his messenger,
' --_--' a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secretly conveyed an account

of this interesting tranfaaion to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a
monk of the fame order, who acted as chaplain to the expe-
dition.

C'oresdc- CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time to take pre-
feats his
schemes, and cautions for his own safety. His first ftep was to find ome
continues hs pretext for removing from Havana Diego de Ordaz, an offi-
preparations.

cer of great merit, but in whom, on account of his known
attachment to Velasquez, he could not confide in this trying
and delicate jundcure. He gave him the command of a vessel,
deflined to take on board ome provisions in a finall harbour
beyond Cape Antonio, and thus made sure of his abfencc,
without seeming to fufpet his fidelity. When he was gone,
Cortes no longer concealed the intentions of Velasquez from
his troops ; and as officers and soldiers were equally impatient
to set out on an expedition, in preparing for which most of
them had expended all their fortune, they expressed their alto-
nifhment and indignation at that illiberal jealousy, to which
the governor was about to sacrifice, not only the honour of their
general, but all their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth.
With one voice they intreated that he would not abandon the
important flation to which he had such a good title. They
conjured him not to deprive them of a leader whom they fol-
lowed with fhch well-founded confidence, and offered to shcd
the last drop of their blood in maintaining his authority. Cortes
was cafily induced to comply with what he so ardently dcfircd.
IIe fworc that he would never delcrt foldicrs who had given
hiln fclh a signal proof of their attachment, and promiscd in-
flaitly to comndluc: them to that rich country, which had been

6 Ib
6

so long the object of their thoughts and wishes. This decla- B 0 0 K

V.

ration was received with transports of military applause, accom- --
panied with threats and imprecations againPt all who should
presume to call in question the jurifldition of their general, or
to obflrua the execution of his designs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their departure: but The amount

though this expedition was the united effort'of the Spanish of his forces.
power in Cuba ; though every settlement had contributed its
quota of men and provi sions; though the governor had laid
out considerable fitms, and each adventurer had exhausted his
flock, or fIrained his credit, the poverty of the preparations
was such as must astonish the present age, and bore, indeed, no
refeimblance to an armament destined for the conquest of a
great empire. The fleet confifled of eleven vessels; the largest
of a hundred tons, which was dignified with the name of Ad-
miral; three of seventy or eighty tons, and the reft small open
barks. On board of theie were fix hundred and seventeen men;
of which five hundred and eight belonged to the land service,
and a hundred and nine were seamen or artificers. The fol-
diers were divided into eleven companies, according to the
number of the flips; to each of which Cortes appointed a cap-
tain, nd committed to him the command of the vessel while
at sea, and of the men when on flore . As the use of fire-
arms among the nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry, only thirteen
soldiers were armed with muskets, thirty-two were cross-bow-
men, and the reft had swords and spears. Inflead of the usual
dcfenfive armour, which mutl have been cumbersome in a hot

Sec N 0 T E IV.
VOL. II. C ,.i:...,

9
v

*ilmidnC,

B 0 0 K climate, they wore jackets, quilted with cotton, which expe-

V, .-- -. rience had taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient protection

againif the weapons of the Americans. They had only sixteen
horses, ten small field pieces, and four falconets h.

Feb.io,5f9. WITH this slender and ill-provided train did Cortes set fail,
Hlis depar-
ture from to make war upon a monarch whose dominions were more ex-
Cuba. tensive than all the kingdoms subjed to the Spanish crown.

As religious enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of ad-
venture in the New World, and, by a combination fill more
strange, united with avarice, in prompting the Spaniards to all
their enterprises, a large cross was displayed in their standards,
with this inscription, Let usfollow the cross, Jar under this
ign weJhall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers animated with

both there passions, that, no less eager to plunder the opulent
country whither they were bound, than zealous to propagate
the Christian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not with
the solicitude natural to men going upon dangerous service,
but with that confidence which arises from security of success,
and certainty of the divine protection.
Touches at As Cortes had determined to touch at every place which Gri-

jalva had visited, he fleered diretly towards the island of Co-
zumel; there he had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de
Aguilar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a prisoner among
the Indians. This man was perfectly acquainted with a dia-
leal of their language, understood through a large extent of

k B. Diaz. c. 19,

country,
10

country, and poffefting besides a considerable hare of prudence B 0o o
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an interpreter. From -
Cozumel, Cortes proceeded to the river ofTabafco, in hopes March .
of a reception as friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and and at Ta-
of finding gold in the fame abundance; but the disposition of
the natives, from rome unknown cause, was totally changed.
After repeated endeavours to conciliate their good-will, he was
constrained to have recourse to violence. Though the forces
of the enemy were numerous, and advanced with extraordinary
courage, they were routed, with great slaughter, in several
successive actions. The loss which they fulltained, and flill
more the astonishment and terror excited by the deftrudive
effeEt of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of the
horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and induced them to sue
for peace. They acknowledged the king of Caflile as their
sovereign, and granted Cortes a supply of provisions, with a
present of cotton garments, ome gold, and twenty female
slaves '.

CORTES continued his course to the westward, keeping as Arrives at St.

Juan de

near the shore as poflible, in order to observe the country; ulua.
but could discover no proper place for landing, until he arrived
at St. Juan de Ulua . As he entered this harbour, a large ca- April z.
noe, full of people, among whom were two who seemed to be
persons of diflintion, approached his ship, with signs of
peace and amity. They came on board without fear or dif-
trust, and addressed him in a most refpeaful manner, but in
a language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes was in
the utmost perplexity and diltrefs, at an event of which he

See NOTE V.
I' B. Diaz, c. 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 18-23. IlIrrera, (ec. . lib. iv. c. it, &c.

C 2 infantly

r

B I K instantly foresaw 'all the consequences, and already felt the he-

C-- fitation and uncertainty with which he should carry on the
1'59' great schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranfations with

the natives, he mult depend entirely upon such an imperfect,
ambiguous, and conjecural mode of communication, as the
use of signs. But he did not remain long in this cmbarraffing
situation: a fortunate accident extricated him, when his own
sagacity could have contributed little towards his relief. One of
the female slaves, whom he had received from the cazique of
Tabasco, happened to be present at the first interview between
Cortes and his new guests. She perceived his distress, as well
as the confusion of Aguilar; and as she perfectly underflood
the Mexican language, she explained what they said in the
Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was acquainted. This
woman, known afterwards by the name of Donna Marina, and
who makes a conspicuous figure in the history of the New
World, where great revolutions were brought about by finall
causes and inconsiderable inflruments, was born in one of the
provinces of the Mexican empire. Having been carried off a
captive by some hostile party, after a variety of adventures he
fell into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had rcfided long
enough among them to acquire their language, without losing
the use of her own. Though it was both tedious and trouble-
some to convcrfe by the intervention of two different interpret-
ers, Cortes was so highly pleated with having discovered this
method of carrying on ome intercourse with the people of a
country into which he was determined to penetrate, that in
the transports of his joy he confidered it as a visible intirpofition
of Providence in his favour

B3. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39, Gomara Cren. c z2, z6. IIcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

II .
12

13
HE now learned, that the two persons whom he had re- B O K

V.
ceived on board of his hip were deputies from Pilpatoe and

'519.

Teutile; the one governor of that province under a great mo- Lands his
narch, whom they called Montczuma, and the other the com- troops.
mander of his forces there, and that they were sent to inquire
what his intentions were in visiting their coast, and to offer him
what affiflance he might need, in order to continue his voyage.
Cortes, fruck with the appearance of thole people, as well as
the tenor of the message, assured them, in refpeCful terms,
that he approached their country with most friendly senti-
ments, and came to propose matters of great importance to the
welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which he would unfold
more fully, in person, to the governor and the general. Next
morning, without waiting for any answer, lie landed his
troops, his horses and artillery; and having chofcn proper
ground, began to ere huts for his men, and to fortify his
camp. The natives, instead of opposing the entrance of tlofe
fatal guests into their country, assisted them in all their opera-
tions, with an alacrity of which they had ere long good reason
to repent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered the Spanifll camp IT;.iit in-

tcrvicev wilh

with a nullncrous retinue, and Cortes conlidering theni as the I cMrxicanr.
miniflers of a great monarch, entitled to a degree of attention
very diflfrent from that which the Spaniards were acciinomcd
to pay to the petty Caziques, with whom they had intercourse,
received them with much formal ceremony. lie informed
tlem, that he came as amhaffador from Don Carlos of AuRria,
king of Caflile, the grcatlcl monarch of the eall, and was i-
truled with propositions of fiich moment, tlat lie could impart
them to none but the emperor Montezuma himfclf, and therc-

9 fore

B 0 K fore required them to conduc him, without loss of time, into

V.
L- - the presence of their master. The Mexican officers could not

conceal their uneasiness at a request, which they knew to be
disagreeable, and which they foresaw might prove extremely
embarraling to their sovereign, whose mind had been filled
with many disquieting apprehensions, ever since the former
appearance of the Spaniards on his coafis. But before they
attempted to dissuade Cortes from insisting on this demand,
they endeavoured to conciliate his good-will, by entreating
him to accept of certain presents, which, as humble slaves of
MAontezuma, they laid at his feet. These were introduced with
great parade, and confilted of fine cotton cloth, of plumes of
various colours, and of ornaments of gold and silver, to a con-
fiderable value; the workmanship of which appeared to be as
curious as the materials were rich. The display of there pro-
duced an effed very different from what the Mexicans intended.
Instead of satisfying, it increased the avidity of the Spaniards,
and rendered them so eager and impatient to become mailers of
a countiy which abounded with such precious productions, that
Cortes could hardly liften with patience to the arguments
which Pilpatoe and Teutile employed to dissuade him from vi-
fiting the capital, and in a haughty determined tone he infifed
on his demand, of being admitted to a personal audience of their
Sovereign. During this interview, some painters, in the train
of the Mexican chiefs, had been diligently employed in deli-
neating upon white cotton cloths, figures of the ihips, the horses,
the artillery, the foiliers, and whatever else attracted their
eyes, as singular. When Cortes observed this, and was in-
formed that there pi&ures were to be ent to Montezuma, in
order to convey to him a more lively idea of the firange and
wonderful objcts now presented to their view, than any words

t could
14. .

could communicate, he resolved to render the representation B 0 0 K

V.

still more animated and interesting, by exhibiting such a spec- .--.-- '
tacle as might give both them and their monarch an awful im- 1 19'
pression of the extraordinary prowess of his followers, and the
irrefitible force of their arms. The trumpets, by his order,
founded an alarm; the troops, in a moment, formed in order
of battle, the infantry performed such martial exercises as were
bell suited to display the effect of their different weapons; the
horse, in various evolutions, gave a specimen of their agility
and strength; the artillery pointed towards the thick woods
which surrounded the camp, made dreadful havoc among the
trees. The Mexicans looked on with that silent amazement,
which is natural when the mind is firuck with objets, which
are both awful and above its comprehension. But, at the ex-
plosion of the cannon, many of them fled, some fell to the
ground, and all were so much confounded at the fight of men
whose power so neally refcmbled that of the Gods, that Cortes
found it difficult to compote and re-assure them. The painters
had now many new fubjeds on which to exercise their art, and
they put their fancy on the fretch in order to invent figures
and characters to represent the extraordinary things which they
had seen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to Montczuma N:o, i

:;nO

with those piures, and a full account of every thing that hald 'il}' ," ,,t:'
passed since the arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes
sent a present of some European curiosities to Montezuma,
which, though of no great value, he believed would be accept-
able on account of their novelty. The Mexican monarchs, in
order to obtain early information of every occurrence in all tlh
corners of their vail cmpire, had introduced a refincment in

olice,

I5

B O0 K police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They had couriers

V.
-....-.- polled at proper flations along the principal roads, and as

1 l ' these were trained to agility by a regular education, and relieved

one another at moderate diflanccs, they conveyed intelligence
with surprising rapidity. Though the capital in which Mon-
tezuma resided was above a hundred and eighty miles from St.
Juan de Ulua, Cortes's presents were carried thither, and an
answer to his demands was received in a few days. The flme
officers who had hitherto treated with the Spaniards, were em-
ployed to deliver this answer; but as they knew how repug-
nant the determination of their mafler was to all the schemes
and wishes of the Spanish commander, they would not venture
to make it known until they had previously endeavoured to
:His presents. soothe and mollify him. For this purpose, they renewed the

negociation by introducing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded
with presents ent to him by Montezuma. The magnificence
of these was such as became a great monarch, and far exceeded
any idea which the Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
They were placed upon mats spread on the ground, in such
order, as howed them to the greatest advantage. Cortes
and his officers viewed, with admiration, the various manufac-
tures of the country, cotton fluffs so fine, and of such delicate
.texture as to resemble silk; pitures of animals, trees, and
other natural objects formed with feathers of different colours,
disposed and mingled with such skill and elegance, as to rival
the works of the pencil in truth and beauty of imitation.
But what chiefly attrated their eyes, were two large plates of
a circular form, one of massive gold representing the fun, the
other of silver, an emblem of the moon ". These were accom-

w' See NOTE VI.

panied

panied with bracelets, collars, rings, and other trinkets of gold; B 0O0 K
and that nothing might be wanting which could give the Spa- '-
niards a complete idea of what the country afforded, with ome 59'
boxes filled with pearls, precious stones, and grains of gold
unwrotght, as they had been found in the mines or rivers.
Cortes received all these with an appearance of profound vene-
ration for the monarch by whom they were bestowed. But
when the Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed him that Forbids Cor-

tes to ap-

their master, though he desired him to accept of what he had proach his
sent as a token of his regard for the prince whom he repre- c"pital
sented, would not give his content that foreign troops should
approach nearer to his capital, or even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, Cortes declared, in a manner more
resolute and peremptory than formerly, that he must insist on
his firit demand, as he could not without dishonour return to
his own sovereign, until he was admitted into the pretence of
the prince whom he was appointed to visit in his name. The
Mexicans, astonished at feeing any man dare to oppose that
will, which they were accustomed to confider as supreme and
irrefiltible, yet afraid of precipitating their country into an
open rupture with such formidable enemies, prevailed with
Cortes to promise, that he would not move from his present
camp, until the return of a messenger, whom they ent to
Montezuma for farther inftrucdions ".

TIHE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his original State of te

proposal flould, naturally, have brought the negociation be- pire at tlha
tween him and Montezuma to. a fpecdy issue, as it feerned to period.
leave the Mexican monarch no choice, but either to receive him

" B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara Cron, c. 27. Hcrrcra, dec. z. lib. v. c. 5, 6.

'7
VOL. II.

D

will

B 0 0 I with confidence as a riend, or to oppose him openly as an

V.

.-- --- enemy. The latter was what might have been expected from
9 a haughty prince in pofleffion of extensive power. The Mex-

ican empire at this period, was at a pitch of grandeur to wlhich
no society ever attained in so hort a period. Though it had
fubfifled only a hundred and thirty years, its dominion extend-
ed from the North to the South Sea, over territories firetching
above five hundred leagues from east to weft, and more than
two hundred from north to south, comprehending provinces
not inferior in fertility, population, and opulence to any in
the torrid zone. The people were warlike and enterprising.
The authority of the monarch unbounded, and his revenues
considerable. If, with the forces which might have been fud-
denly affemblbd in such an empire, Montezuma had fallen upon
the Spaniards while encamped on a barren unhealthy coast,
unsupported by any ally, without a place of retreat, and defti-
tute of provisions, it is impossible, even with all the advantages
of their superior discipline and arms, that they could have isood
the shock, and they muli either have perished in such an une-
qual contest, or have abandoned the enterprise.
c'l:r.lel of As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take this fpiritecl

part, his own dispositions seemed naturally to prompt him to it.
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, he was
the most haughty, the most violent, and the most impatient of con-
troul. Hlis fubjeds looked up to him with awe, and his enemies
with terror. The former he governed with unexampled rigour;
but they were impressed with such an opinion of his capacity,
as commanded their refpcLC; and by many victories over the
latter, he had fprcad far the dread of his arms, and had added
lbveral confidcrable provinces to his dominions. But though

2 his

his talents might be suited to the tranfations of a state o i- B 0 0 K
perfedcly polished as the Mexican empire, and fufficicnt to con- ---
dud them while in their accustomed course, they were altoge- ''19'
ther inadequate to a conjunture o extraordinary, and did not
qualify him either to judge with the discernment, or to ad
with the decision, requisite in such a trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared on his coast, ilis pFrplec-

iiy and terror

he discovered symptoms of timidity and einbarrafliment. In- upon the r-
flead of taking fich resolutions as the consciousness of his own s1raliaf'i
power, or the memory of his former exploits, might have in-
spired, he deliberated with an anxiety and lefitation which
did not escape the notice of his mcaneft courtiers. The per-
plexity and discomposure of Montezuma's mind upon this oc-
cafion, as well as the general difinay of his fubjeas, was not
owing wholly to the imprefflon which the Spaniards had made
by the novelty of their appearance and the terror of their arms.
Its origin may be traced up to a more remote source. There
was an opinion, if we may believe the carlieft and most authen-
tic Spanish historians, almost universal among the Americans,
that tome dreadful calamity was impending over their heads;
from a race of formidable invaders who should come from re-
gions towards the rising fun, to overrun and desolate their
country. Whether this disquieting apprehension flowed from
the memory of some natural calamity which had affliaed that
part of the globe, and impresscd the minds of the inhabitants
with fuperflitious fears and forebodings, or whether it was an
imagination accidentally suggested by the aftoniflmcnt which
the first fight of a new race of men occasioned, it is impofible
to determine. But as the Mexicans were more prone to lupcr-
flition than any people in tlie New World, they were more

1) 2 deeply

B 0 K deeply affedted with the appearance of the Spaniards, whom

V.

-- .,

~- their credulity instantly represented as the infiruments defined
'1'9q to bring about that fatal revolution which they dreaded. Un-

der those circumstances, it ceases to be incredible that a handful
of adventurers flhould alarm the monarch of a great empire and
all his subjects .

Continues to NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this impreflion, when
negociac. the messenger arrived from the Spanish camp with an account

that Cortes, adhering to his original demand, refused to obey
the order enjoining him to leave the country, Montezuma
assumed some degree of resolution, and in a transport of rage
natural to a fierce prince, unaccuflomed to meet with any oppo-
fition to his will, he threatened to sacrifice those presumptuous
firangers to his gods. But his doubts and fears quickly re-
turned, and instead of issuing orders to carry his threats into
execution, he again called his ministers to confer and offer
their advice. Feeble and temporizing measures will always be
the result when men assemble to deliberate in a situation where
they ought to a. The Mexican council took no effectual
measure for expelling such troublesome intruders, and were fa-
tisfied with issuing a more positive injundion, requiring them
to leave the country; but this they preposterously accompanied
with a present of such value, as proved a fresh inducement to
remain there.

Anxiety and MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without solicitude or
apprcehenfions

fthe Spa- a variety of sentiments, in deliberating concerning their own
Riards. future conduc. From what they had already seen, many of

째 Cortes Rclationc Scconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 35. IIerrcra, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i.
lib, v, c. . lib. vii. c. 6. Gomara Con. c. 66. 92. 144,

6 them
20

them formed such extravagant ideas concerning the opulence B O O K
of the country, that, despising danger or hardships, when '----
they had in view treasures which appeared to be inexhauft- '59.
ible, they were eager to attempt the conquest. Others, eti-
mating the power of the Mexican empire by its wealth, and
enumerating the various proofs which had occurred of its being
under a well regulated administration, contended that it would
be an a of the wildell frenzy to attack such a ltate with a fiall
body of men, in want of provisions, unconneaed with any
ally, and already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar to the cli-
mate, and the loss of several of their number . Cortes fccretly
applauded the advocates for bold measures, and chcriflied their
romantic hopes, as such ideas corresponded with his own, and
favoured the execution of the schemes which lie had formed.
From the time that the suspicions of Velasquez broke out witl Schemes of

Cortes.

open violence in his attempt to deprive him of the authority
which he had conferred, he saw the necessity of dissolving a
connetion which would obftrut and embarrass all his opera-
tions, and watched for a proper opportunity of coming to a
final rupture with him. Having this in view, he had laboured
by every art, to secure the efteein and affecion of his soldiers.
With his abilities for command, it was easy to gain their
esteem; and his followers were quickly satisfied that they might
rely, with perfet confidence, on the conduat and courage of
their leader. Nor was it more difficult to acquire their assec-
tion. Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank, and ferv-
ing at their own expence, the dignity of command did not
elevate a general above mingling with those who aed un-
der him. Cortes availed himself of this freedom of intcr-
course, to insinuate himself into their favour, and by his affable

r B. Diid . C. 40.

manners,

21

Bo K manners, by well-timed ads of liberality to ome, by infpir-

V.
t --.-- ing all with vail hopes, and by allowing them to trade pri-

'5 9' vately with the natives , he attached the greater part of his

soldiers so firmly to himself, that they almost forgot that the
armament had been fitted out by the authority, and at the ex-
pence, of another.

His aJircfs DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with the prefcnt
in carrvipg
tilie on. from Montezuma, and, together with it, delivered the ultimate

order of that monarch to depart inflantly out of his dominions;
and when Cortes, inltead of complying, renewed his requefi of
an audience, the Mexican turned from him abruptly, and quit-
ted the camp with looks and geflures which firongly expressed
his surprise and resentment. Next morning, none of the na-
tives, who used to frequent the camp in great numbers, in or-
der to barter with the soldiers, and bring in provisions, ap
peared. All friendly correspondence seemed now to be at an
end, and it was expeted every moment that hofilities would
commence. This, though an event that might have been fore-
seen, occasioned a sudden conflernation among the Spaniards,
which emboldened the adherents of Velasquez not only to mur-
mur and cabal against their general, but to appoint one of their
number to rcmonflrate openly againit his imprudence in at-
tempting the conquest of a mighty empire with such inadequate
force, and to urge the ncceftty of returning to Cuba, in order
to refit the fleet and augment the army. Dicgo de Ordaz, one
of his principal officers, whom the malcontents charged with
this commiflion, delivered it with a foldicry freedom and bi ,,,t-
necs, afluring him that he fpok the ifntiments of the whole

I See NOTE VIT.

armny.

army. Cortes listened to him without any appearance of emo- B O IK
tion, and as he well knew the temper and wishes of his fol- -
*diers, and foresaw how they would receive a proposition fatal I519
at once to all the splendid hopes and schemes which they had
been forming with such complacency, he carried his diffimula-
tion so far as to seem to relinquish his own measures in com-
pliance with the request of Ordaz, and issued orders that the
army should be in readiness next day to reimbark for Cu-
ba. As oon as this was known, the disappointed adventurers
exclaimed and threatened; the emissaries of Cortes, mingling
with them, inflamed their rage; the ferment became general;
the whole camp was almost in open mutiny; all demanding
with eagerness to fee their commander. Cortes was not flow
in appearing; when, with one voice, they expressed their aflo-
nifhment and indignation at the orders which they had re-
ceived. It was unworthy, they cried, of the Castilian courage
to be daunted at the first asped of danger, and infamous to fly
before any enemy appeared. For their parts, they were deter-
mined not to relinquish an enterprise, that had hitherto been
fucccfsful, and which tended so vilibly to spread the knowledge
of true religion, and to advance the glory and interest of their
country. Happy under his command, they would follow him
with alacrity through every danger, in quell of those fettle-
ments and treaflres which lie had so long held out to their
v;ew; hit if he clioli' rather to return to Cuba, and tamely
give up all his hopes of diflindion and opulence to an envious
rival, they would inltantly chuse another general to conduct
them in that path of glory which he had not spirit to enter.

CORTFS, delighted with their ardour, took no oflence at the
boldncfs with which it was uttered. The lfntimclnts were what

h

B 0o 0 he hinfclf had inspired, and the warmth of expression satisfied

V.
-- .-- him that his soldiers had imbibed them thoroughly. He as-

5'9' feEtcd, however, to be surprised at what he heard, declaring

that his orders to prepare for embarking were issued from a per-
-suasion that this was agreeable to his troops; that, from defe-
rence to what he had been informed was their inclination, he
had sacrificed his own private opinion, which was firmly bent
on establishing immediately a settlement on the fca-coaft, and
then on endeavouring to penetrate into the interior part of the
country; that now he was convinced of his error; and as he
perceived that they were animated with the generous spirit
which breathed in every true Spaniard, he would resume, with
fresh ardour, his original plan of operation, and doubted not
to conduct them, in the career of vicory, to such independent
fortunes as their valour merited. Upon this declaration, shouts
of applause tetlified the excels of their joy. The measure seemed
to be taken with unanimous consent; such as secretly con-
demned it, being obliged to join in the acclamations, partly to
conceal their difaffetion from the general, and partly to avoid
the imputation of cowardice from their fellow-foldiers '.

F.iablifles a WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to reflect, Cortes
form of civil
government. let about carrying his design into execution. In order to

give a beginning to a colony, he afembled the principal per-
sons in his army, and by their suffrage elected a council and
magiflrates, in whom the government was to be veiled. As
men naturally transplant the inflitutions and forms of the
mother-country into their new settlements, this was framed
upon the model of a Spanish corporation. The magistrates
were diftinguifled by the fame names and ensigns of office,

' B. Diaz. c. 40. 4, 42. llerrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. 6, 7.

and
21

and were to exercise a similar jurifdidion. All the persons B 0 o rK
clofen were most firmly devoted to Cortes, and the infirument
of their election was framed in the king's name, without any '5'9.
mention of their dependance on Velasquez, The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted the Spaniards
to all their ntcrprifes in the New World, seem to have con-
curred in figgefling the name which Cortes beltowed on his
intended settlement. He called it, Villa rica de la vera Cruz;
that is, The rich town of the true Cross.

TiHE first meeting of the new council was diftinguifed by a ReGig; s 11

tranfadion of great moment. As soon as it assemblcd, Cortes con"m"liou
applied for leave to enter; and approaching with many marks
of' profound refpec, which added dignity to the tribunal, and
fct an example of reverence for its authority, he began a long
harangue, in which, with much art, and in terms extremely
flattering to erfons jft entering upon their new funcion, lie
observcd, that as the fupremejuriificion over the colony whlich
they had planted was now veiled in this court, lie confidered
them as clothed with the authority and representing the perfbn
of their fovcreign; that accordingly he would communicate to
them what lie deemed efrential to the public safety, with the
fame dutiful fidelity as if he were addrefing his royal mafler;
that the ecurity of a colony fittled in a great empire, whose
fovcreign had already discovered his hoflile intentions, depended
upon arms, and the efficacy of these upon the fulbordination
andi discipline prefcrved among the troops; that his right to
command was derived from a commiflion granted by tlle go-
veCrnor of Cuba; and as that had been long lince revoked, the
lawfulness of his jurisdiCtion might well be queflioncd ; that he

VOL, 1I. E temiucd

B o0 K seemed to a upon a defe&ive, or even a dubious title; nor

V.
-- --' could they truit an army which might dispute the powers of its

'1'1' general, at a juncure when it ought implicitly to obey his

orders; that, moved by these considerations, he now resigned
all his authority to them, that they, having both right to chufe,
and power to confer full jurifdidion, might appoint one, in.
the king's name, to command the army in its future opera-
tions; and as for his own part, such was his zeal for the service
in which they were engaged, that he would most cheerfully
take up a pike with the fame hand that laid down the general's
truncheon, and convince his fellow-foldiers, that though ac-
customed to command, he had not forgotten how to obey.
Having finished his discourse, he laid the commission from Ve-
lafquez upon the table, and, after kissing his truncheon, de-
livered it to the chief magiitrate, and withdrew.

and is chocn THE deliberations of the council were not long, as Cortes
and cpjitain had concerted this important measure with his confidents, and
general. had prepared the other members, with great address, for the

part which he wiihed them to take. His resignation was ac-
cepted; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their prosperity
under his conduct afforded the most satisfying evidence of his
abilities for command,. they, by their unanimous suffrage,
eleded him chief justice of the colony, and captain-general of
its army, and appointed his commiflion to be made out in the
king's name, with most ample powers, which were to continue
in force until the royal pleasure should be farther known.
That this deed might not be deemed the machination of a
junto, the council called together the troops, and acquainted
them with what had been resolv.ed. The soldiers, with eager

2 applause,

applause, ratified their choice; the air resounded with the B 0 0 K
name of Cortes, and all vowed to filed their blood in support _-.--- '
of his authority. '5'9

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to the desired Anc:t, l.i nu

issue, and fliaken off his mortifying dependance on the gover- vigo,,r.
nor of Cuba, accepted of the commiflion, which vested in him
supreme jurifdicion, civil as well as military, over the colony,
with many professions of respect to the council, and gratitude
to the army. Together with his new command, he affilmed
greater dignity, and began to exercise more extensive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the deputy of a fubje&;
now he aed as the representative of his sovereign. The ad-
herents of Velasquez, fully aware of what would be the effect
of this change in his situation, could no longer continue silent
and passive fpedators of his ations. They exclaimed openly
against the proceedings of the council as illegal, and againit
those of the army as mutinous. Cortes, instantly perceiving
the necessity of giving a timely check to such seditious discourse
by some vigorous measure, arrested Ordaz, Efcudero, and Ve-
lafquez de Leon, the ringleaders of this fation, and ent them
prisoners aboard the fleet, loaded with chains. Their depend-
ants, astonished and overawed, remained quiet; and Cortes,
more desirous to reclaim than to punifli his prisoners, who
were officers of great merit, courted their friendship with such
afliduity and addreis, that the reconciliation was perfectly cor-
dial; and on the moil trying occasions, neither their con-
nction with the governor of Cuba, nor the memory of the
indignity with which they had been treated, tempted them to
swerve from an inviolable attachment to his intcret . In this,
' g. Diaz. c 42, .13. (omara Cion. c. o, 31 i -Icrrcta, dec. z. lib, v. c. .

P.'E 2 as

B 0 0 K as well as his other negociations at this critical conjunLLure,
I--- _, which decided with refpea to his future fame and fortune,

'11'' Cortes owed much of his success to the Mexican gold, which

he distributed with a liberal hand both among his friends and
his opponents '.

lis fr;end- CORTES, having tllus rendered the union between imnfelf
flip corte I and his army indissoluble by those common as of diolbcdicnce,
by the Zcm-
FOal!ans. thought he might now venture to quit the camp in which he

had hitherto remained, and advance into the country. To
this he was encouraged by an event no less fortunate than sea-
fonable. Some Indians having approached his camp in a myfie-
rious manner, were introduced into his presence. He found
that they were sent with a proffer of fiiendfhip from the ca-
ziqlle of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no great diflance;
and from their answers to a variety of (qcftions which he put
to them, according to his usual pradtice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that their maiter,
though subject to the Mexican empire, was impatient of the
yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred of Montezuma,
that nothing could be more acceptable to him than any profped
of deliverance from the opprcflion under which he groaned.
On hearing tils, a ray of light and hope broke in upon the
mind of Cortes. He aw tlit the great empire which he in-
tended to attack was not united, nor its sovereign beloved. iHe
concluded, that the caufcs of diitafl'clion could not be confined
to one province, but that in other corners there must be mal-
contents, so weary of fubjedion, or so desirous of change, as
to be ready to follow the flandard of any protecor. Full of
those ideas, on which he began to form a lhemc, that time,

t B, Diaz. c. 4t,

anl
28

and more perfect information concerning the slate of the coun- B O K

.

try, enabled him to mature, he gave a molt gracious reception _
to the Zempoallans, and promised soon to visit their cazique". ' '9

IN order to perform this promise, it was not necesSary to vary M.arrhcs to

the route which he had alrcady fixed for his march. Some of- Z "i" 11
ficers, whom he had employed to furvcy the coaf, having dif-
covered a village named Qiabiilan, about forty miles to the
northward, which, both on account of the fertility of the ioil,
and commodiousness of the harbour, seemed to be a more pro-
per fation for a settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoalla lay in his
way, where the cazique received him in the manner which he
had reason to expect; with gifts and caresses, like a man soli-
citous to gain his good-will; with rcfpcCL approaching almost
to adoration, like one who looked up to him as a deliverer.
From him he learned many particulars with refpea to the cha-
rader of Montezuma, and the circumstances which rendered
his dominion odious. H-I was a tyrant, as the cazique told him
with tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious; wlo treated his
own fubjeds with arrogance, ruined the conquered provinces
by exceflive exadions, and often tore their sons and daughters
from them by violence; the former, to be offercd as victims to
his gods ; the latter, to be reservcd as concubines for hinifelf or
favourites. Cortes, in reply to him, artfully insinuatcd, that
one great objec of the Spaniards in visiting a country ol remote
from their own, was to rcdr-el grievances, and to relieve the
opprefed ; and having encouraged him to hope for this inter-
position in due time, he continued his march to Quiabillan.

" L. I):z., c, 41. G.)mil; a Cion, c. 2:.

T iir I

B 0 K THE spot which his officers had recommended as a proper

V.

_-_ situation, appeared to him to be so well chosen, that he imme-
Builds a ort. diately marked out ground for a town. The houses to be ereded

were only huts; but there were to be surrounded with fortifi-
cations, of sufficient strength to refill the aflaults of an Indian
army. As the finishing of those fortifications was essential to
the existence of a colony, and of no less importance in prose-
cuting the designs which the leader and his followers medi-
tated, both in order to secure a place of retreat, and to preserve
their communication with the sea, every man in the army,
officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes
himself setting them an example of ativity and perseverance in
labour. The Indians of Zempoalla and Quiabifan lent their
aid; and this petty flation, the parent of so many mighty set-
tlements, was soon In a state of defence

Concludes a WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes had several
formal al-
liance ith interviews with the caziques of Zempoalla and Quiabinan; and
veal ca- availing himself of their wonder and astonishment at the new

objects which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired them
with such an high opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of a fu-
perior order, and irresistible in arms, that, relying on their
protecion, they ventured to insult the Mexican power, at the
very name of which they were accustomed to tremble. Some
of Montezuma's officers having appeared to levy the usual tri-
bute, and to demand a certain number of human vicims, as an
expiation for their guilt in presuming to hold intercourse with
those frangcrs whom the emperor had commanded to leave his
dominions, instead of obeying the order, they made them pri-

'x B. Diaz, c., 4 , 6. 4. Goniara Cron. c. 3, 33. 37. IHerrera, Idc. z. lib. v.
c. o8,9.

soners,
30

foners, treated them with great indignity, and as their fper- B 0o K

V.

ftition was no less barbarous than that of the Mexicans, they -
threatened to sacrifice them to their gods. From this last dan- 1j'9'
ger they were delivered by the interposition of Cortes, who
manifested the utmost horror at the mention of such a deed.
The two caziques having now been pushed to an aa of such
open rebellion, as left them no hope of safety but in attaching
themselves inviolably to the Spaniards, they oon completed
their union with them, by formally acknowledging themselves
to be vassals of the fame monarch. Their example was fol-
lowed by the Totonaques, a fierce people who inhabited the
mountainous part of the country. They willingly fubjeted '-
themselves to the crown of Castile, and offered to accompany
Cortes, with all their forces, in his march towards Mexico Y.

CORTES had now been above three months in New Spain; Ilis meafares

and though this period had not been diflinguified by martial ctonfirmtion
cntcrprifes, every moment had been employed in operations, of is autho-

e rity by the

which, though less splendid, were more important. By his king.
address in conducing his intrigues with his own army, as well
as his iagacity in carrying on his negociations with the natives,
he had already laid the foundations of his future success. But
whatever confidence he might place in the plan which he had
formed, he could not but perceive, that as his title to com-
mand was derived from a doubtful authority, he held it by a
precarious tenure. The injuries which Velafqucz had received,
were such as would naturally prompt him to apply for rcdrefs
to their common sovereign; and such a reprefcntation might
be given of his conduct, that he had reason to apprehend, not
only that he might be degraded from his present rank, but flub-
y B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. I-Icrrcra, dec. 2. lib. v. c., io, II.

jeced

3r

B 6o0 J jcced to punifnllcnt. Before he began his march, it was ne-
<-.--, ccflary to take the mo cffc'-ual precautions againfl this im-

1 '9' pending danger. Vith this view, he perfiaded the magistrates

of his colony to addrcfs a letter to the king, containing a long
account of their own services; a pompous description of the
country which they had discovercd; its riches, the number of
its inhabitants, their civilization and arts; a view of the pro-
grefs which they had already made, in annexing several exten-
five provinces of it to the crown of Cafile, and of the schemes
which they had formed, as well as the hopes which they enter-
tained, of reducing the whole to ful)jeEtion; and last of all, they
gave a minute detail of the motives which had induced them
to renounce all connetion with Vclafquez, to fettle a colony
dependant upon the crown alone, and to veil the supreme
power, civil as wel as military, in the hands of Cortes; hum-
bly rcqucfling their sovereign to ratify what they had done by
his royal authority. Cortes himself wrote in a similar firain;
and as he knew that the Spanish court, accustomed to the ex-
aggerated representations of every new country by its disco-
verer, would give little credit to their fplcndid accounts of New
Spain, if they were not accompanied with such a specimen of
what it contained, as would excite an higli idea of its opulence,
he solicited his soldiers to relinquinf what they might-claim
as their part of the treasures which had hitherto been collected,
in order that the whole might be ent to the king. Such was
the afccndant which he had acquired over their minds, and such
their own romantic} cxpectations of future wealth, that an
army of indigent and rapacious adventurers was capable of this
generous eflort, and offcred to their sovereign the riches pre-
finlt that llad hitherto been tranmlliitcd friom the New World

cc N\ 1 1'"
VIIr.

Portocarrcro
l

Portocarrero and Montejo, the chief magiilrates of the colony, B K

V.

were appointed to carry this present to Caffilc, with express ---
orders not to touch at Cuba in their paage thither a. 19

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their departure, an un- A cnrfpiracy

expe&ed event occasioned a general alarm. Some soldiers and :"0'
tailors, secretly attached to Velasquez, or intimidated at the
profped of the dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate
into the heart of a great empire with fich unequal force, formed
the design of seizing one of the brigantines, and making their
escape to Cuba, in order to give the governor such intelligence
as might enable him to intercept the hip which was to carry
the treasure and dispatches to Spain. This conspiracy, though
formed by persons of low rank, was conducted with profound
secrecy; but at .the moment when every thing was ready for
execution, they were betrayed by one of their afbociates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed so sea- He dearoys

fonably on this occasion, the detetion of this conspiracy filled his feet.
his mind with mofi disquieting apprehensions, and prompted
him to execute a scheme which he had long revolved. He
perceived that the spirit of difaffedCion still lurked among
his troops; that though hitherto checked by the uniform
success of his schemes, or kept down by the hand of au-
thority, various events might occur which would encourage
and call it forth. He observed, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to revisit their settlements
in Cuba; and that upon any appearance of extraordinary
danger, or any reverse of fortune, it would be impoifible
to refrain them from returning thither. He was fcnfible

B. Diaz, c 5.. Gomara Cron. c. 40.

that
VOL. II.

F

1B 6o K that his forces, already too feeble, could bear no diminution,

-,- _and that a very small defetion of his followers would oblige
1'59' him to abandon the enterprise. After ruminating, often, and

with much solicitude, upon those particulars, he saw no hope
of success, but in cutting off all possibility of retreat, and re-
ducing his men to the necessity of adopting the fame resolution
with which he himself was animated, either to conquer or to
perish. With this view, he determined to destroy his fleet;
but as he durst not venture to execute such a bold resolution by
his ingle authority, he laboured to bring his soldiers to adopt
his ideas with refped to the propriety of this measure. His
address in accomplishing this was not inferior to the arduous
occasion in which it was employed. He persuaded ome, that
the hips had suffered so much by having been long at sea, as
to be altogether unfit for service; to others he pointed out
what a seasonable reinforcement of strength they would derive
from the juncion of an hundred men, now unprofitably em-
ployed as sailors; and to all he represented the ne'cessity of
fixing. their eyes and wishes upon what was before them, with-
out allowing the idea of a retreat once to enter their thoughts.
With universal content the ships were drawn. ashore,. and after
stripping them of their fails, rigging, iron-works, ..and what-
ever else might be of use, they were broke in. pieces. Thus,
from an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing pa-
rallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily consented to be
ihut up in a hostile country, filled with powerful and unknown
nations; and having precluded every means of escape, left
thenfelves without any resource but their own valour and per-
f'cverance b.

b Rclat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. zzS. B. Diaz. c. 5,, 58. Herrcra, dec. . lib. v.

c. 4.
34

NOTiHING
2

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of his troops B 0O OK

V.

and the disposition of his allies were equally favourable. All ---
the advantages, however, derived from the latter, though pro- '5''
cured by much assiduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a
moment by an indiscreet ally of religious zeal, which, on
many occasions, precipitated Cortcs into aions inconsistent
with the prudence that diftinguiihes his character. Thougl
hitherto he had neither time nor opportunity to explain to the
natives the errors of their own fuperfition, or to inftrua them
in the principles of the Christian faith, he commanded his fol-
diers to overturn the altars and to destroy the idols in the chief
temple of Zempoalla, and in their place to erec a crucifix and
an image of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld this with
astonishment and horror; the priefis excited them to arms;
but such was the authority of Cortes, and so great the ascendant
which the Spaniards had acquired, that the commotion was ap-
peased without bloodshed, and concord perfetly re-established .

CORTES began his march from Zempoalla on the sixteenth Advances in.

of August, with five hundred men, fifteen horse, and fix field- try.he coun
pieces. The reft of his troops, consisting chiefly of such as
from age or infirmity were less fit for active service, he left as
a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command of Efcalante, an
officer of merit, and warmly attached to his iritereft. The
cazique of Zempoalla supplicd him with provisions, and with
two hundred of those Indians called Tamemes, whose office, in
a country where tame animals were unknown, was to carry
burdens, and perform all fervilc labour. They were a great
relief to the Spanifl foldicrs, who hitherto had been obliged,

B. Diaz. c..l1, 42. I-errera, dec. z, lib. v, c. 3, .

35
F

not

B 0 K not only to carry their own baggage, but to drag along the

V.
i_-c- artillery by main force. He offered likewise a considerable body

'5'9 of his troops, but Cortes was satisfied with four hundred; tak-

ing care, however, to chute persons of such note as might prove
hostages for the fidelity of their mafler. Nothing memorable
happened in his progress, until he arrived on the confines of
Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that province, a warlike people,
were implacable enemies of the Mexicans, and had been united
in an ancient alliance with the caziques of Zempoala. Though
less civilized than the fubjeas of Montezuma, they were ad-
vanced in improvement far beyond the rude nations of Ame-
rica, whose manners we have described. They had made con-
fiderable progress in agriculture; they dwelt in large towns;
they were not firangers to some species of commerce ; and in
the imperfea accounts of their inflitutions and laws, transmitted
to us by the early Spanish writers, we discern traces both of
diitributive jutlice and of criminal jurifdiQion, in their interior
police. But still, as the degree of their civilization was incom-
plete, and as they depended for subsistence not on agriculture
alone, but trusted for it, in a great measure, to hunting, they
retained many of the qualities natural to men in this state.
Like them, they were fierce and revengeful; like them, too,
they were high-fpirited and independant. In confeqience of
the former, they were involved in perpetual hostilities, and
had but a slender and occasional intercourse with neighbouring
flates. The latter inspired them with such detestation of fervi-
tude, that they not only refused to stoop to a foreign yoke, and
maintained an obitinate and successful contest in defence of their
liberty against the superior power of the Mexican empire, but
they guarded with equal solicitude against domeflic tyranny;

I anld
36

and disdaining to acknowledge any mafler, they lived under B 0 0 K.
the mild and limited jurifdidion of a council eleced by their
several tribes. 1il 9

CORTES, though he had received informatioh concerning the llis wxnr with

martial characer of this people, flattered himself that his pro- tilaa-
fefions of delivering the oppressed from the tyranny.of Mon-
tezuma, their enmity to the Mexicans, and the example of
their ancient allies the Zempoallans, might induce them to
grant him a friendly reception. In order to dispose them to
this, four Zcmpoallans of great eminence were sent ambafna-
dors, to request, in his name and in that of their cazique, that
they would permit the Spaniards to pass through the territories
of Tlafcala in their way to Mexico. But inftcad of the favour-
able anfwvcr which was cxpcecd, the Tlafcalans seized the am-
bafladors, and, without any regard to their public charadcr,
made preparations for sacrificing them to their gods. At the
fame time, they aflfembled thcir troops, in order to oppose those
unknown invaders, if they hould attempt to make their passage
good by force of arms. Various motives concurred in precipi-
tating the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce people, fliut
up within its own narrow precincs, and little acculomedl to any
intercourse with foreigners, is apt to confider every flrangcr as
an enemy, and is easily excited to arms. They concluded, from
Cortes's proposal of viliting Montezuma in his capital, that,
notwithilanding all his profcffioiis, he courted the fricndfliip of
a monarch whom they botlh hated and feared. The imprudent
zeal of Cortcs in violating the temples in Zcmpoalla, filled the
'Tlafcalans with horror; and as they were no lcs attached to
their fuipcriflition t tha ll other nations of New Spain, they
were impatient to avengc t;chir injured gols, and to aciquire the

merit

37

B V0 K merit of offering up to them as victims those impious men,

V.
--v.' who had dared to profane their altars; the Spaniards, from

'9'' the smallness of their number, were objects of their contempt;

they had not yet measured their own strength with theirs, and
had no idea of the superiority which they derived from their
arms and discipline.
Aug. 30. CORTES, after waiting ome days, in vain, for the return

of his ambassadors, advanced into the Tlafcalan territories. As
the resolutions of people who delight in war are executed with
no less promptitude than they are formed, he found troops in
the field ready to oppose him. They attacked him with great
intrepidity, and in the firfl encounter, wounded some of the
Spaniards, and killed two horses; a loss, in their situation, of
great moment, becauife it was irreparable. From this specimen
of the courage of his new enemies, Cortes saw the necessity of
proceeding with caution. His army marched in close order;
he chore the stations, where he halted with attention, and for-
tified every camp with extraordinary care. During fourteen
days he was exposed to almost uninterrupted assaults, the Tlaf-
calans advancing with numerous armies, and renewing the at-
tack in various forms, with a degree of valour and perseverance
to which the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the New
World. The Spanish historians describe those successive battles
with great pomp, and enter into a minute detail of particulars,
mingling many exaggerated and incredible circumflances with
those which are real and marvellous. But no power of words
can render the recital of a combat interesting, where there is no
equality of danger; and when the narrative closes with an ac-

dSe NOTE IX.

count

count of thousands slain on the one fide, while not a ingle per- B 0 0 K

V.

son falls on the other, the most laboured descriptions of the ----
previous disposition of the troops, or of the various vicissitudes 1I9'
in the engagement, command no attention.

TH ERE are some circumstances, however, in this war, which Some singular

circum~lance s

are memorable and merit notice, as they throw light upon the ;, it.
characer both of the people of New Spain, and of their con-
querors. Though the Tlafcalans brc-ight into the field such vast
armies as appear sufficient to have overwhelmed the Spaniards,
they were never able to make any impression upon their small
battalion. Singular as this may seem, it is not inexplicable.
The Tlafcalans, though addited to war, were, like all unpo-
liflied nations, strangers to military order and discipline, and
loft all the advantage which they might have derived from their
numbers, and the impetuosity of their attack, by their conflant
solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded. This point of
honour, founded on a sentiment of tenderness natural to the
human mind, and strengthened by anxiety to preserve the bo-
dies of their countrymen from being devoured by their enemies,
was universal among the people of New Spain. Attention to
this pious office occupied them, even during the heat of com-
bat e, broke their union, and diminiihed the force of the im-
pression which they might have made by a joint effort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of little avail, but

the imperfecion of their military weapons rendered their va-
lour in a great measure inoffensive. After three battles, and
many skirmishes and assaults, not one Spaniard was killed in.

e B. Diaz. c. 6..

the

B 0o Ki the field. Arrows and fpcars, headed with flint or the bones
L-,, of fiflles, flakes hardened in the fire, and wooden swords,

i1 9 though defr-uive weapons among naked Indians, were easily

turned aside by the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly pene-
trate the enapiles, or quilted jackets which the soldiers wore.
The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the charge, and often fought
hand to hand. Many of the Spaniards were wounded, though
all slightly, which cannot be imputed to any want of courage
in their enemies, but to the defe&c of the arms with which they
assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the Tlafcalans at-

tacked the Spaniards, they eem to have conducted their
hostilities with some degree of barbarous generosity. They
gave the Spaniards Warning of their hostile intentions, and as
they knew that they wanted provisions, and imagined, per-
haps, like the other Americans, that they had left their own
country because it did not afford them fubfilfence, they ent to
their camp a large supply of poultry and maize, desiring them
to eat plentifully, because they scorned to attack an enemy en-
feebled by hunger, and it would be an affront to their Gods to
offer them famished vidims, as well as difagreable to them-
selves to feed on such emaciated prey '.

WHEN they were taught by the first encounter with their

new enemies, that it was not easy to execute this threat; when
they prceived, in the subsequent engagements, that notwith-
standing all the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was slain or

Herrcra, dcc. z. lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c.'47.

taken,
4째

taken, they began to conceive them to be a superior order of B O0 K
beings, against whom human power could not avail. In this _..-,,
extremity, they had recourse to their priests, requiring them 1519.
to reveal the mysterious causes of such extraordinary events,
and to declare what new means they hould employ in order to
repulse those formidable invaders. The priests, after many fa-
crifices and incantations, delivered this response. That these
firangers were the offspring of the fun, procreated by his ani-
mating energy i the regions of the east; that, by day, while
cherished with the influence of his parental beams, they were
invincible; but by night, when his reviving heat was with-
drawn, their vigour declined and faded like the herbs in the
field, and they dwindled down into mortal meng. Theories
less plausible have gained credit with more enlightened nations,
and have influenced their conduct. In consequence of this, the
Tlafcalans, with the implicit confidence of men who fancy
themselves to be under the guidance of Heaven, acted in con-
tradidion to one of their most established maxims in war, and
ventured to attack the enemy in the night-time, in hopes of
destroying them when enfeebled and surprised. But Cortes
had more vigilance and discernment than to be deceived by the
rude stratagems of an Indian army. The centinels at his out-
posts, observing some extraordinary movement among the Tlaf-
calans, gave the alarm. In a moment the troops were under
arms, and sallying out, disperscd the party with great flaugh-
ter, without allowing them to approach the camp. Convinced,
by fad experience, that their priests had deluded them, and
satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to deceive or to
vanquish their enemies, the fierceness of the Tlafcalans abated,
and they began to incline seriously to peace.

g B. Diaz. c. 60.

41
G

TlEY
VOL. II.

B 0 0 THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner to address

V.
.-- - the firangers, what idea to form of their char4aer, and whe-

The ' i ca- ther to confider them as beings of a gentle or of a malevolent
lans dpofed nature. Tlecre were circumfances in their condud which
to peace.

seemed to favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the
Spaniards confiantly difmifled the prisoners whom they took,
not only without injury, but often with presents of Euro-
pean toys, and renewed their offers of peace after every vic-
tory; this lenity amazed people accultomed to the exterminat-
ing fyflem of war known in America, and who sacrificed and
devoured without mercy all the captives taken in battle, and
disposed them to entertain favourable ifntiments of their huma-
nity. But, on the other hand, as Cortes had seized fifty of
their countrymen who brought provisions to his camp, and
fippofing them to be spies, had cut off their hands h; this
bloody fpetacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horfcs, filled them with dreadful impressions of their
ferocity '. Accordingly, this uncertainty was apparent in their
mode of addressing the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are
divinities of a cruel and savage nature, we present to you five
slaves, that you may drink their blood and eat their flesh. If
you are mild deities, accept an offering of incense and varie-
gated plumes. If you are men, here is meat, and bread and
fruit to nourish you "'. The peace which both parties now de-
Ccnaludet. fired with ecual ardour, was oon concluded. The Tlafcalans

yielded thcmfelves as vassals to the crown of Castile, and en-
gaged to assist Cortes in all his future operations. He took the
republic under his proteefion, and pron.ifed to defend their
persons and poffcfIions from injury or violence.

Cortcs Relar. Ranur. iii. 228. C. Gomnira Crnn. c. ,18. See NOTE X..
k B, Diaz. c. 70. Gomara CronC.c. 47, lerrcra, dec. z. lib. vi. c. 7.

8 THIS
42

THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable juncure for the B 0v K

Spaniards. The fatigue of service among a small body of men, '-,--
surrounded by such a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Advan'tageB
Half the army was on duty every night, and even they whose orit to the
turn it was to refl, slept always upon their arms, that they
might be ready to run to their polls on a moment's warning.
Many of them were wounded, a good number, and among
there Cortes liimfelf, laboured under the distemper peculiar
to the climate, and several had died ince they set out
from Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding the supplics which
they received from the Tlafcalans, they were often in
want of provisions, and so destitute of the necessaries most
requisite in dangerous service; that they had no salve to dress
their wounds, but what was composed with the fat of the In-
dians whom they had slain'. Worn out with such intolerable
toil and hardships, many of the soldiers began to murmur,
and when they reflected on the multitude and boldness of their
enemies, more were ready to despair. It required the utmost
exertion of Cortes's authority and address to check this spirit of
despondency in its progress, and to reanimate his followers with
their wonted sense of their own superiority over the enemies
with whom they had to contend m. The fubmiflion of the Tlaf-
calans, and their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence paid to beings of
a fiperior order, banished, at once, from the minds of the
Spaniards all memory of palt sufferings, dispelled every anxi-
ous thought with refpe to their future operations, and fully
satisfied them that there was not now any power in America
able to withtfand their arms ".

I B Dia. .

i z . 6. "Cortes Re'at. Ramus. iii. 22 . . Diaz. c. 6C.
Goinara Cron. c. . n Cortes Relat. Ra lif. iii, 23', . i. Dinz c. 7 '.

G 2 CO iTSS

43

B 0 0 K CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in order to allow

V.

--,-- his troops a short interval of repose after such hard service.
Cortes foici- During that time, he was employed in tranfadions and inqui-
tous to gain
their confi ries of great moment with refpea to his future schemes. In
drienc. his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he received in-

formation concerning every particular relative to the state of the
Mexican empire, or to the qualities of its sovereign, which
could be of use in regulating his conduct, whether he should
be obliged to a as a friend or as an enemy. As he found
that the antipathy of his new allies to the Mexican nation was
no less implacable than had been represented, and perceived
what benefit he might derive from the aid of such powerful
confederates, he employed all his powers of insinuation in order
to gain their confidence. Nor was any extraordinary exertion
of there necessary. The Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind
natural to unpolifhed men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fondness. Every
thing in the appearance and conduct of their guests, was to them
matter of wonder . They gazed at whatever the Spaniards did
with admiration, and fancying them to be of heavenly origin,
were eager not only to comply with their demands, but to an-
ticipate their wishes. They offered, accordingly, to accom-
pany Cortes in his march to Mexico, with all the forces of the.
republic, under the command of their most experienced cap.
tains.

Whi(h he BUT, after bestowing so much pains on cementing this
had alniolf
lotA by is union, all the beneficial fruits of it were on the point of being
rah zcal. loft, by a new ffufion of that intemperate zeal with which

째 Sec NOT XI.

Cortes
44

Cortes was animated, no less than the other adventurers of the B 00 K
age. They all confidered themselves as initruments employed
by Heaven to propagate the Chriltian faith, and the less they x59.
were qualified either by their knowledge or morals for such a
function, they were more eager to discharge it. The profound
veneration of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards, having encou-
raged Cortes to explain to obme of their chiefs the dodtrines of
the Christian religion, and to insist that they flould abandon
their own superstitions, and embrace the faith of their new
friends, they, according to an idea universal among barbarous
nations, readily acknowledged the truth and excellence of what
he taught; but contended, that the Tenles of Tlafcala were di-
vinities no less than the God in whom the Spaniards believed;.
and as that Being was intitled to their homage, so they were
bound to revere the fame powers which their ancestors had
worshipped. Cortes continued, nevertheless, to urge his de-
mand in a tone of authority, mingling threats with his argu-
ments, until the Tlafcalans could bear it no longer, and con-
jured him never to mention this again, left the Gods should
avenge on their heads the guilt of having listened to such a
proposition. Cortes, astonished and enraged at their obllinacy,
prepared to execute by force what he could not accomplifl by
persuasion, and was going to overturn their altars, and cast
down their idols with the fame violent hand as at Zempoalla,
if father Bartholemew de Olmedo, chaplain to the expedition,
had not checked his inconsiderate impetuosity. He represented
the imprudence of such an attempt in a large city newly re-
conciled, and filled with people no les fiiperflitious than war-
like; he declared that the proceeding at Zempoalla had always
appeared to him precipitate and unjul; that religion was not
to be propagated by the sword, or infidels to be converted by

6 violence;

B o0 K violence; that other weapons were to be employed in this mi-

V.
L--,--- niftery, patient inftruaion must enlighten the underlianding,

1519' and pious example captivate the heart, before men could be

induced to abandon error and embrace the truth P. Amidst
scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry appears in such close
union wh oppression and cruelty, sentiments fb liberal and
humane, ooth the mind with unexpeced pleasure; and at a
time, when the rights of conscience were little understood in
the Christian world, and the idea of toleration unknown, one
is aflonifhed to find a Spaniih monk of the sixteenth century
among the first advocates against persecution, and in behalf of
religious liberty. The remonfirances of an ecclefiaflic no less
refpedable for wisdom than virtue, had their proper weight
with Cortes. HI-e left the Tlafcalans in the undisturbed exer-
cife of their own rites, requiring only that they ihould desist
from their horrid practice of offering human victims in fa-
crifice.
Adharces to CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for service, resolved

to continue his march towards Mexico, notwithstanding the
earnest dissuasives of the Tlafcalans, who represented his de-
llrution as unavoidable, if he put himself in the power of a
prince so faithless and cruel as Montezuma. As he was ac-
companied by fix thousand Tlafcalans, lie had now the com-
Oc-. 3 mand of forces which resembled a regular army. They di-

reded their course towards Cholula; Montezuma, who had at
length conlented to admit the Spaniards into his presence, hav-
ing informed Cortes, that he had given orders for his friendly
reception thcrc. Cholula was a conlidcrable town, and though
nly five Icagucs diflant from Tlafcala, was formerly an indc-

1'. Di. c . p 5;.,. c. S;. p. 6i.

pendent
46

pendent state, but had been lately fubjeded to the Mexican B O 0 I
empire. This was confidered by all the people of New.Spain ----
as a holy place, the anluary and chief fear of their gods, to 5'9'
which pilgrims resorted from every province, and a greater
number of human vi&ims were offered in its principal temple
than even in that of Mexico . Montezuma eeins to have in-
vited the Spaniards thither, either fronm ome ;'uperltitious hope
that the gods would not surfer this ihcred mansion to be defiled,
without pouring down their wrath upon those impious firangers,
who ventured to insult their power in the place of its peculiar
reiidence, or from a belief that he himself might there attempt
to cut them off with more certain iucccls, under the immediate
protedion of his divinities.

CORTES had been warned by the TlaCcalans, before he set The everity

out on his march, to keep a watchful eye over the Cholulans. d ureh tre.r
He himself, though received into the town with much eeming
refpecQ and cordiality, observed everal circumstances in their
conduct which excited ufpicion. Two of the Tl;iiclans, who
were encamped at some diflance from the town, as the Cho-
lulans refused to admit their ancient enemies within its prc-
cindts, having found means to enter in dilguife, acquainted
Cortes, that they observed the women and children of the prin-
cipal citizens retiring in great hurry every night; and that fix
children had been acrificecl in the chief temple, a rite which
indicated the execution of some warlike enterprise to be ap-
proaching. At the fame time, Marina te interpreter received
information from an Indian woman of di(lincion, whnl'e con-
fidence flhe had gained, that the deftrucion, of her friends w;ls

q Torquemnda Monar. Ind. i. 281, z8z. ii. 291. Gomara Cron. c. 6. Ilrlc'n,
dec. z. lib. vii. c. 2.

concrtcd ;

47

B 0 0 K concerted; that a body of Mexican troops lay concealed near

V.

--- 쨌 the town; that some of the streets were barricaded, and in
'159' others, pits or deep trenches were dug, and slightly covered

over, as traps into which the horse might fall; that stones and
missive weapons were collected on the tops of the temples,
with which to overwhelm the infantry ; that the fatal hour was
now at hand, and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of the chief
priests, and extorted from them a confeflion that confirmed the
intelligence which he had received. As not a moment was to
be loft, he instantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
flit on them such dreadful vengeance as might firike Monte-
zuma and his fubjeas with terror. For this purpose, the Spa-
niards and Zempoallans were drawn up in a large court, which
had been allotted for their quarters near the centre of the town;
the Tlafcalans had orders to advance; the magifirates, and fe-
veral of the chief citizens, were sent for under various pretexts,
and seized. On a signal given, the troops rushed out, and fell
upon the multitude, destitute of leaders, and so much afto-
nifhed, that the weapons dropped from their hands, and they
flood motionless, and incapable of defence. While the Spa-
niards pressed them in front, the Tlafcalans attacked them in
the rear. The fireets were filled with bloodshed and death.
The temples, which afforded a retreat to the priests and some
of the leading men, were set on fire, and they perished in the
flames. This scene of horror continued two days; during
which, the wretched inhabitants suffered all that the defirudive
rage of the Spaniards, or the implacable revenge of their Indian
allies, could inflit. At length the carnage ceased, after the
slaughter of fix thousand Cholulans, without the loss of a ingle
Spaniard. Cortes then released the magiilrates, and reproach-

ing
48

ing them bitterly for their intended treachery, declared, that n 0 0 I
as jufiice was now appeased, he forgave the offence, but re- ----
quired them to rccal the citizens who hd lied, and re-eftabllifh ' '
order in the town. Such was the ascendant which the Spa-
niards had acquired over this superstitious race of men, and
so deeply were they imprefcid with an opinion of their fupcrior
discernment, as well as power, that, in obedience to this com-
mand, the city was in a few days filled again with people, who,
amidst the ruins of their sacred buildings, yielded refipccful
service to men whose hands were slained with the blood of tlieir
relations and fellow-citizens .

FROMI Cholula, Cortes advanced direlly towards Mexico, on. z9.

which was only twenty leagues diflant. In every place througlh I,,arsMlxi.
which he pafied, he was received as a person poflfcfi'l of flii- co.
cient power to deliver the empire from the opprecfion under
which it groaned; and the caziqucs or governors, with the un-
reserved confidence reposed in superior beings, communicated
to him all the grievances which they felt under the tyrannical
government of Montezuma. When Cortes firfi obfcrved the
feeds of discontent in tle remote provinces of the empire, a ray
of hope broke in upon his mind ; but when lie discovered such
symptoms of alienation from their monarch near the leat of go-
vernment, he concluded that the vital parts of the conflitution
were affedcd, and conceived the most sanguine expecations of
overturning a slate whoSe natural frength was thus divided and
impaired. While those renedions encouraged the general to
persist in his arduous undertaking, the soldiers were no lets
animated by observations mior obvious to their capacity. In

' Cortes Rclat. Rmuir. iii. z31. B. I.i.tz. c. 3, Gomara Cron. c . I-Icrlcin,
dc:. z. lib. vii. c. , . Scc NuTE Xll.

VOL. .
II. II dcccndling

49

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B oO K descending from the mountains of Chalco, across which the

V. -.-v-' road lay, the vast plain of Mexico opened gradually to their
Firrt L.ev of view. When they first beheld this profped, one of the mo[t

firiking and beautiful on the face of the earth; when they ob-
served fertile and cultivated fields, stretching farther than the eye
could reach; when they aw a lake resembling the sea in extent,
encompassed with large towns, and discovered the capital city,
riling upon an iland in the middle, adorned with its temples.
and turrets; the scene so far exceeded their imagination, that
some believed the fanciful descriptions of romance were realized,
and that its enchanted palaces and gilded domes were presented.
to their fight; others could hardly persuade themselves that:
this wonderful pedacle was any thing more than a dream ..
As they advanced, their doubts were removed, but their amaze-
ment increased. They were now fully satisfied that the country
was rich beyond any conception which they had formed of it,
and flattered themselves, that at length they hould obtain an,
ample recompeace for all their services and sufferings.

The irrefola. No enemy had yet appeared. to oppose their progress, though;
lion of Mon.
zuma. several circumstances occurred which led them to fufped that

some design was formed to surprise and cut them. off. Many
messengers arrived successively from Montezuma, permitting
them one day to advance, requiring them on the next to retire,
as his hopes or fears alternately prevailed; and so wonderful
was this infatuation, which seems to be unaccountable on any
supposition but that of a fuperflitious dread of the Spaniards, as
beings of a superior nature, that Cortes was almolt at the gates.
of the capital, before the monarch had determined whether to
receive him as a friend, or to oppose him as an enemy. But as no.

' See NOT XJII.
Q nrsiga

sign of open hostility appeared, the Spaniards, without regarding B 0 v K
the fluctuations of Montezuma's sentiments, continued their --
march along the causeway which led to Mexico through the lake, 's519
with great circumfpeCion and the ltri&eft discipline, though with-
out seeming to fufpet the prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thousand persons, Hi firt inter

view with th

who appeared to be of diflintion, came forth to meet them, Spaniards.
adorned with plumes, and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each
of these, in his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted him ac-
cording to the mode deemed most refpeaful and fulmiffive in
their country. They announced the approach of Montezuma
himself, and oon after his harbingers came in fight. There
appeared first two hundred persons in an uniform dress, with
large plumes of feathers, alike in fashion, marching two and
two, in deep silence, barefooted, with their eyes fixed on the
ground. These were followed by a company of higher rank,
in their most showy apparel, in the midst of whom was Mon-
tezuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented with gold, and
feathers of various colours. Four of his principal favourites
carried him on their shoulders, others supported a canopy of
curious workmanship over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their hands, which they
lifted up on high at certain intervals, and at that signal all
the people bowed their heads, and hid their faces, as unwor-
thy to look on so great a monarch. When he drew near,
Cortes dismounted, advancing towards him with officious hafle,
and in a rcfpedQful poflure. At the fame time Montczuma
alighted from his chair, and leaning on the arms of two of his
near relations, approached with a flow and flatcly pace, his
attendants covering the street with cotton.cloths, that he might

H 2 not

Sr

B ),0 rK not touch the ground. Cortes accofled him with a profound
---.-. _, reverence, after the European fashion, He returned the fa-

lutation, according to the mode of his country, by touching
the earth with his hand, and then kifling it. This ceremony,
the customary exprefiion of reverence from inferiors towards
tliofe who wcre above them in rank, appeared such amazing
condefccnfion in a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to
confidcr the reft of mankind as of the fame ipecies with himself,
that all his ilbjeds firmly belicved those )pcrfons, before whom
he humbled himself in this manner, to be something more than
human. Accordingly, as they marched through the crowd,
the Spaniards frequently, and with much fatisfadion, heard
thcmefelves denominated T7l'les, or divinities. Nothing mate-
rial pafidc in this firfi interview. Montezuma condudted Cortes.
to the quarters which he had prepared for his reception, and
immediately took leave of him, with a politeness not unworthy
of a court more refined. " You are now," fays he, " with
your brothers, in your own house; refrefli yourselves after.
your fatigue, and be happy until I return '." The place allot-
ted to the Spaniards for their lodging was a house built by the
father of Montezuma. It was surrounded by a flone-wall, with.
towers at proper distances, which served for defence as well as
for ornament, and its apartments and courts were so large as
to accommodate both the Spaniards and their Indian allies.
The firlt care of Cortes was to take precautions for his security,
by planting the artillery so as to command the different avenues
which lcd to it, by appointing a large division of his troops to
be always on guard, and by polling ccntinels at proper flations,
with injundlions to observe the fatme vigilant dilfiplinc as if they
v'crc within light of an enemy's camp.

' Cortcs Rclar. Ram i. i 2i . 232-23. .Diaz, c, 83-88. Gomara Cron. c. 6.1,
(5, Il'rrcri, dtc 2. lib, vii. c. 3, .1, 5.

IN
52

I the evening Montezuma returned to visit his guests with B 째 째 K

the fame pomp as in their first interview, and brought presents '---'
of fuich value, not only to Cortes and to his officers, but even to t- li -.of
the private men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to ble thcS,:lr.:Ird".
suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A long conference cn-
sued, in which Cortes learned what was the opinion of Monte-
zuma with refpeQ to the Spaniards. It was an eflablilicd tradi-
tion, he told him, among the Mexicans, that their anceflors came
originally from a remote region, and conquered the provinces nov
fubijed to his dominion; that after they were fettlcd there, the
great captain who condued this colony returned to his own
country, promising, that at some future period his defccnlants
Ihould visit them, assume the government, and reform their con-
flitution and laws; that, from what lie had hcard and fccn of
Cortcs and his followers, he was convinced that they were the
very persons whose appearance their traditions and prophecies
taught them to expecqt; that accordingly lie had received them,
not as firangers, but as relations of the fame blood and paren-
tage, and desired that they might confider thcmfelves as mafiers
in his dominions, for both himself and his fublljcs flould be
ready to comply with their will, and even to prevent their
wishes. Cortes made a reply in his ufuial ftilc witl refpedr to
the dignity and power of his fovecrign, and his intention in
Iendling him into that country; artfully cideavouring lo to
frame his discourse, that it might coincide as much as poiile
with the idea which Montezuma had formed concerning the
origin of the Spaniards. Next morning, Cortes and some of
his principal attendants were admitted to a public audience of
the emperor. The three fubfequcnt ldays ere employed int
viewing the city; the appearance of which, so fiar fuplerir it
the order of its buildings and the number of its iilLbitant to

7 any

53

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B 0 0 any place the Spaniards had beheld in America, and yet so little

resembling the ftrudure of an European city, filled them with
ES9- ifurprife and admiration.

MEXICO, Tenuchtitlan as it was anciently called by the

natives, is situated in a large plain, environed by mountains
of such height, that, though within the torrid zone, the tem-
쨌perature of its climate is mild and healthful. All the moisture
which descends from the high grounds is collected in several
lakes, the two largefi of which, of about ninety miles in cir-
cuit, communicate with each other. The waters of the one
are fresh, those of the others brackiih. On the banks of the
latter, and on rome fnall islands adjoining to them, the capital
of Montezuma's empire was built. The access to the city was
by artificial causeways or streets, formed of flones and earth,
about thirty feet in breadth. As the waters of the lake du-
ring the rainy season overflowed the flat country, these cause-
ways were of considerable length. That of Tacuba on the
weft extended a mile and a half; that of Tezeuco on the north-
weft three miles; that of Cuoyacan towards the south fix
miles. On the east there was no causeway, and the city could
be approached only by canoes ". In each of these causeways
were openings at proper intervals, through which the waters
flowed; and over these beams of timber were laid, which
being covered witl earth, the causeway or fireet had every-
where an uniform appearance. As the approaches to the city
were lingular, its conftlruiion was remarkable. Not only the
temples of their gods, but the houfcs belonging to the monarch,
and to pcrfons of diflindion, were of such dimensions, that,
in comparirfon with any other buildings which had been dif-
쨌covered in America, they might be termed magnificent. The

F, Toi ribio MS.

habitations

habitations of the common people were mean, resembling the B 0o K
huts of other Indians. But they were all placed in a regular ---
manner, on the banks of the canals which patsed through the S
city, in some of its diftrils, or on the fides of the fireets which
interfedted it in other quarters. In several places were large
openings or squares, one of which, allotted for the great
market, is said- to have been so spacious, that forty or fifty
thousand persons carried on traffic there. In this city, the
pride of the New World, and the noblest monument of the
industry and art of man, while unacquainted with the use of
iron, and destitute of aid from any domestic animal, the Spa-
niards, who are most moderate in their computations, reckon,
that there were at leaf sixty thousand inhabitants x.

BUT how much soever the novelty of those objecs might Their dan-

~erous iituaa

amuse or astonish the Spaniards, they felt the utmost solicitude ton.
with refpea to their own situation. From a concurrence of
circumstances, no less unexpected than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed' to penetrate into the heart of a
powerful kingdom, and' were now lodged in its capital,
without having once met with open oppoition from its mno-
narch. The Tlafcalans, however, had earnestly dissuaded them
from placing such confidence in Montezuma as to enter a city
of such a peculiar situation as Mexico, where that prince would
have them at mercy, flhut up as it were in a Inare, from which,
it was impossible to escape. They assured him that the Mex-
ican prielts had, in name of the Gods, counselled their fovc-
reign to admit the Spaniards into the capital, that, he lliglt

x Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 239. D. Rclat. dcla gran citta de Mexico, par un Gentel*
lhiomo del Corcefe. Ram. ibid. 304. E. Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 14, &c.

CUt:

55S

* 0o K cut them off there at one blow with perfect security . They

. n--.--i now perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of their al-
';' hlies were not deflitute of foundation; that, by breaking the

bridges placed at certain intervals on the causeways, or by dc-
flroying part of the causeways themselves, their retreat would be
rendered impracticable, and they must remain cooped up in the
centre of a hoflile city, surrounded by multitudes sufficient to
overwhelm them, and without a poflibility of receiving aid
fiom their allies. Montezuma had, indeed, received them with
diftinguifled refpec. But ought they to reckon upon this as
real, or to confider it as feigned ? Even if it were sincere,
could they promise on its continuance ? Their safety depended
upon the will of a monarch in whose attachment they had no
reason to confide', and an order flowing from his caprice, or a
word uttered by him in passion, might decide irrevocably con-
cerning their fate Z.

S,l^(u TIJESE reflecions, so obvious as to occur to the meanest
i,) otCu.)t. soldier, did not escape the vigilant sagacity of their general.

Befor e

he et out from Cholula, Cortes had received advice

from Villa Ric.a", that Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican ge-
nerals on the frontiers, having assemblcd an army in order to
attack ome of the people whom the Spaniards had encouraged
to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched out with
part of the garrifbn to support his allies; that an engagement
had cnfued, in which, though the Spaniards were vicorious,
Efcalante, with seven of his men, had been mortally wounded,
his horse killed, and one Spaniard had been surrounded by the
enemy and taken alive; that the head of this unfortunate cap-
Y B. Diaz. c. RS, 86. z Ibid. c. 9. a Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 235. C.

tive,
S3

tive, after being carried in triumph to different cities, in order B O0 K

V.

to convince the people that their invaders were not immortal,
had been ent to Mexico b. Cortes, though alarmed with this '9
intelligence, as an indication of Montezuma's hoffile intentions,
had continued his march. But as oon as he entered Mexico,
he became sensible, that, from an excels of confidence in the fu-
perior valour and discipline of his troops, as well as from the
disadvantage of having nothing to guide him in an unknown
country, but the defedtive intelligence which he received from
people with whom his mode of communication was very inper-
fed, he had pushed forward into a situation, where it was dif-
ficult to continue, and from which it was dangerous to retire.
Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain consequence of at-
tempting the latter. The success of his enterprifc depended
upon supporting the high opinion which the pcople of New
Spain had formed with refped to the irrcfifiible power of his
arms. Upon the first symptom of timidity on his part, their
veneration would cease, and Montezuma, whom fear alone re-
firained at present, would let loose upon him the whole force
of his empire. At the fame time, he knew that the counte-
nance of his own fovercign was to be obtained only by a scrics
of vicorics, and that nothing but the merit of extraordinary
success could screen his condu from the ccnulre of irregularity.
From all tlhee considerations, it was neccfilury to maintain his
fation, and to extricate himself out of tle diflicultics in which
one bold fep had involved him, by venturing upon another
fill bolder. The situation was trying, but his mind was equal
to it; and after revolving the matter with deep) attention, lie
fixed upona plan no less extraordinary than daring. 1 e pro-

b B. Diaz. c. 93, 94. Herrcra, dec. . lil. viii. c. i.
VOL. II.

pocfed
1

B 째0 K posed to seize Montezuma in his palace, and to carry him as a

V.

'-- ~-- ' prisoner to the Spanish quarters. From the superstitious venera-
Resolve to tion of the Mexicans for the person of their monarch, as well as

ze Monte- their implicit submission to his will, he hoped, by having Mon-
zuma.

tezuma in his power, to acquire the supreme direction of their
affairs; or at least, with such a sacred pledge in his hands, he
made no doubt of being secure from any effort of their viot
lence.

His manner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers. The timid
of executing
this. g artled at a measure so audacious, and raised objections. The

more intelligent and resolute, conscious that it was the only
resource in which there appeared any profped of safety, warmly
approved of it, and brought over their companions so cordially
to the fame opinion, that it was agreed instantly to make the
attempt. At his usual hour of viiiting Montezuma, Cortes
went to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Saudoval, Lugo,
Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his principal officers,
and as many trusty soldiers. Thirty chosen men followed, not
in regular order, but sauntering at ome diflance, as if they
had no object but curiosity; finall parties were posted at proper
intervals, in all the fireets leading from the Spanish quarters to
the court; and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlafcalan
allies, were under arms, ready to ally out on the first alarm.
Cortes and his attendants were admitted without suspicion; the
Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of respect. He addressed the
monarch in a tone very different from that which he had em-
ployed in former conferences, reproaching him bitterly as the
author of the violent assault made upon the Spaniards by one of
his officers, and demanded public reparation for the loss which
he had fultained by the death of ome of his companions, as

well
58

well as for the insult offered to the great prince whose servants B O
0 K

V.

they were. Montezuma, confounded at this unexpected accu- -
fation, and changing colour either from consciousness of guilt, '159'
or rom feeling the indignity with which he was treated, as-
ferted his own innocence with great earnestness, and as a proof
of it, gave orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca and his accom-
plices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied, with seeming com-
plaifance, that a declaration so respectable left no doubt remain-
ing in his own mind, but that something more was requisite to
satisfy his followers, who would never be convinced that Mon-
tezuma did not harbour hostile intentions against them, unless,
as an evidence of his confidence and attachment, he removed
from his own palace, and took up his residence in the Spanifl
quarters, where he should be served and honoured as became
a great monarch. The firfl mention of so strange a proposal
bereaved Montezuma of speech, and almost of motion. At
length, indignation gave him utterance, and he haughtily an-
fwered, " That persons of his rank were not accustomed volun-
tarily to give up themselves as prisoners, and were he mean
enough to do so, his subjeCts would not permit such an affront
to be offered to their sovereign." Cortes, unwilling to employ
force, endeavoured alternately to soothe and to intimidate him.
The altercation became warm; and having continued above
three hours, Velasquez de Leon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Why waste more
time in vain ? Let us either seize him instantly, or flab him to
the heart." The threatening voice and fierce gestures with
which these words were uttered, struck Montezuma. The Spa-
niards, he was fenfiblc, had now proceeded so far, as left him
no hope that they would recede. His own danger was immi-

1 nclr,

59

B 0 0 K nent, the neceflity unavoidable. He saw both, and aban-

. n--i.n

doning himself to his fate, complied with their request.

1519.

Mlonltzuma His officers were called. He communicated to them his re-
cari:,l to die
Spanifi lar- solution. Though astonished and afflited, they presumed not
tcrs. to question the will of their mailer, but carried him in silent

pomp, all bathed in tears, to the Spanili quarters. When it was
known that the firangers were conveying away the emperor,
the people broke out into the wildest transports of grief and
rage, threatening the Spaniards with immediate destruction, as
the puniihment justly due to their impious audacity. But as
soon as Montezuma appeared with a seeming gaiety of counte-
nance, and waved his hand, the tumult was hushed, and upon
his declaring it to be of his own choice that he went to reside
for rome time among his new friends, the multitude, taught to
revere every intimation of their sovereign's pleasure, quietly
dispersed '.

Tr4U was a powerful prince seized by a few strangers, in

the midst of his capital', at noon-day, and carried off as a pri-
soner without opposition or bloodshed. -iflory contains no-
thing parallel to this event, either with respeCt to the temerity
of the attempt, or the success of the execution; and were not
all the circumfiances of this extraordinary tranfation authenti-
eated by the most unquestionable evidence, they would appear
so wild and extravagant, as to go far beyond the bounds of that
verisimilitude which muff be preserved even in fictitious narra-
tions.

c B. Diaz. c. 95. Gomara Cron. c. 83, Cortes Rclat. iam. iii. p. 23, 236.

IHerrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. z, 3.
6o

MONTEZUMA
7

MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish quarters with all

the ceremonious refped which Cortes had promilic. Ile was
attended by his own domestics, and served with his usual state.
His principal officers- had free access to him, and he. carried on
all the funtions of government as if he had been at perfect
liberty. The Spaniards, however, watched him with all
the scrupulous -vigilance natural in guarding such an important
prize ', endeavouring at the fame time to booth and reconcile
him to his situation, by every external demonfration of rcgard
and attachment. But from captive princes the hour of humi-
liation and suffering is never far (iflant. Quailpopoca, his son,
and five of the principal officers who served under him, were
brought prisoners to the capital, in consequence of the orders
which Montezuma had iued. The emperor gave ihem up to
Cortes, that he might inquire into the nature of their crime,
and determine their punifhnmcut. They were formally tried
by a Spanish court-martial; and though they had ated no
other part than what became loyal fubjeas and brave men, in
obeying the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in opposing
the invaders of their country, they were condemned to be burnt
alive. The execution of such atrocious deeds is fcldlom long
suspended. The unhappy victims were inlantly led forth.
The pile on which they were laid was composed of the weapons
collected in the royal magazine for the public defence. An
innumerable multitude of Mexicans bcheld, in silent aflonifli-
ment, the double insult offered to the majesty of their empire,
an officer of diftintion committed to the flames by the autho-
rity of firangers, for having done what he owed in duty to lis
natural fovcreign; and the arms provided by the forcfiglt of

' Sce NOTE XIV.

thcir

6r
BOOK

V.

1519.

Received
with ppircnt

Sabj.ted to
crurl indig-
nlilies.
Dic. 4-

B oo 0K their ancestors for avenging such wrongs, consumed before

V.

a -_ -their eyes.
1519,

BUT these were not the most hocking indignities which

they had to bear. Cortes, convinced that Qualpopoca wduld
not have ventured to attack Efcalan'te without orders from
his mailer, was not satisfied with inflicting vengeance on
the initrument employed in committing that crime, while the
author of it escaped with impunity. Just before Qualpopoca
was led out to susser, Cortes entered the apartment of Monte-
zuma, followed by ome of his officers, and a soldier carrying
a pair of fetters; and approaching the monarch with a fern
countenance, told him, that as the persons who were now to
undergo the punishment which they merited, had charged
him as the cause of the outrage committed, it was necessary
that he likewise should make atonement for that guilt; then
turning away abruptly, without waiting for a reply, com-
manded the soldiers to clap the fetters on his legs. The orders
were inflantly executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained
up with an idea that his person was sacred and inviolable, and
confidering this profanation of it as the prelude of immediate
death, broke out into loud lamentations and complaints. His
attendants, speechless with horror, fell at his feet, bathing
them with their tears; and bearing up the fetters in their hands,
endeavoured with officious tenderness to lighten their prelfure.
Nor did their grief and despondency abate, until Cortes re-
turned from the execution with a 'cheerful countenance, and
ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Montezuma's spirits
had funk with unmanly dejeaion, they now rose into indecent
joy; and with an unbecoming transition, he pased at once

from
62

from. the anguifli of despair to transports of gratitude and fond- B O K

V.
n1S& towards hiA deliverers.

1519.
IN thpfe tranfacions, as represented by the Spanish hifto- Reafonsof

Cortes's con.

rianpr we search in vain for the qualities which diflinguil du.s
other parts of Cortes's conduat. To usurp a jurisdiCtion which
could not belong to a f-anger, who assumed no higher cha-
raaer than that of an ambassador fror a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflic a capital punishment on men whose
conduc entitled them to esteem, appears an a of barbarous
cruelty. To put the monarch of a great kingdom in irons,
and, after such ignominious treatment, suddenly to release him,
seems to be a display of power no less inconsiderate than wan-
ton. According to their representation, no account can be
given either of the one aion or the other, but that Cortes, in-
toxicated with success, and presuming on the ascendant which
he had acquired over the minds of the Mexicans, thought no-
thipg too bold for him to undertake, or too dangerous to exe-
cute. But, in one view, these proceedings, however repug-
nant to justice and humanity, may have flowed from that artful
policy which regulated every part of Cortes's behaviour. The
Mexicans had conceived the Spaniards to be an order of beings
superior to men. It was of the utmost consequence to cherifl
this illusion, and to keep up the veneration it inspired. Cortes
wiihed that shedding the blood of a Spaniard should be deemed
the most heinous of all crimes; and nothing appeared better
calculated to establish this opinion, than to condemn the first
Mexicans who had ventured to commit it, to a cruel death,
and to oblige their monarch himeiflf to submit to a mortifying
indignity, as an expiation for being accessary to their guilt .

c See NOTE XV.

TiS
3

63

B 0 0 K THE rigour with which Cortes punished the unhappy per-
-----' sons who firfi presumed to lay violent hands upon his followers,
The pov'er seems accordingly to have made all the impression that he de-
aied'ortes fired. The pirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but

s1520 fuibdued. During fix months that Cortes remained in Mexico,

the monarch continued in the Spanish quarters, with an ap-
pearance of as entire fatisfatiion and tranquillity, as if he had
resided there not from constraint, but through choice. His
ministers and officers attended him as usual. He took cog-
nizance of all affairs; every order was issued in his name.
The external afpe of government appearing the fame, and
all' its ancient forms being scrupulously observed, the people
were so little sensible of any change, that they obeyed the man-
dates of their monarch with the fame submissive reverence as
ever. Such was the dread which both Montezuma and his
fubjeds had of the SFaniards, or such the veneration in which
they held them, that no attempt was made to deliver their
sovereign from confinement; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their minds, permit-
ted him not only to visit his temples, but to make hunting ex-
curfions beyond the lake, a guard of a few Spaniards carried
with it such terror as to intimidate the multitude, and secure
the captive monarch f.

Tiius, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in fcizing Mon-

tezuma, the Spaniards at once secured to themselves more exten-
five authority in the Mexican empire than it was poflible to
have acquired in a long course of time by open force; and
they exercised more abfolutc sway in the name of another than
they could have done in their own. The arts of poliffled

Co Lces Rlnt, p, 36. E. . Diaz. C. 5, , 9.

nations
64

nations in fubjeding such as are less improved, have been nearly B 0o K
the fame in every period. The system of screening a foreign --
usurpation, under the fanaion of authority derived from the 15Zo0
natural rulers of a country, the device of employing the ma-
giftrates and forms already eflablifled as infiruments to intro-
duce a new dominion, of which we are apt to boast as sublime
refinements in policy peculiar to the present age, were inven-
tions of a more early period, and had been tried with success
in the Weft, long before they were pratifed in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utmost of the power which Use which he

makes of it,

he possessed by this means. He sent ome Spaniards, whom
he judged best qualified for such commiflions, into different
parts of the empire, accompanied by persons of diflintion,
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them both as guides
and protenors. They visited mofi of the provinces, viewed
their foil and productions, surveyed with particular care the
diftriAs which yielded gold or silver, pitched upon several
places as proper stations for future colonies, and endeavoured
to prepare the minds of the people for submitting to the Spanifl
yoke. While they were thus employed, Cortes, in the name
and by the authority of Montezuma, degraded some of the prin-
cipal officers in the empire, whose abilities or independent spirit
excited his jealousy, and fubflituted in their place persons less
capable or more obsequious.

ONE thing still was wanting to complete his ecurity. He

wished to have such command of the lake as might ensure a re-
treat, if, either from levity or difgufl, the Mexicans should take
arms againf him, and break down the bridges or causeways. This,
too, his own address, and the facility of Montezuma, enabled him

VOL. II. K to

B 째0 K to accompliih. Having frequently entertained his prisoner with

V.

. -X---. pompous accounts of the European marine and art of navigation,
1520' he awakened his curiosity to fee those moving palaces that made

their way through the water without oars. Under pretext of
gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded him to appoint some
of his fubjeds to fetch part of the naval stores deposited at Vera
Cruz to Mexico, and to employ others in cutting down and
preparing timber. With their afliftance, the Spanish carpen-
ters soon completed two brigantines, which afforded a frivolous
amusement to the monarch, and were confidered by Cortes as a
certain resource, if he should be obliged to retire.

Montezuma ENCOURAGED by so many instances of the monarch's tame
acknow-
ledges him- submission to his evill, Cortes ventured to put it to a proof still
felfa vasal more trying. He urged Montezurna to acknowledge himself
of Spain.

a vassal of the king of Caflile, to hold his crown of him as fu-
perior, and to subjed his dominions to the payment of an
annual tribute. With this requisition, the last and molt hum-
bling that can be made to one possessed of sovereign authority,
Montezuma was so obsequious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn harangue, remind-
ing them of the traditions and prophecies which led them to e-
peat the arrival of a people sprung from the fame flock with
themselves, in order to take pofleffion of the supreme power, he
declared his belief that the Spaniards were this promired race;
that therefore he recognized the right of their monarch to govern
the Mexican empire, would lay his crown at his feet, and obey
him as a tributary. While uttering there words, Montezuma
discovered how deeply he was affected in making such a facri-
fice. Tears and groans frequently interrupted his discourse.
Overawed and broken as his spirit was, it fill retained such, a

ifnfc
66

sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which pierces the heart B 0\0 K
of princes when constrained to resign independent power. The ---
firfi mention of such a resolution struck the assembly dumb with I5Zo.
aflonifhment,* This was followed by a fullen murmur of for-
row mingled with indignation, which indicated ome violent
eruption of rage to be near at hand. This Cortes foresaw,
and seasonably- interposed to prevent it, by declaring that his
mafler had no intention to deprive Montezuma of the royal
dignity, or to make any innovation upon the constitution and
laws of the Mexican empire. This aurance, added to their
dread of the Spaninf power, and to the authority of their mo-
narch's example, extorted a reluctant content from the assem-
bly g. The aC of fbmiflion and homage was executed with
all the formalities which the Spaniards were pleased to pre-
scribe h.

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accompanied this pro- The amount

feflion of fealty and homage with a magnificent present to his sure collefed
new sovereign ; and, after his example, his fubjeds brought in by the Spa-
very liberal contributions. The Spaniards now collected all the
treasure which had been either voluntarily betlowed upon them
at different times by Montezuma, or had been extorted from his
people under various pretexts; and having melted the gold and
silver, the value of these, without including jewels and ornaments
of various kinds, which were preserved on account of their curious
worklnanlhip, amounted to fix hundred thousand p/bs. The fol- Divifon ofit,
diers were impatient to have it divided, and Cortes complied with nd the dif-

content it oc-

their desire. A fifth of the whole was firfl set apart as the tax cafioned.
due to the king. Another fifth was allotted to Cortes, as com-

g See NOlTE XVI. 1' Crtes Rclat. 238. D. B. D;a. c. io,. Gomara
Cro,, c. z. Ilerrcra, dec. z. lib. x. c. 4.

K 2

mandcr

B OO IK mander in chief. The fums advanced by Velasquez, by Cortes,

V.
--_-- anid by some of the officers, towards defraying the expence of

5 *0 fitting out the armament, were then deducted. The remainder

was divided among the army, including the garrison of Vera
Cruz, in proportion to their different ranks. After so many
defalcations, the share of a private man did not exceed a hun-
dred pesos. This fum fell so far below their sanguine expec-
tations, that some soldiers rejected it with scorn, and others
murmured so loudly at this cruel disappointment of their hopes,
that it required all the address of Cortes, and no small exertion
of his liberality, to appease them. The complaints of the army
were not altogether destitute of foundation. As the crown had
contributed nothing towards the equipment or success of the
armament, it was not without regret that the soldiers beheld it
sweep away so great a proportion of the treasure purchased by
their blood and toil. What fell to the share of their general
appeared, according to the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth cen-
tury, an enormous fum. Some of Cortes's favourites had fe-
cretly appropriated to their own use several ornaments of gold,.
which neither paid the royal fifth, nor were brought into ac-
count as part of the common flock. It was, however, so ma-
nifeftly the interest of Cortes at this period to make a large
remittance to the king, that it is highly probable those conceal-
ments were not of great consequence.

Rearons why THE total fum amafled by the Spaniards bears no proportion
gold was
found ti, fuclh to the ideas which might be formed, either by reflecting on the
fimall q;n- descriptions given by historians of the ancient splendour of

Mexico, or by confidering the productions of its mines in
modern times. But, among the ancient Mexicans, gold and
silver were not the standards by which the worth of other

commodities
68

commodities was etimated; and deflitute of the artificial value B 0 0 K

V.

derived from this circumstance, were no farther in request than ---
as they furnished materials for ornaments and trinkets. These
were either consecrated to the gods in their temples, or were
worn as marks of diftintion by their princes and some of their
most eminent chiefs. As the consumption of the precious me-
tals was inconsiderable, the demand for them was not such as
to put either the ingenuity or industry of the Mexicans on the
firetch, in order to augment their store. They were altogether
uracquainted with the art of working the rich mines with which
their country abounded. What gold they had was gathered in
the beds of rivers, native, and ripened into a pure metallic
slate'. The utmost effort of their labour in search of it was to
wash the earth carried down by torrents from the mountains,
and to pick out the grains of gold which subsided; and even
this simple operation, according to the report of the persons
whom Cortes appointed to survey the provinces where there
was a profpea of finding mines, they performed very unfkil-
fully k. From all those caufcs, the whole mass of gold in pof-
feflion of the Mexicans was not great. As silver is rarely found
pure, and their art was too rude to conduct the process for re-
fining it in a proper manner, the quantity of this metal was
fill less considerable'. Thus, though the Spaniards had ex-
erted all the power which they pofeffied in Mexico, and often
with indecent rapacity, in order to gratify their predominant
passion, and though Montezuma had fondly exhausted his stores,
in hopes of satiating their thirst for gold, the product of both,
which probably included a great part of the bullion in the em-
pire, did not rife in value above what has been mentioned"'.

Cortes Rclat. p. 236. F. B. Diaz. c. 102, 103. Gonara Cron. c. 9o.
k B. Diaz. c. 103. ' Herrera, dec. z. lib, ix. c. 4. See NOTE XVII.

BUT

B 0 0 K BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in other matters,

V.

_--.-- with refped to one point he was inflexible. Though Cortes

1 20.

Mniezuma often urged him, with the importunate zeal of a mifflonary,
intlexible
vith relpee to renounce his false gods, and.to embrace the Chriflian faith,
to religion. he always rejected the proposition with horror. Superflition,

among the Mexicans, was formed into such a regular and com-
plete system, that its institutions naturally took fat hol4 of the
mind; and while the rude tribes in other parts of America were
easily induced to relinquish a few notions and. rites, so loose
and arbitrary as hardly to merit the name of a public religion,
the Mexicans adhered tenaciously to their mode of worship,
which, however barbarous, was accompanied with fucli order
and solemnity as to render it the objea of-veneration. Cortes,
finding all his attempts ineffedual thake th:e conflancy of
Montezuma, was so much enraged at his ohftinacy, that in a
transport of zeal he led out his soldiers to throw down the
idols in the great temple by force. But the priests taking arms
in defence of their altars, and the people crowding with great
ardour to support them, Cortes's prudence overruled his zeal,
and induced him to defifl from his rash attempt, after diflodg-
ing the idols from one of the hrines, and placing in their stead
an image of the Virgin Mary ".

Schemes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had permitted the
the Mexicans
t. delloy the imprisonment of their sovereign, and suffered the exactions of
Spaniards. firangers without a firuggle, began to meditate how they

might expel or defiroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
called upon to avenge their insulted deities. The priests and
leading men held frequent consultations with Montezuma for

Sec NOTE XVIII.

this
7

this purpose. But as it might prove fatal to the captive mo- B o K

V.

narch to attempt either the one or the other by violence, he ..
was willing to try more gentle means, Having called Cortes 1520'
into his presence, he observed that now, as all the purposes of his
embassy were fully accommplifhed, the gods had declared their
will, and the people signified their desire that he and his follow-
ers hould instantly depart out of the empire. With this he re-
quired'thsn to comply, or unavoidable deftrution would fall
suddenly on their heads. The tenor of this unexpected requi-
fition, as well as the determined tone in which it was uttered,
left Cortes no room to doubt that it was the result of some deep
scheme concerted between Montezuma and his fubjedts. He
quickly perceived that he might derive more advantage from a
seeming conmliance with the monarch's inclination, than from
an ill-timed attempt todhange or to oppose it, and replied, with
great composure, that he had already begun to prepare for re-
turning to his own country; but as he had destroyed the vessels
in which he arrived, some time was requisite for building other
flips. This appeared reasonable. A number of Mexicans
were-fent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and ome Spanifi
carpenters were appointed to superintend the work. Cortes
flattered hirnfelf that during this interval, he might either find
means to avert the threatened danger, or receive such reinforce-
ments as would enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were elapsed since Portocarrero and Anxiety and

Montejo had failed with his dispatches to Spain; and he daily Cojes=.
cxpeced their return with a confirmation of his authority from
the king. Without this, his condition was insecure and pre-
carious, and after all the great things which he had done, it
might be his doom to bear the name and susser the punishment

3 of

71

B K of a traitor. Rapid and extensive as his progress had been, he

V.
v- _ could not hope to complete the reduction of a great empire with
'5Z" f fnall a body of men, which by this time the diseases of the

climate had considerably thinned; nor could he apply for re-
cruits to the Spanish settlements in the islands until he received
the royal approbation of his proceedings.

Tbe.rrival WHILE he remained in this cruel fituatibn, anxious about
ot alew ar- what was past, uncertain with refped to the future, and, by

the late declaration of Montezuma, oppressed with a new addi-
tion of cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an account of
some hips having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with fond
credulity, imagining that his messengers were returned from
Spain, and that the completion of all ly wishes ad hopes was
at hand, imparted the glad tidings to his companions, who re-
ceived them with transports of mutual gratulation. Their joy
was not of long continuance. A courier from Sandoval, whom
Cortes had appointed to succeed Efcalante in command at Vera
Cruz, brought certain information that the armament was fitted
out by Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and instead of bringing
the aid which they expected, threatened them with immediate
deftruafion.

lited out by TuE motives which prompted Velasquez to this violent mea-
Vc.-itlez. sure are obvious. From the circumstances of Cortes's depar-

ture, it was impossible not to fufpedc his intention of throwing
off all dependence upon him. His neglecing to tranimit any
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened this ffpicion,
which was at last confirmed, beyond doubt, by the indiscretion
of the officers whom Cortes ent to Spain. They, from some
motive, which is not clearly explained by the contemporary

2 hiRtorians,
7z

historians, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary to the per- B 0 O K

V.

emptory orders of their general 째. By this means Velasquez ,--'
not only learned that Cortes and his followers, after formally IjZ
renouncing all connection with him, had eflablifhed an indc-
pendent colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the king to
confirm their proceedings by his authority; but he obtained
particular information concerning the opulence of the country,
the valuabl presents which Cortes had received, and the invit-
ing profpets of success that opened to his view. Every pal-
son which can agitate an ambitious mind; hame, at having been
so grossly overreached; indignation, at being betrayed by the
man whom he had feleded as the objed of his favour and con-
fidence; grief, for having wafted his fortune to aggrandize an
enemy; and,4efpair of recovering so fair an opportunity of eta-
blifling his fame and extending his power, now raged in the
bosom of Velasquez. All these, with united force, excited him
to make an extraordinary effort in order to be avenged on the
author of his wrongs, and to wrest from him his usurped autho-
rity and conquests. Nor did he want the appearance of a good
title to justify such an attempt. The agent whom he sent to
Spain with an account of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a
most favourable reception; and from the specimens which he
produced, such high expecations were formed concerning the
opulence of New Spain, that Velasquez was authorised to pro-
fecute the discovery of the country, and appointed governor of
it during life, with more extensive power and privileges than
had been granted to any adventurer from the time of Co-
lumbus P. Elated by this distinguishing mark of favour, and
warranted to confider Cortes not only as intruding upon his

* B. Diaz. c. 54, 55. Herrern, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14. Gomara Chron. c. 96.
P Herrcra, dec. z. lib. iii. c. i.
VOL. II. L jurifdiaion,

73

BOOK

v. jurifdition, but as disobedient to the royal mandate, he deter-
-'-'--' mined to vindicate his own rights and the honour of his fove-

1520.

Under the reign by force of arms '. His ardour in carrying on his pre-
command of
Narvaez. parations was such as might have been expected from the vio-

lence of the passions with which he was animated; and in a
short time an armament was completed, consisting of eighteen
hips, which had on board fourscore horse-men, eight hun-
dred foot soldiers, of which eighty were musketeers, and a
hundred and twenty cross-bow men, together with a train of
twelve pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's experience of the
fatal confequcnc. of committing to another what he ought to
have executed himself, had not rendered him more enterprif-
ing, he vefted-the command of this formidable body, which;
in the infancy o the Spanish power in America, merits the
appellation of an army, iPamphilo de Narvaez, with inftruc-
tions to seize Cortes and his principal officers, to fend them pri-
foners to him, and then to complete the discovery and conquest-
of the country in his ame..

The proceed- AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed his men with-
ings of Ndr-
vacz. out opposition near St. Juan de Ullua. Three soldiers, whom

Apr'' Cortes had sent to fcarch for mines in that diftric&, immediately

joined him. By this accident, he not only received information
concerning the progress and situation of Cortes, but as these
soldiers had made some pr.ogress in the knowledge of the Mex-
ican language, he acquired interpreters, by whose means he
was enabled to hold ome intercourse with the people of the
country. But, according to the low cunning of deserters, they
framed their intelligence with more attention to what they
thought would be agreeable, than to what they knew to be true;

See NOTE XIX.

and
74

and represented the situation of Cortes to be so desperate, and B 째ov K
the disaffection of his fllowers to be so general, as increased -
the natural presumption and confidence of Narvaez. His firfl: 15'
operation, however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. H-aving ent to summon the governor
of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a pricfi whom he employ-
ed in that service, made the requisition with such insolence,
that Sandoval, an officer of high spirit, and zealously attached
to Cortes, instead of complying with his demands, seized him
and his attendants, and sent them in chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but as friends, and Cortes deeply

ali n cd.

condemning the severity of Sandoval, set them immediately at
liberty. By this well-timed clemency, seconded by carefles and
presents, he gained their confidence, and drew from them fucli
particulars concerning the force and intentions of Narvaez, as
gave him a view of the impending danger in its full extent.
He had not to contend now with half-naked Indians, no match
for him in war, and still more inferior in the arts of policy,
but to take the field against an army in courage and martial
discipline equal to his own, in number far superior, acting un-
der the fandtion of royal authority, and commanded by an
officer of known bravery. He was informed that Narvaez,
more solicitous to gratify the resentment of Velasquez, than at-
tentive to the honour or interest of his country, had begun his
intercourse with the natives, by representing him and his fol-
lowers as filgitives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion againfl their
own sovereign, and of injllice in invading the Mexican em-
pire, and had declared to them that his sole objct in visiting
the country was to punifil the Spaniards, and to rccue theic
from oppression. I-Ie 1(on perceived that the fime unfavour-

I 2 able

B o0 K able representations had been conveyed to Montezuma, and

V.

.-.--' that Narvaez had found means to afiure him, that as the conduc
1520. of those who kept him under restraint was highly displeasing to

the king his mafier, he had it in charge not only to rescue an
injured monarch from confinement, but to reinflate him in
the possession of his ancient power and independence. Ani-
mated with this profpe of being set free from fubjedion to
firangers, the provinces began openly to revolt from Cortes,
and to regard Narvaez as a deliverer no less able than willing
to save them. Montezuma himself kept up a secret intercourse
with the new commander, and seemed to court him as a person
superior in power and dignity to those Spaniards whom he had
hitherto revered as the firit of men B.

His delibera- SUCH were the various afpeds of danger and difficulty which
tions con-
cerning his presented themselves to the view of Cortes- No situation can
own condut. be conceived more trying to the capacity and firmness of a ge-

neral, or where the choice of the plan which ought to be adopt-
ed was more difficult. If he mhould wait the approach of Nar-
vaez in Mexico, deftruaion seemed to be unavoidable; for
while the Spaniards pressed him from without, the inhabitants,
whose turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on such a fa-
vourable opportunity of avenging all their wrongs. If he should
abandon the capital, set the captive monarch at liberty, and
march out to meet the enemy; he mufl at once forego the fruitc
of all his toils and vidories, and relinquish advantages which
could not be recovered without extraordinary efforts, and infi-
nite danger. If, instead of employing force, he liould have

Sea NOTT XX.

recourfc
76

recourse to conciliating measures, and attempt an accommoda- B O O K
tion with Narvaez; the natural haughtiness of that officer,. ---
augmented by consciousness of his present superiority, sorbad L20O
him to cherish any sanguine hope of success. After revolving
every scheme with deep attention, Cortes fixed upon that which,
in execution was. most hazardous, but, if successful, would
prove most beneficial to his country; and with the decisive in-
trepidity, suited to desperate situations, determined to make
one bold effort for vidcory under every disadvantage, rather
than sacrifice his own conquefls and the Spanish interest in
Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contest must be terminated Hisnegocii-

tions with the

finally by arms, it would have been not only indecent, but followers of
criminal, to have marched againfl his countrymen, without at- Narvaez.
tempting to adjufi matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to whose charaCter
the fundtion was well suited, and who possessed, besides, such
prudence and address as qualified him to carry on the secret
intrigues in which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Nar-
vaez rejected, with icorn, every scheme of accommodation that
Olmedo proposed, and was with difficulty refirained from lay-
ing violent hands on him and his attendants. I-e met, how-
ever, with a more favourable reception among his followers, to,
many of whom he delivered letters, either from Cortes or his
officers, their ancient friends and companions. Cortes artfully
accompanied thect with presents of rings, chains of gold, and
other trinkets of value, which inspired those needy adventurers
with high ideas of the wealth that he had acquired, and with.
envy of their good fortune who were engaged in his service.
Some, from hopes of becoming fharcrs in thole rich spoils, de-

clalcd

77

B 0 K dcared for an immediate accommodation with Cortes. Others,

V.

s-- fi:om public spirit, laboured to prevent a civil war, which,
'jO' .-whatever party hould prevail, must shake, and perhaps sub-

vert the Spanish power, in a country where it was so imper-
fedly eablifhed. Narvaez disregarded both, and by a public
proclamation denounced Cortes and his adherents rebelsand
enemies to their country. Cortes, it is probable, was not much
surprised at the untractable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific disposition as might
justify his recourse to other means, he determined to advance
towards an enemy whom he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marches a- HE left a hundred and fifty men in the capital, under the
gainlt him.

May. command of Pedr' de Alvarado, an officer of diltinguiflled cou-

rage, for whom the Mexicans had conceived a singular degree
of refped. To the custody of this slender garrison he commit-
ted a great city, with all the wealth he had araffed, and, what
was still of greater importance, the person of the imprisoned mo-
narch. His utmost art was employed in concealing fiomn Mon-
tezuma the real cause of his march. He laboured to persuade
him, that the firangers who had lately arrived were his friends
and fellow-fubjeds; an'd that, after a hort interview with
them, they would depart together, and return to their own
country. The captive prince, unable to comprehend the de-
signs of the Spaniards, or to reconcile what he now heard with
the declarations of Narvacz, and afraid to discover any fymptoni
of suspicion or diflruft of Cortcs, promilcd to remain quietly
in the Spanifll quarters, and to cultivate the fame fiiendflip
with Alvarado which he had uniformly maintained with him.
Cortes, with seeming confidence in this promise, but relying
.principally upon the injunclions which he had given Alvarado

i to
78

to guard his prisoner with. the most scrupulous vigilance, fct B O 0 K

V.
out from Mexico,_

His flrength, even after it was reinforced by the juncion of Number of

Sandoval and the garrison of Vera Cruz, did not exceed two his toops'
hundred and fifty men. As he hoped for success chiefly from
the rapidity of his motions, his troops were not encumbered
either with baggage or artillery. But as he dreaded extremely
the impression which the enemy might make with their cavalry,
he had provided against this danger with the foresight and fa-
gacity which distinguish a great commander. Having observcd
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla ud spears of ex-
traordinary length and force, he armed his soldiers with these,
and accustomed them to that deep and compac arrangement
which the use of this formidable weapon, the best perhaps that
ever was invented for defence, enabled them to assume.

WITH this small but firm battalion, Cortes advanced towards Continues to

Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had taken possession. During Yc'catca
his march, he made repeated attempts towards ome accommo-
dation with his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers should instantly recognize his title to be go-
vernor of New Spain, in virtue of the powers which he derived
from Velasquez, and Cortes rcfufing to submit to any autho-
rity which was not founded on a commiflion from the emperor
Pimfelf, under whose immediate protection he and his adhe-
rents had placed their infant colony, all these attempts proved
fruitless. The intercourfc, however, which this occasioncd
between the two parties, proved of no finall advantage to Cortes,
as it afforded him an opportunity of gaining ome of Narvacz's
officcrs by liberal prelfcnts, of softening others by a ilnblancc

of'

of moderation, and of dazzling all by the appearance of wealth
among his troops, mofl of his foldicrs having converted their
짙hare of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets, and other or-
naments, which they displaycd with military oflentation. Nar-
vaez and a little junto of his creatures excepted, all the army
leaned towards an accommodation 'with their countrymen.
This discovery of their inclination irritated his violent temper
almost to madness. In a transport of rage, he set a price upon
the head of Cortes, and of his principal officers; and having
learned that he was now advanced within a league of Zem-
poalla with his finall body of men, he considered this as an
insult which merited immediate chafiftement, and marched out
with all his troops to offer him battle.

-4

BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and experience

than to fight an enemy so far superior in number, and so much
better appointed, on equal ground. Having taken his flation
on the opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he knew
that he could not be attacked, he beheld the approach of the
enemy without concern, and disregarded this vain bravade.
It was then the beginning of the wet season t, and the rain had
poured down, during a great part of the day, with the violence
peculiar to the torrid zone. The follbwers of Narvaez, unac-
customed to the hardships of military service, murmured so
much at being thus fruitlessly exposed, that, from their unfol-
dier-like impatience, as well as his own contempt of his ad-
verfary, their general permitted them to retire to Zempoalla.
The very circumstance which induced them to quit the field,
encouraged Cortes to form a scheme, by which he hoped at
once to terminate the war. He observed, that his hardy vete-

t Hackluyt. vol. iii. 467. De Laet Defcr. Ind Occid. 221.
BOOK

V.

1520.

Attacks Nar-
vaez in the
night.

8o

4

rans,

rans, though standing under the torrents, which continued to B o
0 s

V.

fall, without a single tent or any flelter whatsoever to cover
them, were so far from repining at hardihips that were become 11'
familiar to them, that they were still frelh and alert for service.
He foresaw that the enemy would naturally give themselves tip
to repose after their fatigue, and that, judging of the conduc
of others by their own effeminacy, they would deem themnfelves
perfetly secure at a season so unfit for ation. He resolved,
therefore, to fall upon them in the dead of night, when the
surprise and terror of this unexpected attack might more than
compensate the inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers, fen-
fible that no resource remained but in some desperate effort of
courage, approved of the measure with such warmth, that
Cortes, in a military oration which he addressed to them before
they began their march, was more solicitous to temper than to
inflame their ardour. He divided them into three parties.
At the head of the first he placed Sandoval; entrusting this gal-
lant officer with the most dangerous and important service, that
of seizing the enemy's artillery, which was planted before the
principal tower of the temple, where Narvaez had fixed his
head-quarters. Chrifloval deOlid commanded the second, with
orders to assault the tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes
himself conduded the third and smallest division, which was to
adc as a body of reserve, and to support the other two as there
should be occasion. Having paflcd the river de Canoas, which
was much swelled with the rains, not without difficulty, the
water reaching almost to their chins, they advanced in profound
silence, without beat of drum, or found of any warlike inflru-
ment; each man armed with his sword, his dagger, and his
Chinanllan fpcar. Narvaez, remiss in proportion to his fccu-
rity, had polled only two ccntinels to watch the motions of an

VOL. . M ccnemy

B 0 K enemy whom he had such good cause to dread. One of these

V.
--,I --i wa's seizcd by the advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other

made his cfcape, and hurrying to the town with all the pre-
cipitation of fear and zeal, gave such timely notice of the
enemy's approach, that there was full leisure to have prepared
for their reception. But, through the arrogance and infatua-
tion of Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He imputed
this alarm to the cowardice of the centinel, and treated with
derision the idea of being attacked by forces so unequal to his
own. The shouts of Cortes's soldiers, ruffling on to the assault,
convinced him at last, that the danger which he despised was
real. The rapidity with which they advanced was such, that
only one cannon cpuld be fired, before Sandoval's party closed
with the enemy, drove them from their guns, and began to
force their way up the Ileps of the tower. Narvaez, no less
brave in ation than presumptuous in conduc, armed himself
in hafle, and by his voice and example animated his men to the
combat. Olid advanced to sustain his companions; and Cortes
himself, rushing to the front, conducted and added new vigour
to the attack. The compact order in which this small body
prefled on, and the impenetrable front which they presented
and over- with their long spears, bore down all opposition before it. They

os him, had now reached the gate, and were fir-uggling to burst it open,

when a soldier having ft fire to the reeds with which the towel
was covered, compelled Narvacz to sally out. In the firlt en-
counter he was wounded in the eye with a spear, and falling to
the ground, was dragged down the steps, and in a moment clapt
in fetters. The cry of victory rcfounded among the troops of
Cortes. Those who had sallied out with their leader now main-
tained the conflict feebly, or began to furrendcr. Among the re-
mainder of his soldiers, stationed in two finaller towers of the

temple,
82

temple, terror and confusion prevailed. The darkness was so great, B 0 0 K
that they could not diflinguifh between their fiends and foes. '-
Their own artillery was pointed against them. Wherever they 1sZO.
turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleaming through the ob-
fcurity of night, which, though proceeding only from a variety
of shining infecs, that abound in moist and sultry climates,
their affrighted imaginations representcd as numerous bands of
mufketcers advancing with kindled matches to the attack. As-
ter a Ihort reffrtance, the ioldiers compelled their officers to
capitulate, and before morning all laid clown their arms, and
submitted quietly to their conquerors.

THIS complete victory proved more acceptable, as it was Thlccfles of

gained almost without bloodshed, only two soldiers being killed t'l5vi:"'r'
on the fide of Cortes, and two officers, with fifteen private men,
of the adverse faction. Cortes treated the vanquished not like
enemies, but as countrymen ant friends, and offered either to
fend them back directly to Cuba, or to take them into his ervice,
as partners in his fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers.
This latter proposition, seconded by a seasonable diftiibution of
some prefcnts from Cortes, and liberal promises of more, opened
profpecs so agreeable to the romantic expetations which had
induced them to engage in tlis service, that all, a few partizans
of Narvacz excepted, cloced with it, and vied with each other
in profcfions of fidelity and attachmncnt to a general wholle re-
cent fuiccels had givcn thmi fch a firiking proof of his abili-
ties for command. Thus, by a series of events no lcfs for-
tunatc than uncommon, Cortes not only escapcd fi-om perdition
wlicli fccmcd inevitable, lbu t, when lie had leans reason to cx-
)pc'l it, was placed at ti hc;ad of a thoufiafd Spaniiards, ready
to follow vhllercver lie Illould lead them. \VWhoever rIclects

M 2 lI1)u

83

B o0 K upon the facility with which this vicory was obtained, or con-

V.
- ---- - fiders with what sudden and unanimous transition the followers
5!0Za of Narvaez ranged themselves under the standard of his rival,

will be apt to ascribe both events as much to the intrigues as
to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufpedc that the ruin of
Narvaez was occasioned, no less by the treachery of his own
followers, than by the valour of his enemy .

TheMexicans BUT, in one point, the prudent condua and good fortune
take arms
against the of Cortes were equally conspicuous. If, by the rapidity of his
Spaniards.

Span operations after he began his march, he had not brought mat-

ters to such a speedy issue, even this decisive victory would
have come too late to have saved his companions whom he left
in Mexico. A few days after the discomfiture of Narvaez, a
courier arrived with an account that the Mexicans had taken
arms, and having seized and defiroyed the two brigantines, which
he had built in order to secure the command of the lake, had
attacked the Spaniards in their quarters, had killed several of
them and wounded more, had reduced to ashes their magazine
of provisions, and carried on hostilities with such fury, that,
though Alvarado and his men defended themselves with un-
daunted resolution, they must either be soon cut off by famine,
or fink under the multitude of their enemies. This revolt was
excited by motives which rendered it still more alarming. On
the departure of Cortes for Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered
themselves, that the long-expeced opportunity of refloring
their sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating their country from
the odious dominion of firangers, was at length arrived; that
while the forces of their oppressors were divided, and the arms

I, Cortes Rclat. . 4 . D. B. Diaz. c. Ilo,-~ z IIerrcra, dec, z. lib.ix. c. 18,
&c. Gomara Cron. c. 97, &c.

2 of
84

of one party turned against the other, they might triumph with B O K
greater facility over both. Consultations were held, and schemes, I
formed with this intention. The Spaniards in Mexico, con- I5zo.
fcious of their own feebleness, fuilfced and dreaded those
machinations. Alvarado, though a gallant officer, possessed.
neither that extent of capacity, nor dignity of manners, by
which Cortes had acquired such an ascendant over the minds of
the Mexicans, as never allowed them to form a just estimate of
his weakness or of their own strength. Alvarado knew no mode
of upporting his authority but force. Instead of employing
address to disconcert the plans or to sooth the spirits of the
Mexicans, he waited the return of one of their solemn festivals,
when the principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to custom, in the court of the great temple; he seized
all the avenues which led to it, and, allured partly by the rich.
ornaments which they wore in honour of their gods, and partly
by the facility of cutting off at once the authors of that con-
fpiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them, unarmed and
unfufpicious of any danger, and massacred a great number,.
none escaping but such as made their way over the battlements
of the temple. An aion so cruel and treacherous filled not
only the city, but the whole empire, with indignation and
rage. All called aloud for vengeance ; and regardless of the
safety of their monarch, whose life was at the mercy of the
Spaniards, or of their own danger in afTaulting an enemy who
had been so long the objed of their terror, they committed all
those acts of violence of which Cortes received an account.

To him the danger appeared o imminent, as to admit nei- nic marche

ther of deliberation nor delay. Ile ft out infllantly wit all capi tal
his forces, and returned from Zermpoalla with no lts rapidity

than

B 0o K than he had advanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by

._^_-- two thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexican ter-
1520' ritories, he found that difaffeation to the Spaniards was not

confined to the capital. The principal inhabitants had deserted
the towns through which he pafied ; no person of note appear-
ing to meet him with the usual refpet; no provision was made
for the fubfitlence of his troops; and though he was permitted
to advance without opposition, the solitude and silence which
reigned in every place, and the horror with which the people
avoided all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-rooted an-
tipathy, that excited the most jult alarm. But, impiacable as
the enmity of the Mexicans was, they were so unacquainted
with the science of war, that they knew not how to take the
proper meafurea, either for their own safety or the dcltrution
of the Spaniards. UninftruQed by their former error in ad-
mitting a formidable enemy into their capital, instead of break-
ing down the causeways and bridges, by which they might
have inclosed Alvarado and his party, and have effetually
June 24. flopt the career of Cortes, they again suffered him to march

into the city without molel-ation, and to take quiet poffeflion
of his ancient station.

Improper TIHE transports of joy with which Alvarado and his soldiers
c(nuit of e
Coltes. received their c mpanions cannot be cxprefced. Both parties

were Ib much elat d, the one with their fialbnable deliverance,
and the otlier with the great exploits wlich they had atchicvcd,
that this inloxication of fuccels lccmis to have so far reached
Cortes him lfli, tliat lie behaved ol this occasion neilher with
his ntJfal Ilgacity nor attention. lie not only ncglcccd to vie t
M\lontceziin, but cinl)itterecd tle inflult by cxpreflions f11 of
contempnt fr that unfortunate prince ad l llis people. 1 he

x fsorces
86

fbrces of which he had now the command, appeared to him so B o0 K
irresistible, that he might assume an higher tone, and lay alfde _--,
the mask of moderation, under which he had hitherto concealed 1520.
his designs. Some Mexicans who understood the Spanifi lan-
guage, heard the contemptuous words which Cortes uttered,
and reporting them to their countrymen, kindled their rage
anew. They were now convinced that the intentions of the
general were equally bloody with those of Alvarado, and that
his original purpose in visiting their country, had not been, as
he.pretended, to court the alliance of their fovcrcign, but to at-
tempt the conquest of his dominions. They resumed tleir arms Thle io!'nt

ho:hility rnf

with the additional fury which this discovery inspircd, attacked tlc Mvci-
a considerable body of Spaniards who were marching towards Cl":
the great square in which the public market was held, anl
compelled them to retire with some loss. Emboldened by this
success, and delighted to ind that their oppressors were not in-
vincible, they advanced next day with extraordinary martial
pomp to afTault the Spaniards in their quarters. Their number
was formidable, and their undaunted courage Hill more so.
Though the artillery pointed against their numerous battalions,
crouded together in narrow streets, swept off multitudes at every
discharge; though every blow of the Spanifi weapons fell
with mortal effec- upon their naked bodies, the impctuolity of
the assault did not abatc. Frefl mnci rulcld forward to occupy
the places of the llain, and meetingr witl the fme fate, were
succeeded by others no less intrepid and eager on vcngcnce.
The utmost effcorts of Cortes's abilities and experience, fccondled
by the difcilplincl valour of his troops, were hardly filTi'icnt
to defend their fortifications, into which the CenCIy e\'rc Inrc
than once on the point of forcing tlicir way.

87

B 0 0 K CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable ferocity of a

V.

k--4-_ people, who seemed at firfl to submit tamely to the yoke, and
Diarelorf had continued so long passive under it. The soldiers of Nar-
the Spaniards. vaez, who fondly imagined that they followed Cortes to share

in the poils of a conquered empire, were astonished to find
that they were involved in a dangerous war, with an enemy
'whose vigour was flill unbroken, and loudly execrated their
own weakness, in giving such easy credit to the delusive pro-
miles of their new leader . But surprise and complaints were
of no avail. Some immediate and extraordinary effort was re-
quifite to extricate themselves out of their present situation. As
soon as the approach of evening induced the Mexicans to retire,
in compliance with their national cuflom of ceasing from hofili-
ties with the setting fun, Cortes began to prepare for a ally,
with such a considerable force, as might either drive the ene-
my out of the city, or compel them to liften to terms of accom-
modation.

Cortes at- HE conducted, in person, the troops detined for this im-
tacks them
without fuc. portant service. Every invention known in the European art
cers. of war, as well as every precaution, suggested by his long ac-

quaintance with the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared and deter-
mined to oppose him. The force of the Mexicans was greatly
augmented by fresh troops, which poured in continually from
the country, and their animosity was in no degree abated.
They were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhortations of
their priests, and fought in defence of their temples and fami-
lies, under the eye of their gods, and in presence of their wives

' 3. Diaz. c. 126.

and
88

and children. Notwithstanding their numbers, and enthufi- B 0O K
aftic contempt of danger and death, wherever the Spaniards i--
could close with them, the filperiority of their discipline and o20'.
arms obliged them to give way. But in narrow fireets, and
where many of the bridges of communication were broken
down, they could seldom come to a fair rencounter, and the Spa-
niards, as they advanced, were exposed to howers of arrows
and stones from the tops of the houses. After a day of incef-
sant exertion, though vast numbers of the Mexicans fell, and
part of the city was burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the
slaughter, and harassed by multitudes which successively reliev-
ed each other, were obliged at length to retire, with the morti-
fication of having accomplished nothing so decisive as to com-
penfate the unusual calamity of twelve soldiers killed, and above
sixty wounded. Another ally, made with greater force, was
not more effecual, and in it the general himself was wounded
in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal error into which Montezuma

ain.

he had been betrayed by his own contempt of the Mexicans,
and was satisfied that he could neither maintain his present fta-
tion in the centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it without
the most imminent danger. One resource still remained, to
try what effect the interposition of Montezuma might have to
tooth or overaw his fubjets. When the Mexicans approached
next morning to renew the'affault, that unfortunate prince, at
the mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced to the fad neceflity of
becoming the infirument of his own disgrace, and of the fla-
very of his people Y, advanced to the battlements in his royal

y Sec NOTE XXr.

89
VoIL. I.

N

robes,

B 0 0 K robes, and with all the pomp in which he used to appear omu

V,
cI. fQlemn occasions. At fight of thei sovereign, whom they had.

1520. long been accuflomed to honour, and almost to revere as a god,.

the weapons dropt from their hands, every tongue was silent,,
all bowed their heads, and many profirated themselves on the-
ground. Montezuma addressed them with every argument
that could mitigate their rage, or persuade them to cease fiom,
hostilities. When. he ended his discourse, a. fuilen. murmur of
disapprobation run through the croud ;. to this. succeeded re-
proaches and threats; and their fury rising in a moment above.
every restraint of decer.cy or refped, flights of arrows and vol-
leys of stones poured in so violently upon the ramparts, that
before the Spanish soldiers, appointed. to. cover Montezuma.
with. their buckleis, had time to lift them. in his defence, two.
arrows wounded the unhappy monarch,. and.the blow ofa ftona
on his temple struck him to the ground. On foeing him fall,,
the Mexicans were so much astonished, that, with a tranfitionr
not uncommon in popular tumults, they passed in a moment
from one extreme to the other., remorse succeeded to insult, and:
they fled with horror, as if the vengeance.of Heaven were pur-
fling the crime which they had committed. The Spaniards,,
without molestation, carried Montezuma to his apartments,.
and Cortes hastened thither to console him .under his misfortune.
But the unhappy monarch now perceived how low he was funk,.
and the haughty spirit which seemed to have been to long. ex-
tin.&, returning, he scorned to surviv-e this last humiliation, and.
to protraS an ignominious life, not only as- the prisoner andc
tool of his enemies, but as the objed of contempt or dctefta-
tion among his iibjeds. In a transport- of rage he tore the
bandages from his wounds, and reflfed, with such obflinacy,,
to take any nourihmcnt, that he foon.enjed his wretched days,,

rcjeaing,

rejecing with disdain all the solicitations of the Spaniards to B OVO K
,embrace tlhe'Chriftian farth.

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes 'having loft all hope New con-

of bringing the Mexicans to any accommodation, saw no pro- 1''
fpectof safety but in attempting a retreat, and began to prepare
for it. But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him in
new conflics. They took poffcflion of a high tower i the
great temple which overlooked the Spanish quarters, and plac-
ing there a garrison of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard
could fir without being exposed to their miflile weapons.
From this pofl it was necessary to dislodge them at any rilk,
and Juan de Efcobar, with a numerous detachment of chosen
soldiers, was ordered to make the attack. But Esgobar, though
a gallant officcr, and at the head of troops accuflomed to con.
quer, and who now fought under the eyes of their country-
men, was tlrice repulsed. Cortes, sensible that not only the
reputation but the safety of his army depended on the fucccfs
of this assault, ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he
could not manage it with his wounded hand, and ruhecd with
his drawn sword into the thickest of the combatants. Encou-
raged by the presence of their general, the Spaniards returned to
the charge with such vigour, that they gradually forced their
way up the fleps, and drove the Mexicans to the platform at
the top of the tower. There a dreadful carnage began, when
two young Mlexicans of high rank, obfcrving Cortes as he ani-
mated his soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to facri-
lice their own lives in order to cut o the author of all the
calamities which desolated their country. They approached
him in a supplicant poflure, as if they had intended to lay
down their arms, and seizing him in a moment, hurried him

N z towards

9r

B 00 K towards the battlements, over which they threw themselves

V.
---- ' headlong, in hopes of dragging him along to be dashed in
1' 째' pieces by the fame fall. But Cortes, by his strength and agility,

broke loose from their grasp, and the gallant youths perished
in this generous, though unsuccessful, attempt to save their
country. As oon as the Spaniards became masters of the
tower, they set fire to it, and without farther moleflation,
continued the preparations for their retreat.

The Spani- THIS became the more necessary, as the Mexicans were so
ards abandon
the city. much astonished at the last effort of the Spanilh valour, that

they began to change their whole system of hostility, and in-
stead of inceffanj attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the
streets, and breaking down the causeways, to cut off the com-
munication of the Spaniards with the continent, and thus to
starve an enemy whom they could not subdue. The first point
to be determined, was whether they should march out openly
in the face of day, when they could discern every danger, and
fee how to regulate their own motions, as well as how to resist
the assaults of the enemy; or whether they should endeavour
to retire secretly in the night. The latter was preferred, partly
from hopes that their national superstition would refrain the
Mexicans from venturing to attack them in the night, and
partly from their own fond belief in the predictions of a
private soldier, who having acquired universal credit by a
finattering of learning, and his pretensions to atrology, boldly
assured them of ficcefs, if they made their retreat in this man-
ner. They began to move, towards midnight, in three divi-
sions. Sandoval lcd the van; Pedro Alvarado, and Velasquez
de Ieon, had the conduct of the rear; and Cortes commanded
in the centre, where he placed the prisoners, among whom

were
92

were a son and two daughters of Montezuma, together with B o0 K
several Mexicans of diftindion, the artillery, the baggage, and ---
a portable bridge of timber, intended to be laid over the 152
breaches in the causeway. They marched in profound silence
along the causeway which led to Tacuba, because it was flortcr
than any of the reft, and, lying most remote from the road to-
wards Tlafcala and the ea coast, had been left more entire by
the Mexicans. They reached the first breach in it without
molestation, hoping that their retreat was undiscovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only watched all Attacked by

the Mexicans,

their motions with attention, but had made proper dispositions
for a morl formidable attack. While the Spaniards were intent
upon placing their bridge in the breach, and occupied in con-
duding their horses and artillery along it, they were suddenly
alarmed with the tremendous found of warlike instruments,
and a general shout from an innumerable multitude of enemies;
the lake was covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and showers
of flones poured in upon them from every quarter; the Mcxi-
cans ruhing forward to the charge with fearless impetuosity,
as if they hoped in that moment to be avenged for all their
wrongs. Unfortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight of
the artillery, was wedged so fast into the floncs and mud, that
it was impossible to remove it. Dismayed at this accident, the
Spaniards advanced with precipitation towards the second
breach. The Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide, and
though they defended themselves with their usual courage, yet
crouded together as they were on a narrow cauftiway, their dif
cipline and military fiill were of little avail, nor did the obfcu-
rity of the night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the superiority of their other weapons. All

3 Mexico

B 0 0 K Mexico was now in arms, and so eager were the people on the de-

V.

-_-. - . truaion of their oppressors, that they who were not near enough
'520. to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay, pressed forward

'ith such ardour, as drove on their countrymen in the front with
ir-refiible violence. Fresh warriors instantly filled the place of
filch as fell. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and un-
able to fuflain the weight of the torrent that poured in upon
them, began to give way. In a moment the confusion was
universal; horse and foot, officers and soldiers, friends and
enemies, were mingled together; and while all fought, and
many fell, they could hardly diftinguilh from what hand the
blow came.

Their dif- C')RTES, wich about a hundred foot soldiers and a few horse,
alters, forced his way over the two remaining breaches in the cause-

way, the bodies of the dead serving to fill up the chasms, and
reached the main land. Having formed them as oon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capable of service,
to aflift his friends in their retreat, and to encourage them, by
his pretence and example, to persevere in the efforts requisite
to effet it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had broke
through the enemy, but found many more overwhelmed by
the multitude of their aggressors, or perishing in the lake; and
heard the piteous lamentations of others, whom the Mexicans,
having taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be facri-
siced to the god of war. Before day, all who had escaped as-
fembled at Tacuba. But when.the morning dawned, and dif-
covered to the view of Cortes his hattered battalion, reduced to
lels than half its number, the survivors dejected, and molt of
them covered with wounds, the thoughts of what they had
suffered, and the remembrance of so many faithful friends and

~~~~* gallant
94

gallant followers who had fallen in that night of sorrow ", B K
pierced his foul with such anguish, that while he was forming --.---
their ranks, and issuing ome aeceffary orders, his soldiers ob- 5
served the tears trickling from his eyes, and remarked, with
much fatisfaaion, that while attentive to the duties of a gene-
ral, he was not insensible to. the feelings of a man..

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diflinCion perished 3 an loss.

and among these Velasquez de Leon, who having forsaken the
party of his kinsman, the governor of Cuba, to follow the for-
tune of his companions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpeaed by them as the second person in
the army. All' the artillery, ammunition, and baggage, were
loft; the greater part of the horses, and above two thousand;
Tlafcalans, were killed, and' only a very finall portion of the-
treasure which they had amafled was saved. This, which hadf
been always their chief objec, proved now a great cause of their
calamity; for many of the soldiers having so overloaded them-
selves with bars of gold as rendered them unfit for action, an&
retarded their flight, fell, ignominiouffy, the vidims of their
own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so many difalters, it was.
fime consolation to find that Aguilar and Marina, whose funclion.
as interpreters was. of such essential. importance, had made their
efcapc _

THEi sirs care of Cortes was to find some hclter for hia. rDin;lcu rr-

trt ;i' thle

wearied troops; for as the Mexicans infcftcd them on every s1iil;ai,:.
fide, and the people of Tacuba began to take arms, he could

NorlA rifte is the nme by which it is (ill dininguiflcd in New Sllain,
Sce NOTIE XXII. b Coltei l'cl

R .. p. .1. . i.lz. c. 12S
Comnara Cion.. c. to). Herrr.a, doc. .. lib. x. c. i , .

not

95

B 째o K not continue in his present flation. He direced his march to-

_.- --' wards the rising ground, and having fortunately discovered a

temple situated on an eminence, took possession of it. There
he found not only the shelter for which he wished, but, what
was no less wanted, ome provisions to refreif his men; and
though the enemy did not intermit their attacks throughout the
day, they were with little difficulty prevented lIom making any
impreflion. During this time Cortes was engaged in deep con-
fultation with his officers, concerning the route which they
ought to take in their retreat. They were now on the weft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where they could
hope for a friendly reception, lay about fixty-four miles to the
east of Mexico c; so that they were obliged to go round the
north end of the 1lake before they could fall into the road which
led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be their guide,
and conduced them through a country in some places marshy,
in others mountainous, in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled.
They marched for fix days with little respite, and under con-
tinual alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering around
them, sometimes harassing them at a distance with their mif-
file weapons, and ometimes attacking them closely in front, in
rear, in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew that they
were not invincible. Nor were the fatigue and danger of those
incessant confliCts the worfi evils to which they were exposed.
As the barren country through which they passed afforded hardly
any provisions, they were reduced to feed on berries, roots,
and the stalks of green maize; and at the very time that famine
was depressing their spirits and wafting their flrength, their
situation required the most vigorous and unremitting exertions
of courage and ativity. Amidst those complicated distresses,

c Villa Segnor Teatro Anmeicano, lib. ii. c. .

OL1C
96,

97

one circumstance supported and animated the Spaniards. Their o0o K
commander sustained this fad rverfe of fortune with unshaken ,--,--
magnanimity. I-is presence of mind never forsook him; his j:3
sagacity foresaw every event, and his vigilance provided for it.
He was foremofi: in every danger, and endured every hardfip
with checrfulncfs. The difficulties with which he was fur-
rounded seemed to call forth new talents; and his soldiers,
though despairing thermelves, continued to follow him with
increasing confidence in his abilities.

ON the sixth day they reached Otumba, not far from the road Battle of O

between Mexico and Tlafcala. Early next morning they be-uba
gan to advance towards it, flying parties of the enemy still
hanging on their rear; and amidst the insults with which they
accompanied their hostilities, Marina remarked that they often
exclaimed with exultation, " Go on, robbers; go to the place
where you fllall quickly meet the vengeance due to your
crimes." The meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not com-
prehend, until they reached the summit of an eminence before
them. There a spacious valley opened to their view, covered
with a vast army, extending as far as the eye could reach.
The Mexicans, while with one body of their troops they ha-
rafled the Spaniards in their retreat, had afninllcd their prin-
cipal force on the other fide of the lake ; and nmarching; along
the road which led dirc.lly to Tlafcala, postcd it in the phlin
of Otumlba, through which they knew Cortes must parSs. At
tlhe filgt of tlis incredible multitude, which thecy c,)'!:1 filr-
vey at once 0fom1 tle rising ground, the Spaniards were n;l,-
nifhcd, and even the boldlcl- began to dcfjir. But C r!tic
without allowing Icifurc for their ftears to acltlirC Itlhgtil lby
refletion, aftcr warning them briefly that no alhernative now

VOL. II. 0 reIlmaiciC

B 0 0 K remained but to conquer or to die, led them instantly to the

V.
----- charge. TheMexicans waited their approach with unusual forti-
tl20' ttlde. Such, however, was the superiority of the Spanish difci-

pline and arms, that the impreflion of this small body was irre-
fiftible; and whichever way its force was directed, it penetrated
and dispersed the moit numerous battalions. But while these
gave way in one quarter, new combatants advanced from an-
other, and the Spaniards, though successful in every attack,
were ready to fink under those repeated efforts, without feeing
any end of their toil, or any hope of victory. At that time
Cortes observed the great tfandard of the empire, which was
carried before the Mexican general, advancing; and fortunately
recollecting to have heard, that on the fate of it depended the
event of every battle, he assembled a few of his bravest officers,
whose horses were still capable of service, and placing himself
at their head, pushed forward towards the standard with an
impetuosity which bore down every thing before it. A chosen
body of nobles, who guarded the fandard, made ome resist-
ance, but were oon broken. Cortes, with a firoke of is
lance, wounded the Mexican general, and threw him to the
ground. One of his followers alighting, put an end to his life,
and laid hold of the imperial standard. The moment that their
leader fell, and the standard, towards which all direced their
eyes, disappeared, an universal panic firuck the Mexicans, and,
as if the bond which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away his wea-
pons, and all fled with precipitation to the mountains. The
Spaniards, unable to pursue them far, returned to collec the
spoils of the field, which were o valuable as to be some com-
penfation for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for in
the enemy's army were most of their principal warriors, drefled

out
98

out in their richest ornaments, as if they had been marching to B 0 0 K

V.
assured victory. Next day, to their great joy, they entered ,

I zo.
the Tlafcalan territories d.July .

Bur, amidst their fatisfation in having got beyond the pre- Reception of

cinds of an hostile country, they could not look forward with- jn, TlSlac a!
out solicitude, as they were still uncertain what reception they
might meet with from allies, to whom they returned in a con-
dition very different from that in which they had lately set out
from their dominions. Happily for them, the enmity of tile
Tlafcalans to the Mexican name wxas to inveterate, their desire
to avenge the death of their countrymen ib vehement, and
the ascendant which Cortes had acquired over the.chiefs of the
republic so complete, that, far from entertaining a thought of
taking any advantage of the distressed situation in which they
beheld the Spaniards, they.reccived them with a tenderness and
cordiality which quickly diflipated all their suspicions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was now abfo- New dlite-

lutely necessary; not only that the Spaniards might give atten- Cortes.
tion to the cure of their wounds, which had been too long
neglected, but in order to recruit their strength, exhausted by
such a long succession of fatigue and hardflips. During this,
Cortes learned that he and his companions were not the only
Spaniards who had felt the effects of the Mexican enmity. A
considerable detachment, which was marching from Zempoalla
towards the capital, had been cut off by the people of Tepeaca.
A finallcr party, returning from Tlafcala to Vcra Cruz, with the

.d Cortes Rclat. p, 219. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gorara Crcn. c. o. Ilcrrcra, dec. z.

lib, x.
x . 1 z 13.

0 2

share

B 0 0 K share of the Mexican gold allotted to the garrison, had been-

V.
_ .__ .surprised and defroyed in the mountains. At a juncture when
5210. the life of every Spaniard was of importance, such losses were

deeply felt. The schemes which Cortes was meditating ren-
dered them peculiarly afflicive to him. While his enemies,
and even many of his own followers, confidered the disasters
which had befallen him as fatal to the progress of his arms,
and imagined that nothing now remained but speedily to
abandon a country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perseverance as for enterprise, was
flill bent on acconplilhing his original purpofLe, of subject-
ing the Mexican empire to the crown of Caflile. Severe and
unexpeced as the check was which he had received, it did
not appear to hll a sufficient reason for relinquishing the con-
quests which he had already made, or against resuming his
operations with better hopes of success. The colony at Vera
Cruz was not only safe, but had remained unmolefled. The
people of Zempoalla and the adjacent difirits had discovered
no symptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans continued faithful
to their alliance. On their martial spirit, easily rouzed to
arms, and inflamed with implacable hatred of the Mlexicans,
he depended for powerful aid. He had fill the command of
a body of Spaniards, equal in number to that with which he
had opened his way into the centre of the empire, and had
taken pfl'effion of the capital; so that witl the benefit of
greater experience, as well as more pcrfcd& knowicdge of the
country, lie did not despair of quickly recovering all that he
had been deprived of by untoward events.

Tle mernnfircs FLL Los this idea, le courted the Tlafcalan clicfs with fuchi
he Likci. attcntion, and difiributed among them Ib libcrally the rich spoils

I- of

of Otumba, that he was secure of obtaining whatever he hould B O K
require of the republic. He drew a small supply of ammuni- ---,
tion, and two or three field-pieces, from his stores at Vera 1520.
Cruz. He dispatched an officer of confidence with four hips
of Narvaez's fleet to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adven-
turers, and to purchafc horses, gunpowder, and other military
stores. As lid knew that it would be vain to attempt the re-
dution of Mexico, unless lie could secure the command of the
lake, he gave orders to prepare in the mountains of Tlafcala
materials for building twelve brigantines, so as they might be
carried thither in pieces ready to be put together, and launched
when he flood in need of their service .

BuT while, with provident attention, he was taking those Mi iinousfrpi-

rit of his

neceflary fleps towards the execution of his measures, an ob- trops.
itacle arole in a quarter where it was leafi expeaed, but most
formidable. The iirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were planters
rather than soldiers, and had accompanied him to New Spain
with anguine hopes of obtaining settlements, and little inclina-
tion to engage in the hardlhips and dangers of war. As the
fame motives had induced them to enter into their new engage-
ments witl Cortes, they no sooner became acquainted with the
nature of the rvice, than they bitterly repented of their choice.
Such of tlicem as hadl tle ood fortune to survive the perilous
adventures in which their own imprudnce had involved them,
happy in having mandle their cfcapc, trembled at the thoughts
of being exposcd a cond timie to iniilar calamities. As soon
as they ilcovercd the intention of Cortes, they began secretly

C Cortes Rclat. p. 3, E, Goniar Cron. c. 17.

Co

10!

B 0 0 K to murmur and cabal, and waxing gradually more audacious,

V.
'q-v - they, in a body, offered a remonstrance to their general a.gainst

the imprudence of attacking a powerful empire with his hattered
forces, and formally required him to lead them back direOtly
to Cuba. Though Cortes, long praififed in the arts of com-
mand, employed arguments, entreaties, and presents, to con-
vince or to ooth them; though his own soldiers, animated with
the spirit of their leader, warmly seconded his endeavours; he
found their fears too violent and deep-rooted to be removed,
and. the utmost he could effe&L was to prevail with them to defer
their.depart.ure for some time, on a promise that he would, at
a more proper juncture, difinifs such as should defre it.

Means he THAT the malcontents might have no leisure to brood over
employs to
revive thtr the causes of their difaffedion, he resolved inflantly to call
confidence. forth his troops into action. He proposed to chastise the people

of Tepeaca for the outrage which they had committed, and as
the detachment which they had cut off happened to be com-
posed mostly of soldiers who had served under Narvaez, their
companions, from the desire of vengeance, engaged more wil-
Augul. lingly in this war. He took the command in person, accom-

panied by a numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the space of
a few weeks, after various encounters, with great slaughter of
the Tepeacans, reduced that province to fubjedion. During
several months, while he waited for the supplies of men and
ammunition which he expected, and was carrying on.his pre-
parations for conftruting the brigantines, he kept his troops
conflantly employed in various expeditions against the adjacent
provinces, all of which were conducted with an uniform tenor
of success. By these, his men became again accustomed to vic-
tory, and refuned their wonted sense of superiority; the Mex-

9 ican
.IP

ican power was weakened; the Tlafcalan warriors acquired the B K

V.

habit of acting in conjuncion with the Spaniards; and the
chiefs of the republic delighted to fee their country enriched 1sZC.
with the spoils of all the people around them, and astonished
every day with fresh discoveries of the irresistible prowess of
their allies, declined no effort requisite to support them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however, though the Strengthened
most prudent and efficacious which the situation of Cortes al- y ifeveralre-

inforcements.

lowed him to make, would have been of little avail, without a
reinforcement of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply
sensible, that it was the chief object of his thoughts and wiihes;
and yet his only profped of obtaining it from the return of the
officer whom he had sent to the isles to solicit aid, was both
diflant and uncertain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
power could have procured, he owed to a series of fortunate
and unforeseen incidents. The governor of Cuba, to whom the
success of Narvaez appeared an event of infallible certainty,
having ent two small ships after him with new inftrucions
and a supply of men and military flores, the officer whom
Cortes had appointed to command on the coast, artfully decoy-
ed them into the harbour of Vera Cruz, seized the vessels, and
easily persuaded the soldiers to follow the standard of a more
able leader than him whom they were dcftined to join '. Soon
after, three fiips of more considerable force came into the har-
bour separately. These belonged to an armament fitted out by
Francisco de Garay, governor of Jamaica, who, being possessed
with the rage of discovery and conqcueft which animated every
Spaniard fettled in America, had long aimed at intruding into

f B. Diaz. c. 131.

Io3

BO K some diftrid of New Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glory

V.

----' 'and gain of annexing that empire to the crown of Castile.
1520. They unadvisedly made their attempt on the northern pro-

vinces, where the country was poor and the people fierce and
warlike; and, after a cruel fucceflion of disasters, famine com-
pelled them to venture into Vera Cruz, and call themifelves
OoLer zS. upon the mercy of their countrymen. Their fidelity was not

proof againtf the splendid hopes and promises which had fe-
dueed other adventurers, and as if the spirit of revolt had been
contagious in New Spain, they likewise abandoned the mailer
whom they were bound to serve, and inlifted under Cortes .
Nor was it America alone that furnished such unexpected aid.
A hip arrived from Spain, freighted by some private merchants
with military flores, in hopes of a profitable market in a coun-
try, the fame of whose opulence began to spread over Europe.
Cortes eagerly purchased a cargo which to him was invaluable,
and the crew, following the general example, joined him at
Tlafcala h

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cortes was aug-

mented with an hundred and eighty men, and twenty horses,
a reinforcement too inconsiderable to produce any consequence
which would entitle it to have been mentioned in the history
of other parts of the globe. But in that of America, where
great revolutions were brought about by causes which seemed
to bear no proportion to their effects, fucl finall events rife
into importance, bccaufe they were sufficient to decide with
rcfpeal to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the least remarkable
inltance of the singular felicity conspicuous in any pafiiges

짙 Cortes Rclat. 253, F. B. Diaz. c. 133. h Ibid. c. 136.

of
J104

of Cortes's flory, that the two persons chiefly infirumental in B 0째o K
furnishing him with those seasonable supplies should be an - _
avowed enemy who aimed at his deitruction, and an envious 1520.
rival who wished to supplant him.

THE firfl effea of the juntion with his new followers was

to enable him to dismiss ich of Narvaez's soldiers as remained Number of
with reluEtance in his service. After their departure, he fill hisforces.
mustered five hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourscore
were armed with muskets or cross-bows, forty horsemen, and
a train of nine field-pieces'. At the head of these, accompa-
nied by ten thousand Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians,
Cortes began his march towards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth
of December, fix months after his fatal retreat from that
ity k.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unprepared to re-
ceivehim. Upon the death of Montezuma, the Mexican chiefs, Preparations

of he Mex-

in whom the right of eleaing the emperor was vested, had in- icans fort-heir
ftantly raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. His avowed defelce.
and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards, would have been fuffi-
cient to gain their suffrages, although he had been les diflin-
guithed for courage and capacity. -Ie had an immediate
,opportunity of flicwing that: lie was worthy of their choice,
by conducting, in person, tloC icrce attacks which compelled
the Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as soon as their retreat
afforded him any refpitc fromn ation, lie took mcafilrcs for
preventing their return to Mexico, witl prudence equal to the
ipirit which he had dilplayed in driving them out of it. As

I Cortes Relat. z25, E. . l' Rclat 256, A. B. Diaz . c. 137.
VoL. II.

Io5
1'

froml

B 0 0 K from the vicinity of Tlafcala, he could not be unacquainted with

V.
짬 --' the motions and intentions of Cortes, he observed the storm that

I1 Z was gathering, and began early to provide against it. He re-

paired what the Spaniards had ruined in the city, and strength-
ened it with such new fortifications as the skill of his fubjeats
was capable of erecing. Beside filling his magazines with the
usual weapons of war, he gave diretion to make long spears
headed with the swords and daggers taken from the Spaniards,
in order to annoy the cavalry. He summoned the people in
every province of the empire to take arms againtf their oppref-
fors, and as an encouragement to exert themfclves with vigour,
he promised them exemption from all the taxes which his prede-
ceffors had imposed '. But what he laboured with the greatest
earnestness was, to deprive the Spaniards of the advantages which
they derived from the friendflip of the Tlafcalans, by endea4'
vouring to persuade that people to renounce all connetion with
men who were not only avowed enemies of the gods whom they
worshipped, but who would not fail to subjea them at last to
the fame yoke, which they were now inconsiderately lending
their aid to impose upon others. These representations, no less
iriking than well-founded, were urged so forcibly by his am-
baffadors, that it required all the address of Cortes to prevent
their making a dangerous imnpreffion m"

BUT while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan of defence,

with a degree of foresight, uncommon in an American, his
days were cut lhort by the small-pox. This distemper, which
raged at that time in New Spain with fatal malignity, was

t Cortes Relat. p. 253, E. 254, A. B. Diaz. c. 14. B. Diaz. c. 129.

Ilerrcrn, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 14. 19.
io6

unknown
5

unknown in that quarter of the globe, until it was intro- B o째V K
duced by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among
the greatest calamities brought upon them by their invaders. 15z.
In his stead the Mexicans raised to the throne Guatimozin,
nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma, a young man of fich
high reputation for abilities and valour, that in this dangerous
crisis, his countrymen, with one voice, called him to the fu-
preme command ".

As oon as Cortes entered the enemy's territories, he disco- 121.

Co! tei ad-

vered various preparations to obflruEt his progress. But his v.:ices ,-
troops forced their way with little difficulty, and took poleflion C'Or' MCx-
of Tezeuco, the second city of the empire, situated on the
banks of the lake about twenty miles from Mexico 째. Here
he determined to eflablifil his head-quarters, as the most pro-
per station for launching his brigantines, as well as for making
his approaches to the capital. In order to render his residence
there more secure, he deposed the cazique or chief, who was at
the' head of that community, under pretext of some defect in
his title, and substituted in his place a person whom a faction of
the nobles pointed out as the right heir of that dignity. At-
tached to him by this benefit, the new cazique and his adhe-
rents served the Spaniards with inviolable fidelity'.

As the conflruaion of the brigantines advanced slowly under i- op.ra-

tions flow ad

the unskilful hands of soldiers and Indians, whom Cortes was cautious.
obliged to employ in assisting three or four carpenters who
happened fortunately to be in his service, and as he had not
yet received the reinforcement which he expected from Hifipa-

' B. Diaz. c. i ;o. o Villa Scnor Theatro Americano, i. r56. P Cortes
Rclat. 256, &c. B. Diaz. c. 137. GornaraCron. . 121, Herrcrn, dec. 3. . i.

P 2 niola,

107

B 0 0K niola, he was not in a condition to turn his arms direaly

V.
-,,- against the capital. To have attacked a city so populous, so짙

ILZ* well prepared for defence, and in a situation of such peculiar

flrcngth, mufl have exposcd his troops to inevitable deftruc-
tion. Three months elapsed before the materials for construct-
ing the brigantines were finifled, and before he heard any
thing with refpe& to the success of his negociation in His-
paniola. This, however, was not a season of ination to
Cortes. He attacked fiuccffively several of the towns situated
around the lake, and though all the Mexican power was ex-
erted to obftrud his operations, he either compelled them to
fubmit'to the Spanish crown, or reduced them to ruins. Other
towns he endeavoired to conciliate by more gentle means, and
though he could not hold any intercourse with the inhabitants
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under all the dif-
advantage of that tedious and imperfect mode of communica-
tion, he had acquired such thorough knowledge of the state of
the country, as well as of the dispositions of the people, that
he conduaed his negociations and intrigues with astonishing
dexterity and success. Most of the cities adjacent to Mexico were
originally the capitals of finall independent flates; and some of
them having been but lately annexed to the Mexican empire,
fill retained the remembrance of their ancient liberty, and bore
with impatience the rigorous yoke of their new maflers.
Cortes having early observed symptoms of their difaffedion,
availed himself of this knowledge to gain their confidence and
fiicndflip. By offering, with confidence, to deliver them from
the odious dominion of the Mexicans, and by liberal promises
of more indulgent treatment, if they would unite with him,
against their opprelfors, he prevailed on the people of fcveral
confidecrable dilrid's not only to acknowledge the king ofCaflile

a~
Io0

as their overeign, but to fipply the Spanish camp with pro- B 0 lK
visions, and to firengthen his army with auxiliary troops. I_,_
Guatimozin, on the first appearance of defection among his '"'
fubjedts, exerted himself with vigour to prevent or to punish
their revolt; but in spite of his efforts, the spirit continued to
spread, The Spaniards gradually acquired new allies, and with
deep concern he beheld Cortes arming against his empire those
very hands which ought to have been active in its defence;
and ready to advance against the capital at the head of a nume-
rous body of his own fubjeds .

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was gradually

circumscribing the Mexican power, within such narrow limits
that his profped of overturning it seemed neither to be uncer-
tain nor remote, all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a
conspiracy no less unexpected than dangerous. The soldiers of
Narvaez had never united perfectly with the original compa-
nions of Cortes, nor did they enter into his measures with the
fame cordial zeal. Upon every occasion that required any ex-
traordinary effort of courage or of patience, their spirits were
apt to fink; and now, on a near view of what they had to en-
counter, in attempting to reduce a city so inacceflible as Mexico,
and defended y a numerous army, the resolution even of
those among them who had adhered to Cortes when he was
deserted by their associates, began to fail. Their fears led
them to presumptuous and unfioldier-like diifullions concerning
the propriety of their general's meafuircs, anl the improbability
of their success. From there they proceeded to censure and
invectives, and at last began to deliberate how they might pro-

q Cortes Relat. 256-260. B. Diaz. c. 137-140. Gnmara Cron. c. zz, 123.
lecrrcra., dec. 3. lib. i. c. , 2.

6. vie

log9

c 0 0 K vide for their own safety, of which they deemed their com-
- ---. Imander to be totally negligent. Antonio Villefagna, a private
152 . soldier, but bold, intriguing, and strongly attached to Velasquez,

artfully fomented this growing spirit of difaffedion. His quar-
ters became the rendezvous of the malcontents, where, after
many consultations, they could discover no method of checking
Cortes in his career, but by assassinating him and his mofi con-
fiderable officers, and conferring the command upon some per-
son who would relinquish his wild plans, and adopt measures
more consistent with the general security. Despair inspired them
with courage. The hour for perpetrating the crime, the per-
sons whom they destined as victims, the officers to succeed
them in command, were all named; and the conspirators signed
an afrociation, by which they bound themselves with most so-
lemn oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening before the
appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient followers, who'had
been seduced into the conspiracy, touched with compunction
at the imminent danger of a man whom he had long been
accustomed to revere, or itruck with horror at his own
treachery, went privately to his general, and revealed to him
all that he knew. Cortes, though deeply alarmed, discerned at
once what conduct was proper in a situation so critical. He
repaired instantly to Villefagna's quarters, accompanied by
some of his most trufly officers. The aftonifhnent and con-
fusion of the man at this unexpected visit anticipated the con-
session of his guilt. While his attendants seized him, Cortes
snatched fiom his bosom a paper containing the arociation,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to know how far the de-
feetion extended, he retired to read it, and found there names
which filled him with surprise and sorrow. But, aware how
dangerous a ftriat scrutiny might prove at such a jun&ure, he

confined
110

confined his judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone. As the B 0 0 K

V.

proofs of his guilt were manifest, he was condemned after a v
ihort trial, and next morning he was seen hanging before the 1521'
door of the house in which he had lodged. Cortes called his
troops together, and having explained to them the atrocious
purpose of the conspirators, as well as the justice of the punilh-
ment inflicRed on Villefagna, he added, with an appearance of
fatisfation, that he was entirely ignorant with refpet to all
the circuinflances of this dark tranfadion, as the traitor, when
arrefied, had suddenly torn and swallowed a paper, which pro-
bably contained an account of it, and under the severest tor-
tures possesld such constancy as to conceal the names of his
accomplices. This artful declaration reflored tranquillity to
many a brcaft that was throbbing, while he spoke, with con-
fcioufnefs of guilt and dread of detecion; and by this prudent
moderation, Cortes had the advantage of having discovered
and of being able to observe such of his followers as were dif-
affeCted; while they, flattering themselves that their pafl crime
was unknown, endeavoured to avert any suspicion of it, by re-
doubling their activity and zeal in his service r.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to ruminate on what had: i-:s singular
happened; and as the most effectual means of preventing the preparations

for building

return of a mutinous spirit, he determined to call forth his brigantines..
troops immediately to aion. Fortunately, a proper occasion
for this occurred without his eeming to court it. He received
intelligence, that the materials for building the brigantines were
at length completely finised, and waited only for a body of.
Spaniards to conduct them to Tezeuco. The command of this.

r Cortes Rclat. 283, C. B. Diaz. c. 146. -Ierrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. i.

convoy,

I II

B 0 0 K convoy, consisting of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen horse-

V.
- .., men, and two field-pieces, he gave to Sandoval, who, by the
'52j' vigilance, aivity, and courage which he manifested on every

occasion, was growing daily in his confidence, and in the efli-
ination of his fellow-foldiers. The service was no less singular
than important ; the beams, the planks, the mails, the cordage,
the fails, the iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
rcquifite for the conftrudion of thirteen brigantines, were to
be carried sixty miles over land, through a mountainous coun-
try, by people who were unacquainted with the ministry of
domestic animals, or the aid of machines to facilitate any work
of labour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thousand Tamenes,
an inferior order of men destined for servile tasks, to carry the
materials on their shoulders, and appointed fifteen thousand
warriors to accompany and defend them. Sandoval made the
disposition for their progress with great propriety, placing the
Tamenes in the centre, one body of warriors i the front,
another in the rear, with considerable parties to cover the flanks.
To each of thee he joined ome Spaniards, not only to assist
them in danger, but to aceuftom them to regularity and sub-
ordination. A body so numerous, and so much encumbered,
advanced leisurely, but in excellent order; and in some places,
where it was confined by the woods or mountains, the line of
march extended above fix miles. Parties of Mexicans frequently
:appeared hovering around them on the high grounds; but per-
ceiving no profped of success in attacking an enemy continually
on his guard, and prepared to receive them, they did not ven-
ture to molest him; and Sandoval had the glory of conducting
safely to Tezeuco a convoy on which all the future operations
of his countrymen depended '.

* Cortes Relat. 26o, C, E. B. Diai. c. 14o.

Tolis
112

THIS was followed by another event of no les moment. Four B 째0 0

V.

flips arrived at Vera Cruz from Hispaniola, with two hundred
soldiers, eighty horses, two battering cannon, and a confi- Rcceives a

new rein-

derable supply of ammunition and arms '. Elevated with ob- forccrnlet.
serving that all h;s preparatory schemes, either for recruiting
his own army, or impairing the force of the enemy, had now
produced their full effec, Cortes, impatient to begin the siege
in form, hastened the launching of the brigantines. To faci-
litate this, he had employed a vast number of Indians for two
months in deepening the small rivulet which runs by Tezeuco
into the lake, and in forming it into a canal near two miles in
length '; and though the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as
well as of the danger which threatened them, endeavoured fre-
quently to interrupt the labourers, or to burn the brigantines,
the work was at last completed . On the twenty-eighth of April, The brigan-
all the Spanish troops, together with auxiliary Indians were tdesdlalch
drawn up on the banks of the canal; and with extraordinary mi-
litary pomp, heightened and rendered more solemn by the cele-
bration of the most sacred rites of religion, the brigantines, were
launched. As they fell down the canal in order, Father Olmedo
blessed them, and gave each its name. Every eye followed them
with wonder and hope, until they entered the lake, when they
hoisted their fails, and bore away before the wind. A general
shout ofjoy was raised; all admiring that bold inventive genius,
which, by means so extraordinary that their success almost ex-
ceeded belief, had acquired the command of a fleet, without

'Cortes Relat. 2z9, F. z6z, D. Gomara Cron. c. zg9.
"See NOTE XXIII. B. Diaz. c. I4o.

1 13

QL
VOL. II.

the

B Vo K the aid of which Mexico would have continued to set the Spa-

V.
^--- nifh power and arms at defiance Y.
i521.
.ifpofitions CORTES determined to attack the city from three different

quarters; from Tezeuco on the eafl fide of the lake, from Ta-
cuba on the weft, and from Cuyocan towards the south. Those
towns were situated on the principal causeways which led to the
capital, and intended for their defence. He appointed Sandoval
to command in the first, Pedro de Alvarado in the second, and
Chrifioval de Olid in the third; allotting to each a numerous
body of Indian auxiliaries, together with an equal division of
Spaniards, who, by the junction of the troops from Hispaniola,
amounted now t6 eighty-fix horsemen, and eight hundred and
eighteen foot soldiers; of whom a hundred and eighteen were
armed with muskets or cross-bows. Their train of artillery con-
sised of three battering-cannon, and fifteen field-pieces '. He
reserved for himself, as the station of greatest importance and
danger, the conduct of the brigantines, each armed with one of
his small cannon, and manned with twenty-five Spaniards.
May 10. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the poRts assigned

them, they broke down the aqueducts which the ingenuity of
the Mexicans had erected for conveying water into the capital,
and by the distress to which this reduced the inhabitants, gave
a beginning to the calamities which they were destined to sus-
ser'. Alvarado and Olid found the towns of which they were
ordered to take possession deserted by their inhabitants, who

Y Cortes Relat. 266. C. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. i. c. . Gomara Cron. c. 129.
2 Cortes Rlat. 6(, C. Cortes Rclat. 267, B. B. Ditz. c. x5o.
Icrincra, dec. 3. lib. i. c 13. '

had
Il4

had -fled for safety to the capital, where Guatimozin had col- B 째O K
leaed the chief force of his empire, as there alone he could ----
hope to make a successful stand againf the formidable enemies S5
who were approaching to assault him.

THE first effort of the Mexicans was to destroy the fleet of Mexicans at,

tack t,,e bri.

brigantines, the fatal effeds of whose operations they foresaw ganrle'.
and dreaded. Though the brigantines, after all the labour
and merit of Cortes in forming them, were of inconfider-
able bulk, rudely conftruded, and manned chiefly with land-
men, hardly pofleffed of kill enough to conduct them, they
must have been objefts of terror to a people unacquainted
with any navigation but that of their lake, and pofeffed of no
vessel larger than a canoe. Necessity, however, urged Guati-
mozin to hazard the attack; and hoping to supply by numbers
what he wanted in force, he aflembled fucl a multitude of
canoes as covered the face of the lake. They rowed on boldly to
the charge, while the brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could
scarcely advance to meet them. But as the enemy drew near, Repu!re.
a breeze suddenly sprung up; in a moment the fails were
spread, and the brigantines, with irrefiflible impetuosity, broke
through their feeble opponents, overset many canoes, and dif-
fipated the whole armament with such slaughter, as convinced
the Mexicans, that the progress of the Europeans in knowledge
and arts rendered their superiority greater on this new clement
than they had hitherto found it by land ".

FRonM that time Cortes remained mafler of the lake, and the 'Siniiilar pli

brigantines not only preserved a communication between the \tlc u,'c1.

h Cortes Rclat. 267, C. C. Diaz. c. 15o. Go uar. Con. c. rij. Ilcrrcr., dec. 3.
lib. i. c. I7.

I5S
( )

pl)aniardls

B 0V K Spaniards in their different flations, though at considerable dif-
짬,-v----' tance from each other, but were employed to cover the cause-

ways on each fide, and keep off the canoes, when they at-
tempted to annoy the troops as they advanced towards the city,
He formed the brigantines in three divisions, allotting one to
each flation, with orders to second the operations of the officer
who commanded there. From all the three flations he puihed
on the attack against the city with equal vigour; but in a man-
ner so very different from that whereby sieges are conducted ins-
regular war, that he himself seems afraid that it would appear
no less improper than singular, to persons unacquainted with
his situation . Each morning his troops assaulted the barri-
cades which theenemy had ereced on the causeways, forced
their way over the trenches which they had dug, and through
the canals where the bridges were broken down, and endea-
voured to penetrate into the heart of the city, in hopes of ob-
taining ome decisive advantage, which might force the enemy
to urrender, and terminate the war at once; but when the
obstinate valour of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the day
ineffectual, the Spaniards retired in the evening to their former
quarters. Thus their toil and danger were, in some measure,
continually renewed; the Mexicans repairing in the night what
the Spaniards had destroyed through the day, and recovering
the posts from which they had driven them. But necessity
prescribed this flow and untoward mode of operation. The
number of his troops was so fnall, that Cortes durst not, with
a handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in a city where
he might be surrounded and annoyed by such a multitude of
enemies. The remembrance of what he had already suffered
by the ill-judged confidence with which he had ventured into

c Cortes Relat. 270, F.

such
9

fiich a dangerous situation, was still frelh in his mind. The B o0 K

V.

Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue, were unable to guard the _
various polts which they.daily gained; and though their camp ';1
was filled with Indian auxiliaries, they durlt not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little accuflomed to
discipline, that no confidence could be placed in their vigilance.
Besides this, Cortes was extremely solicitous to preserve the city
as much as pofible from being destroyed, both as he destined it
to be the capital of his conquests, and willed that it might re-
main as a monument of his glory. From all these confidera-
tions, he adhered obtlinately, for a month after the siege was
opened, to the system which he had adopted. The Mexicans, in
their own defence, displayed valour which was hardly inferior
to that with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land, on
water, by night and by day, one furious conflict succeeded to
another. Several Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and
all were ready to fink under the toils of unintermitting service,
which were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of the
season, the periodical rains being now set. in with their usual
violence '.d

ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length and difficul- Endeavours

to take the

ties of the siege, Cortes determined to make one great effort to ciy by torm.
get possession of the city before he relinquifled the plan which
he had hitherto followed, and had recourse to any other mode
of attack. With this view, he ent inRftrutions to Alvarado
and Sandoval to advance with their divisions to a general assault,
and took the command in person of that poRed on the causeway
of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the expectation July 3.
of ome decisive event, the Spaniards pushed forward with irre-

' B. Diaz. c. 151.

fiflible

i17

B 0o 0 fifbible impetuosity. They broke through one barricade after an-

V.
-,-..i_- other, forced their way over the ditches and canals, and having

'52I' entered the city, gained ground incessantly, in spite of the mul-

titude and ferocity of their opponents. Cortes, though de-
lighted with the rapidity of his progress, did not forget that he
might still find it necessary to retreat; and in order to secure it,
appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of chief note in the
troops which he had received from Hispaniola, to fill up the
canals and gaps in the causeway as the main body advanced.
That officer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed, while
his companions were in the heat of aion and the career of
vicory, negleced the important charge committed to him, and
hurried on inconsiderately to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were daily im-
proving, no sooner observed this, than they carried an account
of it to their monarch.
Repuifed GUATIMOZIN instantly discerned the consequences of the

error which the Spaniards had committed, and, with admir-
able presence of mind, prepared to take advantage of it.
He commanded the troops ported in the front to flacken their
efforts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push forward, while
he dispatched a large body of chosen warriors through different
fireets, ome by land, and others by water, towards the great
breach in the causeway, which had been left open. On a fig-
nal which he gave, the priests in the principal temple firuck
the great drum consecrated to the god of war. No sooner did
the Mexicans hear its doleful solemn found, calculated to in-
spire them with contempt of death and enthufiatfic ardour, than
they rullied upon the encmy with frantic rage. ' he Spaniards,
unable to rfil men urged on no less by religious fury than

7 Iope
118

hope of success, began to retire, at first leisurely, and with a B o 0 K
good countenance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their own '
impatience to escape increased, the terror and confusion became 5,
so general, that when they arrived at the gap in the causeway,
Spaniards and Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged in
promiscuously, while the Mexicans ruffed upon them fiercely
from every fide, their light canoes carrying them through shoals
which the brigantines could not approach. In vain did Cortes
attempt to flop and rally his flying troops; fear rendered them
regardless of his entreaties or commands. Finding all his en-
deavours to renew the combat fruitless, his next care was to
save some of those who had thrown themselves into the water;
but while thus employed, with more attention to their situation
than to his own, fix Mexican captains suddenly laid hold of with consi

derable logi.

him, and were hurrying him off in triumph; and though two
of his officers rescued him at the expence of their own lives,
he received several dangerous wounds before he could break
loose. Above sixty Spaniards perished in the rout; and what
rendered the disaster more afflicing, forty of there fell alive
into the hands of an enemy never known to siew mercy to a
captive '.

THE approach of night, though it delivered the dejeded Thimr who

wtr' akcen

Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, uhered in, what was ,acri !, toi
hardly less grievous, the noise of their barbarous triumph, and LI" gd ot'
of the horrid feflival with which they celebrated their victory.
Every quarter of the city was illuminated; the great temple
shone with such peculiar splendour, that the Spaniards could
plainly fee the people in motion, and the priests busy in halen:-

c Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz. c. 152. Gomara Cron. c. ij8. Ilerrcra, ('cc. ii.
Jib. . c. 20.

lug

i19

B 0O0 K ing the preparations for the death of the prisoners. Through

.--,-- t'he gloom, they fancied that they discerned their companions
5i ' by the whiteness of their skins, as they were fiript naked and

compelled to dance before the image of the god to whom they
were to be offered. They heard the shrieks of those who were
sacrificed, and thought that they could diflinguifh each unhappy
victim, by the well-known found of his voice. Imagination
.added to what they really saw or heard, and augmented its
horror. The most unfeeling melted into tears of compaion,
and the flouteff heart trembled at the dreadful fpedacle which
they beheld .

-New rehemes CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in common with his
and efforts of
the Mexi. soldiers, was oppressed with the additional load of anxious re-
cans. fledions natural to a general on such an unexpected calamity,

could not, like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its
anguish. He was obliged to assume an air of tranquillity, in
order to revive the spirit and hopes of his followers. The junc-
ture, indeed, required an extraordinary exertion of fortitude.
The Mexicans, elated with their vicory, allied out next morn-
ing to attack him in his quarters. But they did not rely on the
efforts of their own arms alone. They ent the heads of the
Spaniards whom they had sacrificed to the leading men in the
adjacent provinces, and assured them that the god of war, ap-
peased by the blood of their invaders, which had been hed so
plentifully on his altars, had declared with an audible voice,
that in eight days time those hated enemies should be finally
destroyed, and peace and prosperity re-established in the em-
pire.

Scc NOTE XXIV.

A PXE-
20

A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, and in terms E 째0 K

V.
so void of ambiguity, gained univcrfal credit among a people ---

1521.
prone to fuperflition. The zeal of the provinces, which had Corts de-

farted by

already declared against the Spaniards, augmented, and several, lny orfhis
which had hitherto remained inactive, took arms with enthufi- Indi; alies.
afiic ardour to exectite the decrees of the gods. The Indian
auxiliaries who' had joined Cortes, accuflomed to venerate the
famc dcitics with tle Mlexlicans, and to receive tlhe rcfponfes of
their pricfls with the fame implicit faith, abandoned the Spa-
niards as a race of men devoted to certain dellirucion. Even
the idelity of the 'Ilacalans was ihaken, and the Spanili
troops were left al!ncul alone in their flations. Cortes finding ,
that he ttemttcd in vain to dilifcl tle fiiperflitious fears of his
confederates by arg l-nlicnt, took advantage, fiom the impru-
dence of thole who liad framed the prolphecy, in fixinlg its ac-
complilimcnt lo near at han!, to give them a firiking demon-
flration of its falsity. -le fifpended all military operations
during the period marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
the brigantincs which kept the enemy at a distance, his troops
lay in safety, and the fatal term expired without any disaster g.

His allies, afliamcd of their own credulity, returned to their lc rcenin

their friend-

station. Other tribs, judging that the gods who had now de- tlirn
ccivcd the Mexicans, hlad dccreed finally to withdraw their
protc[ion fiom them, joincd his flandard ; and iuchl was tlhe
levity of a simple people, moved by every flight impression,
that, in a fliort time after flch a general defection of his con-
federates, Cortes iaw iinmfclf, if we may believe his own ac-
count, at the head of a hundred and fifty thouland Indians.

c B. Diaz. c. 153. GComara Cron. c. 13 .

I2I
VOL. II.

1R

Even

B o0 K Even with such a numerous army, he found it necessary to

V.

---- adopt a new and more wary system of operation. Intfead of
and adopts a renewing his attempts to become maiter of the city at once, by
ew ytYRem of such bold but dangerous efforts of valour as he had already
attack.

tried, he made his advances gradually, and with every poflible
precaution againfi exposing his men to any calamity similar to
that which they fill bewailed. As the Spaniards pushed for-
ward, the Indians regularly repaired the causeways behind
them. As oon as they got possession of any part of the town,
the houfcs were instantly levelled with the ground. Day by
day, the Mexicans, forced to retire as their enemies gained
ground, were hemmed in within more narrow limits. Guati-
mozin, though uable to flop the career of the enemy, conti-
nued to defend his capital with obfinate resolution, and dif-
puted every inch of ground. But the Spaniards, having not
only varied their mode of attack, but, by orders of Cortes,
having changed the weapons with which they fought, were
again armed with the long Chinantlan spears, which they had
employed with such success against Narvaez, and, by the firm
array in which this enabled them to range themselves, they
repelled, with little danger, the loose assault of the Mexicans:
incredible numbers of them fell in the conflias which they
renewed every day . While war wafted without, famine be-
gan to consume them within the city. The Spanifli brigan-
tines, having the entire command of the lake, rendered it im-
poflible to receive any supply of provisions by water. The vast
number of his Indian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to slut up the
avenues to the city by land. The flores which Guatimozin had
laid up were exhaustcd, by the multitudes which crouded into

h Cortes Relat. p. 275, C, 276, F. B. Diaz, c. 153.

the
122

the capital, to defend their sovereign and the temples of their B 0 0 K

V.

gods. Not only the people, but persons of the highest rank L-
felt the utmost diflrcffes of want. What they suffered brought 1'"'
on infectious and mortal diiempers, the last calamity that visits
besieged cities, and which filled up the measure of their woes '

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such various evils, Courage and

the spirit of Guatimozin remained firm and unfubdued. He CG'atoyimo
rejeced, with scorn, every overture of peace from Cortes, and
disdaining the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his coun-
try, determined not to survive its ruin. The Spaniards conti- July 27.
nued their progress. At length all the three divisions pene-
trated into the great square in the centre of the city, and made
a secure lodgment there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quarter was so
closely pressed, that it could not long withfland assailants who
attacked it from their new station with superior advantage, and
more assured expectation of success. The Mexican nobles,
solicitous to save the life of a monarch whom they revered, pre-
vailed on Guatimozin to retire from a place where refitance was
now vain, that he might rouse the more diflant provinces of the
empire to arms, and maintain there a more successful struggle
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate the execution of
this measure, they endeavoured to amuse Cortes with overtures
of fubmifflon, that, while his attention was employed in adjull-
ing the articles of pacification, Guatimozin might cape unper-
ceived. But they made this attempt upon a leader of greater
fhgacity and difcerument than to be deceived by their arts.
Cortes, fuilpeding their intention, and aware of what nmoncnt

' Cortes Relat. 276, E. 7-, 1. B Diaz. 15. Go. Con. Con. c. 1 .

R 2 it

123

B 0 K it was to defeat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer on whose

V. .--,,-w vigilance he could most perfetly rely, to take the command of
'5L,' the brigantines, with ftrid injuntions to watch every motion

of the enemy. Sandoval, attentive to the charge, observing
tome large canoes crouded with people rowing across the
lake with extraordinary rapidity, infantly gave the signal to
chace. Garcia Holguin, who commanded the fleetest brigan-
tine, oon overtook them, and was preparing to fire on the
foremnot canoe, which eemed to carry ome person whom all

He is taken the reft followed and obeyed. At once the rowers dropt their
prisoner.

oars, and all on board, throwing down their arms, conjured
him with cries and tears to forbear, as the emperor was there.
Holguin eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin, with a dig-
nified composure, gave himself up into his hands, requefling
only that no insult might be offered to the empress or his chil-
dren. When conduted to Cortes, he appeared neither with
the fullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the dejection of a
supplicant. " I have done," aid he, addressing himself to the
Spanish general, " what became a monarch. I have defended
my people to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but to
die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on one which Cortes
wore, " plant it in my breast, and put an end to a life which
can no longer be of use '."

As soon as the fate of their sovereign was known, tle resistance

Aug. 13. of the Mexicans ceased; and Cortes took polfeffion of that frnall
The city

part of the capital which yet remained undeftroycd. Thus termi-
nated the siege of Mexico, the most memorable event in the con-
qucft of America. It continued feventy-five days, hardly one of

k Cortes Relat. 279, n. Diaz. c. 156. Gomara Cron. c. q14.. Ilerera, dec. 3.
lib. ii, c. 7.

which.
124

which passed without some extraordinary effort of one party in B o0 K
the attack, or of the other in the defence of a city, on the fate of -.--
which both knew that the fortune of the empire depended. As ,5s'
the struggle here was more obflinate, it was likewise more equal
than any between the inhabitants of the Old and New W\orlds.
The great abilities of Guatimozin, the number of his troops,
the peculiar situation of his capital, so far counterbalanced the
superiority of the Spaniards in arms and discipline, that they
must have relinquished the enterprise, if they had trufled for
success to themselves alone. IBut Mexico was overturned
by the jealousy of neighbours who dreaded its power, and
by the revolt of fubjeds impatient to fllake off its yoke. By
their effectual aid, Cortes was enabled to accomplifl what,
without such fuipport, he would hardly have ventured to at-
tempt. How much soever this account of the reduction of
Mexico may detrad, on the one hand, from the marvellous
relations of some Spanifll writers, by ascribing that to simple
and obvious causes which they attribute to the romantic valour
of their countrymen, it adds, on the other, to the merit and
abilities of Cortes, who, under every disadvantage, acquir-
ed such an ascendant over unknown nations, as to render
them instruments towards carrying his schemes into exccu-
tion '.

TIIE exultation of the Spaniards, on accomplifling this srnlncT of

arduous entci-rpifc, was at irfil cxccrfive. But this was quickly the ,.y,)ll,
damped by the cruel disappointment of those sanguine hopes, pcl m^cz;tof

liec Spani-

which had animated them amidst so many hardfiips and dan- ard,.
gers. Inftcad of the incxhauUiible wealth which they cxpcelcd

Sce NOTE XXV.

Sio*~ ifrom

25

( K firom becoming mafiers of Montezuma's treasures, and the or-
.-.-- ---- naments of ib many temples, their rapaciousness could collect

only an inconsiderable booty amidltf ruins and desolation'.
Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, had ordered what
remained of the riches amassed by his ancestors to be thrown
into the lake. The Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards
were engaged in conflit with the enemy, had carried off the
most valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be divided among
the conquerors was so finall, that many of them disdained to
accept of the pittance which fell to their flare, and all mur-
mured and exclaimed; ome, against Cortes and his confidents,
whom they fufpeLed of having secretly appropriated to their
own use, a large portion of the riches which should have been
brought into the common stock; others, against Guatimozin,
whom they accused of obstinacy, in refuting to discover the
place where he had hidden his treasure.

Guatimozin ARGUMENTS, entreaties, and promises were employed in
tortured.

order to tooth them, but with so little effet, that Cortes, from
solicitude to check this growing spirit of discontent, gave way
to a deed which lained the glory of all his great actions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guatimozin, or feel-
ing any reverence for those virtues which he had displayed, he
fubjeded the unhappy monarch, together with his chief favou-
rite, to torture, in order to force fiom them a discovery of the
royal treasures, which it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatimozin bore whatever the refined cruelty of his tormentors
could inflic, with the invincible fortitude of an American
warrior. H-is fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of the

' The gold and filvr, according to Cortes, amounted only to 120,0o0 pc/os, Relar.
28o, A. a funi far infiior to that which the Spaniards had formerly divided in Mexico.

anguifll,
I12

anguish, turned a dejeaed eye towards his maftcr, which B 00 l
seemed to implore his permission to reveal all that he knew. ----
But the high-fpirited prince, darting on him a look of autho-
rity mingled with scorn, checked his weakness by asking, " Am
I now reposing on a bed of flowers?" Overawed by the re-
proach, he persevered in his dutiful silence, and expired. Cor-
tes, ahamed of a scene so horrid, rescued the royal vicaim from
the hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life refervld for
new indignities and sufferings ".

TI-E fate of the capital, as both parties had foreseen, decided All t pmo.

ille', , te

that of the empire. The provinces submitted one after another c'.i,,. z'b.
to the conquerors. Small detachments of Spaniards marching ml:.
through them without interruption, penetrated in different
quarters to the great Southern Ocean, which, according to the
ideas of Columbus, they imagined would open a hort as well
as easy passage to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of
Castile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions "; and the Cnrecs forms

fcherne, of

active mind of Cortes began already to form schemes for at- rew dicco-
tempting this important discovery 째. xcries,

HE did not know, that during the progress of his viclorious vhich are

arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of which he began to form CN:.ll';1,.
some idea, had been undertaken and acconmplifhed. As this is
one of the molt fplcndid events in the hliflory of thle Spanili
discoverics, and has been productive of effcts peculiarly inte-
rcfling to those extcnfive provinces which Cortes had now fIb-
jccted to the crown of Cafiile, the account of its rife and pro-
grefs merits a particular detail.

'" B. Di;iz. c. 157. Goimara Cron. c. 1(6. ilcricia, dcc, . li. ii. c. . 'Tor-
quem. Mon. Ind. i. 574. Corcts Rlat. z28o, D, &c. 1. 1)1 ;z. c. 157.

o lleircr., dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Goniaia Cron. c. 1'9.

I

I27
S:i, R DINANI)

B O0 K FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a Portuguese gen-
t---.. tleman of honourable birth, having served several years in the

Z East Indies, with distinguished valour, under the famous Albu-

querque, demanded the recompence which he thought due to his
services, with the boldness natural to a high-fpirited soldier.
But, for fomc reason which is not explained, both his general
and his sovereign rejected his suit with a disdainful coldness,
that was intolerable to a man conscious of what he had done,
and of what he deservcd. In a transport of resentment, he
formally renounced his allegiance to an ungrateful mafler, and
151'7 fled to the court of CafPile, in hopes that there his worth would

be more jufily eflimatcd. He endeavoured to recommend him-
self by proposing to execute a fcheie, the accomplishment of
which, he knew, would wound the monarch against whom he
was exasperated in the most tender part. He revived Colum-
bus's original and favourite project, of discovering a paflage to
India by a westerly course, and without encroaching on that
portion of the globe which was allotted to the Portuguese by
the line of demarcation. He founded his hopes of success on
the ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by many obferva-
tions, the result of his own naval experience, as well as that of
his countrymen, in their intercourse with the East. The un-
dertaking, he acknowledged, was both arduous and expensive,
as it could not be attempted but with a squadron of considerable
force, and victualled for at leait two years. Fortunately, he
applied to a minister who was not apt to be deterred, either by
the boldncfs of a dcfign, or the expence of carrying it into exe-
cution. Cardinal Ximcnes, who at that time directed the affairs
of Spain, difccrning at once what an increase of wealth and
glory would accrue to his country by the ficccfs of Magellan's
propolal, liltencd to it with a mofl favourable ear. Charles V.

on

on his arrival in his Spanilh dominions, entered into the mea- B 0 0 K
sure with no less ardour, and orders were issued for equip- ----
ping a proper squadron at the public charge, of which the 'I
command was given to Magellan, whom the king honoured
with the habit of St. Jago and the title of Captain-General P.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hundred and nine- His voyage.

teen, Magellan failed from Seville with five (hips, which,
according to the ideas of the age, were deemed to be of
considerable force, though the burden of the largest did not
exceed one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the whole
amounted to two hundred and thirty-four men, among whom
were ome of the most skilful pilots in Spain, and fevcral Por-
tuguefe sailors, in whose experience, as more extensive, Ma-
gellan placed still greater confidence. After touching at the
Canaries, he flood directly south towards the equinoaial line
along the coast of America, but was so long retarded by tedious
calms, and spent so much time in searching every bay and inlet
for that communication with the Southern Ocean which he
wished to discover, that he did not reach the river De la Plata till
the twelfth of January. That spacious opening through which o520,
its vast body of water pours into the Atlantic allured him to
enter; but, after failing up it for ome days, he concluded, from
the shallowness of the fiream and the freshness of the water, that
the wifled-for itrait was not situated there, and continued his
course towards the south. On the thirty-firfl of March he ar-
rived in the port of St. Julian, about forty-eight degrees south
of the line, where he resolved to winter. In this uncomlbrtable
llation lie loft one of his squadron, and the Spaniards fuiflrcd

I Ierrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomra lli . c. 91.
Vo L . . S so

129

B 0o K so much from the excessive rigour of the climate, that the crews

V.
'---,--' of three of his hips, headed by their officers, rose in open

'522. mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing the visionary project of a

desperate adventurer, and returning directly to Spain. This
dangerous insurrection Magellan suppressed, by an effort of
courage no less prompt than intrepid, and inflicted exemplary
punishment on the ringleaders. With the remainder of his
followers, overawed but not reconciled to his scheme, he con-
tinued his voyage towards the south, and at length discovered,
near the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a firair,
into which he entered, notwithstanding the murmurs and re-
monstrances of the people under his command. After failing
twenty days in tat winding dangerous channel, to which he
gave his own name, and where one of his ships deserted
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his view, and with
tears of joy he returned thanks to Heaven for having thus far
crowned his endeavours with success .

BUT he was frill at agreater distance than he imagined from

the objec of his withes. He failed during three months and
twenty days in an uniform direction towards the north-west,
without discovering land. In this voyage, the longest that had"
ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he suffered incredible
distress. His flock of provisions was almnot exllhuflcd, the
water became putrid, the men were reduced to the shortest al-
lowance with which it was possible to fuflain life, and the
scurvy, the most dreadful of all the maladies with which fca-
faring people are affliced, began to spread among the crew.
One circumstance alone afforded them lome conolation; they
enjoyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, with fulch f;t-

q Herrera, dc. 2. lib. iv. c. io. lib. ix. c. io, &c. Gomara IL t. c. 9z. Piga-

fctta Viaggio ap, Ramus. ii. p. 32, &c.
I30

vourable
4

vourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on that ocean the name B K
of Pacific, which it fill retains. When reduced to such ex- _
tremity that they mull, ave funk under their sufferings, they 1521'
fell in with a cluster of fmnall but fertile islands, which afforded March 6.
them refiefhments in such abundance, that their health was
Loon re-established, From these isles, to which he gave the
name of DC los Ladrones, he proceeded on his voyage, and Loon
made a more important discovery of the islands now known by
the name of the Philippines. In one of there he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who attacked him with a
numerous body of troops well armed; and while he fought at
the head of his men with his usual valour, he fell by the hands April z6.
of those barbarians, together with several of his principal
officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other commanders.

After visiting many of the smaller isles scattered in the eastern
part of the Indian ocean, they touched at the great island of
Borneo, and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Moluccas, Nov. 8.
to the afonifhment of the Portuguese, who could not compre-
hend how the Spaniards, by holding a westerly course, had arrived
at that sequestered feat of their most valuable commerce, which
they themselves had discovered by failing in an opposite direc-
tion. There, and in the adjacent isles, they found a people
acquainted with the benefits of extensive trade, and willing
to open an intercourse with a new nation. They took in a cargo
of the precious spices, which are the diftingtifhed production
of those islands, and with that, as well as with specimens of
the rich commodities yielded by the other countries which they
had visited, the Vicfory, which, of the two ships that remained
of the squadron, was most fit for a long voyage, set fail for Jan. 1522.

S Europe,

B 0o K Europe, under the command of Juan Sebastian del Cano. He

V.

followed the course of the Portuguese by the Cape of Good
152'. Hope, and, after many disasters and sufferings, he arrived at

St. Lucar on the seventh of September one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-two, having failed round the globe in the
space of three years and twenty-eight days .

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan of the satis-

fadion of accomplishing this great undertaking, his contem-
poraries, just to his memory and talents, ascribed to him not
only the glory.of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almost every obfacle to the completion of it; and in
the present age hjs name is fiill ranked among the highest in the
roll of eminent and successful navigators. The naval glory of
Spain now eclipsed that of every other nation, and by a singular
felicity she had the merit, in the course of a few years, of dif-
covering a new continent almost as large as that part of the
earth which was formerly known, and of ascertaining by ex-
perience the form and extent of the whole terraqueous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory of having

firfi encompassed the earth; they expected to derive great com-
mercial advantages from this new and boldest effort of their
maritime skill. The men of science among them contended,
that the spice islands, and several of the richest countries in the
East, were so situated as to belong of right to the crown of
Caflile, in consequence of the partition made by Alexander VI.
The merchants, without attending to this difcuflion, engaged
eagerly in that lucrative and alluring commerce, which was

q Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. . 3. 9. lib. iv. c. . Gomara Cron. c. 93, &c. Pigaretta
ap. Rainuf. ii. p. 361, &c.
132

I

now

now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed at the intru- B 00 I
sion of such formidable rivals, remonitrated and negociated in '--
Europe, while in Asia they obftruted the trade of the Spaniards 1521
by force of arms. Charles, not sufficiently inftruaed with rc-
fpeLc to the importance of this valuable branch of commerce,
or difftraed by the multiplicity of his schemes and operations,
did not afford his fubjeas proper protection. At lafl, the low
slate of his finances, exhausted by the efforts of his arms in
every part of Europe, together with the dread of adding a new
war with Portugal to those in which he was already engaged,
induced him to make over his claim of the Moluccas to the Por-
tuguefe for three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He reserved,
however, to the crown of Castile the right of reviving its pre-
tensions on repayment of that um, but other objects engrossed
his attention and that of his successors; and Spain was finally
excluded from a branch of commerce in which it was engaging
with sanguine expectations of profit'.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was relinquished,

the voyage of Magellan was followed by commercial effets of
great moment in Spain. Philip II. in the year one thousand
five hundred and fixty-four, reduced those islands which he
discovered in the Eastern Ocean to fubijcdion, and established
settlements there; between which and the kingdom of New
Spain, a regular intercourse, the nature of which flhall be ex-
plained in its proper place, is carried on. I return now to the
tranfadions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring flch vast territories An o to
for his native country, and preparing the way for future con- 'opres1,

Illrrera, dec. 3. lib. vii, c. , &c. dcc. iv. lib. v. c. 7, &c.

quefns,

J33

B 0 0K quests, it was his fngular fate not only to be destitute of any

V. _,-.-- 쨌 commission or authority from the sovereign whom he was
'52'' serving with such successful zeal, but to be regarded as an un-

dutiful and seditious subject. By the influence of Fonseca,
bishop of Burgos, his conduc in assuming the government of
New Spain was declared to be an irregular usurpation, in con-'
tempt of the royal authority; and Chriftoval de Tapia received
a commission, impowering him to supersede Cortes, to seize his
person, to confiscate his effeds, to make a stria scrutiny into
his proceedings, and to transmit the result of his inquiries to
the council of the Indies, of which the bihop of Burgos was
president. A few weeks after the reducaion of Mexico, Ta-
pia landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to strip its
conqueror of his power, and to treat him as a criminal. But
fonseca had chosen a very improper instrument to wreak his
vengeance on Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor
the talents that suited the high command to which he was ap-

hich he pointed. Cortes, while he publickly expressed the most refpecd-
eludes. ful veneration for the emperor's authority, secretly took mea-

fures to defeat the effec of his commiflion; and having
involved Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of negocia-
tions and conferences, in which he ometimes had recourse to
threats, but more frequently employed bribes and promises, he
at length prevailed on that weak man to abatdon a province
which he was unworthy of governing '.

Applies gain BUT notwithflanding the fortunate dexterity with which he
to the2cOUrt had eluded this blow, Cortes was so sensible of the precarious

May 15 tenure by which he held his power, that he dispatched depu-

' Hcrrcda, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. iv. c. i. Cort. Rclat. 281. E. B. Diaz.
c. 158.

ties
134

ties to Spain with a pompous account of the success of his arms, B K
with farther specimens of the productions of the country, and -

i5zz.

with rich presents to the emperor, as the earnest of future con-
tributions from his new conquelt; requesting, in recompence
for all his services, the approbation of his proceedings, and
that he might be entrurfed with the government of those terri-
tories, which his conduct, and the valour of his followers had
added to the crown of Caflile. The juncture in which his de-
puties reached the court was favourable. The internal commo-
tions in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of Charles's
reign, were just appeased. The ministers had leisure to turn
their attention towards foreign affairs. The account of Cortes's
vicories filled his countrymen with admiration. The extent
and value of his conquests became the object of vail and inte-
refling hopes. Whatever stain he might have contracted, by
the irregularity of the feps which he took in order to attain
power, was so fully effaced by the splendor and merit of the
great ations which this had enabled him to perform, that every
heart revolted at the thought of inflising any censure on a
man, whose services entitled him to the highest marks of dif-
tinsdion. The public voice declared warmly in favour of his
pretensions, and Charles arriving in Spain about this time,
adopted the fentimnents of his fubjecs with a youthful ardour.
Notwithfianding the claims of Velaliluez, and the partial repre- and is ape

pointed

fentations of the bilhop of Burgos, he appointed Cortes captain Captain-Ge-
general and governor of New Spain, judging that no peribn n"C";bl" fGo-
was so capable of maintaining the royal authority, or of ceta- New Spain.
blilhing good order both among his Spanifhl and Indian fiub-
jcqds, as the comiriander whom the former would willingly obey,

Ilif. (of Chailes V. vol. ii. b. iii.

and!

B o0 K and the latter had long been accustomed to fear and to re-

v.

'--_--쨩 spect.

IIis schemes EVEN before his jurifdiaion received this legal fandtion,
and arrange.
inents. Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers of a governor, and,

by various arrangements, endeavoured to render his conquest a
secure and beneficial acquisition to his country. He determin-
ed to establish the feat of government in its ancient flation,
and to raise Mexico again from its ruins; and having conceived
high ideas concerning the future grandeur of the state of which
he was laying the foundation, he began to rebuild its capital
on a plan which hath gradually formed the molt magnificent
city in the New World. At the fame time, he employed fkil-
ful persons to search for mines in different parts of the coun-
try, and opened some which were found to be richer than any
which the Spaniards had hitherto discovered in America. He
detached his principal officers into the remote provinces, and
encouraged them to fettle there, not only by bellowing upon
them large trads of land, but by granting them the fame do-
minion over the Indians, and the fame right to their service,
which the Spaniards had assumed in the islands.

Tnfurreflions IT was not, however, without difficulty that the Mexi-
of the Mex-
icans, and can empire could be entirely reduced into the form of a Spanish
c'anlird ofthe colony. Enraged and rendered desperate by oppreflion, the

natives often forgot the superiority of their enemies, and run
to arms in defence of their liberties. In every contest, how-
ever, the European valour and discipline prevailed. But,

llerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron,. 164, I6S. . Diaz. 167, t(8.

fatally
I36

fatally for the honour of their country, the Spaniards sullied B 0 O K

V.

the glory redounding from these repeated victories by their i- _.
mode of treating the vanquished people. After taking Guati- 'izz'
mozin, and becoming mailers of his capital, they supposed that
the king of Castile entered on possession of all the rights of the
captive monarch, and affeaed to confider every effort of the
Mexicans to assert their own independence, as the rebellion of
vassals against their sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves against
their mailer. Under the fandion of those ill-founded maxims,
they violated every right that should be held sacred between
hotile nations. After every infurretion, they reduced the com-
mon people in the provinces which they subdued, to the molt hu-
miliating of all conditions, that of personal servitude. Their
chiefs, supposed to be more criminal, were punished with greater
severity, and put to death in the most ignominious or the most
excruciating form, that the insolence or the cruelty of their con-
querors could devise. In almost every province of the Mexican
empire, the progress of the Spanish arms is marked with blood,
and with deeds so atrocious as disgrace the enterprising valour
that conducted them to success. In the province of Panuco,
sixty caziques, or leaders, and four hundred nobles, were burnt
at one time. Nor was this shocking barbarity perpetrated in
any sudden ally of rage, or by a commander of inferior note.
It was the aCt of Sandoval, an officer whose nalne is entitled to
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, executed after a
solemn consultation with Cortes; and to complete the horror of
the scene, the children and relations of the wretched viclims
were afnembled, and compelled to be i'pctators of their dying
agonies Y. It fecms hardly poflible to xceed in horror this
dreadful example of severity, but it was followed by another,

v Crtc, Rclat. 291, C. CGonara Croi;. c. I;1 .
\VOL . . T wh)ic

I37

B 0o 0K which affeced the Mexicans fiill more sensibly, as it gave

V.
----' them a most feeling proof of their own degradation, and of the
S22 minall regard that their haughty maflers retained for the ancient

dignity and splendour of their slate. On a flight suspicion, con-
firmed by very imperfect evidence, that Guatimozin had form-
ed a scheme to hake off the yoke, and to excite his former
subjects to take arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial,
ordered the unhappy monarch, together with the caziques of
Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two persons of greatest eminence in
the empire, to be hanged; and the Mexicans, with astonish-
ment and horror, beheld this ignominious punishment inflicted
upon persons, to whom they were accustomed to look up
with reverences hardly inferior to that which they paid to the
gods themselves . The example of Cortes and his principal
officers, encouraged and justified persons of subordinate rank to
venture upon committing greater excesses. Nuno de Guzman,
in particular, stained an illustrious name by deeds of peculiar
enormity and rigor, in various expeditions which he con-
ducted '.

ONE circumfiance, however, saved the Mexicans from far-

ther consumption, perhaps from one as complete as that which
had depopulated the islands. The first conquerors did not at-
tempt to search for the precious metals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy to carry on the
expensive works, which are requisite for opening those deep
recesses where Nature has concealed the veins of gold and
silver, nor sufficiently skilful to perform the ingenious opera-
tions by which they are separated from their refpedive ores.

L Gomnara Cron. c. 170. B. Diaz. c. 177. IHerera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. . Sec
NOTE XXVI. HIerrern, dec. 4 and 5. pallin.

They
J38

139

They were satisfied with the more simple method, pracifed by 째0 0 K
the Indians, of waffing the earth carried down rivers and tor-
rents from the mountains, and collecting the grains of native
metal deposited there. The rich mines of New Spain, which
have poured forth their treasures with such profulion on every
quarter of the globe, were not discovered for several years after the 55Z, &-,
conquest b. By that time, a more orderly government and police
were introduced into the colony; experience, derived from former
errors, had suggested many useful and humane regulations for
the protecion and preservation of the Indians; and though it
then became necessary to increase the number of those employed
in the mines, and they were engaged in a species of labour
more pernicious to the human constitution, they suffered less
hardship or diminution than from the ill-judged, but less ex-
tensive, schemes of the firt conquerors.

THIS extraordinary mortality among the Indians, dif-

appointed the hopes of their new mafier. Few seem to have
derived any considerable wealth from their ill-conduced
researches. According to the usual fate of first settlers in new
colonies, it was their lot to encounter danger and to struggle
with difficulties; the fruits of their victories and toils were re-
served for times of tranquillity, and reaped by fucceflors of
greater industry, but of inferior nmerit. The early historians
of America abound with accounts of the fuffcrings and of the
poverty of its conqucrors . In New Spain, their condition
was rendered more grievous by a peculiar arrangement. When
Charles V. advanced Cortes to the government of that country,
he, at the fame time, appointed certain comminioners to rc-
b -Hei.era, dec. 8 lib. x. c. 21. ' Cortes Rclat. z3. F . . Diaz. c. 209.

T 2

ceCve

B 0o0 K ceive and aminifler the royal revenue there, with independent
a _--a- jurifdidion d. These men, chosen fronm inferior atiols in
i5 22 various departments of public business at Madrid, were so

much elevated with their promotion, that they thought they
were called to at a part of the first consequence. But being
accustomed to the minute formalities of office, and having con-
traded the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which they had
15z4. hitherto moved, they were allonifhed, on arriving in Mexico,

at the high authority which Cortes exercised, and could not
conceive that the mode of adminiitration, in a country recently
subdued and fettled, must be different from that which took
place in one where tranquillity and regular government had
been long eitaliifhed. In their letters, they represented Cortes
as an ambitious tyrant, who having usurped ajurifdiEtion fupe-
rior to law, aspired at independence, and by his exorbitant
wealth and extensive influence, might accomplish those dif-
loyal chemes which he apparently meditated e. These infinu-
ations made such deep impreflion upon the Spanish minitfers,
moti of whom had been formed to business under the jealous
and rigid adminifiration of Ferdinand, that unmindful of all
Cortes's past services, and regardless of what he was then sus-
fering in conducting that extraordinary expedition, in which
he advanced from the lake of Mexico to the western extremi-
ties of Honduras ', they infued the fame suspicions into the
mind of their master, and prevailed on him to order a solemn
inquest to be made into his condua, with powers to the licen-
1525. ciate Ponce de Leon, entrusted with that commiflion, to seize

his person, if he ihould find that expedient, and fend him pri-
soner to Spain .

d Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. * Id. dec. 3. lib. v. c. 4.

Sec NO T E XXVII. c lIcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 14, 15.
140

THIE
4

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few days after his B 째0 K

V.

arrival in New Spain, prevented the execution of this commis- ---
sion. But as the objet of his appointment was known, the IS5.
mind of Cortes was deeply wounded with this unexpected re-
turn for services which far exceeded whatever any fubje of
Spain had rendered to his sovereign. He endeavoured, how-
ever, to maintain his flation, and to recover the confidence of
the court. But every person in office, who had arrived from
Spain since the conquest, was a spy upon his conduct, and with
malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable representation of all
his ations. The apprchenfions of Charles and his ministers
increased. A new commission of inquiry was issued, with more 1528,
extensive powers, and various precautions were taken to pre-
vent or to punish him, if he should be so presumptuous as to
attempt what was inconfifient with the fidelity of a subjea h.
Cortes beheld the approaching crisis of his fortune with all the
violent emotions natural to a haughty mind, conscious of high
desert, and receiving unworthy treatment. But though some
of his desperate followers urged him to assert his own rights
against his ungrateful country, and, with a bold hand, to seize
that power which the courtiers meanly accused him of coveting',
he retained such felf-command, or was actuated with such fen-
timents of loyalty, as to reject their dangerous counsels, and to
chufe the only course in which he could secure his own dignity,
without departing from his duty. He resolved not to expose
himself to the ignominy of a trial, in that country which hadi
been the scene of his triumphs; but, without waiting for the
arrival of his judges, to repair diretly to Castile, and commirt

h llerrern, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. . lib. iv. c. 9, . . Diaz.
c. 172. 196. Goniara Cron. c. 166. I B. Diaz. c. 194.

himself

14!

B ()t K himself and his cause to the juflice and generosity of his so-
'--- vereign k

1;28.

CORTES appeared in his native country with the splendour

that suited the conqueror of a mighty kingdom. He brought
with him a great part of his wealth, many jewels and orna-
ments of great value, several curious productions of the coun-
try ', and was attended by some Mexicans of the first rank, as
well as by the molt considerable of his own officers. His ar-
rival in Spain removed at once every suspicion and fear that had
been entertained with refpet to his intentions. The emperor,
having now nothing to apprehend from the designs of Cortes,
received him like a person whom consciousness of his own
innocence had brought into the pretence of his mailer, and who
was intitled, by the eminence of his services, to the highest
marks of diftindion and refpe&. The order of St. Jago, the
title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the grant of a vast ter-
ritory in New Spain, were successively bellowed upon him;
and as his manners were correct and elegant, although he had
passed the greater part of his life among rough adventurers, the
emperor admitted him to the fame familiar intercourse with
himiflf, that was enjoyed by noblemen of the firfl rank .

BUT, amidst those external proofs of regard, symptoms of

remaining diftrufi appeared. Though Cortes earnestly solicited
to be reinltated in the government of New Spain, Charles, too
sagacious to commit such an important charge to a man whom
he had once fufpeaed, peremptorily refused to inveRt him again
with powers which he might find it impossible to controul.

k Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 8. See N T E XXVIII.
m Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. I. lib. vi. c. 4. B. Diaz. c. 19. Gom. Cron.

C. 182.
14

Cortes,
9

Cortes, though dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico B 0o I
with diminished authority. The military department, with i
powers to attempt new discoveries, was left in his hands; but 1'33'
the supreme direcion of civil affairs was placed in a board called
The Audience of Netw Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion of authority more
united and extensive became necessary, Antonio de Mendoza,
a nobleman of high rank, was ent thither as Viceroy, to take
the government into his hands.

THis division of power in New Spain proved, as was un-

avoidable, the source of perpetual dissention, which embittered
the life of Cortes, and thwarted all his schemes. As he had
now no opportunity to display his aive talents but in attempt-
ing new discoveries, he formed various schemes for that purpose,
all of which bear impressions of a genius that delighted in what
was bold and splendid. He early entertained an idea, that,
either by fleering through the gulf of Florida along the east
coast of North America, ome itrait would be found that com-
municated with the weflern ocean; or that, by examining the
ifhmus of Darien, some passage would be discovered between
the North and South Seas". But having been disappointed in his
expecations with refped to both, he now confined his views to
such voyages of discovery as he could make from the ports of
New Spain in the South Sea. There he fitted out successively
fevcral finall squadrons, which cither perished in the attempt,
or returned without making any dilcovcry of moment. Cortes,
weary of enitrufling the condud of his operations to others,
took the coninand of a new armament in perlon, and, after ,;

" Cort. Rclat. Ram. Bii. .:'
1 B,

CeluIri,' i,

I43

HIST~tRY 1 F AMElICA.

B oo K enduring incredible hardships, and encountering dangers of
i.-~.~ every species, he discovered the large peninsula of California,

1536. and surveyed the greater part of the gulf which separates it

from New Spain. The discovery of a country of such extent
would have refleEted credit on a common adventurer; but it
could add little new honour to the name of Cortes, nor satisfy
the sanguine expectations which he had formed . Disgusted
with ill success, to which he had not been accustomed, and
weary of contesting with adversaries to whom he confidered it
3540. as a disgrace to be opposed, he once more fought for redress in

his native country.

B1T his reception there was very different from that which

gratitude, and even decency, ought to have secured for him.
The merit of his ancient exploits was already, in a great mea-
sure, forgotten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more
valuable conquests in another quarter of America. No service
of moment was now expected from a man of declining years,
and who began to be unfortunate. The emperor behaved to
him with cold civility; his ministers treated him, sometimes
with negleCt, sometimes with insolence. His grievances re-
ceived no redress; his claims were urged without effedc; and
after several years spent in fruitless application to miniflers and
judges, an occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a
man of high spirit, who had moved in a sphere where he was
more accustomed to command than to folicir, Cortcs ended his
days on the second of December one thousand five hundred and
forty-feven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. His fate was

Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9, o. dec. 8. lib. vi . 4.c Vengas Hill. of Ca.
'itorn. i. 12z. Lorenzana Hill, p. 322, &c.

the

the fame with that of all the persons who distinguished them- B 00 K
selves in the discovery or conquest of the New World. Envied I
by his contemporaries, and ill requited by the court which he x136.
served, he has been admired and celebrated by succeeding ages.
Which has formed the most just estimate of his character, an
impartial consideration of his ations must determine.

VoL. II.

THE
U

# BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T O R Y

o F
AMER I CA.

B O O K VI.

ROM the time that Nugnez deBalboa discovered the great B o 0 K
Southern Ocean, and received the first obscure hint con- _

cerning the opulent countries with which it might open a com- Is'23.
munication, the wiihes and schemes of every enterprising person discovering
in the colonies of Darien and Panama were turned towards the
wealth of those unknown regions. In an age when the spirit
of adventure was so ardent and vigorous, that large fortunes
were wafled, and the molt alarming dangers braved, in pursuit
of discoveries merely poflible, the faintcft ray of hope was fol-
lowed with eager expectation, and the slightest information was
sufficient to inspire such perse&- confidence, as conduCted men
to the most arduous undertakings .

" Sec NOTE XXIX,

ACCORDINGLY,
U 2

B 0 K ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted out in order

VT.
.-- to explore and take roffeflion of the countries to the east of Pa-
l523.

Unsuccessful nama, but under the condut of leaders whose talents and re-
for Come sources were unequal to the attempt h. As their excursions did
lime.

not extend beyond the limits of the province to which the Spa-
niards have given the name of Tierra Firme, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and extremely
unhealthy, they returned with dismal accounts concerning the
difireffes to which they had been exposed, and the unpromising
asped of the places which they had visited. Damped by there
tidings, the rage for discovery in that direction abated; and it
became the general opinion, that Balboa had founded visionary
hopes, on the tale of an ignorant Indian, ill understood, or
calculated to deceive.

Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama, on whom
by Pizarro,
Almagro,and the circumitances which deterred others made so little impref-
Luque. sion, that, at the very moment when all confidered Balboa's

1524. expectations of discovering a rich country, by fleering towards

the east, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt the execution
of his scheme. The names of those extraordinary men were
Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and Hernando Luque.
Pizarro was the natural on of a gentleman of an honourable
family by a very low woman, and, according to the cruel fate
which often attends the offspring of unlawful love, had been so
totally neglected in his youth by the author of his birth, that he
seems to have destined him never to rife beyond the condition of
his mother. In consequence of this ungenerous idea, he set him,
when bordering on manhood, to keep hogs. But the apiring

b Calanclla Coronica, p. zoo.

mind
I48

mind of young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation, he B 0 l K
abruptly abandoned his charge, enlifled as a soldier, and after i_
serving ome years in Italy, embarked for America, which, by 1524.
opening such a boundlcfs range to aive talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his ambitious
thoughts. There, Pizarro early diflinguiflhed himself. With
a temper of mind no less daring than the constitution of his
body was robust, he was foremost in every danger, patient
under the greatefl hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read, he was oon
confidered as a man formed to command. Every operation
committed to his conduct proved successful, as, by a happy but
rare conjunCtion, he united perseverance with ardour, and was
as cautious in executing, as he was bold in forming his plans.
By engaging early in aive life, without any resource but his
own talents and industry, and by depending on himself alone
in his firuggles to emerge from obscurity, he acquired such a
thorough knowledge of affairs, and of men, that he was fitted
to assume a superior part in conducting the one, and in govern-
ing the other .

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent as Pizarro. The

one was a bastard, the other a foundling. Bred, like his com-
panion, in the camp, he yielded not to him in any of the fol-
dierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable activity, or
insurmountable conflancy in enduring the hardships inseparable
from military service in the New World. But in Alniagro
there virtues were accompanied with the openness, generosity,

C Herrera, dec. I & 2, pallim. dec. 4. lib. vi, c. 107. Gomara lill. c. 144.
Zarate, lib. iv, c. 9.

and

B 째0 K and candour natural to'men whose profession is arms; in Pi-

V[.
- I zarro, they were united with the address, the craft, and the
'5"4' dissimulation of a politician, with the art of concealing his own

purposes, and with sagacity to penetrate into those of other
men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclefiafiic, who aded both

as priest and schoolmaster at Panama, and, by means which
the contemporary writers have not described, had amafled riches
that inf)ired him with thoughts of rising to greater emi-

nence.

Terms of SUCH were the men defined to overturn one of the most ex-
their aocia- tensive empires on the face of the earth. Their confederacy for this

purpose was authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in the adventure.
Pizarro, the least wealthy of the three, as he could not throw
so large a fulm as his associates into the common stock, engaged
to take the departmentof greatest fatigue and danger, and to com-
mand in person the armamentwhichwas to go firfi upon discovery.
Almagro offered to conduct the supplies of provisions and rein-
forcements of troops, of which Pizarro might fland in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to ncgociate with the gover-
nor, and filperintend whatever was carrying on for the gcneral
illtcrcfl. As the fl)irit of cnthultlafin uniformly accompanied
that cf aven)turc in tlhe New Woildl, and by that flrange union
botl acquired an incrcalf of force, this confederacy, formed by
ambition and avarice, was confirmed by the noft solemn at
of religion. Luquc cclclbratd mass, divided a consecratcd hofl
into three, and rcfrving one part to himfclf, gave the other
two to his afsociatcs, of which they partook; and thus, in name

of
15o

of the Prince of Peace, ratified a contract of which plunder and B O0 ) K
bloodshed were the objeds d. i_-

1524.

THE attempt was begun with a force more fiited to the rrhi:rr::,t-

humble condition of the three adventurers, than to the greatness tC'"1'"
of the enterprise in which they were engaged. Pizarro fit fail Nov. 14.
from Panama with a tingle vefial, of small burden, and a hun-
dred and twelve men. But in that age, so little were the Spa-
niards acquainted with the peculiarities of climate in America,
that the time which Pizarro chose for his departure was the
most improper in the whole year; the periodical winds, which
were then 'et in, being directly adverse to the course which he
purposed to fleer . After beating about for seventy days, with
much danger and incessant fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards 1525.
the south-east was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at several places on
the coast of Tierra Firme, but found every where the fame un-
inviting country which former adventurers had described; the
low grounds converted into swamps by the overflowing of
rivers; the higher, covered with impervious woods; few in-
habitants, and those fierce and hostile. Famine, fatigue, fre-
quent rencounters with the natives, and, above all, the diftern-
pers of a moist, sultry climate, combined in wafting his slender
band of followers. The undaunted resolution of their leader Attinded
continued, however, for some time, to fltain their ifirits, al- wit'lll"'le
though no sign had yet appeared of discovering thole golden
regions to which he had promicd to conduct them. At length,
he was obliged to abandon that inhospitable coast, and retire to

Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. vi, c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. i. c lcrrcra, dec. 4.
ib. ii. c. 8. Xerez. p. 179.

Chucllam;la,
5

ISt

B 0 0 K Chuchama, opposite to the pearl islands, where he hoped to

V. .---..- receive a supply of provisions and troops from Panama.
152+.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port with seventy men,

flood direetly towards that part of the continent where he hoped
to meet with his associate. Not finding him there, he landed
his soldiers, who, in searching for their companions, underwent
the fame difireffes, and were exposed to the fame dangers, which
had driven them out of the country. Repulsed at length by
the Indians in a sharp conflit, in which their leader loft one
of his eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were com-
pelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the place of Pizarro's
retreat, where they found tome consolation in recounting their
adventures, and comparing their fufl'erings. As Almagro had
Julle 24. advanced as far as the river St. Juan, in the province of Po-

payan, where both the country and inhabitants appeared with
a more promising apet, that dawn of better fortune was
Iufficient to determine such sanguine projectors not to abandon
their scheme, notwithstanding all that they had suffered in
prosecuting it .

They rcdrme ALMAIGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of recruiting their
the underak-
hrng. i shattered troops. But what he and Pizarro had suffered, gave

his countrymen such an unfavourable idea of the service, that it
was with difficulty he could levy fourscore men . Feeble as this
rcinforcclent was, they did not hesitate about resuming their
operations. After a long series of dilafters and disappointments,
not inferior to those which they had already experienced, part
of the armament reached the Bay of St. Matthew, on the coall

f Hcrrera, (ec. 3. lib. viii. c. 1I, z. See NOT E XXX.

i,,4i,t 1,1,, i. i.. ,.
I52

of
3

153

of Quito, and landing at Tacamez, to the south of the river of B Y K
Emeraulds, they beheld a country more champaign and fertile
than any they had yet discovered in the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad in garments of woollen or cotton fluff, and adorned
with several trinkets of gold and silver.

BUT notwithstanding those favourable appearances, magni-

sied beyond the truth, both by the vanity of those who brought
the report fiom Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of
those who listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not
venture to invade a country so populous with a handful of men,
enfeebled by fatigue and diseases. They retired to the finall
island of Gallo, where Pizarro remained with part of the troops,
and his afociate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement, as might enable them to take poffefilon
of the opulent territories whose existence seemed to be no longer
doubtful .

BUT some of the adventurers, les enterprising, or less hardy P;zarro re-

called bv the

than their leaders, having secretly conveyed lamentable ac- governor of
counts of their sufferings and lofies to their friends at Panama, Panama.
Almagro met with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the government of that
settlement. After weighing the matter, with that cold oecono-
mical prudence, which appears the firfl of all virtues to per-
sons whose limited faculties are incapable of conceiving or exe-
cuting great dcfigns, he concluded an expedition, attended with
ifch certain wafle of men, to be so detrimental to an infant
and feeble colony, that he not only prohibited the raising of

'' Xcrt. 181. Ilcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 13.
VoL. 1I.

X

Inew

B o0 K new levies, but dispatched a vessel to bring home Fizarro and

VI.
'--.. his companions from the island of Gallo. Almagro and Luque,

though deeply affeced with these measures, which they could
not prevent and durfl not oppose, found means of communicat-
ing their sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to relinquish an enterprise which was the foundation of all
their hopes, and the only means of re-establishing their repu-
tation and fortune, that were both on the decline. Pizarro's
mind, bent with inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to perfifl in the scheme. lEe peremptorily re-
Pe f:ls ihis fused to obey the governor of Panama's orders, and employed

all his addrcfs and eloquence in persuading his men not to
abandon him, But the incredible calamities to which they
had been exposed were frill so recent in their memories, and
the thoughts of revisiting their families and friends after a
long absence, rushed with such joy into their minds, that when
Pizarro drew a line upon the sand with his sword, permitting
such as wifihed to return home to pass over it, only thirteen of
all the daring veterans in his service had resolution to remain
with their commander'.

THIS fiall, but determined band, whose names the Spanish

historians record with deserved praise, as the persons to whose
perlevering fortitude their country is indebted for the molt va-
luable of all its American possessions, fixed their refidcnce in
the illand of Gorgona. This, as it was farther removed from
the coalt than Gallo, and uninhabited, they confidered as a
more lecure retreat, where, unmolested, they might wait for
filpplics from Panama, which they truflcd that the aivity of

i L-lcrrl, ldec 3.

3 I, x. x c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. z. Xcrez, 181. (jonara [li,
c. I)..ir

thcir
'51

their associates there would be able to procure. Almagro and B , Kl
Luque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and their inceflant -
importunity was seconded by the general voice of the colony,
which exclaimed loudly against the infamy of exposing
brave men, engaged in the public service, and chargeable
with no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal and
courage, to perish like the most odious criminals in a desert
island. Overcome by those intreaties and expoflulations, the
governor at last consented to fend a small veifel to their relief.
But that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any new
enterprise, he would not permit one land-man to embark on
board of it.

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had remained EIHa'clips he

five months in an island, infamous for the mofl unhealthy
climate in that region of America k. During all this period,
their eyes and hopes were turned towards Panama, in hopes
of succour from their countrymen, but worn out at lengtl with
fruitless expectations, and dispirited with suffering hardffiips of
which they saw no end, they, in despair, came to a resolution of
committing themfelvcs to the ocean on a float, rather than con-
tinue in that detestable abode. But, on the arrival of the vcefel
from Panama, they were transportcd with such joy, that all
their sufferings were forgotten. Their hopes revived, and, with
a rapid transition, not unnatural among men accuflomcd by
their mode of life to sudden vicifitudes of fortune, hligl coin-
fidence succeeding to extreme dcjection, Pizarro cafily induced
them to resume their former scheme with fefl ardour. Infllca
of returning to Panama, they flood towards the foutl calt, and

Sec N OTr XXXI.

X 2 l1mo'e

B o0 K more fortunate in this than in any of their palt efforts, they,

V1.
'-----_ on the twentieth day after their departure from Gorgona, dif-

:,z6.

Dircovers covered the coast of Peru. After touching at some places of
Pe". less note, they landed at Tumbez, a place of ome note, above

three degrees south of the line, diftinguifled for its flately tem-
ple, and a palace of the Incas or sovereigns of the country
There the Spaniards feasted their eyes with the firt view of
the opulence and civilization of the Peruvian empire. They
beheld a country fully peopled, and cultivated with an ap-
pearance of regular induflry; the natives decently clothed,
and poffefied of ingenuity so far surpassing the other inha-
bitants of the New World, as to have the ife of tame
domeflic animals. But what chiefly attracted their notice,
was fuich a show of gold and silver, not only in the orna-
ments of their persons and temples, but in several vessels
and utensils for common use, formed of the fame precious
metals, as left no room to doubt that they abounded with pro-
fusion in the country. Pizarro and his companions seemed
now to have attained to the completion of their mofl sanguine
hopes, and fancied that all their wiflies and dreams of rich do-
mains, and inexhaustible treasures, would loon be realized.
Rerns to BUT with the slender force then under his command, Pizarro

anaa. could only view the rich country of which he hoped hereafter to

obtain poffeflion. He ranged, however, for ome time' along
1527. the coast, maintaining every where a peaceable intercourse with

the natives, no less astonished at their new visitants, than the
Spaniards were with the uniform appearance of opulence and
cultivation which they beheld. Having explored the country

Calanclia, p. 103.

as
,-6

as far as was requisite to ascertain tile importance of tlie disco- B 0 K

VI.

very, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants ibme of tlicir -.,_
Llamas or tame cattle, to which the Spaniards gave the name of '
fhleep, some velTels of gold and silver, as well as fime fpeci-
mens of their other works of ingenuity, and two young men,
whom lie proposed to inflrut in the Cafilian laiguage, that
they might fcrve as interpreters in the expedition which lie me-
ditated. With these he arrived at anama, towards the clole
of the third year from the time of his departure thence "'. No
adventurer of the age suffered hlrdlhips or encountered dangers
wvliich cqual those to which lie was exp) cd during this long
period. The patience with which lie endured the one, and the
fortitude with which lie surmounted the other, exceed what-
cver is recorded in the hiltory of the New \orld, where so
many romantic displays of those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave of the in- 1528.

Ne.v ciemes

credible opulence of the country which he had dilcovered, nor of tie afbo-
his bitter complaints on account of that unfealonable recal of ciates.
his forces, which had put it out of his power to attempt mak-
ing any fcttlement there, could move the governor of Panama
to swerve from his fbrmer purpole. He Qill contended, that the
colony was not in a condition to invade such a mighty empire,
and refused to authoricf an expedition which lie foresaw would
I)e so alluring that it Imight ruin tle province in which he pre-
fided, by an eftort be)yond its strength. His coldness, however,
did not in any degree abate the ardour of the three associates;
but they perceived that they could not carry their fchcme into
execution without the countenance of fupilcior authority, and

"' feIrrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7, 8. Vega, z. lib, i.
< lo-1 i. Zailte, lib. i.. 2. 2 Icnzo lin. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. .

must
3

157

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B o0 I mull solicit their fovcreign to grant that permiflion which they

VI.
-h-v could not extort from his delegate. With this view, after ad-
'5'8. jllting among theinfelves that Pizarro should claim the station

of Governor, Allnagro that of lieutenant-governor, and Lu-
'que the dignity of bishop in the country which they purposed
to conquer, they sent Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though
their fortunes were now so much exhausted by the repeated
efforts which they had made, that they found ome difficulty
in borrowing the small fum requisite towards equipping him
for the voyage ".

Pz: rro Ciit PIZAIRRO loft no time in repairing to court, and new as the
,guc'ai't. scene might b to him, he appeared before the emperor with

the unembarraffed dignity of a man, conscious of what his ser-
vices merited; and he conducted his negociations with an in-
linuating dexterity of address, which could not have been
cxpected either from his education, or former habits of life.
His feeling description of his own sufferings, and his pompous
account of the country which he had discovered, confirmed by
the specimens of its produaions which he exhibited, made such
an impreflion both on Charles and his ministers, that they not
only approved of the intended expedition, but seemed to be
interefled in the success of its leader. Presuming on those dif-
positions in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the

Neple&as is intcreft of his aflociates. As the pretensions of Luque did
:4 ,cia.cs ,

not interfere with his own, he obtained for Iiim, the ec-
clefiaflical dignity to which he aspircd. For Almagro, lie
claimed only the command of the fortrcfs which flould be
erected at Tumbcz. To himself he securcd whatever his

" Ierr ia, dcc. 'l lib, iii . . . Vega, 2. .
l i . c 14,

boundlcfs
7

Boundless ambition could desire. He was appointed governor, B K

VI.

captain general, and adelantado of all the country which he ,----
had discovered, and hoped to conquer, with fupremne authority, Ju'5 26.
civil as well as military; and a full right to all the privileges alcd procure
and emoluments usually granted to adventurers in the New co:lil nm d to
World. His jurifdiEtion was declared to extend two hundred
leagues along the coafl to the south of the river St. Jago, to be
independent of the governor of Panama; and he had power to
nominate all the officers who were to serve under him. In re-
turn for those conccffions, which cost the court of Spain no-
thing, as the enjoyment of them depended upon the success of
his own efforts, Pizarro engaged to raise two hundred and fifty
men, and to provide the flhips, arms, and warlike flores requi-
iite towards fubjeding, to the crown of Caflile, the country of
which the government was allotted him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was,' which Pizarro S',nl r si ce

had undertaken to raire, his funds and credit were so low tiat to,,,.."i
he could hardly complete half the number; and after obtain- :.
ing his patents from the crown, he was obliged to flcal pri-
vately out of the port of Sevillc, in order to elude the fcrutilny
of the officers who had it in charge to examine whether lie ad
fulfilled the flipulations in his contra ". Itcfbrc lis departulre,
however, he received fbome liipply of money fron( Cortes, \ li)
having rcturned to Spain about this time, was vx.'iing to con-
tribute his aid towards enabling an ancient cwnltpa.itm, \nith
whole talents and courage lie was well acq(lliiittcd, to bcegiln .
career ofglory imniliar to that which lie lhimiifll' iIad fnlifilcl '.

* llciecr, dec. . tl). vii. c. 9. I' l 1d. b. 'ii c. i-.

.11 ;:

159

B 0 I HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched across the

VI.

isthmus to Panama, accompanied by his three brothers, Ferdi-
15 29 nand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of whom the fir was born in law-

ful wedlock, the two latter, like himself, were of illegitimate
birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.
They were all in the prime of life, and of such abilities and
courage, as fitted them to take a distinguishcd part in his sub-
sequent tranfations.

.J3o. ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro bound Almagro so much

His reconci-
iaion with exasperated at the manner in which lih had conduted his ne-
Allnagro gociation, that he not only retuied to a any longer in concert

with a man by whose perfidy he had been excluded from the
power and ho'nours to which he had a just claim, but laboured
to form a new aflociation, in order to thwart or to rival his for-
mer confederate in his discoveries. Pizarro, however, had
more wisdom and address than to susser a rupture so fatal to all
his schemes, to become irreparable. By offering voluntarily to
relinquish the office of adelantado, and promising to concur in
soliciting that title, with an independent government for Al-
magro, he gradually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted
soldier, which had been violent, but was not implacable. Lu-
que, highly atisfied with having been successful in all his own
pretensions, cordially seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A recon-
ciliation was effetecd; and the confederacy renewed on its ori-
ginal terms, that the cnterprile should be carried on at the
common expence of the aociates, and the profits accruing
from it should be equally divided among them .

1 Ittrrera, dec. 4 lib. vii. c, 9. Zirate, lib. I. c. 3. Vcg., 2. Jib. ib . 14.

EVEN
16o

EVEN after their re-union, and the utmof efforts of their B 째0 K

VI.

interest, three small vessels, and a hundred and eighty soldiers,
thirty-fix of whom were horsemen, composed the armament Thcir arna-
which they were able to fit out. But the aflonilhing progress ment.
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them with such
ideas of their own superiority, that Pizarro did not hesitate to 153,.
fail with this contemptible force to invade a great empire. Al- Feb'uary
magro was left at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with
whlat reinforcement of men he flould be able to muller. As the
season for embarking was properly chosen, and the course of
navigation between Panama and Peru was now better known,
Pizarro completed the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the
force of the winds and currents, he was carried above a hundred
leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place of his destination,
and obliged to land his troops in the bay of St. Matthew.
Without losing a moment, he began to advance towards the
south, taking care, however, not to depart far from the sea- Lnids in
shore, both that he might easily effed a jundion with the sup-
plies which he expeced from Ianama, and secure a retreat in
cafe of any disaster, by keeping as near as poflible to his flips.
But as the country in several parts on the coast of Peru is bar-
ren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled ; as the Spaniards had to
pass all the rivers near their mouth, where the body of water is
greatef; and as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-
tives when he should have fludied to gain their confidence, had
forced them to abandon their habitations; famine, fatigue, and
difeaefs of various kinds, brouglt upon him and his followers
calamities hardly inferior to those which they had endured in
their former expedition. What they now experienced corrc-
fponded o ill with the alluring dfcription of the country givel,
by Pizarro, that many began to reproach Iiiin, and every lfldicr
mufft have become cold to the fcrvice, if, even in this unfertile

VOL. II. Y region

I6i

B ;c1째 K region of Peru, they had not met with fomc appearances of

wealth and cultivation, which feermed to junify the report of

15 jl. their leader. At length they reached the province of Coaque;
Apil 14. and, having surprised the principal icttlcment of the natives,

they seized there veficls and ornaments of gold and silver, to
the amount of thirty thousand pesos, with other booty of such
value, as dispelled all their doubts, and inspired the most de-
fponding with ianguine hopes '.

His mea2ftres PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with this rich
for obtaining
a reinfoice- spoil, which he conlidercd as the firif-fruits of a land swing
"elt. with treasure, that he instantly dispatched one of his hips to

Panama with a large remittance to Almagro; and another to
Nicaragua with a considerable fum to some persons of influence
in that province, in hopes of alluring adventurers, by this early
display of the wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdaining to employ
any means of reducing the natives but force, he attacked them
with such violence in their scattered habitations, as compelled
them either to retire into the interior country, or to submit to
his yoke. This fuddcn appearance of invaders, whose apee-
and manners were so firange, and whose power seemed to be
so irresistible, made the fame dreadful impression as in other
parts of America. Pizarro hardly met with resistance until lie
attacked the island of Puna in the bay of Guayquil. As that
was better peopled than the country through which lie had
pafled, and its inhabitants fierccr and lels civilized tlan tholc
of the continent, they defended themfclves with fiuch obslinatc
valour, that Pizarro spent fix months in reducing tlhem to i'ilb-
,jcdiion. From Puna he proceeded to Tumbcz, where the di짙-

' Ilerrcra, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. . lib. ii. c. . Xercs. 182.
162

T

temlpers

tempers that raged among his men compelled him to remain i O. I'
,for three months . -

1532.

\VHILE he was thus employed, lie began to reap advantage

'from his own attention, to fprcad the fame of his first success
at Coaque. Two different detachments arrived fiom Nica-
ragua, which, though neither exceeded thirty men, he con- f,:'i.ns
idecrel as a reinforcement of great consequence to his feeble and c""rinuc

to advancc.

band, especially as the one was under the command of Sebaf-
tian Bcnalcazar, and the other of Hernando Soto, officers not
inferior in merit and reputation to any who had served in
America. From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, and May i1.
in an advantageous station near the mouth of it, he eflabliflhcd
the firPt Spanish colony in Peru; to which he gave the name of
St. Michael.

As izarro continued to advance towards the centre of the

Peruvian empire, he gradually received more full information
concerning its extent and policy, as well as the situation of its
affairs at that junaure. WVithout some knowledge of these, he
could not have conducced his operations with propriety; and
without a suitable attention to there, it is impollible to account
for the progrcfs which the Spaniards had already made, or to
*unfold tlh caules of their fulbfeqlucnt fucccls.

Sta!e of the

ATr the tiim when tlhe Spaniards invaded Peru, tlhe domi- pC,.Iv:,,, cl

nions of its sovereigns extended in length, fiomn north to south, pit'c
above siften hundred miles along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth,
from carl to well, was much leils confiderablc; being uniformly

P. S.mcho ap. Ra.,,,. iii. p. 371, F. IUerrcra, dec. . lib. vii. c. 18. lib. ix. c. ,1
'.arltc, lib. ii. c. 2, 3. Xcrcs, pi. i' z, &c.

. 63
Y 2

bounded

B o0 K bounded by the vait ridge of the Andes, fretching from its one

VI. .l-.--.. extremitv to the other. Peru, like the reft of the New World,
153z.

was originally possessed by small independent tribes, differing
from each other in manners, and in their forms of rude policy.
All, however, were so little civilized, that, if the traditions
concerning their mode of life, preserved among their descend-
ants, deserve credit, they muff be classed among the mofi un-
improved savages of America. Strangers to every species of
cultivation or regular industry, without any fixed residence,
and unacquainted with those sentiments and obligations which
form the firfl bonds of social union, they are said to have
roamed about naked in the forests, with which the country
was then covered, more like wild beasts than like men. After
they had firuggled for several ages with the hardships and ca-
lamities which are inevitable in this barbarous state, and when
no circumstance seemed to indicate the approach of any un-
common effort towards improvement, we are told that there
appeared on the banks of the lake Titiaca, a man and woman
of majestic form, and clothed in decent garments. They
declared themselves to be the children of the Sun, ent by their
beneficent parent, who beheld with pity the miseries of the
human race, to inflruct and to reclaim them. At their per-
suasion, enforced by reverence for the divinity in whose name
they were supposed to speak, several of the dispersed savages
united together, and receiving their commands as heavenly in-
juncions, followed them to Cuzco, where they fettled, and
began to lay the foundations of a city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for filch were the names

of those extraordinary personages, having thus collccled some
wandering tribes, formed that social union, which, by multi-
plying the desires, and uniting the efforts of the human species,

excites
164

excites induttry, and leads to improvement. Manco Capac ol l K
infiruded the men in agriculture, and other useful arts. Mama ----
Ocollo taught the women to spin and to weave. By the labour
of the one sex, fubfifence became less precarious; by tlat of
the other, life was rendered more comfortable. After securing
the objects of first ncceflity in an infant slate, by providing
food, raiment, and habitations for the rude people of whom
he took charge, Manco Capac turned his attention towards
introducing such laws and policy as might perpetuate their
happiness. By his inflitutions, which flall be more particu-
larly explained hereafter, the various relations in private life
were eftablihed, and the duties resulting from them prescribed
with such propriety, as gradually formed a barbarous people to
decency of manners. In public adminifiration, the fun&ions
of persons in authority were so precisely defined, and the sub-
ordination of those under their jurifdiaion maintained with
such a heady hand, that the society in which he presided, soon
assumed the aspet of a regular and well-governed slate.

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was founded the

empire of the Itcas or Lords of Peru. At first, its extent was
small. The territory of Manco Capac did not reach above
eight leagues from Cuzco. But within its narrow precinats,
he excrcifcd absolute and uncontrolled authority. Iis fuccef-
fors, as their dominions expanded, arrogated a similar jurifilic-
tion over their fubjcds: the dcfpotilf of Asia was not more
complete. The Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but
revered as divinities. lTheir blood was held to be sacred, and,
by prohilbiting iinterlarri::gcs witll tle people, was never con-
tamninated by mixinig vitli thiat of any other race. Tlie tamily,
thus separatcd from tlhe rcfl of the nation, was dillinguillhcd

by,

165

B o K Y

by peculiarities in.drefs and ornaments, -which it was unlawful
-- -- for others to aume. The monarch himself appeared with

53 ' ensigns of royalty referred for him alone; and received from

his fuljcelqs, marls of obsequious homage and refpet, which
.approached almofi to adoration.

BULT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded power of their

,monarchs is aid to have been uniformly accompanied with at-
tention to the good of their fubljes. It was not the rage of
conquest, if we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions, but the
desire of diffusing the bleflings of civilization, and the know-
ledge of the arts which they poffefied, among the barbarous
people whom"they reduced. During a succession of twelve
monarchs, it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
character '

W-IEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of Peru, in

:the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, Huana
Capac, the twelfth monarch from the founder of the slate,
was feated on the throne. He is represented as a prince
diflinguiflled not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to
the race, but eminent for his martial talents. By his vic-
torious arms the kingdom of Quito was fubjcded, a con-
quest of fich extent and importance as almost doubled the
.power of the Peruvian empire. He was fond of residing in
the capital of that valuable province, which he had added to
his dominions; and, notwithfianding the ancient and funda-
mental law of the monarchy against polluting the royal blood
'Cie;a d Lcon, Chroll. c. 4.1 I-lerrcia, dec. 3. lib. x c. 4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

by

by any foreign alliance, he married the daughter of the van- B o0 IK
quihed monarch of Quito. She bore him a son named Atahual- _---
pa, whom, on his death at Quito, which fccms to have happened 53.
about the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-nine, he
appointed his fucceflbr in that kingdom, leaving the reit of his
dominions to Huafcar, his eldest son, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory of a monarch
who had reigned with more reputation and splendour than any of
his predecessors, the dcfiination of H-uana Capac concerning the
succession, appeared so repugnant to a maxim coeval with the
empire, and founded on authority deemed sacred, that it was
no fooncr known at Cuzco than it excited general difguit. En-
couraged by those sentiments of his fubjecls, Huafcar required
his brother to renounce the government of Quito, and to ac-
knowlcdge him as his lawful superior. But it had been the
first care of Atahualpa to gain a large body of troops which
had accompanied his father to Quito. These were the flower
of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour Huana Capac had
been indebted for all his victories. Relying on their fipport,
Atahualpa firfl eluded his brother's demand, and then marched
against him in hostile array.

Tus the ambition of two young men, the title of tlie one

founded on ancient usage, and that of tle otlier assertcd by the
veteran troops, involved P'let ill ci\il war, a calamity, t>
which, under a ftlcccfiion of virtuouts princes, it lhad Ilithlirto
been a firanger. Inc a coitcll, tlh i!lte was oblviot:s
force of arms triu lliltd over the authoiity of laws. Atillitill.
remained vidorioiis, a1nd 1m lc a crulel tie of Ilis virlolr. Coi-
Ciious of the dL'cL il l o\VII title to the crown1 , lie attclll)tc'i
to extermlini:lt th iL r ';il racc, by lp tting to death all [lIc cliil-
dren of the Sn dc;cL ' Lll

f lo L
M ic CMic Iac, whom li c()uld

l i- c

167

B 00 K seize either by force or fratagem. From a political motive,

VI.

'. --- the life of his unfortunate rival Huafcar, who had been taken
1532Z prisoner in the battle which decided the fate of the empire,

was savcd for some time, that, by issuing orders in his name,
the usurper might more easily eftablilh his own authority ".

Favourable to WIHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Matthew, this civil
the progrfs war raged between the two brothers in its greatest fury.
of Pizarro.

Had he made any hostile attempt in his former visit to Peru
in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-feven,
he must then have encountered the force of a powerful
state, united under a monarch, possessed of capacity and
courage, and unembarraffed with any care that could divert
him from opofing his progress. But at this time, the two
competitors, though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon
the operations of a war, which they deemed more intereiting,
that they paid no attention to the motions of an enemy, too
inconsiderable in number, to excite any great alarm, and to
whose career, it would be easy, as they imagined, to give a
check when more at leisure.

-re avils i im- BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof Pizarro could
self of it, and
advances. have no foresight, and of which, from his defective mode of in-

tcrcourfc with the people of the country, he remained long igno-
rant, he was permitted to carry on his operations umoleflted,
and advanced to the centre of a great empire before one effort
of its power was exerted to flop his progress. During their pro-
grefs, the Spaniards had acquired fonme impcrfct knowledge of
this flilrggle between the two contending factions. The firfl coin-

Z ialate, lib. i. c. . Vega, i. lib. ix. c. iz anl 32-40. Hericra, dec. .
lil). i. c. . ib. iii. c. 17.

pIcte
i68

l

plete information, with refpea to it, they received from mef- B o o K
fengers whom Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in order to solicit his t_---
aid against Atahualpa, whom he represented as a rebel and an ' 52'
usurper ". Pizarro perceived at once the importance of this in-
telligence, and foresaw so clearly all the advantages which might
be derived from this divided state of the kingdom which he had
invaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement which he
expected from Panama, he determined to push forward, while
intefline discord put it out of the power of the Peruvians
to attack him with their whole force, and while, by taking
part, as circumstances should incline him, with one of the
competitors, he might be enabled with greater ease to crufli
both. Enterprising as the Spaniards of that age were in all
their operations against Americans, and diflinguiihed as Pizarro
was among his countrymen for daring courage, we can hardly
suppose, that after having proceeded hitherto slowly, and with
much caution, he would have changed at once his system of
operation, and have ventured upon a measure so hazardous,
without some new motive or prospect to justify it.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, in order to leave a State of his

garrison in St. Michael, sufficient to defend a ltation of equal forces.
importance as a place of retreat in cafe of any difatler, and as a
port for receiving any supplies which fliould come from Panama,
he began his march with a very slender and ill-accoutred train of
followers. They consisted of fixty-two horsemen , and a hun-
dred and two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed with
cross-bows, and three with muskets. He direted his course
towards Caxamalca, a small town at the distance of twelve days

" Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3. See NOTE XXXI.
VOL. I. Z7 march

I69

o
0 K march from St. Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
VI.
~ ---. a considerable body of troops. Before he had proceeded far,

5532. an officer dispatched by the Inca met him with a valuable pre-

sent from that prince, accompanied with a proffer of his alliance,
and assurances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca. Pizarro,
according to the usual artifice of his countrymen in America,
pretended to come as the ambassador of a very powerful mo-
narch, and declared that he was now advancing with an inten-
tion to offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who dif-
puted his title to the throne .

Ideas of the As the object of the Spaniards in entering their country was
Peruvians concerning altogether incomprehensible to the Peruvians, they had formed
their designs. various conjectures concerning it, without being able to decide

whether they hould confider their new guests as beings of a
superior nature, who had visited them from some beneficent
motive, or as formidable avengers of their crimes, and enemies
to their repose and liberty. The continual professions of the
Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them with the know-
ledge of truth, and lead them in the way of happiness, favoured
the former opinion; the outrages which they committed, their
rapaciousness and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the latter.
While in this state of uncertainty, Pizarro's declaration of his
pacific intentions so far removed all the Inca's fears, that he
determined to give him a friendly reception. In consequence
of this resolution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in
tranquillity across the sandy desert between St. Michael and
Motupe, where the most feeble effort of an enemy, added to,
the unavoidable distresses which they suffered in passing through,

Y Herrcra, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3. Xerez. p. 189.

that
70o

that comfortless region, must have proved fatal to them ". B K
From Motupe they advanced towards the mountains which en-
compass the low country of Peru, and passed through a defile 1'i'
so narrow and inaccessible, that a few men might have defended
it against a numerous army. But here likewise, from the fame
inconsiderate credulity of the Inca, the Spaniards met with no op-
position, and took quiet possession of a fort erected for the fecu-
rity of that important fation. As they now approached near to
Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his professions of friendship;
and as an evidence of their sincerity, sent them presents of
greater value than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took possession of a large Arrive at

court, on one fide of which was a house which the Spanish Caxai'alca.
hiflorians call a palace of the Inca, and on the other a temple
of the Sun, the whole filrrounded with a strong rampart or wall
of earth. When he had pofled his troops in this advantageous
station, he dispatched Hernando Soto, and his brother Ferdi-
nand, to the camp of Atahualpa, which was about a league
diflant from the town. He inftruded them to confirm the de-
claration which he had formerly made of his pacific disposition,
and to desire an interview with the Inca, that he might explain
more fully the intention of the Spaniards in visiting his country.
They were treated with all the refpedful hospitality usual among
the Peruvians in the reception of their most cordial friends,
and Atahualpa promised to visit the Spanish commander next
day in his quarters. The decent deportment of the Peruvian
monarch, the order of his court, and the reverence with which
his fubjeds approached his person and obeyed his commands,
afloniflhed those Spaniards, who had never met in Amerisa with

See NOTE XXXIII.

Z 2 any

17I

B 0V K any thing more dignified than the petty cazique of a barbarous
x.-__-/ tribe. But their eyes were still more powerfully attracted by

'132. the vafi profusion of wealth which they observed in the Inca's

camp. The rich ornaments worn by him ad his attendants,
the vessels of gold and silver in which the repast offered to them
was served up, the multitude of utensils of every kind formed
of those precious metals, opened profpeats far exceeding any
idea of opulence that a European of the sixteenth century could
form.

Peifidious ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds were yet
scheme of Pi.
zarro. warm with admiration and desire of the wealth which they had

beheld, they gave such a description of it to their countrymen,
as confirmed Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
From his own observation of American manners during his long
service in the New World, as well as from the advantages which
Cortes had derived from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what
consequence it was to, have the Inca in his power. For this
purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was perfidious. Not-
withstanding the character he had assumed of an ambassador
from a powerful monarch, who courted an alliance with the
Inca, and in violation of the repeated offers which he had made
to him of his own friendflip and axiftance, he determined to
avail himself of the unfiifpicious simplicity with which Ata-
hualpa relied on his professions, and to seize his person during
the interview to which he had invited him. He prepared for
the execution of his scheme with the fame deliberate arrange-
ment, and with as little compuntion, as if it had reflected no
disgrace on himself or his country. He divided his cavalry into
three finall squadrons, under the command of his brother Ser-
dinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his infantry were formed in

5 one
I72

I73

one body, except twenty of most tried courage, whom he kept B O K
near his own person to support him in the dangerous service '--v--
which he reserved for himself; the artillery, confifing of two 53
field-pieces' and the crofs-bowmen, were placed opposite to the
avenue by which Atahualpa was to approach. All were com-
manded to keep within the square, and not to move until the
signal for ation was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was all in mo- Nov. 6.
tion. But as Atahualpa swas olicitous to appear with the Visited by the

tion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous

to appear with the Inca.

greatest splendour and magnificence in his first interview with
the strangers, the preparations for this were so tedious, that
the day was far advanced before he began his march. Even
then, left the order of the procession should be deranged, he
moved so slowly, that the Spaniards became impatient and ap-
prehenfive that some suspicion of their intention might be the
cause of this delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro dispatched
one of his officers with fresh assurances of his friendly difpofi-
tion. At length the Inca approached. First of all appeared
four hundred men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to clear
the way before him. He himself, fitting on a throne or couch,
adorned with plumes of various colours, and almost covered
with plates of gold and silver enriched with precious flones,
was carried on the houlders of his principal attendants. Behind
him came some chief officers of his court, carried in the fame
manner. Several bands of fingers and dancers accompanied
Ihis cavalcade; and the whole plain was covered with troops,
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

a Xcrcz, p. 94.

As

B o o K As the Inca drew near the Spanifl quarters, father Vincent

V[.

L ,..

1-. Valverde, chaplain to the expedition, advanced with a crucifix

Strange ha- il one hand, and a breviary in the other, and in a long dif-
rangue of fa- course explained to him the doctrine of the creation, the fall
,ther Val-
verdc. of Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refurredion of

Jesus Chrilt, the appointment of St. Peter as God's vicegerent
on earth, the transmission of his apostolic power by fucceflion
to the popes, the donation made to the king of Caltile by pope
Alexander of all the regions in the New World. In confe-
quence of all this, he required Atahualpa to embrace the Christian
faith, to acknowledge the fuipreme jurifdiaion of the pope, and
to submit to the king of Caflile as his lawful sovereign, pro-
mifing, if he complied instantly with this requisition, that the
Castilian monarch would protect his dominions, and permit
him to continue in the exercise of his royal authority; but if
he ihould impiously refuse to obey this summons, he denounced
war against him in his mater's name, and threatened him with
the most dreadful effects 9f his vengeance.
Reply of the THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep mysteries, and al-

lca. luding to unknown facts, of which no power of eloquence

could have conveyed at once a diflint idea to an American,
was so lamely translated by an unskilful interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish tongue, and incapable
of expressing himself with propriety in the language of the Inca,
that its general tenor was altogether incomprehensible to Ata-
hualpa. Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with atoniflment and indignation. His reply, however,
was temperate. He began with observing, that he was lord of
the dominions over which he reigned by hereditary Lfcceflion;
and added, that he could not conceive how a foreign priell

ea~~~2~~~~ fliould
74

'75

lhould pretend to dispose of territories which did not belong to B 0 O K
him; that if such a preposterous grant had been made, he, who -
was the rightful poffeflbr, refused to confirm it; that he had ,532.
no inclination to renounce the religious institutions established
by his ancestors; nor would he forsake the service of the Sun,
the immortal divinity whom he and his people revered, in order
to worship the- God of the Spaniards, who was subjet to death;
that with refpea to other matters contained in his discourse, as
he had never heard of them before, and did not now understand
their meaning, he desired to know where he had learned things
so extraordinary. " In this book," answered Valverde, reach-
ing out to him his breviary. The Inca opened it eagerly, and
turning over the leaves, lifted it to his ear: " This," fays he,
" is silent; it tells me nothing ;" and threw it with disdain
to the ground. The enraged monk, running towards his
countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Christians, to arms; the
word of God is insulted; avenge this profanation on those im-
pious dogs b."

PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, had with dif- Pizarroat-

tacks the P-

ficulty refrained his soldiers, eager to seize the rich spoils of ruvian,,
which they had now so near a view, immediately gave the
signal of assault. At once the martial music struck up, the
cannon and muskets began to fire, the horse sallied out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry rushed on sword in hand. The
Peruvians, atonifhed at the suddenness of an attack which they
did not expect, and dismayed with the deftruftive effects of the
fire-arms, and the irrefiflible impression of the cavalry, fled
with universal consternation on every fide, without attempting
either to annoy the enemy, or to defend themselves. Pizarro,

b Sec NOTE XXXIV.

at

B /0 K at the head of his chosen band, advanced diretly towards the

--- Inca; and though his nobles crowded around him with offi-

9. cious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while they vied

one with another in sacrificing their own lives, that they might
cover the sacred person of their sovereign, the Spaniards oon

and seizes tle penetrated to the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by
Inca.

the arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him as a
prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the monarch increased
the precipitate flight of his followers. The Spaniards pursued
them towards every quarter, and with deliberate and unrelent-
ing barbarity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives, who
never once offered at refinance. The carnage did not cease
until the close of day. Above four thousand Peruvians were
killed. Not a single Spaniard fell, nor was one wounded but
Pizarro hiAfelf, whose hand was slightly hurt by one of his
own soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay hold on the
Inca c.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any idea which the

Spaniards had yet formed concerning the wealth of Peru, and
they were so transported with the value of the acquisition, as
well as the greatness of their success, that they pased the night
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent adventurers
on such an extraordinary change of fortune.
Dejeaion of AT first the captive monarch could hardly believe a calamity

th Inca which he so little expected to be real. But he soon felt all the

misery of his fate, and the dejection into which he funk was
in proportion to the height of grandeur from which he had
fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the advantages which he

c See NOTEXXXV.

hoped
176

177

hoped to derive from the possession of such a prisoner, laboured B O O 1
to console him with professions of kindness and refpcr, that - .----
corresponded ill with his aions. 3y rcfiding among the Spa- 1532.
niards, the Inca quickly discovered their ruling passion, which,
indeed, they were no-wise solicitous to conceal, and by apply-
ing to that, made an attempt to recover his liberty. He offered His offer of

a ranolll.

as a ransom what aflonifhed the Spaniards, even after all they
now knew concerning the opulence of his kingdom. The
apartment in which he was confined was twenty-two feet in
length and sixteen in breadth; he undertook to fill it with
veflels of gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed eagerly
with this tempting proposal, and a line was drawn upon the
walls of the chamber, to mark the flipulatcd height to which
the treasure was to rife.

ATAIUALPA, transported with having obtained ome pro-

fpet of liberty, took measures instantly for fulfilling his part
of the agreement, by fending messengers to Cuzco, Qito, and
other places, where gold had been amassed in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or the houses of
the Inca, to bring what was necessary for completing his ran-
fom direcly to Caxanmalca. Though Atahualpa was now in
the custody of his enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians
accuflomed to refpcd every mandate issued by their fovcrcign,
that his orders were executed with the greatest alacrity. Soothed
with hopes of recovering his liberty by this means, the fubjels
of the Inca were afraid of endangering his life by forming any
other fchcme for his relief; and though the force of the empire
was flill entire, no preparations were made, and no army aflcmblcd
to avenge their own wrongs or those of their monarch . Tile

Xcrcz, zo5.
VoL. II. A a Spaniards

B O K Spaniards rcmaincd in Caxamalca tranquil and unmolefledc

VI.
...- , Small detachments of their number marched into remote pro-

The Spa. vinllC of the empire, and instead of meeting with any oppo-
ninids visit fitinn, were every where received with marks of the moll sub-
d,ff'rcnt Fro
vinces. mis\ive rceftieCa

A!magro ar- INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and desirous as Pi-
rtves ,vith a
reinforc- a

zarro might be to obtain ome knowledge of the interior state

Xlent. of the country, he could not have ventured upon any diminu-
December. tion of his main body, if he had not about this time received

an account of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael with
fiuch a reinforcement as would almofr double the number of his
followers . The arrival of this long-expeted succour was not
more agreeable to the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca.
HIe saw the power of his enemies increase; and as he knew
neither the source whence they derived' their supplies, nor the
means by which they were conveyed to Peru, he could not
forefe to what a height the inundation that poured in upon
his dominions might rife. While disquieted with such appre-

1533. henlions, he learned that ome Spaniards, in their way to Cuzco,
liiafar put had vilited his brother Huafcar in the place where he kept him

confined, and that the captive prince had' represented to them
the justice of his own caufc, and as an inducement to espouse it,
had promised them a quantity of treasure vaitly exceeding what
he had engaged to pay for his ransom. If the Spaniards should
linen to this proposal, he perceived his own defrudion to be
inevitable; and fufrpeding that their insatiable thirfd for gold
would tempt them to lend a favourable ear to it, he determined
to sacrifice his brother's life, that he might save his own; and his

See NOTE XXXVL r Xcrz, z20. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. , 2.

8 order
178

orders for this purpose were executed, like all his other corn- B O K
mands, with scrupulous punCtuality s. - .-

153.3-
MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxamalca from dif- The Spa.

niards make

ferent parts of the kingdom, loaded with treasure. A great adivifion of
part of the flipulated quantity was now amafred, and Atahualpa the oil
assured the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented the
whole from being brought in, was the remoteness of the pro-
vinces where it was deposited. But such vail piles of gold, pre-
sented continually to the view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed
their avarice, that it was inpoffible any longer to restrain their
impatience to obtain possession of this rich booty. Orders were
given for melting down the whole, except some pieces of cu-
rious fabric, reserved as a present for the emperor. After set-
ting apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred thousand
pesos as a donative to the soldiers which arrived with Almagro,
there remained one million five hundred and twenty-eight
thousand five hundred pesos to Pizarro and his followers.
The feltival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was the July zS.
day chosen for the partition of this vaRl fum, and the manner
of conduting it strongly marks that firange alliance of fana-
ticism with avarice, which I have more than once had occasion
to point out as a striking feature in the character of the con-
querors of the New World. Though aflcmblcd to divide
the spoils of an innocent people, procured by deceit, extor-
tion, and cruelty, the tranfaclion began with a solemn invo-
cation of the name of God ', as if they could have expeed
the guidance of Heaven in distributing those wages of ini-
quity. In this division above eight thousand pesos, at that
time not inferior in value to as many pounds Sterling in the

E Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomara Ilift. c. 115. Herrcrn, dec.. lib. iii. c. 2.
" HIcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

i79

nc..l lt
a 2

B oo ; present century, fell to the flare of each horseman, and half

'-- ' that fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his officers,
1533. received dividends in proportion to the dignity of their rank.

The effea of TIlERE is no example in history of such a sudden acquisition
it. of wealth by military service, nor was ever a fum so great di-

vided among so finall a number of soldiers. Many of them
having received a recompence for their services far beyond their
nmofl sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire fiom fatigue
and danger, in order to spend the remainder of their days in their
native country, in ease and opulence, that they demanded their
discharge with clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that
from such men he could exped neither enterprise in ation nor
fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that wherever they went,
the display of their riches would allure adventurers, less opulent
but more hardy, to his flandard, granted their suit without re-
luctance, and permitted above sixty of them to accompany his
brother Ferdinand, whom he ent to Spain with an account of
his success, and the present destined for the emperor'.

The Tnca de- TrHE Spaniards having divided among them the treasure
,nady hi' amafled for the Inca's ransom, he insisted with them to fulfil

ai. itheir promise of setting him at liberty. But nothing was far-

ther from Pizarro's thoughts. During his long service in the
New World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of his
fcllow-loldiers, which led them to confider its inhabitants as an
inferior race, neither worthy of the name, nor intitlcd to the
rights, of men. In his compact with Atahualpa, he had no
other object than to aufe his captive with such a proflipc of

i lerera, dec . lib. iii. c. . Vega, p. , lib. i. c. 38.

rccovering
18o0

recovering his liberty, as might induce him to lend all the aid B 0 0 K
of his authority towards collecting the wealth of his kingdom. -
Having now accomplished this, he no longer regarded his '53'
plighted faith, and at the very time when the credulous prince
hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had fccretly rcfolved to
bereave him of life. Many circumflances fcem to have con-
curred in prompting him to this aion, the mol criminal and
atrocious that slains the Spanish name, amidst all the deeds of
violence committed in carrying on the conquct of the New
World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imitation of Cor- Heandtlie

tes's condua towards the Mexican monarch, he did not possess rmutuilljca
talents for carrying on the fame artful planof policy. Deflitute lou.
of the temper and address requisite for gaining the confidence
of his prisoner, he never reaped all the advantages which might
have been derived from being mafler of his person and autho-
rity. Atahualpa was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and
discernment than Montezuma, and seems to have penetrated
more thoroughly into the character and intentions of the Spa-
niards. Mutual suspicion and diltruf accordingly took place
between them. The ftrid attention with which it was necef-
fary to guard a captive of such importance, greatly increased
the fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping him ap-
peared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him as an incumbcr-
ance, from which he wished to be delivered k

ALrMATGRo and his followers had made a demand of an Almagro and

hi= fllowc rs

equal flarc in the Inca's ransom ; and though Pizarro had dcmrnnd his
bestowed upon the private men the large gratuity which I li

L Iecrrcra, dec. 5. lib, ii, c. .

18i

have
I

B 0 0 K have mentioned, and endeavoured to tooth their leader by pre-

VI.

.r_ I sents of great value, they still continued dissatisfied. They

w33 ere apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa remained a
prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever treasure
should be acquired, to make up what was wanting of the quan-
tity flipulated for his ransom, and under that pretext exclude
them from any part of it. They infifled eagerly on putting the
Inca to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might thereafter
be on an equal footing'.

Motives PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with accounts of
which induc-
edI'izarroto forces assembling in the remote provinces of the empire, and
content. fufpeded Atahualpa of having ifrued orders for that purpose.

These fears.and suspicions were artfully increased by Phillppillo,
one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off from Tumbez
in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty, and whom he
employed as an interpreter. The funcion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the captive mo-
narch, heprefumed, notwithstanding the meanness of his birth, to
raise his affeaions to a Coya, or descendant of the Sun, one of
Atahualpa's wives ; and feeing noprofpet of gratifying that pas-
sion during the life of the monarch, he endeavoured to fill the
ears of the Spaniards with such accounts of his secret dcfigns
and preparations, as might awaken their jealousy and incite
them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly demanded the life

of the Inca, and Philippillo laboured to ruin him by private
machinations, that unhappy prince inadvertently contributed
to haflen his own fate. During his confinement he had at-

Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. 2. lib. i. c. 7. Herrera. dec. . lib. iii. c. 4.

tached
182

tachled himself with peculiar affeCtion to Fcrdinand Pizarro and B o K

V 1.

Ilernando Soto; who, as they weli pcrfons of birth and edu- --
cation fiperior to the rough adventurers with whom they 1'33.
servcd, were accuflomcd to bhave with more decency and at-
tention to the captive monarch. Soothed with this rcfpet
firom persons of such high rank, he dclighed in their society.
But in the pretence of the governor he was uneasy, and over-
awed. This dread soon came to be mingled with contempt.
Among all the European arts, what he admired moil was that
of reading and writing; and he long deliberated with himself,
whether he should regard it as a natural or acquired talent. In
order to determine this, he desired one of the soldiers, who
guarded him, to write the name of God on the nail of his thumb.
This he flewed successively to several Spaniards, asking its
meaning; and to his amazement, they all, without hesitation,
returned the fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he blushed, and with ome confusion was
obliged to acknowledge his ignorance. From that moment,
Atahualpa confidered him as a mean person, less inftruted
than his own oldiers ; and he had not address enough to con-
ceal the sentiments with which this discovery inspired him. To
be the object of a barbarian's scorn, not only mortified the pride
of Pizarro, but excited such resentment in his breat, as added'
force to all the other considerations which prompted him to put
the Inca to death '".

BUT in order to give ome colour of juflice to this violent 1-is trial.

adion, and that he himself might be exempted from standing
singly responsible for the commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to

I-errcra, dec. 5, lib, iii. c. 4. Vcgn, p, I . lib, i. c. 38.

try

B O째v K try the Inca with all the formalities observed in the criminal
- _-J- courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro, with two

533. affiflants, were appointed judges, with full power to acquit

or to condemn ; an attorney-general was named to carry on
the prosecution in the king's name; counsellors were chosen to
affifl the prifoncr in his defence; and clerks were ordained to
record the proceedings of court. Before this strange tribunal,
a charge was exhibited still more amazing. It confifed of va-
rious articles; that Atahualpa, though a bafRard, had difpofleffed
the rightful owner of the throne, and usurped the regal power;
that he had put his brother and lawful overeign to death; that
he was an idolater, and had not only permitted, but commanded
the offering of human sacrifices; that he had a great number of
concubines; that since his imprisonment he had wafted and em-
bezzled the royal treasures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjets to take arms against
the Spaniards. On these heads of accusation, some of which
are so ludicrous, others so absurd, that the effrontery of
Pizarro, in making them the foundation of a serious proce-
dure, is not less surprising than his injultice, did the court
go on to try the sovereign of a great empire, over whom it
had no jurifdiaion. With rcfpea to each of the articles, wit-
nefies were examined; but as they delivered their evidence in
their native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power to give their
words whatever turn belt fited his malevolent intentions.
To judges predetermined in their opinion, this evidence appeared

ie s crn- frilicient. They pronounced Atahualpa guilty, and condemned
dl ictned.

him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde proftituted the authority
of his lacred funtion to confirm this sentence, and by his fig-
naturc warranted it to be jufl. Aftoniihcd at his fate, Ata-
hualpa endeavourcd to avert it by his tears, by promiifes, and

by
184

ty entreaties, that he might be sent to Spain, where a monarch B 0

o K

would be the arbiter of his lot. But pity never touched the -
unfeeling heart of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led instantly 1s33'
to execution; and what added to the bitterness of his last
moments, the fame monk who had just ratified his doom, of-
sered to console, and attempted to convert him. The most
powerful argument Valverde employed to prevail with him to
embrace the Christian faith, was a promise of a mitigation in
his punishment. The dread of a cruel death extorted from the
trembling victim a desire of receiving baptism. The ceremony
was performed; and Atahualpa, instead of being burnt, was and exectted.
strangled at the stake ".

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation, even among Several Spa-

the profligate adventurers which it sent forth to conquer and niards protet
desolate the New World, there were persons who retained some
tinaure of the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, before
the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had set out for Spain,
and Soto was sent on a separate command at a distance from Cax-
amalca, this odious tranfadion was not carried on without censure
and opposition. Several officers, and among those some of the
greatest reputation and most refpeaable families in the service,
not only remonstrated, but protested against this measure of their
general, as disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and an ufurpa-
tion ofjurifdition over an independent monarch, to which they
had no title. But their endeavours were vain. Numbers, and
the opinion of such as held every thing to be lawful which

" Zarate, lil'. ii. C. 7. Xcrez. p. 33. Vega, p. . lib. i. C. 36, 37. Gninara
Hil. . 17. IIel era, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

VOL. II. B b they

B 0 0 K they deemed advantageous, prevailed. History, however, re-

--- . cords even the unsuccessful exertions of virtue with applause;
*533. and the Spanifl writers, in relating events where the valour

of their nation is more conspicuous than its humanity, have
.not failed to preserve the names of those who made this laudable
effort to save their country from the infamy of having perpe-
trated such a crime .

Diflolution of ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invested one of his sons
nd order in with the ensigns of royalty, hoping that a young man without
Perul experience might prove a more passive instrument in his hands,

than an ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to inde-
pendent command. The people of Cuzco, and the adjacent
country, acknowledged Manco Capac, a brother of Huafcar,
as Inca P. But neither possessed the authority which belonged
to a sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into which
the empire had been thrown, first by the civil war between the
two brothers, and then by the invasion of the Spaniards, had
not only deranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld their monarch
a captive in the power of strangers, and at last suffering an ig-
nominious death, the people in several provinces, as if they had
been set free from every restraint of law and decency,. broke
out into the most licentious excesses q. So many descendents of
the Sun, after being treated with the utmost indignity, had been
cut off by Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the slate
diminiflhed with their number, but the accustomed reverence
fo.r that sacrcd race sensibly decreased. In consequence of this

e Vega, p. 1I. lib. i. c. 37. Xcrez. i. 235. Herrcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. 5.

Vega, p. i .
1 lib. ii. c. 7. ' Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. lib. iii. c. 5.

fatc
i6

Rtate of things, ambitious men in different parts of the empire B 00 K

VI.

aspired to independent authority, and usurped jurifdiion to - -~
which they had no title. The general who commanded for 133'
Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother and children of his
master, put them to a cruel death, and disclaiming any con-
neCtion with either Inca, endeavoured to eflablifh a separate
kingdom for himself'.

THE Spaniards, with pleafurle, beleld the spirit of discord p;,lro d.

diffusing itself, and the vigour of government relaxing among ,nc to
the Peruvians. They confidered those disorders as symptoms
of a fate hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had received such
considerable reinforcements, that he could venture, with little
danger, to penetrate so far into the interior part of the country.
The account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca, operated as
he had foreseen. No sooner did his brother Ferdinand, with
the officers and soldiers, to whom he had given their discharge
after the partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their aftonifled country-
men, than fame spread the account with such exaggeration
through all the Spanish settlements on the South Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua, could hard-
ly restrain the people under their jurifdi'tion, fromi abandon-
ing their pofTefions, and crowding to that inexhaufliblc source
of wealth which seemed to be opened in Peru'. In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers retorted thither,
that Pizarro began his march at the head of five undred

Zaratc, lib. ii. c, 8. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 3, .
' G rn aia Ilia. c. 25. Vega, p. i i. lit). ii. c. i. llcrrcra, dcc 5. , lb. iii. c. , .

b men,

187

B 0 0 K men, after leaving a considerable garrison in St. Michael, under

VI.
-_ the command of Benalcazar. The Peruvians had assembled;
'533 some large bodies of troops to oppose his progress. Several

fierce encounters happened. But they terminated, like all the
aCtions in America; a few Spaniards were killed or wounded;
the natives were put to flight with incredible slaughter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took quiet pof-
session of that capital. The riches found there, even after all
that the natives had carried off and concealed, either from a
fuperfitious veneration for the ornaments of their temples, or
out of hatred for their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in value
what had been received as Atahualpa's ranfomn. But as the
Spaniards were now accustomed to, the wealth of the count-ry,.
and it came to be parcelled out among a greater number of ad-
venturers, this dividend did. not excite the fame surprise either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fuam that fell to the Mhare
of each individual,'.

DURING the march. to Cunco that son of Atahualpa. whom

Pizarro treated as Inca, died, and as the Spaniards substituted;
no person in. his place, the title of Manco Capac seems to have
been uiverfally recognized ".

Quto con. WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed, Benalcazar,
quered by governor of St, Michael, an able and enterprising officer, was.
Btnalcazarpising

aflamed of remaining inactive, and impatient to have his name
distinguished among the discoverers and conquerors of the
New World. The seasonable arrival of a fresh body of recruits
from Panama and Nicaragua, put it in his power to gratify

' Se NOTE XXXVII. ' l-erra, dec. 5. lib. v. c. z.

this
188

this passion. Leaving a sufficient force to protec the infant B K
settlement entrufled to his care, he placed himself at the head .I--
of the reft, and set out to attempt the reducion of Quito, '533
where, according to the report of the natives, Atahualpa had
left the greatest part of his treasure, Notwithstanding the vast
distance of that city from St. Michael, the difficulty of march-
ing through a mountainous country covered with woods, and.
the frequent and fierce attacks of the best troops in Peru, com-
manded by a skilful leader, the valour, good conduct, and per-
severance of Benalcazar surmounted every obstacle, and he en-
tered Quito with his victorious troops. But they met with a
cruel mortification there. The natives, now acquainted, to
their sorrow, with the predominant passion of their invaders)
and knowing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpet of which had prompted them to under-
take this arduous expedition, and had supported them under all
the dangers and hardships wherewith they had to struggle in.
carrying it on".

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader who at- Alvarado',

tacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame of its riches attraed expdition
a more powerful enemy. Pedro de Alvarado, who had dif-
tinguifhed himself so eminently in the conquest of Mexico,
having obtained the government of Guatimala as a recompence
for his valour, soon became disgusted with a life of uniform
tranquillity, and longed to be again engaged in the bustle of
military service. The glory and wealth acquired by the con-
querors of Peru heightened this passion, and gave it a deter-

1 Zarate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 9. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 1, 12.
lib. v. c. 2, 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

mined'

199

139
B o0 K mined direc1ion. Believing, or pretending to believe, that the

VI.
t - kingdom of Quito did not lie within the limits of the province

' 33' allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade it. The high repu-

tation of the commander allured volunteers from every quarter.
He embarked with five hundred men, of whom above two hun-
dred were of such distinCtion as to serve on horseback. He
landed at Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient knowledge of
the country, or proper guides to conduct him, attempted to
march direcly to Quito, by following the course of the river
Guayquil, and crofling the course of the Andes towards its
head. But in this route, one of the most impradicable in all
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing their way
through forests and marshes on the low grounds, and suffered
ib inuchf from exceflive cold when they began to ascend the
mountains, that before they reached the plain of Quito, a fifth
part of the men and half of their horses died, and the refl were
so much dispirited and worn out, as to be almost unfit for ser-
vice . There they met with a body, not of Indians but of
Spaniards, drawn up in hostile array againfl them. Pizarro,
having received an account of Alvarado's armament, had de-
tached Almagro with ome troops to oppose this formidable in-
vader of his jurifdicion ; and these were joined by Benalcazar
and his victorious party. Alvarado, though surprised at the
fight of enemies whom he did not expect, advanced boldly to
the charge. But, by the interposition of ome moderate men
in each party, an amicable accommodation took place; and the
fatal period, when Spaniards suspendcd their conquefs to em-
bruc their hands in the blood of their countrymen, was post-
poned a few years. Alvarado engaged to return to his go-

Y Scc NOTE II XXX\'V;1.

VCler'IlcnIIt',

vernment, upon Almagro's paying him a hundred thousand B O0/ K
pesos to defiay the expence of his armament. Mofl of his -
followers remained in the country; and an expedition, which 153+.
threatened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed to
augment its strength .

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in Spain. Tle I-Ionors con-

immense quantities of gold and ilver which he imported , zaro ad A-.
filled the kingdom with no less astonishment than they had "'!r째'
excited in Panama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was re-
ceived by the emperor with the attention due to the bearer of a
present so rich as to exceed any idea which the Spaniards had
formed concerning the value of their acquisitions in America,
even after they had been ten years mailers of Mexico. In re-
compence of his brother's services, his authority was confirmed
with new powers and privileges, and the addition of seventy
leagues, extending along the coast, to the southward of the
territory granted in his former patent. Almagro received the
honours which he had so long desired. The title of Adelan-
tado, or governor, was conferred upon him, with jurifdilion
over two hundred leagues of country, firetching beyond the
southern limits of the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand
himself did not go unrewarded. IIe was admitted into the
military order of St. Jago, a diflinion always acceptable to a
Spanifl gentleman, and soon set out on his return to Peru,
accompanied by many persons of higher rank, than had yet
served in that country b

2 Zarate, lib. 2. c. 10-13. Vegn, p. I1. lib. ii. c. , 2. 9, &c. Gonara IIifl.
c. 126, &c. Renme al. ilt. Guatiial. lib. iii. c. 6. Ilcrrcra, dec. . lib. vi. c. 1, 2.7, 8.

a Sec NOTE XXXIX. u Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. i I. lib. ii. c. 19.
Hcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c, 13.

19I

SOME
I.

B 0 0 K SOME account of his negociations reached Peru before he

VI.

<-,- *- arrived there himself. Almagro no sooner learned that he had
Beginning of obtained the royal grant of an independent.government, than,

'tween Pro pretending that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas, lay
,mad Almagro. within its boundaries, he attempted to render himself mafler of

that important fiation. Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared
to oppose him. Each of the contending parties was supported
by powerful adherents, and the dispute was on the point of
being terminated by the sword, when Francis Pizarro arrived
in the capital. The reconciliation between him and Almagro
had never been cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in engrossing
to himself all the honours and emoluments, which ought to have
been divided with his associate, was always present in both
their thoughts. The one, conscious of his own perfidy, did
not expet forgiveness; the other, feeling that he had been
deceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though avarice
and ambition had induced them not only to dissemble their fen-
timents, but even to at in concert while in pursuit of wealth
and power, no sooner did they obtain poffeflion of these, than
the fame passions which had formed this temporary union,
gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each of them was at-
tached a small band of interested dependents, who, with the ma-
licious art, peculiar to such men, heightened their suspicions,
and magnified every appearance of offences. But with all those
feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus aiduoufly cherished,
,each was so thoroughly acquainted with the abilities and cou-
rage of his rival, that they equally dreaded the consequences
of an open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at Cuzco,
and the address mingled with firmness, which he manifetled in
his expostulations with Almagro and his partizans, averted that
evil for the present. A new reconciliation took place; the chief

4 article
192

article of which was, that Almagro should attempt the con- B o 0o 0
quest of Chili; and if he did not find in that province an efta- ----
blifhment adequate to his merit and expectations, Pizarro, by 34
way of indemnification, hould yield up to him a part of Peru. J-ie 12
This new agreement was confirmed with the fame sacred so-
lemnities as their first contract, and observed with as little
fidelity c.

SOON after he concluded this important tranfadion, Pizarro Regul.aions

marched back to the countries on the sea coai, and as he now of Pizarro.
enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, undiflurbed by any enemy,
either Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that perfc-
vering ardour, which diffinguifhes his character, to introduce a
form of regular government, into the extensive provinces sub-
jet to his authority. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any disquisition concerning the principles of civil
policy, and little accustomed by his former habits of life to
attend to its arrangements, his natural sagacity supplied the
want both of science and experience. He distributed the coun-
try into various difries; he appointed proper magifirates to
preside in each; and established regulations concerning the ad-
ministration of justice, the collection of the royal revenue, the
working of the mines, and the treatment of the Indians, ex-
tremely simple, but well calculated to promote the public
prosperity. But, though, for the present, he adapted his plan
to the infant tfate of his colony, his aspiring mind looked
forward to its future grandeur. He confidered himself as lay- Foundation of
ing the foundation of a great empire, and deliberated long, Lil"a.
and with much solicitude, in what place he should fix the `cat

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 13. Vega, p. I. lib. ii. . 19. BcMzo, lib. iii. c. . IHcrrcra,
dec. . lib. vii. c. 8.

VOL. II. C c of

193

B OOV K of government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the Incas, was
4~ -'- situated in a corner of the empire, above four hundred miles-

5134" from the Tea, and much farther from Quito, a province of whose

value he had formed an high idea. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name of a town,
or to allure the Spaniards to fix their residence in it. But, in
marching through the country, Pizarro had been truck with
the beauty and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
moit extensive and belt cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks
of a small river, of the fame name with the vale which it wa-
ters and enriches, at the distance of fix miles from Callao, the
molt commodious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded a
city which h destined to be the capital of his government.

'53i5 He gave it the name of Ciudad de los Reyes, either from the
Jaay circumstance of having laid the first sone, at that season when

the church celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or, as is
more probable, in honour of Juanna and Charles, the fove-
reigns of Castile. This name it fill retains among the Spaniards,
in all legal and formal deeds; but it is better known to so-
reigners by that of Lima, a corruption of the ancient appel-
lation of the valley, in which it is situated. Under his in-
fpedion, the buildings advanced with such rapidity, that it
soon assumed the form of a city, which, by a magnificent pa-
lace that he ereced for himself, and by the flately houses built
by several of his officers, gave, even in its infancy, ome in-
dication of its subsequent grandeur d.

A'niagro in- IN consequence of what had been agreed with Pizarro, AI-
vades chihi. magro began his march towards Chili; and as he poflefed ia

1 Iterrern, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. z2, lib, vii, c. 13.. Calancho Coronica, lib. i. c. 37.
Barnuiuo, Lima fundada, ii. 294,

an
J94:

an eminent degree the virtues most admired by soldiers, bound- B 0 1
less liberality and fearless courage, his itandard was followed by l--
five hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of Europeans 's35
that had hitherto been assembled in Peru. From impatience
to finish the expedition, or from that contempt of hardship and
danger acquired by all the Spaniards who had served long in
America, Almagro, instead of advancing along the level coun-
try on the coast, chore to march across the mountains by a route
that was fhortcr indeed, but almost impracicable. In this at-
tempt his troops were exposed to every calamity which men
can susser, from fatigue, from famine, and from the rigour of
the climate in those elevated regions of the torrid zone, where
the degree of cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the survivors, when
they descended into the fertile plains of Chili, had new difficul-
ties to encounter. They found there a race of men very dif-
ferent from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,
and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigour of spirit,
nearly resembling the warlike tribes in North America. Though
filled with wonder at the first appearance of the Spaniards, and
still more aftoniflled at the operations of their cavalry and the
effeas of their fire-arms, the Chilefe oon recovered so far
fiom their surprise, as not only to defend thenmfelvcs with ob-
flinacy, but to attack their new enemies with more determined
fierccnefs than any American nation had hitherto difcovcred.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate into the coun-
try, and collecled frome conliderable quantities of gold ; but
were so far fiom thinking of making any Icttlcmicnt amidfl
such formidable ncighbours, that, in spite of all tile experience
and valour of their lcader, the final ilfTie of the expedition fill
remained extremely dubious, when they were recalled from it

Cc 2 by

BO3 0 by an unexpected revolution in Peru '. The causes of this I

V.
. ,' shall endeavour to trace to their source..

1535.

An ifurrec- So many adventurers had flocked' to-Peru- from every Spa.
tion of the
Peruvians. nifh colony in America, and all with such high expectations of

accumulating in-dependent fortunes at once, that, to men pof-
sessed with notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient industry, would
have been not only a disappointment, but an infalt. In order
to find occupation for men who could not with- safety be allowed
to remain inacive, Pizarro encouraged some of the most diftin-
guifhed officers who had lately joined him, to invade different
provinces of the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed-for this purpose.;
and about the time that Almagro set out -for Chili, they marched.
Its rife into remote diftrics of the country. No sooner did Manco Capac,

the Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of the Spaniards.iin
thus dispersing their troops, and that only a handful of men
remained in Cuzco, under Juan and Gonzalez. Pizarro, than he
thought that the happy periodwas at length come for vindicating
his own rights, avenging. the wrongs of his country, and ex-
tirpating its oppressors. Though fridly watched by the Spa-
niards, who allowed him to reside in the palace of his anceflors
at Cuzco, he found means of communicating his scheme to the
persons who were to be entrufled with the execution of..it.
Among people accustomod to revere their sovereign as a divi-
nity, every hint of his will carries the authority of a command;
and they themselves were now convinced, by the daily increase
in the number of their invaders, that the fond. hopes. which

c Zarate, lrb. iii. c i. Gomara I-lt. c. 131. Vega, p. 2. lib. ii. c. 20. Ovalle
lill. de Chile, lib, iv, c. 15, &c. Hlcrrra, dtc. 5. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. x. c. I, &c.

?.* they
I96

they had long entertained of their voluntary departure were B K
altogether vain. All perceived that a vigorous effort of the
whole nation was requisite to expel them, and the preparations 535
for it were carried on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to
Americans.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca to make his and progrefsi

escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening to arrive at that time in
Guzco, he obtained permission from him to attend a great fefli- 1536.
val which was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capital.
Under pretext of that solemnity, the great men of the empire
were assembled. As soon as the.Inca joined them, the.ftandard
of war was ereced; and in a short time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili, were in
arms. Many Spaniards, living securely on the fcttlements al-
lotted them,. were massacred- Several detachments, as they
marched carelessly through a country which seemed to be. tamely
submissive to their dominion, were cut off to a man. An army
amounting (if we may believe the Spanish writers) to two hun-
dred thousand men attacked. Cuzco, which the three brotlhrs
endeavoured to defend with only a hundred and seventy Spa-
niards. Another formidable body invceted Lima, and kept tle
governor closely ihut up. There was no longer any commu-
nication between the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians freading. over. the country, intercepted every mef-
fengcr; and as the parties in Cuzco and Lima were cqually
unacquainted with쨌 the fate of their countrymen, each boded
the worlt concerning the other, and imagined that they tlicm-
felvcs were the only persons who had survivcd .the general ex-
tinaion of the Spanilli name in Peru.'.

'' Vega, p. ii. lib. ii. c, 28. Zarate, lit,. iii. c. 3. Cicca dc Lcon, c. 8z. Co-
ni(ra llil, . 35. llcrrra, dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5.

I-t

B o K Ir was at Cuzco, whcre the Inca commanded in person, that

VI.
.-쨌- the Peruvians made their chief effort. During nine months

1536 SiegcofCuz. they carried on the icgc with incessant ardour, and in various
co. forlns; and though they displayed not the fame undaunted fe-

rocity as the Mexican warriors, they conduced ome of their
operations in a manner which discovered greater sagacity, and a
genius more susceptible of improvement in the military art.
They not only observed the advantages which the Spaniards
derived from their discipline and their weapons, but they en-
deavoured to imitate the former, and turn the latter against
tlhem. They armed a considerable body of their bravest war-
riors with the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they had
taken from the Spanifl soldiers whom they had cut off in dif-
ferent parts of the country. These they endeavoured to marshal
in that regular compad order, to which experience had taught
them that the Spaniards were indebted for their irrefiflible force
in aion. Some appeared in the field with Spanish -muskets,
and had acquired fill and resolution enough to use them. A
few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca himself, were
mounted on the horses which they had taken, and advanced
briskly to the charge like Spanish cavaliers, with their lances
in the reft. It was more by their numbers, however, than by
those impcrfet eflays to imitate European arts, and employ
European arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spaniards .
In spite of the valour, heightened by delfair, with which the
three brothers defended Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered pof-
feflion of one lialf of his capital; and before the Spaniards
could drive him out of it, they loft Juan Pizarro, the efl be-
loved of all the brothers, together with some other persons of
note. Worn out with the fatigue of incciant duty, distressed

Sec NOTE XL.

with
198

with want of provisions, and despairing of being able any longer B 째0 K
to resist an enemy whose numbers daily increased, the soldiers *- .- .
became impatient to abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining 1536.
their countrymen, if any of them yet survived, or of forcing
their way to the ea, and finding some means of escaping from
a country which had been so fatal to the Spanifl name '. While
they were brooding over those desponding thoughts, which.
their officers laboured in vain to dispel, Almagro appeared fud--
denly inthe neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts transmitted to Almagro concerning-the general Arival of A-

infurrefaion of the Peruvians, were fuch.as would have induced 'I""'gr
him, without hesitation, to relinquish the conquest of Chili, and
haften to the aid of his countrymen. But in this resolution he
was confirmed by a motive less generous, but more interesting. and motives
By the fame meffcnger who broughthim intelligence of the nca's ofrhi:con-
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him governorof Chili,
and defining the limits of hisjurifdiCion. Upon confidering the
tenor of it, he deemed it manifest beyond contradiction, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his government, and he was
equally solicitous to prevent the Peruvians from recovering pof-
fcflion of their capital, and to wrest it out of the hands of the.
Pizarros. From impatience to accomplish both, he ventured to
return by a new route; and in marching through the sandy
plains on the coafl, he fufl-ered, from heat and drought, cala-
mities of a new fpccies, hardly inferior to those in which lhe
had been involved by cold and famine on the funuinits of the
Andes.

Herrera, dc. . lib. viii. c. 1,

99
YI s

B. o o K HI-s arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment. The Spa-

vi.
---- 'niards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon him with equal so-

His opera. licitude. The former, as he did not study to conceal his pre-
t.ons. t-ensions, were at a loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer,

or to take precautions against him as an enemy. The latter,
knowing the points in contest between him and his country-
men, flattered themselves that they had more to hope than to
dread from his operations. Almagro himself, unacquainted
with the detail of the events which had happened in his ab-
fence, and solicitous to learn the precise pofiure of affairs,
advanced towards the capital slowly, and with great circuni-
fpeclion. Various negotiations with both parties were set on
foot. The Inca conducted them on his part with much address.
At firfi he .endeavoured to gain the friendship of Almagro;
and after many fiuitlefs overtures, despairing of any cordial
union with a Spaniard, he attacked him by surprise with a nu-
merous body of chosen troops. But the Spanifi discipline and
valour maintained their wonted superiority. The Peruvians
were repulsed with such slaughter, that a great part of their
army dispersed, and Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco
without interruption.

Takes pofreC- THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make head against the
sion of Cuzco.

Peruvians, directed all their attention towards their new enemy,
and took measures to obflrut his entry into the capital. Pru-
dence, however, restrained both parties for ome time from
turning their arms against one another, while surrounded by
common enemies, who would rejoice in the mutual slaughter.
Different `chemes of accommodation were proposed. Each
.endeavoured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his followers.

The
200

The generous, open, affable temper of Almagro gained many B K
adherents of the Pizarros, who were disgustcd ,ith tlieir harsh ----
domineering manners. Encouraged by this defecion, he ad-
vanced towards the city by night, furp:-ifed the ccntinels, or
was admitted by them, and investing the house where the two
brothers resided, compelled them, after an obflinate defence,
to firrender at discretion. Almagro's claim ofjurifdiion over
Cuzco was universally acknowledged, and a form of admini-
ftration established in his name .

Two or three persons only were killed in this firfl adt of civil ciji ,.

hoility; but it was soon followed by scenes more bloody. ce f ^-A
Francis Pizarro having dispersed the Peruvians who had in- mag;o,
veiled Lima, and received some considerable reinforcements
from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred mcii,
under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado, to march to Cuzco,
in hopes of relieving his brothers, if they and their garrison
were not already cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which,
in the infancy of the Spanish power in America, must be
deemed a considerable force, advanced near to the capital before
they knew that they had any enemy more formidable than In-
dians to encounter. It was with atfonifhment that they beheld
their countrymen posted on the banks of the river Abancay to
oppose their progress. Almagro, however, wishcd rather to
gain than to conquer them, and by bribes and promises endea-
voured to seduce their leader. The fidelity of Alvarado re-
mained unflaken; but his talents for war were not equal to
his virtue. Almagro anmufed him with various movements, of
whicl lie did not comprehend the meaning, while a large de- J,'y 12.

* Zaratc, lib. iii. c. . Vega, p. ii. lib. ii. c. 9. 31. GomIIaa Ililf, c. 13.
-Herera, dec. . lib. i,. c, i- .

VOL. II. 1) d tacliment

201

B V00 K tachmnnt of chosen soldiers passed the river by night, fell upon

VJ.
'-- ----- his camp by firprifc, broke his troops before they had time to

j37' form, and took him prisoner, together with his principal

oflicers h

htit d(oes rt BY the sudden rout of this body, the contcft between the
iraprove hsi
a vt t:ti'.5 two rivals mult have been decided, if Almagro had known as

well how to improve as how to gain a vicory. Rodrigo Or-
gognez, an officer of great abilities, who having served under
the conflable Bourbon, when he led the Imperial army to Rome,
had been accuflomed to bold and decisive counsels, advised him
instantly to issue orders for putting to death Ferdinand and
Gonzalo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons whom
lie could not hope to gain, and to march directly with his vic-
torious troops to Lima, before the governor had time to pre-
pare for his defence. But Almagro, though he discerned at
once the utility of the counsel, and had courage to have
carried it into execution, suffered himself to be influenced
by sentiments unlike those of a soldier of fortune grown
old in fervicc, and by scruples which suited not the chief of
a party who had drawn his sword in civil war. Ieelings of
humanity reflrained himn from fliedding the blood of his
opponents; and the dread of being deemed a rebel deterred him
from entering a province which the king had allotted to another.
Though lie knew that arms mufi terminate the dispute between
him and Pizarro, and resolved not to ihun that mode of deci-
sion, yet, witli a timid delicacy prepoflerous at such a juncqurc,
lie was so solicitous that his rival fiould be confidered as the

Zarate, ilb. iii. c. . Gom, IIit, c. 138. Vcga, p. 11. lib. ii. c, 33, 3 .. I!cr-
rern, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. ).

aggrc flr,
202

aggreflbr, that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait his !0
approach .

s 37.

PIZARRo was flill unacquainted with all the interefling D:! cr.,f

events that had happened near Cuzco. The account of Alma-
gro's return, of the loss of the capital, of the death of one bro-
tlcer, of the imprisonment of the other two, and of the defeat
of Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a tide of
misfortunes almost overwhelmed a pirit which had continued
firn and erel under the rudlet fiocks of adversity. lut the
neccflity of attending to his own safety, as wecll as the decire of
revenge, preserved him from inking under it. Ile took inca-
iurcs for both with his wonted sagacity. As he lhad the coin- lli :,fTl
mand of the fea-coafl, and expected considerable supplics both
of men and of military fores, it was no less his interest to gain
time, and to avoid aion, than it was that of Almagro to pre-
cipitate operations, and bring the contest to a fpecdy issue. He
had recourse to arts which he had formerly practiicd with fuc-
cess, and Almagro was again weak enough to furler hilnfelf to
be amused with a prospect of terminating their diflerlcnces by
tome amicable accommodation. By varying his overtures, and
flifting his ground as often as it suited his purpole, fomctimes
fccming to yield every thing that his rival could dclire, and
then rctracing all that he had granted, Pizarro dexteronfly pro-
tra&dcd the negociation to such a length, tlat though every day
was precious to Almagro, several months laipld wilitout coiinig
to any final agreement. While thle attention of Almnagro, and
of the ofliccrs with whom lie consultcd, vwas occulied in de-
tcting and eluding the fraudulent intentions o tlec goverlor,
(oiilzalo l'izarro and Alvarado found nmeans to corrupt tle bll-

I lciscr;,, dcc, 6. li). ii. c. o, 1 1.

1) d 2 dici.

0 K

1 ( diers to whore cfirody they were committed, and not only made

*-----' tthlir cfcape themiclvcs, but persuaded sixty of the men who
k''' formerly guarded them to accompany their flight k. Fortune

having thus delivered one of his brothers, the governor scrupled
not at one ad- of perfidy more to procure the release of the
other. He proposed, that every point in controversy between
Almagro and himfelffhould be submitted to the decision of their
sovereign; that until his award was known, each should retain
undisturbed pofffion of whatever part of the country he now
occupied; that Ferdinand Pizarro should be set at liberty, and
return inflantly to Spain, together with the officers, whom
Almagro purposed to fend thither to represent the justice of his
claims. Obvious as the design of Pizarro was in those propo-
fitions, and familiar as his artifices might now have been to his
opponent, Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua-
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an agreement on
there terms '.

ilisprep.ra- THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered his liberty,
ons for ,ar. the governor, no longer fettered in his operations by anxiety

about his brother's life, threw off every disguise which his con-
cern for it had obliged him to assume. The treaty was for-
gotten; pacific and conciliating measures were no more men-
tioned; it was in the field, he openly declared, and not in the
cabinet ; by arms, and not by negociation; that it must now be
determined who should be master of Peru. The rapidity of
his preparations suited such a decisive resolution. Seven hun-
i3. dred men were oon ready to march towards Cuzco. The corm-

k Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.

1 lerrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 9. Gomnara llil c. c. o.
Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c. 35.

Imalld
204

mand of these was given to his two brothers, in whom he B o o K

VI.

could perfecly confide for the execution of his most violent -
schemes, as they were urged on not only by the enmity flow-
ing from family rivalfhip, but animated with the desire of
vengeance, excited by recolletlion of their recent disgrace and
sufferings. After an unsuccessful attempt to cross' the moun-
tains in the direCt road between Lima and Cuzco, they march-
ed towards the south along the coast as far as Nafca, and then
turning to the left, penetrated through the defiles in that branch
of the Andes which lay between them and the capital. Alma-
gro, inflead of hearkening to some of his officers, who advised
him to attempt the defence of those difficult pafls, waited the
approach of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two rcafons
seem to have induced him to take this resolution. His followers
amounted hardly to five hundred, and he was afraid of weak-
ening such a feeble body, by fending any detachment towards
the mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the adverse
party, both in number and discipline, and it was only in an
open country that he could avail himself of that advantigc.

TH E Pizarros advanced without any obftrulion, but what li ay

arose from the nature of the defcrt and horrid regions through 'uzcL'"
which they marched. As oon as they reached the plain, both
fations were equally impatient to bring this long-protraced
contcfi to an ifluc. Though countrymen and friends, the sub-
iccs of the fame sovereign, and each witlI the royal flandard
displaycd ; and though they beheld the mountains that lir-
rounded the plain in which they were drawn up, covered with
a vast multitude of Indians, aebled to enjoy the fjctcacle of
their mutual carnage, and prepared to attack whatever party
remained maicer of the field ; so fell and implacable was the

6 rancour

205

B 0 0 K rancour which had taken poffefion of every bread, that not

, '
,,J one pacific counsel, not a ingle overture towards accommoda-

tion proceeded from either fide. Unfortunately for Almagro,
he was so worn out with the fatigucs of fcrvice, to which his
advanced age was unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, lie
could not exert his wonted aivity; and lie was obliged to
commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez, who, though
an officer of great merit, did not pofcefs the fame ascendant
either over the pirit or afFecions of the soldiers, as the chief
whom they had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

April z6. TiHE conflic was fierce, and maintain ed by each party with
A'.elaL, equal courage. On the fide of Almnagro, were more veteran

boldiers, and a larger proportion of cavalry, but these were
counterbalanced by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and by
two companies of well-difciplined muketeers, which, on re-
ceiving an account of the infurredion of the Indians, the em-
peror had sent from Spain m. As the ife of fire-arms was not
fiequent among the adventurers in America , haffily equipped
for service, at their own expence, this finall band of soldiers,
regularly trained and armed, was a novelty in Peru, and de-
cided the fate of the day. Wherever it advanced, the weight
of a heavy and well-fufiained fire bore down horse and foot
before it; and Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally and
animate his troops, having received a dangerous wound, the
rout became general. The barbarity of the conquerors slaincd
the glory which they acquired by tis complete iiory. The
violcnce of civil rage hurried on fT)me to slaughter their country-
men with indiicriminatc cruelty; the ncannels of private rc-
vcngc infligated others to ingle out indlividiuls as the objcis

Il riclra, dcc. 6. lib. iii. c. ?. n Zalr: , lib. iii. c. S.
2o

of
I

of their vengeance. Orgognez antd fveral oiccrs of d(ilinilon 째 1
were maifacred in cold blood ; above a hundred and iury f!- '------
diers fell in the field; a large proportion, where thic nnnbcr of
combatants was few, and the heat of the contest soon over.
Almagro, though so feeble that he could not bear the mntion!
of a horse, had infifed on being carried in a litter to an cmi-
nence which overlooked the field of battle. From thence, in
the utinoft agitation of mind, he viewed the various move-
ments of both parties, and at last beheld the total defeat of hi:;
own troops, with all the paflionate indignation of a veteran
leader long accuflomed to viLory. I-e endeavoured to ave aindl t;ikn.
hiinfelf by flight, but was taken prisoner, and guarded with
the flriteft vigilance 째.

THFE Indians, instead of executing the resolution which they

had formed, retired quietly after the battle was over; and in
the history of the New World, there is not a more friking in-
fiance of the wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had
acquired over its inhabitants, than that after feeing one of the
contending parties ruined and dispersed, and the other weak-
ened and fatigued, they had not courage to fall upon their ene-
mies, when fortune presentcd an opportunity of attacking them
.with fucht advantage ".

C:;.co was pillaged by i':e vilonrious troops, who found Nv c:lPc-

tlcrc a considerable booty, (cuniflilng partly of the gleanings of tlio:'"쨌
the Indian trcasurcs, and p:.ttly of the wealth amafred by their
antagonifls from the fioils of l'Peru and Chili. But so far (lid

/:.';t, lil). iii. c. i

, Ia. Vi\1;, I'* 1 I i'. ii. c. 36- 3S. lclr c:' , d:c. r.

Iii, iii. c. Ic- :, ilb. iv. c. i- 6. 1' Z.uate, lib. iii. ,. .l.

\' "

I
lib. ii. c. 3Y.

this,
a

207

B o0 K this, and whatever the bounty of their leader could add to it,

VT.
' ---' fall below the high ideas of the recompence which they con-

j538. ceived to be due to their merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable

to gratify such extravagant expetations, had recourse to the
fame expedient which his brother had employed on a similar
occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation for this turbulent
assuming spirit, in order to prevent it from breaking out into
open mutiny. With this view, he encouraged his most ac-
tive officers to attempt the discovery and reduction of various
provinces which had not hitherto fabmitted to the Spaniards.
To every flandard erected by the leaders who undertook any of
those new expeditions, volunteers resorted with the ardour and
hope peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers joined
them, and thus Pizarro had the fatisfadion of being delivered
both from the importunity of his discontented friends, and the
dread of his ancient enemies .

Almagro ALMAGRO himself remained for several months in cultody,
tried,

under all the anguish of fufpence. For although his doom was
determined by the Pizarros from the moment that he fell into
their hands, prudence confirained them to defer gratifying
their vengeance, until the soldiers who had served under him,
as well as several of their own followers in whom they could not
perfectly confide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon
their different expeditions, Almagro was impeached of treason,
condemned, formally tried, and condemned to die. The sentence aftonilhed

him, and though he had often braved death with an undaunted
spirit in the field, its approach under this ignominious form
appalled him so much, that he had recourse to abject fupplica-

' Zaratc, lib, iii. c.12. Coi. I ill. . 141. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv, c. 7.

tions,
208

tions, unworthy of his former fame. Ie besought the Pi- B 0 0 K

VI.

zarros to remember the ancient friendship between their brother
and him, and how much he had contributed to the ficcefs and 3
prosperity of their family; he reminded them of the humanity
with which, in opposition to the repeated remonfirances of his
own most attached friends, he had spared their lives when he had
them in his power; he conjured them to pity his age and infir-
mities, and to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of his
days in bewailing his crimes, and in making his peace with
Heaven. The intreaties, fays a Spanish historian, of a man so
much beloved, touched many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears
from many a hard eye. But the brothers remained inflexible.
As soon as Almagro knew his fate to be inevitable, he met it with
the dignity and fortitude of a veteran. He was firangled in and put to
prison, and afterwards publicly beheaded. He suffered in the
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by an Indian wo-
man of Panama, whom, though at that time a prisoner in Li-
ma, he named as successor to his government, pursuant to a
power which the emperor had granted him '.

As, during the civil dissensions in Peru, all intercourse with '139-

Deliberations
Spain was suspended, the detail of the extraordinary tranfac- of the court

of Spain con-

tions there did not soon reach the court. Unfortunately for the cerning the
victorious faction, the first intelligence was brought thither flatcotPcru.
by rome of Almagro's officers, who left the country upon the
ruin of their cause; and they related what had happened, with
every circumstance unfavourable to Pizarro and his brothers.
Their ambition, their breach of the most solemn engagements,
their violence and cruelty were painted with all the malignity

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Corn. I-l. c. ,i. Vega, p. 1i. lib. ii. c. 39. I-Ierrera,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v. c. .

VOL. II. E c and

209

B 00 K and exaggeration of party hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who ar-
---'-- ' rived soon after, and appeared in court with extraordinary

splendor, endeavoured to efface the imprefion which their ac-
cufations had made, and to justify his brother and himself by
representing Almagro as the aggressor. The emperor and his
ministers, though they could not pronounce which of the con-
tending factions was mofl criminal, clearly discerned the fatal
tendency of their dissensions. It was obvious, that while the
leaders, entrufled with the conduc of two infant colonies, em-
ployed the arms which hould have been turned against the com-
mon enemy, in destroying one another, all attention to the public.
good must cease, and there was reason to dread that the Indians
might improve the advantage which their disunion presented to-,
them, and extirpate both the viCors and the vanquilhed. But the-
evil was more apparent than the remedy. Where the informa-
tion which had been received was so defeaive and suspicious,
and the scene of ation so remote, it was almost impossible to-
chalk out the line of conduct that ought to be followed; and be-
fore any plan that hould be approved of in Spain could be car-.
ried into execution, the situation of the parties, and the cir-
cumftances of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effects extremely pernicious.

Vaca deCa- NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a person to Peru,
llrero nt tl'- vetied with extenflve and discretionary power, who, after view-
pie poers. ing deliberately the poflure of affairs with his own eyes,

and enquiring upon the spot, into the condui of the dif-
ferent leaders, should be authorised to eflablilh the govern-
ment in that form which he deemed molt conducive to the
interefl of the parent state, and the welfare of the colony. The
man fclecd for this important charge was Chrifnoval Vaca de

1' Caltro,
210

Callro, a judge in the court of royal audience at Valladolid; 1 00o K
and his abilities, integrity, and firmness, juflified the choice. -----'
His inftrutions, though ample, were not such as to fetter him 5
in his operations. According to the different aspec of affairs,
he had power to take upon him different characters. If he
found the governor still alive, he was to assume only the title
of judge, to maintain the appearance of acting in concert with
him, and to guard against giving any just cause of offence to a
man who had merited so highly of his country. But if Pi-
zarro was dead, he was entrusted with a commiifon that
he might then produce, by which he was appointed his fuc-
ceffor in the government of Peru. This attention to Pizarro,
however, seems to have flowed rather from dread of his power,
than from any approbation of his measures; for at the very
time that the court seemed so solicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and confined to a,
prison, where he remained above twenty years '.

WHILE Vaca de Castro was preparing for his voyage, events of 1 40.

Pizarr di-

great moment happened in Peru. The governor, confidcring vidrl'cru
himself, upon the death of Almagro, as the unrivalled possessor of `lo hi.,ls'

t ulloi~er:.

that vast empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories among the
conquerors; and had this division been made with any degree of
impartiality, the extent of countrywhich he had to beflow was sis-
ficient to have gratified his friends, and to have gained his enemies.
But Pizarro conducted this tranfadion not with the equity and
candour of a judge attentive to discovcr and to reward merit,
but with the illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large difrids,
in parts of the country most cultivated and populous, were et

' Gcmnn 11.1 c. :z. Veg1, p. II. lib. ii. c. ,to. Ierrra, dec. 6. lib. viii.
c. 10, . lib. x, c. 1.

' c 2,

apart

B O K apart as his own property, or granted to his brothers, his

VL.
-_- adherents and favourites. To others, lots less valuable and

'540. inviting were assigned. The followers of Almagro, amongst

whom were many of the original adventurers to whose valour
and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for his success, were
totally excluded from any portion in those lands, towards the ac-
quifition of which they had contributed so largely. As the vanity
of every individual set an immoderate value upon his own ser-
vices, and the idea of each concerning the recompence due to
them rose gradually to a more exorbitant height in proportion as
their conquefls extended, all who were disappointed in their expec-
tations exclaimed loudly against the rapaciousness and partiality
of the governor. The partisans of Almagro murmured in secret,
and meditated revenge '.

Progrefsof RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South America
theSpani had been since Pizarro landed in Peru, their avidity of do-

minion was not yet satisfied. The officers to whom Ferdinand
Pizarro gave the command of different detachments, penetrated
into several new provinces, and though ome of them were ex-
posed to great hardships in the cold and barren regions of the
Andes, and others suffered distress not inferior amidfl the woods
and marfles of the plains, they made discoveries and conquests
which extended their knowledge of the country as well as added
to their power. Pedro de Valdivia re-affumed Almagro's
icheme of invading Chili, and notwithstanding the fortitude of
the natives in defending their poffeflions, made such progrcrs
in the conquer of the country, that he founded the city of
St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the eftablifhmient of the Spa-

' Vega, p. l. lib. iii. c. z. Herrcr, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. .
212

ninl
4

nii dominion there". But of all the enterprizes undertaken B 째o K
about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was the most re- --
markable. The governor, who seems to have resolved that no Remarkable
person in Peru should posess any Ilation of distinguished emi- epedition of
nence or authority but those of his own family, had deprived zao.
Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his command in that
kingdom, and appointed his brother Gonzalo to take the go-
vernment of it. He inftruded him to attempt the discovery
and conquest of the country to the east of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians, abounded with cin-
namon and other valuable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any
of his brothers in courage, and no less ambitious of acquiring
diftindion, eagerly engaged in this difficult service. He set out
from Quito at the head of three hundred and forty soldiers,
near one half of whom were horsemen, with four thousand In-
dians to carry their provisions. In forcing their way through
the defiles, or over the ridges of the Andes, excess of cold and
fatigue, to neither of which they were accustomed, proved fa-
tal to the greater part of their wretched attendants. The rIardnfips
Spaniards, though more robust, and inured to a variety of they endure.
climates, suffered considerably, and loft some men; but when
they descended into the low country their distress increased.
During two months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their cloaths . The vast
plains upon which they were now entering, either altogether
without inhabitants, or occupied by the rudest and least in-
duflrious tribes in the New World, yielded little subsistence.
They could not advance a flep but as they cut a road through
woods, or made it through marfles. Such incessant toil, and

Zarate, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovalle, lib. ii. c. , &c. x Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2z

continual

213

B O 0 I continual scarcity of food, seem more than sufficient to have

Vi.

--- exhausted and dispirited any troops. But the fortitude and

perseverance of the Spaniards in the 'sixteenth century were in-
superable. Allured by frequent btit false accounts of rich coun-
tries before them, they persisted in firuggling on, until they
reached the banks of the Coca or Napo, one of the large rivers
whose waters pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built a bark,
which they expected would prove of great utility, both in con-
veying them over rivers, in procuring provisions, and in ex-
ploring the country. This was manned with fifty soldiers,
under the command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank to Pizarro. The fiream carried them down with such
rapidity, that they were soon far a head of their countrymen,
who followed slowly and with difficulty by land.

Deserted by AT this dirance from his commander, Orellana, a young
Orelldna. man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy himself independent,

and transported with the predominant passion of the age, he
formed the scheme of distinguishing himself as a discoverer, by
following the course of the Maragnon, until it joined the ocean;
and by surveying the vast regions through which it flows.
This:fcheme of Orellana's was as bold as it was treacherous.
For, if he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated his
duty to his commander, and with having abandoned his fellow-
soldiers in a pathlefs.defert, where they had hardly any hopes of
success, or even offafety, but what were founded on the service
which theyexpefted fiom the bark; his crime is, in some measure,
balanced by the glory of having ventured, upon a navigation of
near two thousand leagues, through unknown nations, in a veflel
baflily conltrulted, with grecn timber, and by very unskilful

hands,
i14

hands, without provisions, without a compass, or a pilot. But B o O K
his courage and alacrity supplied every defect. Committing v-
himself fearlessly to the guidance of the fiream, the Napo Sailsdown the
bore hinm along to the fouth,iuntil he reached the great channel. Maragnon..
of the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast, he held.
on his course in that direjion. He made frequent descents o.
both fides of tle river, sometimes seizing by force of arms the
provisions of the fierce savages feated on its banks; and ometimes
procuring a supply of food by a friendly intercourse with more'
gentle tribes. After a long series of dangers which he encoun-
tered with amazing fortitude, and of distresses which he sup-
ported with no lefsmagnanimity, he reached the ocean", where ..
new perils awaited him. These he likewise surmounted, and.
got safe to the Spanifl settlement in the ifand Cubagua, from
thence he failed to Spain. The vanity natural to travellers
who visit regions unknown to the reft of mankind, and the.
art of an adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,.
concurred in prompting him. to mingle an extraordinary pro-
portion of the marvellous in the narrative of his voyage. He
pretended to have difcovcred nations so rich, that the roofs of
their temples were. covered with plates. of gold; and described
a republic of women so warlike and powerful, as.to have ex-
tended their dominion over a considerable tra. of the fertile:
plains which he had visited. Extravagant as tliofe tales were,
they gave rife to an opinion, that a region abounding with gold,
diflinguifled by the name of Ll Dorado, and a community of.
Amazons, were to be found in this part of the New World ;
and ficlh is the propensity of mankind to believe, what is.
wonderful, that it has been llowly and with difficulty, that.

Sce NOTE XLI.

reason

215

B 째0 K reason and observation have exploded those fables. Tie voy-

VI.
. _--.-i age, however, even when firipped of every romantic embel-

540' lifhment, deserves to be recorded, not only as one of the most

memorable occurrences in that adventrous age, but as the first
event that led to any certain knowledge of those immense re-
gions that firetch eastward from the Andes to the ocean Y.
Diltreftof No words can describe the conflernation of Pizarro, when

Pizrr he did not find the bark at the confluence of the Napo and

Maragnon, where he had ordered Orellana to wait for him.
He would not allow himself to fufpec that a man, whom he
had entrusted with such an important command, could be so
base and so ,unfeeling, as to desert him at such a jundure. But
imputing his absence from the place of rendezvous to some
unknown accident, he advanced above fifty leagues along the
banks of the Maragnon, expeting every moment to fee the
1541. bark appear with a supply of provisions. At length he came

up with an officer whom Orellana had left to perish in the
desert, because he had the courage to remonstrate against his
perfidy. From him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime,
and his followers perceived at once their own desperate situation,
when deprived of their only resource. The spirit of the flouteft
hearted veteran funk within him, and all demanded to be led
back instantly. Pizarro, though he assumed an appearance of
tranquillity, did not oppose their inclination. But he was now
twelve hundred miles from Quito; and in that long march the
Spaniards encountered hardships greater than those they had en-
dured in their progress outward, without the alluring hopes

Y Zarac, lib. iv. c. 4. Gomara Hilt. c. 86. Vcga, p. il. lib. iii. c. 4. Herrera,
dec 6. lib. ix. c. 2,-5. Rodriguez El Maragnon y Amazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

which

which then soothed and animated them under their sufferings. B 0 0 KI
Flunger compelled them to feed on roots and berries, to eat all -
their dogs and horses, to devour the most loathsome reptiles, '54'
and even to gnaw the leather of their saddles and fword-belts.
Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten Spaniards pe-
rifhed in this wild disastrous expedition, which continued
near two years; and as fifty men were aboard the bark with
Orellana, only fourscore got back to Quito. These were naked
like savages, and so emaciated with famine, or worn out with
fatigue, that they had more the appearance of speares than
of men "

Bu T, inflead of returning to enjoy the repose which his con- Number of

malcontents

dition required, Pizarro, on entering QEito, received accounts in Peru.
of a fatal event that threatened calamities more dreadful
to him, than those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of his con-
quets which has been mentioned, the adherents of Almagro,
confidering themselves as proscribed by the party in power, no
longer entertained any hope of bettering their condition. Great
numbers in despair resorted to Lima, where the house of young
Almagro was always open to them, and the slender portion of
his father's fortune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them subsistence. The warm attach-
ment with which every person who served under the elder Al-
magro, devoted himself to his interests, was quickly transferred
to his on, who was now grown up to the age of manhood,
and poffcffed all the qualities which captivate the affections of

Zarate, lib. iv. c. z-5. Vega, p. 1. !ib. iii. c .

3, , . 14. I-errcra, dec. vi.
lib viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix. c. 2-5. dec. vii. lib. iii. c. 14. P'izar. Varones Illullr. 349, &c.

VOL. II. F f soldiers.

2I7

B O 0 KI soldiers. Of a graceful appearance, dextrou's at all maritial' ex-

'>-- ercifes, bold, open, generous, he seemed to be formed for

Confider command; and as his father, conscious of his own inferiority
young Alma- from the total want ofeducation,. had been: extremely attentive
gro as their
leader. to hav.e him inftrued in .every science becoming a gentleman;

the.a짖ceonplhinments which he had acquired heightened the re-
fpe&t of :is followers, ;as they gave him diffin6ion and emi-
nrence among illiterate Oventiirers. In this young man the
Almagrias. fouad a, point. as.' union which they vwanted, and
looking up to him at their head, were ready to undertake
any thing for his advancement. Nor was affecion for Alma-
gro their only incitement, they were urged on by their own
diflreffes. Many of them, destitute of common necessaries ,
and weary of loitering away life, a burden to their chief, or
to such of their associates as had saved ome remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed impatiently for
an ocafion to exert their aivity and courage, and began to
deliberate how tey might be avenged on the author of all

Conspire their misery. Their frequent cabals did not pa:ss unobserved;
againf the
lifofPizarro, and the governor, was warned to be on his guard againit men:

who meditated fomae desperate deed, and had resolution to ex-
ecute it. But either from the native intrepidity of his mind,
or from contempt of persons whose poverty rendered their
machinations of little consequence he disregarded the admo-
nitions of his friends. " Be in no pain, said he earelefly,
about my life, it is perfectly fare, as long as every man in.
Peru knows that I can in .a moment put him to death who
dares to harbour a thought against it." This security gave the
Almagrians full leisure to digest and ripen every part of their

a Sec NOTE XLII.

2 fheme;
짬

fheme; and Juan de Herrada, an officer of great abilities, who B O O K
had the charge of Almagro's education, took the lead in their ---
consultations, with all the zeal which that connetion inspired, '54'-
and with all the' authority which the ascendant that he was
known to have over the mind of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-day, the ea- and kill him.

son of tranquillity and repose in all sultry climates, Herrada,
at the head of eighteen of the most determined conspirators,
rallied out of Almagro's house in complete armour; and draw-
ing their swords, as they advanced hastily towards the governor's
palace, cried out, " Long live the king, but let the tyrant die."
Their associates, warned of their motions by a signal, were in
arms at different fatiions ready to support them. Though
Pizarro was usually frrounded by such a numerous train of
attendants as suited the magnificence of the most opulent sub-
jet of the age in which he lived, yet as he was just risen from
table, and most of his domestics had retired to their own apart-
ments, the conspirators passed through the two outer courts of
the palace unobserved. They were at the bottom of the stair-
cafe, before a page in waiting could give the alarm to his
master, who was converting with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose fleddy mind no form of danger could ap-
pal, starting up, called for arms, and commanded Francisco de
Chaves to make fast the door. But that officer, who did not
retain so much presence of mind as to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the flair-cafe, wildly asked the confpira-
tors what they meant, and whither they were going. Instead
of answering, they stabbed him to the heart, and burlt into the
hall. Some of the persons who were there threw themselves
from the windows; others attempted to fly; and a few draw-

F f ing

B 0 K ing their swords, followed their leader into an inner apartment.

VI. '---- ' The conspirators, animated with having the obje: of their
1541. vengeance now in view, rufled forward after them. Pizarro,

with no other arms than his fworcd and buckler, defended the
entry, and fipported by his half-brother Alcantara, and his
little knot of friends, he maintained the unequal contest with
intrepidity worthy of his pafi exploits, and with the vigour of
a youthful combatant. " Courage, cried he, companions, we
are yet enow to make those traitors repent of their audacity."
But the armour of the conspirators protected them, while every
thruit they made took effea. Alcantara fell dead at his brother's
feet; his other defenders were mortally wounded. The gover-
nor, so weary that he could hardly wield his sword, and no
longer ableto parry the many weapons furioully aimed at him,
received a deadly thrust full in his throat, funk to the ground,
and expired.

Almagro ac- As soon as he was slain, the assassins run out into the streets,
knowledged
.s his rfuccef- and waving their bloody swords, proclaimed the death of the
fior. tyrant. Above two hundred of their associates having joined

them, they conduced young Almagro in solemn proceflion
through the city, and aembling the magistrates and princi-
pal citizens, compelled them to acknowledge him as lawful fuc-
ceflbr to his father in his government. The palace of Pizarro,
together with the houses of several of his adherents, were
pillaged by the soldiers, who had the fatisfaaion at once of
being avenged on their enemies, and of enriching thcmfelvcs
by the spoils of those through whose hands all the wealth of
Peru had paifed b.

b Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Comnra llift. c. 14,4, 14;. Vega, p. 11. i.,. c. ;--7.

Ilerrcra, dec. 6. lib. x. c, 4-7. Pizarro Var. Illul. p. 183.
220

T E
4

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, as well as the B ,00 K

name and popular qualities of Almagro drew many soldiers to -
his standard. Every adventurer of desperate fortune, all who Ne,, appear-
were difalisfied with Fizarro, and from the rapacioufnels :.cls ot dir

cord.

of his government in the latter years of his life, the number of
malcontents was considerable, declared without hesitation, in
favour of Almagro, and he was soon at the head of eight
hundred of the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth
and inexperience dilqualified him from taking the command
of them himself, he appointed Herrada to a as general. But
though Almagro speedily colleced such a respectable force,
the acquicfcence in his government was far from being general.
IPizarro had left many friends to whom his memory was dear;
the barbarous assassination of a man to whom his country was
so highly indebted, filled every impartial person with horror.
The ignominious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
title on which he founded his pretensions, led others to con-
fider him as an usurper. Tle officers who commanded in
some provinces refused to recognize his authority, until it was
confirmed by the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal fiandard was erected, and preparations made to re-
venge the murder of their ancient leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not hlave lain long dor- Arival or

\aca d( Caf-

mant, acquired greater vigour and acivity, when the arrival of Oca
Vaca de Cafiro was known. After a long and difaNirous voy-
age, lhe was driven by frefs of weather into a inall harbour
in the province of Popayan ; and proceeding from thence by
land, after a journey no lets tedious than diflicult, lie reach-
ed Qito. In his way lie received accounts of I'izarro's
death, and of the events which followed upon it. IHe ilm-

mcdilatcly

22I

B 0 0 K mediately produced the royal commission appointing him. go-
-_--.. vernor of Peru, with the fame privileges and authority;
who aunnes and his jurifdidion was acknowledged without hesitation
the title of by Benalcazar, Adelantado, or lieutenant-general for the em-

peror in Popayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the
absence of Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troops
left in Quito. Vaca de Cafiro not only assumed the supreme
authority, but hewed that he poffefred the talents' which the
exercise of it at that jundure required. By his influence
and address he soon assembled such a body of troops, as not
only set him above all fear of being exposed to any insult from
the adverse party, but enabled him to advance from Quito with
the dignity that became his character. By dispatching persons
of confidence to the different settlements in Peru, with a formal
notification of his arrival and of his commission, he communi-
cated to his countrymen the royal pleasure with refpedc to the
government of the country. By private emiflaries, he excited
such officers as had discovered their disapprobation of Almagro's
proceedings, to manifest their duty to their sovereign by sup-
porting the person honoured with his commission. Those mea-
fures were productive of great effecs. Encouraged by the ap-
proach of the new governor, or prepared by his machinations,
the loyal were confirmed in their principles, and avowed them
with greater boldnes; the timid ventured to declare their fen-
timents; the neutral and wavering, finding it necessary to chufe
a fide, began to lean to that which now appeared to be the safest
as well as the most just .
Condua of ALMAGRO observed the rapid progress of this spirit of dif-

affedion to his cause, and in order to give an effectual check

c Benzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib.. v. . . Gomara, c. 146, 147. Herrera,
dec. 6. ib. x. c. 1, , 3. 7, &c.

to
짙22

to it before the arrival of Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head B O O K
of his troops for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of -
opponents had erected the royal standard, under the commiand 542'
of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During his march thither, Her-
rada, the skilful guide of his youth and of his counsels, died;
and from that time his measures were conspicuous for their
violence, but concerted with little sagacity, and executed with
no address. Holguin, with forces far inferior to those of the
opposite party, was descending towards the coast at the very
time that Almagro was on his way to Cuzco. By a very simple
stratagem, he deceived his unexperienced adversary, avoided
an engagement, and effected a juncion with Alvarado, an of-
sicer of note, who had been the first to declare against Almagro
as an usurper.

SOON after, Vaca de Castro entered the camp with the troops Progress of

which he brought from Quito, and ereting the royal standard Vataode
before his own tent, he declared, that, as governor, he would
discharge in person all the funcions of general of their com-
bined forces. Though formed by the tenour of his past life to
the habits of a sedentary and pacific profession, he at once as-
fumed the activity and discovered the decision of an officer long
accufiomed to command. Knowing his trength to be now far
superior to that of the enemy, he was impatient to terminate
the contest by a battle. Nor did the followers of Almagro,
who had no hopes of obtaining pardon for a crime so atrocious
as the murder of the governor, decline that mode of decision.
They met at Chupas, about two hundred miles from Cuzco, Sept. 16..
and fought with all the fierce animosity inspircd by the violence
of civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the cagerness of
revenge, and the last efforts of dcflair. Victory, after re-

inaining,

223.

B o K maining long doubtful, declared at last for Vaca de Caflro.
--- The superior number of his troops, his own intrepidity, and
Defats Al- the martial talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran officer

nng:. formed under the great captain in the wars of Italy, -and who

on that day laid the foundation of his future fame in Peru,
triumphed over the bravery of his opponents, though led on
by young Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a better
cause, and deserving another fate. ''he carnage was great ill
proportion to the number of the combatants. M. Alny of the
vanquished, especially such as were conscious that they might
be charged with being accessory to the affafiination of Pi-
zarro, rufling on the swords of the enemy, chose to f1ll like
soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious doom. Of fourteen
hundred men, the total amount of combatants on both fides,
five hundred lay dead on the field, and the number of the
wounded was tfill greater .

Severityofhis IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de Castro, both in
proceedings. the council and in the field, surprised the adventurers in Peru,

they were still more astonished at his conduct after the victory.
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser ofjuftice, and persuaded
that it required examples of extraordinary severity to.refirain
the licentious spirit of soldiers so far removed from the feat of
government, he proceeded directly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty were condemned to susser the death of traitors, others
were banished from Peru. Their leader, who made his escape
from the battle, being betrayed by ome of his officers, was

d Zarate, lib. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. 148. Vega, p. Ii. lib. iii. c. -18.
1Herrera, dec. 7. lib. i. c. , z, 3. lib. iii . i-11.

publicly
224

publicly beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of Alma- B O li
gro, and the spirit of the party, was extinct. .

I 542.

DURING those violent convulsions in Peru, the emperor and Consultations
his minifers were intently employed in preparing regulations, ofrheem-

peror con-
by which they hoped not only to re-establish tranquillity there, cerning his

dominions in

but to introduce a more perfet fyflem of internal policy into America.
all their settlements in the New World. Rapid and extensive
as the Spanish conquefis in America had been, they were not
carried on by any regular exertion of the national force, but
by the occasional efforts of private adventurers. After fitting
out a few of the first armaments for discovering new regions,
the court of Spain, during the bury reigns of Ferdinand and of
Charles V. the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered with such
a multiplicity of schemes, and involved in war with so many
nations of Europe, that it had not leisure to attend to dillant
and less interesting objets. The care of prosecuting discovery,
or of attempting conquest, was abandoned to individuals;
and with such ardour did men push forward in this new
career, on which novelty, the spirit of adventure, avarice,
ambition, and the hope of meriting heaven, prompted themn
with combined influence to enter, that in lets than half a cen-
tury almost the whole of that extensive empire which Spain
now pofferes in the New World, was fubjcded to its dominion.
As the Spanilh court contributed nothing towards the various
expeditions undertaken in America, it was not intitled to claim
much from their success. Tle sovereignty of the conquered
provinces, with the fifth of the gold and silver, was reserved

Zarate, lib. iv. c z. Coniara, c. 0o. Ilcrrcra, dec. 7. lib. iii. c. 12. lib. vi.
c. .

VOL II. G g for

B o0 K for the crown; every thing else was seized by the aflociates as

VL. ---.-. their right. The plunder of the countries which they invaded

I,'4Z fcrved to indemnify them for what they had expended in

equipping themselves for the service, and the conquered ter-
ritory was divided among them, according to rules which cuf-
tom had introduced, as permanent establishments which their
successful valour merited. In the infancy of those settlements,
when their extent as well as their value were unknown, many
irregularities escaped observation, and it was found necessary
to connive at many excefles. The conquered people were pil-
laged with deltrudive rapacity, and their country parcelled out
among its new mailers in exorbitant hares, far exceeding the
highest recompence due to their services. 1 he rude conquerors
of America, incapable of forming their eftablihments upon any
general or extensive plan of policy, attentive only to private
interest, unwilling to forego present gain from the profped of
remote or public benefit, seem to have had no object but to
amass sudden wealth,' without regarding what might be the
consequences of the means by which they acquired it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanish court the im-
portance of its American poffefions, the neceflity of new-
modelling their whole frame became obvious, and in place of
the maxims and pracices prevalent among military adven--
turers, it was found requisite to fubflitute the institutions of
regular government.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate remedy.

The conquerors of Mexico and Peru imitated the fatal example
of their countrymen fctiled in the islands, and employed them-
selves in searching for gold and silver with the fame inconfidcratc
cagernefs. Similar effects followed. The natives employed in

this
226

this labour by mailers, who in imposing their tasks had no re- B O K
gard either to what they felt or to what they were able to per-
form, pined away and perished so fafl, that there was reason -4z
to apprehend that Spain, intfead of possessing countries peopled
to such a degree as to be susceptible of progressive improvement,
would oon remain proprietor only of a vail uninhabited defart.

THE emperor and his ministers were so sensible of this, and

so solicitous to prevent the extinction of the Indian race, which
threatened to render their acquisitions of no value, that from
time to time various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for securing to that unhappy people more gentle and
equitable treatment. But the distance of America from the
feat of empire, the fecblenefs of government in the new colo-
nies, the avarice and audacity of soldiers unaccustomed to re-
itraint, prevented there salutary regulations from operating with
any considerable influence. The evil continued to grow, and
at this time the emperor found an interval of leisure from the
affairs of Europe to take it into attentive consideration. He The perSons
consulted not only with his ministers and the members of the heiadvihfes.
council of the Indies, but called upon several persons who had
resided long in the New World, to aid them with the result of
their experience and observation. Fortunately for the people
of America, among these was Bartholomew de las Casas, who
happened to be then at Madrid on a milion from a chapter of
his order at Chiapa'. Though, since the miscarriage of his
former schemes for the relief of the Indians, he had continued
flhut up in his cloiflcr, or occupied in religious functions, his
zeal in behalf of the former oljes of his pity was so far from
abating, that, from an increased knowledge of their sufferings,

f Rcmclfil Ilift. tie Chiapa, p. I f,.

Gg its

B 0 0 K its ardour had augmented. He seized eagerly this opportunity

Vt. .-.--.j of reviving his favourite maxims concerning the treatment of
J542. the Indians. With the moving eloquence natural to a man on

whose mind the scenes which he had beheld had made a deep
impression, he described the irreparable waste of the human
species in the New World, the Indian race almost totally swept
away in the islands in less than fifty years, and hastening to
extincion on the continent with the fame rapid decay. With
the decisive tone of one firongly prepossessed with the truth of
his own system, he imputed all this to a single cause, to the
exations and cruelty of his countrymen, and contended that
nothing could prevent the depopulation of America, but the
declaring 'f its natives to be freemen, and treating them as
fubjeds, not as slaves. Nor did he confide for the success of
this popofal in the powers of his oratory alone. In order to
enforce them, he compoed his famous treatise concerning the
deftru&ion of America , in which he relates, with many hor-
rid circumstances, but with apparent marks of exaggerated de-
scription, the devastation of every province which had been
visited by the Spaniards.

His olicitude THE emperor was deeply affliaed with the recital of so many
to introduce
ageneralre- acions shocking to humanity. But as his views extended far
formation of beyond those of Las Casas, he perceived that relieving the In-
government.

dians from oppression was but one ftep towards rendering his
poffefions in the New World a valuable acquisition, and would
be of little avail, unless he could circumscribe the power and
usurpations of his own fubjets there. The conquerors of
America, however great their merit had been towards their
country, were mofily persons of such mean birth, and of fich
abject rank in focicty, as give no diftintion in the eye of a

Rcnmefal, p. 192. 199.

monarch.
228

monarch. The exorbitant wealth with which some of them B O O K
returned, gave umbrage to an age not accustomed to fee men in
inferior condition elevated above their level, and rising to emu- '
late or to surpass the ancient nobility in splendour. The ter-
ritories which their leaders had appropriated to themselves were
of enormous extent '; and if the country hould ever be im-
proved in proportion to the fertility of the foil, they muff grow
too wealthy and too powerful for fubjecs. It appeared to
Charles, that this abuse required a remedy no less than the
other, and that the regulations concerning both must be en-
forced by a mode of government more vigorous than had yet
been introduced into America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws, containing many New regula-

salutary appointments with refpet to the conflitution and powers riurpof tili
of the supreme council of the Indies; concerning the station
and jurifdidion of the royal audiences in different parts of Ame-
rica, the administration of justice, the order of government,
both ecclesiastical and civil. These were approved of by all
ranks of men. But together with them were iflued the fol-
lowing regulations, which excited universal alarm, and occa-
sioned the most violent convulsions :-" That as the reparti-
mientos or hares of land seized by several persons appeared to
be exceflive, the royal audiences are empowered to reduce them
to a moderate extent: That upon the death of any conqueror
or planter, the lands and Indians granted to him shall not de-
scend to his widow or children, but return to the crown: That
the Indians hall henceforth be exempted from personal service,
and (hal-l not be compelled to carry the baggage of travellers, to
labour in the mines, or to dive in the pearl fisheries: That the

h Sec NOTE XLIII.

flated

229

B o K Rated tribute due by them to their superior shall be ascertained,

VT. --.-%-. and they hall be paid as servants for any work they voluntarily

1542. perform: That all persons who are or have been in public of-

sices, ecclefiaflics of every denomination, hospitals and mona-
fteries, shall be deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to
them, and these be annexed to the crown: That every person
in Peru, who had any criminal concern in the contefls between
Pizarro and Almagro, hould forfeit his lands and Indians i."'

His minifiers ALL the Spanish miniflers who had hitherto been entrufled
remnionlrate
againlu them. with the direction of American affairs, and who were belt ac-

quainted with the fRate of the country, remonstrated against
those regulations, as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
represented, that the number of Spaniards who had hitherto
emigrated to the New World was so extremely small, that no-
thing could be expected from any effort of theirs towards im-
proving the vast regions over which they were scattered; that
the success of every scheme for this purpose must depend upon
the ministry and service of the Indians, whose native indolence
and averfon to labour, no profped of benefit or promise of
reward could surmount; that the moment the right of im-
posing a tafi, and exacting the performance of it, was taken
from their matiers, every work of industry must cease, and all
the sources from which wealth begun to pour in upon Spain
mufl be tfopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all times of
his own opinions, and so much impressed at present with the
view of the diolrders which reigned in America, that he was
willing to hazard the application even of a dangerous remedy,
perfifled in his resolution of publifling the laws. That they
might be carried into execution with greater vigour and au-

Herrcra, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Fernandez Hilt. lib. i. c. , z.

thority,
210

thority, he authorised Francisco Tello de Sandoval to repair to B o0 1
Mexico as vitador or superintendent of that country, and to --
co-operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy, in enforcing 's+'
them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez Vela to be governor of A v;cerv "p-

pontej for

Peru, with the title of Viceroy; and in order to strengthen his t'cru.
administration, he established a court of royal audience in Lima, s43-.
in which four lawyers of eminence were to preside as judges k.

THE viceroy and superintendent failed at the fame time; 1544.

Efffft, of the

and an account of the laws which they were to enforce reached regulation in
America before them. The entry of Sandoval into Mexico New Spain..
was viewed as the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited
grant of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard in Ame-
rica without diflinflion, and there was hardly one who might
not on some pretext be included under the other regulations,
and flffer by them. But the colony in New Spain had now
been so long accuflomed to the refiraints of law and authority
under the tedy and prudent administration of Mendoza, that
how much soever the 1firit of the new statutes was detested and
dreaded, no attempt was made to obflrua the publication of
them by any a of violence unbecoming subjes. The magi-
firates and principal inhabitants, however, prcfcnted dutiful
addlrcflcs to the viceroy and fiperintendent, reprefcnting the
fatal confcquences of enforcing them. Happily for them,
lMcndoza, by long rclidcnce in the country, was so thoroughly
acquainted with its slate, that he knew what was for its interest
as well as what it could bear; and Sandoval, though new in
office, (lifpla)ed a degree of moderation fcldomr poflcLffd by per-
sons just entering upon the exercise of power. They engaged
to ful)cnd, for Iblm time, the execution of what was offcnive

k Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomara, c. 151. Vega, p.. lib. iii. c. 20.

ia

231

B o o K in the new laws, and not only conented that a deputation of

VI.
I- --- ' citizens should be sent to Europe to lay before the emperor the

i544. apprehensions of his fubjets in New Spain with refpe to

their tendency and effecs, but they concurred with them in
supporting their sentiments. Charles, moved by the opinion
of men whose abilities and integrity intitled them to decide
concerning what fell immediately under their own view, granted
such a relaxation of the rigour of the laws as re-eftabliflled the
colony in its former tranquillity '.
In Peru. IN Peru the torm gathered with an aspea fill more fierce

and threatening, and was not so oon dispersed. The conquer-
ors of Peru, of a rank much inferior to those who had sub-
jeated Mexico to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
infpedion of the parent Rate, and intoxicated with the sudden
acquisition of wealth, carried on all their operations with greater
licence and irregularity than any body of adventurers in the
New World. Amidst the general subversion of law and order,
occasioned by two fuccefive civil wars, when each individual
was at liberty to decide for himself, without any guide but his
own interest or passions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by anarchy, the in-
troduction of regular government, the power of a viceroy, and
the authority of a refpedable court of judicature, would have
appeared formidable restraints, to which they would have sub-
mitted with reluctance. But they revolted with indignation
against the idea of complying with laws, by which they were
to be stripped at once of all they had earned so hardly during
many years of service and suffering. As the account of the

I Fernandez lHilt lib. i. c. 3, 4, . Vega, p. . lib. iii . .21, 22. -Herrcr, dec.

7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii. c. , 1S. Toiquem Mon. Ind. lib. v. c. 13.
232

3

new

new laws spread successively through the different settlements, B K
the inhabitants run together, the women in tears, and the men A
exclaiming against the injustice and ingratitude of their fove- .+.
reign in depriving them, unheard and unconvided, of their
poffeflions. " Is this, cried they, the recompence due to per-
sons, who, without public aid, at their own expence, and by
their own valour, have fubjeded to the crown of Caffile terri-
tories of such vail extent and opulence ? Are these the rewards
bellowed for having endured unparalleled diflrefs, for having
encountered every species of danger in the service of their coun-
try ? Whose merit is so great, whose conduc has been so irre-
proachable, that he may not be condemned by ome penal
clause in regulations, conceived in terms as loose and compre-
henfive, as if it had been intended that all hould be entangled
in their snare? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held some
public office, and all, without diftinaion, have been confirain-
ed to take an active part in the contest between the two rival
chiefs. Were the former to be robbed of their property be-
cause they had done their duty ? Were the latter to be punished
on account of what they could not avoid ? Shall the conquer-
ors of this great empire, instead of receiving marks of ditlinc-
tion, be deprived of the natural consolation of providing for
their widows and children, and leave them to depend for sub-
fiftence on the scanty supply they can extort from unfeeling
courtiers m ? We are not able now, continued they, to explore
unknown regions in quelt of more secure settlements; our con-
tfitutions, debilitated with age, and our bodies covered with
wounds, are no longer fit for active service; but fill we polfefs

" Hcrrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, IS.

233
VOL. II.

H h

vigour

B o ;K vigour sufficient to assert our just rights, and we will not tamely
I- --- susser them to be wrested from us ."

'544.

An infurrec- BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehemence, and lif-
tion prevent-
ed by the tened to with universal approbation, their paffilons were inflam-
moderation
of Castro. ed to such a pitch, that they were prepared for the most violent

measures; and began to hold consultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy and
judges, and prevent not only the execution but the pro-
mulgation of the new laws. From this, however, they
were diverted by the address of Vaca de Cafiro, who flattered
them with hopes, that, as oon as the viceroy and judges should
arrive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and remon-
ftrances, they would concur with them in endeavouring to pro-
cure ome mitigation in the rigour of laws which had been
framed without due attention either to the itate of the country,
or to the sentiments of the people. A greater degree of accom-
modation to these, and even some concessions on the part of
government, were now become requiiite to compote the present
ferment, and to sooth the colonifis into fubmifion, by infpir-
ing them with confidence in their superiors. But without pro-
found discernment, conciliating manners, and flexibility of

The piritof temper, such a plan could not be carried on. The viceroy
dincated째byo poiffeed none of these. Of all the qualities that fit men for
the viceroy. high command, he was endowed only with integrity and cou-

rage; the former harlh and uncomplying, the latter border-
ing so frequently on rashness or obstinacy, that in his situation
March 4. they were defets rather than virtues. From the moment that

n Comara, c. 2z. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c, 1o, Jl. Vega, p. 11. lib. iii. c. 20.
22. lib. iV. . 3, 4.

he
234

he landed at Tunbez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered B C l0
himself merely as an executive officer, without any discretionary
power; and, regardless of whatever he observed or heard con- 1s4+
cerning the Rate of the country, he adhered to the letter of the
regulations with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns through
which he passed, the natives were declared to be free, every
person in public office was deprived of his lands and servants;
and as an example of obedience to others, he would not susser
a single Indian to be employed in carrying his baggage in his
march towards Lima. Amazement and consternation went be-
fore him as he approached; and so little solicitous was he to
prevent them from augmenting, that on entering the capital, he
openly avowed that he came to obey the orders of his sovereign,
not to dispense with his laws. This harsh declaration was ac-
companied with what rendered it ill more intolerable, haugh-
tiness in deportment, a tone of arrogance and decision in dif-
course, and an insolence of office grievous to men little accuf-
tomed to hold civil authority in high refped. Every attempt
to procure a suspension or mitigation of the new laws, the
viceroy confidered as flowing from a spirit of difaffetion that
tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank were confined,
and some put to death, without any form of trial. Vaca de
Caflro was arrefled, and notwithstanding the dignity of his
former rank, and his merit in having prevented a general in-
lIrredtion in the colony, he was loaded with chains, and shut
up in the common jail 째.

BUT however general the indignation was against such pro- The malcon-

tents chuife
ceedings, it is probable that the hand of authority would have Gonzalo Pi-

za;rro to be
their leader.

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 2 . Gomara, c. 153-15. Vega, p. ii. lib. iv.
c. 4, 5. Fernandez, lib. . c. 6- o.

H-Ih

been

Yo o K been strong enough to suppress it, and to prevent its burfling
*-- .-s out with open violence, if the malcontents had not been pro-

5i44. vided with a leader of credit and eminence to unite and to

dire& their efforts. From the time that the purport of the new
iegulations was known in Peru, every Spaniard there turned
his eyes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person able to
avert the ruin with which they threatened the colony. From
all quarters, letters and addresses were sent to him, conjuring
him to stand forth as their common protecor, and offering to
support him in the attempt with their lives and fortunes.
Gonzalo, though inferior in talents to his other brothers,
was equally ambitious, and of courage no less daring. The
behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his brothers and him-
self, dwelt continually on his mind, Ferdinand a llate prisoner
in Europe, the children of the governor in custody of the vice-
roy, and sent aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the discovery and conquest
of which Spain was indebted to his family. There thoughts
prompted him to seek for vengeance, and to assert the rights
of his family, of which he now confidered himself as the guar-
dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily surmount
that veneration for his sovereign which is interwoven in his
frame, the idea of marching in arms against the royal standard
filled him with horror. He hesitated long, and was flill unre-
solved, when the violence of the viceroy, the universal call of
his countrymen, and the certainty of becoming soon a victim
himself to the severity of the new laws, moved him to quit his
residence at Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and received him with
rranfports of joy, as the deliverer of the colony. In the fervour
of their zeal, they eleded him procurator general of the Spa-

5 nifh

nifh nation in Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regulations. B 0

VI.

They authorised him to lay their remonflrances before the royal I---.._
audience in Lima, and upon pretext of danger from the In- '544'
dians, authoried him to march thither in arms. Under fanc-
tion of this nomination Pizarro took pofeffion of the royal
treasure, appointed officers, levied soldiers, seized a large train
of artillery which Vaca de Castro had deposited in Guamanga,
and set out for Lima, as if he had been advancing against a
public enemy. Difaffedion having now assumed a regular
form, and being united under a chief of such a distinguished
name, many persons of note resorted to his standard; and a
considerable part of the troops raised by the viceroy to oppose
his progress, deserted to him in a body P.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had happened Dilentions

of the viccroy

there, which encouraged him to proceed with almost certainty and court of
of success. The violence of the viceroy's administration was audience.
not more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru than his over-
bearing haughtiness was odious to his associates, the judges of
the royal audience. During their voyage from Spain, ome
symptoms of coldness began to appear . But as oon as they
entered upon the exercise of their refpeaive offices, both par-
ties were so much exasperated by frequent contests, arising from
interference of jurifdidion and contrariety of opinion, that
their mutual difgufl soon grew into open enmity. The judges
thwarted the viceroy in every measure, set at liberty prisoners
whom he had confined, jultified the malcontents, and applaud-
ed their remonstrances. At a time when both departments of

P Zarate, lib. v. c. . Gomara, c. 156, 157. Vega, p. Il. lib. iv. c. 4-12.
Fernandez, lib. . c. 12-17. IIerrera, dc. 7. lib. vii. . 18, &c. lib. viii. c. -5.

' Gomara, c. 171.

government

237

B 0 0 K government should have united against the approaching enemy,
, ---- they were contending with each other for superiority. The
The'vi4croy judges at length prevailed. The viceroy, universally odious,
imprisoned. and abandoned even by his own guards, was seized in his pa-

lace, and carried to a desert island on the coast, to be kept there
until he could be ent home to Spain.
Views of Pi- THE judges, in consequence of this, having assumed the fu-

zaro preme direaion of affairs into their own hands, issued a procla-

mation fifpending the execution of the obnoxious laws, and
sent a meflage to Fizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to difnifs his troops, and to
repair to ima with fifteen or twenty attendants. They could
hardly expect that a man so daring and ambitious would tamely
comply with this requisition. It was made, probably, with no
such intention, but only to throw a decent veil over their own
conduct; for Cepeda, the president of the court of audience, a
pragmatical and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and; had already formed the plan,
which he afterwards executed, of devoting himself to: his ser-
vice. The imprisonment of the viceroy, the usurpation of the
judges, together with the universal confusion and anarchy con-
sequent upon events so singular and unexpected, opened new
and vast profpeds to Pizarro. He now beheld the supreme
power within his reach. Nor did he want courage to puil on
towards the objec which fortune presented to his view. Car-
vajal, the prompter of his resolutions, and guide of all his
adions, had long fixed his eye upon it as tie only end at
which Pizarro ought to aim. Inflead of the inferior funcion
of procurator for the Spanish settlements in Peru, he openly
demanded to be governor and captain general of the whole pro-

2 'vince,
238

vince, and required the court of audience to grant him a corn- B 0O K
mission to that effect. At the head of twelve hundred men, -.-
within a mile of Lima, where there was neither leader nor '544.
army to oppose him, such a request carried with it the authority
of a command. But the judges, either from unwillingness to
relinquish power, or from a desire of preserving ome attention
to appearances, hesitated, or seemed to hesitate, about comply-
ing. Carvajal, impatient of delay, and impetuous in all his Heaflumes
operations, marched into the city by night, seized several offi- 'eg.v"
cers of diftinCEion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them with-
out the formality of a trial. Next morning the court of au-
dience issued a commission in the emperor's name, appointing
Pizarro governor of Peru, with full powers, civil as well as
military, and he entered the town that day with extraordinary
pomp, to take possession of his new dignityr.

BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence that accompanied oa. 28.

The viceroy

this total dissolution of the frame of government, the minds of recovershi
men, set loose from the ordinary restraints of law and autho- liberty.
rity, aed with such capricious irregularity, that events no less
extraordinary than unexpected followed in a rapid succession.
Pizarro had scarcely begun to exercise the new powers with
which he was inverted, when he beheld formidable enemies
rife up to oppose him. The viceroy having been put on board
a vessel by the judges of the audience, in order that he might
be carried to Spain under custody of Juan Alvarez, one of their
own number; as oon as they were out at sea, Alvarez, either
touched with rcmorfe or moved by fear, fell at the feet of his
prisoner, dcclaring him from that moment to be free, and

' arate, lib. v. c. 8-o. Vega, p. il. lib. iv. c. 13-19. Gomara, c. 159-163.
Fernandez, lib. i. c. 18-zS. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. viii, c. o-zo.

that

.39

e4o
B 0 K that he himself, and every person in the hip, would obey him

VI.
------ as the legal representative of their overeign. Nugncz Vela

ordered them to seer to Tumbez, and landing there, ercecd
the royal standard, and resumed his functions of viceroy. Se-
veral pcrfons of note, to whom the contagion of the seditious
spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Lima had not reached, in-
flantly avowed their resolution to support his authority '. The
violence of Pizarro's government, who observcd every indivi-
dual with the timid jealousy natural to ufirpers, and punished
every appearance of ilfaffecion with rigour, oon augmented
the number of his adherents, as it forced some leading men in
the colony to fly to him for refuge. While he was gathering
such strength at Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the
appearance of what was confidered as an army in America,
Diego Centeno, a bold and aive officer, exasperated by
the cruelty and oppression of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in
the province of Chareas, formed a conspiracy againat his life,
cut him off, and declared for the viceroy '.

1545. PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appearances of hofti-

Pizarro
mnarches lity in the opposite extremes of the empire, was not difcon-
against him certed. He prepared to assert the authority to which he had

attained, with the spirit and conduct of an officer accutomed
to command, and marched diretly against the viceroy as the
enemy who was nearest as well as most formidable. As he was
master of the public revenues in Peru, and molt of the military
men were attached to his family, his troops were so numerous,
that the viceroy, unable to face them, retreated towards Quito.

8 Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 23. Herrera, dec. 7.

lib. viii. c. iS. t Zarate, lib. v. c, 18. Gomara, c. 169, Herrera, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. 27.

Pizarro

Pizarro followed him, and in that long march, through a wild B 0 O K
mountainous country, both suffered hardflips and encountered .----.
difficulties, which no troops, but those accutfomed to serve in s'
America, could have endured or surmounted . The viceroy
had scarcely reached Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's
forces appeared, led by Carvajal, who, though near fourscore,
was as hardy and ative as any young soldier under his com-
mand. Nugnez Vela instantly abandoned a town incapable of
defence, and with a rapidity more resembling a flight than a
retreat, marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro conti-
nued to pursue, but finding it impossible to overtake him, re-
turned to Quito. From thence he dispatched Carvajal to op-
pole Centeno, who was growing formidable in the southern
provinces of the empire, and he himself remained there to make
head against the viceroy x.

BY his own aaivity, and the affifance of cnalcazar, Nugncz The viceroy

defeated,

Vela oon assembled four hundred men in Popayan. As he re-
tained, amidst all his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and
the fame high sense of his own dignity, he rejeaed with dif-
dain the advice of ome of his followers, who urged him to
make overtures of accommodation to Pizarro, declaring that it
was only by the sword that a contefl with rebels could be de-
cided. With this intention he marched back to Qito. Pi- ;,s6.
zarro, relying on the superior number, and ill more on the
discipline and valour of his troops, advanced resolutely to
meet him. The battle was fierce and bloody, both parties J:,nuary a.
lighting like men who knew that the pofFcfion of a great cm-

u Sec NOTE XLIV. " ar.tc, lib. v. c. , 16-2... Gomarn,

c. 167. Vega, p. i. lib. iv, c. . -z . ,:crnndcz7, lb. i. c. 34. 40. -lerrera,
d(ce. 7. lib. viii. c. 16. 20-27.

VOL. II. I i pire,

241

B O IK pire, the fate of their leaders, and their own future fortune, de-

. .-.-. pended upon the issue of that day. But Pizarro's veterans
1546. pushed forward with such regular and well-direded force, that

they soon began to make impression on their enemies. The
viceroy, by extraordinary exertions, in which the abilities of
a commander and the courage of a soldier were equally dif-
and slain. played, held vicory for ome time in suspense. At length he

fell, pierced with many wounds; and the rout of his followers
became general. They were hotly pursued. His head was
cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in Quito, which Pi-
zarro entered in triumph. The troops assembled by Centeno
were dispersed oon after by Carvajal, and he himself compelled
to fly to the mountains, where he remained for several months
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, from the frontiers
of Popayan to those of Chili, ubmitted to Pizarro; and by his
fleet, under Pedro de Hinojofa, he had not only the unrivalled
command of the South-Sea, but had taken pofleffion of Pana-
ma, and placed a garrison in Nombre de Dios, on the'oppofite
fide of the iflhmus, which rendered him master of the usual
avenue of communication between Spain and Peru Y.

Pizarro ad- AFTER this decisive vitory, Pizarro and his followers re-
vised to as-
fume the so- mained for some time at Quito, and during the first transports
ereignty of of their exultation, they ran into every cxcefs of licentious

indulgence, with the riotous spirit usual among low adven-
turers upon extraordinary success. But, amidst this difipation,
their chief and his confidents were obliged to turn their thoughts
sometimes to what was serious, and deliberated with much so-

Y Zarate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Gomara, c. 170. Vega, p. xi. lib. iv. c. 33, 34.

Feinandez, lib. i. c. 51-54. Ilerrera, dec. 7. lib. x. c. z. . 19-2z. dec. 8. lib. i.
c. 1-3. Benzo, lib. iii. c. 12.

licitulc
242

licitude concerning the part that he ought now to take. Car- B O 0 K
vajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than in the field, .---.
had from the beginning warned Pizarro, that in the career on
which he was entering, it was vain to think of holding a
middle course; that he muff either boldly aim at all, or attempt
nothing. From the time that Pizarro obtained possession of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame maxim with
greater earnestness. Upon receiving an account of the victory
at Quito, he remonstrated with him in a tone frill more per-
emptory. " You have usurped (said he, in a letter written to
Pizarro on that occasion) the supreme power in this country,
in contempt of the emperor's commiflion to another. You
have marched, in hoflile array, against the royal standard;
you have attacked the reprefentativc of your sovereign in the
field, have defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not that
ever a monarch will forgive such insults on his dignity, or that
any reconciliation with him can be cordial or sincere. De-
pend no longer on the precarious favour of another. Assume
yourself the sovereignty over a country, to the dominion of
which your family has a title founded on the rights both of
discovery and conquest. It is in your power to attach every
Spaniard in Peru of any consequence inviolably to your inte-
reft by liberal grants of lands and of Indians, or by infti-
tuting ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour similar
to those which are courted with so much cagernefs in Europe.
By eftablilhing orders of knighthood, with privileges and
diftinaions resembling those in Spain, you may beflow a gra-
tification upon the officers in your fervicc, suited to the ideas of
military men. Nor is it to your countrymen only that you
ought to attend; endcavour to gain the natives. By nimay-
ing the Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in fiicceffion to tile

I i 2 crown,

243

B 0 0 I crown, you will induce the Indians, out of veneration for the

V[.
----' blood of their ancient princes, to unite with the Spaniards in
1546. support of your authority. Thus, at the head of the princi-

pal inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the new settlers there,
you may set at defiance the power of Spain, and repel with
ease any feeble force which it can fend at such a dftance."
Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's confidential coun-
fellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's exhortations, and employed
whatever learning he possessed in demonfirating, that all the
founders of great monarchies had been raised to pre-eminence,
not by the antiquity of their lineage, or the validity of their
rights, but by their own enterprising valour and personal
merit .

But chufes to PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and could not conceal
negociate
with the court the fatisfadion with which he contemplated the objec that
of Spain. they presented to his view. But happily for the tranquillity of

the world, few men possess that superior firength of mind,
and extent of abilities, which are capable of forming and exe-
cuting such daring schemes, as cannot be accomplished with-
out overturning the eftablilhed order of society, and violating
those maxims of duty which men are accustomed to hold
sacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed his
ambition within more narrow limits. Instead of aspiring at
independent power, he confined his views to the obtaining fromn
the court of Spain a confirmation of the authority which he
now poufeffed; and for that purpose, he sent an officer of
diftinaion thither, to give such a representation of his con-

Vega, p. . lib. iv. c. 40. Fernandcz, lib. i. c. 34. lib. ii. c. 13. 49. Icerrerl,
dec. 8. lib. ii. c. o.

dud,
244

duct, and of the slate of the country, as might induce the em- B 0 0 K

VI.

peror and his ministers, either from inclination or from necef- L
fity, to continue him in his present flation. 1546.

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refped to the part Confultat;ons
which he should take, consultations were held in Spain, with oftheliSpanifn

m ikilcrs.

no less solicitude, concerning the measures which ought to be
pursued in order to re-establish the emperor's authority in
Peru. Though unacquainted with the last excefles of outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded there, the court had re-
ceived an account of the insurrection againfl the viceroy, of
his imprisonment, and the usurpation of the government by
Pizarro. A revolution so alarming, called for an immediate
interposition of the emperor's abilities and authority. But as
he was fully occupied at that time in Germany, in condud-
ing the war against the famous league of Smalkalde, one of
the most interesting and arduous enterprises in his reign, the
care of providing a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved
upon his son Philip, and the counfcllors whom Charles had ap-
pointed to aflift him in the government of Spain during his
absence. At first view, the actions of Pizarro and his adhe-
rents appeared so repugnant to the duty of fubjedts towards
their overeign, that the greater part of the ministers infifled
on declaring them instantly to be guilty of rebellion, and on
proceeding to punifl them with exemplary rigour. But when
the fervour of their zeal and indignation began to abate, innu-
merable obstaclcs to the execution of this measure prcfcnted
theinfelves. The veteran bands of infantry, the llcength and
glory of the Spanilh armies, were then employed in Germany.
Spain, exhaufled of men and money by a long fcries of wars,
in which she had been involved by the rcftlcls ambition of two

Ificccffivc

245

B 0 0 K successive monarchs, could not easily equip an armament of

v].
.--, --- sufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To transport any refpeaable

body of troops to a country so remote as Peru, appeared almost
impossible. While Pizarro continued master of the South-Sea,
the direC route by Nombre de Dios and Panama was impraci-
cable. An attempt to march to Quito by land through the new
kingdom of Granada, and the province of Popayan, across
regions of vast extent, desolate, unhealthy, or inhabited by
fierce and hostile tribes, would be attended with unfurmount-
able danger and hardships. The passage to the South-Sea
by the Straits of Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain,
and so little known in that age, that no confidence could be
placed in- any effort carried on in a course of navigation so
remote and precarious. Nothing then remained but to relin-
quifh the fyflem which the ardour of their loyalty had first
suggested, and to attempt by lenient measures what could not
be effeced by force. It was manifest from Pizarro's solicitude
to represent his conduct in a favourable light to the emperor,
that, notwithstanding the excesses of which he had been guilty,
he still retained sentiments of veneration for his sovereign. By
a proper application to there, together with some fich concef-
lions as should discover a spirit of moderation and forbearance
in government, he might be yet reclaimed, or the ideas of loy-
alty natural to Spaniards might so far revive among his fol-
lowers, that they would no longer lend their aid to uphold his
usurped authority.

Gafca ap- THE success, however, of this negociation, no less delicate than
pointed to re-
pair' to Per it was important, depended entirely on the abilities and ad(drlcs
as prcfdecnt. f the person to whom it fihold be committed. After weigh-

ing with much attention the comparative merit of various per-

3 sfonS,
246

song, the Spanish miniftcrs fixed with unanimity of choice, upon 째O () K
Pedro de la Gafca, a prielt in no higher llation than tlat of coun-
iellor to the inquisition. Though in no public ollice, he had been 16.
occasionally employed by government in affairs of trust and con-
sequence, and had conducced them with no les skill than fuc-
cels; diflilaying a gentle and ininuiating temper, accompanied
with much iirmncls; probity, iuperior to any feeling of private
interest; and a cautious circumlnfpcion in concerting meaifres,
followed by such vigour in executing then, as is rarely found
in alliance with the other. These qualities marked him out
for the funation to which he was dcflined. The emlperor, to
whom Galca was not unknoswn,, warmly approved of the choice,
and communicated it to him in a letter, containing expressions
of good-will and confidence, no lces honourable to the prince
who wrote, than to the subjea who received it. Gafca, notwith-
standing his advanced age and feeble constitution, and tllougl,
from the apprehensions natural to a man, who, during the
course of his life, had never been out of his own country,
he dreaded the effets of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy
climate', did not hesitate a moment about complying with the
will of his sovereign. In order to shew that it was from tllis Ilis nodera-
principle alone that he aed, he refuced a bishopric which
was offered to him, in order that he might bear a more
dignified charaCter; he would accept of no higher title thani
that of prceident of the court of audiencc in Lima; and
declared tlat he would receive no salary on account of his
difcliarging the duties of that office. All he required was, that
the xpence of lupporting his family should be defrayed by
the public, and as lie was to go like a minister of peace with

Icrnadcz, lib. ii. c. 17.

his

247

0 K his gown and breviary, and without any retinue but a few
VI.

domestics, this would not load the revenue with any enormous

5+6. burden .

The powers Bur while he discovered such difinterefled moderation with
committed to
himn. refped to whatever related personally to himself, he demanded

his official powers in a very different tone. He insisted, as
he was to be employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to his sovereign
for new inftrudions on every emergence; and as the whole
fuccels of his negociations must depend upon the confidence
which the people with whom he had to treat could place in
the extent of his powers, that he ought to be invested with un-
limited authority, that his jurifdidion muff reach to all persons
and to all causes; that he muff be empowered to pardon, to pu-
nifh, or to reward, as circumfiances and the behaviour of dif-
ferent men might require; that, in cafe of refitance from the
malcontents, he might be authorised to reduce them to obedi-
ence by force of arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to
call for affinance from the governors of all the Spanish fettle-
ments in America. These powers, though manifestly conducive
to the great objects of his mission, appeared to the Spanish
ministers to be inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which ought
not to be delegated to a subjea, and they refused to grant
them. But the emperor's views were more enlarged. As
from the nature of his employment, Gafca must be entrusted
with discretionary power in several points, and all his efforts
might prove ineffecual if he was circumscribed in any one

h Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, . 174. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 14-16. Veg,

p. ii. lib. v. c. . Herrera, dec. 8. lib, i. c. 4, &c.
248

particular,
4

particular, Charles scrupled not to invest him with authority B 00
to the full extent that he demanded. Highly satisfied with this -
fresh proof of his mafler's confidence, Gafca haflencd his de-
parture, and without either money or troops, set out to quell a May z5-
formidable rebellion c.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found EIernan Mexia, iuly, 2rri

an officer of note, polred there, by order of Pizarro, with a con- Panama.
fiderable body of men, to oppose the landing of any hostile
forces. But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a train
io little formidable, and with a title of no such dignity as to
excite terror, that he was received with much rcfpec'. From
Nombre de Dios he advanced to Panama, and met with a fimi-
lar reception fronm linojofa, whom Pizarro had entrufled with
the government of that town, and the command of his fleet
fiationed there. In both places he held the fame language,
declaring that he was fcnt by their sovereign as a messenger
of peace, not as a miniller of vengeance; that he came to re-
dress all their grievances, to revoke the laws which had ex-
cited alarm, to pardon past offences, and to re-establish order
and jullice in the government of Peru. His mild deportment,
the simplicity of his manners, the fanciity of his profelion,
and a winning appearance of candour, gained credit to his
declarations. The veneration due to a person clothed witli
legal authority, and aing in virtue of a royal commiiflon,
began to revive among men accuflomed for lome time to no-
thling more rcfpcdable than an furped juiliciq:ion. Hinojofa,
VMexia, and several other officers of c iflintion, to cach of wholmn
Gafca applied feparatcly, wcre gained over to his intcrefn, and

c Frnaidez, litb. i. c. 16-18.

249
VOL. II.

Kk;

waited

B 째0 K waited only for ome decent occasion of declaring openly in his

VI.
s쨩-z-~쨩 favour d.

1546.

Violent pro- THIS the violence of Pizarro oon afforded them. As oon
ccedings of
P'izarro. as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama, though he received,

at the fame time, an account of the nature of his commiflion,
and was informed that he offered to render every Spaniard in
Peru easy concerning what was past, by an at of general
oblivion; and secure with refped to the future, by repealing
the obnoxious laws; inflead of accepting with gratitude his
sovereign's gracious concessions, he was so much exasperated
on finding that he was not to be continued in his ftatibn
as governor of the country, that he instantly resolved to op-
pose the president's entry into Peru, and to prevent his ex-
ercifing any jurifdicdion there. To this desperate resolution
he added another as highly preposterous. He sent a new de-
putation to Spain to justify this conduEt, and to insist, in name
of all the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the go-
vernment to himself during life, as the only means of pre-
serving tranquillity there. The persons entrufled with this
strange commillion, intimated the intention of Pizarro to the
president, and required him, in his name, to depart from Pa-
nama and return to Spain. They carried likewise secret in-
flru&ions to Hinojofa, direcing him to offer Gafca a present
of fifty thousand pesos, if le would comply voluntarily with
xvhat was demanded of him; and if he should continue obstinate,
to cut him off either by aaffination or poison'.

d Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. r. 6, 7. Gomarn, c. 175. Vcga,

r . 11b. v. c. 3. e Zaratc, lib. vi. c. 8. Fcrnandez, libi. ic. 3, 31.
Hrr,'rc:a, ec.( , 8. lib. ii c. 9, o.

MANY
250

MANY circumstances concurred in pulhing on Pizarro o o B 1 K

VI.
those wild measures. Having been once accuflomed to the - -

1546.

pre-eminence of supreme command, he could not bear the G:Iaf gaims
thoughts of descending to a private station. Conscious of his his ilCet.
own demerit, he fufpeded that the emperor fludied only to de-
ceive him, and would never pardon the outrages which he had
committed. His chief confidents, no lets guilty, entertained
the fame apprehensions. The approach of Gafca without any
military force excited no terror. There were now above fix
thousand Spaniards fettled in Pcru ; and at the head of
these he doubted not to maintain his own independence, if the
court of Spain hould refuse to grant what he required. But
he knew not that a spirit of defection had already begun to
spread among those whom he trufled most. Hinojofa, amazed
at his precipitate resolution of setting himself in opposition to
the emperor's commission, and disdaining to be his infirument in
executing the odious crimes pointed out in his secret infiruc-
tions, publicly recognized the president as his only lawful fu-
perior. The officers under his command did the fame. Such
was the contagious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru; and at the
time when Pizarro expected to hear either of Gafca's return to
Spain, or of his death, he received an account of his being
master of the fleet, of Panama, and of the troops flationed
there.

IRRITATED almolt to madness by an event so unexpected, pizarro re.

he openly prepared for war; and in order to give tome colour ,lvs o"
of julice to his arms, he appointed the court of audience in s'57-

f I-irera, de. 8. lib. iii. c, o

K k z Lima
-

B 0 0 K Lima to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of having

VI.
.--.--.I seized his ships, educed his officers, and prevented his deputies
'547. from proceeding on their voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though

aaing as a judge in virtue of the royal commission, did not
scruple to proltitute the dignity of his funcion by finding Gafca
guilty of treason, and condemning him to death on that accountg.
Wild, and even ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it imposed
on the low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was filled,
by the semblance of a legal fandion warranting Pizarro to carry
on hoflilities against a convicted traitor. Soldiers accordingly
resorted from every quarter to his fandard, and he was soon
at the head of a thousand men, the bell equipped that had evor
taken the field in Peru.

Prcpaatcns GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force must be employed
of Gafca.

in order to accomplish the purpose of his miflion, was no less
afliduous in collecting troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and
other settlements on the continent; and with such success, that
he was soon in a condition to detach a squadron of his fleet,
April. with a considerable body of soldiers, to the coafi of Peru. Their

appearance excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not
attempt for ome time to make any descent, they did more es-
fetual service, by setting ashore in different places persons who
dispersed copies of the aat of general indemnity, and the revo-
cation of the late edicts; and who made known every where the
pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of the president.
The effet of spreading this information was wonderful. All
who were diflatisfied with Pizarro's violent administration, all
who retained any sentiments of fidelity to their overeign, be-

g Fcrnandez, lib. ii . c . , Vega, p. II. lib. v. c. .' IIcrrera, dec. 8. lib. iii.
,c, 6.ga

c. G. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ "
252

gan to meditate revolt. Some openly deserted a cause which B 00 K
they now deemed to be unjust. Centeno, leaving the cave in L.---
which he lay concealed, assembled about fifty of his former Infurreion
adherents, and with this feeble half-armed band advanced boldly of enteno;
to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in the night-time, in which he
displayed no less military kill than valour, he rendered him-
self mailer of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Most of there having ranged themselves
under his banners, he had soon the command of a respectable
body of troops h.

PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding one enemy ap- anainawhom

Pizarro

proaching by sea, and another by land, at a time when he marches,
trufled to the union of all Peru in his favour, was of a spirit
more undaunted, and more accustomed to the viciflitudes of
fortune, than to be disconcerted or appalled. As the danger
from Centeno's operations was the most urgent, he instantly
set out to oppose him. Having provided horses for all his fol-
diers, he marched with amazing rapidiry. But every morning
he found his force diminifled by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became ffilpicious to excess,
and punished without mercy all whom he fufpedcd, the rage
of desertion was too violent to be checked. Before he got
within fight of the enemy at Huarina, near the lake Titiacna
he could not muflcr more tlian four hundred foldicrs. But there
he jufly confidered as men of tried attachment, on whom lie
might depend. They were indeed the boldel and moil dcfpe-
rate of his followers, confeious like. hIimfclf of crimes for
lwhich they could hardly expe forgivencfs, and without any

'l Zarate, lib. vi. c. 13-16. Gomara, c. 180, 181. Fernandlcz, llb. ii. c. 28.
61., &c.

ope)C
J

253

B 0o0 K hope but in the success of their ams. With these he did not

VJ.

,-... hesitate to attack Centeno's troops, though double to his own
Ofob'er2o. in number. The royalifls did not decline the combat. It was

the molt obstinate and bloody that had hitherto been fought in
and defeats Peru. At length the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the fupe-

riority of Carvajal's military talents, triumphed over numbers,
and obtained a complete vitory. The booty was immene ',
and the treatment of the vanquished cruel. By this signal
success the reputation of Pizarro was re-effabliflied, and being
now deemed invincible in the field, his army increased daily in
number k.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru, which more

than counterbalanced the splendid vidory at Huaina. Pizarro
had scarcely left Lima, when the citizens, weary of his oppref-
five dominion, erected the royal tandard, and Aldana, with a
detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took possession of the
Gafca lands town. About the fame time', the president landed atTumbez

n Peru with five hundred men. Encouraged by his pretence, every

settlement in the low country declared for the king. The fitua-
tion of the two parties was now perfeEtly reverted; Cuzco and
the adjacent provinces were possessed by Pizarro; all the reft of
the empire, from Qtito southward, acknowledged the jurif-
didion of Gafca. As his numbers augmented fall, Gafca ad-
vanced into the interior part of the country. His behaviour
still continued to be gentle and unafluming; he expressed, on
every occasion, his ardent with of terminating the contest with-
out bloodshed. More solicitous to reclaim than to punifi, he

m See NOTE XLV. k Zarate, lib. vii. c. z, 3. Gomara, c. 18r.

Vega, p. ii. lib. v. c. 18, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 79. Hcrrera, dec. 8. lib. iv.
c. , . Zarate, lib, vi. c. 17.

upbraided
254

upbraided no man for past offences, but received them as a fa- B O0 O K
ther receives penitent children returning to a sense of their duty. v
Though desirous of peace, he did not flacken his preparations 1547.
for war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his troops
in the fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco ". There Advances to-
he remained for ome months, not only that he might have wardsCuzco.
time to make another attempt towards an accommodation with
Pizarro, but that he might train his new soldiers to the use of
arms, and accustom them to the discipline of a camp, before
he led them against a body of victorious veterans. Pizarro,
intoxicated with the success which had hitherto accompanied
his arms, and elated with having again near a thousand men
under his command, refused to liften to any terms, although
Cepeda, together with several of his officers, and even Carvajal
himself", gave it as their advice to close with the president's
offer of a general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws 째. Gafca having tried in vain every expedient to
avoid imbruing his hands in the blood of his countrymen, be- Dec. zg.
gan to move towards Cuzco at the head of sixteen hundred
men.

PIZARRO, confident of viatory, suffered the royalifls to pass Both artcs

prepaire for

all the rivers that lie between Guamanga and Cuzco without b:itte.
opposition, and to advance within four leagues of that capital, ,5s8.
flattering himself that a defeat in such a situation as rendered a
retreat impradieable would at once terminate the war. He
then marched out to meet the enemy, and Carvajal chose his
ground, and made the disposition of the troops with the dif- April9.
cerning eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war, con-

Z arate, lib. vii. c. i. Fcrnanrlcz, lib) .

i . c. 7. 82.
" Se N fOTE XLVI. 째 Zirate, lib. vii, c. 6. Vega, p. 1 r. il!. v. C. 27.

2 fpiculous

255

B 째0 K fpicuous in all his operations. As the two armies moved for-

VI.
-.-. .ward slowly to the charge, the appearance of each was singular.
1548. In that of Pizarro, .composed of men enriched with the spoils of

the mofl opulentcountry in America, every officer, and almost
all the private men were clothed in fluffs of silk, or brocade,
. embroidered with gold and silver; and their horses, their arms,
their standards, were adorned with all the pride of military
,pomp . That of Gafca, though not so splendid, exhibited
what was no less firiking. He himself, accompanied by the arch-
bishop of Lima, the bishops of Qiito and Cuzco, and a great
number of ecclefiaflics, marching along the lines, blessing the
men, and encouraging them to a resolute discharge of their duty.

Pizarro de- WHIEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda set spurs to
lerted by his
troop, his horfc, galloped off, and surrendered himself to the prefi-

dent. Garcilafo de la Vega, and other officers of note, fol-
lowed his example. The revolt of persons of such high rank
firuck all with amazement.. The mutual confidence on which
the union and strength of armies depend, ceased at once. Dif-
trust and contfernation spread from rank to rank. Some silent-
ly flipped away, others threw down their arms, the greatest
number went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and some
leaders, employed authority, threats, and entreaties to flop
them, but in vain. In less than half an hour, a body of men,
which might have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire, was
totally difpcrfed. Pizarro, feeing all. irretrievably loft, cried
out.in amazement to a few officers who fill faithfully adhered
to him, " What remains for us to do ?" " Let us rufl, re-
plied one of them, upon the enemy's firmert battalion, and die
like Romans." Dejeded with such a revcrfe of fortune, he
.. r Zrate, lib, vi. c. .

+*~~~~~~ ~~hadl
256

had not spirit to follow this soldiery counsel, and with a tame-
ness disgraceful to his former fame, he surrendered to one of
Gafca's officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was over-
taken and seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless vidory, did not slain it with

cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a finall number of the most
diflinguifhed or notorious offenders, were punifed capitally.
Pizarro was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He sub-
mitted to his fate with a composed dignity, and eemed defi-
rous to atone by repentance for the crimes which he had com-
mitted. The end of Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his
trial he offered no defence. When the sentence adjudging him
to be hanged was pronounced, he carelessly replied, " One can
die but once." During the interval between the sentence and
execution, he discovered no sign either ofremorfe for the pafl, or
of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all who visited him, in
his usual sarcastic vein of mirth, with the fame quickness of re-
partee and gross pleasantry as at any other period of his life.
Cepeda, more criminal than either, ought to have shared the
fame fate; but the merit of having deserted his afiociates at
such a critical moment, and with such decisive effect, saved
him from immediate puniflment. He was sent, however, as
a prisoner to Spain, and died in confinement q.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary hiflorians have

given of the civil diffcnfions that raged in Peruc, with little in-,
terruption, during ten years, many circumstances occur ob

'i Zarate, lib v.

vi . . 6, 7, . Goniara, c. iRq, 180(. Vrg , p. 11. lib. v. c. 3, &c.
Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. c, 86, &c. Ilceicra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

.VoL0. II. L I flriking,

B 0 0 K
BOOK

VI.

154S.

taken,

and put to
death.

257

B 0 K firiking, and which indicate such an uncommon state of man-
-----' ners, as to merit particular attention.
1548.

Nomerce- THOUGH the Spaniards who first invaded Peru were of the
cenary fol-
diers in the lowest order in society, and the greater part of those who after-
civil wars of wards joined them were persons of desperate fortune, yet in all
Peru.

the bodies of troops brought into the field by the different
leaders who contended for superiority, not one man aded as a
hired soldier, that follows his tfandard for pay. Every adven-
turer in Peru confidered himself as a conqueror, entitled, by
his services, to an establishment in that country which had been
acquired by his valour. In the contefis between the rival chiefs,
each chose his fide as he was directed by his own judgment or
affections. He joined his commander as a companion of his
fortune, and disdained to degrade himself by receiving the wages
of a mercenary. It was to their swords, not to pre-eminence in
office, or nobility of birth, that most of the leaders whom they
followed were indebted for their elevation; and each of their
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a way for him-
self to the possession of power and wealth '.

Armies im- BUT though the troops in Peru served without any regular pay,
enfiely ex- they were railed at immense expence. Among men accustomed

to divide the spoils of an opulent country, the desire of obtaining
wealth acquired incredible force. The ardour of pursuit aug-
mented in proportion to the hope of success. Where all were
intent on the fame objeCt, and under the dominion of the fame
passion, there was but one mode of gaining men, or of fecur-
ing their attachment. Officers of name and influence, beides

Vegn, p, il, lib. iv. c, 38. 41.
258

the
2

the promise of future establishments, received in hand large gra- B O o r

vr.

tuities from the chief with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pi- '----
zarro, in order to raise a thousand men, advanced five hundred I548.
thousand pesos '. Gafca expended on the troops which he led
against Pizarro nine hundred thousand pesos '. The diftribu-
tion of property, bestowed as the reward of success, was still
more exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence of his perfidy Andimmenfe

rewards to

and address, in persuading the court of royal audience to give individuals.
the fandion of its authority to the usurped jurifdidion of Pi-
zarro, received a grant of lands which yielded an annual in-
come of a hundred and fifty thousand pesos . Hinojofa, who,
by his early defetion from Pizarro, and surrender of the fleet
to Gafca, decided the fate of Peru, obtained a diftrid of country
affording two hundred thousand pesos of yearly value . While
such rewards were dealt out to the principal officers, with more
than royal munificence, proportional hares were conferred upon
those of inferior rank.

SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its natural effects. Their profu.

sion and lux-

It gave birth to new wants, and new desires. Veterans long ury.
accustomed to hardship and toil, acquired of a sudden a taste
for profuse and inconsiderate dissipation, and indulged in all
the excesses of military licentioufniefs. The riot of low de-
bauchery occupied some; a relish for expensive luxuries spread
among others . The meanest soldier in Peru would have
thought himself degraded by marching on foot, and at a time
when the prices of horses in that country were exorbitant,
each insisted on being furnished with one before he would take

' Fcrnndez, lib. ii. c. 54. ' Zarate, lib. vii. c. Io. Herrcra, dec. 8. lib. v.

c. 7. U Gomara, c. 164. x Vcg;, p. . lib. vi. c. 3. Y Ilerrera,
dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii. c. o.

the
Li 2

B O K the field. But though less patient under the fatigue and hard-

VI.
A_
- i/hips of service, they were ready to face danger and death with
1 54' as much intrepidity as ever, and animated by the hope of new

rewards, they never failed, on the day of battle, to display all
their ancient valour.

Ferocity with TOGETHER with their courage, they retained all the fero-
which their
contests were city by which they were originally diffinguilhed. Civil discord
carried on.

never raged with a more fell spirit than among the Spaniards
in Peru. To all the passions which usually envenom con-
tesss among countrymen, avarice was added, and rendered their
enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to seize the valuable forfei-
tures exeaedd upon the death of every opponent, shut the door
against mercy. To be wealthy, was of itfelffufficient to expose
a man to accusation, or to subjet him to punishment. On the
slightest suspicions, Pizarro condemned many of the most opu-
lent inhabitants in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching
for any pretext to jufify his cruelty, cut off many more. The
number of those who suffered by the hand of the executioner,
was not much inferior to what fell in the field Y; and the
greater part was condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

And want of THE violence with which the contending parties treated their
faith.

opponents was not accompanied with its usual attendants, at-
tachment and fidelity to those with whom they aed. The
tics of honour which are held sacred among soldiers, and the
principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly in the Spanifl
charader as in that of any nation, fecm to have been equally

z See NOTE XLVII.

forgotten.
26o

forgotten. Even regard for decency, and the sense of flhame, B 0 0 K

VI.

were totally loft. During their diflenfions, there was hardly a i
Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party which he had 54
originally espoused, betray the afociates with whom he had
united, and violate the engagements under which lie had come.
The viceroy Nugnez Vela, was ruined by the treachery of
Cepeda and the other judges of the royal audience, who were
bound by the duties of their function to have supported his au-
thority. The chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo Pizar-
ro's revolt, were the first to forsake him, and submit to his ene-
mies. His fleet was given up to Gafca, by the man whom he
had ingled out among his officers to entrust with that important
command. On the day that was to decide his fate, an army
of veterans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their arms
without friking a blow, and deserted a leader who had often
conducted them to viEory. Instances of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obligations which attach
man to man, and bind them together in social union, rarely oc-
cur in history. It is only where men are far removed from the
feat of government, where the refiraints of law and order are
little felt, where the prospect of gain is unbounded, and im-
mense wealth may cover the crimes by which it is acquired,
that we can find any parallel to the levity, the rapacioufilefs,
the perfidy and corruption prevalcnt among the Spaniards in
P'eru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in every corner of c;rcA.l dci,

Peru laid down their arms, and tranquillity ficmncd to be per- fr hl)u"L
fcdly re-eilablifhed. But two very interefling ol)jcCs flill re- d'ClS.
mained to occupy the prclident's attention. The one was to
find immediately such employment for a multitude of turbulent

and

B 0 K and daring adventurers with which the country was filled, as
A _cv- might prevent them from exciting new commotions. The

other, to bestow proper gratifications upon those to whose loy-
alty and valour he was indebted for his success. The former
of there was in some measure accomplished, by appointing Pe-
dro de Valdivia to prosecute the conquest of Chili; and by em-
powering Diego Centeno to undertake the discovery of the vast
regions bordering on the river De la Plata. The reputation of
those leaders, and the hopes of bettering their condition in a new
country, alluring many of the most indigent and desperate fol-
diers to follow their standards, drained off no inconsiderable
portion of that mutinous inflammable spirit which Gafca dreaded.

His division THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty, and to be ad-
of the coun.
try among justed with a more attentive and delicate hand. The reparti-
his followers. nzientos, or allotments of lands and Indians which fell to be

distributed, in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for-
mer possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos of yearly rent'.
Gafca, when now absolute master of this immense property,
retained the fame difinterefled sentiments which he had origi-
nally professed, and refused to reserve the smallest portion of it
for himself. But the number of claimants was great; and
whilst the vanity or avarice of every individual fixed the value
of his own services, and eflimated the recompence which he
thought due to him, the pretensions of each were so extrava-
gant, that it was irpoflible to satisfy all. Gafca listened to
them one by one, with the most patient attention, and
that he might have leilure to weigh the comparative merit
of their several claims with accuracy, he retired, with the

a Vega, p. il. lib. vi. c. 4.

archbishop
16z2

archbishop of Lima and a ingle secretary, to a village twelve B o O K

VI.

leagues from Cuzco. There he spent several days in allotting -.-
to each a difiria of lands and number of Indians, in pro- 1;48.
portion to his idea of their pail services, and future importance.
But that he might get beyond the reach of the fierce storm of
clamour and rage, which he foresaw would burst out on the
publication of his decree, notwithstanding the impartial equity
with which he had framed it, he set out for Lima, leaving the
instrument of partition fealed up, with orders not to open it for
some days after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publishing the decree of parti- Ag. 24.

The difcon-

tion was not less than Gafca had expeced. Vanity, avarice, tentitocca-
emulation, envy, shame, rage, and all the other passions that
most vehemently agitate the minds of men when both their ho-
nour and their interest are deeply affeced, conspired in adding
to its violence. It broke out with all the fury of military info-
lence. Calumny, threats, and curses were poured out openly
upon the president. I-e was accused of ingratitude, of par-
tiality, and of injufice. Among soldiers prompt to action, such
seditious discourse would have been oon followed by deeds no
lcfs violent, and they already began to turn their eyes towards
some discontented leaders, expeding them to sand forth in rc-
dress of their wrongs. By some vigorous interpositions of go-
vernment, a timely check was given to this mutinous spirit, and
the danger of another civil war was averted for the present ".

GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was suppressed 14.

Re ellablifles
rather than extinguished, laboured with the utmost afliduty order and go-

vcrnment,

b Zarate, lib. vii. c 9. Gomarn, c. 187. Vega, p. II. lib. vii. c. , &c. Ser-
nandez, p . li. i . c. i, &c. ierrc a, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

to,

263

B o K to soothe the malcontents, by bellowing large gratuities on some,

VI.
i--- by promising repartimieintos, when they fell vacant, to others,

'813 and by carefling and flattering all. But that the public fecu-

rity might reft on a foundation more stable than their good
affecion, he endeavoured to flrengthen the hands of his fuc-
ceffors in office, by re-establishing the regular adminifiration of
justice in every part of the empire. He introduced order and
simplicity into the mode of collecting the royal revenue. He
issued regulations concerning the treatment of the Indians, well
calculated to protect them from opprefion, and to provide for
their inflrudion in the principles of religion, without depriving
;55o. the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from their labour. Having

now accomplished every objeEt of his miflion, Gafca, longing
to return again to a private flation, committed the government

Feb. I. of Peru to the court of audience, and set out for Spain. As,

and sets ut
for Stain. during the anarchy and turbulence of the four last years, there

had been no remittance made of the royal revenue, he carried
with him thirteen hundred thousand pesos of public money,
which the oeconomy and order of his administration enabled
.him to save, after paying all the expences of the war.

Hisrecepticn HE was received in his native country with universal admi-
there..

ration of his abilities, and of his virtue. Both were, indeed,
highly conspicuous. Without army, or fleet, or public funds;
with a train ib iinple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him , lie set out to oppose a formidable
rebellion. Iy his address and talents he supplied all those dc-
sets, and fcemcd to create instruments for executing his
deligns. I-Ic acquired such a naval force, as gave him the com-

' Ierlarlnzlet , lib. ii. c. 18.
264

mand
1

mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able to cope with B 0 K

VI.

the veteran bands which gave law to Peru. He vanquished .--
their leader, on whose arms vicory had hitherto attended, and I5
in place of anarchy and usurpation, he eftabliflled the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful sovereign. But
the praise belfowed on his abilities was exceeded by that which
his virtue merited. After residing in a country where wealth
presented allurements which had seduced every pcrfon who had
hitherto possessed power there, he returned from that trying
flation with integrity not only untainted but unfufpeacd. After
diRributing among his countrymen poflcffions of greater extent
and value than had ever been in the dil'ofal of a fuibjed in any
age or nation, he himfclf remained in his original slate of po-
verty ; and at the very time, when he brought fich a large recruit
to the royal treasury, lie was obliged to apply by petition for a
small fum to diicharge some petty debts which he had con-
traaed during the course of his service '. Charles was not in-
sensible to such disinterested merit. Gafca was received by hinm
with the molt diflinguifhing marks of esteem, and being pro-
moted to the bishopric of Palencia, lie paffcl the remainder of
his days in the tranquillity of retirement, rcfpc-ed by his coun-
try, honoured by his fovcreign, and beloved by all.

NOTnITIISTANDING all Gafca's wife regulations, the tran-

quillity of Peru was not of long continuance. In a country,
xi here the authority of govcrnment was alinofl forgotten during
lte long prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there wcrc
lila)ppointcd leaders ripe for revolt, and clditious loldiers ready
to follow them, it was not dilhicult to kindle coinbulion. Sc-

,' MS. pcnes ne.

265
VoL. II.

M 111

B o0 K veral successive infurretions desolated the country for some

V.

_---s years. But as those, though fierce, were only transient storms,
55 excited rather by the ambition and turbulence of particular

men, than by general or public motives, the detail of them is
not the obje& of this history. These commotions in Peru, like
every thing of extreme violence either in the natural or political
body,were not of long duration, and by carrying off the corrupted
humours which had given rife to the disorders, they contributed in
the end to firengthen the society which at first they threatened to
destroy. Ding their fierce contests, several of the first invaders
of Peru, and many of those licentious adventurers whom the fame
of their success had allured thither, fell by each other's hands.
Each of the parties, as they alternately prevailed in the struggle,
cleared the country of a greater number, by executing, profcrib-
ing, or banishing their opponents. Men less enterprising and
desperate, and more accustomed to move in the path of fober
and peaceable industry, fettled in Peru; and the royal authority
was gradually eablilhed as firmly there as in the other Spa-
nifh colonies.

T II E
266

# BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T R Y

O F
A M E R IA.

B O 0K VII.
A S the conquest of the two great empires of Mexico and B O O K

Peru forms the most splendid and interefling period in V ,

the history of America, a view of their political institutions, and
a description of their national manners, will exhibit the human
species to the contemplation of intelligent observers in a very
singular stage of its progrcfs a.

WHEN compared with other parts of the New World, Mcx- Mexico and

ico and Peru may be confidered as polished states. Inflead of polisl'd than
finall, independent, hoftilc tribes, flruggling for fubfifience ohler palri'
amidlt woods and marshes, firangers to induflry and arts, un-
acquainted with subordination, and alnoft without the appear-
ance of regular government, we find countries of great extent

See NOT. Xl,VllI.

m 2 fubjctcd

B o0 K fubje&ted to the dominion of one sovereign, the inhabitants col-
- .--- leded together in cities, the wisdom and foresight of rulers em-

ployed in providing for the maintenance and security of the
people, the empire of laws in some mcafure established, the
authority of religion recognized, many of the arts essential to
life brought to some degree of maturity, and the dawn of such
as are ornamental beginning to appear.

Their infeii- BUT if the comparison be made with the people of the an-
ority to the vi
nations of the cient contint, the inferiority of Anerica in improvement will
tincint.con be conspicuous, and neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians

will be entitled to rank with those nations which merit
the name of civilized. They, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the useful metals, and the pro-
grefs which they had made in extending their dominion over
the animal creation was inconsiderable. The Mexicans had
gone no farther than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a
species of fmal-1 dogs, and rabbits b. By this feeble essay of in-
genuity, the means of fu.bfitemce were rendered somewhat more
plentiful and secure, than when men depend solely on hunting;
but they had no idea of attempting to subdue the more robust
animals, or of deriving any aid from their miniitry in carrying
on works of labour. The Peruvians seem to have neglected
the inferior animals, and had not rendered any of them domeflic
except the duck; but they were more fortunate in taming the
Llama, an animal peculiar to their country, in form resembling
a camel, and of a size somewhat larger than a sleep. Under the
protection of man, this species multiplied greatly. Its wool fur-
msifhed the Peruvians with clothing, its fefli with food. It was

i lIcrrera dcc. . lib. vii. c. 12,
263

^

CVCt

even employed as a. beast of burden, and carried a moderate B O O K
load: witl much patience and docility '. It was never uscd for ---
draught; ad! the breed being confined to the mountainous
coutry, its service., if we may judge by incidents that occur
in the early Spanish writers, was not very cxtenfive among the
Peruvians in their original slate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed towards civility,

the dicovery of the useful metals, and the acquisition of domi-
nion over the animal creation, have been marked as ftcps of ca-
pital importance in their progress. In our continent, society
continued in that state which is denominated barbarous, long
after men had attained both. Even with all that command over
nature which there confer, many ages elapfc, before industry be-
comes fo.perfect as to render ifbfiftencc fecurc, before the arts that
supply the wants and furnish the accommodations of life are
invented, and before any idea is conceived of the various infli-
tutions requisite in a well-ordered society. The Mexicans and
Peruvians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or the aid
of domeflic animals, laboured under disadvantages which nmuf
have greatly retarded their progress, and in their higlhef state
of improvement, their power was so limited, and their opera-
tions so feeble, that they can hardly be confidered as having
advanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

AFTER this general observation concerning the mofl fingu- View of the

inlitutions3

lar and diflinguifling circumstance in the (late of both the great and nalinlc:,.
empires in America, I fiall endeavour to give uch a view of of 'tci.
the constitution and interior police of each, as may enable us to

c Vga, p. . lib. viii. c. 16. Zarate, lib. i. c. r.l

ascertain.

B C) 0 K ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot them their
'---' proper station between the rude tribes in the New World, and

the polished states of the ancient, and to determine how far
they had risen above the former, as well as how much they
fell below the latter.

Im),rfeta in- MEXICO was first fubjeded to the Spanish crown. But
fortiratinn concerning our acquaintance with its laws and manners is not, from
tho- of
Mexc. that circumflance, more complete. What I have remark-

ed concerning the defective and inaccurate information on
which we must rely with refped to the condition and customs
of the avage tribes in America, may be applied likewise to our
knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, and the rapacious
adventurers who accompanied him, had not leisure or capacity
to enrich either civil or natural history with new observations.
They undertook their expedition in quest of one object, and
seem hardly to have turned their eyes towards any other. Or,
if during some hort interval of tranquillity, when the occupa-
tions of war ceased, and the ardour of plunder was suspended,
the institutions and manners of the people whom they had in-
vaded drew their attention, the inquiries of illiterate soldiers
were conducted with so little sagacity and precision, that the
accounts given by them of the policy and order eflablithed in
the Mexican monarchy are superficial, confused, and inexpli-
cable. It is rather from incidents which they relate occafon-
ally, than from their own dedutions and remarks, that we are
enabled to form some idea of the genius and manners of that
people. The obscurity in which the ignorance of its con-
querors involved the annals of Mexico, was augmented by the
iupcrflition of those who fuccccded them. As the memory of
pal events was prefcrved among the Mexicans by figures

5 painted
270

painted on skins, on cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, the B 0 IC
early missionaries, unable to comprehend their meaning, and A
struck with their uncouth forms, conceived them to be monu-
ments of idolatry which ought to be destroyed, in order to fa-
cilitate the conversion of the Indians. In obedience to an edic
issued by Juan'de Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk, the first bishop
of Mexico, all those records of the ancient Mexican flory were
colleted and committed to the flames. In consequence of this
fanatical zeal of the monks who firit visited New Spain, and
which their successors oon began to lament, whatever know-
ledge of remote events such rude monuments contained was
entirely loft, and no information remained concerning the an-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but what was de-
rived from tradition, or from ome fragments of their historical
paintings that escaped the barbarous researches of Zummaraga d.
From the experience of all nations it is manifest, that the me-
mory of past tranfadtions can neither be long preserved, nor be
transmitted with any fidelity by tradition. The Mexican paint-
ings which are supposed to have served as annals of their em-
pire, are few in number, and of ambiguous meaning. Thus
amidll the uncertainty of the former, and the obscurity of the
latter, we mult glean what intelligence can be colleced fiom
the scanty materials scattered in the Spanifl writers.

ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans themselves, Origin of the

Mexican mo-

their empire was not of long duration. Their country, as they narcliy.
relate, was originally pofliffcd, rather than peopled, by finall
nidependent tribes, whose mode of life and manners rcfemblcd
those of the rudcef favagcs which we have described. But
about a period correfponling to the beginning of the tenth
century in the Chriflian ara, everal tribes moved in fuccellive

a Ace fa, lib, vi. c. 7. T ru'm. Proe m, lib. ii. lib. iii. c. (. li. xiv. c. 6.

imigrations

271

E o K migrations from unknown regions towards the north and'north-

---- weft, and fettled in different provinces of A.nabac, the ancient

name of New Spain. These, more civilized than the original
inhabitants, began to form them to the arts of social life. At
length, towards the commencement of the thirteenth century,
the Mexicans, a people more pblifhed than any of the former,
advanced from the border of the Californian gulf, and took
poffeflion of the plains adjacent to a great lake near the centre
of the country. After residing there about fifty years, they
founded a town, since distinguished by the name of Mexico,
which from humble beginnings soon grew to be the most con-
fiderable city in the New World. The Mexicans, long after
they yvere etablifhed in their new possessions, continued, like
other martial tribes in America, .unacquainted with regal do-
minion, a nd were governed in peace and conduaed in war by
such -as were entitled to pre-eminence by their wisdom or their
valour. But among them, as in other flates whose power and
territories 'becomne extensive, the supreme authority centred at
last in a ingle person; and when the Spaniards under Cortes
invaded the country, Montezuma was the ninth monarch in
order who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary
right, but'by election.
Very rcccnt. SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans concerning the

progrcfs of their own empire. According to this, its duration
was very hort. From the first migration of their parent tribe,
they can reckon little more than three hundred years. From the
esTablishment of monarchical government, not above a hundred
and thirty years, according to one account , or a hundred
and ninety seven, according to another computation had
clapled. If, on one hand, we suppose the Mexican slate to

d Acoft. Hill. lib. vii. c. 8, &c. C Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. o168, &c.

have
272

have been of higher antiquity, and to have fubflfled during s o K

1

such a length of time as the Spanish accounts of it, civilization
would naturally lead us to conclude, it is difficult to conceive
how, among a people who poffefcdl the art of recording events
by picures, and who confidered it as an essential part ot
their national education, to teach their children to repeat the
historical songs which celebrated the exploits of their anccf-
tors , the knowledge of past tranfadions should be to slender
and limited. If, on the other hand, we adopt their own system
with refpea to the antiquities of their nation, it is no less dif-
ficult to account either for that improved slate of iociety, or for
the extensive dominion to which their empire had attained,
when firfl visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of nations is
so long, and, even when every circumflance is favourable to
their progress, they advance so slowly towards any maturity of
firength or policy, that the recent origin of the Mexicans seems
to be a firong presumption of exaggeration, in the splendid
descriptions which have been given of their-government and
manners.

BUT it is not by theory or conjecures that hiflory decides, IaS vlhic
with regard to the state or character of nations. It produces provce their

progress hi

fads as the foundation of every judgment which it ventures to civilization.
pronounce. In collecing those which must regulate our opi-
nion in the present inquiry, ome occur that fuggef an idea
of considerable progress in civilization in the Mexican empire,
and others which seem to indicate that it had advanced but
little beyond the ravage tribes around it. Both shall be exhi-
bited to the view of the reader, that, from comparing them, he
may determine on which fide the evidence preponderates.

c Hierrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. i8.
VOL. II. N n THE

273

B K THE right of private property was perfecly underflood, and

VII. Ad- established in its full extent. Among several savage tribes,

The right of
property fully we have seen, that the idea of a title to the separate, and
elablifhed. exclusive poffeflion of any object was hardly known; and

that among all, it was extremely limited and ill-defined. But
in Mexico, where agriculture and industry had made ome
progress, the diftintion between real and moveable posses-
sions, between property in land and property in goods, had
taken place. Both might be transferred from one person
to another by sale or barter; both might descend by inhe-
ritance. Every person who could be denominated a free man
had property in land. This, however, they held by various
tenures. Some possessed it in full right, and it descended to
their heirs. The title of others to their lands was derived from
the office or dignity which, they enjoyed ; and when deprived of
the latter, they loft poffefion of the former. Both these modes
of occupying land were deemed noble, and peculiar to citizens
of the highest class. The tenure, by which the great body of
the people held their property, was very different. In every
difrid a certain quantity of land was measured out, in propor-
tion to the number of families. This was cultivated by the
joint labour of the whole; its produce was deposited in a com-
mon fiorehoufe, and divided among them according to their
refpeedive exigencies. The members of the Calpullee, or affo-
ciations, could not alienate their share of the common efcate;
it was an indivisible permanent property, destined for the sup-
port of their families . In consequence of this diltribution of
the territory of the fate, every man had an interest in its wel-
fare, and the happiness of the individual was conneced with
the public security.

Hcrrcra, dec. . ib. iv. c. 15. Torquern. Mon. Ind, lib. xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

8 TII
274

TfIE number and greatnes of the cities in the Mexican em- B () K

pire is one of the most firiking circumstances, that diflinguifh it , -r---'
from those nations in America which we have already described. ,.i 1n.;,
While society continues in a rude state, the wants of men are t t"l'
so few, and they stand so little in need of mutual affiiance,
that their inducements to crowd together are extremely feeble.
Their industry at the fame tine is so imperfec, that it can-
not secure subsistence for any considerable number of fami-
lies fettled in one spot. They live dispersed, at this period,
from choice as well as from necessity, or at the utmofl aemble
in small hamlets on the banks of the river which supplies them
with food, or on the border of tome plain left open by nature,
or cleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, accustomed
to this mode of habitation among all the savage tribes with
which they were then acquainted, were aftoniihed, on entering
New Spain, to find the natives residing in towns of such extent
as resembled those of Europe. In the first fervour of their ad-
miration, they compared Zempoalla, though a town only of
the second or third size, to the cities of greatefl note in their
own country. When, afterwards, they visited in fucceflion
Tlafcala, Cholula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itfilf, their
amazement increased so much, that it led them to convey ideas
of their magnitude and populoufilefs bordering on what is in-
credible. Even where there is leifitre for observation, and no
interest that leads to leceive, conjedlural efimates of the num-
I)er of people in cities are extremely loose, and usually much
exaggerated. It is not furprlfing, then, that Cortes and is
companions, little accustomcd to fulch computations, and power-
fully tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit of their
own discoveries and conquefs, fliouldl have been betrayed into
this common error, and have raiscd their dclcriptions confi-

N n 2 derably

275

B 0 0 K derably above truth. For this reason, ome considerable abate-

VII.
_--i--> ment ought to be made from their calculation of the number

of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may fix the flan-
dard of their population much lower than they have done; but
fill they will appear to be cities of such consequence, as are not
to be found but among people who have made some considerable
progress in the arts of social life g.

The frpar.- THE eparation of professions among the Mexicans is a
tion of pro-
fellions. symptom of improvement no less remarkable. Arts, in the

early ages of society, are so few and so simple, that each man
is sufficiently master of them all, to gratify every demand of
his own limited desires. The savage can form his bow, point
his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his canoe, without call-
ing in the aid of any hand more skilful than his own. Time
must have augmented the wants of men, and ripened their in-
genuity, before the productions of art become so complicated
in their ftrucutre, or o curious in their fabric, that a particular
course of education is requisite towards forming the artificer to
expertness in contrivance and workmanship. In proportion as
refinement spreads, the diflintion of professions increases, and
they branch out into more numerous and minute subdivisions.
Among the Mexicans, this separation of the arts necessary in
life had taken place to a considerable extent. The functions
of the mafbn, the weaver, the goldfinith, the painter, and of
fcveral other crafts, were carried on by different persons. Each
was regularly iiflracd in his calling. To it alone his indufiry
was confined ; and by assiduous application to one objed, to-
gether with the pcrlfcvcring patience peculiar to Americans,
their artizans attained to a degree of neatnacs and pecrfetion in

Se; c N()O'E XIX.
276

work far beyond what could have been expected from the rude B o 0 K;

VIL

tools which they employed. Their various productions were -,-
brought into commerce; and by the exchange of them in the
ilated markets held in the cities, their mutual wants were sup-
plied h, in such orderly intcrcourfe as characSterizes an improved
slate of society.

TIlE distinction of ranks elablifhed in the Mexican empire The difin.--

is the next circumstance that merits attention. In surveying ti"on u ra" .
the savage tribes of America, we observed, that confcioufiefs
of equality, and impatience of subordination, are sentiments
natural to man in the infancy of civil life. During peace, the
authority of a superior is hardly felt among them, and even in
war it is but little acknowledged. Strangers to the idea of
property, the difference in condition resulting fiom it is un-
known. Birth or titles confer no pre-eminence; it is only by
personal merit and accomplishments that it can be acquired.
The form of society was very different among the Mexicans.
The great body of the people were in a most humiliating state.
A considerable number, known by the name of Mayeques,
nearly resembled in condition those peasants who, under va-
rious denominations, were confidered, during the prevalence
of the feudal fyfiem, as infiruments of labour attached to the foil.
The Mayeques could not change their place of residence without
permiflion of the superior on whom they depended. They were
conveyed, together with the lands on which they were fettled,
from one proprietor to another; and were bound to cultivate
the ground, and to perform several kinds of servile work '.

1' Cortes PIc!;it. a) R:;nuf. iii. 239, &c, Gom.. Cron. . 79. Torquem. lib. xiii.

c. 4 l. Ilcrrcra, doc. . lib v, c.

. 15, &c. llcirera, dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. 17. Corita, MS.

Others
S

B 0 0 K Others were reduced to the lowefi form of fubjeaion, that of
-- -- domestic servitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that wretched

slate. Their condition was held to be so vile, and their lives
deemed to be of so little value, that a person who killed one of
those slaves was not fubjeted to any punishment k. Even tho'e
con fidered as freemen were treated by their haughty lords as beings
of an inferior species. The nobles, possessed of ample territories,
were divided into various classes, to each of which peculiar titles
of honour belonged. Some of there titles, like their lands, de-
scended from father to son in perpetual succession. Others were
annexed to particular offices, or conferred during life as marks
of personal diflindion '. The monarch, exalted above all, en-
joyed extensive power, and supreme dignity. Thus the dil-
tindion of ranks was completely eftablilled, in a line of re-
gular ubordination, reaching from the highest to the lowes
member of the community. Each of these knew what he could
claim, and what he owed. The people, who were not allowed
to wear a dress of the fame faflion, or to dwell in houses of a
form similar to those of the nobles, accofred them with the molt
submissive reverence. In the presence of their overeign, they
durst not lift their eyes from the ground, or look him in the
face m. The nobles themselves, when admitted to an audience
of their sovereign, entered bare-footed, in mean garments,
and, as his slaves, paid him homage approaching to adoration.
This rcfpel due from inferiors to those above them in rank,
was eftabliflhed with such ceremonious accuracy, that it incor-
porated with their language, and influenced its genius and
idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded in expressions of re-
verence and courtesy. The flile and appellations, used in the

k -Ierrera, dee. 3, lib. iv. c. 7. ' cHrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i;.
Corita, MS. " lerrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14.

intercourle
278

intercourse between equals, would have been so unbecoming B O0 K
in the mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accofled a _ ,
person in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult". It is only
in ocieties, which time and the intfitution of regular govern-
ment have moulded into form, that we find such an orderly
arrangement of men into different ranks, and such nice atten-
tion paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized and bended Their politi-

cal con iliu,

to subordination, was prepared for submitting to monarchical tion.
government. But the descriptions of their policy and laws, by
the Spaniards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and
contradicory, that it is difficult to delineate the form of their
conflitution with any precision. Sometimes they represent
the monarchs of Mexico as absolute, deciding according to
their pleasure, with refpea to every operation of the state.
On other occasions, we discover the traces of established cuf-
toms and laws, framed in order to circumscribe the power
of the crown, and we meet with rights and privileges of the
nobles which seem to be opposed as barriers against its en-
croachments. This appearance of inconsistency has arisen
from inattention to the innovations of Montezuma upon the
Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition subverted the ancient
fyflem of government, and introduced a pure defpotifin. He
disregarded their laws, violated their privileges, and reduced
his ifubjeLs of every order to the level of slaves . The
chiefs, or nobles of the firit rank, submitted to the yoke with
such reludance, that, from impatience to hake it off, and hope
of recovering tleiroriginal rights, many of them courted the

" Sec N 1' IL L. o 째 irrcrn, dlcc. 3. lib. ii. c. 14. Torqucrm.
lib. ii. . 6.

protc.ion.

279

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

C tv1 I; protedion of Cortes, and joined a foreign power againfl their
'-__-->- domeflic opprcffor P. It is not then under the reign of Monte-

zuma, but under those of his predecessors, that we can disco-
ver wilat was the original form and genius of Mexican policy.
From the foundation of the monarchy to the eletion of Mon-
tezuma, it fecms to have fibfifted with little variation. That
body of citizens, which may be diflinguifhed by the name of
nobility, formed the chief and most refpetable order in the
slate. They were of various ranks, as has already been ob-
fcrved, and their honours were acquired and transmitted in dif-
ferent manners. Their number seems to have been great. Ac-
cording to an author accuflomed to examine with attention
what he relates, there were in the Mexican empire thirty of
this or"der, each of whom had in his territories about a hun-
dred thousand people, and ubordinate to there, there were
about three thousand nobles of a lower class . The territories
belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba, were hardly
inferior in extent to those of the Mexican monarch r. Each of
there pofeffed complete territorial jurifdiaion, and levied taxes
from their own vassals. But all followed the ltandard of
Mexico in war, serving with a number of men in proportion
to their domain, and most of them paid tribute to its monarch
as their superior lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican constitution, an

image of feudal policy in its most rigid form rites to view,
and we discern its three diftinguifling charaaeriftics, a no-
bility possessing almost independent authority, a people de-

P Herrera, dec, 2. lib. v. c. io, i, Torquem. lib. iv. c. 49.
q Herrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. z, ' Torquem. lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS.

prefled

pressed into the lowest state of fubjetion, and a king entrusted B o0 K

ViI.

with the executive power of the slate. Its spirit and principles _.
seem to have operated in the New World in the fame manner,
as in the ancient. The jurifdition of the crown was extremely
limited. All real and efFccive authority was retained by the
Mexican nobles in their owil hands, and the shadow of it
only left to the king. Jealous to excess of their own rights,
they guarded with most vigilant anxiety against the encroach-
ments of their sovereigns. By a fundamental law of the em-
pire, it was provided that the king lhould not determine con-
cerning any point of general importancc, without the appro-
bation of a council composcd of the prime nobility . Unless
he obtained their content he could not engage the nation in
war, nor could he dispose of the mofl considerable branch of the
public revenue at pleasure, it was appropriated to certain pur-
poses from which it could not be diverted by the regal autho-
rity . In order to secure full effeet to those constitutional re-
firaints, the Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to
descend by inheritance, but disposed of it by elecion. The
right of election seems to have been originally veiled in the
whole body of nobility, but was afterwards committed to fix
elecdors, of whom the Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were
always two. From refpec for the family of their monarchs,
the choice fell generally upon some person sprung from it.
But as the aivity and valour of their prince was of greater
moment to a people perpetually engaged in war, than a firiCt
adherence to the order of birth, collaterals of mature age or
diflinguiflied merit were often preferred to those who were

Hlerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. . lil. iv. c. 6. Corita, MS.
Ibid . 17.

28
VOL. II.

Oo

nearer

B 째0 K nearer the throne in direc descent ". To this maxim, in their

Vii.
-_----' policy, the Mexicans appear to be indebted for such a fuccef-

sion of able and warlike princes, as raised their empire in a
short period to that extraordinary height of power, which it
had attained when Cortes landed in New Spain.

Power and WHILE the jurifdicion of the Mexican monarchs continued
splendour of
hceir mo- to be limited, it is probable that it was exercised with little
narchs. ostentation. But as their authority became more extensive, the

splendour of their government augmented. It was in this last
slate that the Spaniards beheld it, and firuck with the appear-
ance of Montezuma's court, they describe its pomp at great
length, and with much admiration. The number of his at-
tendants, the order, the silence, and the reverence with which
they served him; the vast extent of his royal mansion, the
variety of its apartments allotted to different officers, and the
oflentation with which his grandeur was displayed, whenever
he permitted his fubjeds to behold him, seem to resemble the
magnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia, rather than the
simplicity of the infant fiates in the New World.

O dr of their BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty that the Mex-
guvernment. ican potentates exhibited their power, they manifested it more

beneficially in the order and regularity with which they con-
duted the internal adminifiration and police of their domi-
nions. Complete jurifdition, civil as well as criminal, over its
own immediate vassals, was veiled in the crown. Judges were
appointed for each department, and if we may rely on the ac-
count which the Spanish writers give of the maxims and laws
" Acolla, lib. vi. c. 2. -lerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3. Corita, MS.

upon
282

upon which they founded thei, decisions with respeCt to the B 0 K
diflribution of property and the punishment of crimes, juflice
was administered in the Mexican empire, with a degree of order
and equity, resembling what takes place in societies highly ci-
vilized.

THEIR attention in providing for the support of govern- Proviion so.

mnent was not less sagacious. Taxes were laid upon land, upon hfit.ppr
the acquisitions of industry, and upon commodities of every
kind exposed to sale in the public markets. These duties,
though considerable, were not arbitrary, or unequal. They
were imposed according to efablifhed rules, and each knew what
share of the common burden he had to bear. As the use of
money was unknown, all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus
not only the natural producions of all the different provinces
in the empire, but every species of manufacture, and every
work of ingenuity and art were collected in the public fore-
houses. From those the emperor supplied his numerous train
of attendants in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with cloaths, and ornaments. People of inferior condition,
neither poffefling land nor engaged in commerce, were bound
to the performance of various services. By their ifated la-
bour the crown-lands were cultivated, public works were
carried on, and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built, and kept in repair ".

THE improved state of government among the Mexicans is con- Their pol'ce.
fpicuous not only in points cflential to the being of a well-ordered
Ibciety, but in several regulations of inferior confcquence with

" Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16, 17. See NOTE LI.

283
00 2

refl)ea

B V0 K refpet to police. The institution, which I have already mention-

VII.
c---~J~ ed, of public couriers, stationed at proper intervals, to convey

intelligence from one part of the empire to the other, was a
refinement in police not introduced into any kingdom of Eu-
rope at that period. The ftruture of the capital city in a
lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways of great length, which
served as avenues to it from different quarters, erected in the water
with no less ingenuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized people. The
fame observation may be applied to the structure of the aque-
ducts, or conduits, by which they conveyed a stream of freh
water, from a considerable distance, into the city, along one
of the-taufeways . The appointment of a considerable num-
ber of persons to clean the streets, to light them by fires kin-
dled in different places, and to patrole as watchmen during the
night Y, discovers a degree of attention which even polished
nations are late in acquiring.
Their aits. THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts is confidered

as the most decisive proof of their superior refinement. Cortes,
and the early Spanish authors, describe this with rapture, and
maintain, that the most celebrated European artists could not
surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and neatness of work-
manship. They represented men, animals, and other objets,
by such a disposition of various coloured feathers, as is said to
have produced all the effecs of light and fliade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their ornaments of
gold and silver have been described to be of a fabric no less
curious. But in forming any idea, from general defcrip-

X See NOTE LII. y Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

tions,
284

tions, concerning the slate of arts among nations imperfec2ly B 0 o K
poliffed, we are extremely ready to err. In examining the --
works of people whose advances in 'improvement are nearly the
fame with our own, we view them with a critical, and often
with a jealous eye. Whereas, when conscious of our own fu-
periority, we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are astonished at works executed by them under such ma-
nifeft diladvantages, and in the warmth of our admiration,
are apt to represent them as productions more finified than
they really are. To the influence of this illusion, without
supposing any intention to deceive, we may impute the exagge-
ration of some Spanish authors, in their accounts of the Mex-
ican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from confidering such

specimens of their arts as are still preserved, that we must de-
cide concerning their degree of merit. As the ship in which
Cortes sent to Charles V. the most curious producions of the
Mexican artisans, which were collected by the Spaniards when
they first pillaged the empire, was taken by a French corsair ,
the remains of their ingenuity are less numerous than those of
the Peruvians. Whether any of their works with feathers, in
imitation of painting, be fill extant in Spain, I have not
learned; but many of their ornaments in gold and silver, as
well as various utensils employed in common life, are deposited
in the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial produscions,
lately opened by the king of Spain; and I am informed by
persons on whose judgment and taste I can rely, that there boast-
ed efforts of their art are uncouth representations of common
objecs, or very coarse images of the human and tome animal

' Relac. de Cort. Ranmif. iii. 294, F,

forms,

28S

B K forms, destitute of grace and propriety . The justness of there
- v--- observations is confirmed by infpeding the wooden prints or

copper-plates of their paintings, which have been published by
various authors. In them every figure of men, of quadrupeds,
or birds, as well as every representation of inanimated nature,
is extremely rude and aukward. The hardef Egyptian file,
fliff and imperfect as it was, is more elegant. The scrawls of
children delineate objeCs almost as accurately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may be ranked,

when viewed merely as works of art, a very different flation
belongs to them, when confidered as the records of their coun-
try, as, historical monuments of its policy and tranfations;
and they become curious as well as interefling objects of atten-
tion. The nobleR and m oft beneficial invention of which hu-
man ingenuity can boast, is that of writing. But the sirs essays
of this art, which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and it advanced
towards perfection slowly, and by a gradual progression. When
the warrior, cager for fame, wished to transmit ome knowledge
of his exploits to succeeding ages; when the gratitude of a peo-
ple to their sovereign prompted them to hand down an account of
his beneficent deeds to posterity; the first method ofaccomplifhing
this, that seems to have occurred to them, was to delineate, in
the best manner they could, figures representing the acion of
which they were Solicitous to preserve the memory. Of this,
which has very properly been called piflure-wvriting h, we find
traces among some of the most savage tribes of America. When
a leader returns from the field, he strips a tree of its bark, and

a See NOTE I.III. b Divine Legat. of Moses, iii. 73.
286

with
8

with red paint scratches upon it some uncouth figures, which B o 0 K
represent the order of his march, the number of his followers, ---
the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps and captives which
he brought home. To those simple annals he trusts for renown,
and sooth.s himself with hope that by their means he shall
receive praise from the warriors of future times '.

COMIPARED with those aukward essays of their avage coun-

trymen, the paintings of the Mexicans may be confidered as
works of composition and design. They were not acquainted,
it is true, with any other method of recording tranfadcions,
than that of delineating the objects which they wished to re-
present. But they could exhibit a more complex series of events
in progreflive order, and dcfcribe, by a proper disposition of
figures, the occurrences of a king's reign from his accession to
his death; the progress of an infant's education from its birth
until it attained to the years of maturity; the different recom-
pences and marks of diftintion conferred upon warriors, in
proportion to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this picure-writing have been preserved,
which are jufily confidered as the most curious moLnumrents of
art brought from the New World. The most valuable of these
was published by Prchas in fixty-fix plates. It is divided
into three parts. The first contains the hiflory of the Mexican
empire under its ten monarchs. The second is a tribute-roll,
reprelcnting what each conquered town paid into the royal
trcafury. The third is a code of their inflitutions, domeflic,
political, and military. Another specimen of Mexican paint-
ing has been publishcd in thirty-two plates, by the prefcnt

c Sir W. Johnson Philof. Tianfifa. vol. xiii, p. 143. Meml. tie la HontJ11 . ii. 191.
Lafitau, Murs dc Saur. ii. 3.

archbishop

287

B 0 Ko archbifllop of Toledo. To both are annexed a full explana-
---_ tion of what the figures were intended to represent, which

was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians well acquainted
with their own arts. The ityle of painting in all there is the
fame. They represent tings, not words. They exhibit images
to the eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may, there-
fore, be confidered as the earliest and most imperfect essay of
men in their progress towards discovering the art of writing.
The dcfers in this mode of recording tranfadions muff have
been early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from its na-
ture, a very tedious operation; and as affairs became more
complicated, and events multiplied in any society, its annals
muffhave swelled to an enormous bulk. Beides this, no ob-
jeas could be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions of
the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as piaure-writ-
ing could not convey an idea of these, it muff have been a
very imperfec art. The necessity of improving it mufft have
rouzed and fliarpened invention, and the human mind holding
the fame course in the New World as in the Old, might have
advanced by the fame successive steps, first, from an atual
picture to the plain hieroglyphic; next, to the allegorical sym-
bol, then to the arbitrary character; until, at length, an al-
phabet of letters was discovered, capable of expressing all the
variety of combinations of found employed in speech. In the
paintings of the Mexicans we, accordingly, perceive, that this
progress was begun among them. Upon an attentive infpec-
tion of the plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
some approach to the plain or finple hieroglyphic, where some
principal part or circumstance in the subjea is made to stand
for the whole. In the annals of their kings, publilhed by
Purchas, the towns conquered by each are uniformly repre-

5 fcnted
288

sented in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a house; B K
but in order to point out the particular towns which submitted v---
to their victorious arms, peculiar emblems, ometimes natural
objeas, and ometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbishop of Toledo, the house,
which was properly the picture of the town, is omitted, and
the emblem alone is employed to represent it. They seem even
to have made some advances beyond this, towards the use of
the more figurative and fanciful hieroglyphic. In order to
describe a monarch, who had enlarged his dominions by force
of arms, they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he subdued. But
it is only in one instance, the notation of numbers, that
we discern any attempt to exhibit ideas which had no
corporeal form. They had invented artificial marks, or igns
ofconvention, for this purpose. By means of there, they com-
puted the years of their kings reigns, as well as the amount
of tribute to be paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in small numbers, the computa-
tion was made by repeating it. Larger numbers were ex-
pressed by a peculiar mark, and they had such as denoted all
integral numbers from twenty to eight thousand. The short
duration of their empire prevented the Mexicans from advan-
cing farther in that long course which conducts men from the
labour of delineating real objets, to the simplicity and ease of
alphabetic writing. Their records, notwithstanding some dawn
of iuch ideas as might have led to a more perfec ftylc, can be
confidered as nothing more than a species of piCure-writing, b
far improved as to mark their fiperiority over the savage
tribes of America, but still so defctive as to prove that they had

VOL. II. P p not

289

B o O K not proceeded far beyond the firt flage in that progress which

VII.
---' must be completed, before any people can be ranked among

polished nations d.

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may be confidered as a more
of computing
time. decisive evidence of their progress in improvement. They di-

vided their year into eighteen months, each consisting of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But as they
observed that the course of the fun was not completed in that
time, they added five days to the year. These, which were
properly intercalary days, they termedfupernumnerary or 'waJe;
and as they did not belong to any month, no work was done,
and.,no sacred rite performed on them; they were devoted
wholly to festivity and pastime . This near approach to phi-
lofophical accuracy is a remarkable proof that the Mexicans
had bestowed rome attention upon inquiries and speculations,
to which men in a very rude state never turn their thoughts.

Faas indicat- SUCH are the most striking particulars in the manners and
ing a small
progress in ci- policy of the Mexicans, which exhibit them to view as a people
vilization. considerably refined. From other circumstances, one is apt to

fufped that their character, and many of their institutions, did
not differ greatly from thoe of the other inhabitants of Ame-
rica.

Their wars LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexicans were in-
continual and
ferocious. ceffantly engaged in war, and the motives which prompted them

to hostility seem to have been the fame. They fought, in order
to gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of their cnc-

' See NOTE LIV. ' Acolta, lib. vi. c. 2.
29o

niles.
I

mies. In battle they were chiefly intent on taking prisoners, B 0 0 K
and it was by the number of these that they eflimated the glory i
of viaory. No captive was ever ransomed or sparcd. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh devoured with the fame
barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages. On some occasions
it rose to even wilder excefles. Their principal warriors covered
themselves with the kins of the unhappy vicims which they
had slain, and danced about the freets, boasting of their own
valour, and exulting over their enemies . Even in their civil
institutions we discover traces of that barbarous disposition
which their system of war inspired. The four chief counsellors
of the empire were distinguished by atrocious titles, which
could have been afiumed only by a people who delighted in
blood 3. This ferocity of character prevailed among all the na-
tions of New Spain. The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan,
and other states at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted equally
in war, and treated their prisoners with the fame cruelty. In
proportion as mankind combine in social union, and live under
the influence of equal laws and regular policy, their manners
soften, sentiments of humanity arise, and the rights of the fpe-
cies come to be underflood. The fierceness of war abates, and
even while engaged in hostility, men remember what they owe
one to another. The savage fights to deflroy, the citizen to
conquer. The former neither pities nor spares, the latter has
acquired sensibility that tempers his rage. To this sensibility
the Mexicans seem to have been perfec firangers, and among
them war was carried on with so much of its original barbarity,
that we cannot but fufped their degree of civilization to have
been very imperfct.
f Ileircra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c.15. Gomn. Chron. c.. 21 Sec NOT'' LV.

29I
Pp 2

THEIR

B OO K THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than those of the

-,T-h- ea most savage tribes. On the death of any distinguished person-

Their fneral
iires. age, especially of the Emperor, a certain number of his attend-

ants were chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate victims were put to death without mercy, and
buried in the fame tomb h

Their agri- THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive than that of
culture im-
perfect. the roving tribes who trusted chiefly to their bow for food, it

seems not to have supplied them with such fubfiftcnce as men
require when engaged in efforts of aive industry. The Spa-
niarjls appear not to have been firuck with any superiority of
the Mexicans over the other people of America in bodily vi-
gour. Both, according to their observation, were of such a
feeble frame as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians. This they
imputed to their scanty diet, on poor fare, sufficient to preserve
life, but not to give firmness to the constitution '. Such a remark
could hardly have been made with refped to any people fur-
nifhed plentifully with the neceftaries of life. The difficulty
which Cortes found in procuring subsistence for his small body
of soldiers, who were often constrained to live on the fponta-
neous productions of the earth, seems to confirm the remark
of the Spanish writers, and gives no high idea of the slate of
cultivation in the Mexican empire.

A farther - A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain appears to
proof of this..

favour this opinion. The Mexican women gave fuck to their

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib, ii. c. 8. Corn. Chron. c. 202.
iii. 306. A. errera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. dec. z. lib. vi. c. 16.

9 Relat. np. Ramlir.

children
292

children for several years, and during that time they did not B K
cohabit with their husbands k. This precaution against a bur- '-.---
denfome increase of progeny, though necessary, as I have al-
ready observed, among savages, who, from the hardships of
their condition, and the precariousness of their subsistence, find
it impossible to rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed
to have continued among a people who lived at ease and in
abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which has been con- Doubts con-

cerning the

fidered, and with justice, as the molt decisive proof of a confi- extent ofthe
derable progress in regular government and police, is one of empire.
those fads in the hiflory of the New World which fcems to
have been admitted without due examination or sufficient evi-
dence. The Spaniih hiflorians, in order to magnify the valour
of their countrymen, are accustomed to represent the dominion
of Montezuma as fretching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the North to the Southern Ocean. But a great part
of the mountainous country was possessed by the Otomies, a
fierce uncivilized people, who seem to have been the residue of
the original inhabitants. The provinces towards the north
and weft of Mexico were occupied by the Chichejmecas, and
other tribes of hunters. None of these recognized the Mexi-
can monarch as their superior. Even in the interior and more
level country, there were several cities and provinces which had
never submitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafcala, though only
twenty-one leagues from the capital of the empire, was an in-
dependent and hofile republic. Cholula, though fill nearer,
had been fulbjccd only a short time before the arrival of the

k Gom. Chron. c. zo8. Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv, c. 16.

293
3

Spaniards.

294
BOO K Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the diflance of thirty leagues from

_.-.. Mexico, seems to have been a separate slate, governed by its

own laws '. Mechoacan, the frontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable
for its implacable enmity to the Mexican name". By there
hoffile powers the Mexican empire was circumscribed on every
quarter, and the high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanish historians, should be considerably
moderated.

Little inter- IN consequence of this independence of several fates in New
course among
its several Spain upon the Mexican empire, there was not any considerable
provinces. intercourse between its various provinces. Even in the interior

country, not far distant from the capital, there seem to have
been no roads to facilitate the communication of one diftrit
with another; and when the Spaniards firif attempted to pe-
netrate into it, they had to open their way through forests
and marlhes . Cortes, in his adventrous march fiom Mexico
to Honduras in 1525, met with obftrudions and endured hard-
hips little inferior to those with which he mufi have firuggled
in the most uncivilized regions of America. In rome places, he
could hardly force a passage through impervious woods, and
plains overflowed with water. In others, he found so little cul-
tivation, that his troops were frequently in danger of perifling
by famine. Such fads correspond ill with the pompous de-
scription which the Spaniih writers give of Mexican police and
indufiry, and convey an idea of a country nearly similar to that
possessed by the Indian tribes in North America. Here and

z Herrera, dec. 2. lib, x.c. . zl. B. Diaz. c. 130. H errera, dec. 3.
lib, ii. c. io. 째 B. Diaz, c . 66 . ic. 17

there

there a trading or a war-path, as they are called in North Ame-
rica, led from one settlement to another0, but generally there
appeared no sign of any eftablifled communication, few marks
of industry, and no monument of art.

A NO less striking proof of this imperfecion in their com-

mercial intercourse is their want of money, or ome universal
standard by which to estimate the value of commodities. Tlie
discovery of this is among the fleps of greatest consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made, all their
tranfations must be so aukward, so operose, and so limited, that
we may boldly pronounce that they have advanced but a little
way in their career. The invention of such a commercial
standard is of such high antiquity in our hemisphere, and rifes
so far beyond the ara of authentic history, as to appear almost
coeval with the existence of society. The precious metals seem
to have been early employed for this purpose, and from their
permanent value, their divisibility, and many other qualities,
they are better adapted to serve as a common standard, than any
other fubfiance of which Nature has given us the command.
But in the New World, where there metals abound most, this-
use of them was not known. The exigencies of rude tribes, or
of monarchies imperfectly civilized, did not call for it. All
their commercial intercourse was carried on by barter, and their
ignorance of any common standard by which to facilitate that
exchange of commodities which contributes to much towards
the comfort of life, may be justly mentioned as an evidence
of the infant slate of their policy. But even in the New
World the inconvenience of wanting ome general instrument of
commerce began to be felt, and some efforts were made towards.

O 1lcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

flipplying

13 00 K

ViI.

Father procE'
ot this.

295

VB K supplying that defea. The Mexicans, among whom the number
i -v-.j and greatness of their cities gave rife to a more extended com-

merce, than in any part of America, had begun to employ a
common tfandard of value, which rendered smaller tranfaions
much more easy. As chocolate was the favourite drink of
persons in every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao, of
which it is comnpofed, were of such universal consumption, that,
in their stated markets, there were willingly received in return
for commodities of small price. Thus they came to be con-
fidered as the instrument of commerce, and the value of what
one wiihed to dispose of, was eflimated by the number of nuts
of the cacao, which he might expec in exchange for it. This
seems to be the utmost length which the Americans had ad-
vanced towards the discovery of any expedient for supplying
the use of money. And if the want of it is to be held, on one
hand, as a proof of their barbarity, this expedient for supplying
that want, should be admitted on the other, as an evidence no
less satisfying, of the superior progress which the Mexicans had
made in refinement and civilization.

Doubts con- IN such a rude slate were many of the Mexican pro-
cerninther vinces when sirs visited by their conquerors. Even their
slate of their
cities. cities, extensive and populous as they were, seem rather to be

the habitation of men just emerging from barbarity, than the
residence of a polished people. The description of Tlafcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A number of low
firaggling huts, cattered about irregularly, according to tic
caprice of each proprietor, built with turf and lfone, and
thatched with reeds, without any light but what they received
by a door, so low that it could not be entered upright '. In

P lHercra, dec. 2. lib. vi. c, 1 z.

Mexico,
296

Mlexico, though from the peculiarity of its situation, the difpo- B 01 K
fition of the houses was more orderly, the flrudure of the greater ---
part was equally mean. Nor does the fabric of their temples and 'rl,!e,,
other public edifices iecm to have been such as entitled them to
the high praises bellowed upon them by many Spanifl authors.
As far as one can gather from their obscure and inaccurate de-
scriptions, the great temple of Mexico, the most famous in New
Spain, which has been represented as a magnificent building,
railed to such a height, that the ascent to it was by a flair-cafe
of a hundred and fourteen steps, was a solid mass of earth of a
square form faced partly with tfone. Its bae on each fide
extended ninety feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced
in height, it terminated in a quadrangle of about thirty feet,
where were placed a shrine of the deity and two altars on
which the vidims were sacrificed . All the other celebrated
temples of New Spain exactly resembled that of Mexico '. Such
ftrudures convey no high idea of progress in art and ingenuity;
and one can hardly conceive that a form more rude and simple
could have occurred to a nation, in its first efforts towards cre&-
ing any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were displayed, if we may .nnl olir

public t il-

believe the Spanish historians, in the houses of the emperor and inlps.
in those of the principal nobility. There, rome elegance of
design was visible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart-
ments was attended to. But t' buildings corresponding to iclh
descriptions had ever cxifled in the Mexican cities, it is probable
that some remains of them would still be visible. From the man-
ner in which Cortes conductcd the siege of Mexico, we can indeed

llerrern, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 17. r See NOT'' LVr.
VOL. II. Q cafily

0

o K easily account for the total deflruaion of whatever had any ap.
----,; pearance of splendor in that capital. But as only two centuries

and a half have elapsed since the conquest of New Spain, it
seems altogether incredible that in a period so short, every vef-
tige of this boasted elegance and grandeur hould have difap-
peared; and that in none of the other cities, particularly in
those which did not susser by the deftruaive hand of the con.
querors, there are not any ruins, which can be confidered as
monuments of their ancient magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there are buildings

of greater extent and elevation than common dwelling-houfes.
Those which are destined for holding the council of the tribe,
and in which all assemble on occasions of public festivity, may
be called flately edifices, when compared with the reft. As
among the Mexicans the diftinaion of ranks was etablifhed,
and property was unequally divided, the number of distinguished
firuatures in their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to have been either
so solid or magnificent as to merit there pompous epithets which
some Spanish authors employ in describing them. It is pro-
bable that, though. more ornamented, and built on a larger
scale, they were erected with the fame flight materials which
the Indians employed in their common buildings ', and Time,
in a space much less than. two hundred and fifty years,. may
have swept away all remains of them '.

FROM this enumeration of fads, it seems, upon the whole, to be
evident that the state of society in Mexico was considerably ad-

' Sec NOTE LVII. ' See NOTE LVIII.

vanced
298

vanced beyond that of the savage tribes which we have delineated. B K

VII.

But it is no less manifest, that with refpea to many particulars, the v
Spanish accounts of their progress appear to be highly embellished.
There is not a more frequent or a more fertile source of decep-
tion in describing the manners and arts of savage nations, or
of such as are imperfectly civilized, than that of applying to
them the names and phrases appropriated to the inflitutions and
refinements of polished life. When the leader of a finall tribe,
or the head of a rude community, is dignified with the title of
king or emperor, the place of his refidencc can receive no other
name but that of his palace; and whatever his attendants may
be, they mufl be called his court. Under such appellations they
acquire an importance and dignity which does not belong to
them. The illusion spreads, and giving a false colour to every
part of the narrative, the imagination is so much carried away
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to discern objects
as they really are. The Spaniards, when they first touched
on the Mexican coast, were so much struck with the appearance
of attainments in policy and in the arts of life, far superior to
those of the rude tribes with which they were hitherto acquainted,
that they fancied they had at length discovered a civilized people
in the New World. This comparison between the people of
Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours thay seem to have kept
constantly in view, and observing with admiration many things
which marked their pre-eminence, they employ in describing
their imperfect policy and infant arts, fich terms as are appli-
cable to the infiitutions of men far beyond them in improve-
ment. Both there circumflances concur in detraacing from the
credit due to the early Spanifl descriptions of Mexican manners.
By drawing a parallel between them and thofc of people to much,
lcla civilized, they raiscd their own ideas too high. By their

Q q 2 mode

299

B o K mode of dcfcribing them, they conveyed ideas to others no lefi

A...-^-._
- exalted above truth. Later writers have adopted the style of the

original hiflorians, and improved upon it. The colours with
.which D Solis delineates the character of Montezuma, the
splendor of his court, the laws and policy of his empire, are
the fame that he mufl have employed in exhibiting to view the
monarch and inflitutions of an highly polished people.

BUT though we may admit, that the warm imagination of

the Spanifl writers has added fore embelliffiment to their dc-
scriptions, this will not justify the decilive and peremptory
tone, with which several authors pronounce all their accounts of
theMexican power, policy and laws, to be the fidions of men
who wished to deceive, or who delighted in the marvellous.
There are few historical fads that can be ascertained by evi-
dence more unexceptionable, than may be produced in support
of the material articles, in the description of the Mexican con-
ftitution and manners. Eye-witnesses relate what they had be-
held, men who had resided among the Mexicans both before
and after the conquest, describe institutions and customs which
were familiar to them, persons of such different professions that
objeds must have presented themselves to their view under every.
various asped, soldiers, priefis, and lawyers, all concur in their
teflimony. Had Cortcs ventured to impose upon his sovereign,
by exhibiting to him a pidure of imaginary manners, there
wanted not enemies and rivals who were qualified to dcte his
deceit, and who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But
according to the jufi remark of an author, whose inge-
nuity has illustrated and whose eloquence has adorned the hil-
tory of America ', this supposition is in itself as improbable, as

u M. 1'AbbC R.nynal IIl., rhilof. & polit. &c. iii. 12.,

6 tli
3o0

tahe attempt would have been audacious. Who among the de- B 0 0 K
ftroyers of this great empire was so enlightened by science, or _
so attentive to the progress and operations of men in social life,
as to frame a fictitious fyltem of policy, so well combined and
so consistent, as that which they delineate,. in their accounts of
the Mexican government ? VWhere could they have borrowed
the idea of many inflitutions in lcgiflation and police, to which,
at that period, there was nothing parallel in the nations with
which they were acquainted ? There was not at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, a regular cftabliflment of poRs for
conveying intelligence, to the sovereign of any kingdom in
Europe. The fame observation will apply to what they relate,
with refpea to the ftrucure of the city of Mexico, the regulations
concerning its police, and various laws eftabliflcd for the admi-
nifiration of justice, or securing the happiness of the community.
Whoever is accustomed to contemplate the progress of nations,
will often, at very early flages of it, discover a premature and
unexpected dawn of those ideas, which give rife to inflitutions,
that are the pride and ornament of its most advanced period.
Even in a slate as imperfectly polished as the Mexican empire,
the happy genius of some sagacious obfervcr, excited or aided
by circumfiances unknown to us, may have introduced inflitu-
tions which are seldom found but in focictics highly refined.
But it is almost impossible that the illiterate conquerors of the
New World should have formed in any one inflance a conception
of cufloms and laws, beyond the flandard of improvement in their
own age and country. Or if Cortes and his followers had been ca-
pable of this, what inducement had those by whom they were fu-
perfeded to continue the deception ? Why flould Corita, or Moto-

linca,

B O o K linea, or Acofta, have amused their sovereign or their fellow-

VII.
t- citizens with a tale purely fabulous ?

Religion of IN one particular, however, the guides whom we must fol.
the Mexicans. low have represented the Mexicans to be more barbarous per-

haps than they really were. Their religious tenets, and the
rites of their worship, are described by them as wild and cruel
in an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no confider-
able place in the thoughts of.a savage, whose conceptions of any
superior power are obscure, and his sacred rites few and simple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular system, with
its complete train of priests, temples, vicims, and festivals.
This, of itself, is a clear proof that the slate of the Mex-
icans was very different from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious notions, or the
barbarity of their rites, no conclusion can be drawn with cer-
.tainty concerning the degree of their civilization. For nations,
long after their ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to
refine, adhere to fyflems of superstition founded on the rude
conceptions of early ages. From the genius of the Mexican
religion we may, however, form a most just conclusion with
refped to its influence upon the charater of the people. The
asped of superstition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious. Its
divinities were clothed with terror, and delighted in vengeance.
They were exhibited to the people under detestable forms that
created horror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and of other
defirudive animals, decorated their temples. Fear was the only
principle that inspired their votaries. Fasts, mortifications, and
penances, all rigid andmany of them excruciating to an extreme

degrec,
3o0

degree, were the means which they employed to appease their B O0 K
wrath, and they never approached their altars without fprin- -,
kling them with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of all
offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the most acceptable.
This religious belief, mingling with the implacable spirit of
vengeance, and adding new force to it, every captive taken in
war was brought to the temple, was devoted as a victim to the
deity, and sacrificed with rites no less solemn than cruel . The
heart and head were the portion consecrated to the gods; the
warrior by whose prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried
off the body to feast upon it with his friends. Under the im-
prefflon of ideas so dreary and terrible, and accuflomed daily to
scenes of bloodshed rendered awful by religion, the heart of
man must harden, and be fleeled to every sentiment of hu-
manity. The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-
feeling and atrocious. The genius of their religion so far
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts, that, not-
withstanding their progress in both, their manners, instead of
softening, became more fierce. To what circumstances it was
owing that superstition assumed such a dreadful form among
the Mexicans, we have not sufficient knowledge of their
history to determine. But its influence is visible, and produced
an effe& that is singular in the hiflory of the human species.
The manners of the people in the New World who had made
the greatest progress in the arts of policy, were the molt fero-
cious, and the barbarity of some of their cutoms exceeded even
those of the savage state.

THE empire of Peru boaits of an higher antiquity than that Pretenions
[of Mexico. According to the traditionary accounts colleaced of Peu to a

high antqui-
ty,

" Cort. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 24o, &c. B. Dinz. c. 82. Acolla, lib. v. c. 13, &c.
LIIerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii . 15, &c. Gomara Chron. c. 80. &c. Sec N OT E LIX.

co lby

B o o IK by the Spaniards, it had fubfifled four hundred years, under

ViL.
1 .--^.- twelve fucceflive monarchs. But the knowledge of their ancient

ifory, which the Peruvians could communicate to their con-
uincrtain. qtlerors, must have been both imperfect and uncertain . Like

the other American nations, they were totally unacquainted
with the art of writing, and deltitute of the only means by
which the memory of past tranfaaions can be preserved with
any degree of accuracy. Even among people to whom the ut:
of letters is known, the ra where the authenticity of hifiory
commences, is much posterior to the introduction of writing.
That noble invention continued long subservient to the common
business and wants of life, before it was cmployed in record-
ing events, with a view of conveying information from one
age to another. But in no country did ever tradition alone
carry down hifloric knowledge, in any full continued fiream
during a period of half the length that the monarchy of Peru
is laid to have fubfiRcd.

Defeas in THE 2iipos, or 'knots on cords of different colours, which
eby ir rrds are celebrated by authors fond of the marvellous, as if they had

been regular annals of the empire, imperfectly supplied the
place of writing. According to the obscure description of them
by Acofta ", which Garcilaffo de la Vega has adopted with little
variation and no improvement, the quipos seem to have been a
device for rendering calculation more expeditious and accurate.
By the various colours different objets were denoted, and by
each knot a diftina number. Thus an account was taken, and
a kind of register kept, of the inhabitants in each province, or
of the several produions colleced there for public use. But
as by there knots, however varied or combined, no moral or

z See N OTE LX. a llin. lib. vi. c. 8.

alllra1

abftrad idea, no operation or quality of the mind could be re- B 0 0 K
presented, they contributed little towards preserving the memory -
of ancient events and institutions. The Mexican paintings and
symbols, rude as they were, conveyed to them more knowledge
of remote tranfaaions, than the Peruvians could derive from
their boasted quipos. Had they been even of more extcnfive
use, and better adapted to supply the place of written records,
they perished so generally, together with the other monuments
of the Peruvian ingenuity, in the general wreck occasioned by
the Spanish conquest, and the civil wars subsequent to it, that no
accession of light or knowledge comes from them. All the zeal
of Garcilaffo de la Vega for the honour of that race of monarchs
from whom he descended, all the industry of his researches, and
the superior advantages with which he carried them on, opened
no source of information unknown to the Spanish authors who
wrote before him. In his Royal Commentaries, he confines him-
self to illustrate what they had related concerning the antiquities
and institutions of Peru ; and his illustrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary tales cur-
rent among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute details which

have been given of the exploits, the battles, the conquests, and
private character of the early Peruvian monarchs. We can
reft upon nothing in their flory, as authentic, but a few
fads, so interwoven in the system of their religion and po-
licy, as preserved the memory of them from being loft; and
upon the description of such cutfoms and institutions as con-
tinued in force at the time of the conqucft, and fll under the

b Lib. i. c. io.
VoL. 1.

R r

immediate

B 0 K immediate observation of the Spaniards. By attending care-

vlI.
'-_-_v-' fully to these, and endeavouring to separate them from what

appears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I have la-
boured to form an idea of the Peruvian government and

manners.

Origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already observed', had not
their civil
policy. advanced beyond the rudest form of savage life, when Manco

Capac, and his consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftrud and
civilize them. Who there extraordinary personages were, whe-
ther they imported their system of legislation and knowledge of
arts from some country more improved, or, if natives of Peru,
how they acquired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with refpea to which
the Peruvian tradition conveys no information. Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the propensity in the Pe-
ruvians to fuperfliticn, and particularly of their veneration for
the Sun, pretended to be children of that glorious luminary,
and to deliver their inftruaions in his name and authority.
The multitude liflened and believed. What reformation in
policy and manners the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the Inca and his
consort, their ancestors gradually acquired ome knowledge of
those arts, and some relish for that industry, which render sub-
fiftence secure and life comfortable, hath been formerly related.
Thoe blessings were originally confined within narrow pre-
cinds; for the authority of the first Inca did not reach many
leagues beyond Cuzco. But, in process of time, his fucceflbrs
extended their dominion over all the regions that firetch to the

Book vi. p. 163, &c.

wcel
306

welt of the Andes from Chili to Quito, efablifhing in every B K

VI.
province their peculiar policy and religious institutions. _

THE motl singular and itriking circumstance in the Peruvian Founded in

government, is the influence of religion upon its genius and relioio."
laws. Religious ideas make such a feeble iinpreffion on the
mind of a avage, that their effeCt upon his sentiments and
manners are hardly perceptible. Among the Mexicans, reli-
gion, reduced into a regular system, and holding a considerable
place in their public inflitutions, operated with conspicuous
efficacy in forming the peculiar character of that people. But
in Peru, the whole system of civil policy was founded on reli-
gion. The Inca appeared not only as a legislator, but as the
messenger of Heaven. His precepts were received not merely
as the injuntions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. His race was held to be sacred; and in order to pre-
serve it diftin&l, without being polluted by any mixture of infe-
rior blood, the sons of Manco Capac married their own sifters,
and no person was ever admitted to the throne who could not
claim it by such a pure descent. To those Chillren of the Sun,
for that was the appellation bestowed upon all the offspring of
the first Inca, the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a superior order. They were deemed to be under the
immediate protetion of the deity from whom they issued, and
by him every order of the reigning Inca was supposed to be
didated.

FROM those ideas two consequences rcCulted. The authority Two remnr;-

of the Inca was unlimited and absolute, in the moll extensive ablel eflfts of
meaning of the words. Whencvcr the decrees of a prince are
confidercd as the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an

I r 2 act

3o7

B o K aa of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or oppose his will.
'_ --- Obedience becomes a duty of religion; and as it would be pro-
T'he abllu'e
power i illi fane to controul a monarch under the guidance of Heaven, and
Inca. Iprefumptuous to advise him, nothing remains but to submit

with implicit refpetl. This must necessarily be the effe of
every government eflablifhed on pretensions of intercourse with
fiperior powers. Such accordingly was the blind fubmiflion
which the Peruvians yielded to their sovereigns. The persons of
highest rank and greatest power in their dominions acknow-
ledged them to be of a more exalted nature; and in testimony
of this, when admitted into their presence, they entered with
a burden upon their shoulders, as an emblem of their servitude,
and willingness to bear whatever the Inca was pleated to impore.
Among their fubjeats, force was not requisite to second their
commands. Every officer entrutfed with the execution of them
was revered, and, according to the account of an intelligent
observer of Peruvian manners , might proceed alone from one
extremity of the empire to another, without meeting oppofi-
tion; for, on producing a fringe from the royal Borla, an orna-
ment peculiar to the reigningInca, the lives and fortunes of the
people were at his difpoal.

All crimes ANOTHER consequence of establishing government in Peru
punflhed ca-
liially. on the foundation of religion, was, that all crimes were pu-

nifhed capitally. They were not confidered as transgressions
of human laws, but as insults offered to the Deity. Each,
without any diftindion between such as were flight and fiich
as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and could be expiated
only by the blood of the offender. Consonantly to the fame
ideas, punishment followed the trespass with inevitable ccr-

Zaratc, lib, i. c. 13.

taintv,
308

tainty, because an offence againit Heaven was deemed such an B o o K

VII.

high enormity as could not be pardoned . Among a people
of corrupted morals, maxims of jurisprudence so evere and
unrelenting, by rendering men ferocious and defpcrate, would
be more apt to multiply crimes than to restrain them. But the
Peruvians, of simple manners and unfufpicious faith, were
held in such awe by this rigid discipline, that the number of
offenders were cxtremely finall. Veneration for monarchs,
enlightened and directed, as they believed, by the divinity
whom they adored, prompted them to their duty; the dread
of punishment, which they were taught to confider as unavoid-
able vengeance inflicted by offended Heaven, withheld them
from evil.

THE system of superstition on which the Incas ingrafted Mild genius

of their rl-

their pretensions to such high authority, was of a genius very gion.
different from that eftabliflied among the Mexicans. Manco
Capac turned the veneration of his followers entirely towards
natural objeds. The Sun, as the great source of light, of joy,
and fertility in the creation, attraCted their principal homage.
The Moon and Stars, as co-operating with him, were entitled
to secondary honours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore some siperior power, takes
this direction, and is employed in contemplating the order and
beneficence that really cxift in nature, the pirit of fuperflition
is mild. Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy and
the fears of men, are supposed to preside in nature, and become
the objeds of worflip, fuperflition always assumes a wilder and
more atrocious form. Of the latter we have an example among

\'cga, lib. ii. c. 6.

the

309

B OK the Mexicans, of the former among the people of Peru. They

'L-M~-' had not, indeed, made such progress in observation or inquiry,

as to have attained jult conceptions of the Deity; nor was there
in their language any proper name or appellation of the Su-
preme Power, which intimated that they had formed any idea
of him as the Creator and Governor of the World '. But by
directing their veneration to that glorious luminary, which, by
its universal and vivifying energy, is the best emblem of divine
beneficence, the rites and observances which they deemed ac-
ceptable to him were innocent and humane. They offered to
the Sun a part of those productions which his genial warmth
had called forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared to
maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of gratitude, some
of the animals who were indebted to his influence for nourish-
merit. They presented to him choice specimens of those works
of ingenuity which his light had guided the hand of man in
forming. But the Incas never stained his altars with human
blood, nor could they conceive that their beneficent father the
Sun would be delighted with such horrid viCims g. Thus the
Peruvians, unacquainted with those barbarous rites which ex-
tinguifh sensibility, and suppress the feelings of nature at the
fight of human sufferings, were formed, by the spirit of the
fuperflition which they had adopted, to a national character
more gentle than that of any people in America.

Its influence ITS influence operated even upon their civil inflitutions, and
on ciil po tended to correct in them any thing that was adverse to gentleness

of character. The dominion of the Incas, though the molt abfo-
lute of all despotisms, was mitigated by its alliance with reli-

l Acolta, lib. v, c. 3. e See NOTE LXr.

gion.
3IO

3,I
gion. The mind was not humbled and depressed by the idea of B o o K

VII.

a forced fubjedion to the will of a superior; obedience, paid v .
to one who was believed to be clothed with divine authority,
was willingly yielded, and implied no degradation. The so-
vereign, conscious that the submissive reverence of his people
flowed from their belief of his heavenly descent, was continu-
ally reminded of a diftinaion which prompted him to imitate
that beneficent power which he was supposed to represent. In
consequence of those impreflions, there hardly occurs in the
traditional history of Peru, any instance of rebellion againt
the reigning prince, and, among twelve successive monarchs,
there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were carried and use on
on with a spirit very different from that of other American their militari:

fyftcm.

nations. They fought not, like savages, to destroy and exter-
minate; or, like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirty divinities
with human sacrifices. They conquered, in order to reclaim
and civilize the vanquished, and to diffuse the knowledge of
their own institutions and arts. Prisoners seem not to have
been exposed to the insults and tortures, which were their lot
in every other part of the New World. The Incas took the
people whom they subdued under their protection, and ad-
mitted them to a participation of all the advantages enjoyed
by their original fubjeds. This practice, so repugnant to
American ferocity, and resembling the humanity of the most
polished nations, mull lbe ascribed, like other peculiarities
which we have observed in the Peruvian manners, to the genius
of their religion. The Incas, confidering the honiage paid to
any objcd but the heavenly powers which they adored, as in-
pious, were fond of gaining proselytes to their tfvourite sys-

I teCllo

B 0 0 K tern. The idols of every conquered province were carried in

VII.
A _--v- triumph to the great temple at Cuzco h, and placed there as

trophies of the superior power of the divinity who was the
protecdor of the empire. The people were treated with lenity,
and inffruded in the religious tenets of their new masters ', that
the conqueror might have the glory of having added to the
number of the votaries of his father the Sun.
Peculiar state THE state of property in Peru was no less singular than that

of religion, and contributed, likewise, towards giving a mild
turn of charaCter to the people. All the lands capable of cultiva-
tion were divided into three hares. One was consecrated to the
Suny and whatever it produced was applied towards the erecion
of temples, and furnishing what was requisite towards celebrat-
ing the public rites of religion. The other belonged to theInca, and
was set apart as the provision made by the community for the sup-
port of government. The third and largest iliare was reserved for
the maintenance of the people, among whom it was parcelled
out. No person, however, had a right of exclusive property
in the portion allotted to him. He possessed it only for a year,
at the expiration of which a new division was made in propor-
tion to the rank, the number, and exigencies of each family.
All those lands were cultivated by the joint indultry of the
community. The people, summoned by a proper officer, re-
paired in a body to the fields, and performed their common
task, while songs and musical infiruments cheered them to

EfrTes of their labour k. By this singular distribution of territory, as well
this.

as by the mode of cultivating it, the idea of a common interclt,

h IIerrern, dec. . lib. i. .

c .

4 Vega, lib. v. c. Iz. I Heirera, dec. .

lib. iv. c. 8. k -Icrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. .
312

2

and

and of mutual subserviency was continually inculcated. Each B o O K

VII.

individual felt his connecion with those around him, and I_-.
knew that he depended on their friendly aid for what increase
he was to reap. A state thus constituted may be confidered as
one great family, in which the union of members was so
complete, and the exchange of good offices so perceptible, as to
create stronger attachment, and to bind man to man in closer
intercourse, than fubfifled under any form of society efablifhed
in America. From this resulted gentle manners, and mild vir-
tues unknown in the savage state, and with which the Mexi-
cans were little acquainted.

BUT, though the institutions of the Incas were so framed Inequality of

as to strengthen the bonds ofaffection among their fuljeCs, there
was great inequality in their condition. The diflindion of
ranks was fully established in Peru. A great body of the in-
habitants, under the denomination of Yanaconas, were held in
a slate of servitude. Their garb and houses were of a form
different from those of free-men. Like the Tamemes of
Mexico, they were employed in carrying burdens, and in per-
forming every other work of drudgery '. Next to them in
rank, were such of the people as were free, but diflinngifhed
by no official or hereditary honours. Above them were railed,
those whom the Spaniards call Orejones, from the ornaments
worn in their ears. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace, as well as war, held every
office of power or trust"'. At the head of all were the chil-
dren of the Sun, who, by their high descent, and peculiar pri-

J Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. lib, x .

c. . m l

H rrera, dcr. ,
lib. iv. c. .

VOL. II.

Ss

vilege.s

B ov K vileges, were as much exalted above the Orejones, as there
t_.,-..v were elevated beyond the people.
Sta: of arts. SUCiH a form of society, from the union of its members, as

well as from the diftintion in their ranks, was favourable to
progress in the arts. But the Spaniards having been ac-
quainted with the improved state of various arts in Mexico,
several years before they discovered Peru, were not so much
itruck with what they observed in the latter country, and de-
scribe the appearances of ingenuity there with less warmth of
admiration. The Peruvians, nevertheless, had advanced far
beyond the Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life, and in
fuch-as have some title to the name of elegant.

Improved IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary neceflity in social
latefagri- life, was more extensive, and carried on with greater skill

than in any part of America. The Spaniards, in their progress
through the country, were so fully supplied with provisions
of every kind, that in the relation of their adventures we meet
with none of those dismal scenes of distress occasioned by fa-
mine, in which the conquerors of Mexico were so often in-
volved. The quantity of foil under cultivation was not left to the
discretion of individuals, but regulated- by public authority in
proportion to the exigencies of the community. Even the
calamity of an unfruitful season was but little felt, for the pro-
dut of the lands consecrated to the Sun, as well as thofc fct
apart for the Inca, being deposited in the Tambos, or pblic
storehouses, it remained there as a stated provilion for times
of scarcity . As the extent of cultivation was determicned \wih

'" aratc, lib. i c. 1. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.
314

5

fichi

such provident attention to the demands of the slate, the in- 3 0 0 K

VII.

vention and indufiry of the Peruvians were called forth to ex- -
traordinary exertions, by certain defccts peculiar to their cli-
nlate and foil. All the vast rivers that flow from the Andes
take their course eafiward to the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is wa-
tered only by some flreams which rush down from the nourn-
tains like torrents. A great part of the low-country is
sandy and barren, and never refreshed with rain. In order to
render such an unpromising region fertile, the ingenuity of the
Peruvians had recourse to various expedients. By means of
artificial canals conducted, with much patience and confidcr-
able art, from the torrents that poured across their country,
they conveyed a regular supply of moiflure to their fields .
They enriched the foil by manuring it with the dung of sea-
fowls, of which they found an inexhauflible store on all the
islands scattered along their coafls P. In describing the cufloms
of any nation thoroughly civilized, such praCtices would hard-
ly draw attention, or be mentioned as in any degree remark-
able, but in the history of the improvident race of men in
the New World, they are entitled to notice as ingular proofs
of indufiry and of art. The use of the plough, indecd, was
unknown to the Peruvians. They turned up the earth with
a kind of mattock of hard wood '. Nor was this labour deemed
so degrading as to be devolved wholly upon the women. Both
sexes joined in performing this neceflary work. Even the
children of the Sun ict an example of industry, by cultivating
a field near Cuzco with their own ha!ds, and they digniicld
tlis function by denominating it their triumph over the earth r.

" Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. 'egi, lib. v. . . &, 2.1. Acolla, lib. iv. c. 37.
Vega, I;b. v. c. 3. Sec N OTE' LXII. /arate, lib. i. c. f.

' Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

315

TFIE
S 2

B o K THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is obvious, like-

VIl.

, .._, wife, in the confirudion of their houses and public buildings.
Their builJ-

er buil In the extensive plains which firetch along the Pacific Ocean,

where the sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild, their
houses were very properly of a fabric extremely flight. But
in the higher regions, where rain falls, where the viciffitudeof
seasons is known, and their rigour felt, they were conftruded
with greater solidity. They were generally of a square form,
the walls about eight feet high, built with bricks hardened in
the fun, the door low and strait, and without any windows.
Simple as there flrurures were, and rude as the materials may
seem to be of which they were formed, they were so durable, that
many of them still subsist in different parts of Peru, long after
every monu ment that might have conveyed to us any idea of the
domestic fate of the other American nations has vanified from
the face of the earth. But it was in the temples consecrated to
the Sun, and in the buildings destined for the residence of their
monarchs, that the Peruvians displayed the utmost extent of
their art and contrivance. The descriptions of them by such
of the Spanish writers as had an opportunity of contemplating
them while, in some measure, entire, might have appeared
highly exaggerated, if the ruins which fill remain, did not
vouch the truth of their relations. These ruins of sacred or
royal buildings are found in every province of the empire,
and by their frequency demonfrate that they are monuments
of a powerful people, who must have subsisted, during a pe-
riod of ome extent, in a state of no inconsiderable improve-
ment. They appear to have been edifices various in their di-
mcnfions. Some of a moderate size, many of immense extent,
all remarkable for solidity, and resembling each other in the
flile of architecture. The temple of Pachacamac, together

with
3a6

with a palace of the Inca, and a fortress, were so conneced to- B 0 0 K
gether as to form one great ftruEture, above half a league in L.-.-
circuit. In this prodigious pile, the fame singular taste in build-
ing is conspicuous as in other works of the Peruvians. As
they were unacquainted with the use of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large flones and
bricks which they employed in building to any considerable
height, the walls of this edifice, in which they seem to have
made their greatefl effort towards magnificence, did not rife
above twelve feet from the ground. Though they had not dif-
covered the use of mortar or of any other cement in building,
the bricks or flones were joined with so much nicety, that the
lears can hardly be discerned '. The apartments, as far as the
difiribution of them can be traced in the ruins, were ill-difpofed,
and afforded little accommodation. There was not a single
window in any part of the building, and as no light could en-
ter but by the door, all the apartments of largest dimension
must either have been perfecly dark, or illuminated by orne
other means. But with all these and many other impcrf&ions
that might be mentioned, in their art of building, the works
of the Peruvians which fill remain mutl be confidered as flu-
pendous efforts of a people unacquainted with the use of iron,
and convey to us an high idea of the power pofleffed by their
ancient monarchs.

THESE, however, were not the noblest or molf useful works Their l,

of the Incas. The two great roads fiom Cuzco to Quito, ex- r"ad''
tending in an uninterrupted firetch above five hundred leagues,
are entitled to fill higher praise. The one was conducted

o See NOTE LXIIf.

th rough
6

B 0 K through the interior and mountainous country, the other
A
--- ) through the plains on the ea-coaft. From the language of ad-

mriration in which some of the early writers exprelf their afto-
nifhment when they first viewed those roads, and from the
more pompous dcfcriptions of later writers, who labour to up-
port olme favourite theory concerning America, one might be
led to compare this work of the Incas to the famous military
ways which remain as monuments of the Roman power: But
in a country where there was no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never used for draught, and but little as a beast of bur-
den, where the high roads were eldom trod by any but a human
foot, no great degree of labour and art was requisite in forming
them-. The Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet in breadth ',
and in many places so slightly formed, that time oon effaced
every veflige of the course in which they ran., In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than. to pliant trees
or to fix potls at certain intervals, in order to mark the proper
route to travellers. To open a path through the mountainous
country was a more arduous talk. Eminencies were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the preservation of the road, it
was fenced with a bank of turf. At proper distances, Tambos,
or storehouses, were erected for the accommodation of the Inca
and his attendants, in their progress through his dominions.
From the manner in which the road was originally formed in
this higher and more impervious region, it has proved more
durable; and though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every objct& but that of working their mines, nothing has been
done towards keeping it in repair, its course may Hill be traced .

t Cieca, c. o. i" Xcrcz, p. 18,, 191. Zaratc, lib. i. c. 13, .f. Vci.1,
lib. ix. c. 13. Bougucr Voyage, p. 0oS. Ulloa illtrctenemcnicntos, p 65.

Such
3I8

Such was the celebrated road of the Incas; and even from this B O K
description, divefled of every circumfiance of manifefi exagge-
ration, or of suspicious alipct, it mnut be confidered as a ftrik-
ing proof of an extraordinary progress in improvement and
policy. To the savage tribes of America, the idea of faci-
litating communication with places at a distance had never oc-
curred. To the Mexicans it was hardly known. Even in the
most civilized countries of Europe, men had advanced far
in refinement, before it became a regular object of na-
tional police to form such roads as render intercourse com-
modious.

The formation of those roads introduced another improvement and bidges.

in Peru equally unknown over all the reft of America. In its course
from south to north, the road of the Incas was interfeaed by all
the torrents which roll fiom the Andes towards the Western
Ocean. From the rapidity of their course, as well as from
the firequency and violence of their inundation, these were un-
navigable. Some expedient, however, was to be found for
pasing them. The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance
with the use of arches, and their inability to work in wood,
could not construct bridges either of stone or timber. But necef-
lity, the parent of invention, suggested a device which sup-
plied tlat defec. They formetl cablcs of great flrcngth, by
twifliiig together sone of the pliable withs or osiers, with
which their country abounds ; fix of which they firetched a-
cruss the itrcam parallel to one another, and made them fal on
each fide. Thcfe they bound firmly togethlr by interweaving
linallcr ropes so clolc, as to form a compa:c piece of net-work,
which being covered witl branches of' trees and arthl they

patlcd

B (i K pafled along it with tolerable security'. Proper persons were
'-----' appointed to attend at each bridge, to keep them in repair, and

to assist passengers . In the level country, where the rivers
became deep and broad and flill, they are passed in Balzas, or
floats; in the conflrution, as well as navigation of which, the
ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to be far superior to that of
any people in America. These had advanced no farther in
naval Ikill than the use of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians
ventured to raise a malt, and spread a fail, by means of which
their balzas not only went nimbly before the wind, but could
veer and tack with great celerity '.

Mode of re- -NOR were the ingenuity and art of thePeruviansconfined sole-
fining silver
e re. ly to objecs of essential utility. They had made some progress

in arts, which may be called elegant. They possessed the pre-
cious metals in greater abundance than any people of America.
They obtained gold in the fame manner with the Mexicans, by
searching in the channels of rivers, or washing the earth in
which particles of it were contained. But in order to procure
silver, they exerted no inconsiderable degree of skill and in-
vention. They had not, indeed, attained the art of finking a
shaft into the bowels of the earth, and penetrating to the riches
concealed there; but they hollowed deep caverns on the banks
of rivers, and the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In other places,
where the vein lay near the furfacc, they dug pits to fucl a
depth, that the person who worked below could throw out the
ore, or hand it up in baskets'. They had discovered the art

x NOTE LXIV. r Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 376, B. Zarate, lib. i. c. 1i.

Vega, lib. iii. c. 7, 8. Ilerrera, dec. v. lib. iv. c. 3, 4. * Ulloa Voy.
i. 167, &c. Ramufio, iii. 414, A.

of
3:0

of smelting and refining this, either by the simple application B 째0 K

Vii.

of fire, or where the ore was more flubborn, and inpregnat- ----
ed with foreign fuibfances, by placing it in inMall ovens or fur-
naces on high grounds, so artificially conftruLued, that tile
draught of air performed the filnction of a. bellows, a machine
with which they were totally unacquainted. By this simple
device, the purer ores were fineltcd with such facility, that
the quantity of silver in Peru was so considerable, that
many of the utensils employed in the funfcions of common
life were made of it'. Several of those veflels and trinkets
are faidl to have merited no small degree of eflimation, on ac-
count of the neatness of the workmanllfip, as well as the in-
trinfic value of the materials. But as tle conquerors of Ame-
rica were well acquainted with the latter, but had scarcely any
conception of the former, most of them were melted down,
and rated according to their weight and fineness in the division
of the spoil.

IN other works of mere curiosity, or ornament, their ingenuity Work, of

has been highly celebrated. Many of those have been dug out of egace.
thle GIacas, or mounds of earth, with which they covered the bo-
(lies ofthedead. Among these are mirrors of various dimensions,
of hard llining stones highly poliised ; vessels of carthen ware
of different forms; hatchets, and other inflruments, some def-
tined for war, and others for labour. Some were of flint,
foine of copper, hardened to such a degree by an unknown
proccs, as to supply the place of iron on several occasions.
Had the use of thcfc tools formed of copper been general, the
progress of the Peruvians in the arts might have been fucli, as

1' Acofla, lib. iv. c. , q. Vcga, p. i. lib. viii, c. .5. Ulloa intrcltcn, 258.

321
VOL,. 11.

to

B o0 OK to emulate that of more cultivated nations. But either the

V_. metal was
so rare, or the operation by which it was hardened

so tedious, that their infiruments of copper were few, and fu
extremely small, that they seem to have been employed only
in flighter works. But even to such a circumscribed use of
this imperfect metal, the Peruvians were indebted for their fu-
periority to the other people of America in various arts c. The
fame observation, however, may be applied to them, which ?
formerly made with refped to the arts of the Mexicans. From
several specimens of Peruvian utensils and ornaments, which
are deposited in the royal cabinet in Madrid, and from tome
preserved in different collecions in other parts of Europe, '
have reason to believe, that the workmanship is more to be ad-
mired on account of the rude tools with which it was executed,
than on account of its intrinsic neatness and elegance, and that
the Peruvians, though the most improved of all the Americans,
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

Animperfe BUT notwithstanding so many circumstances, which seem to
civilization. indicate an high degree of improvement in Peru, others occur

that suggest the idea of a society fill in the first flages of its
transition from barbarism. to civilization. In all the dominions

No cities but of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that had the appearance.
Cuzco. or was entitled to the name of a city. Every where else, the

people lived mofily in detached habitations, disperscd over the
country, or, at the utmost, fettled together in small villages'.
But until men are brought toaffemble in numerous bodies, and
incorporated in fiuch close union, as to enjoy frequent inter-
course, and to feel mutual dependence, they never imbibe pcr-

UlloaVoy. tom. i. 3Rr, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c,
d Zarate, lib, i. c. 9. Ilerrcra, dec. v. lib, vi. c. 4.

fc Ily
3.

fecaly the spirit, or assume the manners of social life. In a B o O K
country of immense extent, with only one city, the progress V---
of manners, and the improvement either of the necessary or
more refined arts, must have been so flow, and carried on un-
der such disadvantages, that it is more surprising the Peruvians
hould have advanced so far in refinement, than that they did
not proceed farther.

IN consequence of this tfate of imperfec union, the fepara- No perrCt

separation of

tion of profelions in Peru was not so complete as among the profefrions.
Mexicans. The less closely men associate, the more simple are
their manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts of com-
mon and most necessary use in life do not, in such a slate, be-
come so complex or difficult, as to render it requisite that men
should be trained to them by any particular course of education.
All those profefflons were accordingly exercised by every Peru-
vian indiscriminately. None but the artists, employed in works
of mere curiosity or ornament, constituted a separate order of
men, or were diflinguifhed from other citizens e.

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another consequence fol- Little com-

mercial inter-

lowed. There was little commercial intercourse among the in- courre.
habitants of that great empire. The aivity of commerce is
co-eval with the foundation of cities; and fiom the moment
that the members of any community fettle in considerable num-
bers in one place, its operations become vigorous. The ci-
tizen muff depend for fubfiftcnce on the labour of those who
cultivate the ground. They, in return, muff receive some

e Acofa, lib. vi. c. 15. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. IIerrcrn, dec .
v. lib. iv. c. 4.

equivalent.

323
Tt

B 0 K equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is eftablilhed, and the

_
- produtions of art are regularly exchanged for the fruits

of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexican empire, flatad
markets were held, and whatever could supply any want or
desire of man was an oljeat of commerce. But in Peru, from
the singular mode of dividing property, and the manner
in which the people were fettled, there was cfarcely any
species of commerce carried on between different provinces',
and the community was less acquainted with that aCtive inter-
course, which is at once a bond of union, and an incentive to
improvement.

lnwtarlke BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was the molt re-
spirit of the
Peruvians.e markable, as well as moll fatal defet in their charaCter . The

greater part of the rude nations in America opposed their in-
vaders with undaunted ferocity, though with little conduct or
success. The Mexicans maintained the struggle in defence of
their liberties, with such persevering fortitude, that it was with
difficulty the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru was sub-
dued at once, and alnoft without resistance; and the mofe
favourable opportunities of regaining their freedom, and of
cruffling their opprcflbrs, were loft through the timidity of the
people. Though the traditional history of the Peruvians rc-
presents all the Incas as warlike princes, frequently at the head
of armies, which they led to vidory and conquest; few fymp-
toms of itch a martial spirit appear in any of their operations
fulbfequent to the invasion of the Spaniards. The influence,
perhaps, of those inflitutions which rendered their manners

f Vega, lib. vi. c. 8. Xcrez, 190. Sancho ap Ram. iii. 372.
Herrcra, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

gentle,
324

gentle, gave their minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the P 째 째 ()
constant serenity and mildness of the climate may have ener- (
vatcd the rigour of their frame; perhaps, ome principle in
their government, unknown to us, was the occasion of this po-
litical dcbility. Whatever may have been the cause, the faa
is certain, and there is not an inflance in hiflory of any 'people
so little advanced in refinement, so totally defiitute of military
talents and enterprize. This charader hath descended to tlceir
pofierity. The Indians of Peru are now more tame and de-
prefled than any people of America. Their feeble ifirits, re-
laxed in lifeless inaaion, seem hardly capable of any bold or
manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital defecs in the political slate of

Peru, ome detached circumfiances and fads occur in the Spa-
nifil writers, which discover a considerable remainder of barbari-
ty in their manners. The fame cruel custom, that prevailed in
fore of the moll savage tribes, subsisted among the Peruvians.
On the death of the Incas, and of other eminent persons, a
considerable number of their attendants were put to death,
and interred around their Guaca, tlat they might appear in
the next world with their former dignity, and be icrvcd with
the fame respect. On the death of Huana-Capac, the most
powerful of their monarchs, above a thouifand vidimis welre
(loomed to accompany him to the tomb'. In one particular,
their manners appear to have been more barbarous than thofl
of most rude tribes. Though acquainted with the ulf of fire
in preparing maize, and other vegetables for food; they de-
voured both fleflh and fish perfectly raw, and allonilhcd the

' Acolla, lib. v. c 7.

Spaniards,

325

B 0 K Spaniards, with a pracice repugnant to the ideas of all civilized

VII.

----, people.

Othcr don- But though Mexico and Peru are the poffeffons of Spain in
Other dnl-
nionsofSpain the New World, which, on account both of their antient and
in Ameria.

present state, have attraCted the greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconsiderable, either in
extent or value. Molt of them were reduced to fubjedion
during the first part of the sixteenth century, by private adven-
turers, who fitted out their small armaments either in Hifpa-
niola, or in Old Spain, and were we to follow each leader in
his progress, we should discover the fame daring courage, the
fame persevering ardour, the fame rapacious desire of wealth,
and the fame capacity of enduring and surmounting every thing
in order to attain it, which distinguished the operations of the
Spaniards in their greater American conquests. But, inflcad
of entering into a detail, which, from the similarity of the
tranfations, would appear almost a repetition of what has
been already related, I shall satisfy myself with such a view of

A brief fur- those provinces of the Spaniil empire in America, which have
veyofthem. not hitherto been mentioned, as may convey to my readers a

more adequate idea of its greatness, fertility, and opulence.

I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the two great mo-

Such saread- narchies, of whose history and inflitutions I have given tome ac-
jacent to he count, and shall then briefly describe the other diltricqs of Spanish
empire of
Mexico. America. The jurifdidion of the viceroy of New Spain extends

over several provinces, which were not subjed to the dominion

Cinaa of theMexicans. ThecountriesofCinaloa and Sonora, that firetch

Cinaloa and
Sonora, &c. along the eaRl fide of the Vermilion sea, or gulfofCalifornia, as

well as the immense kingdoms of New Navarre and New Mexico,

Xcrez, p. 190. Sincho, Ram. iii. 32. C. lerrera, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

which
326

which bend towards the weft and north, did not acknowledge the B 째0 K.
sovereignty of Montezuma, or his predecessors. There regions, ---
not inferior in magnitude to all the Mexican empire, are re-
duced more or less completely under the Spaniflh yoke. They
extend through the most delightful part of the temperate zone;
their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile, and all their pro-
ductions, whether animal or vegetable, are most perfeCt in
their kind. They have all a communication either with the
Pacific Ocean, or with the Gulf of Mexico, and are watered by
such rivers as not only enrich them, but may become subser-
vient to commerce. The number of Spaniards fettled in those
vast countries, is indeed extremely small. They may be said
to have subdued, rather than to have occupied them. But if
the population in their ancient eflablifhments in America llall
continue to increase, they may gradually spread over those dif-
trids, of which, however inviting, they have not hitherto been
able to take poffefion.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the speedy population

of some distriCts. Very rich mines both of gold and silver have Rich mine.
been discovered in many of the regions which I have men-
tioned. Wherever these are opened, and worked with success,
a multitude of people retort. In order to supply them with
the necessaries of life, cultivation must be increased, artisans
of various kinds muff assemble, and industry as well as wealth
will be gradually diffused. Many examples of this have oc-
curred in different parts of America since they fell un-
der the dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages and
large towns have suddenly arilcn amidst uninhabited wilds and
mountains; and the working of mines, though far fiom being
the most proper objet towards which the attention of an infant

focicty

B 0 0 K society should be turned, may become the means both of pro-
1---- moting useful aEivity, and of augmenting the number of people.
A recent anl A recent and singular inflance of this has happened, which, as
remarkablec
discovery. it is but little known in Europe, and may be produQive of

great effes, merits attention. The Spaniards fettled in the
provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been long diflurbed by
the depredations of ome fierce tribes of Indians. In the year
1765, their incursions became so frequent, and so deftruive,
that the inhabitants, in despair, applied to the Maiquis de St.
Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for fich a body of troops as might
enable them to drive those for.nidable invaders fiom their
places of retreat in the mountains. But the treasury of Mexico
was so much exhaufied by the vafl fums drawn from it, in or-
der to support the late war against Great Britain, that the vice-
roy could afford them no aid. The refped due to his virtues,
accomplished what his official power could not ctFel. He pre-
vailed with the merchants to advance about two hundred thou-
sand pesos for defraying the expence of the expedition. The
war was conduced by an officer of abilities; and after being
protraCted for three years, chiefly by the difficulty of pursuing
the fugitives over mountains and through defiles which were
almost impaflable, it terminated in the year I77 1, in the final fil,-
mission of the tribes, which had been so long the objc of
terror to the two provinces. In the course of this service, tlic
Spaniards marched through countries into which they fecm not
to have penetrated before that time, and difcovcredl mines of
such value, as was aflonllirlg even to men acquaintc( with tlhe
riches contained in the mountains of the New World. At
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered a plain of
fourteen leagues in extent, in which they found gold in grains,
at the depth of only fixtecn inches, of such a size, that fume

irX~~~~~~ ~~of
328

of them weighed nine marks, and in such quantities, that in a B 0 0 K
short time, with a few labourers, they colleted a thouland '-----
marks of gold in grains, even without taking time to wash the
earth that had been dug, which appeared to be so rich, that
persons of skill computed that it might yield what would be
equal in value to a million of pesos. Before the end of the
year 771, above two thousand persons were fettled in prolilble
Cineguilla, under the government of proper magistrates, e of
and the inspection of several ecclefiaflics. As several other
mines, not inferior in riches to that of Cineguilla, have been dif-
covered, both in Sonora and Cinaloak, it is probable that these
neglected and thinly inhabited provinces, may soon become as
populous and valuable as any part of the Spanish empire in
America.

THE peninsula of California on the other fide of the Vermi- C:lifornia,

its Ifatc,

lion ea, seems to have been less known to the ancient Mexi-
cans, than the provinces which I have mentioned. It was dif-
covered by Cortes in the year 1536 (Book V. p. 143).
During a long period it continued to be so little frequented, that
even its form was unknown, and in molt charts it was repre-
sented as an island, not as a peninsula '. Though the climate of
this country, if we may judge fiom its situation, mufl be very
desirable; the Spaniards have made finall progrcfs in peopling
it. Towards the close of the last century, the Jesuits, who had
great merit in exploring this negleted province, and in civilizing
its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly acquired a dominion over it
as complete as that which they poffeil'cd in their millions in 1a-

k See NOTE LXV. ' Scc NOTE LXVI.

Uu
VO L. II.

ranguay,

:B o l K raguay, and they laboured to introduce into it the fame policy,
(--w --' and to govern the natives by the fame maxims. In order to

prevent the court of Spain from conceiving any jealousy of their
designs and operations, they seem studiously to have depreciat-
ed the country, by representing the climate as so disagreeable
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren, that nothing but
their zealous desire of converting the natives, could have in-
duced them to fettle there". Several public-fpirited-citizens en-
deavoured to undeceive their sovereigns, and to give them a

and probai- better view of California; but in vain. At length, on the ex-
iity of its im-
proving. pullion of the Jesuits from the Spanish dominions, the court of

Madrid, as prone at that juncture to fufpet the purity of the
Orders intentions, as formerly to confide in them with implicit
trust, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities have since
raised him to the high rank of minister for the Indies, to visit that
peninsula. His account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fiflhery on its coasts to be valuable, and discovered mines
of gold of a very promising appearance". From its vicinity to
Cinaloa and Sonora, it is probable, that if the population of these
provinces fliall increase in the manner which I have supposed,
California may, by degrees, receive from them such a recruit of
inhabitants, as to be no longer reckoned among the desolate
and useless difirids of the Spanish empire.
Yucaian and ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras.are comprehend-

ed in the government of New Spain, though anciently they can
hardly be said to have formed a part of the Mexican empire.
These large provinces, firetching from the Bay of Campeachy
beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like the other territories

' Vcncgas, Iilt. of California, i. 26. X Lorenzano, 349, 35o.

2 of

33r
of Spain in the New World, derive their value either from the B o K

VII.

fertility of their foil, or the richness of their mines, but they _.
yield in greater abundance, than any part of America, the log-
wood tree, which, in dying ome colours, is so far preferable to
any other material, that the consumption of it in Europe is con-
fiderable, and it has become an article in commerce of great
value. During a long period, no European nation intruded
upon the Spaniards in those provinces, or attempted to obtain
any share in this branch of trade. But after the conquest of Ja-
maica by the English, it soon appeared what a formidable rival
was now feated in the neighbourhood of the Spanish territories.
One of the firfi objets that tempted the English, was the great
profit arising from the logwood trade, and the facility of wresting
some portion of it from the Spaniards. Some adventurers from Their dco
Jamaica made the first attempt at Cape Catoche, the fouth-eafl dine,
promontory of Yucatan, and by cutting logwood there, carried
on a gainful traffic. When most of the trees near the coast in
that place were felled, they removed to the island of Trill, in
the Bay of Campeachy; and, in later times, their principal fla-
tion has been in the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards, alarm-
ed at this encroachment, endeavoured by negociation, remon-
ftrances, and open force, to prevent the Englifl from obtaining
any footing on that part of the American continent. But after
firuggling againfl it for more than a century, the difaflcrs of
last war extorted fiom the court of Madrid a reluctant consent
to tolerate this fettlcment of foreigners in the heart of its terri-
tories . The pain which this humbling conccflioin ccalionc(d,
eemns to have fuggclcd a method of rendelring it of little con-
fcqucncc, more cfrciLual thanl all the csorts of ncgociatio (ior

" ' e.ty of I'ar, Art. xv ii.

U 2

viole ICt'cc.

B O K violence. The logwood produced on the weft coast of Yucatan,

viI.
-'----" where the foil is drier, is in quality far superior to that

which grows on the marshy grounds where the English
and rcv are fettled. By encouraging the cutting of this,, and permitting

the importation of it into Spain without paying any duty',
such vigour has been given to this declining branch of com-
merce, and the logwood which the English bring to market
has funk so much in value, that their trade to the Bay of Hon-
duras has gradually declined since it obtained a legal fanaion;
and, it is probable, will oon be finally abandoned. In that
event, the provinces of Yucatan and Honduras will become pof.
sessions of considerable importance to Spain.

Cefa Rica Still farther east than Honduras lie the two provinces of Cofla
and Veragua.

Rica and Veragua, which likewise belong to the vice-royalty of.
New Spain; but both have been so much neglected by the Spa-
niards, and are apparently of such small value, that they merit
no particular attention.
Chll. THE moss important province depending on the vice-royalty

of Peru, is Chili. The Incas had eftabliffed their dominion
in some of its southern diflrids; but in the greater part of the
country, its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants maintained
their independence. The Spaniards, allured by the fame of
its opulence, early attempted the conquest of it under Diego Al-
magro ; and after his death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the de-
sign. Both met with fierce opposition. The former relin-
quiihed the enterprize in the manner which I have mentioned r.
The latter, after having given many displays, both of courage

P Real Cedula, Campomanes, iii. 145 q See NOTE LXVII.
' Book vi, . 195, &c.

and
332

3i3

i0

and military fill, was cut off with a considerable. body of B O O K
troops under his command. Francisco de Villagra, his lieu- _-
tenant, by his spirited condul, checked the natives in their
career, and saved the remainder of the Spaniards fi-om (cflruc-
tion. By degrees, all the champaign country along the coalt
was fubjeted to the Spanish dominion. The mountainous
country is still posseTsed by the Puelchles, Araucos, and other
tribes of its original inhabitants, formidable neighbours to the
Spaniards; with whom, during the course of two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain perpetual hofility, suspend-
ed only by a few intervals of insecure peace.

THAT part of Chili then, which may properly be deemed a Excellenlce c

it, climli:e

Spanish province, is a narrow diiricd, extending along the coafl and Ibil.
from the desert of A tacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the most delicious of the New
World, and is hardly equalled by that of any region on the
face of the earth. Though bordering on the Torrid Zone, it
never feels the extremity of heat, being screened on the east by
the Andes, and refreshed from the weft by cooling fea-breezes.
The temperature of the air is so mild and equable, that theSpa-
niards give it the preference to that of the southern provinces
in their native country. The fertility of the foil corresponds
with the benignity of the climate, and- is wonderfully accommo-
dated to European produtions. The most valuable of these,
corn, wine, and oil, abound in Chili, as if they had been na-
tive to the country. All the fruits imported from Europe attain,
to full maturity there. The animals of our lheiifphcre nor oii-
ly multiply, but improve in this delightful region. The horn-
ed cattle are of larger size than thofl of Spain. Its breed of
horses filrpafles, both in beauty aud in (pirit, the fainous Anda-

liifianr

B o K lufian race, from which they sprung. Nor has Nature exhaust-

VII. . --,_ ed her bounty on the surface of the earth; he has stored its

bowels with riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop-
per, and of lead, have been discovered in various parts
of it.

Caufeofits A COUNTRY distinguished by so many bleflings, we may be
glefed by apt to conclude, would early become a favourite station of the
the Spani- Spaniards, and must have been cultivated with peculiar predi-
ards.

letion and care. Instead of this, a great part of it remains
unoccupied. In all this extent of country, there are not above
eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about three times that
number of negroes and people of a mixed race. The most ser-
tile foil in America lies uncultivated, and some of its mofl pro-
mifing mines remain unwrought. Strange as this neglect of
the Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages, which seemed
to court their acceptance, may appear, the causes of it can be
traced. The only intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the
South Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the annual
fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of the colonies were ship-
ped in the ports of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and
carried from thence across the isthmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were conveyed
from Panama to the fame harbours. Thus both the exports
and imports of Chili passed through the hands of the mer-
chants of Peru. These had of course a profit on each; and
in both tranfaaions the Chilefe 'felt their own fuborli-
nation; and having no direL intercourse with the parent
flatc, they depended upon another province for the clill)oial
of their pro)d!uiols, as well as far the flupply of their wants.
Under lIcll dilcouragcmcnts, population could not icrcalc,

anlll
334

335

and industry was' destitute of one chief incitement. But B 0 0 K
now that Spain, from motives which I hall mention hereafter, -,--

Pre fpvd of

has adopted a new fyflem, and carries on her commerce with i;' i,,,vf.
the colonies in the South Sea, by hips which go round Cape "'cilt
Horn, a direc intercourse is opened between Chili and the Mo-
ther-country. The gold, the silver, and the other commodi-
ties of the province will be exchanged in its own harbours
for the manufactures of Europe. Chili may speedily rife into
that importance among the Spaniflh settlements to which it is
entitled by its natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific Ocean; it
may supply them with wine, with cattle, with horses, with
hemp, and many other articles for which they now depend up-
on Europe. Though the new system has been established only
a few years, those effed's of it begin already to be observed'.
If it shall be adhered to with any steadiness for half a century,
one may venture to foretell, that population, industry and
opulence will advance in this province with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tucuman and Rio Provinces of

Tucumnan and

de la Plata, border on Chili, and like it were dependent on the Rio de la
Vice-royalty of Peru. These regions of immense extent stretch Plata.
in length from north to south above thirteen hundred miles,
and in breadth more than a thousand. This country, which is Northern and

so tlchern di-

larger than molt European kingdoms, naturally forms itself into vilion.
two great divisions, one on the north, and the other on the
south of Rio de la Plata. The former comprehends Paraguay,
the famous millions of the Jesuits, and several other difricds.
But as disputes have long fibfiftcd between the courts of Spain

Carpoinanc, ii. 57.

and

B O K and Portugal, concerning its boundaries, which, it isprobable, will

VIL

--- be oon finally ascertained, either amicably, or by the decision of

the sword, I chufe to rcferve my account of this northern di-
vilion, until I enter upon the hiflory of Portuguese America,
with which it is intimately connected; and, in relating it, I hall
be able from authentic materials, supplied both by Spain and
Portugal, to give a full and accurate description of the operations
and views of the Jesuits, in rearing that singular fabric of policy
in America, which has drawn so much attention, and has been so
imperfetly understood. The latter division of the province
contains the governments of Tucuman and Buenos-Ayres, aid
to these I shall at present confine my observations.
v i iw of the TH E Spaniards entered this part of America by the river De la

l.cr. Plata, and though a succession of cruel disasters besel them in their

early attempts to establish their dominion there, they were en-
couraged to persist in the design, at first by the hopes of discover-
ing mines in the interior country, and afterwards by the necessity
of occupying it, in order to prevent any other nation from fettling
there, and penetrating by this route into their rich poffefions
in Peru. But except Buenos-Ayres, they have made no fettle-
ment of any consequence in all the vast space which I have
mentioned. There are, indeed, scattered over it, a few places
on which they have bellowed the name of towns, and to which
they have endeavoured to add some dignity, by erecing thecn
into bihopricks; but they are no better than paltry vil-
lages, each with two or three hundred inhabitants. One cir-
cumflancc, however, which was not originally forefecn, has
contributed to render this diflridc, though thinly peopled, of
conliderable importance. The province of Tucuman, together
with the country to the south of the Plata, inltead of being

Id9~- ~covercle
336

3 7

covered with wood like other parts of America, forms one vast B o O K
open plain, almost without a tree. The foil is a deep fertile
mold, watered by many fireams descending from the Andes,
and clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich pfturage, the
horses and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe have
multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds belief. This has
enabled the inhabitants not only to open a lucrative trade with
Peru, by supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but to
carry on a commerce no les beneficial, by the exportation of
hides to Europe. From both the colony has derived great ad-
vantages. But its commodious situation for carrying on con-
traband trade, has been the chieffource of its prosperity. While
the court of Madrid adhered to its ancient system, with refpea
to its communication with America, the river De la Plata
lay so much out of the course of Spanish navigation, that in-
terlopers, almost without any rifque of being either observed or
obftruaed, could pour in European manufactures in such quan-
tities, that they not only supplicd the wants of the colony, but
were conveyed into all the eastern diflriQs of Peru. \Vhen
the Portuguese in Brasil extended their settlements to the banks
of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was opened, by which pro-
hibited commodities flowed into the Spanili territories, with
still more facility, and in greater abundance. This illegal traffic,.
however detrimental to the parent slate, contributed to the in-
crease of the fettlemcnt, which had the immediate benefit of it,
and Buenos Ayres became gradually a populous and opulent
town. What may be the cffct of the alteration lately made in the
government of this colony, the nature of which lhall be dcfcrib-
cd in the fubfequcnt Book, cannot hitherto be known.

VOL. II.

A L L
Xx

B 0 K ALL the other territories of Spain in the New World, the
L -.-.. islands excepted, of whose dfcovery and reduction I have for-
Other terri-
tories of merly given an account, are comprehended under two great
Spain. divisions; the former denominated the kingdom Tierra Firme,

the provinces of which itretch along the Atlantic, from the
eastern frontier of New Spain to the mouth of the Orinoco;
the latter, the New Kingdom of Granada, situated in the inte-
rior country. With a ihort view of these I shall close this part
-of my work.

To the eaff of Veragua, the last province subjed to the vicce
Darien. roy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of Darien. Though it was il

this part of the continent, that the Spaniards first began to plant
colonies, they have made no considerable progress in peopling;
it. As the country is extremely mountainous, deluged with
rain during a good part of the year, remarkably unhealthful,
and contains no mines of great value, they would probably
have abandoned it altogether, if they had not been allured to
continue by the excellence of the harbour of Porto-bello on the
one ea, and that of Panama on the other. These have been
called the keys to the communication between the north and
south ea, between Spain and her most valuable colonies. In
consequence of this advantage, Panama has become a confider-
able and thriving town. The peculiar noxiousness of its cli-
mate has prevented Porto-bello from increasing in the fame
proportion. As the intercourse with the settlements in the Pa-
cific Ocean, is now carried on by another channel, it is pro-
bable that both Porto-bello and Panama will decline, when no
longer nourished and enriched by that commerce, to whicli
they were indebted for their prosperity, and even their exifi-

ence.
338

TH E provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha, firetch to B o O K

VII.

the eastward of the iflhmus of Darien. The country flill con- -----
tinues mountainous, but its vallies begin to expand, are well and Sata
watered, and extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeded Martha.
tllis part of America to the crown of Spain, about the year
I532. It is thinly peopled, and of course ill cultivated. It
produces, however, a variety of valuable drugs, and some
precious stones, particularly emeralds. But its chief import-
ance is derived from the harbour of Carthagena, thefafeft and
bell fortified of any in the American dominions of Spain. In a
situation so favourable, commerce soon began to flourish. As
early as the year 1544, it fccms to have been a town of ome
note. But when Carthagcna was chosen as the port in which
the galcons (hould first begin to trade on their arrival from Eu-
rope, and to which they were directed to return, in order to
prepare for their voyage homeward, the commerce of its inha-
bitants was so much favoured by this arrangement, that it soon
became one of the mot populous, opulent, and beautiful cities
in America. There is, however, reason to apprehend, that it
has reached its highest point of exaltation, and that it will be
fb far asseRted by the change in the Spanish system of trade
with America, which has withdrawn from it the desirable visits
of the galeons, as to feel at least a temporary decline. But the
wealth now collected there, mull find or create employment for
itself, and may be turned witl advantage into tome new chan-
nel. Its harbour is so safe, and fb conveniently situated for re-
ceiving commodities from Europe, its merchants have been
so long accuf-omed to convey there into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will flill retain this branch of
trade, and Carthagena continue to be a city of great im-
portance.

339
Xx

TIIE

B 0 0 K THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on the east, was

.

. .first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in the year 1499 ; and the
Venezuela. Spaniards, on their landing there, having observed some huts in

an Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise them above
the tfagnated water which covered the plain, were led to beflow
upon it the name of Venezuela, or little Venice, by their usual
propensity to find a resemblance, between what they discovered
in America, and the objects which were familiar to them in
Europe. They made some attempts to fettle there, but with
little success. The final redudion of the province was accom-
plifhed by means very different from those to which Spain was
indebted for its other acquisitions in the New World. The
ambition of Charles V. often engaged him in operations of such
variety and extent, that his revenues were not sufficient to de-
fray the expence of carrying them into execution. Among
other expedients for supplying the deficiency of his funds, he
had borrowed large fums from the Velfers of Augfburgh, the
most opulent merchants at that time in Europe. By way of retri-
bution for these, or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan,
he bestowed upon them the province of Venezuela, to be held
as an hereditary fief of the crown of Caffile, on condition that
within a limited lime they should render themselves maetcrs of
the country, and eflablifll a colony there. Under the direcion
of filch persons, it might have been expected, that a settlement
.would have been eflablifhed on maxims very different fronm
those of the Spaniards, and better calculated to encourage such
useful industry, as they might have known to be the only certain
source of prosperity and opulence. But unfortunately they com-
mitted the execution of their plan, to some of thole soldiers of

' Book ii. p. 148.

fortune
+.

fortune with which Germany abounded in the sixteenth cen- B K

VII.

tury. These adventurers, impatient to amass riches, that they
might speedily abandon a flation which they soon discovered to be
very uncomfortable, inflead of planting a colony that might have
cultivated and improved the country, wandered from diifri to
diftric in search of mines, plundering the natives with unfeel-
ing rapacity, or opprefing them by the imposition of intole-
rable talks. In the course of a few years, their avarice and
examtions, in comparison with which those of the Spaniards
were moderate, desolated the province so completely, that it
could hardly afford them fubfiflance, and the Velfers relinquifli-
ed a property, fiom which the inconsiderate condut of their
agents left them no hope of ever deriving any advantage".
When the wretched remainder of the Germans desertcd Ve-
nezuela, the Spaniards again took poftffion of it; but, notwith-
ltanding many natural advantages, it is one of their molt
languiihing and unproducive fcttlements.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the lafl of the Caraccas and

.Cumana.

Spanish territories on this coast; but in relating the origin and
operations of the mercantile company, in wlich an exclusive
right of trade with them has been veited, I fIall hereafter have
occasion to confider their state and produaions.

TiE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an inland country New king-

dom of Gra-

ofvalt extent. This important addition was made to the domini- nada.
ons of Spain about the year 1536, by Sebaflian de B3enalcazar and
Gonzalo Ximenes de Quefada, two of tlh bravest and molt ac-
compliflid oflicers employed in the conqucft of America. Thei

vicdlo y Dagnios Ilin. de VcnlczItl;, p. 1 , &c.

former,

B 0 0 IK former, who commanded at that time in Quito, attacked it

V1J.
t -- -- _from the south; the latter made his invasion from Santa Mar-

tha on the north. As the original inhabitants of this region
were farther advanced in improvement, than any people in Ame-
rica but the Mexicans and Peruvians , they defended them-
selves with great resolution and good conduct. The abilities
and perseverance of Benalcazar and Quefada surmounted all op-
position, though not without encountering many dangers, and
reduced the country into the form of a Spanish province.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far elevated above the level

of the sea, that though it approaches almost to the equator, the
climate is remarkably temperate. The fertility of its vallies is not
inferior to that of the richest difirits in America, and its higher
grounds yield gold and precious stones of various kinds. It is
not by digging into the bowels of the earth that this gold is
found; it is mingled with the foil near the surface, and feparat-
ed from it by repeated waffing with water. This operation is
carried on wholly by negroe slaves; for though the chill fubter-
ranean air has been discovered, by experience, to be so fatal to
them, that they cannot be employed in the deep silver mines,
they are more capable of performing the other species of labour
than Indians. As the natives in the New Kingdom of Granada
arc exempt from that service, which has wafled their race o
rapidly in other parts of America, it is relnarkably populous.
Some diflricts yield gold with a profusion no lcis wonderful
than that in the vale of Cineguilla, which I have formerly men-
tioned, and it is often found inpLppilts, or grains, which mini-
fest the abundance in which it is produced. On a riling ground

L'ook iv. p. 31, &c.
342

nca
3

near Pamplona, single labourers have collected in a day what was B O O K
equal in value to a thousand pesos Y. A late governor of Santa I.,-_
Fe brought with him to Spain a lump of virgin gold, eflimated
to be worth seven hundred and forty pounds sterling. But with-
out founding any calculation on wlha is rare and extraordinary,
the value of the gold usually collectcd in this country, par-
ticularly in the provinces of Popayan and Choco, is of
confidcrable amount. Its towns are populous and flourish-
ing. The number of inhabitants in almoll every part of the
country daily increases. Cultivation and industry of various
kinds begin to be encouraged, and to prosper. A confidcrable
trade is carried on with Carthagcna, the produce of tlhe mines,
and other commoditics, being conveyed cdown tie great river of
St. Magdalen to that city. On another q(arter, the New King-
dom of Granada has a communication 'ith the Atlantic by the
river Orinoco; but the country which frctlcics along its banks
towards the eafl, is little known, andl imnpcrfetlly occupied by tlle
;Spaniards.

Y Pic.!rahita Iill. dJ ;N. Reyno, p. 48r, 1 .'I prnes me,

THE

343'

# BOOK VIII.

T H E
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
AM E R IC Ao

B O O K VIII,
FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards in their B K

VIII.

discoveries and conquests during more than half a cen- .
tury, I have conducted them to that period when their autho- View of tnh

policy and
rity was establishcd over almost all the vast regions in the New trade of the

Spaniflh co.

World fRill subject to their dominion. The effec of their fettle- lonies.
ments upon the countries of which they took pofTeffion, the
maxims which they adopted in forming their new colonies, the
interiorftruaure and policy of there, together with the influence
of their progreflive improvement upon the parent slate, and
the commercial intcrcourfe of nations, are the objeds to
which we now turn our attention, and they arc no Icfs interest-
ing than important.

TiiE first visible consequence of the eflabliflments made Depopulatkin

of America
by the Spaniards in America, was the diminution of the an- thc irll cnc

VOL. II. Y y ient ofm,

B o O K cient inhabitants, to a degree equally aflonilhing and deplo-

VIII. -I-.-._t rable. I have already, on different occasions, mentioned tile

disastrous influence under which the connecion of the Ameri-
cans with the people of our hemisphere commenced, both in
the islands, and in several parts of the continent, and have
touched upon various causes of their rapid consumption. Where-
ever the inhabitants of America had resolution to take arms in
defence of their liberty and rights, many perilhed in the un-
equal contef, and were cut off by their fierce invaders.
But the greatest desolation followed after the sword was
heathed, and the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity.

Caufesofthis It was in the islands, and in those provinces of the con-
in the islands,
andfomeparts tinent which firetched from the Gulf of Trinidad to the con-
of the con-
tinent. fines of Mexico, that the fatal effects of the Spanifhi dominion

were first and most sensibly felt. All these were occupied either
by wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as had made but
fmallprogrefs in cultivation and induffry. When they were
compelled by their new mailers to take up a fixed residence, and
to apply to regular labour; when tasks were imposed upon
them disproportioned to their firength, and were exaced with
unrelenting severity; they possessed not vigour either of mind
or of body to sustain this unusual load of oppression. Dejection
and despair drove many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine destroyed more. In all those extensive regions, the
original race of inhabitants wafted away; in some it was totally
extinguished. In Mexico, where a powerful and martial
people diflinguifled their opposition to the Spaniards, by efforts
of courage worthy of a better fate, great numbers fell in the
field; and there, as well as in Peru, ill greater numbers perifli-
ed under the hardships of attending the Spanish armies in their
various expeditions and civil wars, worn out with the

inccftil'a
546

inceflant toil of carrying their baggage, provisions, and mi- B o o K
litary stores.
v

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spaniards were so In NewSpaii;

deiructive to the people of Mexico and Peru, as the inconfide- and Peru.
rate policy with which they etabliihed their new fcttlements.
The former were temporary calamities, fatal to individuals;
the latter was a permanent evil, which, with gradual confump-
tion, wafted the nation. When the provinces of Mexico and
Peru were divided among the conquerors, each was eager to
obtain a diftria, from which he might expect an inflantaneous
recompence for all his services. Bold adventurers, accuflomed
to the careleflnefs and dissipation of a military life, had neither
industry tocarry on any plan of regular cultivation, nor patience
to wait for its flow, but certain returns. Inflead of fettling in the
vallies occupied by the natives, where the fertility of the foil
would have amply rewarded the diligence of the planter, they
chose to fix their flations in ome of the mountainous regions,
frequent both in New Spain and in Peru. To search for mines
of gold and silver, was the chief objea of their activity. The
vast prospects which this opens, and the alluring hopes which
it continually presents, correspond wonderfully with the spirit of
cnterprize and adventure that animated the first emigrants to Anic-
rica in every part of their conduc. In order to push forward those
favourite projects, so many hands were wanted, that the service of
the natives became indispensably requifitc. They were, according-
ly, compelled to abandon their ancient habitations in the plains,
and driven in crowds to the mountains. This fuddcn transition
from the fuiltry climate of the vallies, to the chill penetrating
air peculiar to high lands in the torrid zone; the fatigue of

Y y 2 exorbitant

exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholesome nourishment, and
the despondency occasioned by a species of oppression to which
they were not accutomed, and of which they saw no end, affeCted
them nearly as much as their less industrious countrymen in the
islands. They funk under the united pressure of those calamities,
and melted away with almost equal rapidity . In confequencc
of this, together with the introduction of the finall-pox, a ma-
lady unknown in America, and extremely fatal to the natives ,
the number of people both in New Spain and Peru was so much
reduced, that in a few years the accounts of their ancient popu-
lation appeared almost incredible b

-A
SUCH are the most considerable events and causes, which,

by their combined operation, contributed to depopulate America.
Without attending to there, many authors astonished at the
suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed this unexampled
event to a scheme of policy no less profound than atrocious. The
Spaniards, as they pretend, conscious of their own. inability to
occupy the vast regions which they had discovered, and foresee-
ing the impossibility of maintaining their authority over. a people
infinitely superior to themselves in number, in order to prefervc
America, resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by convert-
ing it into a defart, endeavoured to secure their own dominion over
it . But nations eldom extend their views to objects so remote,
or lay their plans so deep; and, for the honour of humanity,
we may observe, that no nation ever deliberately formed such

2 Torquemada, i. 613.

lib. x. c. 4. Ulloa Entrecn, zo6.
See NOTE LXVIII.

a B. Diaz, c. 124. I-errcra, dec. ii.

b Torquem. 615. 6.z, 6.13.
Sec NOTE LXIX.

an
BOOK

VIII.

Not the result
of any f) fem
of policy;
348

9

an execrable scheme. The Spanifl monarchs, far from ating B o O K
upon any such system of deitrution, were uniformly folici- -
tous for the preservation of their new fubjeds. With Isabella,
zeal for propagating the chrifiian faith, and the desire of com-
municating the knowledge of truth, and the confoations of reli-
gion to people deflitute of spiritual light, were more than oflen-
fible motives for encouraging Columbus to attcmpt his disco-
vcries. Upon hiis success, flhe endeavourcd to fullil her pious
purpose, and manifested the moil tender concern to secure not
only religious infirulion, but mild treatment, to that inoffen-
live race of men filbjeded to her crown . -Her fucceflbrs adopt-
ed the fame ideas; and, on many occasions, which I have men-
tioned, their authority was interpnfcd in the moil vigorous
exertions, to proredc the people of America from the oppref-
sion of their Spanilh fubjees. Their regulations for this pur-
pose were numerous, and often repeated. They were framed
with wisdom, and dicated by humanity. After tleir posses-
sions in the New World became bo extensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in retaining their do-
minion over them, the spirit of their regulations was as mild
as when their settlements were confined to the islands alone.
Their solicitude to protecc the Indians teems rather to have
augmented as their acquisitions increased ; and from ardour to
accomplish this, they cnadcd, and endcavoured to enforce the
execution of laws, which excited a formidable rebellion in one
of their colonies, and spread alarm and difaffedion through all
the reft. But the avarice of individuals was too violent to be
controuled by the authority of laws. Rapacious and daring
adventurcrs, far removed from the feat of goverinlent, little

4 Sec NOTE L'X,

accunoomed

B O K accuflomed to the refiraints of military discipline while in ser-

VIII.

vice, and flill less disposed to refpea the feeble jurifdidion of
civil power in an infant colony, despised or eluded every regu-
lation that set bounds to their exactions and tyranny. The pa-
rent slate, with persevering attention, issued edias to prevent
the oppression of the Indians; the colonifis, regardless of these,
or trusting to their distance for impunity, continued to confider,
and treat them as slaves. The governors themselves, and other
officers employed in the colonies, several of whom were as in-
digent and rapacious as the adventurers over whom they prefid-
ed, were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ideas of the con-
quered people; and, intfead of checking, encouraged or con-
nived at their excefles. The desolation of the New World
fliould not then be charged on the court of Spain,or be confidered
as the effect of any fyfiem of policy adopted there. It ought to
be imputed wholly to the conquerors and first planters of Ame-
rica, who, by measures no less inconsiderate than unjust, coun-
teraced the edits of their Sovereign, and have brought disgrace
upon their country.

nor the es- WITH fill greater injustice, have many authors represented
fRe of eli- the intolerating spirit of the Roman Catholic religion, as the

cause of exterminating the Americans, and have accused the
Spanish ecclesiastics of animating their countrymen to the
slaughter of that innocent people, as idolaters and enemies of
God. But the first miflionaries who visited America, though
weak and illiterate, were pious men. They early espoused the
defence of the natives, and vindicated their character from the
aspersions of their conquerors, who, describing them as inca-
pable of being formed to the offices of civil life, or of compre-
hending the doctrines of religion, contended, that they were

a sub-
35o

a subordinate race of men, on whom the hand of nature had B o o K

VIIL.

set the mark of servitude. From the accounts which I have - -'
given of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanish mif-
fionaries, in protecting the helpless flock committed to their
charge, they appear in a light which reflects lustre upon their
function. They were ministers of peace, who endeavoured to
wrest the rod from the hands of oppressors. To their power-
ful interposition, the Americans were indebted for every regu-
lation tending to mitigate the rigour of their fate. The clergy
in the Spanish settlements, regular as well as secular, arc tfill
confidered by the Indians as their natural guardians, to whom
they have recourse under the hardships and exaaions to which
they are too often exposed '.

BUT, notwithifanding the rapid depopulation of America, a The number

very considerable number of the native race still remains both in of lliti,,ins
Mexico and Peru, especially in those parts which were not cx- illg
posed to the first fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated by the
firt efforts of their indufiry, fill more ruinous. In Guatimala,
Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the other delightful provinces of the
Mexican empire that stretch along the south-sea, the race of
Indians is still numerous. Their ettlements in ome places are
so populous, as to merit the name of cities . In the three au-
diences into which New Spain is divided, there are at least two
millions of Indians; a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient po-
pulation, but uch as frill forms a body of people superior in
number to that of all the other inhabitants of this vast country' .
In Peru several dilih'iis, particularly in the kingdom of Quito,
arc occupied almolt entirely by Indians. In other provinces,
' SeeNOTELXXI. ' See NOTE LXXII. s See NOTE LXXI!I.

they
6

B o0 OK they are mingled with the Spaniards, and in many of their

VIII.
Kt. .,-_ settlements praftife the mechanic arts, and fill most of the in-

ferior stations in society. As the inhabitants, both of Mexico
and Peru were accustomed to a fixed residence, and to some de-
.gree of regular indultry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European modes of civil life.
But wherever the Spaniards fettled among the savage tribes of
America, their attempts to incorporate with them have been
always fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Impatient of
refiraint, and disdaining labour as a mark of servility, they
either abandoned their original feats, and fought for independ-
ance in mountains and forests inaccessible to their oppressors, or
periflfed when reduced to a fate repugnant to their ancient ideas
and habits. In the diftrits adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama,
and to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more general than even
in those parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spaniards have
taken most full possession.

:Generalidea BUT the eflabliflments of the Spaniards in the New World,
of the policy
of Spain inits though fatal to its ancient inhabitants, were made at a period

colonis when that monarchy was capable of forming them to befi ad-

vantage. By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful fate, equal to so great an undertaking. Its
monarchs, having extended their prerogative far beyond the li-
mits which once circumscribed the regal power in every king-
dom of Europe, were hardly subjed to controul, either in con-
certing, or in executing their measures. In every wide extend-
ed empire, the form of government muff be simple, and the au-
thority of the sovereign absolute; that his resolutions may be
taken with promptitude, and pervade the whole with undirni-
nifhed force. Such was the power of the Spanilh monarchs,

when
3;2

when they were called to deliberate concerning the mode of B K
establishing their dominion over the molt remote provinces, ...-
that had ever been fubjeded to any European fate. In this de-
liberation, they felt themselves under no constitutional restraint,
and that as independent masters of their own resolves, they
might ifue the edidts requisite for modelling the government of
the new colonies, by a mere act of prerogative.

Tnes early interposition of the Spanith crown, in order to Early inter-

regulate the policy and trade of its colonies, is a peculiarity pofitionl1ofth'
which diflinguifhes their progress from that of the colonies of rty.
any other European nation. When the Portuguese, the English,
and French, took possession of those regions in America which
they now occupy, the advantages which they promised to yield
were so remote and uncertain, that they were suffered to struggle
through a hard infancy, almost without guidance or protection
from the parent slate. But gold and silver, the first productions
of the Spanish settlements in the New World, were more allur-
ing, and immediately attracted the attention of their monarchs.
Though they had contributed little to the discovery, and almost
nothing to the conquest of the New World, they inflantly as-
fumed the fundcion of its legislators; and having acquired a
species of dominion formerly unknown, they formed a
plan for exercising it, to which nothing similar occurs in the
history of human affairs.

THrE fundamental maxim of Spanish jurisprudence with re- All powet

fpea to America, is to confider what has been acquired there ncd prinpety
as veiled in the crown, rather than in the slate. By the crown"
bull of Alexander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
founded its right, all the regions that had been, or hould

VOL. II. Z z be

355

B 0 0 K be discovered, were bellowed as a free gift upon Ferdinand and

VII1.
a>^_,_L Isabella. They and their successors were uniformly held to be

the universal proprietors of the vail territories, which the arms
of their ifbjeds conquered in: the New World. From tlhem,
all grants of land there flowed, and to them they finally return-
ed. The leaders who conduaed the various expeditions, the
governors who presided over the different colonies, the oficeCa
ofjuflice, and the mniniflers of religion, were all appointed by
their authority, and removable at their pleasure. The people
who composed infant settlements were intitled to no privileges
independent of the fovercign, or that served as a barrier againil
the power of the crown. It is true, that when towns were
built, and formed into bodies corporate, the citizens were per-
mitted to elect their own magiflrates, who governed by laws
which the community enacted. Even in the most despotic
states, this feeble spark of liberty is not extinguished. But in
the cities of Spanish America, this jurifdidon is merely muni-
cipal, and is confined to the regulation of their own interior
commerce and police. In whatever relates to public govern-
inent, and the general interest, the will of the overeign is law.
No political power originates from the people. All centres in
the crown, and in the officers of its nomination.

All the new WIEN the conquefis of the Spaniards in America were com-
(oniinioi ns of
Spain rfuljca- plcted, their monarchs, in forming the plan of interior policy
':I o 짙WO
}iceroys. for their new dominions, divided them into two immcnfe ,o-

vernments, one fubjcEcl to the viceroy of New Spain, the otlicr
to the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdiaion of the former extend-
ed over all the provinces belonging to Spain in the northern i-
vilion of the American continent. Under that of the latter, was
comprehended whatever flie poflcfcd in South America. 'I hls

8 arrangc!icnr
354

arrangement which, from the beginning, was attended with E o K
many inconveniencies, became intolerable when tlhe rclnote - J
provinces of each viceroyalty began to improve in indufhl y and
population. The people complained of their fiibjction to a
superior, whose place of residence was so diflant, or io inaccef-
fible, as almost excluded them from any intcrcourfe with the
feat of government. The authority of the viceroy over diflriEts
so far removed from his own eye and obfcrvation, was unavoid-
ably both feeble and ill-direaed. As a remedy for those evils,
a third viceroyalty has been cflablifhed in the present century,
at Santa Fe de Bogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, thejurifdition of which extends over the whole king-
dom of Tierra Firme, and the province of Qito'. Thole Thirpowcrs.
viceroys not only represent the person of their fovcrcign,
but possess his regal prerogatives within the precints of their
own governments, in their utmost extent. Like him, they
exercise fuipreme authority in every department of government,
civil, military, and criminal. They may preside in every tri-
bunal. They have the sole right of nominating the persons
who hold many offices of the highest importance, and tie occa-
fional privilege of supplying Ifch as are in the royal gift, until
the successor appointed by the king fliall arrive. The extcrnal
pomp of their government is suitcd to its real dignity and power.
Their courts are formed upon the modcl of that at Madrid,
with horse and sot guards, a household regularly eflablifllcd,
numerous attendants, and cnfigns of command, difilaying
fuich magnificence, as hardly retains the appearance of delcgat-
ed authority'
h Voy. de U1loa, i. 23. 2 . J.lou , \oy. i 2. ( ,, 6i.

L~~Z2~ UIo, o. .iu.(;gr~
Z 7 2

355
13 rr

B O O K BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in person the funaions

Viii.

t_ _

V of a supreme magistrate in every part of their extensive jurifdic-

Courts of Au-
dience. tion, they are aided in their government by officers and tribu-

nals similar to those in Spain. The conduct of civil affairs
in the various provinces and diftrils, into which the Spanish
dominions in America are divided, is committed to magistrates
of various orders and denominations; some appointed by the
king, others by the viceroy, but all subjeCt to his command,
and amenable to his jurifdiaion. The administration ofjuftice
is vefed in tribunals, known by the name of Audiences, and
formed upon the model of the court of Chancery in Spain.
These are eleven in number, and dispense justice to as many
dirtias, into which the Spanish dominions in America are di-
vided . The number of judges in them is various, according
to the extent and importance of their jurifdition. The flation
of a judge in the court of Audience is no less honourable than
lucrative, and is commonly filled by persons of such abilities and
merit, as renders this tribunal extremely refpeaable. Both ci-
vil and criminal causes come under their cognizance, and for
'heirjurif- each peculiar judges are set apart. Though it is only in the

dion. most despotic governments, that the sovereign exercises in per-

son the formidable prerogative of administering justice to his
fubjeds, and in absolving, or condemning, consults no law but
what is deposited in his own breast; though, in all the mo-
narchies of Europe, judicial authority is committed to magif-
trates, whose decisions are regulated by known laws and elta-
blified forms, the Spanifl viceroys have often attempted to in-
trude themfclvcs into the feat of juflice, and with an ambition
which their distance from the controul of a fupcrior, rendered

t ece NOTE LXXIV.

bold,

357

bold, have aspired at a power which their mafter-.does not ven- B o 1 K
ture to assume. In order to check an usurpation which must i
have annihilated jufiice and security in the Spanish colonies, by
fubjeting the lives and property of all to the will of a single
man, the viceroys have been prohibited, in the most explicit
terms,, by repeated laws, from interfering in the judicial pro-
ceedings of the courts of Audience, or from delivering an opi-
nion, or giving a voice with refpeC to any point litigated be-
fore them'. In ome particular cafes, in which any question
of civil right is involved, even the political regulations of the
viceroy may be brought under the review of the court of Au-
dience, which, in those instances, may be deemed an interme-
diate power placed between him and the people, as a conflitu-
tionalbarrier tocircumfcribe his jurifdidion. But aslegal restraints
on a person who represents the sovereign, and is clothed with
his authority, are little suited to the genius of Spanish policy;
the hesitation and reserve with which it confers this power on
the courts of Audience, are remarkable. They may advise,
they may remonfirate, but in the event of a dire& collision be-
tween their opinion and the will of the viceroy, what he deter-
mines muff be carried into execution, and nothing remains for
them, but to lay the matter before the king and the council of
the Indies". But to be intitled to remonstrate, and inform
against a person, before whom all others muff be silent, and
tamelyfubmit to his decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to
the courts of Audience. This is farther augmented by another
circumfiance. Upon the death of a viceroy, without any provi-
sion of a ficceffor by the king, the supreme power is veiled in

Rccop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35. 38. 44. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1, 36, 37.

"' Solorz. I)D jtui Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 40, 41. Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv,1. 3. lil) iii.
lit. iii. 1. 34. Lib.. v. tit. ix. I. .

the

B 0 O K the court of Audience refidcnt in the capital of the viceroyalty,
쨌, and the senior judge, affifled by his brethren, exercises all the

funtions of the viceroy while the office continues vacant". In
matters that come under the cognizance of the Audiences, in
the course of their ordinary jurifdidlion, as courts of jufice,
thei sentences are final in every litigation concerning property
of lcfs value than fix tliouand pesos; but when the fubje in
diliute exceeds that fum, their decisions are subjed to review,
and may be carried by appeal before the royal council of the

Indies .
C.,mcll; o tie IN this council, one of the mofi considerable in the monarchy

for dignity and power, is vested the supreme government of all
the Spanish dominions in America. It was firfi established by
Ferdinand, in the year 1511, and brought into a more perfet
Its power. form by Charles V. in the year I524. Its jurifdidion extends

to every department, ecclesiastical, civil, military, and commer-
cial. All laws and ordinances relative to the government and
police of the colonies originate there, and must be approved of
by two-thirds of the members, before they are issued in the
name of the king. All the offices, of which the nomination is
reserved to the crown, are conferred in this council. To it each
person employed in America, from the viceroy downwards, is
accountable. It reviews their conduct, rewards their services,
and inflids the punifliments due to their malversations' . Bc-
fore it, is laid whatever intelligence, cither public or fcret, is
received fiom America, and every scheme of improving the ;al-
uliniflration, the police, or the commerce of the colonies, is

n irconp. lib. ii. tit. xv. I. ;7, &c. 째 Pccop. lib. v. tit xiii. i. , c.
r Rccop. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1, i, :, &C.

fubmilttcd
358

submitted to its consideration. From the firil infitution of the B 1K
council of the Indies, it has been the conflant objec of the ca- -- --
tholic monarchs, to maintain its autlority, and to make fucl
additions from time to time, both to its power and its splendor,
as might render it formidable to all theli ibje&s in the New
World. Whatever degree of public order and virtue flill re-
mains in that counltry, where so many circumfianccs collfiire
to relax the sorner, and to corrupt the latter, may be afcribcdl
in a great meafiure to the wife regulations and vigilant inflipeio:
of this rcfpedtable tribunal'

As the king is supposed to be always prcfent in his coun- (',:(!C ':' '-

cil of the Indies, its niectings are held in the place where lie
rcfides. Another tribunal has beii inflituted, in order to rc u-
late fucl commercial affairs, as rccquired the immediate and per-
funal inpection of those appointed to fperintcnd tlicm.
This is called Cf: de la Contratcion, or the holufeof trade, and
was eflablifled in Seville, to whole port commerce with the New
World was confined, as early as the year 150o. It may be i rLI':'i..
confidcred both as a board of trade, and as a court of judica-
ture. In the former capacity, it takes cognizance of whatever
relates to the intercourfcof Spain with America, it I c a!; s ' l it
commodities fhlould be exported thither, and ha:s the i,'c)l
of such as are reccived ill return. It decides coniccriiil tlie de-
partu!re of the lccts ir thle \We Idies, the 'rci;iht, and mu:--
den of the flips, tlmeir C!i'i mecilt, ;ald d(-:liiti'n. In the lat-
tcr capacity, it jidl':; w.ili r(lpcL to evC'ry 'llilo, civil (r
co immercial r cl,

or cri iial, larifi i 1 coii _'i'!'c (l the tralf-
acliolns of Spain withll America ; and in both tlicle dcp;articnii;,

'i S l,,i. (' Jull : L'. Vl.lb . 1v . I, ..

il';

3.59

B 0 K its decisions are exempted from the review of any court but that

VIII.
^Av of the council of the Indies'.

SucH is thegreat outline of that system of government, which

Spain has eflablifhed in her American colonies. To enumerate
the various subordinate boards and officers employed in the ad-
miniifration ofjuflice, in collecing the public revenue, and in
regulating the interior police of the country, to describe their
different functions, and to inquire into the mode and effe of
their operations, would prove a detail no less intricate than mi-
nute and uninterefling.

FirI obje&, TIE firfi object of tle Spanish monarchs was to secure
o secure an the productions of the colonies to the parent slate, by an abfo-
trade. lute prohibition of any intercourse with foreign nations. They

took possession of America by right of conquest, and conscious
of the feebleness of their infant settlements, and aware of the
difficulty in establishing their dominion over such vast regions,
or of retaining so many reluctant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the intrusion of firangers; they even shunned their in-
fpedion, and endeavoured to keep them at a distance from their
coasts. This spirit ofjealoufy and exclusion, which at firfi was
natural, and perhaps necessary, augmented as their possessions
in America extended, and the value of them came to be more
fully understood. In consequence of it, a system of colonizing
was introduced, to which there had hitherto been nothing fimi-
lar among mankind. In the ancient world, it was not uncom-
mon to fend forth colonies. But they were of two kinds only.
They were either migrations, which served to disburden a slate

, Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Vcitia Norte de la Contratacion, lib. i c. i.

5 of
360

of its superfluous fubjccs, when they multiplied too salt for B 0 0 K
the territory which they occupied : or they were military de- ^
tachmcnts stationed, as garrisons, in a conquercd province. The
colonies of some Greek republics, and the swarms of northern
barbarians which fcttled in difiercnt parts of Europe, were of
the firlft species. The Roman colonies were of the second. In
the former, the connection with the mother-country quickly
ceased, and they became independent fiates. In the latter, as
the disjuntion was not complete, the dependence continued. In
their American fcttlcmcnts, the Spanish monarchs took lwhat was Rcgulations

for that pur-

peculiar tocachi, and flulied to unite them. By flnding colonies to pore.
regions lo remote, by cflablifhing in each a form of intcrior
policy and adininifiration, under dliflinCt governors, and witli
peculiar laws, they disjoinedc ther fiomn the mother-country.
BIy rctaining in their own lhands the rights of Icgiflation, as
well as that of impoing taxes, together with the power of no-
minating the persons who filled every department, civil or mili-
tary, they securcd their dependence. Happily for Spain, the
situation of her colonies was such, as rendered it poflible to
reduce this new idea into pracice. Ailnofl all the countries
which flle ad discovercd and occupied, lay within the tropics.
Thle produlins of that large portion of the globe, are different
from thol of Europe, even in its niofl futlhern provinces. The
qu.lities of the climate and of the lil naturally turn the in-
(dflry of tliobc wlho fettle there into new channels. When the
Spaniards iril took polfcfl in of their domains in lAmerica, the
prccios t a

s ts hi:h th ly yiceld(c, were the only ohljicl that

attraulcd their attention. EvI n whci tlecir ci'orrl;s bica n to take
a better dlirc'ti in, thely Cl)lo)'cd tlicmf)llvcs almnl wholly in
rearing fIcli Ipcculillr ri;Id(ti Lions tf tlic climate, as, firom their
rarity or value, were of- chief demand in the motler-country.

VOL. 1I. 3 A Allured

361

B 0 0 K Allured by vast profpeas of immediate wealth, they disdained

_-b---' to wafle their indufiry on what was less lucrative, but of fupe-

rior moment. In order to render it impoflible to corret this
error, and to prevent them from making any efforts that might
interfere with those of Spain, the eflablifhment of several species
of manufactures, and even the culture of the vine, or olive,
are prohibited in the colonies , under evere penalties '. They
muff trust entirely to the mother-country for the objects of pri-
mary necessity. Their clothes, their furniture, their infiru-
ments of labour, their luxuries, and even a considerable part of
the provisions which they consume, were imported from Spain.
During a great part of the sixteenth century, Spain poffefling
an extensive commerce and flourishing manufacturcs, could
supply with ease the growing demands of her colonies, from
her own fores. The produce of their mines and plantations
was given in exchange for these. But all that the colonies re-
ceived, as well as all that they gave, was conveyed in Spanish
bottoms. No vessel belonging to the colonies was ever per-
mitted to carry the commodities of America to Europe. Even
the commercial intercourse of one colony with another, was
either absolutely prohibited, or limited by many jealous reftric-
tions. All that America yields flows into the ports of Spain;
all that it consumes mutt issue from them. No foreigner can
enter one of its colonies without express permission; no vcffcl
of any foreign nation is received into their harbours; and the
pains of death, with confiscation of moveables, are denounced
against every inhabitant who presumes to trade with them".
Thus the colonies are kept in a tate of perpetual pupillage;

' Sec N O T E LXXV. B. Ulloa Retab. dca Manus. &c. p, 206.
Rccopil, lib. ix, tit. xxvii. 1. 1. 4. 7, &c..

and

and by the introduction of this commercial dependence, a re- 째o 째 K
finement in policy of which Spain set the first example to the '----
European nations, the supremacy of the parent slate hath been
maintained over remote colonies du:ing two centuries and a
half.

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spanish monarchs stow proorers

of pzpulatiori

seem to have attended in forming their new settlements in Ame- from Eumop.o
rica. But they could not plant with the fame rapidity that they
had destroyed; and, from many concurring caures, their pro-
grefs was extremely flow, in filling up the immense void which
their devaflations had occasioned. As soon as the rage for disco-
very and adventure began to abate, the Spaniards opened their
eyes to dangers and distresses, which at first they did not per-
ceive, or had despised. The numerous hardships witl which
the members of infant colonies have to firuggle, the diseases of
unwholesome climates, fatal to the conflitution of Europeans;
the difficulty of bringing a country, covered with forefis, into
culture; the want of hands neceflary for labour in some pro-
vinces, and the flow reward of industry in all, unless where the
accidental discovery of mines enriched a few fortunate adven-
turers, were evils universally felt and magnified. Discouraged
by the view of these, the spirit of migration was so much damp-
ed, that sixty years after the discovery of the New World, the
number of Spaniards in all its provinces is computed not to have
exceeded fifteen thousand .

T E mode in wlich property was difiributcd in the Sanil D;rcour.icd
colonies, and the regulations cflabliflic with rlicd: to the ly e i;t of

x See NOTE LXXVI.

3G3
3A 2

tranfiniflion

Bo o K tranfinifflon of it, whether by descent, or by sale, were ex-
u..-- tremely unfavourable to population. In order to promote a ra-

pitl increase of people in any new settlement, property in land
ought to be divided into finall hares, and the alienation of it
fiould be rendered extremely easy '. But the rapacioufne.s of
the Spanish conquerors of the New World paid no regard to
this fundamental maxim of policy; and, as tlcy poffeled power,
which enabled them to gratify the utmost extravagance of their
wishes, many of them seized diflrits and provinces of vast cx-
tent, and held them as ecomienllas. By degrees they obtained
the privilege of converting a part of there into Ma)yorfros, a
fpeeies of fief, introduced into the Spanifl fyfernm of feudal
jurisprudence , which can neither be divided nor alienated.
Thus a great portion of landed property, under this rigid form
of entail, is withheld from circulation, and descends from fa-
ther to son unimproved, and of little value either to the proprie-
tor or to the community. In the account which I have given
of the reduction of Peru, various examples occur of enormous
tracs of country occupied by ome of the conquerors'. The
excesses in other provinces were imilar, for as the value of the
lands which they acquired, was originally eflimated according
to the number of Indians which lived upon them, America was
in general so thinly peopled, that only diftrias of great extent
could afford fueh a number of labourers, as might be employed
in the mines with any profpeac of considerable gain. The per-
nicious effects of those radical errors in the distribution and
nature of property in the Spanifl settlements, are felt through
every department of industry, and may be confidered as one

Y Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. 166. PRccop. lib. iv. tit, iii. 1. 24.
Bok vi. p. 259.

great
364

great cause of a progress in population so muclh lower than B o )

0
that which has taken place in better confitutcd colonies.

To this wve may add, that the fipport of the enormous anld R tlle n-

t :e ,f thcir

expenive fabric of their ecclefiafica! clltbll)ifilmnt, has becn a t.c1 il.ili,.,
burden on the Spanish colonies, which has greatly rctarded tle Fo'iy
progress of population and industry. The paymcnt of tythes is
a heavy tax on induflry ; and if the exaCtion of them be not re-
gulated and circumscribed by the wifom of the civil magi-
firate. it becomes intolerable and ruinous. But, instead of any
reflraint on the claims ofecclefiaftics, the inconsiderate zeal of
the Spanish legislators admitted them into America in their full
extent, and at once imposed on their infant colonies a burden
which is in no flight degree oppressive to society even in its
most improved site. As early as the year 15or, the payment
of tythes in the colonies was enjoined, and the mode of it re-
gulated by law, and every article of primary neccifity, towards
which the attention of new settlers must naturally be turned, is
fubjeted to that grievous exadion . Nor were the demands of
the clergy confined to articles of simple culture. Its more artificial
and operose productions; such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal,
were soon declared to be tythable ; and thus the industry of the
planter was taxed in every flage of its progress, from its rudefl
essay to its highet improvement. To the weight of this legal
imposition, the bigotry of the American Spaniards has made many
voluntary additions. From their fond delight in the external
pomp and parade of religion, and from filpcrflitious reverence for
ecclesiastics of every denomination, they have beflowcd profufl

Sec NOT E LXXVII. Rccop. lib. i. tit. xvi. 1. 2.
d Ibid. 1. 3 and 4.

donatives

36-

B 0 K donatives on churches and monasteries, and have unprofitably
X-v_-.-i wafted a large proportion of that wealth, which might have

nourified and given vigour to productive labour in growing
colonies.

Various or- BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of America, which
ders of peo-
pie in the co- the Spaniards have occupied, that notwithstanding all the cir-
lonies. cumftances, which have checked and retarded population, it

has gradually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain with
citizens of various orders. Among these, the Spaniards, who

Chapetones arrive from Europe, distinguished by the name of Chapetones,
he firfE. are the first in rank and power. From the jealous attention of

the Spanish court to secure the dependence of the colonies, every
department ofconfequence is filled by persons sent from Europe;
and in order to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being em-
ployed, each must bring proof of a clear descent from a family of
Old ChrOijians, untainted with any mixture of Jewish or Maho-
metan blood, and never disgraced by any censure of the inquifi-
tion . In such pure hands, power is deemed to be safely lodged,
and almost every public function, from the viceroyalty downwards,
is committed to them alone. Every person, who by his birth,
or residence in America, may be suspeCted of any attachment or
interest adverse to the mother-country, is the object of distrust
to such a degree, as amounts nearly to an exclusion from all of-
sices ds confidence or authority '. By this conspicuous predilec-
tion of the court, the Chapetones are raised to such pre-eminence
in America, that they look down with disdain on every other
order of men.

* Rccopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvi. 1. is, 16. r See NOTE LXXVIII.
366

TfIE
2

TrE charader and state of the Creoles, or descendants of Eu- B O o it
ropeans fettled in America, the second class of fuiibjcds in the -.

Creoles the

Spanifli colonies, has enabled the Chapetones to acquire olher tccoIld.
advantages, hardly less considerable than those which they de-
rive from the partial favour of government. Though iome of
the Creolian race are defccndcd from the conquerors of the New
World; though others can trace up their pedigree to the noblest
families in Spain ; though many are poflfefd of amplc fortunes,
yet, by the enervating influence of a sultry climate, by the ri-
gour of a jealous government, and by their depair of attaining
that diflindion to which mankind naturally apire, the vigour
of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great part of them
waite life in luxurious indulgences, mingled with an illiberal
fuperfiition still more debasing. Languid and unenterprizing,
the operations of an alive extended commerce would be to
them o cumbersome and oppreffivc, that in almost every part of
America they decline engaging in it. The interior traffic of
every colony, as well as its trade with the neighbouring pro-
vinces, and with Spain itself, are carried on chiefly by the Cha-
petones g; who, as the rccompcnce of their indurfly, amass
immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in sloth, arc satisfied
with the revenues of their paternal eltatcs.

FROMI this flated competition for power and wealth, between Rivalflip be-

tween thcec.

thole two orders of citizens, and the various passions excited .
by a rivalfliip so interefing, their hatred is violent and im-
placable. On every occalion, ymptoms of this aversion break
out, and the common appellations which each bellows on the
other, arc as contemptuous as those which flow from the moil

e Vo). dc Ulloa, i. 27. 25 . Voy. de Frczicr, 227.

deep-

8 10 K deep-rooted national antipathy h. The court of Spain, from a

VIII.
s- ,-_-. refinement of distrustful policy, cherishes those feeds of discord,

and foments this mutual jealousy, which not only prevents the
two most powerful classes of its fubjeas in the New World fiomn
combining against the parent state, but prompts each with the
moll vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to counteract the
schemes of the other.

A mnxed racc THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanifli colonies is a
forms the
third order mixed race, the offspring either of an European and a negroc,

or of an European and Indian, the former called Mulatocs,
the latter Mejiizos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to incor-
porate its new vassals with its ancient fubjees, early encourag-
ed the Spaniards fettled in America to marry the natives of that
country, several alliances of this kind were formed in their i-
sant colonies'. But it has been more owing to licentious i-
dulgence, than to compliance with this injunction of their f,..
vereigns, that this mixed breed has multiplied so greatly, as t,
constitute a considerable part of the population in all the Splinii
settlements. The several ftagesofdefcent in this race, and the
gradual variations of slade until the African black, or the cop-
per-colour of America, brighten into an European complcioll,
are accurately marked by the Spaniards, and each liftinguiilic(
by a peculiar name. Those of the first generation are now con-
fidered, and treated as Indians and negroes; but in the third
descent, the charaderiflic hue of the former disappears; and il
the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is so entirely cflacedl, lthat
they can no longer be distinguishcd fi-om Europeans, and are en-

' G::gc's Survey, p. 9. Frrzicr, 2'.
I crrcra, dtc. i. lib. v. c. z. Dec. iii. lib. vii. c. z.

' Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. .

titled
368

3

titled to all their privileges k. It is chiefly by this mixed race, B O O
whose frame is remarkably robust and hardy, that the mechanic _,
arts are carried on, and other ative funcions in society are
discharged, which the two higher claies of citizens, from
pride, or from indolence, disdain to exerciie'.

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the inhabitants of Ne.tocs

,, fr

the Spanish colonies. The introdudcion of that unhappy part dtlet0o"' or-
of the human species into America, together with their services
and sufferings there, hall be fully explained in another place;
here they are mentioned chiefly, in order to point out a peculia-
rity in their situation under the Spanish dominion. In several
of their settlements, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
chiefly employed in domeflic service. They form a principal
part in the train of luxury, and are cherished and carefled
by their superiors, to whose vanity and pleafurea they are equal-
ly subservient. Their dress and appearance is hardly less fplenr
did than that of their maters, whose manners they imitate,
and whose passions they imbibe". Elevated by this diflincion,
they have assumed such a tone of superiority over the Indians,
and treat them with such iniblence and scorn, that the anti-
pathy between the two races has become implacable. Even in
Peru, where negroes are more numerous, and employed in field-
work as well as domeflic service, they maintain their accndl-
ant over the Indians, and their mutual hatred sublists witl
equal violence. The laws lave induftriouny fomented this
avcrfion, to which accident gave rife, and by mofl rigorous in-

k Voy. de UIllo, i. p. 7. ' IiJ. p. 2p . Voy. de Bougucr, p. o.

Melcndez,Treforos, Vcrdaderos, i. 351. "' (;'ag, p. 56. Voy. de Ulloa,
i. 4i?.

VOL. Ir. 3 junctions,

369

B o o K junctions, have endeavoured to prevent every intercourse that

VIII.
- v-- might form a bond of union between the two races. Thus, by

an artful policy, the Spaniards derive flrength from that which
is the weakness of other European colonies, and have fcured
as associates and defenders, those very persons who elsewhere
are objects ofjealoufy and terror ".

The Indans THE Indians form the last, and the molt depressed order of
form the aftp
order ofci- men in that country, which belonged to their ancestors. I
tizcns.

have already traced the progress of the Spanish ideas with re-
fpet to the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more early regula-
tions, concerning a matter of so much consequence in the ad-
ministration of their new dominions. But since that period to
which I have brought down the history of America, the infor-
mation and experience acquired during two centuries, have
enabled the court of Spain to make such improvements in this
part of its American system, that a short view of the present
condition of the Indians may prove both curious and in-
terefiing.

Their present BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in I542, which
conditn. have been so often mentioned, the high pretensions of the con-

querors of the New World, who confidered its inhabitants as
slaves, towhofe service they had acquired a full right of pro-
perty, were finally abrogated. From that period, the Indians
have been reputed freemen, and intitled to the privileges of sub-
jeds. When admitted into this rank, it was deemed jufi, that
they should contribute towards the support and improvement

Rccopi!. lib.vii. tit.. v. i. 7. Icricia, dec. viii. lib. vi c. iz. rczitr, ?44.

of
370

37t

of the society, which had adopted them as members. But as B O O K
no considerable benefit could be expecded from the voluntary -,
efforts of men, unacquainted with regular induflry, and averse
to labour, the court of Spain found it necesSary to fix and fe-
cure, by proper regulations, what ic thought reasonable to exact
from them. With this view, an annual tax was imposed up- 'rT:, importd
on every male, from the age of eighteen to fifty; and, at the
fame time, the nature as well as extent of the services which
they might be required to perform, were ascertained with pre-
cifion. This tribute varies in different provinces, but if we
take that paid in New Spain as a medium, its annual amount
is nearly four shillings a head, no exorbitant fum in countries
where, as at the source of wealth, the value of money is ex-
tremely low 째. The right of levying it likewise varies. In
America, every Indian is either an immediate vassal of the
crown, or depends upon some subjec to whom the dilfrid, in
which he resides, has been granted for a limited time, under
the denomination of enconziezda. In the former cafe, about
three-fourths of the tax is paid into the royal treafuiry; in the
latter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the holder of
the grant. When Spain first took poifielion of America,
the greater part of it was parcelled out among its conquerors,
or those who first fettled there, and but a fnall portion referv-
ed for the crown. As those grants which were made for two
lives only , reverted successively to the fovercign, he had it in
his power either to diffuse his favours by grants to new pro-
prietors, or to augment his own revenue by valuable anncxa-

' See NOTE LXXIX. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. I. 4z. lHackliyt, vol. iii. p. .l6z.
r Recopil, lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 48. Solorz. tlc Ind. jure, bl. ii. c. 16.

3 2

tions.

B K tions". Of these, the latter has been frequently chosen, the

L-Y1 number of Indians now depending immediately on the crown,

is much greater than in the first age after the conquest, and this
branch of the royal revenue continues to extend.

Thcrervires TrIE benefit arising from the services of the Indians accrues
demanded.

either to the crown, or to the holder of the encomienda, accord-
ing to the fame rule observed in the payment of tribute. Those
services, however, which can now be legally exated, are very
different from the servile talks originally imposed upon the In-
dians. The nature of the work which they must perform is
defined, and an equitable recompence is granted for their la-
bour. The Rated services demanded of the Indians, may be
divided into two branches. They are either employed in works
of primary necessity, without which society cannot subsist com-
fortably, or are compelled to labour in the mines, from which
the Spanish colonies derive their chief value and importance.
In consequence of the former, they are obliged to assist in the
culture of maize, and other grain of necessary consumption; in
tending cattle, in ereEting edifices of public utility, in build-
ing bridges, and in forming high roads'; but they cannot be
constrained to labour in raising vines; olives, and fiugar-canes,
or any species of cultivation, which has for its objet the grati-
fication of luxury, or commercial profit '. In consequence of the
latter, the Indians are compelled to undertake the more unplea-
lant task, of extracing ore from the bowels of the earth, and

q Sec NO T E LXXX. Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19, Solorz.

de Ind. jure, ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7. g. ' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. A.ii. c. 1. 8.
Solorz, lib. i. c. 7. N. 4 1, &c.

of
7

of refining it by fuccefive processes, no less unwholesome than B O O K

V111.
operose '.

THE mode ofexaaing both there services is the fame, and is TILe mode of

b. ~ ttle- . .. ... ~~exaaingthesc.

under regulations framed with a view of rendering it as little
opprefive as possible to the Indians. They are called out al-
ternately in divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be
compelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the number called
out must not exceed the fcventh part of the inhabitants in any
dilri'i". In New Spain, where the Indians are more nume-
rous, it is fixed at four in the hundred . During what time
the labour of those Indians, who are employed in agriculture,
continues, I have not been able to learn Y. But in Peru, each
Mita, or division, dcflined for the mines, remains there fix
months; and while engaged in this service, a labourer never
receives less than two shillings a day, and often earns more than
double that fim '. No Indian, residing at a greater diflance
than thirty miles from a mine, is included in the Mita, or divi-
sion employed in working it'; nor are the inhabitants of the
low country exposed to certain deftruAion, by compelling themn
to remove from that warm climate, to the cold elevated regions
where minerals abound

THE Indians who live in the principal towns, are entirely IToVgovern-

subjea to the Spanifl laws and magifirates ; but in their own
villages, they are governed by Caziques, fcme of whom are the
descendants of their ancient lords, others arc named by the

' Sc NOTE LXXXI. " Recolil. lib. vi, tir.xii. 2 . x. Ibid.

1. 22. y See NOTE LXXXII. L Ulloa Enitetcn. 265, 66,
a Recopil, lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3. J Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1.
See NOTE LXXXIII.

Spani si

B 0 0 K Spanish viceroys. These regulate the petty affairs of the people

under them, according to maxims of justice, transmitted to
them by tradition from their ancestors. To the Indians, this
jurisdiCtion, lodged in such friendly hands, affords ome con-
folation; and so little formidable is this dignity to their new
mailers, that they often allow it todefcend by hereditary right '.
.For the farther relief of men so much exposed to opprefflon,
the Spanish court has appointed an officer in every diftrit, with
the title.of Protetor of the Indians. It is his funlion, as the
name implies, to assert the rights of the Indians, to appear in
their defence in the courts ofjuftice; and, by the interposition
of his authority, to set bounds to the encroachments and exac-
tions of his countrymen'. A certain portion of the reserved
fourth of the annual tribute, is deflined for the salary of the
caziques and protectors, another is applied to the maintenance
of the clergy employed in the inftrusion of the Indians '. An-
other part seems to be appropriated for their support, and the
payment of their tribute in years of famine, or when a particu-
lar difiria is affeaed by any extraordinary calamity '. Betides
this, provision is made by various laws, that hospitals shall be
founded in every new settlement for the reception of Indians .
Such hospitals have accordingly been ereted, both for the indi-
gent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico, where the
Indians are treated with tenderness and humanity''.

SUCH is the great outline of the jurisprudence and policy
by which the Indians are now governed in the provinces be-

c Solorz. de jure Ind. lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii. d Solorz. lib. i.

c. 27. . 201. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vi. ' Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 30.
Tit xvi. 1. Iz- 15. f Recopil. lib. vi. tit. ir. 1. 13. g Recopil. lib. i.
tit. iv. 1. , &c. h Voy. de Ulloa, i. 429. 509. Churchill, iv. 496.
374

longing
t

longing to Spain. In those regulations of the Spanish mo- n 0 K
narchs, we discover no traces of that cruel system of extermina- '---
tion, which they have been charged with adopting; and if we
admit, that the necessity of securing subsistence for their colo-
nies, or the advantages derived from working the mines, give
them a right to avail themselves of the labour of the Indians,
we must allow, that the attention with which they regulate and
recompence that labour, is provident and sagacious. In no code
of laws is greater solicitude displayed, or precautions multiplied
with more concern for the preservation, the security, and the
happiness of the subjee, than we discover in the collection of
the Spanish laws for the Indies. But those later regulations,
like the more early edits which have been already mentioned,
have too often proved ineffectual remedies against the evils
which they were intended to prevent. In every age, if the fame
causes continue to operate, the fame effecs must follow. From
the immense distance between the power entrusted with the
execution of laws ; and that, by whose authority they are
enacted, the vigour even of the modl absolute government must
relax, and the dread of a superior too remote to observe with
accuracy, or to punish with dispatch, mull insensibly abate.
Notwithflanding the numerous injunlions of the Spanifi mo-
narchs, the Indians flill suer, on many occasions, both from
the avarice of individuals, and from the exaaions of the magif-
trates, who ought to have prote&ed them ; unrcafonable
tasks are imposed ; the term of their labour is prolonged, and
they groan under all the insults and wrongs whlich are the lot
of a dependent people'. From foine informatiun on which
I can depend, such oppression abounds nore in lPeru, tlha
in any other colony. But it is not general. Accord-

Sec N 0 T E LXXXIV.

ia;

375

B 0 0 K ing to the accounts, even of those authors who are mol

t-^_ disposed to exaggerate the sufferings of the Indians, they, in

several provinces, enjoy not only ease, ut affluence; they pof-
fess large farms; they are masters of numerous herds and
flocks; and, by the knowledge which they have acquired of
European arts and industry, are supplied not only with the nc-
cel-aries, but with many luxuries of life k.

Ecckrfiafical AFTER explaining the form of civil policy in the Spanish
con litution
o the col0- colonies, and the state of the various orders of persons ifubjet
ni'e. to it, the peculiarities in their ecclesiastical constitution merit

coufideration. Notwithstanding the superstitious veneration
with which Spaniards are devoted to the Holy See, the vi-
gilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand early prompted him to
take precautions against the introduction of the papal d6minion

Reflr:nti on into America. With this view, he solicited Alexander VI. for
the papal ju-
rl;UJicin. a grant of the tythes in all the newly-difcovered countries',

which he obtained on condition of his making provision
for the religious inftruaion of the natives. Soon as-
ter, Julius II. conferred on him the right of patronage,
and absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical benefices there m. Both
there pontiffs, unacquainted with the value of what he demand-
ed, bellowed those donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their successors have often lamented, and wished to recal.
In consequence of those grants, the Spanifl monarchs have be-
come, in cffect, the heads of the American church. In them
the adminifration of its revenues is veiled. Their nomination
of persons to supply vacant benefices is instantly confirmed by

k Gage's Survey, p. 8.5. go. o.l. i 19, &c. ' Bulla Alex. VI. . D. i 1,
ap Solorz. de jure hld. ii. p. 498. " Bulla Julii, ii. 15o8. Ibid. 509.

the
376

377
the pope. Thus, in all Spanish America, authority of every B 1 K

VIII.

species centres in the crown. There no collision is known be- _l
tween spiritual and temporal jurifdicion. The king is the on-
ly superior, his name alone is heard, and no dependence upon
any foreign power has been introduced. Papal bulls can-
not be admitted into America, nor arc they of any force there,
until they have been previously examined, and approved of by
the royal council of the Indies ; and if any bull should be fur-
rcptitioufly introduced, and circulated in America without ob-
taining tlat approbation, ecclefiafiics are required not only to
prevent it from taking cflFed, but to seize all the copies of it,
and transmit them to the council of the Indieso. To this limi-
tation of the papal jurisdiction, equally singular whether we
confider the age and nation in which it was dcvifed, or the jea-
lous attention wi;h which Ferdinand, and his successors, have
studied to maintain it in full force P, Spain is indebted, in a great
mea'ure, for the uniform tranquillity which has reigned in her
American dominions.

TIE hierarchy is eftablified in Amcrica in the fame form as Form and en-

dlwnnents of

in Spain, with its full train of archbifllops, bishops, deans, and lc chuhrc, in
other dignitaries. The inferior clergy are divided into three 11 Snif

"I"

.

.

. ~~colunic:.

claffcs, under the dcnomination of Ci7ras, ociceros, and
MJAioncros. The fitft are parifli-pricfis in those parts of the
country where the Spaniards have fcttlcd. The fccond have
the charge of Ifch dliflricls as are inhabitcd by Indians sub-
jeded to the Spanish government, and living under its protec-
tion. The third are mploycd in converting and inflrucling

Rcco il, lib. .

i . ix. . . 2. :l Auas Icl C nrjo dt I.l.h In IaT, lxi.

,, Rccop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. Rcc T. ib. i. aliul.
VOL. [. 3 C those

B 0 K those fiercer tribes, which disdain fubmiflion to the Spanish

L---' yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible regions, to which the

Spanifi arms have not penetrated. So numerous are the eccle-
fiaftics of all those various orders, and such the profuse liberali-
ty with which many of them are endowed, that the revenucs of
the church in America are immense. The fuperflition of Rone
appears with its utmost pomp in the New World. Churches
and convents there are magnificent and richly adorned; and on
high festivals, the display of gold and silver, and precious flones,
is such as exceeds the conception of an European . An eccle-
fiaftical eftablifiment so splendid and expensive, is unfavourablc,
as has been formerly observed, to the progress of rising colo-
nies; but in countries where riches abound, and the people arc
so delighted with parade, that religion must aflume it, in order
to attract their veneration, this propensity to ostentation has
been indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

Perniciouses- TiE early institution of monafleries in the Spanish colonics,
fcas of mo- p
nafic initu. and the inconsiderate zeal in multiplying them, have been at-
tionl. tended with confequenccs more fatal. In every new fettlemcnt,

the first objed is to encourage population, and to incite every
citizen to contribute towards augmenting the fircngth and num-
ber of the community. During the youth and vigour of lt-
ciety, while there is room to spread, and sustenance is procu:-
ed with facility, mankind incrcafe witli amazing rapidity. I:t
tlhe Spaniards had hardly taken policlffon of America, when,
with a moPt prepoflerous policy, they began to crca convens
where perlons of both lfxes were hiut up, under a vow to de-
feat the purpose of nature, and to countcract the li1ll of ler

I Voy), de Ullon, i. 43c.

laws.
*78

S7s

laws. Influcnced by a minfguided piety, which afcribcs tran- B 0O K
fcenlent merit to a ate of celibacy, or allured by the profpcc t--,
of that liflefs ease, which, in sultry climates, is deemed fu-
prLmnr felicity, numbeis crowd into those mansions of iloth and
lirl-{itiol), and are loft to society. As' none but persons of
i;panifl cxtra& are admitted into the monalferies of the New
W\orld, the evil is more sensibly felt, and every monk or nun,
may be confidered as an active member withdrawn from civil
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any situation
where tlie extent of territory requires additional hands to im-
poveC it, is Lo obvious, that fOmc catholic flatcs have exprcfsly
i;rol:ibited any c erfon in their colonies from aki inr tie monafic
vots'. LvC, the pailn ri(iarc, on lme occlions, fccm
to have been alarmed with the frcading of a fiirit so advcrfi to
the incrcafe and prof:erity of tlhir colonier, tlat tlicy have en-

tdcavoured to check it '. But the Spaniards in America, moie

thorougllly under tle ifluence of iipcrllition thn tlicir coun-
trymen in Europe, and dircieled by cclcelaftics more bigottcd
and illiterate, Ihave conceivcd filch an lligl o(pinion of mInoaflic
ftanltity, tli.t no resil.otons can relraini t leir /zeal; and, by
the cxcels of their iil-jldged bounlty, religions Iioufes have
minuiiplied to a ldecrl no lelb amaziing than lpernicious to
ic;ity '.

, vie\wi i 'i ;ic n,.te of colollies, wvlicc tlic In0ii)eCr and1 ill- Ci.lr;tlcr of

tlcie ol ccciciaiics is so great, tile character o tills power- pajiAi'ic.
il I y s ;ian ()iic that mlclits particular attention. A coI- sica;
ijil;.&,lc F.rlt : the feehular clergy in \lexico andl lP'ru are na-

'

\ V. . I '! :!, ',u

l| r Irel.I, .'!r. v. ]h. ix. c. C , z. I' 1' p.

I .

. K1. ! . . I . i. c. z. S l , K. ill c.

' .C x t I i'I ....C
'.

', C 2 tivcs

B o K tives of Spain. As persons accultomed by their education to the

VIII.
----' retirement and indolence of academic life, are more incapable

of active enterprize, and less disposed to firike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclefiaflical adventurers by whom
the American church is recruited, are commonly such as, from
merit or rank in life, have little profpet of success in their
ofthe fcu- own country. Accordingly, the secular priests in the New

World are still less distinguished than their brethren in Spain,
for literary accomplishments of any species; and though, by
the ample provision which has been made for the American
church, many of its members enjoy that ease and independence,
which is favourable to the cultivation of science; the body of
secular clergy has hardly, during two centuries and a half, pro-
duced one author whose works convey such useful information,
or possess such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened nations. But the
greatest part of the ecclesiastics in the Spanish settlements are re-
of the regu gulars. On the discovery of America, a new field opened to the

pious zeal of the monastic orders; and, with a becoming ala-
crity, they immediately sent forth missionaries to labour in
it. The first attempt to instruct and convert the Americans,
was made by monks; and, as soon as the conquest of any pro-
vince was completed, and its ecclesiastical establishment began to
aftume some form, the popes, as a reward of their service, per-
mitted the miflionaries of the four mendicant orders, to accept
of parochial charges in America, to 'perform all spiritual func-
tions, and to receive the tythes, and other emoluments of the
benefice, without depending on the jurifdidion of the bihop of
the diocese, or being fbjec to his cenfuies. In confcquence of
this, a new carccr of ufcfulnefs, as well as new oljecls of ani-
bition presentcd thcmfclves. Whencver a call is made for a ficfh

supply
PO

supply of missionarics, men of the moll ardent and afplring B l K
minds, impatient under the refIraint of acloifler, weary of its -
insipid uniformity, and fatigued with the irksome repetition of
its frivolous functions, offer their service with eagernels, and re-
pair. to the New World in quest of liberty and diflincion. Nor
do they pursue them without success. The highel eccleCiaflical
honours, and mos: lucrative preferments in Mlexico and Peru,
are often in the hands of regulars; and to them chiefly the
Americans are indebted for any portion of fcicnce that is cul-
tivated among them. They are almost the only Spanili
ecclefiaflics, from whom we have received any accounts either
of the civil or natural hiflory of the various provinces in Ame-
rica. Some of them, though deeply tinged with the indelible
fuperlition of their profellion, have publiflhed books which
give a favourable idea of their abilities. The natural and mo-
ral hiflorv of the New World, by the Jesuit Acofla, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more found science,
than are to be found in any description of remote countries pub-
lifhed in the sixteenth century.

BUT the fame difgufl with monastic life, to which America is DiFrlute

indebted for some inftrucors of worth and abilities, filled it n ofotht.
with others of a very different charadcer. The giddy, the pro-
fligate, the avaricious, to whom the poverty and rigid difci-
pline of a convent arc intolerable, confider a million to America
as a release from mortification and bondage. There they soon
obtain some parochial charge, and far removed, by their litua-
tion, from the infp)cion of their monaflic superiors, and ex-
empt, by their charadcr, from the jurilflidlion of their dioccfan ,

AvcndanoThic. Iniic. ii. 253.

they
4

38I

B 0V IcK they are hardly fuibjec to anycontroul. According to the tefimo-
쨩------ ny of the mos: zcalous catholics, many of the regular clergy in

the Spanish fettlemcnts, are not only dellitute of the virtues be-
coming their profcfflion, but regardless of that external decorum
and -refpec: for the opinion of mankind, which preserve a fem-
blance of worth, where- the reality is wanting. Secure of im-
punity, some regulars, in contempt of their vow of poverty,
engage openly in commerce; and are so rapaciously eager in
arnafing wealth, that they become the most grievous opprcffors
of the Indians, whom it as their duty to have protccd.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their vow of chalitv,
indulge with little disguise in the most dissolute licentiounce.s 1

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for redressing cnormi-

ties bo manifest and offensive. Several persons no lets emi-
nent for pietythan discernment, have contended, that the re-
gulars, in conformity to the canons of the church, oght to 1)
confined within the walls of their cloifcrls, and should no
longer be permitted to encroach on the funlRions of the f'cu-
]ar clergy. Some public-fpiritcd magifirates, fi-om conviiio
of its being nccciary to deprive the regulars of a privilege, e-
flowed at frill with good intention, but of which time and c.x-
perience had discovered the pernicious effcQs, openly counl-
tenanlced the secular clergy in their attempts to aflcrt their ownv
4 kiS. rights. The prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru unelcr

Philip III. took mcafires so dccifive and effectual fr circilunl-
fcril)ing the regulars withill theilr prnlCer fihcic, as rnlck tllcm

ilth general cunllcIratiol'. 'I'licy iha;d rccourtc to ticir uli.il

Sc NO 'Fr, I.\XX\'I. ) Sec NO I'E XXX\ 11.

3
.38

arts. They alarmed the superstitious, by representing the pro- B K
ceedings of the viceroy as innovations fatal to religion. They -_.
employed all the refinements of intrigue, in order to gain per-
sons in power; and seconded by the powerful influence of the
Jcfuits, who enjoyed all the privileges which belonged to the
M1indicant orders in America; they made a deep imprcfiion on a
bigotted prince, and a weak ministry. The ancient practice
was tolerated. The abuses which it occasioned continued to
increase, and the corruption of monks, exempt fiom tle re-
firaints of discipline, and the infrpction of any ifupcrior,
became a difgracc to religion. At lafl, as the veneration
of the Spaniards for the monastic orders began to abate, and
the power of the Jcfuits was on tle dccliie, Ferdinand VI.
ventured to apply the only cflFclual rcmcdy, by iiling an Jic 2Je3L
edit, prohibiting Regulars of every denomination fiom taking '?Z
the charge of any pariih with the cure of iouls; and declaring,
that on the demile of the present incumbenlts, none but fcculIar
pricfls, fubj(c& to the jurifdliion of their dioccfans, shall be
presented to vacant benefices . If this regulation is carried into
excecution with fleadinefs, in any degree proportional to the
wifdol with which it is framed, a very considerable reforma-
tion may take place in the ecclcfianiicall state of Spnnifh America,
and tlhe secular clergy may gradually become a refccdlable body
of men. h11e deportment of many ccclcfialics, even at prc-
!int, seers to be decent and exemplary, otlierwife tlicy would
ullat be held in fiich high eflimttion, and pollefs fucl a wonder-
ful afccndant over the minds of their countrymen, througliout
all tile Spanili fcttlcincnts.

R Ccdula MS. pcncs me.

BU r

383

B 0 K Bur whatever merit the Spanifll ecclesiastics in America may
'---, --'poiTefs, the success of their endeavours in communicating the
greilPcoon- knowledge of true religion to the Indians, has been more im-
vetina the perfect than might have been expeced, either from the dgree
Chrillianity. of their zeal, or from the dominion which they had acquiiced

over that people. For this various reasons may be afligncd.
The first miflionaries, in their ardour to make proselytes, ad-
mitted the people of America into the christian church, with.-
out previous inftrudion in the doctrines of religion, and even
before they themselves had acquired such knowledge of tl:cir
language, as to be able to explain to them the myfleries of
faith, or the precepts of duty. Refling upon a subtle diflinc-
flon in fcholaflic theology, they adopted this strange pralice,
no lels inconfifient with the spirit of a religion, which addreffcs
itself to the understanding of men, than repugnant to the dic-
tates of reason. As oon as any body of people, overawed by
dread of the Spanish power, moved by the example of their
own chiefs, incited by levity, or yielding from mere ignor!nce,
expressed the slightest desire of embracing the religion of thei
conquerors, they were inflantly baptized. While this ra'e of
conversion continued, a tingle clergyman baptized in one day
above five thousand Mexicans, and did not desist until he was
so exhaufled by fatigue, that he was unable to lift his handls'.
In the course of a few years, after the reduction of the Mexican
empire, the facramcnt of baptifin was adminiflered to more
than four millions b. Proselytes adopted with such inconsiderate
hafle, and who were neither iniruccdl in the nature of tlc
tenets, to which it was supposed they had given affcnt, nor

a P. orrib:o, MS Torqurm. Molt. In!. b. xvi. c. 6.
b . Torribio. Ibid. I'orquem. lib. xvi. c. 8.

tauglIt
384

taught the absurdity of those which they were required to re- B 0 K
linquifh, retained their veneration for their ancient fuperfli- ---- e
tions in full force, or mingled an attachment to its dodrines
and rites, with that slender knowledge of Chriflianity which
they acquired. These sentiments they tranfinitted to their pof-
terity, into whose minds they have funk so deep, that the Spa-
nifh ecclesiastics, with all their industry, have not been able to
eradicate them. The religious institutions of their ancestors
are fill remembered, and held in honour by the Indians, both
in Mexico and Peru; and whenever they think themselves out
of reach ofinfpedion by the Spaniards, they anfcmble and cele-
brate their idolatrous rites '.

BuT this is not the most unsurmountable obstacle to the pro-

grefs of Christianity among the Indians. The powers of their
uncultivated understandings are so limited, their observations
and refledions reach so little beyond the mere objects of sense,
that they seem hardly to have the capacity of forming abftra&
ideas, and possess not language to express them. To such men,
the sublime and spiritual doctrines of Christianity muff be in-
comprehensible. The numerous and splendid ceremonies of
popish worship, as they catch the eye, please and interest them;
but when their infirudors attempt to explain the articles of
faith, with which those external obfervanccs are connced,
though they liften with patience, they so little conceive tle
meaning of what they hear, that their acquicfcence does not
merit the name of belief. Their indifference is ill greater
than their incapacity. Attentive only to the prcfent moment,
and ingroffed by the objects before them, the Indians lb seldom

Voy. de Ulloa, i. 341. Torqucin, lib. xv. . 23. ilb. xvi. c. z8. (Gige, 7'.
VOL. II. 3 1) relc&l

385

B o0 K reflec upon what is past, or take thought for what is to come,

VIII. A---_*. -that neither the promises, nor threats of religion, make much

impreflion upon them; and while their foresight rarely ex-
tends so far as the next day, it is almost impossible to inspire
them with solicitude about the concerns of a future world.
Astonished equally at their slowness of comprehension, and at
their insensibility, some of the early missionaries pronounced
them a race of men so brutiflh, as to be incapable of understand-
ing the first principles of religion. A council held at Lima
decreed, that, on account of this incapacity, they ought
to be excluded from the sacrament of the Eucharist"' And
though Paul III. by his famous bull, issued in the year I537,
declared them to be rational creatures, entitled to all the privi-
leges of christians e; yet, after the lapse of two centuries, dur-
ing which they have been members of the church, so imperfect
are their attainments in knowledge, that very few possess such
a portion of spiritual discernment, as to be deemed worthy of
being admitted to the holy communion'. From this idea of
their incapacity and imperfed knowledge of religion, when the
zeal of Philip II. established the inquisition in America in the
year 1570, the Indians were exempted from the jurifdition of
that severe tribunal , and still continue under the infpedion of
their diocesans. Even after the mofl perfec inftrudcion, thcir
faith is held to be feeble and dubious; and though some of them
have been taught the learned languages, and have gone through
the ordinary course of academic education with applaufc, their
frailty is fiill so much fufpeed, that no Indian is cither or-
dained a priest, or received into any religious order .

d Torqucm, lib, xvi c. ao. ' Torquem, lib.xvi. c. 2z. Garc;aoril;rn.

3 i. f Voy. de Ullca, i. 343. t Recop. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 3.
T Torqucm, lib. xvii. c. 13. See NOTE LXXXVIII.

Fno .

3387

FROM this brief survey, ome idea may be formed of the in- B o o K
terior rfate of the Spanish colonies. The various produtions

Prnduaion:;

with which they supply and enrich the mother-country, and of tle Spatli1t
the fyflem of commercial intercourse between them, come next colonies.
in order to be explained. If the dominions of Spain in the
New World had been of such moderate extent, as bore any pro-
portion to the parent state, the progress of her colonizing might
have been attended with the fame benefit as that of other na-
tions. But when, in less than half a century, her inconsiderate
rapacity had seized on countries larger than all Europe, her in-
ability to fill such vast regions, with a number of inhabitants
sufficient for the cultivation of them, was so obvious, as to give
a wrong direction to all the efforts of the colonifis. They did
not form compat settlements, where induflry, circumscribed
within limits, both in its views and operations, is conducted
with that fober persevering spirit, which gradually converts
whatever is in its poffeflion to its proper use, and derives from
it the greatest advantage. Instead of this, the Spaniards, fe-
duced by the boundless profped which opened to them, divid-
ed their poffeflions in America into governments of vail extent.
As their number was too small to attempt the regular culture of
the immense provinces, which they occupied rather than
peopled, they bent their attention to a few ol)jcts, that allured
them with hopes of sudden and exorbitant gain, and turned
away with contempt from the humbler paths of indulry, which
lead more slowly, but with greater certainty, to wealth and in-
crease of national strength.

OF all the methods by which riches may be acquired, that of Fl:m tlhir

searching for the precious metals is one of the most inviting to
men, who are either unaccutlomed to the regular afliduity with

3 D 2 whvich

B 0o K which the culture of the earth, and the operations of commerce

VIII.
,., must be carried on, or so enterprising and rapacious, as not to be

satisfied with the gradual returns of profit which they yield.
Accordingly, as soon as the several countries in America were
fubjeded to the dominion of Spain, this was almost the only
method of acquiring wealth which occurred to the adventurers,
by whom they were conquered. Such provinces of the con-
tinent as did not allure them to fettle, by the profpeat of their
affording gold and silver, were totally negleded. Those in
which they met with a disappointment of the sanguine expecta-
tions they had formed, were abandoned. Even the value of
the islands, the first fruits of their discoveries, and the first ob-
jed of their attention, funk so much in their estimation, when
the mines which they had opened there were exhausted, that
they were deserted by many of the planters, and left to be oc-
cupied by more industrious possessors. All crowded to Mexico
and Peru, where the vast quantities of gold and silver found
among the natives, who searched for them with little indufiry,
and less skill, promised an unexhaufted flore, as the recompence
of more intelligent and persevering efforts.

rifcovery of DURING several years, the ardour of their researches was
those of Po-
tofi and Sa- kept up by hope, rather than success. At length, the rich filvcr
cotecas. mines of Potofi, in Peru, were accidentally discovered in the

year 1545 , by an Indian, as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed from his flock.
Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in New Spain, little inferior
to the other in value, were opened. From that time, fucccfivc di:-
coverics have been made in both colonies, and silver mines are now

I Fernandcz, p. i. lib, xi. c. it.

Z~./id~~~ ~so
388

so numerous, that the working of them, and of some few mines B O O K
of gold in the provinces of Tierra Firma, and the new kingdom Vfi
of Granada, has become the capital occupation of the Spani-
ards, and is reduced into a system no less complicated than in-
teresting. To describe the nature of the various ores, the mode
of extracting them from the bowels of the earth, and to explain
the several procefies by which the metals are separated from the
substances with which they are mingled, either by the action of
fire, or the attracive powers of mercury, is the province of
the natural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the his-
torian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the mountains of the Ricleswhich

New World poured forth their treasures, aftoniled mankind, they yield.
accustomed hitherto to receive a penurious supply of the preci-
ous metals, from the more scanty stores contained in the mines
of the ancient hemisphere. According to principles of compu-
tation, which appear to be extremely moderate, the quantity of
gold and silver that has been regularly entered in the ports of
Spain, is equal in value to four millions sterling annually,
reckoning from the year 1492, in which America was disco-
vered to the present time. This in two hundred and eighty-three
years, amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions.
Immense as this fum is, the Spanilh writers contend, that as
much more ought to be added to it, in consideration of the trea-
sure which has been extraced from the mines, without paying
duty to the king. By this account, Spain has drawn from the
New World a supply of wealth, amounting at least to two thou-
sand millions of pounds fierling k.

k Uztariz Theor. v Prac. de Comcrcia, c. 3. IIcrrcra, dec. viii. lib. xi. c. I.
See NOTE LXXXIX

T1 B

389

B 0 K THE mines, which have yielded this amazing quantity of
---.-- treasure, are not worked at the expence of the crown, or of

Spirit to
which this the public. In order to encourage private adventurers, the
gives rife. person who discovers a new vein, is entitled to the property of

it. Upon laying his claim before the governor of the province,
a certain extent of land is measured off, and a certain number
of Indians allotted him, under the obligation of his opening
the mine within a limited time, and of his paying the cufto-
mary duty to the king, for what it shall produce. Invited by
the facility with which such grants are obtained, and encou-
raged by some firiking examples of success in this line of ad-
venture; not only the sanguine and the bold, but the timid
and diffident enter upon it with astonishing ardour. With vafl
objets always in view, fed continually with hope, and ex-
pecting every moment that fortune will unveil her secret flores,
and give them up to their withes, they deem every other occu-
pation insipid and uninteresting. -The charms of this pursuit,
like the rage for deep play, is so bewitching, and take such full
possession of the mind, as even to give a new bent to the na-
tural temper. Under its influence, the cautious become enter-
prizing, and the covetous profuse. Powerful as this charm
naturally is, its force is augmented by the arts of an order of
men known in Peru, by the cant name of Jearchers. These
are commonly persons of desperate fortunes, who, availing
themselves of ome skill in mineralogy, accompanied with the
insinuating manner, and confident pretensions peculiar to pro-
jecors, address the wealthy and the credulous. By plausible
descriptions of the appearances which they have discovered of
rich veins hitherto unexplored; by producing when requisite,
specimens of promising ore; by affirming, with an imposing
assurance, that success is certain, and that the expence mull be

2 trifling;
39째

trifling; they seldom fail to persuade. An association is B K
formed; a finall um is advanced by each co partner; the
mine is opened; the searcher is entrusted with the sole direc-
tion of every operation; unforeseen difficulties occur; new
demands of money are made; but amidfl a fucceflion of dif-
appointments and delays, hope is never extinguished, and the
ardour of expectation hardly abates. For it is obfcrved, that
if any person once enter this seducing path, it is almost impof-
fible to return; his ideas alter, he seems to be pofleffcd with
another spirit, visions of imaginary wealth are continually be-
fore his eyes, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of nothing
else'.

Such is the spirit that muff be formed, wherever the ative Fntal effeia

exertions of any society are chiefly employed in working mines of it
of gold and silver. No spirit is more adverse to such improve-
ment in agriculture and commerce, as render a nation real-
ly opulent. If the system of administration in the Spanish co-
lonies had been founded upon principles of found policy, the
power and ingenuity of the legislature would have been exerted
with as much ardour, in restraining its subje&s from fuich perni-
cious industry, as is now employed in alluring them towards it.
"Projcets of mining (fays a good judge of the political condut
" f nations) instead of replacing the capital employed in them,

together with the ordinary profit of flock, commonly aborb

" both capital and profit. They are the projelcs, therefore, to
"which, of all others, a'prudent law-giver, who desired to

increase the capital of his nation, would lcafl chue to give
any extraordinary encouragement, or to turn towards them a

A Ulloa Entrctcn, p. 223.

' greater

B o 0 K " greater share of that capital than would go to them of

VIII.

"
< its own accord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence
"which all men have in their own good fortune, that wherever
" there is the least probability of success, too great a share of it

is apt to go to them of its own accord m." But in the Spanifl

colonies, government is fludious to cherish a spirit which it
should have laboured to depress, and by the fantion of its ap-
probation augments that inconsiderate credulity, which has
turned the acive industry of Mexico and Peru into
such an improper channel. To this may be imputed the slender
progress which they have made during two centuries and
a half, either in useful manufa&ures, or in those lucrative
brinches of cultivation, which furnish the colonies of other
nations with their staple commodities. In comparison with the
precious metals, every bounty of nature is so much despised,
that this extravagant idea of their value has mingled with the
idiom of the language in America, and the Spaniards fettled
there denominate a country, rich, not from the fertility of its
foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exuberance of its pas-
tures, but on account of the minerals which its mountains con-
tain. In quest of theie, they abandon the delightful plains
of Peru and Mexico, and retort to barren and uncomfortable
regions, where they have built ome of the largest towns which
they possess in the New World. As the activity and enterprise
of the Spaniards originally took this direaion, it is now so
difficult to bend them a different way, that although, from
various causes, the gain of working mines is much decreased;
the fascination continues, and almot every person, who takes
any aive part in the commerce of New Spain or Peru, is fiill
engaged in some adventure of this kind ".

m Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. j55. See NOTE XC.

Bur

92
aY

But though mines are the chief object of, attention to the B 0o IC

Spaniards, and the precious metals which they yield, form the '-O---r
principal article in their commerce; the fertile countries which iilodlii-s ls
they possess, supply them with other commodities of such value .o'oics"!
or scarcity, as to attra& a considerable degree of attention.
Cochineal is a prodution almost peculiar toNew Spain, ofifuch
demand in commerce, tlat the sale is always certain, and it yields
such profit, as amply rewards the pains and attention employed in
rearing the curious i nfeds of which this valuable drug is conpofed,
and preparing it for the market. Qjinquina, or Jesuits Bark, the
most salutary simple, perhaps, and of mos restorative virtue, that
Providence, in coinpafilon for human infirmity, has made known
unto man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a lucra-
tive branch of commerce ". The indigo of Guatimala is iupe-
rior in quality to that of any province in America, and culti-
vated to a considerable extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to
the Spaniih colonies, attains to its highest slate of perfecion
there, and from the great consumption of chocolate in Europe,
as well as in America, is a valuable commodity. The tobacco
of Cuba, of more exquisite flavour than any brought fiom the
New World; the sugar raised in that illand, in Hili)aniola,
and in New Spain; together with drugs of various kinds,
may bc nicntioncd among the natural producions of America,
which enrich the Spanifil conmmerce. To there imuft be added
an article of no inconsiderable account, the exportation of
hides; for whlicl, as well as for many of tliofe whicll I have
enumcrated, the lpaniards are more indebted to the wonlder-
ful fertility of tlc cotntry tian to thcir own orcighlt :a.ln
in duliry. l'ic dornmclic anilnals of Europe, particularly

' See NO I.I XI.
Vor.. I.

hor rned
,,

394
B o o K horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World with a rapi-

VII.

ditywhich almost exceeds belief. A few years after the Spaniards
fettled there, the herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thousands 째. Less attention
being paid to them, as they continued to increase, they were
suffered to run wild, and spreading over a country of boundless
extent, under a mild climate, and covered with rich pasture,
their number became immense. They range over the vast
plains which extend from Buenos Ayres, towards the Andes,
in herds of thirty or forty thousand; and the unlucky tra-
veller who once falls in among them, may proceed several days
before he can disentangle himself from among the crowd that
covers the face of the earth, and seems to have no end. They
are hardly less numerous in New Spain, and in several other
provinces: these are killed merely for the fake of their hides;
and the slaughter at certain seasons is so great, that the flench
of the carcases, which are left in the field, would affeat the
air, if large packs of wild dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazos,
or American vultures, the most voracious of all the feathered
kind, did not inflantly devour them. The number of those
hides exported in every fleet to Europe is prodigious, and is a
lucrative branch of commerce .

Almost all those articles may be qonfidered as staple commo-

dities peculiar to America, and different, if we except that last
mentioned, from the produtions of the mother-country.

Advantages WHEN the importation into Spain of those various articles
dehics ,in" from her colonies, first became aafive and considerable, her in-
her cloics.

Oviedo p. Ramus. iii. Ioi, B. Hackluyt, iii. 466. 511.

P Acolla, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo His, of Chili. Church. Collca. iii. 47. fep,
Ibid. v. p. 680o. 69. ettres Edif. xiii. 235. Fcuille, i. 249.

terior

terior industry and manufacures were in a ate so prosperous, B I K
that with the product of these, fle was able both to purchase ----
the commodities of the New World, and to answer its growing
demands. Under the reigns of Ferdinand and Isabella, and
Charles V. Spain was one of the most industrious countries
in Europe. Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk, were
so extensive, as not only to furnish what was sufficient for her
own consumption, but to afford a surplus for exportation.
When a market for them, formerly unknown, and to which
the alone had access, opened in America, he had recourse to
her domestic flore, and found there an abundant fupplyq.
This new employment muff naturally have added vivacity to
the spirit of industry. Nourished and invigorated by it, the
manufacures, the population, and wealth of Spain might
have gone on increasing in the fame proportion with her colo-
nies. Nor was the state of the Spanish marine at this period
lets flourishing than that of its manufactures. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, Spain is said to have possessed above a
thousand merchant hips r, a number probably far superior to
that of any nation in Europe. By the aid which foreign trade
and domestic industry give reciprocally to each other in their
progress, the augmentation of both muff have been rapid and
extensive, and Spain might have received the fame acceflion of
opulence and vigour from her acquisitions in the New World,
that other powers have derived from their colonies there.

Bur various causes prevented this. It is with nations as with why nlcoes

individuals, when wealth flows in gradually, and with mo- riv'tmlcea
derate increase, it feeds and nourilles that adivity which is

1 See NOTE XCII. r Campomanes, ii. 40o.

3 Ez

friendly

B K friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigorous and well

VII.

conduced exertions; but when it pours in suddenly, and
with too full a fiream, it overturns all fober plans of industry,
and brings along with it a taste for what is wild, and extrava-
gant, and daring in business or in'aEtion. Such was the great
and sudden augmentation of power and revenue, that the poffcf-
sion of America brought into Spain, and some symptoms of
its pernicious influence upon the political operations of that
monarchy oon began to appear. For a considerable time,
however, the supply of treasure from the New World was scanty
and precarious, and the genius of Charles V. conducted public
mtafsures with such prudence, that the effects of this influence
were little perceived. But when Philip II. ascended the Spanifii.
throne, with talents far inferior to those of his father, and re-
mittances from the colonies became a regular and vati branch of
revenue, the fatal operation of this rapid change in the state of
the kingdom, both on the monarch and his people, was at
once conspicuous. Philip, possessing that spirit of unceasing
aTliduity, which often charaCerizes the ambition of men of
moderate talents, entertained fich an high opinion of his own
resources, that he thought nothing: too arduous for him to under-
take. Shut up himself in the solitude of the Escurial, e
troubled and annoyed all the nations around him. He waged
open-war with the Dutch and English; he encouraged and aid-
ed a rebellious faCtion in France; lie conquered Portugal, and
maintained armies and garrisons in Italy, Afi-ica, and both the
Indies. By such a multiplicity of great and complicated operi-
tions, pursucd with ardour during the course of a long rcigr,
Spain was drained both of men and money. Under the wc;ik
administration of his fcccffor, Philip III. the vigour of the na-
tion continued to deccreafc, and funk into the lowell decline,

wvh1cn

when the inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled at once B O K
near a million of his most industrious fubjecds, at the very time l -..
when the exhausted tfate of the kingdom required some extraor- A. D. iG .
dinary exertion of political wisdom to augment its numbers, and
to revive its strength. Early in the seventeenth century, Spain
felt such a diminution in the number of her people, that from
inability to recruit her armies, 1he was obliged to contraE her
operations. Her flourifning manufaaurcs were fallcn into de-
cay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all Europe, were
ruined. Her extensive foreign commerce was loft. The trade
between different parts of her own dominions was interrupted,
and the ships which attempted to carry it on, were taken and
plundered by enemies, whom they once despised. Even agri-
culture, the primary objcct of industry in every prosperous
state, was negle&ced, and one of the molf fertile countries in
Europe hardly raised what was sufficient for the support of its
own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manufacturcs of the Rapid rcc!i.e

parent fate declined, the demands of her colonies continued to of its tra;llc
increase. The Spaniards, like their monarchs, intoxicated with
the wealth which poured in annually upon them, defrtced the
paths of indufiry, to which they had been accuflomed, and re-
paired with cagcrnefs to those regions from which this opulence
issued. By tis rage of emigration, another drain was opened,
and the slrcngth of the colonies augmented by cxhaufling that
of tle mothcr-coltutry. All tliofe emigrants, as w'ell as the
adventurers, whlo had at firfl. fettled in nAmnerica, depended ab-
folutcly upon Spain for almoll every article of ncccll.ry col-
fuption. Engaged in more alluring and lItcrativc lpzrfiits,
or prevented by rltraint:3 which gtovllernment inmpokdl, thIcy

I~~~~~ ~~coutl

B3 0 0 K could not turn their own attention towards establishing the ma.

--- *. nufatures requisite for comfortable subsistence. They received

(as I have observed in another place) their clothing, their fur-
niture, whatever ministers to the ease or luxury of life, and
even their instruments of labour from Europe. Spain, thinned
of people, and void of industry, was unable to supply their in-
creasing demands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The
manufactures of the Low Countries, of England, of France,
and of Italy, which her wants called into existence, or animated
with new vivacity, furnished in abundance whatever he re-
quired. In vain did the fundamental law, concerning the ex-
clufion of foreigners from trade with America, oppose this in-
novation. Necessity, more powerful than any flatute, defeat-
ed its operations, and constrained the Spaniards themselves to
concur in eluding it. The English, the French, and Dutch,
relying on the fidelity and honour of Spanish merchants, who
lend their names to cover the deceit, fend out their manufactures
to America, and receive the exorbitant price for which they are
fold there, either in specie, or in the rich commodities of the
New World. Neither the dread of danger, nor the allure-
ment of profit, ever induced a Spanish factor to betray or de-
fraud the person who confided in him'; and that probity,
which is the pride and diftindion of the nation, contributes to
its ruin. In a short time, not above a twentieth part of the
commodities exported to America was of Spanish growth or fa-
bric'. All the reft was the property of foreign merchants,
though entered in the name of Spaniards. The treasure of the
New World may be said henceforward not to have belonged
to Spain. Before it reached Europe, it was anticipated as the

" Zavala Roprefentacion, p. 226. t Canpomanes, ii. x38.

price

399

price of goods purchased from foreigners. That wealth, B O0 K
which, by an internal circulation, would have spread through -
each vein of industry, and have conveyed life and ativity to
every branch of manufacure, flowed out of the kingdom with
such a rapid course, as neither enriched nor animated it. On
the other hand, the artisans of rival nations, encouraged by
this quick sale of their commodities, improved so much in skill
and industry, as to be able to afford them at a rate so low, that
the manufactures of Spain, which could not vie with theirs,
either in quality or cheapness of work, were still farther de-
pressed. This deftruaive commerce drained off the riches of
the nation faster and more completely, than even the extrava-
gant schemes of ambition carried on by its monarchs. Spain
was so much astonished and distressed, at beholding her Ame-
rican treasures vanish almost as soon as they were imported,
that Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite in circulation,
issued an ediQ, by which he endeavoured to raise copper
money, to a value in currency nearly equal to that of silver 째;
and the lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced
to a wretched expedient, which is the last resource of petty impo-
veriibed states.

THvUS the poffefions of Spain in America have not proved

a source of population and of wealth to her, in the fame man-
ner as those of other nations. In the countries of Europe,
where the spirit of industry ubfiflts in full vigour, every person
fettled. in such colonies, as are finilar in their situation to
those of Spain, is supposed to give employment to three or four
at home in supplying his wants'. But wherever the mother-

Uztariz, c. 104. Child on tradc and colonies.

~~:2~~~~~~a ~country

B OO K country cannot afford this supply, every emigrant may be con-

V1IT.
1_ - 1 ^fidered as a citizen loft to the community, and firangers mult

reap all the benefit of answering his demands.

Increased by SUCH has been the internal slate of Spain from the close of
the ode of
regulating its the sixteenth century, and such her inability to supply the grow-
intercourse ing wants of her colonies. The fatal effets of this difpropor-
with Anmerica.

.tion between their demands, and her capacity of anfveriing
them, have been much increased by the mode in which Spain
has endeavoured to regulate the intercourse between the mo-
ther-country and the colonies. It is from her idea of monopo-
lizing the trade with America, and debarring her fubjeas there
from any communication with foreigners, that all her jealous
and systematic arrangements have arisen. These are so singular
in their nature and consequences, as to merit a particular ex-
planation. In order to secure the monopoly at which fle aim-
ed, Spain did not vest the trade with her colonies in an exclu-
five company, a plan which has been adopted by nations more
commercial, and at a period when mercantile policy was an ob-
ject of greater attention, and ought to have been better under-
flood. The Dutch gave up the whole trade with their colonies,
both in the East and Well Indies, to exclusive companies. The
English, the French, the Danes, have imitated their example
with refpectd to the East Indian commerce ; and the two formcr
have laid a similar refiraint upon some branches of their tir'dl
with the New World. The wit of man cannot, perhaps, dc-
vise a method for checking the progrcfs of iiuliflry and popula-
tion in a new colony more effecual than this. Th'e intcrcll of
the colony, and the cxclufivc company, mul in every point be
diamctricailly oppolitc; and as the latter poflclcs fucl adI\'ii-
tagcs in this uLIC(Iiial contcfi, that it can 'prclI. ribc at plcalt'c

tlh
4o

the terms of intercourse, the former muff not only buy dear B K
and fell cheap, but susser the mortification of having the increase --
of their surplus flock discouraged by those very persons to whomr
alone they are permitted to dispose of it .

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from falling into this Thisconfin-

ed to one

error in policy, by the high ideas which he early formed con- port in Spain.
cerning the riches of the New World. Gold and silver were
commodities of too high value to vet a monopoly of them in
private hands. The crown wished to retain the direction of a
commerce so inviting; and in order to secure that, ordained that
the cargo of every hip fitted out for America, should be infpeCEed
by the officers of the Casa de Contratacion in Seville, before it
could receive a licence to make the voyage; and that on its re-
turn, a report of the commodities which it brought hould be
made to the fame board, before it could be permitted to land
them. In consequence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain
with the New World centred in the port of Seville, and was
gradually brought into a form, in which it has been conduted,
with little variation, from the middle of the sixteenth century
almost to our own times. For the greater security of the valu-
able cargoes ent to America, as well as for the more cafy pre-
vention of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its colonies is
carried on by fleets, which fail under firong convoys. Thcfe
fleets consisting of two squadrons, one distinguished by the name
ofGaleons, the other by that of the Flo/a, are equipped annually.
Formerly they took their departure from Seville; but as the
port of Cadiz has been found more commodious, they have fail-
ed fiom it since the year 1720.

Y Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171.

4o01
VOL. II.

TluE

0 K THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firme, and the king-
'-,-' doms of Peru and Chili, with almost every article of luxury,

Carried on by
the Galeons, or necessary consumption, that an opulent people can demand,

touch firlf at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To the
former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas, the New
Kingdom of Granada, and several other provinces resort. The
latter is the great mart for the rich commerce of Peru and Chili.
At the season when theGaleons are expeced, the product of all the
mines in there two kingdoms, together with their other valuable
commodities, is transported by ea to Panama. From thence,
as soon as the appearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
thiey are conveyed across the isthmus, partly on mules, and
partly down the river Chagre to Porto-bello. This paltry vil-
lage, whose climate, from the pernicious union of excessive
heat, continual moisture, and the putrid exhalations arising
fiom a rank foil, is more fatal to life than any perhaps in the
known world, is immediately filled with people. From being
the residence of a few negroes and mulattoes, and of a miserable
garrison relieved every three months, its fireets are crowded
with opulent merchants from every corner of Peru, and the ad-
jacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wealth of America is
exchanged for the manufactures of Europe, and during its
prescribed term of forty days, the richest traffic on the face of
the earth is begun and finifled, with that simplicity of tranfac-
tion and unbounded confidence, which accompany extcnfive
and SILt'. commerce'. The Flota holds its course to Vera Cruz. The

treasures and commodities of New Spain, and the depending
provinces, which were deposited at Los Angeles in explcEation
of its arrival, are carried thither, and the commercial operations

Sec NOTE XCIII.

of

of Vera Cruz, conduted in the fame manner with those of B O O K
Porto-bello, are inferior to them only in importance and value. --
Both fleets, as oon as they have completed their cargoes from
America, rendezvous at the Havanna, and return in company
to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while thus fettered and Bd cfia of

this arrange.

reftriaed, came necessarily to be conduced with the fame spirit, mt ot.
and upon the fame principles, as that of an exclusive company.
Being confined to a single port, it was of course thrown into a
few hands, and almost the whole of it was gradually engrossed
by a small number of wealthy houes, formerly in Seville, and
now in Cadiz. These by combinations, which they can easily
form, may altogether prevent that competition which prefervcs
commodities at their natural price; and by acting in concert, to
which they are prompted by their mutual interest, they may
raise or lower their value at pleasure. In consequence of this,
the price of European goods in America is always high, and
often exorbitant. A hundred, two hundred, and even three
hundred per cent. are profits not uncommon in the commerce of
Spain with her colonies a. From the fame ingrowing spirit it
frequently happens, that traders of the second order, whose
warehoufcs do not contain a complete aflortment of commodi-
ties for the American market, cannot purchase from the more
opulent merchants, such goods as they want, at a lower price than
that for which they are fold in the colonies. With the fame
vigilant jealousy that an exclulive company guards againfl the
intrusion of the fieetrader, those overgrown moino)plifs cn-
deavour to check the progrcfs of every one wlofe encroachments

B. Ulloa Rciablifl prt ii. p. 91.

3 1 a they

4o3

B oI0 K they dread . But this refiraint of the American commerce to
a--,_..
, sone port, not only affects its domeflic fate, but limits its foreign

operations. A monopolist may acquire more, and certainly will
hazard less, by a confined trade which yields exorbitant profit,
than by an extensive commerce in which he receives only a
moderate return of gain. It is often his interest not to enlarge,
but to circumscribe the sphere of his activity; and inflead of
calling forth more vigorous exertions of commercial industry,
it may be the objeC of his attention to check and set bounds to
them. By some such maxim, the mercantile policy of Spain
seems to have regulated its intercourse with America. Instead
offurnifhing the colonies with European goods in such quantity
as might render both the price and the profit moderate; the
merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem to have supplied them with
a sparing hand, that the eagerness of competition amongst
customers obliged to purchase in a scanty marker, might enable
their factors to dispose of their cargoes with exorbitant gain.
About the middle of the last century, when the exclusive trade
to America from Seville was in its most flourishing state, the
burden of the two united squadrons of the Galeons and Flota,
did not exceed twenty-feven thousand five hundred tons'. The
supply which such a fleet could carry muff have been very in-
adequate to the demands of those populous and extensive co-
lonies, which depended upon it for all the luxuries, and many
of the necessaries of life.

Remedic pro- SPAIN early became sensible of her declension from her for-
posed. mer prosperity, and many refpeCable and virtuous citizens em-

b Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171. Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 438.
! Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435. ii. Ilo.
4째04

6

ploycd

ployed their thoughts in devising methods for reviving the de- B K
caying industry and commerce of their country. From the - --
violence of the remedies proposed, we may judge how desperate
and fatal the malady appeared. Some, confounding a violation
of police with criminality against the slate, contended, that in
order to check illicit commerce, every person conviced of carry-
ing it on, should be punihed with death, and confiscation of
all his effects d. Others, forgetting the diftinEtion between civil
offences and as of impiety, insisted, that contraband trade
hould be ranked among the crimes reserved for the cognizance
of the Inquisition; that such as were guilty of it might be tried
and punished, according to the secret and summary form in
which that dreadful tribunal exercises itsjurifdiCtion . ()thers,
uninftruCted by observing the pernicious effeCts of monopolies
in every country where they have been eflablifhed, have pro-
posed to vest the trade with America in exclusive companies,
whom interest would render the most vigilant guardians of the
Spanish commerce against the encroachments of interlopers'.

BESID E there wild projects, many fchcmes better digcfled, at firfi

without effect, and more beneficial, were fuggeflcd. But under the
feeble monarchs, with whom the reign of the Auilrian line in
Spain closed, incapacity and indecision are conspicuous in every
department of government. Inflead of taking for their model the
active adminifiration of Charles V. they affeded to imitate the
cautious procraflinating wisdom of Philip II. and deflitute of
his talents, they deliberated perpetually, but determined no-
thing. No remedy was applied to the evils under which the

d M. de Santa Cruz Comercio Sutlto, p. z. , Moncnda Rflauracion

politica de Efpagna, p. 4. f Zavala y Augnon Rcprcfeutacion, &c .
p. o.

national

B 0 0 K national commerce, domestic as well as foreign, languihled.

VII.
t..,- _j These evils continued to increase, and Spain, with dominions

more extensive and more opulent than any European slate,
polfeffed neither vigour, nor money h, nor industry. At length,
the violence of a great national convulsion rouzed the slumber-
ing genius of Spain, and the efforts of the two contending par-
ties in the civil war, kindled by the dispute concerning the fuc-
cession of the crown at the beginning of this century, called forth,
in some degree, the ancient fpirir and vigour of the nation. While
men were forming, capable of adopting more liberal sentiments,
than those which had influenced the councils of the monarchy du-
ring the course of a century, Spain derived from an unexpected
source the means of availing itself of their talents. The vari-
ous powers who favoured the pretensions either of the Austrian
or Bourbon candidate for the Spanifli throne, ent formidable
fleets and armies to their support. France, England, and Hol-
land remitted immense fums to Spain. These were spent in
the provinces which became the theatre of war. Part of the
American treasure, of which they had drained the kingdom,
flowed back thither. From thio aera, one of the nofl intelli-
gent Spanish authors, dates the revival of the monarchy; and,
however humiliating the truth may be, he acknowledges, that
it is to her enemies his country is indebted for the acquiition
of a fund of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to the
exigencies of the public'.

Stepstowards AS soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet possession of the
improvement
by ile Bour- throne, they discerned this change in the spirit of the people,
bon moo-
narclis, and in the Rate of the nation, and took advantage of it; for

h Sec NOTE XCIV. i Cnampomancs, i. No.

although
.406

although that family has not given monarchs to Spain, remark- B o K

VIII.

able for superiority of genius, they have all been beneficent v_--
princes, attentive to the happiness of their fubjcds, and folici-
tous promote it. It was, accordingly, the first object of Philip V.
to suppress an innovation which had crept in during the course of
the war, and over turned the whole fyflem of the Spanilh commerce by excluding

foreigners

with America. The English and Dutch, by their superiority in na- from rade
val power, having acquired such command of the ea, as to cut off withPeru;
all intercourse between Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to
furnish them thole necessaries of life, without which they could
not exilt, and as the only means of receiving from thence any
part of their treasure, departed so far from the usual ri-
gour of its maxims, as to open the trade with Peru to her allies
the French. The merchants of St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV.
granted the privilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in it
with vigour, and carried it on upon principles very different
from those of the Spaniards. They supplied Peru with European
commodities at a more moderate price, and not in flinted quanti-
ty; the goods which they imported were conveyed to every
province of Spanish America, in such abundance as had never
been known in any former period. If this intercourse had been
continued, the exportation of European commodities friom
Spain must have ceased, and the dependence of the colonies on
the mother-country have been at an end. The moLt pcrcmp- ,1713.
tory injunctions were therefore iflued, prohibiting the admif-
sion of foreign vessels into any port of Peru or Chili k, and a Spa-
infn fuadron was employed to clear the South Sea of intruders,
whol' aid was no longer icccEary.
k Frczier Voy. zS6. 1. Ulloa Rctab. ii. 1o4, &c. Alccdo y lHcrrcra Avifo, &c. 36.

13u.t

407

B 0 0 K BUT though, on the cessation of the war, which was ter-

VIII. -.-- minated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain obtained relief from

contraband one encroachment on her commercial system, she was exposed to
trade, another which she deemed hardly less pernicious. As an in-

ducement that might prevail with Queen Anne to conclude a
peace, which France and Spain desired with equal ardour,

particularly of Philip V. not only conveyed to Great Britain the Alffento, or con-
Aeffntgocor- tra for supplying the Spanish colonies with negroes, which had
pany, formerly.been enjoyed by France, but granted it the more ex-

traordinary privilege of fending annually to the fair of Porto-
bello a ship of five hundred tons, laden with European commo-
dities. In consequence of this,, British facories were eflabliflled
at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres, and other
Spanish settlements. The veil with which Spain had hitherto
covered the state and tranfaaions of her colonies was removed.
The agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns of most ex-
tensive trade, and of chief retort, had the befl opportunities of
becoming acquainted with the interior condition of their pro-
vinces, of observing their stated and occasional wants, and of
knowing what commodities might be imported into them with
the greatest advantage. In consequence of information so au-
thentic and expeditious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other
English colonies who traded to the Spanish main, were enabled
to assort and proportion their cargoes, so exactly to the demands
of the market, that the contraband commerce was carried on
with a facility, and to an extent unknown in any former pe-
riod. This, however, was not the most fatal consequence of
the Afliento to the trade of Spain. The agents of the British
South Sea Company, under cover of the importation which
they were authorised to make by the ship sent annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spanish continent,

without
408

without limitation or restraint. Inflead of a flip of five hun- B o oc
dred tons, as flipulated in tile treaty, they usually employed one .---
which exceeded nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three smaller vessels, which mooring in oime
neighbouring creek, supplied her clandetfinely with fresh bales
of goods, to replace such as were fold. The infpedors of the
fair, and officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant prcfcnts,
connived at the fraud '. Thus, partly by the operations of the
company, and partly by the activity of private interlopers, al-
moll the whole trade of Spanifi America was ingroffd by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Galeons, forncrly
the pride of Spain, and the envy of other nations, funk to no- 1737.
thing, and the squadron itself, reduced from fifteen thousand to
two thousand tons"', served hardly any purpose but to fetch
home the royal revenue arising from the fifth on filvcr.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, and felt so fen- Glarda Cor-

t, s employed

sibly their pernicious effcs, it was ipoffible not to make fr, ethis pur
some effort to restrain theri. Her firfl expedient was to flation p0e
Ihips of force, under the appellation of Guarda Cofans, upon the
coasts of those provinces, to which interlopers molt frequently
retorted. As private interest concurred with the duty which
they owed to the public, in rendering the officers who com-
manded them vigilant and aive, ome check was given to the
progress of the contraband trade, though in dominions so ex-
tensive, and so accessible by lea, no number of cruizcrs was
sufficient to guard against its inroads in every quarter. This
interruption of an intcrcourfe, which had been carried on with
so much facility, that the merchants in the ritifl colonies

a See NO TE XCV. "' Alcedo y Hcrrcra, p. 359. Camponmacs, i. 436.
VOL. II. 3 G were

B 0o K were accustomed to confider it almost as an allowed branch of

-1---. commerce, excited murmurs and complaints. These authorif

ed, in ome measure, and rendered more interesting, by several
unjustifiable ats of violence committed by the captains of the
1739. Spanish Guarda Coflas, precipitated Great Britain into a war

with Spain, by which the latter obtained a final release from
the Affiento, and was left at liberty to regulate the commerce
of her colonies, without being restrained by any engagement
with a foreign power.

The ufeof As the formidable encroachments of the English on their
Tegifter hips
introduced. American trade, had discovered to the Spaniards the vast

consumption of European goods in their colonies, and taught
them the advantage of accommodating their importations to the
occasional demand of the various provinces, they perceived the
necessity of devising some method of supplying their colonies,
different from their ancient one, of fending thither periodical
fleets. This mode of communication was not only uncertain,
as the departure of the Galeons and Flota was sometimes retard-
ed by various accidents, and often prevented by the wars which
raged in Europe, but was ill adapted to afford America a regu-
lar and timely supply of what it wanted. The scarcity of Eu-
ropean goods in the Spanifli settlements frequently became ex-
ceflive; their price rose to an enormous height; the vigilant
eye of mercantile attention did not fail to oferve this favour-
able opportunity, an ample supply was poured in by intcrlo-
pers from the English, the French, and Dutch islands; and
when the Galcons at length arrived, they found the markets so
glutted by this illicit commerce, that there was no demand for
the commodities with which they were loaded. In order to re-
medy this, Spain permitted a considerable part of her commerce

2 wlith

with America, to be carried on by regifeerjjhips. These are B 1 0 Ki
fitted out, during the intervals between the flated seasons when V-
the Galeons and Flota fail, by merchants in Seville or Cadiz, up-
on obtaining a licence from the council of the Indies, for which
they pay a very high premium, and are destined for thofc ports
where any extraordinary demand is foreseen or expected. By
this expedient, such a regular supply of freflh commodities is
conveyed to the American market, that the interloper is no
longer allured by the fame profpe& of excelfive gain, or the
people in the colonies urged by the fame neceflity, to en-
gage in the hazardous adventures of contraband trade.

IN proportion as experience manifeited the advantages of car- Thbe iflcon

rying on trade in this mode, the number of regiftcr flfips in-
creased; and at length, in the year 1748, the Galeons, after hav-
ing been employed upwards of two centuries, were finally abo-
lifhed. From that period there has been no intercourse with
Chili and Peru but by tingle fllips, dispatched from time to time
as occasion requires, and when the merchants expect a market will
open. Thefefail round CapeHorn, and conveydircclly to the ports
in the South Sea the productions and manufatdures of Europe, for
which the people fettled in those countries were formerly oblig-
ed to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These towns, as has been
formerly observed, muff gradually decline, when deprived of
that commerce to which they owed their existence. This dif-
advantage however is more than compcnfated, for the whole
continent of South America receives supplies of European com-
modities, with so much regularity, and in fiich abundance, as
must contribute greatly to the lhappincfs and profpciity of all the
colonies fIttled thcre. But as all the rcgiflcr filips dlcflinct for
the South Seas, mull flill take their departure from Cadiz, and

3 G 2 arc

B o o K are obliged to return thither", this branch of the Americaa

VIII.
A - commerce, even in its new and improved form, continues sub-

jedc to the restraints of a species of monopoly, and feels those
pernicious effeEts of it, which I have already described.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined to regulating
reviving cornm-
,mrrcv, the trade with its flourishing colonies, it has extended likewise

to the reviving commerce in those settlements where it was ne-
gleded, or had decayed. Among the new taftes which the
people of Europe have acquired, in consequence of their inter-
course with the natives of those countries which they conquered
in America, that for chocolate is one of the molt universal. The
ife of this liquor made with a pase, formed of the nut, or al-
mond of the cacao-tree, compounded with various ingredients, the
Spaniards first learned from the Mexicans; and it has appeared
to them, and to the other European nations, so palatable, so
nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has become a commercial
article of considerable importance. The cacao-tree grows fpon-
taneoufly in several parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the
bell quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the South Sea, are pro-
duced in the rich plains of Caraccas, a-province of Tierra Firme.
In consequence of this acknowledged superiority in the quality of
cacao in that province, and its communication with the Atlantic,
which facilitates the conveyance to Europe, theculture of the cacao
there is more extensive than in any difirid of America. But the
Dutch, by the vicinity of their settlements in the small ilands
of Curazoa and Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gradually
ingroffed the greatest partof the cacao trade. The traffic with the
mother-country for this valuable commodity ceased almofl en-

' Campomannes, i. 434. 440.

tirely

tirely; and such was the supine negligence of the Spaniards, B K
or the defets of their commercial arrangements, that they --
were obliged to receive from the hands of foreigners this pro-
dution of their own colonies, at an exorbitant price. In order
to remedy an evil no less disgraceful, than pernicious to his fuib- by eltblifh

ing the coin-
jedts, Philip V. in the year 1 728, granted to a body of merchants, pany of Ca-

ra~cas.

an exclusive right to the commerce with Caraccas and. Cumana,
on condition of their employing, at their own expence, a sufficient
number of armed eftels to clear the coast of interlopers. This
society, distinguished ometimes by the name of the company of
Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain in which it is eflablifled,
and sometimes by that of the Company of Caraccas, from the
difirid of America to which it trades, has carried on its opera-
tions with flich vigour and ifccefs, that Spain has recovered an
important branch of commerce, which fie had fitffercd to be
wrested from her, and is plentifully supplied with an article of
extensive consumption at a moderate price. Not only the pa-
rent fiate, but the colony of Caraccas, has derived great ad-
vantages from this institution; for although, at the first apect,
it may appear to be one of those monopolies, whose tendency
is to check the spirit of industry, instead of calling it forth to
new exertions, it has been prevented from operating in this man-
ner, by several salutary regulations, framed upon foresight of
such bad erfects, and ofpurpofe to obviate them. The plant-
ers in the Caraccas are not left to depend entirely on the com-
pany, either for the importation of European commodities, or
the sale of their own productions. The inhabitants of the Ca-
nary Islands have the privilege of fending thither annually a
regifler flhip of considerable burden; and fomn Vera Ciuz in
New Spain, a free trade is permitted in every port compre-
hended in the charter of the company. In conc(lqucnce of this,

* there

413

B 0 0 K there is such a competition, that both with refpea to what the
_--' colonies purchase, and what they fell, the price seems to be fixed

at its natural and equitable rate. The company has not the power
of raising the former, or degrading the latter at pleasure; and
accordingly, since it was established, the increase of culture, of
population, and of live flock, in the province of Caraccas has
been very considerable 0.

Enlargement BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any fyflem which
ideas in Spain. time has rendered venerable, or that commerce can be diverted

from the channel in which it has long been accutfomed to flow;
Philip V. in his new regulations concerning the American
trade, paid such deference to the ancient maxim of Spain, con-
cerning the limitation of all importation from the New World
to one harbour, as to oblige both the register hips which return-
ed from Peru, and those of the Guipofcoan Company from Ca-
raccas, to deliver their cargoes in the port of Cadiz. Since his
reign, sentiments more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in
Spain. The spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the glory
of the present age to have turned from frivolous or abstruse
speculations, to the business and affairs of men, has extended
its influence beyond the Pirenees. In the researches of in-
genious authors, concerning the police or commerce of na-
tions, the errors and defeas of the Spanifil fyfiem with refpec
to both met every eye, and have not only been exposed with
severity, but are held up as a warning to other fRates. The
Spaniards, flung with their reproaches, or convinced by their
arguments, and admonished by several enlightened writers of
their own country, fcem at length to have discovercd the dc-

째 See NOTE XCVI.

flruaive

ftrutive tendency of those narrow maxims, which, by cramp- B o K

l

ing commerce in all its operations, have so long retarded its '
progress. It is to the monarch now on the throne, that Spain is
indebted for the first public regulacion formed in consequence of
those ideas.

WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her ancient maxims Eilablillclnnt

concerning her commerce with America, he was so much afiraid packet boats.
of opening any channel, by which an illicit trade might find
admiflion into the colonies, that she almost shut herfelfout from
any intercourse with them, but that which was carried on by
her annual fleets. There was no etablifllment for a regular
communication of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements. From the
want bs this necessary institution, the operations of the slate,
and the business of individuals, were retarded or conducted un-
Ikilfully, and Spain often received from foreigners her first in-
formation with refped to very interesting events in her own co-
lonics. But though this defect in police was sensibly felt, and
the remedy for it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which
the Spanish monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, reltrained
them fron applying it. At length Charles III. surmounted
those confidccrations which ad deterred his predeccffors, and in
the year I7G4, appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
first day of each month, from Corugna to the Havanna or Porto-
Rico. From thence letters are conveyed in finaller vcffcls to
Vera Cruz and Porto-bello, and tranlinitted by pof through
the kingdoms of Tierra Firmn, Cranada, Peru, and New Spain.
With no lcf regularity packct-boats Lail oncc in two months to
Rio de la llata, for the accounllodation of'tle provinces to te
ear of the Andes. Thus provilion is made( for a fpccdy and

ccrtaii;

4rs

B 0o0 K certain circulation of intelligence throughout the vast dominions

L - of Spain, from which equal advantages must redound to the

political and mercantile interest of the kingdom . With this
new arrangement, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately conneced. Each of the packet-boats, which
are vessels of some considerable burden, is allowed to take in
half a loading of such commodities as are the product of Spain,
and most in demand in the ports whither they are bound. In
return for there they may bring home to Corugna an equal quan-
tity of American producions . This may be confidered as the
first relaxations of those rigid laws, which confined the trade
with the New World to a single port, and the first attempt to
admit the reft of the kingdom to ome hare in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In the year
permitted to X765, Charles III. laid open the trade to the windward ifands,
several pro-
vinces. Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his

fubjeds in every province of Spain. He permitted them to fail
from certain ports in each of these, specified in the ediE, at
any season, and with whatever cargo they deemed most proper,
without any other warrant than a simple clearance from the
custom-house of the place whence they took their departure.
He released them from the numerous and oppressive duties im-
posed on goods exported to America, and in place of the whole
substituted a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the com-
modities sent from Spain. He allowed them to return either
to the fame port, or to any other where they might hope for a
more advantageous market, and there to enter the homeward
cargoe, on payment of the usual duties. This ample privilege

P Ponz Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. 5.
Iop. p. 31.

q Append. ii. a 1a Educ.

which
46

which at once broke through all the fences, which the jealous po- B 째0 K
licy of Spain had been labouring for two centuries and a half ----.
to throw round its commercial intercourse with the New World,
was soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the provinces of
Yucatan and Campeachyr.

THE propriety of this innovation, which may be confidered Beneficial es

as the most liberal effort of Spanish legislation, has appeared t
from its effects. Prior to the edic in favour of the free trade,
Spain derived hardly any benefit from its neglected colonies in
H-ispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margareta, and Trinidad. Its com-
merce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and that of Yucatan and
Campeachy was ingroffed almost entirely by interlopers. But
as soon as a general liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone on with a
rapidity of progreflion, of which there are few examples in the
hifory of nations. In less than ten years, the trade of Cuba
has been more than tripled. Even in those settlements where,
from the languishing slate of indufiry, greater efforts were
requisite to reflore its aivity, their commerce has been
doubled. It is computed, that such a number of hips is
already employed in the free trade; that the tonnage of them
far exceeds that of the Galeons and Flota, at the mot flourifll-
ing ara of their commerce. The benefits of this arrangement
are not confined to a few merchants, efiablifhed in a favourite
port. They are diffused through every province of the king-
dom; and by opening a new market for their various produc-
tions and manufadcures, must encourage and add vivacity to the
induflry of the farmer and artificer. Nor does the kingdom

' Appcnd. ii. a la Educ. Pop. 37. 5. 91.
VOL. 1I. 3 H profit

417

B 0 0 K profit only by what it exports, it derives advantage likewise

VIII.

-, from what it receives in return, and has the profpea of being

soon able to supply itself with several commodities of ex-
tensive consumption, for which it formerly depended on so-
reigners. The consumption of sugar in Spain is perhaps as
great in proportion to the number of its inhabitants, as that of
any European kingdom. But though possessed of countries in the
New World, whose foil and climate are most proper for rearing
that valuable plant, though the domefiic culture of the sugar-
cane in the kingdom of Granada was once considerable, such
has been the fatal tendency of its institutions in America,
and such the pressure of injudicious taxes in Europe, that
Spain has loft almost entirely this branch of industry, which
has enriched other nations. This commodity, which has now
become an article of primary necessity in Europe, the Spaniards
were obliged to purchase of foreigners, and had the mortifica-
tion to fee their country drained annually of an immense fum
on that account'. But if that spirit, which' the permiflion of
free trade has put in motion, hall persevere in its efforts with
the fame vigour, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba and Porto
Rico, may increase so much, that in a few years their growth
may be equal to the demand of the kingdom.

Free trade HER experience of the beneficial consequences resulting from
pwrenttehe c- having relaxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws
lonies. with refpet to the commerce of the mother-country with the

colonies, has induced Spain to permit a more liberal intercourse
of one colony with another. By one of the jealous maxims of
the old fyfiem, all communication between the various pro-

"' ztariz, c. 91.i

-vinces
418

vinces situated on the South Seas, was prohibited under the B o K

VIII.

rmoft evere penalties. Though each of these yield peculiar .-.--'
producions, the reciprocal exchange of which might have add-
ed to the happiness of their refpedive inhabitants, or have faci-
litated their progress in industry, so solicitous was the Council
of the Indies, to prevent their receiving any supply of their
wants, but by the periodical fleets from Europe; that in order
to guard against this,. it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru,
in New Spain, in Guatimala, and the New Kingdom of Gra-
nada, from such a correspondence with their fellow-fubjeEts, as
tended manifestly to their mutual prosperity. Of all the nu-
merous reftritions devised by Spain for securing the exclusive
trade with her American settlements, none perhaps was more
illiberal, none seems to have been more sensibly felt, or to have
produced more hurtful effecs. This grievance coeval with the
settlements of Spain in the New World, is at last redressed. In
the year I774, Charles III. published an edic, granting to the
four vast provinces which I havementioned, the privilege of
a free trade with each other '. What may be the effeas of
opening this communication between countries deffined by
their situation for reciprocal intercourse, cannot yet be deter-
mined by experience. They can hardly fail of being beneficial
and extensive. The motives for granting this permission are
manifefily no less laudable, than the principle on which it is
founded is liberal; and both discover the progress of a spirit in
Spain, far elevated above the narrow prejudices and maxims on
which their system for regulating the trade, and conduaing the
government of their colonies, was originally founded.
t Real Cedula penes me. Ponz Viage dc Efpagna, vi. Prologo, p. 2. NOTE XCVI .

3 H2 AT

B 0 0 K AT the fame time that Spain has been intent on introducing

-.__,_ regulations, suggested by more enlarged views of policy, into

tinsconcern- her fyflem of American commerce, the has not been inatten-
ing the go- tive to the interior government of her colonies. Here too there
vernment of
thecoonies. was much room for reformation and improvement, and Don

Joseph Galvez, who has now the direcion of the department
for Indian affairs in Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities,
not only of observing the defeds and corruption in the political
frame of the colonies, but of discovering the sources ofthofe evils.
After being employed seven years in the New World on an ex-
traordinary miflion, and with very extensive powers, as infpec-
tor-general of New Spain, after visiting in person the remote
provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora, and California, and making fe-
veral important alterations in the itate of their police and re-
venue; he began his minifry with a general reformation of the

Reformation tribunals of juflice in America. In consequence of the pro-
of the courts
ofjultice. grefs of population and wealth in the colonies, the business of

the Courts of Audience has increased so much, that the num-
ber of judges of which they were originally composed, has been
found inadequate to the growing labours and duties of the of-
fice, and the salaries fettled upon them, inferior to the dig-
nity of the flation. As a remedy for both, he obtained a royal
edia, establishing an additional number of judges in each court
of Audience, with higher titles, and more ample appointments '.

New dilribu- To the fame intelligent minister Spain is indebted for a new
Crif'n difiribution of government in its American provinces. Even

since the eflablifhment of a third viceroyalty in the New King-

u Gaeta de Madrid, gth March, 1776.

dom
420

dom of Granada, so prodigious is the extent of the Spanish do- B Vll K
minions in the New World, that several places subjeC to the --
jurifdiaion of each of the viceroys, were at such an enormous
diflance from the capitals in which they. resided, that neither
their attention, nor their authority, could reach them. Some
provinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain, lay above
two thousand miles from Mexico. There are countries subjet
to the viceroy of Peru fill farther from Lima. The people in
those remote diftrits, could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit
of civil government. The oppression and insolence of its in-
ferior ministers they often feel, and rather submit to there
in silence, than involve themselves in the expence and trouble
of reporting to the distant capitals, where alone they can find
redress. As a remedy for this, a fourth vice-royalty has been New vie-

royalty,

erected, to thejurifdidion of which are fubjedted the provinces August 1776,
of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, 째PlatO de la
Sts. Cruz de la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and
St. Juan. By this well-judged arrangement, two advantages
are gained. All the inconveniences occasioned by the remote
situation of those provinces, which had been long felt, and long
complained of, are removed. The countries molt diflant from
Lima are separated from the vice-royalty of Peru, and united
under a superior, whose feat of government at Buenos-Ayres
will be commodious and accessible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive, as mufft have
put a final op to the exportation of commodities fiom Spain
to her southern colonies, may be checked more thoroughly, and
with greater facility, when the supreme magiftratc, by his vi.
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, can view its pro-
grefs and cffels with his own eyes. Don Pedro Zevallos, who
has been railed to this new dignity, with appointments equal

9 to

42r

B o o K to those of the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with the

VIII.
_.-,- .j fate and the interest of the countries over which he is to pre-

fide, having served in them long, and with diftinacion. By this
dismemberment, succeeding that which took place at the erection
of the vice-royalty of the New Kingdom of Granada, almost
two-third parts of the territories originally subject to the vice-
roys of Peru, are now lopped off from their jurifdiion.

New govern- THE limits of the vice-royalty of New Spain have likewise
ment in pro-
,inces osSo- been cfiderably circumscribed, and with no less propriety
olra, &c. and discernment. Four of its most remote provinces, Sonora,

Cinaloa, California, and New Navarre, have been formed into
a separate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who is in-
trufled with this command, is not dignified with the title of viceroy,
nor does he enjoy the appointments belonging to that rank, but
his jurifdiaion and authority is altogether independent on the
vice-royalty of New Spain. The erecion of this last government
seems to have been suggested, not only by the consideration of
the remote situation of those provinces from Mexico; but by at-
tention to the late discoveries made there, which I have men-
tionedy. Countries containing such riches, and which probably
may rife into such importance, required the immediate infpec-
tion of a governor, to whom they were specially committed.
As every consideration of duty, of interest, and of vanity,
must concur in prompting those new governors to encourage
such exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity through
the provinces committed to their charge, the beneficial effets of
this arrangement may be considerable. Many diftrias in Ame-
rica, long depressed by the languor and fecblenefs natural to
provinces which compose the extremities of an overgrown cm-

Y Book vi. p. 327.
422

pire,
3

pire, may be animated with vigour and aivity when brought B K

V1II.

so near the feat of power, as to feel its invigorating in- _-
fluence.

SucH, since the acceflion of the Bourbons to the throne of Attempts to

reform do-

Spain, has been the progress of their regulations, and the gra- melaic policy.
dual expansion of their views with refped to the commerce and
government of their American colonies. Nor has their atten-
tion been so entirely engrossed by what related to the more re-
mote parts of their dominions, as to render them neglecful of
what was still more important, the reformation of domestic
errors and defecas in policy. Fully sensible of the causes to
which the declension of Spain, from her former prosperity,
ought to be imputed; they have made it a great object of their
policy, to revive a spirit of industry among their fubjeds, and
to give such extent and perfetion to their manufactures, that
they may be able to supply the demands of America from their
own flock, and to exclude foreigners from a branch of com-
merce which has been so fatal to the kingdom. This they have
endeavoured to accomplish, by a variety of edidcs issued since
the peace of Utrecht. They have granted bounties for the en-
couragement of some branches of indufry; they have lowered
the taxes on others; they have prohibited, or have loaded with
additional duties, such foreign manufacures as come in competi-
tion with them; they have inflituted societies for the improve-
ment of trade and agriculture; they have planted colonies of
husbandmen in ome uncultivated diflris of Spain, and divid-
ed among them the wafle fields; they have had recourse to
every expedient, deviled by commercial wisdom, or commercial
jealousy, for reviving their own induflry, and difcountcnancing
that of other nations. These, however, it is not my province to

explain,

4-3

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B o O K explain, or to inquire into their propriety and effcs. There

VIII.
s is no effort of legislation more arduous, no experiment in po-

licy more uncertain, than an attempt to revive the spirit of in-
duflry where it has declined, or to introduce it where it is un-
known. Nations already possessed of extensive commerce, en-
ter into competition with such advantages, derived from the
large capitals of their merchants, the dexterity of their manu-
facurers, the alertness acquired by habit in every department
of business, that the late which aims at rivalling, or supplant-
ing them, must expect to struggle with many difficulties, ad
be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of productive in-
duftry now in Spain, be compared with that of the kingdom
-under the last listless monarchs of the Aufirian line, its progress
must appear considerable, and is sufficient to alarm the jealousy,
and to call forth the most vigorous efforts of the nations now in
possession of the lucrative trade which the Spaniards aim at
wresting from them. One circumstance may render those exer-
tions of Spain an objec of more serious attention to the other
European powers. They are not to be ascribed wholly to the
influence of the crown and its ministers. The sentiments and
spirit of the people seem to second the provident care of their
monarchs, and to give it greater effca. They have adopted
more liberal ideas, not only with refpeEt to commerce, but do-
meftic policy. In all their later writers, defects in their ar-
rangements concerning both are acknowledged, and remedies
proposed, which pride would not have allowed their ancestors
to confess, and ignorance rendered them incapable of difccrn-
ing ". But after all that the Spaniards have done, much re-
mains to do. Many pernicious intfitutions and abuses, deeply

x See NOTE XCVII.

incorporated

incorporated with the fyflcm of internal policy and taxation, ;; 째 KI

VIII.

which has been long eftablilhed in Spain, mutt be aboliflhed
before industry and manufadurcs can recover an extensive
activity.

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of Spain with Contraband

refped to her colonies, are too rigid and fyllematical to be carri- trade
ed into complete execution. The legislature that loads trade
with impositions too heavy, or fetters it by reftridions too fe-
vere, defeats its own intention; and, in truth, is only multi-
plying the inducements to violate its statutes, and proposing an
high premium to encourage illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both
in Europe and America, circumscribed in their mutual inter-
course by the jealousy, or oppressed by the exaions of the
crown, have their invention continually on the firetch how to
elude its ediEts. The vigilance and ingenuity of private in-
terest discover means of effecing this, which public wisdom
cannot foresee, nor public authority prevent. This spirit,
counteracting that of the laws, pervades the commerce of
Spain with America in all its branches; and from the highest
departments in government, descends to the lowest. The very
officers appointed to check contraband trade, are often employ-
ed as infiruments in carrying it on ; and the boards infituted to
restrain and punish it, are the channels through which it flows.
The king is supposed to be defrauded by various artifices, of
more than one half of the revenue which he ought to receive
fom America Y; and as long as it is the intcrcfl of so many per-
ions to screen thole artifices from detedion, the knowledge of
them will never reach the throne. " How many ordinancec,

Y Solorz de Inc. jure, ii. lib. v.

4'5
VOL. IL

fays.
3 I1

BE O O i fays Corita, lho-. many inflru&ions, how many letters from

-v-.." our sovereign, are ent in order to correct abuses, and how

"little are they observed, and what finall advantage is derived
" from them. To me the old observation appears just, that
a' where there are many physicians, and many medicines, there
" is a want of health; where there are many laws, and many
" judges, there is a want of juflice. We have viceroys, pre-
" sidents, governors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou-
" sands of alguazils abound every where; but notwithstanding
( all these, public abuses continue to multiply '.' Time has
increased the evils which he lamented as early as the reign of
Philip II. A spirit of corruption has infeCted all the colonies
"of Spain in America, Men far removed from the feat of go-
vernment, impatient to acquire wealth, that they may return
speedily from what they are apt to confider as a slate of exile in
a remote unhealthful country, allured by opportunities too
tempting to be refilled, and reduced by the example of those
around them, find their sentiments of honour and of duty gra-
dually relax. In private life, they give themselves up to a dif-
solute luxury, while in their public condua they become un-
mindful of what they owe to their sovereign and their country.

BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish trade in America,

Trade Ic-
tween New there remains one detached, but important branch of it, to be
Sp:in and
thpe Plilnp mentioned. Soon after his accession to the throne, PhilipII.

P s. formed a scheme of planting a colony in the Philippine ilands,

which had been neglected since the time of their dilco-
very ; and he accomplishcd it by means of an armament
fitted out from New Spain b. Manila, in the iland of Luconia,

MS. penes me. a Bookv. p. 127, &c. b Torqucm. i. lib. v. c. i..

2 was
4:6

427
was the station chosen for the capital of this new establishment. B 0 K

VIII,

From it an active commercial intercourse began with the Chinese, ..--
and a considerable number of that industrious people, allured by
the profpet of gain, fettled in the Philippines under the
Spanish protetion. They supplicd the colony so amply with
all the valuable productions and manufactures of the East, as
enabled it to open a trade with America, by a course of navi-
gation, the longest from land to land on our globe. In the in-
fancy of this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on the coast
of Peru ; but experience having difcovcred many diflicultics in
this mode of communication, the ftaplc of this commerce be-
tween the east and weft was removed from Callao to Acapulco,
on the coast of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been brought into a re-

gular form. One or two ships depart annually from Acapulco,
which may carry out silver to the amount of five hundred thouland
pesos', but have hardly any thing elfc of value on board; in re-
turn for which, they bring back spices, drugs, china, and japan
wares, calicoes, chintz, muslins, silks, and every precious article,
with which the benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity of
its people, have enabled the East to supply the reft of the world.
For some time the merchants of Peru were admitted to partici-
pate in this traffic, and might fend annually a ship to Acapul-
co, to wait the arrival of the veflEls from Manila, and receive
a proportional fhiarc of the commodities which they imported. At
length, the Peruvians were excluded by mofi rigorous ediCd's,
and all the commoditics from the East rclcrved folcly for the
consumption of New Spain.

' Rrcop, liI. x. . 4 . 1. 6.

IN
1- 2

B o K IN consequence of this indulgence, the inhabitants of that

'-- country enjoy advantages unknown in the other Spanish co-

lonies. The manufactures of the East are not only more suitcd
to a warm climate, and more showy than those of Europe, but
can be fold at a lower price ; while, at the fame time, the pro-
fits upon them are so considerable, as to enrich all thofc who are
employed, either in bringing them from Manila, or vending
them in New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer and
feller concurred in favouring this branch of commerce, it con-
tinued to extend in spite of regulations, concerted with the
most anxious jealousy to circumscribe it. Under cover of what
the laws permit to be imported, vast quantities of India goods
are poured into the markets of New Spain , and when the flota
arrives at Vera Cruz, it often finds the wants of the people al-
ready supplied by cheaper and more acceptable commodities.

THERE is not in the commercial arrangements of Spain, any

circumstance more inexplicable than the permission of this trade
between New Spain and the Philippines, or more repugnant to
its fundamental maxim of holding the colonies in perpetual de-
pendance on the mother-country, by prohibiting any commer-
cial intcrcourfc that might suggest to them the idea of re-
ceiving a supply of their wants from any other quarter. This
permifion must appear ltill more extraordinary, from confider-
ing that Spain hcrl;lf carries on no direCt trade with her fcttle-
ments in the Phili!,l;iin.s, and grants a privilege to one of her
American colonies, which he denies to her fubjccs in Europe.
It is probable, that the colonifis which originally took pon'lclion
of the Philippines, having been sent out from New Spain, be-

' Sec NOTE XCIX.

gun
428

gun this intercourse with a country which they confidered, in B o K
some measure, as their parent state, before the court of Madrid
was aware of its consequences, or could eflablifh regulations in
order to prevent it. Many remonstrances have been presented
against this trade, as detrimental to Spain, by diverting into
another channel, a large portion of that treasure which ought to
flow into the kingdom, as tending to give rife to a spirit of in-
dependence in the colonies, and to encourage innumerable
frauds, againf which it was impossible to guard, in tranfadions
so far removed from the infpedion of government. But as it
rcquircs no flight effort of political wisdom and vigour to abolish
any pracicc, which numbers are interefled in supporting, and to
which time has added the fandtion of its authority, the commerce
betwixt Acapulco and Manila seems to be as considerable as ever,
and may be confidered as one chief cause of the elegance and
splendor conspicuous in this part of the Spanifli dominions.

But, notwithfanding this general corruption in the colonies, Public re-
and all the defalcations of the public revenue, by the illicit im- venue fom

America.

portation of foreign commodities, or by the fraudulent arts of
its own fubljecs, the Spanish monarchs receive a very confider-
able frum from their American dominions. This arifSs from taxes
of various kinds, which may be divided into three capital
branches. The first contains what is paid to the king, as fove-
rcign, or filpcrior lord of the New World : to this class belongs
the duty on the gold and ilver railed from the mines, and the
tribute cxadlcd fromn tlhe Indians; the former is termed by the
Spaniards the ig lt ofJfniory, the lalter is the dty of vqfa/lagL.
The second branch comprehends the numerous duties upon
commerce, which accompany and opprcfs it in every Ilep of its
progrcls, from the grcateft tranlf.dlions of the wholefile mcr-

chanlt,,

429

B o IC chant, to the petty traffic of the vender by retail The third

VIII.
At_-y~ includes what accrues to the king, as head of the church, and

adminiflrator of ecclesiastical funds in the New World. In
consequence of this he receives the first fruits, annats, spoils,
and other spiritual revenues, levied by the apostolic chamber in
Europe; and is entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the
sale of the bull of Cruzado. This, which is published every
two years, contains, an absolution from palt offences by the
pope, and, among other immunities, a permiflion to eat several
kinds of prohibited food, during Lent, and on meagre days.
The monks employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their
virtues with all the fervour of interested eloquence; the people,
ignorant and credulous, liften with implicit assent; and every
person in the Spanish colonies, of European, Crcolian, or mixed
race, purchases a bull, which is deemed essential to his falva-
tion, at the rate set upon it by government'.
Its amount, WHAT may be the amount of those various finds, it is

almost impoflible to determine with precision. The extent
of the Spanish dominions in America, the jealousy of go-
vernment, which renders them inaccessible to foreigners, the
mysterious silence which the Spaniards are accuflomed to observe
with refped to the interior tfate of their colonies, combine in
covering this subjed with a veil which it is not easy to remove.
But an account, apparently no less accurate, than it is curious,
has lately been publiflhed of the royal revenue in New Spain,
from which we may form ome idea with refpe to what is
collected in the other provinces. According to that account,

c See NOTE C,

the
43o

the crown does not receive from all the departments of taxation B O O K
in New Spain, above a million of our money. from which one ---

i

half Inuft be deducted as the expence of the provincial establish-
ment . Peru, it is probable, yields a um not inferior to this,
and if we fippofe that all the other regions of America, includ-
ing the islands, furnish a third share of equal value; we ilall
not perhaps be far wide from the truth, if we conclude, that
the net public revenue of Spain, railed in America, does not
exceed a million and a half fierling. This falls far flort of
the immense fums, to which suppositions, founded upon con-
jeture, have raised the Spanifi revenue in America . It is
remarkable, however, upon one account. Spain and Portugal
are the only European powers, who derive a direc revenue
from their colonies, as their quota towards defraying the general
expence of government. All the advantage that accrues to
other nations, from their American dominions, arises from the
exclusive enjoyment of their trade; but beside this, Spain has
brought her colonies to contribute to increase the power of the
state; and in return for protection, to bear a proportional share
of the common burden.

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as the amount of the

Spanish revenue from America, comprehends only the taxes
collected there, and is far from being the whole, of what accrues
to the king from his dominions in the New World. The heavy
duties imposcd on the commodities exported from Spain to
America", as well as what is paid by those which fle fends
home in return; the tax upon the negroe-flaves, with which

SecNOTE CI, S Sec NOTE CIH. ' SecNOTE CII.

Africa

B 0 Ic Africa supplies the New World, together with several fnaller

VIII.
tv. j branches of finance, bring large fums into the treasury, the pre-

cife extent of which I cannot pretend to ascertain.

Expence of BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from America be
adminifira-
ioi.ra- great, the expence ofadminiftration in her colonies bears pro-

portion to it. In every department, even of her domeflic po-
lice and finances, Spain has adopted a system more complex,
and more encumbered with a variety of tribunals, and a multi-
tude of officers, than that of any European nation, in which the
sovereign possesses such extensive power. From the jealous fpi-
rit with which ihe watches over her American settlements, and
lier endeavours to guard against fraud in provinces so remote
from infpe&ion; boards and officers have been multiplied there
with ill more anxious attention. In a country where the ex-
pence of living is great, the salaries allotted to every person in
public office must be high, and must load the revenue with an
immense burden. The parade of government greatly augments
the weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and the New
Kingdom of Granada, as representatives of the king's person,
among people fond of ostentation, maintain all the state and
dignity of royalty. Their courts are formed upon the model of
that at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a household regular-
ly eRablifhed, numerous attendants, and ensigns of power, dif-
playing such pomp, as hardly retains the appearance of a dele-
gated authority. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is defrayed by the
crown. The viceroys have betides peculiar appointments suited
to their exalted station. The salaries fixed by law are indeed
extremely moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru is only thirty
thousand ducats; and that of the viceroy of Mexico, twenty

thoufardi
432

thousand ducats'. Of late, they have been raised to forty BOO K

VIII.
thousand. V.

TH ESE salaries, however, constitute but a small part of their

revenue. The exercise of an absolute authority extending to
every department of government, and the power of disposing
of many lucrative offices, affords to them innumerable oppor-
tunities of accumulating wealth. To these, which may be
confidered as legal and allowed emoluments, vast fums arc often
added by exactions, which in countries so far removed from the
feat of government, it is not easy to discover, and impoflible
to restrain. By monopolizing some branches of commerce, by
a lucrative concern in others, by conniving at the fiauds of
merchants, a viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, as no
subjea of any European monarch enjoys . From the ingle article
of presents made to him on the anniversary of his Name-day
(which is always observed as an high fcftival), I am informed
that a viceroy has been known to receive ixty thousand pclbs.
According to a Spanish faying, the legal revenues of a viceroy
are known, his real profits depend upon his opportunities and
his conscience. (Conscious of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly obierved, grant a commilon to their viceroy only for
a few years. This circumlance, however, renders them oftcn
more rapacious, and adds to the ingenuity and ardor wherewith
they labour to improve every moment of power which they
know is hastening fail to a period ; and fiort as its duration
is, it usually affords fufficicnt time for repairing a liattered
fortune, or creating a new one. But even in ituations so try-
ing to human frailty, there arc inftanccs of virtue that remain

i Rccop. lib. iii. tit. iii c. 72. k Sec NO'T' CIV.
VOL. II.

3 1

I)nfcduccd,

B 0o K unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis de Croix finished.

VIII.
'_ ,- _. the term of his vice-royalty in New Spain with nfufpeaed

integrity; and initead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, re-
turned with the admiration and applause of a grateful people,
Vhotn his government had rendered happy.

N O TES
434-440

N O T E

S

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.
VOL. 11;

3L

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTE I. p. 1.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATION S

N T E I. p. i.
O UR knowledge of the events which happened in the con-

quest of New Spain, is derived from sources of information

more original and authentic than that of any tranfaftion in the hiltory
of America. The letters of Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are
the most valuable of there, and the first in order of time. As Cortes
early affurned a command independent of Velasquez, it became ne-
ceffary to convey such an account of his operations to Madrid, as
might procure him the approbation of his sovereign.

THE first of his dispatches has never been made public. It was

sent from Vera-Cruz, July 16th, 1519. It must have come to the
Emperor's hands while he was in Germany, as he left Spain on the
22d of May in that year, in order to receive the imperial crown. I
have made diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain
and in Germany, but without success. This, however, is of les con-
sequence, as it could not contain any thing very material, being writ-
ten so oon after Cortes arrived in New Spain. The second dispatch,
dated OCtober 3oth, 1520, was published at Seville, A. D. 1522, and

3 L 2 the

the third and fourth oon after they were received. A Latin tranfla-
tion of them appeared in Germany A. D. 1532. Ramulio oon as-
ter made them more generally known, by inserting them in his valu-
able collection. They contain a regular and minute history of the ex-
pedition, with many curious particulars concerning the policy and
manners of the Mexicans. The work does honour to Cortes; the
flyle is simple and perspicuous; but as it was manifestly his interest to
represent his own ations in the fairest light, his victories are probably
exaggerated, his losses diminished, and his ats of rigour and violence
somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, by Francisco

Lopez de Gomara, publilhed A. D. 1554. Gomara's historical merit
is considerable. His mode of narration is clear, flowing, always
agreeable, and sometimes elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate
and credulous ; and as he was the domestic chaplain of Cortes after
his return from New Spain, and probably composed his work at his
desire, it is manifest that he labours to magnify the merit of his hero,
and to conceal or extenuate lfch tranfations as were unfavourable to
his character. Of this Herrera accuses him in one instance, Dec. ii.
lib. iii. c. 2. and it is not once only that this is conspicuous. He
writes, however, with so much freedom concerning several measures
of the Spaniflh court, that the copies both of his Hiftoria de las Indias,
and of his Cronica, were called in by a decree of the council of the
Indies, and they were long confidered as prohibited books in Spain,
though of late licence to print them has been granted. Pinelo
Biblioth. 59.

TE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del Castillo to comn-

pose his Hiftoria Verdadera de la Conquifta de la' Nueva Efpagna. He
had been an adventurer in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and
was the companion of Cortes in all his battles and perils. When he
found that neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers
were once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their

4 exploits
444

exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant old veteran laid hold
of his pen with indignation, and composed his true history. It
contains a prolix, minute, confused narrative of all Cortes's opera-
tions, in such a rude vulgar style as might be expected from an illi-
terate soldier. But as he relates transactions of which he was witness,
and in which he performed a considerable part, his account bears all
the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied with such a pleasant
naivete, with such intereffing details, with such amusing vanity, and
yet so pardonable in an old soldier who had been (as he boasts) in a
hundred and nineteen battles, as renders his book one of the most
singular that is to be found in any language.

PET. Martyr ab Angleria in a Treatise de Infulis nuper inven-

tis, added to his Decades de rebus Oceanicis & novo orbe, gives
some account of Cortes's expedition. But he proceeds no farther
than to relate what happened after his firfi landing. This work,
which is brief and flight, seems to contain the information tranfiitted
by Cortes in his firfl dispatches, embellished with several particulars
communicated to the author by the officers who brought the letters
from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern historians have

had recourse for information concerning the conquest of New Spain,
is Hiftoria de la Conquifta de Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, first
published A. D. 1684. I know no author in any language whole li-
terary fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De Solis is reckon-
ed by his countrymen one of the purest writers in the Cafilian tongue
and if a foreigner may venture to give his opinion concerning a matter
of which Spaniards alone are qualilicd tojudge, he is intitlcd to that
praise. But, though his language be correl, his tafie in composition
is far from being just. I-lis periods are so much L;lbourcd as to be
often fliff, and bometimes tumid; the figures, whiclh h employs by
way of ornament, are triteior Itnproper, and his ob(fi-rvations I'uperfici;l.
These blemilhcs, however, might easily be overlooked, if hlc were

not

445

not defecive with refpeE to all the great qualities of an historian.
Destitute of that patient industry in research, which conduEcs to the
knowledge of truth; a stranger to that impartiality which weighs
evidence with cool attention, and ever eager to etablifh his fa-
vourite system of exalting the chara&er of Cortes into that of a per-
fest hero, exempt from error, and adorned with every virtue, he is
less solicitous to discover what was true, than to relate what might ap-
pear splendid. When he attempts any critical discussion, his reasonings
are fallacious, and founded upon an imperfect view of sacs. Though
he ometimes quotes the dispatches of Cortes, he seems not to have
confuked them; and though he sets out with ome censure on Gomara,
he frequently prefers his authority, the most doubtful of any, to that
of the other contemporary historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the fullest and

most accurate information concerning the conquest of Mexico, as well
as every other tranfa&ion in America. The indufry and attention
with which he consulted not only the books, but the original papers
and public records, which tended to throw any light upon the subjec
of his enquiries, were so great, and he usually judges of the evidence
before him with so much impartiality and candour, that his decads
may be ranked among the most judicious and useful historical collec-
tions. If, by attempting to relate the various occurrences in the New
World in a stria chronological order, the arrangement of events in
his work had not been rendered so perplexed, difconneted, and ob-
fcure, that it is an unpleasant task to collet from different parts of
his book, and piece together the detached shreds of a story, he might
justly have been ranked among -the most eminent historians of his
country. He gives an account of the materials from which he com-
posed his work, Dec. vi, lib. iii. c. 9.

NOTE
446

# NOTE II. p. 3.

# NOTE III. p. 5.

# NOTE IV. p. 9.

NOTE II. p;3;
CO R T E S purposed to have gone in the train of Ovando when

he set out for his government in the year 1502, but was detained

by an accident. As he was attempting in a dark night to scramble up
to the window of a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he carried on an
intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mounted, gave
way, and he was so much bruised by the fall as to be unfit for the
voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, cap. .

NOTE III. p. 5.
COR TE S had two thousand pesos in the hands of Andrew Ducro,

and he borrowed four thousand. These funms are about equal in

value to fifteen hundred pounds Sterling; but as the price of every
thing was extremely high in America, they made but a scanty flock
when applied in this manner. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B. Diaz.
C. 20.

NOTE IV. p. 9.
T HE names of those gallant officers which will often occur in the

subsequent story, were Juan Velasquez de Leon, Alonfo Her-

nandez Portocarrero, Francisco de Montejo, Chriftoval de Old, Juan
de Efcalante, Francisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de
Salceda, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself com-
manded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de Orozeo, an officer
formed in the wars of Italy, had the command of the artillery. The
experienced Alaminos ated as chief pilot.

NOTE

47

# NOTE V. p. 11.

# NOTE VI. p. 16.

NOTE V. p. .

N those different conflits, the Spaniards loft only two men, but
had a considerable number wounded. Though there be no occa-

sion for recourse to any supernatural cause to account either for the
greatness of their vi&orie, or the fmadUnefs of their loss, the Spanilh
historians fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of St. Jago, the tu-
telar Saint of their country, who, as they relate, fought at the head
of their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn to the fate of
the battle. Gomara is the first who mentions this apparition of St.
James. It is amusing to observe the embarrassment of B. Diaz de Caf-
tillo, occasioned by the struggle between his superstition and his vera-
city. The former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter re-
strained him from affirming it. " I acknowledge, fays he, that all
our exploits and victories are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that in this battle there was such a number of Indians to every one of
us, that if each had thrown a handful of earth they might have buried
us, if by the great mercy of God we had not been protected. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having appeared on a
mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle Signor St. Jago or
Signor St. Pedro; and that I, as being a finner, was not worthy to
fee him. This I know, that I saw Francisco de Morla on such a
horse, but as an unworthy transgressor, did not deserve to fee any of
the holy apofles. It may have been the will of God, that it was so
as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I never heard among
any of the conquerors that such a thing had happened." Cap. 34.

NO TE VI. p. 16.
SEV E R AL Spanish historians relate this occurrence in such

terms, as if they wished it flould be believed, that the Indians

loaded with the presents, had carried them from the capital in the fame
short space of time that the couriers performed that journey. This is

incredible,
448

# NOTE VII. p. 22.

# NOTE VIII. p. 32.

# NOTE IX. p. 58.

449

incredible, and Gomara mentions a circumstance which thews, that
nothingextraordinary happened on this occaGion. This rich present
had been prepared for Grijalva, when he touched at the fame place
some months before, and was now ready to be delivered, as oon as
Montezuma sent orders for that purpose. Gomara, Cron. c. xxvii;
p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the silver plate

representing the moon, was alone above twenty thousand pesos, about
five thousand pounds Sterling.

NOTE VII. p. 22.
THIS private traffic was directly contrary to the inffrutions of

Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever was acquired by trade

should be thrown into the common flock. But it appears, that the
soldiers had each a private assortment of toys, and other goods pro-
per for the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favour by encou-
raging this under-hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE VIII. p. 32.
GOMARA has publ.fhed a catalogue of the various articles of

which this present consisted. Cron. c. 49. P. Martyr abAngle-

ria, who saw them after they were brought to Spain, and who seems
to have examined them with great attention, gives a description of
each, which is curious, as it conveys some idea of the progrels which
llhe Mexicans had niade in several arts of elegance. De infulis nuper
inventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE IX. p. 3S.
TPHERE is no circumnlance in the history of the conquce of

America, which is more qiuellionale than the account of the

nimerous armies brotu!ht into the fiell ;gainsl thle Spaliarcls. As the
VoL. 1I. 3 M war

war with the Tlafcalans, though of Ihort duration, was one of the
most considerable which they waged in America, the account given
of their forces merits ofme attetqOn. The only authentic informa-
tion concerning this is derived from. three authors. Cortes, in his
second dispatch to the emperor, dated at Segura de la Frontera, Oto-
ber 30, 1520, thus estimates the number of their troops in the first
battle 6000oo; in the second battle oo,ooo; in the third battle
150,000. Relat. ap. Ramtf. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, who
was an eye-witness, and.engaged in all the ations of this war, thus
reckons their numbers; in the first battle 3000, p. 43; in the second
battle 6000, ibid. in the third battle 50,00o, p. 45. Gomara, who
was Cortes's chaplain after. his return to Spain, and published his
Cronica in 1552, follows the computation of Cortes, except in the
'second battle, where he reckons the Tlafcalans at 80,000, p 49. It
was manifeltly the interest of Cortes to magnify his own dangers and
exploits. For it was only by the merit of extraordinary services, that
he could hope to atone for his irregular condu6t, in assuming an in.
dependent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly disposed to
place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-conquerors in the moll
advantageous point of light, had not the fame temptation to exagge-
rate; and, it is probable, that his account of the numbers approaches
nearer to the truth. The assembling of an army of .5o,ooo men re-
quires many previous arrangements, and such provision for their sub-
fitence as feemns to be beyond the foresight of Americans. The degree
ofcultivation in Tlafcala does not seem to have been so great, as to have
furnished such a vast army with provisions. Though this province
was so much better cultivated than other regions of New Spain, that
it was called the country of bread; yet the Spaniards in their march
suffered such want, that they were obliged to subsist upon fTunas, a
species of fruit which grows wild in the fields. Herrera, Dec. ii..
lib. vi. c. 5. p. 182.

NOTE
45,.

# NOTE X. p. 42.

# NOTE XI. p. 44.

NOTE X. p. 42;
T HESE unhappy vidtims are said to be persons of diftin"ion.

It seems improbable that so great a number as fifty should be

employed as spies. So many prisoners had been taken and difmifled,
and the Tlafcalans had sent so many messages to the Spanifli quarters,
that there appears to be no reafbn for hazarding the lives of so many
considerable people, in order to procure information about the position
and state of their camp. The barbarous manner in which Cortes treated
a people unacquainted with the laws of war eftabliihed among polihed
nations, appears so shocking to the later Spaniih writers, that they
diminish the number of those whom he punished so cruelly. Herrera
fays, that he cut off the hands of seven, and the thumbs of ome more.
Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that the hands of fourteen or
fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20.
But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, .. 48,
affirm, that the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOTE XI. p. 44.
THE horses were objects of the greatest aonifhment to all the

people of New Spain. At firit they imagined the horse and his

rider, like the Centaurs of the ancients, to be some monstrous animal of
a terrible form; and supposing, that their food was the fame as that
of men, brought flesh and bread to nourish them. Even after they
discovered their mistake, they believed the horses devoured men in
battle, and when they neighed, thought that they were demanding
their prey. It was not the interefit of the Spaniards to undeceive them.
Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. ii.

NOTE

# NOTE XII. p. 49.

# NOTE XIII. p. 50.

NOTE XII. p. 49.
A CC RD I NG to Bart. de las Casas, there was no reason for this

massacre, and it was an a of wanton cruelty, perpetrated mere-

ly to strike terror into the people of New Spain. Relac. de la De-
firuyc. p. 17, &c. But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to exag-
gerate. In opposition to him Bern. Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the
first miflionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a judicial
inquiry into this tranfa처ion and having examined the priests and
elders of Cholula, found that there was a real conspiracy to cut off
the Spaniards, and that the account given by Cortes was exacly
true. As it was the objea of Cortes at that time, and- manifestly his
,interest, to gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that
he would have taken a tep which tended so visibly to alienate him
from the Spaniards, if he had not believed' it to be neceffiry for-his
own preservation. At the fame time, the Spaniards who served in
America had such contempt for the natives, and thought them so
little entitled to the common rights of men, that Cortes might hold
the Cholulans as guilty upon flight and imperfe evidence. The fe-
verity of the punishment was certainly excessive and atrocious.

NOTE XIII. p. 5So.
THIS description is taken almof literally from Bernal Diaz del

Castillo, who was so unacquainted with the art of composition,

as to'be inchpable ofembellifhing his narrative. He relates in a im-
ple and rude flyle what paffed'in his' own mind; and that of his fellbw-
soldiers on' that occasion; " and let it not be thought firange, fays
he, that I fliould write in this manner of what then happened, for it
ought to be confidered, that it is one thing to relate, another to have
beheld things that were never before seen, or heard, or spoken of
among men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

N O T'L
452

# NOTE XIV. p. 61.

# NOTE XV. p. 63.

NOTE XIV. p. 6p .
B Diaz del Castillo gives us ome idea of the fatigue and hardflips

they underwent in performing this,. and other parts of duty.

During the nine months that they remained in Mexico, every man,
without any diftin&ion between officers and soldiers, sept on his arms,
in his quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or straw spread
on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself as alert as if he
had been on, guard. " This, adds he, became so habitual to me, that
even now in my advanced age, I always sleep in my cloaths, and
never in any bed. When I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it suitable
to my rank, to have a bed carried along with my other baggage, but
I never go into it; but, according to custom, I lie in my-cloaths, and,
walk frequently during the night into the open air, to view the stars:
as I was wont.when in service." Cap. Io8.

NOTE XV. p. 63.
CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the emperor, does:

not explain the motives which induced him either to condemn

Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put Montezuma in irons. Ramus.
iii. 236. B. Diaz is silent with refpecl to his reasons for the former;.
and the only cause he assigns for the latter was, that he might meet
with no interruption in executing the fentencc pronounced against
Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But as Montezuma was his prisoner,
and absolutely in his power, the insult offered to that monarch could
have no effect but to irritate him unnecessarily. Gomara luppofes, that
Cortes had no other object than to occupy Montezuma with his own
distress and fuffcrings, that he might give less attention to what befcl
Qualpopoca. Cron. c. 89. 1-lerrera adopts the fame opinion. )ec.
ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it feenis an odd expedient, in order to make a
person bear one injury, to load him with another tli;at is greater. DI
Solis imagines, that Cortes had nothing else in view than to intimli-

dal.c

453'

# NOTE XVI. p. 67.

# NOTE XVII. p. 69.

date Montezuma, so that he might make no attempt to rescue the
vitims from their fate; but the spirit of that monarch was so fb-
miflive, and he had so tamely given up the prisoners to the disposal of
Cortes, that he had little to dread from him. If the explanation
which I have attempted to give of Cortes's proceedings on this occa-
sion be not admitted, it appears to me, that they must be reckoned
among the wanton and barbarous as of oppreflion which occur too
often in the history of the conquest of America.

NOTE XVI. p.67.
D E Solis aferts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of doing homage

to the King of Spain, came from Montezuma himself, and was

fiade in order to induce the Spaniards to depart out of his dominions.
He describes his conduct on this occafio, as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed with such refined ad-
dress, as to deceive Cortes himself. But there is no hint or circum-
fiance in the contemporary historians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to
justify this theory. Montezuma, on other occasions, discovered no
such extent of art and abilitiesl The anguish which he felt in per-
forming this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to have
been involuntary. But, according to the theory of De Solis, it would
have been preposterous and inconsistent with his own design of deceiv-
ing the Spaniards.

N.O T.g XVII. p. 69;
IN feveralof the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their industry

and influence, could colle& no gold. In others, they procured

only a few trinkets of small value. Montezuma aured Cortes, that
the present which he offered to the King of Castile, after doing ho-
mage, conifted of all the treasure anafed by his father; and told
him, that he had already diltributed the reft of his gold and jewels

2 among

# NOTE XVIII. p. 70.

# NOTE XIX. p. 74.

455'

among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara relates, that all
the silver colleted amounted to 500 Merks. Cron. c. 93. This
agrees with the account given by Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver
was oo marks. Relat. 239. B. So that the fum total of silver was
only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces a mark, which demon-
ftrates the proportion of silver to gold to have been exceedingly frall.

NOTE XVIII, p. 70.
D E Solis, lib. iv. c. . calls in question the truth of this tranfac-

tion, from no better reason than that it was inconsistent with

that prudence which diflinguifhes the character of Cortes. But he
ought to have recolleced the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which
was no less imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it refts upon
the testimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara, and of Herrera.
They all concur indeed, in mentioning this inconsiderate flep which
Cortes took, and they had good reason to do so, for Cortes himself
relates this exploit in his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to
glory in it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 140. D. This is one inftarce,
among many, of De Solis's having consulted with little attention'the
letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which the most authentic inform-
ation with respect to his operations muff be derived.

NOTE XIX. p. 74.
HERRERA and De' Solis suppose, that Velasquez was encou.

raged to equip this armament againfl Cortes, by the accounts

which he received from Spain concerning the reception of the agents
sent by the colony of Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca.
bilhop of Burgos had efpQufed his interest, and condemned the pro-
ceedings of Cortes. lerrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8. De Solis, lib. iv.
c. 5. But the chronological order of events refutes this supposition.
Pertocarrero and. Montejo. failed from Vera Cruz, July 26, 1519.

Herremra,

# NOTE XX. p. 76.

Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in Oober,
according to Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court
at that time, and communicated every occurrence of moment to his
correspondents day by day, mentions the arrival of these agents, for
the first time in December, and speaks of it as a recent event. Epift.
650. All the historians agree, that the agents of Cortes had their
first audience of the emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to that
town to visit his mother in his way to St. Jago de Compoftella. Her-
rera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis, ib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set
out from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the I th of March 520; and
P. Martyr mentions his having seen at that time the presents made to
Charles, Epift. 665. The armament under Narvaez failed from
Cuba in April 1520. It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not
receive any account of what passed in this interview at Tordefillas, pre-
vious to his holtile preparations against Cortes. His real motives
seem to be those which I have mentioned. The patent appointing him
/,delantado of New Spain, with such extensive powers, bears date
November 13, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. iL. He might re-
ceive it about the beginning of January. Gomara takes notice, that
as soon as this patent was delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet
and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

NOTE XX. p. 76.
D E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpreters, he could hold

no intercourse with the people of the provinces, nor converle

with them in any way but by signs, and that it was equally impoffble
for him to carry on any communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv.
c. 7. But it is upon the authority of Cortes himself that I relate all
the particulars of Narvaez's correspondence, both with Montezuma
and with his subjes in the maritime provinces. Rlelat. Ramu'. iii.
244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there was a mode of intercourfl be-
tween Narvaez ani the Mexicans, but does not explain how it was
carried on. Bernal Diaz supplies this defcat, and informs us, that

x the
456

# NOTE XXI. p. 89.

# NOTE XXII. p. 95.

the three deserters who joined Narvaez acted as interpreters, ha ving
acquired a competent knowledge of the language, c. I1o. With his
usual minuteness, he mentions their names and characers, and relates,
in chapter 122, how they were punished for their perfidy. The Spa-
niards had now resided above a year among the Mexicans; and it is
not surprising, that several among them Ihould have made ome profi-
ciency in peaking their language. This seems to have been the cafe.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. . Both B. Diaz, who was present, and
Herrera, the moif accurate and best informed of all the Spanish wri-
ters, agree with Cortes in his account of the secret correspondence
carried on with Montezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8, 19. De Solis
seems to confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Monte-
zuma should have been ready to engage in a correspondence with Nar-
vaez. He supposes that monarch to have contracted such a wonder-
ful affection for the Spaniards, that he was not solicitous to be deli-
vered from them. After the indignity with which he had been treat-
ed, such an affection is incredible; and even De Solis is obliged to ac-
knowledge, that it must be looked upon as one of the miracles which
God wrought to facilitate the conquest, lib. iv. c. 7. The truth
is, Montezuma, however much overawed by his dread of the Spa-
niards, was extremely impatient to recoverhis liberty.

NO rE XXI. p. 89.
THESE words I have borrowed from the anonymous Account of

the European Settlements in America, published by Dodfley, in

two volumes, 8vo. a work of so much merit, that I should think there
is hardly any writer in the age who ought to be ashamed of acknow-
ledging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XXII. p. 95.
T I E contemporary historians differ considerably with refpct to

the loss of the Spaniards on this occasion. Cortes, in his second

dipatch to the emperor, makes the number only 150. Relat. ap.
Vo . I. 3 N Ramul.

457

# NOTE XXIII. p. 113.

# NOTE XXIV. p. 120.

Ranuf. iii. p. 249, A. But it was manifestly his interest, at that
juncture, to conceal from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss
which he had fuflained. De Solis, always fludious to diminish every
misfortune that besel his countrymen, rates their loss at about two
hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19. B. Diaz affirms, that they loft 870
men, and that only 440 escaped from Mexico, c. 128, p. o8. b.
Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles, who seems to have inquired into the
early tranfations of his countrymen in New Spain, with great atten-
tion, confirms the account of B. Diaz with refpea to the extent of
tli-ir loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Gomara ifates their loss at
450 men. Cron. c. o09. Some months afterwards, when Cortes had re-
ceived several reinforcements, he mustered his troops, and found them
to be only 59o. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez
brought 880 men into New Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers
were then alive, it is evident, that his loss in the retreat from Mexico
muf have been much more considerable than what he mentions. B. Diaz,
Iblicitous to magnify the dangers and sufferings to which he and his
fellow-conquerors were exposed, may have exaggerated their loss;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be estimated at less than 600 men.

NOTE XXIII. p. 113.
SOME remains of this great work are ill visible, and the fpo:

where the brigantines were built and launched, is still pointed out

to strangers. Torquemada viewed them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i.
P. 53'-

NOTE XXIV. p. 120.
T H E ifation of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba was the nearest

to the city. Cortes observes, that there they could diflinc-ly ob-

serve what passed when their countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap.
Ramus. iii. p. 273. E. B. Diaz who belonged to Alvarado's divi-
lion, relates what he beheld with his own eyes. C. 152. p. 148, b.
149, a. Like a man whose courage was so clear as to be above full

iciun
458

# NOTE XXV. p. 125.

459

picion, he describes with his usual simplicity the impreflion which this
fpecacle made upon him. " Before, fays he, I saw the breafls of
my companions opened, their hearts yet fluttering, offered to an ac-
cursed idol, and their flesh devoured by their exulting enemies; I was
accustomed to enter a battle not only without fear, but with high
spirit. But from that time I never advanced to fight the Mexicans
without a secret horror and anxiety, my heart trembled at the thoughts
of the death which I had seen them fufler." He takes care to add, that
as soon as the combat began this terror went off; and, indeed, his ad-
venturous bravery on every occasion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz,
c. 156. . 157, a.

NOTE XXV. p. 125.
O N E circumfiance in this siege merits particular notice. The ac-

count which the Spanish writers give of the numerous armies

employed in the attack or defence of Mexico, seems to be incredible.
According to Cortes himself, he had at one time 150,000 auxiliary
Indians in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomara asserts,
that they were above 200,000. Cron. c. 36. Herrera, an author of
higher authority, fays, they were about 200,000. Dec. iii. lib, i.
c. 19. None of the contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the
number of persons in Mexico during the liege. But Cortes on several
occasions mentions the number of Mexicans who were slain, or who
perished for want of food ; and, if we may rely on thoe circumltances,
it is probable, that above two hundred thoufind nmufl have been shut
up in the town. But the quantity of provisions necessary for the Lfb-
liltcnce of iich valt multitudes assembled in one place during three
months is so grcat, and it requires o much foresight and arrangement
to collect them, so as to be certain of a regular supply, that one can
hardly believe that this couldl be accompliflied in a country where
agriculture was to imperfec& as in the Mexican empire, where there
were no tame animals, and by a people naturally lb improvident, and

3N 2 so

so incapable of executing a complicated plan as the most improved
Americans. The Spaniards, with all their care and attention, fared
very poorly, and were often reduced to extreme distress from want
of provisions. B. Diaz, p. 142. Cortes Relat. 271, D. Cortes on one
occasion mentions slightly the subsistence of his army; and after
acknowledging, that they were often in great want, adds, that they
received supplies from the people of the country, of fish, and of some
fruit, which he calls the cherries of the country, Ibid. B. Diaz
fays, that they had cakes of maize, and cerafas de la tierra; and when
the season of these was over, another fruit, which he calls Tunas; but
their most comfortable fubfitence was a root which the Indians use as
food, to which he gives the name of uilites, p. 142, The Indian
., auxiliaries had one means of subsistence more than the Spaniards. They
fed upon the bodies of the Mexicans whom they killed in battle. Cort.
Relat, 176, C. . Diaz confirms his relation, and adds, that when
the Indians returned from Mexico to their own. country, they carried
with them large quantities of the fle(h of the Mexicans salted or dried,
as a most acceptable present to their friends, that they might have the
pleasure of feeding on the bodies of their enemies in. their feffivals.
p. 157. De Solis, who seems to confider it as an imputation of difcre-
dit to his countrymen, that they should a in,concert:with auxiliaries
who fed upon human flesh, is solicitous to prove, that they en-
deavoured to prevent their associates from eating the bodies of the
Mexicans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this from the
original historians. Neither Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz, seem to have
had any such scruple; and, on many occasions, mention the Indian
repasts, which were become familiar to them, without any mark of
abhorrence. Even with this additional flock of food for the Indians,
it was hardly possible to procure subsistence for armies amounting to
such numbers as we find in the Spanish writers. Perhaps, the befl so-
lution of the difficulty is, to adopt the opinion of B. Diaz del Caflillo,
the most artless of all the lliforiadores primnilivos. " When Gomara,
fays he, on ome occasions relates, that there were so many thousand
Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that there were so many thou-

ind
46o

# NOTE XXVI. p. 138.

find houses in this or that town, no regard is to be paid to his enume-
ration, as he has no authority for it, the numbers not being in reality
the fifth of what he relates. If we add together the different numbers
which he mentions, that country would contain more millions than
there are in Castile." C. 129. But though ome considerable deduc-
tion should certainly be made from the Spanish accounts of the Mexi-
can forces;. they must have been very numerous, for nothing but an
immense superiority in number, could have enabled them to withstand
a body of nine hundred Spaniards, commanded by a general of such
abilities as Cortes.

NOTE XXVI. p. 138.

N relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of the conquerors
of New Spain, I have not followed B. de las Casas as my guide.

His account of them,. Relat. de la Deftruyc. p. 8, &c. is manifefily
exaggerated. It is from the testimony of Cortes himself and Gomara,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account of the punish-
ment of the Panucans, and they relate it without any disapprobation.
B. Diaz, contrary to his usual custom, mentions it only in general
terms, c. 62. Herrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous a-
tion of his countrymen, though he mentions 60 caziqucs, and 400
men of note, as being condemned to the flames, asserts, that thirty on-
ly were burnt, and the reft pardoned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this
is contrary to the testimony of the original hillorians, particularly of
Gomara, whom it appears he had consulted, as he adopts several of
his expreflions in this passage. The punishment of Guatimozin is re-
lated by the most authentic of the Spanish writers. Torquemada has
extracted from a hiltory of Tezeuco, composed in the Mexican tongue,
an account of this tranfaftion, more favourable to Guatimozin than
that of the Spanilh authors. Mon. Indiana, i. 575. According to
that account, Cortes had scarcely a shadow of evidence tojultify such
a wanton a: of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and his
fcllow-fufferers asserted their innocence with their last breath, and that

many

46i

# NOTE XXVII. p. 140.

# NOTE XXVIII. p. 142.

many of the Spanilh soldiers condemned this aion of Cortes as equal-
ly unnecessary and unjufi, p. zoo, b. 201, a.

NOTE XXVII. p. 140.

HE motive for undertaking this expedition was, to punish Chris-
toval de Olid, one of his officers who had revolted against him,

and aimed at establishing an independent jurifdiEtion. Cortes regard-
ed this infurretion as of such dangerous example, and dreaded so
much the abilities and popularity of its author, that in person he led
the body of troops deltined to suppress it. He marched, according
to Gomara, three thousand miles, through a country abounding with
-thick forests, rugged mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and
cultivated only in a few places. What he suffered from famine, from
the hostility of the natives, from the climate, and from hardships of
every species, has nothing in history parallel to it, but what occurs in
the adventures of the other discoverers and conquerors of the New
World. Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above two
years, and though it was not distinguished by any splendid event, he
exhibited, during the course of it, greater personal courage, more for-
titude of mind, more perseverance and patience, than in any other
period or scene in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix. Go-
mara Cron. c. 163-177. B. Diaz, 74--19o.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 142.
ACCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which Cortes brought

with him, consisted of fifteen hundred marks of wrought plate,

two hundred thousand pesos of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior
standard, many rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thouliand
pesos, and several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. lib. iv. c. . He afterwards engaged to give a portion witll his
daughter of a hundred thousand pesos. Gomara Cron. c, 237. The

6 fortlint'
462

# NOTE XXIX. p. 147.

fortune which he left his sons was very considerable. But as we have
before related, the fum divided among the conquerors on the first
reduction of Mexico was very small. There appears then to be ome
reason for fufpecing that the accufarions of Cortes's enemies were not
altogether destitute of foundation. They charged him with having
unjuffly applied to his own use a disproportionate hare of the Mexican
spoils; with having concealed the royal treasures of Montezuma and
Guatimozin, with defrauding the king of his fifth, and robbing his
followers of what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15.
dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors themselves entertained
suspicions of the fame kind. B. Diaz, c. 157.

NOTE XXIX. p. 147.
I N tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New Spain, we have

followed Cortes himself as our most certain guide. His dispatches

to the emperor contain a minute account of his operations. But the
unlettered conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpec: to them is derived however from
contemporary and refpeaable authors.

THE most early account of Pizarro's tranfations in Peru, was pub-

Iifhed by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary. It is a simple unadorned
narrative, carried down no farther than the death of Atahualpa, in
1533; for the author returned to Spain in 1534, and soon after he
landed, printed at Seville his short History of the Conquelt of Peru,
addressed to the emperor.

DON Pedro Sancho, an officer who served under Pizarro, drew up

an account of his expedition, which was translated into Italian by Ra-
mufio, and inserted in his valuable collection, but has never been
published in its original language. Sancho returned to Spain at the
fame time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both thole authors
relate concerning the progress and operations of Pizarro, but the re-

fidence

463

fidence of the Spaniards in Peru had been so short, at the time when
they left it, and their intercourse with the natives so lender, that their
knowledge of the Peruvian manners and customs is very imperfet.

THE next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de Leon, whe

published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville in 153. If he had
finilhed all that he proposes in the general division of his work, it
would have been the most complete history which had been publifled
of any region in the New World. He was well qualified to execute it,
having served during seventeen years in America, and visited in per-
son most of the provinces concerning which he had occasion to write.
But only the first part of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains
a description of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an
account of the institutions and customs of the natives, and is written
with so little art, and such an apparent regard for truth, that one must
regret the loss of the otherparts of his work,

THIS Idss is amply supplied by Don Augustine Zarate, who publish-

ed, in 1555, his Hiftoria del defcubrimiento y Conquefta de la Pro-
vincia del Peru. Zarate was a man of rank and education, and em-
ployed in Peru as comptroller-general of the public revenue. His
history, whether we attend to its matter or composition, is a book of
considerable merit; as 'he had opportunity to be well informed, and
seems to have been inquisitive with refpe6 to the manners and tranfac-
tions of the Peruvians, great credit is dule to his ctetimony.

DoN Diego Fernandez publilhed his Hiftoria del Peru in 571.

His sole object is to relate the dissensions and civil wars of the Spaniards
in that empire. As he served in a public station in Peru, and was well
acquainted both with the country, and with the principal actors in
those singular scenes which he describes, as he poffefled found under-
standing, and great impartiality, his work may be ranked among tllofe
of the hiltorians most diffinguiflled for their industry in research, or
their capacity in judging with refpet to the events which they relate.

I ThzE
464

THE lall author who can be reckoned among the contemporary

hifforians of the conquest of Peru, is Garcilafo de la Vega, Incai. For
though the first part of his work, intitled, Comentarios Reales del Oii-
gen de los Incas Reies del Pe-u, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the last emperor,
yet as he was born in Peru, and was the ion of an officer of dillincion
among the Spanish conquerors, by a Caya, or lady of the royal race,
on account of which he always took the name of Inca, as he was maf-
ter of the language spoken by the Incas, and acquainted with the tra-
ditions of his countrymen, his authority is rated very high, and often
placed above that of all the other historians. His work, however, is
little more than a commentary upon the Spanilh writers of the Peru-
vian story, and conpofied of quotations taken from the authors whom
I have mentioned. This is the idea which he himlelf gives of it, Lib i.
c. o. Nor is it in the account of fats only that he follows them ser-
vilely. Even in explaining the inflitutions and rites of his ancestors,
his information seems not to be more perfect than theirs. His explana-
tion of the Quipos is almost the fame with that of Acofia. He pro-
duces no specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which
he borrows from Bias Valera, an early miiflonary, whose memoirs
have never been published. Lib. ii. c. j5. As for composition, ar-
rangement, or a capacity of diftinguifiing between what is fabulous,
what is probable, and what is true, one searches for them in vain in the
commentaries of Inca. His work, however, notwithtlanding its
great defedcs, is not altogether destitute of use. Some traditions
which he received from his countrymen are preserved in it. His
knowledge of the Peruvian language has enabled him to correl ftome
errors of the Spanifl writers, and lie has inserted in it ome curious
fats taken from authors whose works were never published, and are
now loft.

N OT .

465
VOL. II.

3 0

# NOTE XXX. p. 152.

# NOTE XXXI. p. 155.

# NOTE XXXII. p. 169.

NOTE XXX. p. 152.
O N E may form an idea both of the hardships which they endured,

and of the sickliness of the regions which they visited, from the

extraordinary mortality that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried
out 112 men, Almagro 70. In less than nine months iSo of thele
died. Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut off by diseases.
Xerez, p. 18o.

NOTE XXXI. p. 155.
T H I S island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfortable by the

unwholefomenefs of its climate, its impenetrable woods, its

rugged mountains, and the multitude of insets and reptiles, that in
is seldom any softer epithet than that of infernal is employed in defcrib-
ing it. The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout the year
it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. iii. lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched
at this ifand in the year 685; and his account of the climate is not
morefavourable. Vol. i. p. 172. He, during his cruize on thatcoaft,
visited most of the places where Pizarro landed, and his description of
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE XXXII. p. 69.
n Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spanish settlements

on the continent. When Cortes began his expedition in the year

1518, though his armament was more considerable than that o'
Pizarro, and composed of persons superior in rank to those who in-
vaded Peru, he could procure no more than sixteen horses.

N T IE'
466

# NOTE XXXIII. p. 171.

# NOTE XXXIV. p. 175.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 171.
IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ullon, and D. George Juan, travelled

from Gjayquil to Motupe, by the fame route which Pizarro took.

From the description of their journey, one may form an idea of the
difficulty of his march. The sandy plains between St. Michael de
'iura and Motupe extend go miles, without watcl, without a tree, a
plant, or any green thing, on a dreary stretch of burning land. Voyage,
tom. i. p. 399, 9&c.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 175.
T -IIS extravagant and unfealbnable discourse of Valverde has been

censured by all historians, and with jiflice. But though he seems

to have been an illiterate and bigotced monk, nowise reftinbling the
good Olmedo, wlo accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his address
to Atahualpa must not be charged wholly upon him. His harangue
is evidently a translation, or paraphrase of that form, concerted by a
junto of Spanish divines and lawyers in the year 1509, for explaining
the right of their king to the sovereignty of the New World, and for
direcling the officers employed in America how they flould take polf
ieflion of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The fentilnents con-
tained in Valverde's harangue mult not then be imputed to the bigot-
ted imhecillity of a particular man, but to that of the age. Gomara
and Benzoni relate one circumstance concerning Valvcrde, which, if
authentic, renders him an obje not of contempt only, but of horror.
T''lIy alTerr, that during the whole action, Valverde continued to ex-
cite the oltliers to fl atiglLr, calling to them to llrike the enemy not
wirli the edge, but with the points of their swords;. (;om Cron.
c. 11i . Ienz. 1-illor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour was
very dilllrcnt ;from that of the Roman Catholic clergy in other parts of
i\Aericl1,where they uniformly exerted their influence to protCt& the
Inians, and to imoderate the ferocity of their countrymen.

467

NOTE
30 2

# NOTE XXXV. p. 176.

NOTE XXXV. p. I76.
TWO different systems have been formed concerning the conduc

of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in order to justify the vio-

lence of their countrymen, contend, that all the Inca's professions of
friendship were feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and his followers
at one blow; that for this purpose he advanced with such a nume-
rous body of attendants, who had arms concealed under their garments
to execute this scheme. This is the account given by Xerez and Za-
rate, and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of the Inca
to defroy the Spaniards, one can hardly imagine that he would have
permitted them to march unmolested through the desert of Motupe,
or have neglected to defend the passes in the mountains, where they
might have been attacked with so much advantage. If the Peruvians
marched to Caxamalca with an intention to fall upon the Spaniards, it
is inconceivable, that of so great a body men, prepared for action, not
one hould attempt to make resistance, but all tamely fufferthemfelves to
be butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack. Ata-
hualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the apect of a
peaceable procession, not of a military enterprize. He hhncflf, and
his followers were, in their habits of ceremony, preceded, as on J;:ys
of solemnity, by unarmed harbingers. Though rude nations are fre-
quently cunning and false,. yet, if a scheme of deception and treachery
must be imputed either to a monarch, that had no great reason to be
alarmed at a visit from flrangers who solicited admiflion into his pre-
fence as friends, or to an adventurer so daring, and so little fcruln-
lous as Pizarro, one cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the
prefumtion of guilt. Even amidlt the endeavours of the Spanifli
writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly perceives,
that it was his intention, as well as his intercef, to seize the I r.c, anL
that lie had taken measures for that purpose, previous to any fuli)icion
of that monarch's designs,

GARCILASSO
468

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to vindicate his coun-

trymen, the Peruvians, from the crime of having concerted the deftrrc-
tion of Pizarro and his followers, and no less afraid to charge the Spa-
niards with improper conduct tovards the Inca, has framed another
system. He relates, that a man of majeitic form, with a long beard,
and garments reaching to the ground, having appeared in vision to
Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and declared, that he was a child of the
Sun, that monarch built a temple in honour of this person, and erect-
ed an image of him, resembling as nearly as poflible the singular
form in which he had exhibited himself to his view. In this temple,
divine honours were paid to him, by the name ofViracocha. P. i.
lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22. When the Spaniards first appear-
ed in Peru, the length of their beards, and the dress they wore, firuck
every person so much with their likcnefs to the image of Viracocha,
that they supposed them to be children of the Sun, who had descended
from heaven to earth. All concluded, that the fatal period of the I'e-
ruvian empire was now approaching, and that the throne would be oc-
cupied by new pofiefors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the Spa-
niards as neffengers from heaven, was tb far from entertaining any
thoughts of resisting them, that he determined to yield implicit obedi-
ence to their commands. From thole sentiments flowed his professions
of love and refpecl-. To tliole were oing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the fubmiflive reverence
with which he advanced to vilit the Spanifil gcneral in his quarters.
But from the gross ignorance of l'liiliillo, the interpretcr, the decla-
ration of the Spaniards, and his anfwvcr to it, were so ill expl:ined,
that by their imutual inability to colmprehcnd each other's intentions,
the fatdl rencounter at Cax;iamalca, with all its dreadful conleltuences,
was occasioned.

Jr is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperflitious veneration of

the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be foiund either in Xerez, or
Sanclo, or Zarate, previous to the interview at C'ax;lultlca ; and yet
the two former licrvcd under I'izarro at tliat tin:e, and tlhe latter vilit-

t c .l

469

ed Peru soon after the conquest. If either te Inca himself, or his
messengers, had addressed the Spaniards in the words which La Ve'a
put in their mouths, they must have been fruck with such fubmiflive
declarations; and they would certainly have availed theilves of
them to accomplish their own dcfigns with greater facility. La Veca
himself, though his narrative of the intercourle between the Inca and
Spaniards preceding the rencounter at Caxamalca, is founded on tih
supposition of his believing them to be Viracochas, or divine beins.
P. ii. lib. i. c. 17, &c. yet with his usual inattention and inaccuracy
he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not recolles te
resemblance between them and the god Viracocha, until the fatal liiaf.
ters subsequent to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then only began to ca!l
,hem Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 2. This is confirmedby Herrera,
dec. v. lib. ii. c. 12. In many different parts of America, if we may
bLlieve the Spanilh writers, their countrymen were confidered as divine
beings who had descended from Heaven. But in this inllance, .s ii
many which occur in the inrercourfe between nations, whol; pro ,ic:;
in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of those who used die c: 'rel-
sion, were different from the ideas of those who heard it. I-or, l.ch
is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is the fimpliciry of tho.a
who speak them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know the origin;
they fay, that it came down from heaven. Nugnez. Ram. iii.
327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments and proceedings

of the Peruvians, appears to be more natural and conlilcnt tlha:n iier
짰f the two preceding, and is better upported by the fads rclaicd by tle
contemporary hiflorians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Peruvians were killd.

Sancho makes the nu-berc of the slain fix or fcvcn thouland. Rm;. Ii.
274, 1). 3y La Vga's account, live thoulihnd were malai..1.
P. ii. lib. i. c. 2j, The number 'which I have menllioind, b.;.;

I tilC
47째

# NOTE XXXVI. p. 178.

# NOTE XXXVII. p. 188.

the medium between the extremes, may probably be nearefl the
truth.

NOTE XXXVI p. I.7.
7 O TI IN G can be a more riking proof of this, than that three

Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to Cuzco. The diltance be-

tween them is fix hundred miles. In every place throughout this val:
extent of country, they were treated with all the honours which the
Peruvians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their divinities. Under
pretext of amanfing what was wanting for the ransom of the Inca, they
demanded the plates of gold with which the walls of the Temple of the
Sun in Cuzco were adorned; and though the prirtis were unwilling to
alienate those sacred ornaments, and the people refused to violate the
hrine of their God, the three Spaniards with their own hands robbed
the Temple of part of this valuable treasure; and such was the re-
verence of the natives for their persons, that though they beheld this
aft of sacrilege witl aflonifhment, they did not attempt to prevent or
disturb thecommiffion of it. Zarate,lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap.Ramuf. iii.
375, D.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 188.
A C 0 R D I N G to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after setting apart

the king's fifth, was divided among 480 persons. Each received

4000 pesos. This amounts to 1,920,000 pesos. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 3.
lBut as the general, and other officers, were entitled to a part far greater
than thato rlc private men, the iuim total muf- have rifcn much be-
yond what I have mentioned. uGmara, c. 123. and Zaralte, lib, ii.
c. 8. satisfy tlcmeflvcs with afierting in general, that tlh plunder of
Cuzco was of greater value than tic ralfom of Atallhulpa.

NO T

471

# NOTE XXXVIII. p. 190.

# NOTE XXXIX. p. 191.

# NOTE LX. p. 198.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 19o.
N O0 expedition in the New World was conducted with more per-

fevering courage than that of Alvarado, and in none were greater

hardhips endured. Many of the persons engaged in it were, like their
leader, veterans who had served under Cortes, inured to all the ri-
gour of American war. Such of my readers as have not an opportu-
nity of perusing the striking description of their sufferings by Zarate
or Herrera, may form ome idea of the nature of their march from the
sea-coast to Quito, by consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa
gives of his own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
ton. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who proceeded from
'Puerto Viejo to Quito, by the fame road which Alvarado took. He
compares his own journey with that of the Spanish leader, and by the
comparison, gives a most striking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many obstacles. Voyage du
Perou, p. xxviii, &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 191.
A CCORDING to Herrera, there was entered on account of the

king, in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 5400 marks (each 8 ounces)

of silver, betides several vessels and ornaments, ome of gold, and
others of silver; on account of private persons, in gold 499,C00
pesos, and 54,000 marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE LX. p. 198.

ITHE Peruvians had recourse to other military arts than those of
the Spaniards. As the cavalry were the chief object of their ter-

ror, they endeavoured to render them incapable of aing, by throw.
ing a long thong with a fione faflened to each end. This twilled about
the horse and its rider, entangled them so as to render them in-

capable
472

# NOTE XLI. p. 215.

capable of ating. Herrera mentions this as an invention of their own.
Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. i. p. 375, this weapon
is common among several barbarous tribes towards the extremity of
South America; and it is more probable,. that the Peruvians had ob-
served the dexterity with which they used it in hunting, and on this
occasion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were considerably an-
noyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another inflance of the ingenuity of
the Peruvians deserves mention. By turning a river out of its chan-
nel, they overflowed a valley, in which a body of Spaniards was post-
ed, so suddenly, that it was with the utmost difficulty they made their
escape. Herrera, dec. v. lib, viii. c. 5

NO TE XLI. p. 25.

E R R E R A's account of Orellana's voyage is the most minute,
and apparently the mol accurate. It was probably taken from

the journal ofOrellana limiclf. But the dares are not diflincly mark-
ed. His navigation down the Coca, or Napo, begun early in
February 1 541; and he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 2 6th
of August, having spent near seven months in the voyage. M. de la
Condamine, in the year 1743, Iailed from Cuenca to Para, a fettle-
ment of the Portuguese at the mouth of the river, a navigation much
longer than that of Orellana, in less than four months. Voyage,
p. 179. But the two adventurers were very differently provided for
the voyage. This hazardous undertaking, to which ambition prompted
Orellana, and to which the love of fcicnce led M. de la Condamine, was
undertaken in the year 1769, by Madame Godin des Odonais, from con-
jugal affection. The narrative of the hardfhlips which she suffered, of
the dangers to which ffie was exposed, and of the disasters which befcl
her, is one of the most lingular and affeding stories in any language, ex-
hibiting in her condut a firiking pitlure of the fortitude which diflin-
guifl the one ex, mingled with the sensibility and tenderncfs peculiar
to the other. Lettre e M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

NOT
VOL. II.

3 P

# NOTE XLII. p. 218.

# NOTE XLIII. p. 229.

# NOTE XLIV. p. 241.

NOTE XLII. p. 28.
HERRERA gives a friking picture of their indigence. Twelve

gentlemen, who had been officers of diflin&ion under Almagro,

lodged in the fame house, and having but one cloak among them, it
was worn alternately by him who had occasion to appear in public,
while the reft, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to keep
within doors. Their former friend': and companions were so much
afraid of giving offence to Pizarro, that they durst not entertain,
or even converfc with them. One may conceive what was the condi-
tion, and wha처 lie indignation of men once accustomed to power and
ppulence, whe; they felt themselves poor and dcfpifed, without a
roof under which to helter their heads, while they beheld others
whose merit and services were not equal to theirs, living with fplcndor
in sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XLIII. p. 229.
H ERRERA, the most accurate of the Spanish historians, asserts,

that Gonzalo Pizarro pofeffed domains in the neighbourhood of

Chuquefaea de la Plata, which yielded him an annual revenue greater
than that of the archbishopric of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Eu-
rope. Dec. vii. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XLIV. p. 241.
A L L the Spanish writers describe his march, and the distresses of

both parties very minutely. Zarate observes, that hardly any

parallel to it occurs in history, either with respect to the length of the
retreat, or the ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thousand miles. Lib. v.
c. 16. 26.

NOTE
474

# NOTE XLV. p. 254.

# NOTE XLVI. p. 255.

# NOTE XLVII. p. 260.

# NOTE XLVIII. p. 267.

NOTE XLV. p. 254.

T amounted, according to Fernandez, the bes informed historian
of that period, to one million four hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii.
c. 79.

NOTE XLVI. p. 255.
CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an advocate for an

accommodation with Gafca. Finding Pizarro incapable of hold-

ing that bold course which he originally suggested, he recommended to
him a timely fubmifion to his sovereign as the safest measure. When
the president's offers were first communicated to Pizarro, " By our
Lady (said he, in that frain of buffoonery which was familiar to him)
the priest ifiles gracious bulls. He gives them both good and cheap,
let us not only accept of them, but wear them as reliques about our
necks." Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XLVII. p. 260.
DIURING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven hundred men

were killed in battle, and three hundred and eighty were hanged

or beheaded. I-Herrera, dec. viii. lib i.

i . .4. Above three hundred

of thefc were cut off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate
makes the number of those put to a violent death live hundred.
Lib. vii. c. i.

N O TE XLVIII. p. 267.
IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of the Mexicans,

I hve received much information from a large manuscript of )on

Alonlo tic Corica, one of the judges in the Court of Audience of
Mexico. In the year 1 53, Philip 11. in order that lie might disco-

3 P 2 ver

475

# NOTE XLIX. p. 276.

ver the mode of levying tribute from his Indian fubjeds, that would
be most beneficial to the crown, and least opprefive to them, addressed
a mandate to all the Courts of Audience in America, enjoining them
to answer certain queries which he proposed to them, concerning the
ancient form of government established among the various nations of
Indians, and the mode in which they paid taxes to their kings
or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate, Corita, who had resided
nineteen years in America, fourteen of which he passed in New Spain,
composed the work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his so-
vereign, that he had made it an object during his residence in America,
and in all its provinces which he had visited, to inquire diligently into
the manners and customs of the natives, that he had converted for
this purpose with many aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted fe-
veral of the Spanifl ecclesiastics, who understood the Indian languages
most perfectly, particularly some of those who landed in New Spain
soon after the conquest. Corita appears to be a man of some learning,
and to have carried on his inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to
which he pretends. Greater credit is due to his testimony from one
circumfiance. His work was not composed with a view to publica-
tion, or in support of any particular theory, but contains simple, though
full answers to queries proposed to him officially. Though Herrera
does not mention him among the authors whom he had followed as
guides in his history, I flould suppose, from several fadCs of which he
takes notice, as well as from several expressions which he uses, that
this memorial of Corita was not unknown to him.

NOTE XLIX. p. 276.
TH HE early Spanilh writers were so hafly and inaccurate in eflimat-

ing the numbers of people in the provinces and towns of Ame-

rica, that it is impossible to ascertain that of Mexico itfelfwith any
degree of precision. Cortes describes the extent and populousness of
Mexico in general terms, which imply, that it was not inferior to the

gr-cate1p
476

# NOTE L. p. 279.

477

greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is more explicit, and affirms, that
there were 60,000ooo houses, or families in Mexico. Cron. c. 78. errera
adopts his opinion. ec. ii. lib. vii. c. 13; and the generality of wri-
ters follow them implicitly without inquiry or scruple. According to
this account, the inhabitants of Mexico must have been about 300,ooo.
Torquemada, with his usual propensity to the marvellous, aerts,
that there were a hundred and twenty thousand houses or families in
Mexico, and consequently about fix hundred thousand inhabitants.
Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious account of the Mexican em-
pire, by one of Cortes's officers, the population is fixed at 60,o0o
people. Ramufio, iii. 309, A. Even by this account, which pro..
bably is much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico was
a great city.

NOTE L. p. 279.

T is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted for this curi-
ous observation. Palafox, biflop of Los Angeles, confirms and

illufRrates it more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language
in which a termination indicating relfpe&, filavas revcrentialesy de cor-
tfia, may be affixed to every word. By adding the final syllable zin,
or azin to any word, it. becomes a proper expreflion of veneration in
the mouth of an inferior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father
is to be uled, it is 'lail, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One priefl
speaking to another, calls hiim Teopixgue; a person of inferior rank
calls him 'eopixcatzin. The name of the emperor who reigned when
Cortes invaded Mexico, was ilMoltczuma, but his vaflls, from reve-
rence, pronounced it Aollllrhumiiizin. Torribio, MS. l'laf. Virtudes
del Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential nouns, but
rcverential verbs. T'he manner in which there arc formcd from the
verbs in common ule, is explained by 1). Jos. Aug. Aldama y Gue-
vara in his Mexican Grammar, N ". 1 8.

NOrT r

# NOTE LI. p. 283.

# NOTE LII. p. 284.

NOTE LI. p. 283.
FROM comparing several passages in Corita and Herrera, we may

collet with tome degree of accuracy, the various modes in which

the Mexicans contributed towards the upport of government. Some
persons of the first order seem to have been exempted from the payment
of any tribute, and as their only duty to the public, were bound to
personal service in war, and to.follow the banner of the sovereign with
their vaslals. 2. The immediate vaTals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain proportion of the
produce of their lands in kind. 3. Thore who held offices of honour
or trufl, paid a certain fllare of what they received in consequence of
holding these. 4. Each Capulle, or association, cultivated some part
of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of the crown, and de-
posited the produce in the royal granaries. 5. Some part of what-
ever was brought to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
or the various productions of their artists and manufactures, was de-
manded for the public use, and the merchants who paid this were
exempted fiom every other tax. 6. The Alayeques, or adcripti gleba,
were bound to cultivate certain districts in every province, which may
be confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase into public
florehoufes. Thus the sovereign received some part of whatever was
useful or valuable in the country, whether it was the natural produc-
tion of the foil, or acquired by the induflry of the people. What each
contributed towards the support of government, seems to have been
inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one of the queries put to the
Audience of Mexico by Philip II. endeavours to eimate in money
the value of what each citizen might be supposed to pay, and docs
not reckon it at more than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or
two flillings a head.

NOTE LII. p. 28..
(0 I'RT ES, who fcems to have been as much aftonifled with tis,

as with ally inllllace ol Mexican incgnuity, gives a parrlicuar cle-
Jfcrition of it. Along one of the caulkways, fays lie, by which they en-

3 ter
478

# NOTE LIII. p. 289.

ter the ciry, are conduSted two conduits, composed of clay tempered
with Inortar, .bout two paces in breadth, and raised about fix feet.
In one of iilc is conveyed a stream of excellent water, as large as the
body o a man, into the centre of the city, and it supplies all the inha-
bitants plentifully. Tht: other is empty, that when it is necessary to
clean, or rpair the former, the stream of water may be turned into it.
As this conduit passes along two of the bridges, where there are breaches
in the causeway, through which the alt-water of the lake flows, it is
conveyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox, thea
carried from the conduit to the remnote quarters of the city in canoes,
and fold to the inhabitants. Relat. ap. liamuf. 2I, A.

NOTE LII. p. 289.
I N the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are Ihewn suits oft

armour, which are called Montezuma's. They are comnpofed of

i thin lacquered copper plates. In the opinion of very intelligent judges
they are evidently eastern. The forms of the silver ornaments upon
them, representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a confirimaiion of
this. They are infinitely uperior in point of workmanflip to any effort
of American art. TheSpaniards probably received them from the Philip.
pine islands. The only unqueflionable Ipecimen of Mexican art that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold, which is aid to
have belonged to Montezuma. It weighs 5 oz. 12 dwt. 7hree
drawings of it were exhibited to the Society of Antiquaries, June o,
1765. A man's head is represented on this cup. On one fide the full
face, on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the head.
The relievo is said to have been produced by punching the inside )t the
cup, so as to make the reprelentation of a face on the outside. The
features are rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spa-
nifh orlkmanilip. 'I his cuLp was purchased by I'dward earl of Or-
ford, while he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with the fleet under his
command, and is now in the pofelion of his grandon, Lord Archer.

am

# NOTE LIV. p. 290.

I am indebted for this information to my refpedable and ingenious
friend Mr. Barrington.

NOTE LIV. p. 290.
T H E learned reader will perceive how much I have been indebted,

in this part of my work, to the guidance of the bishop of Glou-

cefter, who has traced the fuccefnive steps, by which the human mind
advanced in this line of its progress, with much erudition, and greater
ingenuity. He is the first, as far as I know, who formed a rational and
consistent theory concerning the various modes of writing pracftifed by
nations, according to the various degrees of their improvement. Div.
Legation of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important observations have been
added by the learned and intelligent author of the Traite de la Forma-
tion Mechanique des Langues, tom. i. 295, &c.

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious monuments extant

of the earliest mode of writing, it will not be improper to give some
account of the means by which they'were preserved from the general
wreck of every work of art in America, and communicated to the
Public. For the most early and complete collection of these publifl-
ed by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that curious in-
quirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza, viceroy of New Spain, hav-
ing deemed tlofe paintings a proper present for Charles V. the Ihip
in which they were ent to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and
they came into the possession of Thevet, the king's geographer, who
having travelled himself into the New World, and described one of
its provinces, was a curious observer of whatever tended to illustrate
the manners of the Americans. On his death, they were purchased by
Hakluyt, at that time chaplain of the Englifl ambalfador to the
French court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were publiffled at
the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry Spelman. Purchas, ii.
o165.

THE second specimen of Mexican pi&ure-writing, was published by
Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two copper-plates. The first is a map,

9 or
480

or rcprefentation of the progress of the ancient Mexicans on their fiftr
arrival in the country, and of the various flations in which they fttled,
before they founded the capital of their empire in the lake of Mexico.
The second, is a Chronological Wheel, or'Circle, representing the man-
ner in which they computed and marked their cycle of fifty-two years.
The former was given to him by Dr. Chrilloval de Guadalajora, in
the city of Los Angeles; the latter he received from Don Carlos de
Siguenza y Gongorra. But as ic seems now to be a received opinion
(founded I know not on what evidence) that Carreri was never out of
Italy, and that his famous Giro del Mundo, is an account of a ficitious
voyage, I have noc mentioned these paintings in the text. They
have, however, mnanifeffly the appearance of being Mexican produc-
tions, and are allowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qua-
lified to determine whether they were genuine or fuppofittious. The
tyle of painting in the former is considerably more perfet, than
any other specimen of Mexican design; but as the original is said to have
been much defaced by time, I fufpc& that it has been improved by
some touches from the hand of an European artilt. Carerri, Churchil,
iv. p. 487. The chronological wheel is ajufft delineation of the Mexi-
can mode of computing time, as described by Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2. It
seems to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had seen; and if it be
admitted as a genuine monument, it proves, that the Mexicans had nrti-
ficial, or arbitrary characters, which reprelented several things betides
numbers. Each month is there reprelented by a lfynmbol expressive of
some work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was discovered by another

Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Iloturini Becnaduci fct out for New Spain,
and was led by lIeveral incidents to tudy the language of the Mexicans,
and to collecL the remains of their hillorical monuments. He perfllt-
ed nine years in his rcfearches, with the enthufiafrn of a projecor, and
the patience of an antiquary. In 1746, he publiflied at NlMdlride, dca
de 1ula Nueva IliJloria General de la America Septentrional, containing an
account of the result of his inquiries; and he added to it a catalogue of

VOL. 11. 3 Q hi~

his American Historical Museum, arranged under thirty-fix different
heads. His ideaof a New History appears to me the work of a whim-
fical credulous man. But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings,
tribute-rolls, calendars, &c. is amazing. Unfortunately a ship, in
which he had ent a considerable part of them to Europe, was taken
by an English privateer in, the war before last; and it is probable that
they perished by falling into the hands of ignorant captors. Boturini
himself incurred the displeasure of theSpanifh court, and died in an
hospital at Madrid. The hiftr)ry, of which the Idea, &c. was only a
profpeus, was never publihed. The remainder of his Museum seems to
have been dispersed. Some part of it came into the poffeflion of the pre-
sent archbishop of Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and he
publisied from it that curious, tribute-roll which I have mentioned.

THE only other collecion of Mexican paintings, as far asI can learn;

is in the Imperial Library at Vienna. By order of their Imperial Ma-
jelfies, I have obtained such a specimen of these as I desired, in eight
paintings, made with such fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be diftinguihed from the originals. According to a note in this
Codex. Mexicanus, it appears to have been a present from Emmanuel
King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who died A. D. 1533. As-
ter paging through the hands of several illufbrious proprietors, it fell
into those of the cardinal of Saxe-Eifenach, who presented it to the em-
peror Leopold. These paintings, are manifestly Mexican, but they
are in a flyle very different from any of the former. An engraving
has been made of one of them, in order to gratify such of my rea-
ders, as may deem this an object worthy of their attention. Were
it an object of sufficient importance, it might be possible, with ome
attention, by recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop of
Toledo, as a key, to form plausible conjectures concerning the mean-
ing of this picure. Many of the figures are manifestly similar. A. A.
are targets and darts, almost in the fame form with those published by
Purchas, p. 1070, 1071, &c. B.B. are figures of temples, nearly
refenbling those which occur in Purchas, p. 0og and i 13, and in

Loren-
4.82

# NOTE LV. p. 291.

# NOTE LVI. p. 297.

# NOTE LVII. p. 298.

Lorenzana, Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the
figure of which occurs in almost every plate of Purchas and Loren-
zana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captains in their war dress, the
fantastic ornaments of which resemble the figures in Purchas, p. ii io,

I II 3.

I I should suppose this piEture to be a tribute-roll, as their

mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D.D.D. &c. Accord-
ing to Boturini, the mode of computation by the number of knots,
was known to the Mexicans as well as to the Peruvians, p. 85, and the
manner in which the number of units is represented in the Mexican
paintings in my possession, seems to confirm this opinion. They plainly
resemble a firing of knots on a cord or rope.

NOTE LV. p. 29r.
THI-E first was called, the Prince of the death fill Lance; the

second, the Divider of Men; the third, the Shedder of Blood;
the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-Houfe. Acofta, Lib. VI. c. 25.

NOTE LVI. p. 297.
T H E Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more holy than any

in New Spain, was likewise the molt considerable. But it was

nothing more than a mount of solid earth. According to Torque-
mada, it was above a quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and
role to the height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM infpeaing various figures of Temples, which occur in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be tbme reason for fut-
peeing that all their temples were conftruted in the fame manner. See
vol. iii. p. 1109, 1l1o. 1Jl3.

NOT'E LVII. p. 298,
'T 0 T only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in Mexico itself

the houles of the people were mere huts built with turf, or

mud, or the branches of trees. They were extremely low, and flight,
and without any furniture but a few earthen veTcels. Like the

3 Q( 2 ruldef

483

# NOTE LVIII. p. 298.

tudeft Indians, several families refitled under the fame roof, without
having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. 13.
lib. x. c. 22. Dec. iiii. lib. iv, c. 17. Torquem, lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE LVIII. p. 298.

AM informed by a person who resided long in New Spain, and
visited almost every province of it, that there is not in all the

extent of that vast empire, any monument, or vestige of any building
more ancient than the conquest, nor of any bridge, or highway,
except some remains of the causey from Guadaloupe to the gate of
Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MS. penes me. The au-
thor of another account in manuscript observes, " That at this day
there does not remain even the smallest vestige of the existence of
any ancient Indian building, public or private, either in Mexico
or in any province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he,
through all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia, New
Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom of Leon,
and New Santandero, without having observed any monument worth
notice, except the ruins near an ancient village in the valley de Casas
Grandes, in lat. N. 30째. 46'. longit. 258째. 24'. from the Island of
Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico. He describes
this minutely, and it appears to have been a paltry building of turf
andftone, plaistered over with white earth or lime. A milffonary in-
formed that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of another set-
tlement similar to the former, about a hundred leagues towards N. W.
on the banks of the river St. Pedro. MS. penes me.

THOSE testimonies derive great credit from one circumfiance, that

they were not given in support of any particular fylfem or theory,
but as simple answers to queries which I had proposed. It is pro-
bable, however, that when there gentlemen assert no ruins or
monuments of any ancient work whatever are now to be discovered
in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no such ruins
or monuments, as conveyed any idea of grandeur or magnificence,

in
a.84

# NOTE LIX. p. 303.

in the works of its ancient inhabitants. For it appears from the tef-
timony of ieveral Spanifl authors, that in Ocumba, Tlafcala, Cholula,
&c. ome vestiges ds ancient buildings are fill visible. Villa Segnor
Theatro Amer. p. 143. 308. 353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, formerly
archbiflop of Mexico, and now of Toledo, in his introduction to
that edition of the Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he published
at Mexico, mentions some ruins which are flill visible in several of
the towns, through which Cortes pafled in his way to the capital, p.
4. &c. But neither of these authors give any description of them,,
and they seem to be so very inconsiderable, as to hew only that ftme
buildings had once been there. The large mount of earth at Cholula,
which the Spaniards dignified with the name of temple, still remains,
but without any steps by which to ascend, or any facing of flone. It
appears now like a natural mount, covered with grass and flirubs,
and possibly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 19.
I have received a minute description of the remains of a temple near
Cuernavaca, on the road from Mexico to Acapulco. It is compotld of
large stones, fitted to each other as nicely as those in the buildings of
the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the foundation it
forms a quare of 25 yards; but as it rifes in height, it diminishes in ex,
tent, not gradually, but by being contracted uddenly at regular dif-
tances,.fo.that it muff have resembled the figure B in the Plate. It ter--
minated, it is said, in a spire.

NOTE LIX. p. 303.
T -I E exaggeration of the Spanish Historians, with refpeca:

to the number of human victims sacrificed in Mexico, appears

to be very great. According to Gomara, there was no year in which
twenty thousand human vitims were not offered to the Mexican Di-
vinities, and in some years they amounted to fifty thousand. Cron,
c. 229. The flkulls of those unhappy persons were ranged in order
in a building ereced for that purpose, and two of Cortes's officers who.
had counted them, informed Gomara that their number was a hun-

6 dred.

4.85

# NOTE LX. p. 304.

dred and thirty fix thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's account is still
more incredible, that the number of victims was so great, that five
thousand have been facrnficed in one day, nay on ome occasions, no
less than twenty thousand. Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. 16. Torquenlada goes
beyond both in extravagance for he asserts that twenty thousand chil-
dren, exclusive of other victims, were slaughtered annually. Mon.
Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The most refpetable authority in favour of such
high numbers is that of Zumurraga, the first bishop of Mexico,
who, in a letter to the chapter general of his order, A. D. 1631,
asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed annually twenty thousand vi&ims.
Davila. Teatro Eccles. 126. In opposition to all there accounts, B.
delas Casas oblerves that if there had been such an annual waste of the
human species the country could never have arrived at that degree of
populoulnes, for which it was remarkable when the Spaniards first
landed there; and he positively aerts, that the Mexicans never a-
crificed more than fifty or a hundred persons in a year. See his dif-
pute with Sepulveda, subjoined to his Breviffima Relacion, p. 105.
Cortes does not specify what number of victims was sacrificed annu-
ally, but B. Diaz del Castillo relates that an inquiry having been
made, with refpe&t to this, by the Franciscan Monks, who were lent
into New Spain immediately after the conquest, it was found that
about two thousand five hundred were sacrificed every year in Mexico.
C. 207.

NOTE LX. p. 304.
J T is hardly neceflary to observe, that the Peruvian Chronology is

not only obscure, but repugnant to conclusions deduced from the

most accurate, and extensive observations, concerning the time that
clapses during each reign, in any given fucceflion of princes. The
medium has been found not to exceed twenty years. According to
Acofta and Garcilaflb de la Vega, I-uana Capac, who died about tli
year 1527, was the twelfth Inca. The duration of the l'eruvian mo-
narchy ought not to have been reckoned above two hundred and furty
years; but they affirm that t had subsisted four hundred years.
Acola, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega, lib. i. c. . By this account, each rign

3 ) I
486

is
3

# NOTE LXI. p. 310.

# NOTE LXII. p. 315.

# NOTE LXIII. p. 317.

497

is extended at a. medium to thirty three years, instead of twenty, the
number ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so im-
perfet were the Peruvian traditions, that though the total is boldly
marked, the number of years in each reign is unknown.

NOTE LXI. p. 310.
1M A N Y of the early Spanish writers assert, that the Peruvians of-

sered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. 190. Zarate, lib. i. c. Ii.

Acofta, lib, v. c. i9. But Garcilaffo de la Vega contends, that
though this barbarous practice prevailed among their uncivilized an-
ceftors, it was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human
victim was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This assertion,
and the plausible reasons with which he confirms it, are sufficient to
refute the Spanish writers, whose accounts eem to be founded en-
tirely upon report, not upon what they themselves had observed.
Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their ftetivals, the Peruvians offered
cakes of bread, moistened with blood drawn from the arms, the eye-
brows, and notes of their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite teems
to have been derived from their ancient practice.

NOTE LXII. p. 35.
T H E Spaniards. have adopted both those cufioms of the antient

Peruvians. They have preserved rome of the aqieduts or ca-

nals, made in the days of the Incas, and have made new ones, by
which they water every field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage,
torn i. 422. 477. They likewise continue to ule guano, or the dung
of sea-fowls as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the almost in-
credible quantity of it in the small islands ear the coafl. Ibid. 481.

NOTE LXIII. p. 37.
T H E temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at Callo in the

plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-Cannar, arc delcribed by

Ullo;a, tom. i. 286, &c. who inipe~ed them with great care. M.
de Condamine published a curious memoir concerning the ruins of
Atun-Cannar. Mem. tie 'Academie de Berlin, A. D. 1746, p. 435.

AcoRa

Acoftadefcribes the ruins of Cuzco, which he had examined. Lib.
vi. c. 14.. Garcilaflo in his usual tile, gives pompous and confuted
descriptions of several temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c.
i. 2 . lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata, in a large treatise
concerning Peru, which has not hitherto been publifned, commu-
nicates some information with respect to several monuments of
the ancient Peruvians, which have not been mentioned by other
authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes some of
ihe antient Peruvian fortifications, which were likewile works of
great extent and solidity. Tom. i. 391, Three circumstances struck
all those observers: the vast size of the stones which the Peruvians
employed in some of their buildings. Acofta measured one, which
was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix in thickness; and yet,
he adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were stones considerably
larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Peruvians could move
there, and raise them to the height even of twelve feet. The second
circumstance is, the imperfeation of the Peruvian art, when applied
to working in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural to
Americans, stones may be formed into any shape, merely by rubbing
one against another, or by the use of hatchets or other instruments
made of stone ; but with such rude tools, little progress can be made
in carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams together,
or give any degree of union, or flability to any work compoed ot
timber. As they could not form a centre, they were totally unac-
quainted with the use of arches in building, nor can the Spanish au-
thors conceive how they were able to frame a roof for those ample
ftruRures which they raised.

TH E third circumstance is a firiking proof, which all the monuments

of the Peruvians furnish, of their want of ingenuity and invention, ac-
companied with patience no less astonishing. None of the stones em-
ployed in those works were formed into any particular or uniform
shape, that might render them fit for building. The Indians took
them as they fell from the mountains, or were raised out of the quar-

ries.
488

# NOTE LXIV. p. 320.

ries. Some were square, ome triangular, ome convex-, ome con-
cave. Their art and industry were employed in joining them to-
gether, by forming such hollows in the one, as perfectly corresponded
to the projections or risings in the other. This tedious operation
which might have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface
of the stones to each other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets
of copper, would be deemed incredible, if it were not put beyond
doubt by inspecting the remains of those buildings. It gives them a
very singular appearance to an European eye. There is no regular
layer or firatum of building, and no one stone resembles another in
dimensions or form. At the fame time, by the persevering, but ill-
dire&ed industry of the Indians, all are joined with that minute
nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this observation con-
cerning the form of the stones in the fortress f Atun-Canar. Voy.
i, p. 387. Pineto gives a imilar description of the fortress of Cuzco
the moit perfect of all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me.
Acccording to M. de Condamine there were regular strata of building
in ome parts of Atun-Canar, which he remarks as singular, and
proof of fame progress in improvement.

NOTE LXIV. p. 320.
T H E appearance of those bridges, which bend with their own

weight, wave with the wind, and are considerably agitated by the

motion of every person who passes along them, is very frightful at firfl-.
But the Spaniards have found them to be the easiest mode of palling the
torrents of Peru, over which it would be difficult to throw more -slid
fiructures either of sone or timber. They form those hanging bridges lo
firong and broad that loaded mules pass alongft them. All the trade of
Cuzcois carried on by means of such a bridge over the river Apurimnc.
Ulloa, torm. i. g58. A more fimpie contrivance was mlployed in ;anillng
smaller streams: a balket, in which the traveller was pl.accd, h(cin,';
fulpended from a Irong rope flrctchled across the fircam, it was pullcd
or drawn fiom one fide to the other. Ibid.

VOL. II. 3R NOTE

489

# NOTE LXV. p. 329.

# NOTE LXVI. p. 329.

# NOTE LXVII. p. 232.

NOTE LXV. p. 329.
M Y information with refpec to those events is taken from Nolicia

breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y Cinaloa, fu exito fe-

liz, y vantojofo eftado, en que por confecuencia de ello, e han puelto
ambas provincias, publilhed at Mexico, June 17th, 1771, in order to
satisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furniflied the viceroy
with money for defraying the expence of the armament. The copies
of this Notida are very rare in Madrid; but I have obtained one which
has enabled me to communicate there curious sacs to the Public. Ac-
cording to this account, there was found in the mine Yecorato in Cina-
Joa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which weighted sixteen marks
four ounces four ochavas; this was ent to Spain as a present fit for the
king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE LXVI. p. 329.
T H E uncertainty of geographers with refpecl to. this point is re,

markable, for Cortes seems to have surveyed its coasts with great

accuracy. The archbishop of Toledo has published, from the original,
in the possession of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Domingo Caltillo, in which Cali,
fornia is laid down as a peninsula, stretching out nearly in the fame
direction which is now given to it in the belt maps, and the point
where Rio Colorado enters the gulf. is marked with precision. Hilt.
de Nueva Efpagna, 327.

NOTE LXVI p. 232..
I Am indebted for this fact to M. 'Abbe Raynal, tom. iii. 103,

and upon consulting an intelligent perlon, who having been long
fettled on the Mosquito lhore, has been engaged in the logwood trade,

L 1 fid
490

# NOTE LXVIII. p. 348.

I find that ingenious author has been well informed. The logwood
cut near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much better
quality than that on the other fide of Yucatan, and the Englill trade
in the Bay of Honduras is almost at an end.

N O T E LXVIII. p. 348.
p Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enumerated ten causes

of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to which he gives the name

of the ten plagues. Many of these are not peculiar to that province.
I. The introduction of the Iinall-pox. This dileafe was firfl: brought into
New Spain in the year 1520, by a negroc lave, who attended Narvaez.
Torribio affirms, that one half of the people, in the provinces visited
with this distemper, died. To this mortality occasioned by the small-
pox, Torquemada adds the defruaive effecs of two contagious dif-
tempers which raged in the years 1545 and 1576. In the former
800,000; in the latter, above two millions periiled, according to an
exat account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642. The
small-pox were not introduced into Peru for fveral years after the in-
vafion of the Spaniards, but proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia
Origen, p. 88. 2. The numbers who were killed, or died of famine
in their war with the Spaniards, particularly during the siege of Mexi-
co. 3. The great famine that followed after the reduaion of Mexico,
as all the people engaged, either on one fide or other, had neglected
the cultivation of their lands. Something similar to this happened in
all the other countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The grievous
talks imposed by the Spaniards upon the people belonging to their
tepartimientos. 5. The opprenive burden of taxes which they were un-
able to pay, andi from which they could hope for no exemption. 6. The
numbers employed in collecting the gold, carried down by the torrents
from tie mountains, who were forced from their own habitations,
without any provilion made for their fublifence, and lfubljc:ed to all
the rigour of cold inll thlol elevated regions. 7. The immenle labour

., R :;. of

4 r

# NOTE LXIX. p. 348.

# NOTE LXX. p. 349.

of rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such precipitate
ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of people. 8. The num-
ber of people condemned to servitude, under various pretexts, and
employed in working the silver mines. These, marked by each pro-
prietor with a hot iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the
mountains. The nature of the labour to which they were fubjeted
there, the noxious vapours of the mines, the coldncfs of the climate,
and scarcity of food were so fatal, that Torribio affirms, the country
round several of those mines, particularly near Guaxago, was covered
with dead bodies, the air corrupted with their stench, and so many
vultures, and other voracious birds, hovered about for their prey, that
the fun was darkened with their flight. io. The Spaniards, in the dif-
ferent expeditions which they undertook, and by the civil wars which
they carried on, destroyed many of the natives, whom they compelled
to serve them as famenes, or carriers of burdens. This last mode of op-
preflion was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians. From the number
of Indians who perished in Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the coun-
tries to the east of the Andes, one may form some idea of what they
suffered, and how fast they wafted. Torribio, MS. Corita in his
Breve y Summaria Relacion, illustrates and confirms several of Torri-
bio's observations, to which he refers. MS. penes me.

NOTE LXIX. p. 348.
EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. 18. But

the pafion of that great man for system, ometimes rendered him

inattentive to research; and from his capacity to refine, he was apt,
in some instances, to overlook obvious and just caues.

NOTE LXX. p. 349.
A Strong proof of this occurs in the testament of Isabella, where

she dilcovers the most tender concern for the humane and mild
u.Sage of the Indians. Those laudable sentiments of the queen have

2 been
492

# NOTE LXXI. p. 351.

been adopted into the public law of Spain, and serve as the introduc-
tion to the regulations contained under the title of the good Ireat;ent of
the Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE LXXI . .35r.
1 N the seventh itle of the first book of the Rccopilacion, which con-

tai-ns the laws concerning the powers and functions of archbishops

and bishops, almost a third part of them relates to what is incumbent
upon them, as guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order to defend them
from opprefion, either with respect to their person or property. Not
only do the laws commit to them this honourable and humane office,
but they actually exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced from Spanish

authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was not disposed to,
ascribe any merit to the popifi clergy, to which they were not fully
entitled. Survey, p. 142, 192, &c. Henry Hawks, an English
merchant, who resided five years in New Spain, previous to the year
1572, gives the fame favourable account of the popish clergy. Hak-
luyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. not only bifliops, but other
ecclesiastics, are empowered to inform and admonish the civil ma-
giftrates, if any Indian is deprived of his just liberty and rights. Reco-
pilac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley. 14; and thus were coniitutcd legal pro-
tectors of the Indians. Some of the Spanifl ecclefiaRics rcfulled to,
grant absolution to such of their countrymen as possesed ]Lucc;iendas,
and confidered the Indians as saves, or employed them in working
their mines, Gonz. Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

N OT E

# NOTE LXXII. p. 351.

# NOTE LXXIII. p. 351.

NOTE LXXII. p. 35i.
A CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains 4000 families,

and he mentions it only as one oflargefl Indian towns in America.
P. I04.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 351.
I T is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the state of po-

pulation in those kingdoms of Europe where the police is most per-

sec, and where science has made the greatest progress. In Spanifl
America, where knowledge is still in its infancy, and few men have
leisure to engage in researches merely speculative, little attention has
been paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year 1741, Philip V.
enjoined the viceroys and governors of the several provinces in Ame-
rica, to make an actual survey of the people under theirjurifdiction,
and to transmit a report concerning their number and occupations.
In consequence of this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of
New Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa-Segnor y Sanchez, to
execute that commiflion in New Spain. From the reports of the ma-
giftrates in the several diftrics, as well as from his own observations,
and long acquaintance with mot of the provinces, Villa Segnor pub-
lilhed the result of his inquiries in his Theatro Americana. His report,
however, is imperfe. Of the nine dioceses, into which the Mexican
empire has been divided, he has published an account only of five,
viz, the archbishopric of Mexico, the bishoprics of Los Angeles,
Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The bishoprics of Yucu-
tan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely omitted, though
the two latter comprehend countries, in which the Indian race is more
numerous than in any part of New Spain. In his survey of the exten-
five lioccfe of Nova Galicia, the lituation of the different Indian vil-
lages is described, but he specifies the number of people only in a
filall part of it. The Indians of that vail province, in which the

Spanili
494

Spanish dominion is imperfectly eflablifhed, are not registered with
the fame accuracy as in other parts of New Spain. According to
Villa Segnor, the aual state of population in the five dioceses above
mentioned is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and meilizos, in
the dioceles of

Mexico
Los Angeles
Mechoacan
Oaxaca
Nova Galicia

Families.

I05,202
30,600
- 30,840

- 7,296

16,770

190,708
At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico
Los Angeles -

Mechoacan - -

Oaxaca - -
Nova Galicia - -

19,51I
88,240
36,196
44,222
_ 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number is 1,471,955. We

may rely with greater certainty on this computation of the number of
Indians, as it is taken from the Matricula, or regilter, according to
which the tribute paid by them is collected. As fourdiocefes of ine
are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia, the numbers are im-
perfetly recorded, we may conclude, that the number of Indians in
the Mexican empire exceeds two millions.

THE account of

equally complete.
terms, that several

the number of Spaniards, &c. Ifcens not to be
Of many places, Villa Scgnor obllrves in gener;d
Spaniards, negroes, and people of a mixed race,

relide

49.5

reside there, without specifying .their number. If,. therefore, we
make allowance. for ;these, and all who reside in the four. dioceses omit-
ted, the number-of Spaniards, and of those of a -mixed.race, may
probably amount to a million and a half. In some places, Villa
Segnor diftinguihes between Spaniards and the three inferior races of
negroes, Mulattos, aud Mestizos, and marks their numbers separate-
ly. But he generally blends them together. But from the propor-
tion observable in those places, where the number of each is marked,
as well as from the account of the state of population in New Spain
by other authors, it is manifest that the number of negroes and per-
sons of a mixed race far exceeds that of the Spaniards. Perhaps the
latter ought not to be reckoned above 500,000 to a million of the for-
mer.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been able to pro-

cure such intelligence concerning the number of people in Peru, as
might enable me to form any conjeaure equally sa'tisfying with refpea
to the degree of its population. I have been informed, that in the
year 761, the protector of the Indians in the vice-royalty of Peru
computed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king. As,all females, and
persons under age, are exempted from this tax in Peru, the total
number.of Indians ought, -by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS.
penes me.

I s ALL'mention another mode, by whichone may compute, or at least

form a guess concerning the state of population in New Spain and Peru.
According to an account which 1 have eafon to confider as accurate,
the number of copies of the bull of Oruzada, exported to Peru on
each new publication, is I,171,953; to New Spain a,649,326. I am
informed, that but few Indians purchase bulls, and that they are fold
chiefly to the Spanish inhabitants, and those of mixed race, so that
the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will amount by
this mode of computation at least to three millions.

TiE
496

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in Spanish Ame-

rica, may give us some idea of the extent of population, and correct
the inaccurate, but popular notion entertained in Great Britain., con-
cerning the weak and desolate ilate of their colonies. The city of
Mexico contains at least 150,000 people. Los Angeles contains above
60,000 Spaniards, and people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247.
Guadalaxara contains above 30,000, exclusive 'of Indians. Id. ii, 206.
Lima contains 54,000. D. Cofme Bueno Defcr. de Peru, 1764. Car-
thagena contains 25,000. Potofi contains 25,000. Bueno, 1767.
Popayan contains above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns ofa second class
are ill more numerous. The cities in the most thriving settlements
of other European nations in America cannot be compared with thee.

THESE are such detached accounts of the number of people in fe-

veral towns, as I found scattered in authors whom I thought worthy
of credit. But I have obtained an enumeration of the inhabitants of
the towns in the province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can re-
ly; and I communicate it to the Public, both to gratify curiosity, and
to recify the miltaken notion which I have mentioned. St. Francisco
de Quito contains between 50 and 60,000 people of all the different
races. Besides the city, there are in the Corregimicnto 29 curacies cfla-
blifhed in the principal villages, each of which has fialler hamlets
depending upon it. The inhabitants of there are mofily Indians and
Mestizos. St. Juan de Pasto has between 6 and 8000 inhabitants,
besides 27 dependent villages. St. Miguel de Ibarra 7000 citizens,
and ten villages. The diflrid of Havala between 18 and 20,000
people. The diftric of Tacunna between o and 12,000. The
diftric of Ambato between 8 and o,oo, betides 6 depending
villages. The city of Riobamba between 6 and 20,000 inhabitants,
and 9 depending villages. The diltrict of Chimbo between 6 and
8oco. The city of Guaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants, and 14
depending villages. The clifrid of Atuafi between 5 anld oo00, and
4 depending villages. The city of Cuenza between 25 and 30,000

VOL. II. 3 S i)hl;ibitintl;,

497

# NOTE LXXIV. p. 356.

inhabitants, and 9 populous depending villages. The town of Laxa
from 8 to lo,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. This de-
gree of population, though slender, if we confider the vast extent of
the country, is far beyond what is commonly supposed. I have
omitted to mention, in its proper place, that Quito is the only pro-
vince in Spanish America that can be denominated a manufacturing
country; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarse woollen cloths, are made
there in such quantities, as to be sufficient not only for the confump-
tion of the province, but to furnifl a considerable article for exporta-
tion into other parts of Spanilh America. I know not whether the
uncommon industry of this province should be confidered as the cause
or effect of its populousness. But among the ostentatious inhabitants
'of the New World, the paflion for every thing that comes from Eu-
rope is so violent, that I am told the manufactures of Quito are to:
much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 356.
THESE are effablifhed at the following places. St. Domingo in

the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New Spain, Lima in Peru,

Panama in Tierra Firme, Santiago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New
Galicia, Santa Fe in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the
country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St. Jago de Chili,
Buenos Ayres. To each of these are fubjeted several large provinces,
and ome so far removed from the cities where the courts are fixed,
that they can derive little benefit from their juriidiction. The Sp;iniih
writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of Audience, but they in-
clude that of Manila in the Philippine Islands.

N 0 TI'.
498

# NOTE LXXV. p. 362.

# NOTE LXXVI. p. 363.

# NOTE LXXVII. p. 365.

NOTE LXXV. p. 362.
0 N account of the distance of Peru and Chili from Spain, and the

difficulty of carrying commodities of such bulk as wine and oil

across the isthmus of Panama, the Spaniards in those provinces have
been permitted to plant vines and olives. But they are ftricly pro-
hibited fromexporting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala , or any pro-
vince in such a situation as to receive it from Spain. Recop. lib.
tit. xviii 1. 1 5-8.

NOTE LXXVI. p, 363.

H IS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. 550, fifty-eight
years after the discovery of America. Hilt. Novi Orbis, lib. iii.

c. 2 . But as Benzoni wrote with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed
to detract from the Spaniards in every particular, it is poflible that his
calculation may be too low.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 365.
M Y information with refpea to the division and tranftniflion of

property in theSpanifh colonies is imperfeet. TheSpanifh authors

do not explain this fully, and have not perhaps attended fusliciently to
the effects of their own inflitutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. 6. explains in ome measure the introduction of the
tenure of A2n(ayrafgo, and mentions some of its effles. Villa Segnor
.takes notice of a ingular consequence of it. e observes, that in
tome of the belt lituations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of
ground is unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the houses
once erected upon it; and adds, that as this ground is held by right

3 S2 of

499

# NOTE LXXVIII. p. 366.

# NOTE LXXIX. p. 371.

# NOTE LXXX. p. 372.

of Mayorafgo, and cannot be alienated, that desolation and those ruins
become perpetual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 366.
T H E R E is no law that excludes Creoles from offices either civil

or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there are many Cedulas which

recommend the conferring places of trust indiscriminately on the na-
tives of Spain and America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c.
p. 5, 6. But notwithstanding such repeated recommendations, pre.
ferment in almost every different line is conferred on native Spaniards.
'A remarkable proof of this is produced by the author last quoted.
From the discovery of America to the year 1637, three hundred and
fixty-nine bishops, or archbishops, had been appointed to the different
dioceses in that country, and of all that number only twelve were
Creoles, p. 40.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 371;
M 0 D E R A T E as this tribute may appear, such is the extreme

poverty of the Indians in many provinces of America, that the

exa&ing of it is intolerably oppressive. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de
Indios, p. 192.

NOTE LXXX. p. 372.
IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit and services

of the first conquerors, as well as the small revenue arising from

the country previous to the discovery of the mines of Sacatecas, the
ticomiendas were granted for three, and sometimes for four lives. Re.
copil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE
50oo

# NOTE LXXXI. p. 373.

# NOTE LXXXII. p. 373.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 373.
D Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in the mines is not noxious,

and as a proof of this informs us, that many Mestizos and In-

dians, who do not belong to any Repartimiento, voluntarily hire them-
selves as miners ; and several of the Indians, when the legal term of
their service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice. Etre-
ten. p. 265. But his opinion concerning the wholesomeness of
this occupation is contrary to the experience of all ages; and
wherever men are allured by high wages, they will engage in any
species of labour, however fatiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern,
Carillo Altemirano relates a curious fat incompatible with this opi-
nion. Wherever mines are wrought, fays he, the number of Indians
decreases; but in the provinces of Campeachy, where there are no
mines, the number of Indians has increased more than a third since the
conquest of America, though neither the foil nor climate be so favour-
able as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert. ColleCt. In another memorial:
presented to Philip III. in the year 609, Captain Juan Gonzalez de
Azevedo asserts, that in every diftriEt of Peru, where the Indians are
compelled to labour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to the
half, and in some places to the third of what it was under the vice-
royalty of Don Fran. Toledo in i 58 . Colb. Collec.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 373.
A labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal accuracy,

the tasks seem to be in a great measure arbitrary, and like the

services exacted by feudal superiors, in vinea, prato aut meTe, from
their vasals, are extremely burdensome, and often wantonly oppref-
five. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios.

NOTE

50o

# NOTE LXXXIII. p. 373.

# NOTE LXXXIV. p. 375.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 373.

H E turn of service known in Peru by the name of Mila, is called
Tanda in New Spain. There it continues no longer than a week

at a time. No person is called to serve at a greater diltance from his
habitation than 24 miles. This arrangemenlt is less oppressive to the
Indians than that established in Peru. Memorial of Hern. Carillo Al-
tamirano. Colbert ColleA.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 375.

HE itrongeft proof of this may be deduced from the laws
themselves. By the multitude and variety of regulations to pre-

vent abuses, we may form an idea of their number. Though the
laws have, wifely, provided that no Indian flall be obliged o serve
in any mine at a greater distance from his place of residence than
thirty miles; we are informed in a memorial of D. Hernan Carillo
Altamirano presented to the king, that the Indians of Peru are often
compelled to serve in mines at the diflance of a hundred, a hundred
:and fifty, and even two hundred leagues from their habitation. Col-
'bert Collect. Many mines are situated in parts of the country, o
barren, and so distant from the ordinary habitations of the Indians,
that the neceffiry of procuring labourers to work there, has obliged
the Spanifl monarchs to difpenfl with their own regulations in several
instances, and to permit the viceroys to compel the people of more
remote provinces to resort to those mines. Elcalona Gazophyl.
Perub. lib. i. c. i6. But in justice to them it fMould be observed,
that they have been fludious to alleviate this opprelion as much as
possible, by enjoining the viceroys to employ every method, in order
to induce the Indians to fettle in tome part of the country adjacent to
the mines. Id. ibid.

N 0 1TE
502

# NOTE LXXXV. p. 379.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 379.
TORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration, which has the ap-

pearance of accuracy, concludes the number of monasteries in

New Spain to be four hundred. Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 3. The
number of monasteries in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year
1 745, fifty-five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons
up forty convents in Lima ; and mentioning those for nuns, he fays,
that a small town might be peopled out of them, the number of
persons slut up there is so great. Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter
to the viceroy of Peru, A. D. 1620, observes that the number of
convents in Lima was so great, that they covered more ground than
all the reft of the city. Solonz, lib. iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 6.
Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monastery in New Spain was
founded, A. D. 1525, four years only after the conquest. Torq.
ib. xv. c. 16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete establishment

of the American church in all the Spanish settlements was, in the year
1649, patriarch, 6 arclibilops, 32 bishops, 346 prebends, 2 ab-
bots, 5 royal chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro Ecclefiaftico de las
In(. Occcident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits was expelled
soln all tie .panifh dominions, the colleges, profeJicd houlls, and re-
fid:!.cies, which it poflefiel in the province of New Spain, were
tli,.t', in Quito sixteen, in the New Kingdom of Granada lthirteen,
in Peru iventecen, in Clili eighteen, in l'araguay eighteen, in all a
hunicrcdand twelve. Colleccion General die l'rovidencias hafla acqui
tomalas Ibbre efranamento, &c. de la Compagnia, part i. p. 19.
The number of jesuits, priefls and novices in all thef amounted to
2245. MS.pcncs mec.

IN

503

# NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382.

Is the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a petition to the

king, praying that no new monastery might be founded, and that the
revenues of those already established might be circumscribed, other-
wife the religious houses would soon acquire the property of the
whole country. They request likewise that the bishops might be laid
under reftritions in conferring holy orders, as there were at that
time in New Spain above fix thousand clergymen without any living.
Id. p. 16. They must have been enormous abuses indeed, when
the fliperltition of American Spaniards was hocked, and induced to
remonfrate againfl them.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382.
T HIS description of the manners of the Spanifl clergy, I fiould not

have ventured to give, upon the tflimony of protestant authors

alone, as they may be fufpested of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage,
in particular, who had a better opportunity than any protestant, to
view the interior slate of Spanish America; describes the corruption
of the church, which he had forsaken, with so much of the acrimony
of a new convert, that I should have diftruftled his evidence, though
it communicates some very curious and striking saCs. But Benzoni
mentions the profligacy of ecclesiastics in America at a very early pe-
riod after their settlement there. Hist. lib. ii. c. 19, 20. M. Frezier,
an intelligent obfervcr, and zealous for his own religion, paints the
dissolute manners of the Spanish ecclesiastics in Peru, particul.trly
the regulars, in stronger colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 5.
215, &c. M. Gentil confirms this account. Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circumstances. Voy.
i. 61. 155. 161. I have good reason to believe, that the manners of the
regular clergy, particularly in Peru, are fill extremely indecent.
Acofta himself acknowledges that great corruption of man-
ners had been the consequence of permitting monks to forsake

4 the
5o4

the retirement and discipline of the cloister, and to mingle again
with the world, by undertaking the charge of the Indian pa-
rilfes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv. c. 13, &c. He mentions par-
ticularly thore vices, of which I have taken notice, and confiders the
temptations to them as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion
of those wlio hold that the regular clergy flould not be employed
as parilh priefls. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for the regulars
admit, that many and great enormities abounded among the monks
of differcnt orders, when set siee from the refriaint of monaflic dif-
cipline; and from the tone of their defence, one may conclude that
tle charge brought against them was not deflitute of truth. In the
French colonies, the state of the regular clergy is nearly tlhe ftme as
in the Spanifil settlements, and the fame conlequences have followed.
M. Biet, fulperior of tle fccul.r pIlicets in Cayenne, inqcuires with
no le's piety than candour, into the cautlcs of this corruption, and
imputes it chiefly to the exemption of regulars from the jurifdicion
and censures of their diocesans ; to tle temptations to which they are
exposed; and to their engaging in commerce. Voy. . 320. It is re-
markable that all the authors, who censure the liccntioufnefs of the
Spanifi regulars with greatest severity, concur in vindicating the
conduce of the Jcfuits. Formed under a dilcipline more perfect than
that of the other monastic orders, or animated by that concern for
the honour of the society, which takes ficlh full ponfllion of every
member, the Jceuits, both in Mexico and Peru, it is allowed, have
maintained a mofl irreproachable decency of manners. Frezler, 223.
Gentil, i. 34. The fame prailf is likewise due to the biffops and most
of the dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

NOTE

505
VOL. II.

3 'I'

# NOTE LXXXVII. p. 382.

# NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 386.

NOTE LXXXVII. p. 382.
S O L O R Z A N O, after mentioning the corrupt morals of some

of the regular clergy, with that cautious reserve, which became

a Spanish layman, in touching on a subjet so delicate; gives his opi-
nion very explicitly, and with much firmness against committing pa-
rochial charges to monks. He produces the tefimnony of several
refpetable authors of his country, both divines and lawyers in con-
firmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A striking
proof of the alarm excited by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache
to exclude the regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
belt collection of papers. Several memorials were presented to the
king by the procurators for the monastic orders, and replies were
made to these in name of the secular clergy. An eager, and even
rancorous, spirit is manifef on both fides, in the conduct of this dif-
pute.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 386.

0 T only the native Indians, but the Mestizos, or children of
a Spaniard and Indian, were originally excluded from the priest-

hood, and refutfed admission into any religious order. But by a law
iflued Sept. 28th, 1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America
to ordain such metlizos born in lawful wedlock, as they should find
to be properly qualified, and to permit them to take the vows in any
monastery where they had gone through a regular noviciate. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this
law in New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a rcprefentation of this
to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a new edict enforcing the
observation of it, and profcfling his dcfire to have all his fubjcsts
Indians, and mcftizos as well as Spaniards admitted to the enjoyment
of the fame privileges. Such, however, was the avcrfion of the Spa-

niards
50o6

# NOTE LXXXIX. p. 389.

# NOTE XC. p. 392.

niards in America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems to
have produced little effet; for, in the year 1725, Philip V. was
obliged to renew the injunction in a more peremptory tone. But so
unsurmountable are the hatred and contempt of the Indians among the
Peruvian Spaniards, that the present king has been constrained to en-
force the former edics anew by a law, published September , 1774.
Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 389.

Z T ARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator, seems to ad-
mit, that the quantity of silver that does not pay duty may be

flated thus high. According to Herrera, there was not above a third
of what was extracted from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii.
lib. ii. c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quantity of silver
which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than that which is re-
gularly ifamped, after paying the fifth. De Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v,
p. 846.

NOTE XC. p.392;
W H E N the mines of Potofi were discovered in the year r545, the

veins were so near the surface, that the ore was easily extracted, and

so rich, that it was refined with little trouble, and at small expence, merely
by the acion of fire. This simple mode of refining by fusion alone con-
tinued until the year 1574, when the use of mercury in refining silver,
as well as gold, was discovered. Those mines having been wrought
without interruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk so deep,
that the expence of extracting the ore is greatly increased. Besides
this, the richness of the ore, contrary to what happens in most other
mines, has become less as the vein continued to dip, ad has diminifl-
ed to such a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards should per-

3T2 sis:

507

# NOTE XCI. p. 398.

# NOTE XCII. p. 395.

sift in working it. Other rich mines have been successively discovered,
but in general the value of the ores has decreased so much, while the
expence of extracting them has augmented, that the court of Spain,
in the year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from afifth to
a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Peru, is extracted from the famous
mine of Guanacabelica, discovered in the year 1563. The crown has re-
served the property of this mine to itself; and the persons who purchased
the quicksilver, paid not only the price of it, but likewise afifth, as a
duty to the king. But, in the year 761, this duty on quicksilver was
abolished, on account of the increase of expence in working mines.
Ulloa, Entretenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 505. 523. Any
of my readers who are desirous of being acquainted with the mode in
which the Spaniards conduct the working of their mines, and the re-
finement of the ore, will find an accurate description of it by Acofta.
Lib. iv . -c. I3.

NOTE XCI. p. 398.
IN consequence of this abolition of the fifth, and ome subsequent

abatements of price, which became necelrary on account of the in-

creasing expence of working mines, quicksilver, which was formerly
fold at eighty pesos the quintal, is now delivered by the king at the
rate of sixty pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132. Note. The
duty on gold is reduced to a twentieth, or five per cent.

NOTE XCIT. p. 395.
M AN Y remarkable proofs occur of the advanced slate of industry

in Spain, at the beginning of the sixteenth century. The number

of cities in Spain was coniderable, and they were peopled far beyond
the proportion that was common in other parts of Europe. The caufxs
of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha. V. i. 158. Wherever cities are
populous, that species of indufiry which is peculiar to them increases,
artificers and manufa&urers abound. The effect of the American

trade

# NOTE XCIII. p. 402.

# NOTE XCIV. p. 406.

trade in giving acRivity to these is manifest, from a singular sac. In
the 1545, while Spain continued to depend on its own indultry, for the
supply of its colonies, so much work was bespoke from the manufac-
turers, that it was supposed they could hardly finish it in less than fix
years. Campom. i. 406. Such a demand must have put much in-
dufry in motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts. Accord-
ingly, we are informed, that in the beginning of Philip II's reign,
the city of Seville alone, where the trade with America centered, gave
employment to no fewer than 6,ooo looms in silk or woollen work,
and that above 130,000 persons had occupation in carrying on there
manufactures. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was
the operation of the causes which I shall enumerate, that before
Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in Seville were reduced to 40o.
Uztariz, c. 7.

NOTE XCIII. p. 402.
N 0 bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treasure is examined.

Both are received on the credit of the persons to whom they be-

long; and only one instance of fraud is recorded, during the long period
in which trade was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the coin-
ed silver which was broughtfrom PerutoPorto-bello in the year 1654,
was found to be adulterated, and to be mingled with a fifth part of base
metal. The Spanish merchants with their usual integrity, sustained,
the whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by whom they were
employed. The fraud was detected, and the treasurer of the revenue
in Peru, the author of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de
Manus. &c. b ii .
p. 102.

NOTE XCIV. p. 406.
AI ANY striking proofs occur of the scarcity of money in Spain. Of

all the immense fums which have been imported from America,
the amount of which I shall afterwards have occasion to mention, Mon-

3, cada

# NOTE XCV. p. 409.

cada asserts, that there did not remain in Spain, in 619, above two
hundred millions of pess, one half in coined money, the other in plate
and jewels. Reftaur. de Efpagna, Disc. iii. c. i. Uztariz, who
published his valuable work in 1724, contends, that in money, plate,
and jewels, there did not remain a hundred million. Theor. &c. c. 3.
Campomanes on the authority of a remonstrance from the university of
Toledo to Philip III. relates, as a certain proof how scarce cash had be-
come, that persons who lent money, received a third part of the fum
which they advanced, as interest and premium. Educ. popul. i. 47.

NOTE XCV. p. 409.
rTHE account of the mode in which the fa&ors of the South Sea

Company conducted the trade in the fair of Porto-bello, which

was opened to them by the Afliento, I have taken from Don Dion.
Alcedo y Herrera, president of the court of Audience in Quito, and
governor of that province. Great credit is due to his testimony, as
he was an eye-witness of the transactions which he relates, and often
employed in detecting and authenticating the frauds which he describes.
It is probable, however, that his representation being composed at the
commencement of the war which broke out between Great Britain and
Spain, in the year 1739, may, in ome instances, be exaggerated. His
detail of fats is curious; and even English authors confirm it in soma
degree, by admitting both that various frauds were praftifed in the tranf-
aftions of the annual hip, and that the contraband trade from Jamaica,
and other British colonies, was become enormously great. But for the
credit of the English nation it may be observed, that those fraudulent
operations are not to be confidered as deeds of the company, but as
the dishonourable arts of their factors and agents. The Company it-
self fulfained a considerable loss by the Affiento trade. Many of its
servants acquired immense fortunes. Anderson. Chronol. deduct.
ii. 388.

NOTE

# NOTE XCVI. p. 414.

NOTE XCVI. p. 414.
S E VE RAL fasts with refpea to the institution, the progress, and the

effects, of this company, are curious, and but little known toEnglifh

readers. Though the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four
hundred miles along the coast, and is one of the most fertile inAmerica;
it was to much negleted by the Spaniards, that during the twenty years
prior to the eftabliflment of the company, only five ships failed from
Spain to that province and during sixteen years, from 1706 to 1722,
not a fi.igle flip arrived from the Caraccas in Spain, Noticias de Real
Companiade Caraccas, p. 28. During this period Spain must have
been supplied almoRt entirely with the large quantity of cacao, which
it consumes, by foreigners. Before the erection of the company,
neither tobacco nor hides were imported from Caraccas into Spain.
Id. p. 17. But since the commercial operations of the company be-
gan in the year 173 1, the importation of cacao into Spain, has increaf-
ed amazingly. During thirty years subsequent to 1701, the number of
.anegas of cacao (each a hundred and ten pounds) imported from Ca-
raccas, was 643,215. During eighteen years subsequent to 173 r, the
number of Fanegas imported was 869,247 ; and if we suppose the im-
portation to be continued in the fame proportion during the remainder
of thirty years, it will amount to ,448,746 ];anegas, which is an
increase of 805,531 2anegas. Id. p. 148. During ight years fubfe-
quent to 1756, there has been imported into Spain by the Company,
88,482 arolbas (each twenty-five pound: of tobacco; and hiles to the
number of 177,54. I. d. 161. Since the publication of the Noticias de
Compania, in 176b, its trade ieems tobe on rhe increase. During five
years fubifquent to 1769, it has imported 179,156 Fanegas of cacao
into Spain, 36,,08 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and 221,,32
pesos in specie. Campomanes, ii. 16. T he lall article is a proof of
the growing wealth of the colony. It receives cafl from Mexico in.
return for the cacao, with which it supplies tiat province, and this it

s reni ic t

51.

# NOTE XCVII. p. 419.

remits to Spain, or lays out in purchasing European goods. But, be-
fides this, the most explicit evidence is produced, that the quantity of
cacao raised in the province is double to what it yielded in 1731 ; the
number of its live-stock is more than treble, and its inhabitants much
augmented. The revenue of the biflop, which arises wholly from
tythes, has increased from eight to twenty thousand pesos. Notic.
p. 69. In consequence of the augmentation of the quantity of cacao
imported into Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for the
fanega to forty. Id. 6.1.

N OTE XCVII. p. 419.
TH I S first experiment made by Spain of opening a free trade with

any of her colonies, has produced eff'e처s so remarkable, as to

merit tome farther illustration. The towns to which this liberty has
been granted, are Cadiz and Seville, for the province ofAndalufia; Ali-
cant and Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona, for Cata-
lonia and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for Galicia; and
Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii. a la Educ. popul. p. 41. These are
either the ports of chief trade in their refpetive diftrics, or those mot
conveniently situated for the exportation of their refpefive produc-
tions. The following fads give a view of the increase of trade in the
settlements, to which the new regulations extend. Prior to the allow-
ance of free trade, the duties collected in the custom-house at the Ha-
vanna, were computed to be 104,208 pesos annually. During the five
years preceding 1774, they rose at a medium to 308,000 pesos a year.
In Yucatan, the duties have risen from 8,ooo to 15,000. In [-ifpaniola
from 2,500 to 5,600. In Porto Rico from 1,200 to 7,000. The
total value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was reckoned, in
1774, to be 1,500,000 pesos. Educ. Popul. i. 450, &c.

NOTE
512

# NOTE XCVIII. p. 424.

# NOTE XCIX. p. 428.

N O T E XCVII. p. 424.

HE two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Campomanes, Fiscal
del real consej y Supremo (an office in rank and power near-

ly similar to that of Attorney General in England), and Direc-
tor of the Royal Academy of History, the one intitled, Difcurfo
fobre el Fomento de la Induftria Popular; the other Difcurfo fobre la
Educacion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the former pub-
lifhed in 774, and the latter in 177.5, afford a firiking proof of this.
Almost every point of importance with refped to interior police, taxa-
tion, agriculture, manufactures, and trade, domestic as wvell as so-
reign, is examined in the course of there works; and there are not
many authors, even in the nations most eminent for commercial know-
ledge, who have carried on their inquiries with more thorough know-
ledge of those various fubjecs, and a more perseEt freedom from vul-
gar and national prejudices, or who have united more happily the
calm researches of philosophy, with the ardent zeal of a public spirited
citizen. These books are in high estimation among the Spaniards,
and it is a decisive evidence of the progress of their own ideas, that they
are capable of relilhing an author whose sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE XCIX. p. 428.
THE galeon employed in that trade, instead of the fix hJluidrll

tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop. lib. xlv. 1. 5. is com-

monly from twelve hundred to two thousand tons burden. h'le ship
from Acapulco, taken by Lord Anson, instead of the 500,000 pleos
permitted by law, had on board 1,3I3,843 peobs, besides uncoined
silver equal in value to 43,611 pfos more. Anson's Voyage, 384.

VOL. II.

3U

N 0 T E

# NOTE C. p. 430.

NOTE C. p. 430.
T H E price paid for the bull varies according to tie rank of dif-

ferent persons. Thdfe in the lowest order, who are servants or

Raves, pay two reals of plate, or one hilling ; other Spaniards pay
eight reals, and those in public office, or who hold encomiendas, fix-
teen reals. Solorz. dejure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According to
Chilcon, an English merchant who resided long in the Spanish fettle-
mients, the bull of Cruzado bore an higher price in the year 1570, be-
ing then fold for four reals at the lowefl. Hakluyt, iii. 461. The
price seems to have varied at different periods. That exaced for the
bulls issued in the lass Predicacion, will appear from the ensuing table,
which will give ome idea of the proportional numbers of the different
classes of citizens .in New Spain and Peru.

There were ifued for New Spain,
Bulls at o pesos each

at 2 pesos each
at i peso each
at 2 reals each

4

. 22,601
164,220
2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 6 pesos 4 reals each
at 3 pesos, 3 reals each
at i peso, 5 - reals
at 4 reals
at 3 reals

I4,202
78,822
410,325
668,6oi

,'17',953
54

# NOTE CI. p. 431.

NOTE CI. p.431.
AS Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this information,

was accomptant-general in one of the most considerable depart-

ments of the royal revenue, and by that means had access to proper
information, his testimony with respect to this point merits great crc-
dir. No such accurate detail of the Spanifi revenues in any part of
America, has hitherto been publishcd in the English language, and
the particulars of it may appear curious and interefling to Ibme of Imy
readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzada, publifled every two years, there arises an
annual revenue in pesos - 150,000

From the duty. on silver - - 700,000
From ditto on gold - - 6o,o0
From tax on cards - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink tufed by the Indians - x61,coo
From tax on stamped paper 4 1,000
From ditto on ice - 5,522
From ditto on leather - - -2,50:)
From ditto on gunpowder - 7 !,55)
From tax on salt - - - 32,000
From ditto on copper of Mechocan - .1,ooo
From ditto on alum - - 6, ,oo
Fron ditto on Jui-go de los Gallos - , 0oo
From the halr of ecclcfiallical ain .lts - - t),oo
From royil ninth of Lifhoprics, &c. - 6c,, ;
F1'rom the tribuce of ndli;a - - - ( :;,c- t
From Alcavala; , or dury on lte of goods - 7,-'

00

From tlihe \lrn;jorilafgo, cullom-iuullc - - , 3 3
. From the mint - - - 5,5 (

S, .;2,0'o

T1Ii;
3U 2

THIS fum amounts to 819,6I 1. Sterling, and if we add to it the

profit accruing from the sale of 5ooo quintals of quicksilver, im-
Iportcd fiom the mines of Almaden, in Spain, on the king's ac-
count, and what accrues from the A.veria, and some other taxes
which Villa Segnor does not estimate, may well be reckoned above a
million pounds sterling money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38, &c. Ac-
cording to Villa Segnor, the total produce of the Mexican mines,
amounts at a medium to eight millions of pesos in silver annually,
and to 5912 marks of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of the re-
venue have been explained in the course of the history; ome, which
there was no occasion of mentioning, require a particular illustration.
The right to the tylhes in the New World, is vested in the crown of
.Spain, by a bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be
applied in the following manner. One-fourth is allotted to the bishop
of the diocese, another fourth to the dean and chapter, and other
officers of the cathedral. The remaining half is divided into nine equal
parts. Two of these, under the denomination of los dos Novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch of the royal revenue.
The other seven parts are applied to the maintainance of the parochial
clergy, the building and support of churches, and other pious uses.
Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley, 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. Indic.
vol. i p. 184.

THE Alcavala, is a duty levied by an excite on the sale of goods. In

Spain, it amounts to ten per cent. In America to four per cent.
Solorzano Polit. Indiana, lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

THE Almajorifafgo, or custom paid in America on goods imported

and exported, may amount on an average to fifteen per cent. Recopil.
lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. . Avendano, vol. . 88.

TilE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to guard the flips

failing to and from America, was first imposed when Sir Francis Drake
filled the New World with terror by his expedition into the South Sea.

It
516

It amounts to 2 pe? cent. on the value of goods. Avindano, vol. i.
p. 89. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley. 43, 44.

I rAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of the several

branches of revenue in Peru, later than the year 1614. From a curi-
ous manuscript, containing a slate of that vice-royalty in all its depart-
ments, presented to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopez
Caravantes, accomprant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it appears,
that the public revenue, as nearly as I can compute the value of the
money in which Caravantes states his accounts, that the revenue col-
leCted, amounted in ducats, at 4s. l d., to - 2,372,768

Expences of government - - 1,242,992

Net free revenue I,I29,776

The total in ferling money - ,. 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this computation, such

as the duty on Itamped paper, leather, ecclesiastical annats, &c. so
that the revenue of Peru may be well supposed equal to that of
Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New Spain, I may

take that of Peru as a Itandard. There the annual cftablifiment for
defraying the charge of administration, exceeds one half of the re-
venue collelced, and there is no reason for supposing it to be less in
New Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of the public
revenue of Spain from America and the Philippines, which, as the

9 reader

517

# NOTE CII. p. 431.

reader will perceive from the two last articles, is more recent than any
of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas pesos fuertes

(Customs), &c. - -

Duties on gold and silver
Bull of Cruzada -
Tribute of the Indians
By sale of quicksilver
Paper exported on the king's account, and fold in the

royal warehouses - -

Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small duties
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one real de la Plata

for each mark
From the trade of Acapulco, and the coalsing trade

from province to province

Affiento of negroes - - -
From the trade of Mathe, or herb of Paraguay, for-

merly monopolized by the Jesuits. -
From other revenues formerly belonging to that order

2,500,000
3,000,000
1,000,000
2,000,000

300,000

300,000
1,000,000

300,000

500,000
200,000

500,000
400,000

Total 12,O00,000

Total in tterling money 2,700,000
Deduce half, as the expence of administration, and

there remains net free revenue - -

1,350,000

NOTE CII. p, 43,r.
A N author, long. conversant in commercial speculation, lhs com-

puted that from the mines of New Spain alone, the king receiv's

annually, as his sift', the umn of two millions of our money. Harri.
Collet. of Voy. ii. p. 164. According to this calculation, the total
produce of the mines mull be ten millions sterling; a fumn so exor-

bitart,

7
518

# NOTE CIII. p. 431.

# NOTE CIV. p. 433.

bitant, and so little corresponding with all accounts of the annual im-
portation from America, that the imformation on which it is founded
muff evidently be erroneous. According to Campomanes, the total
product of the American mines may be computed at thirty millions
of pesos, which, at four ifillings and fix pence a peso, amounts to
7,425,0001. ferling, the king's fifth of which (if that were regularly
paid) would be ,4.5,oool. But from this um the expence of admi-
niftration is to be deducted, which is very considerable as appears from
the preceding note. Educ. Popular, vol. ii. p. 13i. note.

NOTE CIII. p. 43r.
A CCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods exported

from Spain to America pay duties of various kinds, amounting

in all to more than 25 per cent. As mofl of the goods with which
Spain supplies her colonies are foreign ; such a tax upon a trade so cx-
tensive muff yield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de Manurf & du
Commerce d'Efp. . 150. I-Ie computes the value of goods exported
annually from Spain to America, to be about two millions and a half
sterling, p. 97.

NOTE CIV. p. 433.
p H E Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a monopoly of

salt, and by'embarking deeply in the Manila trade as well as in

that to Spain, gained annually a million of ducats. In one year he re-
mitted a million of ducats to Spain, in order to purchase fiom the
Cond5 Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of his government,
p. 6. He was successful in his suit, and continued in office from
1624 to 1635, double the usual time.

S II 0 R T

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

SHORT ACCOUNT

0 F
What is contained in the LETTER sent to the

EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

HIS letter is dated July 6th, 1519. Cortes in his
cfcond dispatch takes notice that it was fcnt off on the
16th of July.

THE great object of the persons who wrote this letter, is to

juflify their own conduct in efablifhing a colony independent
on the jurifdiaion of Vclafquez. With this view they en-
dcavour to detracd from his merit, in fitting out the two
former armaments under Cordova and Grijalva, representing
thcfc as equipped by the adventurers who engaged in the ex-
pedition, not by the governor. They labour likewise to depre-
ciate the services of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt the
incit of their own exploits.

tI l:v contend, that thle folc ojcet (EfVclafqlucz was to

trade or liarltcr swi thle natives, not to attempt the con(lueRt
of New 'p;iin, or the clalblillnmcnl of a colony there. This is
friceq(ently mncnitiocd by 1. Diaz del Caflillo, c. !). 41, 12,
&c. t3ut if Vc;afin (z. hlad not conqticl and f t tl lllcllt in
vi ew, there stems to hiave beicn no rcafon ibr eq(lippi ng ilch a
ctiedl r
tablc arniaitmlct.

VoL. lI.

3 X

TII.Y assert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest part of the ex-

pence of fitting out the armament. But this does not agree
with the account of his slender fortune given by Gomara,
Cron. c 7. and B. Diaz, c. 20, or what I have mentioned
Note iii, vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable numbers were

wounded in their different encounters with the people of Ta-
bafco, not one of them died, and all recovered in a short time.
This seems to confirm what I have observed vol. ii. p. 39, con-
cerning the imperfeaion of the offensive weapons of the
Americans.

THEY give tome account of the manners and institutions of

the Mexicans. It is very short, and as they had resided but a
short time in the country, and had but little intercourse with
the natives, it is both defedive and inaccurate. They describe
minutely, and with great horror, the human sacrifices offered
by the Mexicans to their deities, and affirm that some of their
number were eye-witnesses of those barbarous rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and description of

the presents ent to the emperor. That published by Gomara,
Cron. c. 29. seems to have been copied from it, and Pet.
Martyr dclcribcs many of the articles in his trcatife De Infulis
nupcr inventis, p. 354, &c.

A CATA-
522

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

0 F
Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A

C A R E T E de Bicfay, Relation des Voyages dalns la Rivire de la Plata,
& dela par Tcrre au Perou. Exftat. Recueil de Thecvenot, Part. IV.

---- ----- A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and thence by Land to
Peru, 8vo. London, 69.

Acofta (Jofeplh d) EHifloire Naturclle & Morall des Indcs tant Oricnit.lcs qt'
Occidentalcs, 8vo. Paris, 6co.

- Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis. Exfl. i Colled.
Theod. de B3ry, Pats IX.

-- De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de procuranda Illndruli
Salute, Libri fcx, Salmaint. 8vo, 589.

--- (Chlritov.) Tratado delas Drogas y Mcdccinas de las Indias
Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al vivo, 4o. BIurgos, 157'.

Acugna (P. Chlritoph.) Relation dc la Riviere des Anmazoincs, ?Ino. Tom.
ii. Paris, 1682.

A Relation of the great River of the Aimazons il Suoth A liciia,
8vo. Lond. I698.

Alarclhon (lerin.) N.vig;tiott a Scoprice il Rc,,to di 1 Ii t tl: Cit(i. Rtrinlfio,
III. 33.

Alblc)tllrqtlc Cocllo ()Duarl til) ilrcoii.ll dti Alrtc.: d( a G ;IUr.n dcl l';ai;l,
4t0 Mid. 1634..

., 2

Al,tltrai o

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Historical Relation of the Discovery of the Isle of
Madera, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-Politico-Geografico, con

las Noticias mas particulares, del Peru, Tierra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reyno
de Granada, 4to Mad. 1740.

Compendio Hiftorico de la Provincia y Puerto de Guayaquil, 4to.
Mad. 1741.

Aldama y Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arte de a Lengua Mexicana,
i2mo. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes Referiendole sus Ex-

pediciones y Conquiftas en varias Provincias de N. Efpagna. Exft. Barcia His-
toriad. Primit. tom. i.

- - Lettere due, &c. Ext. Ramus. III. 296.
Aranzeles Reales de los Miniftros de la Real Audiencia de N. Efpaglna, fol.
Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Iflas Malucas, fol.
Mad. 1609.

--- Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragofs, 1630.
Arriago (P Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Peru,. 4to. Lima,
162 :.

Avendagno (Didac,) Thesaurus Indicus ceu generalis Ihftrutor pro Regimine
Confcientiae, in is ifque ad Indias fpedant, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 1660.

B

Barcia (D, And. Gonzal.) Hifloriadores Primitivos de las Indias Occidentales,
foJ. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera (D. Martin di) Argentina y Conquifta del Rio de la Plata
Poema. Exit. Barcia Hiftoriad. Primit. III.

Barros (Joao de) Dccadas de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifboa, 1628.
Bclleftcros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, fol. 2 vols. Lima, 1685.
Bcnzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hifloriae-De ry America, Part IV, V, VI.
Betancurt y Figucroa (Don Luis) Dcrecho de las Iglefias Metro I'olitan:s dc
las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Convcrfion de Piritu de Indios Cum.nagotos y otras,
l2mo, Mad. 69o.

Boturini Bcnaduci. (Lorcnzo) Idea de una nueva Hiftoria general dc la Ame-

rica Septentrional, fundada fobre material copiofa de Figuras, Symbolas Ca-
radercs,. Cantarcs y Majlutritos de Autorcs Indios, 4to. Mad, 1746.

Uotcllo
524

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco de) El NuevoMundo Poema
Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Dcfcription de Todas las Provincias, Reynos, y Ciu-
dades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, I 48.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralcla Geographiae Veteris & Novae, 4to. Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los Naufragios. Exft. Barcia
Hilt. Prim. Tom. i.

---- ---- Examen Apologetico de la Hiftorica Narration de los Nau-
fragios. Exft. ibid.

------ Commcntarios de lo fuccedido duarante fu gubicrno del Rio de
la Plata. Exll. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 310.
Cabota (Sebaff.) Navigazione de. Exft. Ranmu. II. 211.
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Order de San Auguffin en
cl Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California - Diario Hiftorice de los Viages de Mar y Tierra liechos en 1768,

al Norte de California di ordcn del Marqucs de Croix Vi-rcy de Nueva Es-
pagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que a fu Magefad
Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to. 1645.

Caracas- Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compagnia Guipufcoana de
Caracas, 12mo. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopcz d) Relacion de las Provincias que ticne cl Govicrno

del Peru, los Oficios quc en cl fe Provien, y la Hacienda quc alli tiene fu Ma-
gellad, lo quc fe Gafsa de ella y Ic queda Librc, &c. &c. Dedicado al Marques
de Santos Claros, Agno. de 1611. MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico para la Hifloria general de la
Florida, ful Mad. 1733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) I-Iiforia de las Ordenes Militarcs de Santiago, Cala-
trava y Alcantara, fl. Mad. 1629.

Cairanzania (D. Gonrcalcs) A Geographical Dcf ciiptioni of tlic Coafls, &c.
of the Spanfli Wf-Indlies, vo. Loud. 1740.

Casas (art. dc las) B3rvifllia lcellicioi dc a Dtrlrtucion de las ndias,
410. 1552.

--- Narratio lconibts Illuftrata per Theod. d Bry. 4to. Oppenc. 1614.
- - Bart. dc las) An Account of the fitft Voyages and Dilcoverics of
the Spaniards in America, 8vo. Lond. 1693.

3 CafI ,li :

525.

CafFani (P. Joseph) Hiitoria de la Provincia de Compagnia de Jcfus del
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fl. Mad. 1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do D)fcobrimento & Conquifta de India
pelos Portugueses, fol. 2 vol. Lifboa, 1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera Parte de las Elegias de Varoncs Illufhres de
Indias, 4to. Mad. 1589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiftoria Vcrdadcra de la Conquifta de Nueva Es-
pagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Cavallero (D. Jolf Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las pefa:s y vMedidas
di varias Naciones, rcducidas a las que Corren cn Cafli!la, 4.to. Mad. 1731.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro dc) Chronica dcl Peru, fol. Svill. 1553.
Cifieros (Diego) Sitio, NaturI'icza y Prop:icdades de la Ciudad de Mexico,
4to. Mexico. 6i8.

Qogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yucatan, fol. Mad. 168'.
Collecao dos Brives Pontificos c Leves Regias quc forao Expedidos y Publi-

cadas defde o Anno. 1741, fobre a la Liberda}a des Peflbas bene c Commcrcio
dos Indos de Brcfil.

Coleccion General de las Providenciashafta aqui tomadas per el Gobierno fobrc

el Eftragnimento, y Occupacion de Temporalidades de los Rcgulares de la
Compagnia, de Efpagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D. Chriftoval Colon.
Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. I. I.

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua tnultas Regiones liacenus incognitas in-
vcnit. Exit. Nov. Orb. Grynai, p. go.

---- --- (Fcid.) Life and Aionsofhis Father Admiral Chrifloph. Co-
lumbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Concilios Provincialcs Primcro y Segundo celcbrados en la muy Noble y muy
Ical Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos dc 555 & 1565. fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mcxicanum Provincialc tcrtium celebratum Mexici, Anno 1585,
fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Brevc y rumaria Relacion de los Segnorcs, mancra y

Diflcrencia dc cllos, qu hlavia n la Nucva Epagna, y otr;:s Provincias sus
Comarcanas, y de fts Lcyes, Ufls y Coflumbres, y de la Fornma qu tnian cn
Tributas sis Vaf.!llos en Ticmpo de si, Gcntilidad, &c. MS. 4t0. Ipp. 307.

Curonad.i (Fr. Vail'. d) omimario di duce uc Lcttcre dl Viag,:io ato dlcl
lr;:. Marco da Nizza a; fettc Cit fLde CeCVla. 'Ex f. Ramufio !II. 35.

---- --lRelation dcl Vi;a ii)ll ale fltte Citta. Ramufio III. 359.

('ortco (ctrn ) Qilattro Cartas dirigidas al Elmpcrador Carlos V. cn quIc hal
l.,l.cil dc sIs Con(luiflas cl la Nuva Elipagni'. xfl'. I.rcia Ilitl. riln.

C.Jitcfii (I'cd ) I)D i,,'uli5 ul,.: r invciltis N.iirationcs ad C.troliiin \' . 5 ;i..

2 C l' tlt
526

Ccrtcfe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 225.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del lMayor Parte del Mundo Zaragol.
4to. 1688.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria de a Fundacion y Difcurfo de Provincia
de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs. 625.

--- (Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la Primitiva Iglefia de
las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. I649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regularcs de la Compnagnia
fiufcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas Obifpo de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Ecliavari (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El. Ryno Jefuitico del Paraguay. ExfL.
tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentos, 4to. Mad. 1770.

Echave y AfFu (D. Francisco de) La Eftrella de Limaconvertida en Sol fobre
sus tres Coronas, fol. Ambcrcs, 688.

Eguiara el Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotlleca Mexicana, five Eruditorum

Hiftoriia Yirorum in America Borcali natorum, &c. tom. Prim. fol. Mex. 1755,
N 13. No more than one volume of this work has been published.

Ercila y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana Pooma Eroico, fol. Mad.

1733.

Elcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Pcru-Vicum, fol. Mad.
1775.

F
Faria y Sousa (lM.iicl de) H:i2or;a dcl Reyno de Portugal, fol. Amber. 1730.

-- - [lilorv of )ortiie.l from tlhe firt Ages to the Revolution under
Jhln 1 V. vo. Loud. 16,)8.

Icriinandcz (ligo) ililtoli ii dcl e'-ru, fol. Sevill, 1 571.

(1---- Jual I'.u ) Rclacion HJlllial dti las Milioncs d lo)' Ini liis

que Clain;iii Chiquitos, 4to. MaJ. 1726.

Feyjoo (iGCnit. Gcron) l'li,.ginolcs Aincricanos-D)ifculL VI. del tom. iv.
dl 'I'ctro Cr'Iiico. Mad.l 1 -

Solutionl dcl gi;a Problenla Jido;ic, 처!rc la l'otlol ci u] d'
.a Aeclii: - )iCurllo XV. dtl tom. v. dtl 'I'caro Critico.

- --i- (I). Mig ) ICl .lcinl I)cllril)tiv dLc l cuidad y i ovinic.l (1l
Truxillo del l',.rtl, fl. AI.1d. 170g.

Ficyr)' (Ant.) I'irata:; doe a Allici i , to.
lS .il'o1 (I). 'ctro) ID)e I'c;io) ' atroniiti lidiarmi , fol. '2 vl:.. M altliti, 1775.

.1lVlb

G

Galvao (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos antigos y Modernos, fol.
Lifboa, I731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the first Original unto
the Year 1555. Osborne's Collet. IT. 354.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiftoria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de la India Oriental y Oc-
cidental, y Predicacion de la Santa Evangelia en ella, I2nmo Bacca, 626.

(Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo Mundo, fol. Mad.
1729.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del Defcubrimiento de

divcrfas Ciudades, y Provincias y Guerras que tuio con los Indios. Exft.
Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

---e-- Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 300,
Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las Indias, I2mo. Anv. I554.

---- -- Hiftoria general de las Indias. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. ii.
---- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 6 Conquifta deMexico. Exft.
Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) Hitoire Naturellc, Civile & Geographique de l'Orenoque.
Traduite par M. Eidous, I2rno. tom. iii. Avign. 758

Gufman (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provincia de Mechuacan
delia maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exft. Ramufio III. 33I,

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephereridcs belli Guaranici, ab Anno 754. Exft.
Collecion gener:l de Docum. tom. iv.

Hfirnatidcs (Fran.) Plantarumn, Animaliumr & Mineralium Mexicanorumi
Hifioria, fol. Rom. 1651.

-lerrcra (Anton. dc) dI-loria general de los Hechos de los Caftellanos en las
Iflas y Tierra Firma del NM;r Occano, fol. 4 vols. Mad. 1601.

-- lliftoria Gnccral, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 1730.

-- Gneral lifory, &c Trnflated by Steplhens, 8v ol. Lond. 17o0.

1)cfcriptio Indlia Occidclntalis, uol. Anit. 1i 2.

1 ron (r. Ruiz. dc) liern:ldia Po(l' 1 IJcroyco de Coln(ltuia dc I\lexic,
,4to. Mad. 1755.

-- -- (Ant. dc) IEpitome de la Bibliutlhec.i Oliental y Occidental, N',I-
ticay Gcografici, ol. A1ld, 177.

Lima, A true Account of the Earthquake which happened there 28th Oc-
tober 1746. Translated from theSpanifh, 8vo. Lond. 1748.

Lima Gozofa, Description de las feftibas Demonftraciones, con quc efta

ciudad Celebr6 la real Proclamacion de el Nombre Augufto del Catolico Mo-
narcho D. Carlos III. Lima, 4to. 1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo I. de las Memorias His-

torico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologeticas de la America Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz.

I759.

Lopez (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Septentrional y Meridional,

i2mo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria de Nueva Epagna, efcrita por fu Efcla-

recido ConquitPador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada con otros Documentos y
Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, del Terretorios, Arboles,

Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los ritos y Coftumbres, delas innunmerabiles
Naciones que la Habitan, 4to. Cordov. 1733.

- Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus cn la Provincia del Paraguay,
fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernment du Perou. Exft. oy-
ages qui ont fervi a l'etabliffement dc la comp. des Indes, tom. ix. Io5.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfcrmcdades de la Compagnia de
Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hiitorias de los Def-

cubrimientos, Conquiftas y Guerras de la India Oriental, y sus Illas, defde los
Tiempos del Infante Don Enriquc de Portugal fu inventor, 4to. Mad. 1681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Pctr.) Dc Rebus Oceanicis & Novo Orbe Decades tres,
I2mo. Colon. 1574.

.._ --. De Infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus'Incolarum.Ibid. p. 329.

_ O OpusEpiftolarum, fol. Amft. 1670.

쨌-_ _- II Sommario cavato della fua Iiftoria del Nuevo MI\'ido. Ra-

mufio III. i.

Meclluacan--Rclacion dc las Ccrcmionis, Ritos y Pobl.icioi dc los Indioa

de Mechuacan-hecha at . S. D. Ant. de Mendoza Virrcy de Nueva IEiagna,
fol. MS.

Melenlez (Fr. Jull) Tcforos Vcrdadlros de .is hitlias lliloria de la Pro-

vincia tie S. Juan Biaptifla dl lPerl, dcl Ordcll dc P-rcicdorcs, fol. 3 vols.
Rom. S681.

VOL. 2. Y Mcntd za

529

Mendoza (D. Ant. de) Lcttera al Imperatorc del Difcoprimcnto dclla Terra
Firma dellaN. Spagna verso Tramontano. Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

- (Juan Gonz. de) iftoria del gran Reyno de China con un Itine-
rario del Nuevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom. 1585.

Monardcs (El Dottor) Primcra y Segunda y Tcrccra Parte de la Hiftoria

Mledicinal, de las Cosas que fc traen de nucftras Indias Occidentales, que
firven en Medecina, 4to. Scvilla 1574.

Moncada (Sancho dc) Rctauracion Politica dc Ellagna y dcfeos Publicos,
4to, Mad, 1746.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Rclatione dcl Viaggio fatta per Terra al Cevole, Regno
di cette Citta. Exft. Ramus. III. 356.

Nodal-Relacion dcl Viage que hicieron los Capitancs Barth. y Gornz. de

Nodal al defcubriiniento del Eltrecho que hoy cs nombradn de Maire, y re-
conocimicnto del de Magellanes, 4to. Mad.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna dibidida en trcs

Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos, Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Ticmpo
de fu Gentilidad. En la fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo
de celebrar las Fiestas de Nueitra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera del Genio y
Caracter de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que notaban sus Acontecimientos,
con otras particularidades; y Noticias de las principales Ciudades en aquel
Reyno. Efcritaen cl Agno 154 por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos que
primero Paflaron a entender en fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp. 6 8.

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, i2mo. Mad. 605.
Ordenanzas del Confejo real dc las Indias, fol. Mad. 681.
Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer Viage hecho al re-
dcdor dcl Mundo, 4t0. Mad. 1769.

Ollbrio (Jerome) History of the Portuguese, during the Reign of Emmanuel,
Svo. 2 vols. Loud. 1752.

Oflbrius (Hicron.) Dc rebus Emmanuclis Lufitaniae Rcgis, 8vo. Col. Agr.
1572.

Ovallc (Alonfo) fiftorica Relacion del Reyno de Chili, fol. Rom. 1646.
---- An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili. Exit. Churchill
Collect. III. .

Oviedo y Bagnos (D, Jos.) Hiftoria la Conquifta y Publacion de Venezuela,
fol. Mad. 1723-

Ovicd(
539

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exfl. Ramufio III. 44.
Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hifsoria Natural de las
Indias. Exit. BarciaHift. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hiforia Generale & Naturale Dell Indie Occidcntalc. Exit. Ra-
mufio. I1l. 74.

- Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiflima Fiume Maragnon.
Exit. Ramus. III. 45.

P

Palafox y Mendoza (. Juan) Virtudcs del Indios o Naturaliza y Col-
tumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

-- -- Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de 'Angelopolis,

I2mo. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de las Iflas de Gran

Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pegna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Parochos de Indios, en

que tratan las materias mas particulares, tocantcs a ellos para u bucn adminil-
tracion, 4to. Amberes, 1754.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Conquifta del Peru Poema
Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apollol de las Indias y nueves gentes

San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia de Jesus Epitome de us Apoftolicos
hechos, 4to. Pamp. 1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annacs Hiftoricos do cflado do Maranchao,
fol. Lifboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo dcl Defcoprimento y Conquifta dcl
Peru. Exfi. Ramus. III. 371.

Pcru-Relatione d'un Sccretario de Franc. Pizzarro della Conquefla dcl Peru.
Exft. Ramufio I11. 392.

- Relacion del Peru, MS.

Pcfquifa dc los Oydorcs de Panama contra D. Jayme Mugnos &c. por havcrlos
Comncrciado illicitamcante cn ticmpo de Gucrra, fol. 1755.

Pllililpinas-Carta que efcribc ui i Rcligiofo antiuo de I'hilipiinls, a urL

Anmigo su),o cn I'fp);a: , (IuIc Ipre:tlinata el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Na-
turalcs dc Etfl;a 111.is. I4S. 4to.

Picdrahita (uc. Feln.) f-liiloria gcneral de lis Conqiif.s del Nicro Reylio
de Granada. ful. Ambres.

Pinclo (Ant. de Icon) Epitolme dc l;i Bibliutllcci Oriental y Occidenta.l en

que fe conticncn los el

ritolrc, (de las Inilias Oricll.lc; O Occilcntales. fol.
2 vols. Mad. 17 37.

Y' 2.

S3K
'll1ZI)11i1s

Pinzonius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio & res per cum repert.e
Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. iig.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuftres del N. Mundo, fol. Mad".
K639.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hiflorias de los Def-
cubrimientos de la India Oriental yfus Iflas, 4to. Mad. 68.

Q-

Quir (Ferd. de) Terra Australis Incognita, or a New Southern Discovery,
containing a fifth Part of the World lately found out, 4to. Lond. 6I-7.

R

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias hifforiales Pracicas, d.

los Succeffos y Adelantamientos de etla Compagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728
hnfta 1764, 4to. 765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, fol. 4 vols, Mad. 1756.
Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe della gran Citta Temif-
tatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nova Spagna. Exft. Ramus. III. 304-

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria general de las Indias Occidentales y particular
de la Governacion de Chiapa y Guatimala, fol. Mad. I620.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage defde que falio dc.
Lima, hafta que Ileg6 a Efpagna, 4to. Mad. 1657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Compendio de el Regio.
Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad. 755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hiftoria de los Triumphos de Nueitra Sta Fe, entre
Gentes las mas Barbaras, en las mifllones de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el eflado atual de los
Papeles universales de la Monarchia, MS.

Rocha P.itta (Sebaftiano de) Hiftoriada America Portouguezadcs de o Anno
dc 1500 de fu Defcobrimcnto ate o de 1724, fol. Lifboa 1730.

Rodriguez (Manuel) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Santa Cruzada, 4to.
Alcala, 1589.

-- - (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, Hiftoria de los Dcfculbri-
mientos, Entradas y Reducion de Naciones, fol. Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron.) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1595.
Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida dl Juan de Palafox Arzobilpo de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1671.

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hccha por los Religiofos de la Com-

pagnia de Jcfus, en las Provincias d la Paraguay Uraguay,. arana y T'ape,
4to. Mad. 1639.
532

Salazar
I

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Efpagna, tom. i, ii, iii, fol.
Mad. 1770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquifla de Mexico-Segunda
parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Contfituciones y Ordenanzas anti-

guas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real Univerfidad y eftudio general de San
Marcos de la Ciudad de los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes,.
1735-

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur 'Origine de la Maladie Venerienne,

dans laquelle on prouve qu'elle n'a point eSt portee de 'Amerique, i2mo. Paris,
x765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Eitrecho de Magellanes, 4to.
Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Companias General, Izmo.
Mad. 732.

Schemidel (Hulderico) Hiftoria y Defcubririento del Rio de la Plata y Para-
guay. Exf. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Analytique de tout ce

qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dite de Jesus, depuis son entree dans cc Royaume
en 54ojufqu'a son Expulsion en 1759, i2mo. 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juttis belli caufis praefertim in Indos Novi
Orbis. MS.

Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval Hydrographico, 4to. 648.
.- .._ Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotcro de la Region Austral Ma-
gellanica, 4to. Mad. 169o.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquiftas de Ticrra Firne en las
Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627,

Solis (D. Ant. de) Iliftoria de las Conquiflas de Mexico, fol. Mad. 684.

- - History of the Conqucfi of Mexico.-Tranflatcd by Towilfcnd,
fol. 1;24.

Solorzano Pcreirra (Joan.) Politica Indiana.

-.. Dc Indiarum jure five de jufta Indiarum Occidentalium Guber-
nationl, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. 1672.

Dc Indiarum Jure, fol Matriti, 2 vols. fol. 1629.

Suarez de Figucroa (Chriftov.) Hcchos de L. Garci; H-urtado de Mendoza,
+to. Mad. 1613.

Tarragone"

533

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmographia, 4to. Milan, 1556.
Techo (F. Nichol. de) The History of the Provinces Paraguay, Tucuman,
Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Churchill's Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1723.
Torres (Sirm. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exfl. Barcia Hist. Prim. III.

(Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Militares de Santiago,

Calatrava y Alcantara, defde si Fundacion hafta el Rey D. Felipe II. Ad-
miniftador perpetuo dellas, fol. Mad. 629.
Torribio (P. F. os.) Aparato para la Hiftoria Natural Efpagna la fol. Mad.
1754.

--- -- Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte Geografica de
las flas Philipinas, 12mo. Mad. 1753.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de 'Amerique Meridionale, 4to.
2 tom. Paris, 1752.

-- - Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos Phyficos-Hiftoricos,
fobre la America Meridional y la SeptentrionalOriental, 4to. Mad. 772.

(Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole delle Specierie fino al
Mare detto Vermejo nel 1539. Exft. Ramus. I[I. 339.

-- - (D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manufactures & du Commerce
d'Efpagne, 12mo. Amft. 1753.

Uztariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y Prafica de Commercio & de Marina, fol.
Mad. 1757.

- The Theory and Pradtice of Commerce, and Maritime Affairs,
8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil Hiflory of California, 8vo. 2 vols.
,ond. 1759.
Varages (D. Thom. Tamaio de) Reflauracion de la Ciudad del Salvador y
Baia de Todos Santos en la Provincia del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1628.

Vargas Machuca (I). Bern. de) Milicia y Dcfcripcion de las Indi;as, 4to.
Mad. 1699.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) FIiftoire des Guerres Civiles des Efpagnolcs

dans les Indes, par Baudouin, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 648.
53+

Vega
t

Vega (Garcilaflo de la) Hiltoire de la Conquete de la Floride. Traduite,
par Richelet, 12mo. 2 tom. Leyd. r731.

-- Royal Commmentarics of Peru, by Rycaut, fol. Lond. 1688.

Veitia Linagc (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of. Trade to the Weft Indies, 8vo.
Lond. 1702.

----- Nortc de la Contratacion de las Indias Occidentales, fol. Sevill.
1672.

Vcrazzano (Giov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui Scoperta ncl 524. Exit.
Ramuflo I[. p. 420.

Viage de Elpagna, z2mo. 6 tom. Mad. 1776.
Viloria (Fran.) Rclationes Thcologic de Indis & de jure belli contra cos,
4to. Mad. 1765,

Vicra y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la Hilaoria general de las Ilas dc Ca-
naria, 4to. 2 ton. Mad. 1772.

Villagra (GafC. de) Hiftoria de Nueva Mexico Poema, i2mo. Alcala, 16io.
Villa Segnor Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Americano. Description

general de los Reynos y Provincias de la Nueva Efpagna, fol. 2 tom. Mex.
1746.

X

Xerez (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquifla del Peru y Provincia
de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. Ill.

----- Relatione, &c. &c. Exit. Ramufio III. 372.

Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hiftoria del Defcubrimicnto y Conquilta de la Provincia
del Peru. Exft. Barcia. Hilt. Prim. tom. III.

Hiftoirc de la Decouvcrte & d la Conquctc du Perou, 12mno.
2 tor. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Migucl de) Rcprclentacion al Rey N. Segnor D.
Philipe V. dirigida a mas feguro Aurncnto dcl Rcal Erario. No place, 1732.

Zcvallos. (D. Pedro Ordogncz de) Hifloria y Viage dcl Mundo, 4to. Maid.

INDEX.

535

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the Figures to the Page.

A
/BYSSINI , an embassy sent to that

country by John II. King of Portugal,

l 55.
Acapulca, the nature of the trade carried on

from thence to Manila, ii. 427. Amount
of the treasure on board the ship, taken by
Lord Anson, 51 1.
Acofla, his method of accounting for the dif-

ferent degrees of heat, in the old and new
continents, i. 448.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper

of the native Americans, i. 475.
Adanfon, his juflification of Hanno's account

of the African seas, i. 423.
Africa, the western coast of, firit explored by

order of John I. King of Portugal, i. 40.
Is discovered from Cape Non, to Bojador,
42. Cape Bojador doubled 46. The
countries southward of the River Senegal
discovered, 52. Cape of Good Hope fccn
by Bartholomew Diaz, 55. Causes of the
extreme heat of the climate there, 254.
Ignorance of the antient astronomers con-
cerning, 42 .
Agriculture, the slate of, among the native

Americans, i, 328. Two principal caufcs
of the defecs of, 332.
.guad/o, is sent to Hifipaniola, as a commis-

fioncr to infpec the conduc of Columbus,
i. 130.
Afgtilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long

captivity among the Indians at Cozumcl,
by Fernando Cortes, ii. io.

VOL. II

Aibuquerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treat-

ment of the Indians of Hispaniola, i. 214.
Alcavala, in the Spanih customs, the term

explained, ii. 514.
Alexander the Great, his political chara6cer, i.

14. His motive in founding the city of
Alexandria, I5. His discoveries in India,
16.
Alexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and

Isabella of Castile, the right of all their
wefern discoveries, i. 113. Sends mif-
fionaries with Columbus on his second voy-
age, 114.
Almagro, Diego de, his birth and character,

ii. 149. Associates with Pizarro and de
Luque, in a voyage of discovery, i5o.
His unsuccessful attempts, 15I. Is ne-
glected by Pizarro in his Spanih negocia-
tion, 59. Is reconciled to him, 16o.
Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at Peru,
178. Beginning of dissensions between
him and Pizarro, 192. InvadesChili, 195.
Is created governor of Chili, and marches to
Cusco. icq. Seizes Cusco, out of the
hands of Pizarro, 201. Defeats Alvarado,
and takes him prisoner, ibid. Is deceived
by the artful negociations of Francis Pi-
rarro, 203. Is defeated by the Pizarros,
206. Is taken prisoner, 207. Is tried and
condemned, 208. Is put to death, 209.
A'lnagro the fun, affords refuge to his father's

followers at Lima, ii. 217. His characer,
ibid. Heads a conspiracy againfl Francis
Pizarro, 218. Pizarro aflafllnated, 219.
Is acknowledged as his fuccfcbr, 220.

3 Z Ilis

His precarious situation, 22,. Is defeated
by Vaca de Callro, 223. 1, betrayed and
executed, 224.
,Al'ajo3rijf/, in the Spani'h American cuf-

toiTs, tie amount of, ii. 514.
A.varaa'o, Alonz, is lent from Lima, by

Frincis Piz::rro, with a body of Spaniards
to relieve his brothers at Cusco, ii. 201.
Is taken prisoner by Almagro, 202. His
escape, 203.
Alvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortes to com-

mand at Mexico, while he marched against
Narva,.z, ii. 78. He is besieged by the
Mexicans, 84. His imprudent conduct
85. His expedition to Quio in Peru, 189.
Amazons, a coinmunity of, said to cxil in

South America, byFrancis Orellana, ii. 215.
Ameica, the continent of, discovered by

Chrillopher Columbus, i. 38. How it
obtained this name, 149. Ferdinand of
Caltile nominates two governments in,
192. The propositions offered to the na-
tives, ibid. 11 reception of Ojeda and
Nicuefla among them, 193. The South
Sea dicfovered by Balboa, 204. Rio de
Plata discovered, 213. The natives of,
injuriously treated by the Spaniards, 233.
The vast extent of, 248. The grand ob-
jc&s it presented to view, 249. The cir-
cumftances of, favourable for commerce
and civilization, 250. The climates of,
252. Various caulcs of the pcculiarity of
irs climates, 253. Its rude and uncul-
tivated state when firit discovered, 257.
Its animals, 259. Its ilnfcCtc and reptiles,
261. Birds, 262. Gerneral account of its
foil, 263. Inquiry into the si t population
of 204. Could not be peopled by civilize d
nations, 270. The northeri extremity of,
contiguous to Asia, 273. Probably pco-
plhd by Asiatics, 280. Condition and cha-
ractcr of the native inhlabitants inquired
into, 281. Were irore rude tha te
la:ivcs of any other knowni parts of the
carth, 282. Thr Pcl'tvi.trs a;ril lMexicans
exc p)tcd, 283. '1h: si fl dii(. vceirs in-
cai :llc of a judiciotis (lircul.tt \e cx.atmi
irti,,, 285. The vali ).s )flctlls of
philfoidi rs refI'cliing tilhe n:i\'cs, 286.
Mtltloll oltfcrvcl ill the ,refeit review of
their bodily conllitulioin and cirunlftanccs,

288. The venerealdifeafe derived from this
part of the world, 307. Why so thinly
inhabited, 337. The country depopulated
by continual wars, 366. Cause of the ex-
treme coldness toward the southern ex-
tremity of, 451. The natural uncultivats
ed state of the country described, 453.
Bones of large extint species of animals
discovercd under ground near the banks
of the Ohio, 454.. Why European ani-
mals degeneiate there, 455. Supposed to
have undergone a convulsive separation
from Asia, 459. Causes of the dtpo-
pulation of, traced, ii. 346. T'his depopu-
lation not the result of any intentional sys-
tem of policy, 348. Nor the result of
riligion, 350. Number cf Indian natives
fill emaining in Mexico and Peru, 351.
All the Spanith dominions there, fubjeed
to two viceroys, 354. Its third viceroy-
alty lately ctablifhcd, 355. See AltJxico,
Peru, Cortes, Pizarro, &c.
Americans, native, in Spanish America, their

bodily conflitution and complexion, i. 289.
Their strength and abilities, 290. Their
insensibility with regard to their women,
292. No deformities in their frame, 296.
This circumstance accounted for, 297.
Uniformity of their colour, 298. A pe-
culiar race of, described, 301. The E-
quinaux, .302. Patagonians, 303. The
existence of Patagonian giants yet remain-
ing to be decided, 305. Their diseases,
306. The venereal dircafe, peculiaily
theirs, 307. T'he powers and qualitis of
their minds, 0o8. Are only oliciouis to
supply immediate wants, 310. 'he art
of computation, fcarc(ly known to th nm.
ibid. IHave no abftrat ideas, 312. 'Tie
North Americanis much more intellicent
than those of the outh, 313. Tlcir
avcrfion to labour, 315. 'Their social
slate, 317. )D. melic union, ilid. The
women, 318. 'Th' ir women not prllilic,
321. Their parental aftl'Cttio a Filial
dity, 322 Ti' ir modlc. of IiblifirL',
324. 'illiirni, 325. Iliitiiig, 326. A:,i-
cultuire, 3' 8. 'l'he v.llion:i oljeCL ol th ir
cultie, 32'. Two p)iincipl.l cal'cs ol the
dclcls of h:ir aRgicultuic, 32. 'l,'er
want of tame animals, ibid. 'I'lhir wnmt

us

of useful metals, 334. Their political in-
flitutioui-, 33b. Were divided into finall
independent communities, ilid. Unac-.
quaintcd with the idea of property, 33.
Their high Ienfce of equality and id -pen-
dence, 338. Their ideas of subordination
imperfed, 3.10. To what tribes thcfe de-
scriptions aplply, 341. Some exceptions,
343. Florida, ilid. The Natchez, 344.
The islands, 315. In Bogota, ibid. In-
quiry into the cauifes of tlhef irregularities,
346. ' heir alt of war, 349. Their
motives to hflility, 350. Causes of their
ferocity, 351. Perpetuity of their ani-
mofities, 352. Their modes of conduct-
ing wir, 353. Arc n(t deffitiute of cou-
rage and Ifrtitude, 355. Incapable of
military discipline, 356 . Thir tlct:int't
of prisoners, 357. ''hir fortitude ulder
torture, 35:;. Never c.:t lhu:i a; fl.fi t ut
to gratify revenge, 361. How tile South
Americans treated their p!ifolncs, 3' 2.
Their military education, 363. Strange
nethod of chufing a captain, among the
Indians on the banks of the Orinoco, i.i/.
Their numbers wanteJ by cntinual wars,
"66. Their tribes now recruit tieci
numbers by a'eFting plifoners, 367. Are
n sver formidable in war, to more poliflicd
nations, 368. 'Th:i arts, dress, and or-
naments, 39. Tl-ir hibitations, 372.
''hLir arms, 374 '1Thcir donletic uten-
Iils, 375. ContrtlRcioa e(s their can;cs,
376. Ihe lIfllci;:clt wi.h which the y
apply to labour, 377. heir religion,
378. Some tii!cs ;llogcthir ccflitutc of
any, 381. Rcnlark;ble divcrfily in thcir
rcligio-.s notIinIs, 3)4. Their ideas of
tlih iniolt;lil of te Ifoll, 387. Their
nmodes of inllial, 38. XV iy hri.r phtfi-
ci:!ins priend t ie ( oljur;s. 390. 'Their
love I t ,l:.iF, 3t ).;. 'i h'- ir iiinlcderate
p.,flilon fr ! ..in;g, r',5. AIe cxtrcnicly
adJlkt'l l o ,t r(!ilr!:;, t Ils. 'c(). 'Put their
;aged anl incura.ilc t,> 'li . G -
|I :,l e(liia.ie tc rs tlr i l ci: 1,1cr, .Clt.

'l iTih lltiu. l pov. Ir., 4-.a 'I h ir
li iic.il laI'nl:; , .;(,, . lo '.. ol :as( ttli.. ,

;':'" ). .rd l ir'ls

( :] It, ,:c" . ' Ill

' i, ill-

I li i)y, 4c6. I Ta, i nl), 4 ," 'I lh :r
curit ii:;', . iS. T l('l ir vil' ', 4 I) I l i' r

t1 il o1 i[C)'.CjL dilc , .1I0 .
0 'r-itu dC

iiil. Attachment to their commuiitv,
411. Their latisfartion with their otv il
clndition, iid. General caution with re-
fptct to this inquiry, 414. Two diltin-
guiflable cl.ific. ol; 415. Exceptions as
to their character, 417. Their charac-
teriflic features dccfihcd, 460. InfTlnces
of thrir perfevetiiig ipeed, 461. An an-
tipathy inldultioufly encouraged between
them and the ncrots in America, by the
Spaniards, ii. 369. Thrir present con-
dition, 370. -low taxed, 37r. Stated
services demandce. from them, 372. AMode
of exacting thee services, 373. [low go-
verned, ibid. I'roltctor of the Indianl;,
his ftiicrion, 37. Realfos why so Imall
a progieCt is niade in lthir conv( rlion, 384.
A.'icriao \'efc)it:i, publiflt.s the firit wiittcnl

accoun t ol' the New XVorl, and henec
gave naimeto Ameinicia, i. 149. His claim
as a dilfoverer examined, 441.
/i,'scon,/, a female caziqaue of H-lifpaniola,

her blic and cruel usage by the Spaniards,
i. i8o.
/,;rs, flupctrdcus hciglit and extent of that

ranige of niountaiins, i. 249. ''heir heigliht
compared wi ih other motuntains, 446.
GoInz:lo Piz.arro's remarkable expeditio
over, ii. 213.
inals lari.e, very few found in Ameiicaat
its first discovery, i. 259.

jiii, i,
; s, ctulc of ith impcl fcSion of the art

of nrvi:'ition armonlg tilen, i. 4. 'i heir

t' r

. ictl k wlectie e.xtremeily cllin-

Ce1, 22. .12 , 42.|. .126.
/Ani;b:'ts, pccuLli.rly attachliel to tle fludy of

g:oguaplhy, i. 27.
A;a"(,iit, tlhe expeditiorn o , whly so famous

among tlhe (C i's, i. 1:.
yrit/w':d.:, or conii iutation, tlir art of, hard-

ly lnov.'t to tlih nrlrive An;ciittans, i. 3o.
.y'li:o, f.ill. r, ilis e\tr.t,)lit:try million to

tilhe illc uli tilC :'I .' , i. 3 .
Jyl/ji,'li dioveiics nmaJld by tlle lRiflians, i.

'7:
/I,/.,i tr-de, the Italtiure if, exlplaiidc,, ii.

tiS. T i Ir.a;d:e it, d hlow ut an eld
io, -t) ''.

fs Z Z

7 .; .:.u i. litl
J15 lTi. lit!er lrttrlc Il, lis

tl e <
,r i lr'tri, i:,. 8emd. plile i

:i z lo

to Pizarro, 170. Visits Pizarro, 173. Is
perfidiously seized by him, 176. Agrees
with Pizarro on a ransom, 177. Is refused
his liberty, 180. His behaviour during
his confinement, 183. A form of trial
bestowed on him, I84. Is put to death,
185. Comparison of authorities relating
to his tranfaclions with, and treatment by
Pizarro, 468.
audience of New Spain, board of, etablifled

by the Emperor Charles V. ii. 143. Courts
of, theirjurifdicion, 356.
jveria, a Spanish tax for convoy to and from

America, when first imposed, ii. 514. Its
rate, 515.
Azores, thole islands discovered by the Portu-

guefe, i. 50. 4

B
Balboa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony

at Santa Maria on the gulph of Darien,
i. 194. Receives intelligence of the rich
country of Peru, 200 His character, 202.
Marches across the isthmus, 203. Dif-
covers the Southern Ocean, 204. Re-
turns, 205. Is superseded in his command
by the appointment of Pedrarias Davila,
207. Is fined by Pedrarias for former
tranfa&ions, 208. Is appointed lieutenant
governor of the countries on the South
Sea, and marriesPedrarias'sdaughter, 210.
Is arrefled and put to death by Pedrarias,
211.
Bark, Jesuits, a production peculiar to Peru,

ii. 393.
Barrere, his description of the conftruslion

of Indian houses, i. 482.
Behring and 'Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators,

thought to have discovered the north-
weft extremity of America from the ealt-
ward, i. 275. Uncertainty of their ac-
counts, 458.
Banalcazar, governor ofSt. Michael, reduces

the kingdom of Quito, ii. t88. Is de-
prived of his command by Pizarro, 213.
Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordi-

nary travels, i. 3r.
Bernaldes, instance of the bravery of the Ca-

ribbecs, mentioned by him, i. 487.
Bethencourt, John de, a Norman baron, con-

quers and poflellfs the Canary Islands, i. 3.

Birds, an account of those natural to Ame-

rica, i. 262. The flight of, often firetch
to an immense diflance from land, 431.
Bogota in America, some account of the in-

habitants of, i. 345. Causes of their tame
submission to the Spaniards, 348. Their
religious doctrines and rites, 386.
Bojador, cape, the firit discovery of, i. 42.

Is doubled by the Portuguefedifcoveries, 46.
Boffu, his account of the American war song,

i. 478.
Bovadilla, Francis de, is ent to Hispaniola

to inquire into the condut of Columbus,
i. 154. Sends Columbus home in irons,
155. Is degraded, 158. 161.
Bougainville, his defence of the Periplus ot

Hanno, i. 422.
Bourger, M. his character of the native Pe-

ruvians, i. 465.
Brasil, the coast of, discovered by Alvarez

Cabral, i. 151. Remarks on the climate
of, 451.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, ii. 489.
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some ac-

count of that province, ii. 336.
Bulls, papal, of no force in panifh Ame-

rica, before examined and approved by the
royal council of the Indies, ii. 377. See
C, uzado.
Burial of the dead, American mode of, i.

388.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander,

discovers the coast of Brasil, i. 151.
Cacoa, the belt in quality, produced in the

Spanifi American colonies, ii. 393. Tlhe
preparation ofchcolate from, derived fron
the Mexicans, 412.
Cadliz, the galeons and flota, removed thi-

ther from Seville, ii. 40o.
California, the peninsula of, dicuvered by

Fernando Cortes, ii. i44. The true late
(,f this country long unknown, 379.
Why depreciated by the Jeluits, 330. Fa-
vourable account of, given by Don Jo-
feph Galvez, ibid.
Califrnians, the charafler of, by P. Venegas,

i. 467.
Camlpea, by, discovered by Cordova, who is

repulied by the natives, i, 239.

Camnpomanes,

Campomanes, Don Pedro Rodriguez, charac-

ter of his political and commercial writings,
ii. 51. His account of the produce of the
Spanish American mines, 516.
Canary islands erected into a kingdom by pope

Clement VI. i. 37 Are conquered by John
de Bethencourt, 38.
Cannibals, no people ever found to eat human

flesh for fubfilfence, though often for re-
venge, i. 361. 478.
Canoes, American, the conftruAfion of, de-

fcribed, i. 376.
Caraccas, efltbliniment of the company trad-

ing to that coal1, ii. 413. Growth of the
trade, 509.
Caribbee illands, discovered by Columbus in

his second voyage, i. r14.
Carilbbes, their spirit peculiarlv fierce, i. 417.

Their character by M. de Chanvalon, 466.
Probable conjecture as to the diflinclion in
characLer betwcen them and the natives of
the larger ifllnds, 488.
Catpini, his extraordinary mission to the prince

of the Tartars, i. 32.
C;I-rtbigera, the harbour of, the farfei and best

fortilied of any in all the Spanish American
domiinioln, ii. 3 9.
Carthalinians, state of commerce and naviga-

tion among, i. 8. The sanious voyages of
Hanno and Himilco, 9.
Carvjnal, rancifco de, contributes to Vaca

de Callru's viLory over young Almagro, ii.
224. Encourages (onzalo Pizarro to as-
fume the government of Pciu, 238. Ad-
vises P.zario to nflnme the overeignty of
the country, 243 Is fcizcd by Gafca and
executed, 257.
Caf/ilio, Bernal Lioz del, character of his

Hifturia Vcrdadcro Jc la Conquifla de la
Nueva Efpagna, ii. 4'14.
Cittens, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pi-

zarro to the viceroy of Peru, ii. 240. Is
defeated by Carvajal, and fecretcs hinifllr in
a cave, 42. .allies out and leizes Cuzco,
253. Is reduced by Pizarro, 254. Jsem-
ployed by Galia to make dilcovcrics in the
regions about the river Plata, 262.
Chaivalon, MI. de, his character of the native

Caribbecs, i. 46t.
CIapotonIes, in the Spanifi Americanl colonies,

who thus dillinguilled, ii. 3(6.
Charksi 111. king of pain, cflabliflecs packet

3

boats between Spain and the colonies, .
415. Allows free trade to the windward
islands, 416. Giants the colonies a free
trade with each other, 48.
쨌Charles V. emperor, ends Roderigo de Si-

gueroa to Hifpaniula, as chiefjudge, to re-
gulate the treatment of the Indians, i.
225. Causes this fubje t to be el'ated be-
fore him, 230 Equips a squadron at the
folicitaiion of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 1i9.
Resigns his claim on the Mvluccas to the
Portuguese, 133. Appoints Cottes go-
vernor of New Spain, 135. Rewards him
on coming home, 142. Eftabliflies a board
called the Audience of New Spaiin, 143.
His consultations on American affairs, 225.
Efiabhifhes new regulations, 229.
Citi, is invaded by A\lmagro, ii. 195. How

fubje'led by the Spaniards, 332. Excel-
lence of its climate and foil, 333. CaLfe
of i:s being ncgletcd, 334. Pilofpct1 of
its improvement, 335.
CLiqijitJ., political site of that people, fromr

hernanccz, i. '175.
C/vicolate, the ife of, dt rived fom the Mexi-

cans, ii. 412.
Choluli, in Mexico,, arrival of Cortes there,

with smell account of he town, ii. 46. A
conspiracy against Cortes difcovcrcd, and
the inhabitants dcflroyed, 48.
Cicero, instance of his ignoance i geogra-

phy, i. 426.
Cinalea, po:itical slate of the peolle there, i.

474. Their mode of liiing, 481. AI:
deflitute of all religion, 4b4. E:xtraor-
dilnary large grain of gold found thcre, ii.
4)0.
Ciniguiiln, in the province of Sonora, late

dilcoverics of rich mines made theic by the
Spaniards, ii. 328. Probable tfllcts of
thlee difcovcrits, 39.
Clement VI. pope, crects the Canary Iflinds

into a kingdom, i. 37.
Climates, influenced by a variety of carses, i.

952. Their operation o mankind, 414.
Inlquiry into the caufc of the tlillcicnit e-
grces of licat in, 448.
CocijNial, an i!mortant p)rodui'lion, aln:oft pe-

culiar to New Spain, ii. 393.
Co/il, extraordinary predomininlcc of, in the

cliImates f America, i. 252. Caufrs of
this peculiarity, 253,

Coleni's,

Colmies, Spanish American, view of the poiicy

and trade of, ii. 345. Depopulation the
firlt effet of them, ibid. Cau(es of tiis
depopulation, 316. l'he fnall-pox very
fatal to, 348. General idea of the Spanilh
policy in, 352. Early interposition of the
regal authority in, 353. Al exclulive
trade the firi object i, 360. Compared
with those of ancient Greece and Rome,
3(61. The great reltricliois they are lub-
iet to, 362. Slow progress of their po-
pulation from Europe, 363. A:e dilfou-
raged by the slate of property there, iid.
And by the nature of their ecclefiattical po-
licy, 365. The vaiious clafes of people
in, 366. Ecclefiallical conlitution of,
376. Form and endowments of the church
theie, 377. Pernicious effcs of monafltc
inllitutiots there, 378. Charater of the
tccicliallics there, 379. PIroductions of,
38-. The mines, b;d. 'lThofe of Potofi
aind Sacotecas, 388. The spirit with which
they are woiked, 39o. Fatal effetis of this
ardour, 391. Other commodities that com-
pole the cnimece of, 393. Amizinig in-
crease of horned cattle there, ')4. Ad-
vantages which Spain formerly derived
from them, ibid. Why the fame advan-
tages are not fill received, 396. Guarda
collas employed to check the contraband
traJc in, 409. The use of register sips
introduced, 40. And alcons laid aside,
411. Comnpany of the Caraccas inflituted,
413. Lftab ifmnent of regular p:icket-
boats to, 45. Free trade permitted be-
tween them, 418. New regulations in the
governmlent of, 420. Reformation of the
courtsof ju slice, iid. New dilfribution of
grvernmcents, iiil. A fourth viceroyalty
cf.,illillicl, 4t2. Attempts ;o Ieliror do-
imcl;c pl:c\, 423. ' Their trade with the
Phili pilt, islands, 4.26. RIcv line derived
fron, b,, S!p.in, 429. Expence of almi-
Jiltration l I re, 43z. State of population
in, ,19. ' lhe number of nionalteries there,
50jo. 't' M;'i'.\.o, ]PI', &c.
(C alu.b.ais, .rtilcilollc :w, is felt h)' his trother

Chrillo II r to noci,tec with Ienry VII.
kinlg ol,' Enld;l, i1. 70. The misf(,rtucs
of hi. vo, .L;;', 7;. I''ollows his brothr to
Ili)laniol,., 173. Is veled with the admli-
niltration ul ft'il's tlicr by his brother on

his return to Spain, 13i. Founds the town
of St. Domingo, 139.
CoiuiNus, Chritoplier, birth and education

of, i. 9. His early voyages, 60. Mar-
ries and fettlts at Lisbon, 61. His geo-
gr.il cal reflections, 63. Conceives the
idea of makinr discoveries to the weltward,
65. Oflers his services to the Gernc'C fe-
nate, 67. Cause of hisoveitures being re-
jctidtd in Poittuga!, 6. Applies tJ the
courts of Caffile and England, ilii. His
propod., how treated, by tlhe Spanih geo-
grapl;els, 71. Is pat:onifed by Juan l'crcz,
74. iis p;opofals again rejected, 75. Is
invited by liabelhl, and engaged in the
Spanifli fervicr, 79. I'rcparatiois or his
voyage, o8. ''he amount of his equip-
nment, 81. Siils from Spain, 82. His
vigilant attention to all circamiilances dur-
iig his voyage, 84. Apprclheniions of Iis
crew, 85. His address in quieting their
cabals, '7. Indications of their approach-
ing land, 89. An ifand difcovcted, go.
He lands, 91. His interview. with tle na-
tives, 92. Names tlhe island SaI S a-
dore, 9. 1'roilccutts his discoveries foatih-
ward, 94. I)lfcovcrs, and lands on, the
island ot Cubs, 95. Dicovers Hispaniola,
96. Suffers shipwreck, but is saved by the
Indians, 9. Builds a fort, 102. Returns
to Europe, Ic4. Iis expedient to p;-e-
serve the memory of his discoveries durin
a florm, io6. Arrives at the Azores, ibid.
Arrives at Liflon, 107. His reception in
Spain, oS8. 1-lis audience with lierdinand
and If.bclla, lo9. Ilis equipment for a
second voyage, 112. i3ifcovers the Carib-
bee illands, i 4. Finds his colony on l il-
paniola destroycd, i 5. Builds a citv,
which he calls Il'.!h'll, 117. Visits the
ilterior parts of tle coiunliy, 119. -, is
men discontented andl fatious, 120, 1D)s-
covers the illai( oif Jamaica, 1i L. Meets
his brothcr lirthollmcw at I.ibcll., 12;.

i'he itiv\'ls Ill tiCed by his men, anr.I b'gi

to be ;il:rmcl, 124. Ile Icl .rts tlhe In-
'inm , i7.7. I"x.icts tlihote ir:m till',

,'XS. Re\, ttr. s to S'p in ll joiiulify his riii-

d11,l, 1 31. Is fut1ilt.el d X iih a ,ole :-

n l. , r

)ld, for c l!l:.; atiol, 1i 1 lls

thitill voy. ge, s l(. I tli ovl thle 1l.i:
of tl'tizidad, 1 7. )lihuvcrs tile e. n-

2 tiUCiit

tinent of America, 38. State of Hispaniola
on his arrival, 139. Comports the mutiny
of Reldan and his adherents, 142. Is dif-
trefcd by the factious bchaviour of his men,
152. Complaints carried to Spain against
him, 53. Is fcnt home in irons, 155.
Clears his conduct, but is not restored to
his authority, 157. His bo'icitations ne-
glected, 61. Forms new fchcmts of dif-
'covery, 162. Engages in a furth vo age,
164. His treatment at Hifpanio!a, ib//d.
Searches after a paflagc to the Indian oc an,
166. Is flipwreckcd on tile coafl of Ja-
ma:ca, 6'. His artifice to fcure the
fricnilnip of th Indians, 177. Is deliver-
ed, and arrives at ilpaniola, 1-3. Re-
tuins t SpAin, 174.. His datd, 175. llis
right to the original discovery of America
delindcd, 4-24.
Cal, nreus, Don Diego, sues out his claims to

his father's privileges, i. 188. Marries
and goes over to Hispaniola, 189. !;fia-
bliflies a pearl fishery at Cubatia, 190.
P:(jclt. the conlucf of Cotba, 196. His
measures thwarted by Ferdilnand, 213. Re-
turns to Spain, 214.
C'o.mln-re, the xara from which is cOmmnnce-

nient is to be datcd, i. 2. M'1otives to an
interciurl amiil; dliftlnt nations, 4. Still
f!oi illicd in the etafern empire after he
'libverfiln of the western, 26. Pcvivu1 of,
in Eur ope, 2S.
Ca/mpiJs, marine:'s, navi ation cxt.'nJd,! more

by the inventi(n of, tiltan by a l the ciiorts
of preceding ages, i. 35. lBy vl hlo in-
vented, 36.
Cc':I//Nln.' t', \l. his a cco nlt i)f tlhe crlntiv :! t

tlle (lot of the Ani),'s, in .(uiti Atilne,itc;,
i. 45 . His iemaik, on t:c iha aiicrof
the n.tive ,\niricans, t.';.
(onnso, the kintidm o;, di::ot .lcicl by the I'or-

tlt.[;e , t i. 5..
Coi//,i,:;l//', tlhe conl'i'.,t'ne (of rloving

the leat of thile lonan en pire t, i 2..
Co,, iled a (iml.li'l(il; (:t)y alter th' c'.-
tin:'lioil o,f the w(ftI rn i' htl', :2). 1 c-
calnll l '

(l I t l ilart(,l It. \', '.8.
Cl ' !61.,, I'rrtilit.( 11' II:ili'-., l s ()'l x.I'tl-

ratall, i. ' h. I[s l- |'l c.l a.t C( . iJ C;i.c y,
undl rc!I:! ii.i ) C i'

z .i, .' '9.

CO,i .1, /O, Is )ci
rveItion'; o) (I;e

coltraballd trade of thi; Sj.iilii clo1lie:,

ii. 425. Characer of his American me-
moirs, 475.
Cortes, Fernaindo, his irth, education, and

character, ii. . Is b) Vl.i q(uC appoint-
ed comniaider of the aint.iincnt fit cd ut
by him against New Spain, 4, Vifqclueri
becomes jealous of him, 6. Velafqtlz
finds orders to depiive him of h:s c:'niiiil-
son, and lay him underl al: !t, 7. Is pr,-
tedled by his troops, S. The amounit ft
his fore' s, 9. r'RcJ::-s the Indi!:an a t '::-
ha fco, !. Arrives at St. Ju.n de UL U a,
ibid. Hi-s intrvi .v vith! two lc.xic.,t
commanders, 13. 3,;..;ds prelL.ls to Mlon-
teyzunma, 15. 'Lc;C:.;is o!,crs in rcLtun,
lb. His (i'hemc , . I'bl.,i ft's a f' in
of civil gcvel In.: 1n, ?4. lteligin hiis coni-
million unilcrVeliarqltez,c and aflillles the
commiand in tl kin2's na, 27. Iis
fricndflhp courecd hy the Zempoalanlis,
28. Builds a foit, 30. C.unciudes a for-
mal a li.incc wth Icveral caziqies, ibid.
Dilcovers a confliracy among his men, and
dclroys hi, fiips, 33. Advances into the
countrn, 35. Is oppt.led by the Tafcalans,
37. Concludes a pacce with them, 42.
His rafll zeal, 44. Proceeds to Cholula,
46. I)ilcovcrs a conspiracy againii himi
lre, and dclitoys the inhabitants, 4.
Appio.'ches in fight of the capital ci'y of
Mexico, 50. His first interview w!th
Mont, z.iilta, t. I lis anxiclty at hiis fitua-
tion in te city of Mecxico, 5. Seizrs
lMolntezuo. a, 6o. O)rders him to be set-
t itc'( , (;'. l lI)11s of his COll(]tlcI , ('3.
P) cv.!rt on Montli.zlnla t ) own hinfilf,] ;aI
v.il]:! to th.' <|):ii'h c 0vi'it, 06. Almount
and d!v'li.,nol o his tl u.t't.l , 67. l' t'agcs
the I\lexic.Ills by lii; ilpri)rLJ cit zCal, 70.
All ;a11inn(' font by \'tCi.l(.qlc/. ) ipe1)Cr-
f;:Cde hi,]i, 74. H l ii l't;. itati; ,s ol) this
cvlent, 7. AtlIcIIIs no) itiLtt N.tv;iUz,
79. fa's N.irv.i:', atil t.ikis l)in "'-
filer, G'2. (,ail;i oc'r tlie Spatlii}l Iol-
dier', t) hi it''rcl- , V2 . e lru1ii v t(o Mi\(i-
(o, 8. Ilis inmproplr coinduiit on hi ar-

lis.d, tS i. is tl'(l:crly att;tickcd Iy i!h

Lex,..i!i; {7. tAlt., ks ili'tli in1 tlli] vi'ilt;-

nt hi cod, h1. Ideitht of ittie.oiaj,

Out t'u, ccs',, 81:~. J)C.tt (}f

I\l,,I) ofT. tllll,

(,. .,i]it1', tiht .ity ol Mcii o, 9.
Is .tttaj-cd Iy ti c,icans(23, lli ;'i,,t

lItlis

lofTes in the encounter, q4. Difficulties ol
his retreat, 95. Battle of Otumba, 97,
Defeats the Mexicans, 98 Mmtinous pi-
rit of his troops, o10. Reduces the Te-
peacans, 102. Is ftrengtheled by everal
reinforcements, 104. Returns to Mexico,
105. Efiablilhes his head-quarters at Te-
zeuco, 107. Reduces, or conciliates the
surrounding country, 1o8. Cabals among
his troops, og9. His prudence in fuppref-
sing them, lno. Builds and launches a
fleet of brigantines on the lake, 113. Be-
sieges Mexico, S15. Makes a grand as-
fault to take the city by storm, but is re-
pulsed, II8. Evades the Mexican pro-
phecy, 121. Takes Gautimozin prisoner,
124. Gains poffeflion of the city, ibid.
And of the wiole empiLci 127. Defeats
another attempt to supersede him in his
command, 134. Is appointed governor of
New Spain, 135. His schemes and ar-
rangements, 136. Cruel treatment of the
natives, 137. His condut fubje6ted to in-
quiry, 140. Returns to Spain to justify
himself, 41. Is rewarded by theemperor
Charles V. 142. Goes back to Mexico
with limited powers, 143. Dilcovers Ca-
lifornia, 144. Returns to Spain, and dies,
ibid. Inquiry into the nature of his letters
to the emperor Charles V. 443. Authors
who wrote of his conquest of New Spain,
444.

Council of the Indies, its power, ii. 358.
Creoles, in the Spanifl American colonies, cha-

raflerof, ii. 367.
Croglan, colonel George, his account of the

discovery of the bones of large extina
species of animals in North America, i. 454.
Crusades to the Holy Land, the great political

advantages derived from, by the European
nations, i. 30.
Crusado, bulls of, published regularly every

two years in the Spanish colonies, ii. 430.
Prices of, and amount of the sale at the last
publication, 512.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. 95. Is failed round by Ocam-
po, 188. rhe conquetl of, undertaken
by Diego Velafqlez, 96. Cruel treat-
ment of the caziquc Hlatley, and his re-
partee to a friar, 197. Co Iimbus's en-
thufiaftic dfcription of a harbour in, 431.

F The tobacco produced Aiere, the finest in

all America, ii. 393.
Cubagua, a pearl filhery established there, i.

190.
Cumana, the natives of, revenge their ill-

trearment by the Spaniards, i. 233. The
country desolated by Diego Ocampo, 235.
Cucro, the capiral of the Peruvian empire,

founded by Manco Capac. ii. 164. Is
seized by Pizarro, 88. Is besieged by tie
Peruvians, 198. Is surprised by Almagro,
201. Is recovered and pillaged by the
Pizarros, 207. Was the only city in all
Peru, 322.

D.
Dancing, the love of, a favourite paflioa

among the Americans, i. 393.
Darien, the isthmus of, described, i. 20r.

The increase offettlement there, obftruted
by the noxiousness of the climate, ii. 338.
De Solis. his unfortunate expedition up the

river Plata, i. 212.
De Slis, Antonio, chara&er of his Hiftoria

de la Conquifta de Mexico, ii. 445.
D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his

vigorous measures for restraining the ex-
cefes of the regular clergy there, ii. 382.
Rendered ineffe&ual. 383.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of

Good Hope, i. 55.
Discoveries, the difference between those

made by land, and those by sea, stated, i.
425.
Doldwell, his objecion to the Periplus of Han-

no exploded, i. 42!.
Domingo, St. on the island of Hispaniola,

founded by Bartholomew Columbus, i. 39.
Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly re-

monftrate against the cruel treatment of
the Indians, i. 215. See Las Ca/as.
Drunkenness, strong propenfityof the Ameri-

cans to indulge in, i. 396.

E.
Earth, the globe of, how divided into zones

by the ancients, i. 22.
Egyptian, ancient, ltate of commerce and

navigation among them, i. 5.

i!

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so

called, made by Francis Orellana, ii. 215.
Elephant, that animal peculiar to the tortid

zone, i. 455.
EJquimaux Indians, resemblances between

them and their neighbours the Greenland-
ers, i. 278. Some account of, 362. 483.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an

exclusive right to all the countries they
'should discover, from Cape Non to the
continent of India, i. 49.
Etrope, how affected by the dismemberment

(of the Roman empire by the barbarous na-
tions, i. 25. Revival of commerce and
navigation in, 28. Political advantages
derived from the crusades, 30.

F.
Ferdinand king of Castile. See Coltumbus and

Isabella. Turns his attention at length to
the regulation of American affairs, i. 184.
Don Diego de Columbus sues out his fa-
ther's claims against him, 188. EreAs two
governments on the continent of America,
192. Sends a fleet to Darien, and fuppcr-
fedes Balboa, 207. Appoints Balboa lieu-
tenant-governor of the countries on the
South Sea, 210. Sends Dias de Solis to
discover a western passage to the Moluccas,
212. Thwarts the measures of Diego Co-
lumbus, 313. His decree concerning the
treatment of the Indians, 216.
FPrnandez, Don Diego, charaecer of his Ilif-

toria del Peru, ii. 464.
Fernandez, P. his description of the political

state of the Chiquitos, i. 475.

Fignuroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief

judge of Hispaniola, with a cmmiflion to
examine into the treatment of the In ljian
natives, i. 225. Makes n cxperiment to
determine the capacity of the Indians, '234.
FI.ridan, discovered by Juan Ponce d Leon,

i. 197. The chiefs there hereditary, 341.
Account of, from Alvar Nugnlcz Cabeca
de Vaca, i. 470.

Flota, Spanlifh, some account of, ii. 4or.
/ riJeca, billhop of Baidjos, miniflcr for In-

Alian aft'ils, ubltrucfs the plans of ( oloLni-
zation anid difcovcry furmcd by Columbtlus,

Vo.;,. 11.

i. 128. 36. Patronizes the expedition
of Alonzo de Ojeda, 148.

G.
Galeons, Spanifli, the nature and purpose of

these vefTels, ii. 401. Arrangement of
their voyage, 402.
Galvez, Don Joseph, ent to discover the true

state of California, ii. 330.
Gana, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i.

I44. Doubles the Cape of Good Hope,
145. Anchors before the city IMelinda,
ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Malabar, 146.
Gaming, firange propensity of the Americans

to, i. 395.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to

the position of that river, i. 424.
G(fa, Pedro de la, ent to Peru as president

of the court of Audience in Lima, ii. 246.
His charactcr and moderation, 247. The
powers he was vested with, 248. Arrives
at Panama, 249. Acquires poflTlTion of
Panama with the fleet and foices there.
251. Advances tow.rds ('u7co, 2 ;.
Pizarro's troops desert to hiim, 256 lls
moderate ufeofthevicory, 257. Devilcs
employment for his soldiers, 261. His
division of the country among his followuis,
262. Reflores order and gveilnlcnIt, 263.
His reception at his return to Silin, 264.
Geminmus, innfiance of his ignorance in gco-

graphy, i. 426.
Gtograply, the knowledge of, extremely con-

fined among the ancients, i. 27. lc(came
a favourite fludy among the Arabiins, 7.
Giants, the accrounts of, in our (arly (r.i-

vellers, uncolnfirmed by recent difcovcicsi
i. 35. 463.

Gioia, Fla io, thei c
i i citor of the marilcr's

compa's, i. 3(i0
Globe, its divifiuo into zonles ly the ancients,

i. 22.
Go/l, why the firl mctal with which an wa';

acqu.lintcd, i. 33 I xtraordinary lr.!;c
glaiiln of, fotild il the minlesat Cial.l, 490.
Gimr ai, clhar; ;:lcr of hliis Cronica de la Nut . a

':s|p.II;I:, ii. 4-44
G;ood ll.p,, cape:l (o, difcovcrd by aitliolo-

mew lD)a, i. 55.

4 A (;o ui n-

Government, no visible form of, among the

native Americans, i. 340. Exceptions,
343.
Gran Cbaco, account of the method of mak-

ing war among the natives of, from Lozano,
i. 476.
Granaa, new kingdom of, in America, by

whom reduced to the Spanish dominion, ii.
341. Its climate and produce, 342. A
viceroy lately established there, 355.
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and

difcovcry among them, i. I 1. Their com-
mercial intercourse with other nations very
limited, 13.
Greenland, its vicinity to North America, i.

278.
Grijalva, Juan de, fcs out from Cuba on a

voyage of difcovejy, i. 240. L)ifcovers
and gives name to New Spain, 241. His
reasons for not planting a colony in his
newly discovered lands, 243.
Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to check

illicit trade in the American colonies, ii.
409.
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in

America, ii. 393.
Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Mon-

tezuma, succeeds Quetlavaca in the king-
dom of Mexico, ii. 107. Repulses the at-
tacks of the Spaniards in lorming the city
of Mexico, S. Is taken prisoner by
Cortes, 124. Is tortured to discover his
treasure, 126. Is hanged, 138.
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the exceflive fertili-

ly of the foil there, i. 457.

H.
janno, his Periplus defended, with an ac-

count of his voyage, i. 421.
Natiey, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treat-

ment, and memorable icpartee to a Fran-
cifcan friar, i. 197.
.llawkJiwortb's voyages, account of New

Holland, and the inhabitants from, i. 472.
Heat, the diffrent degrees of, in the old and

new continents accounted for, i. 448.
Estimated, 456.

lenry, prince of Portugal, his characqer and
R'udics, i. 42. Expeditions formed by his

order, 44. Applies for a papal grant of h-s
new discoveries, 48. His death, 50.
Herrada, Juan de, alfaffinates Francis Pizar-

ro, ii. 219, Dies, 223.
1Ierrera, the belt historian of the conquef of

New Spain, ii. 446. His account of Or-
rellana's voyage, 473.
Hispaniola, the iland of, discovered by Chris.-

topher Columbus, i. 96. His tranfaftions
with the natives, 97. A colony left there
by Columbus, 103. The colony destroy.
ed, I'5. Columbus builds a city called
Iabella, 117. The natives ill-uied, and
begin to be alarmed, 24. Are defeated
by the Spaniards, 127. Tribute exated;
from them, 128. They scheme to starve
the Spaniards, 129. St. Domingo found.
ed by Bartholomew Columbus, 139. Co.
lumbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla,
155. Nicholas de Ovanda appointed
governor, 158. Summary view of
the condua of the Spaniards towards
the n ives of, 179. Unhappy fate of
Anacoana, 18o. Great produce from
the mines there, 182. The inhabitants
diminish, 185. The Spaniards recruit
them by trepanning the natives of the Lu-
cayos, 186. Arrival of Don Diego de Co-
lumbus, 89. The natives of, almost ex-
tirpated by lavery, 195. 214. Contro-
verfy concerning the treatment of them,
215. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of,
432. Curious instance of superstition in
the Spanish planters there, 456.
]olquin, Pedro Alvarez, erefs the royal ftan-

dard in Peru, in opposition to the younger
Almagro, ii. 223. Vaca de Caltro arrives
and alFumes the command, ibid.
Homer, his account of the navigation of the

ancient Greeks, i. 2.

londuras, the value of that country, owing

to its producion of the logwood-tree, ii. 331.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in

Spanifli America, ii. 394.
lorfes, atonilhmcnt and miltakes of the

Mexicans at the first fight of them ii. 451.
Expedient of the Peruvians to render them
incapable of aion, 472.
Iuana Capac, Inca of Pcru, his characer

and family, ii. 166.

Hiwcar

Huafiar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his

brother Atahualpa's fucceflion to Quito, ii.
167. Is defeated and taken prisoner by
Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits the afliflance of
Pizarro against his brother, 169. Is put
to death by order of Atahualpa, 178.

1.
Jamaiea, discovered by Chriflopher Colum-

bus, i. 122.
Jeromc, St. three monks of that order sent

by cardinal Ximenes to Hispaniola, to re-
gula'e the treatment of the Indians, i. 220.
Their conduc under this commiflion, 222.
Are recalled, 225.
7eJuits, acquire an absolute dominion over

California, ii. 329. Their motives for de-
preciating the country, 330.
.ews, ancient, slate of commerce and naviga-

tion among them, i. 7.
Incas of Peru, received origin of their empire,

ii. 165. 306. Their empire founded both
in religion and policy, 307. See Peru.
India, the motives of Alexander the Great in

his expedition to, i. 15. The commerce
with, how carried on in ancient times,
19. And when arts began to revive in
Europe, 28. The first voyage made round
the Cape of Good Hope, 145.

Indians in Spanish America. See Americans.
Indies, Weft, why Columbus's discoverics

were so named, i. i r.
Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinary milion to

the prince of the Tartars, i. 32.
Inquisition, court of, when and by whom, fil

introduced into Portugal, i. 429.
lifecfs and reptiles, why io numerous and

noxious in Ameiica, i. 261.
J7ohn I. king of Portugal, the first who fnt

ships to explore the weflcrr) coalts of Africa,
i. 40. His lon prince Henry engages in
these attcmpts, 42.

7osn II. Icing of I'ortugal, patonircs all at-

tempts toward difloveries, i. 52. Sends
an embally to Abyrinia, 55. His u ge-
nerous treatment of Columbus, 69.
Iron, the reaon why savage nations were un-

acqluainted with this metal, i. 334.
llaiel//, queen of Cafilc, is applied to by
Julan l'crez in behalf ofCliflopher Coluni-

bus, i. 74. Is again applied to by Quin.
tanilla and Santangcl, 77. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 78. Dies, 174. Hler
real motives for encouraging discoveries in
America, ii. 349.
Ifabelia, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by

Chriflophcr Columbus, i. 117.
Italy, the firt country in Europe, where ci-

vilization and arts revived after the over-
throw of the Roman empire, i. 28. The
commercial spirit of, aive and enterprif-
ing, 29.

L.
Ladrone illands, discovered by Ferdinand Ma-

gellan, ii. 131.
Lakes, amazing size of those in North Ame-

rica, i. 250.
Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns from His-

paniola to solicit the cause of the enslaved
Indians at the court of Spain, i. 219. Is
sent back with powers by cardinal Ximcnes,
220. Returns dflliisfied, 223. Procures
a new commilfion to be sent over on this
subjec, 225. Recommends the scheme
of supplying the colonies with negroes,
226. Undertakes a new colony, 228.
His conference with the biflop of Darien
before the emperor Charles V. 230. Goes
to America to carry his schemes into exe-
cution, 232. Circumstances unfavourable
to hin, 234. His final mifcarliagc, 235.
Revives his representations in fivour of the
Indians, at the dcfire of the emperor, ii.
227. Composes a treatise on the deflruc-
tion of America, 228.
Leon, Pedro Citza de, characor of his Chro-

nica del Peru, ii. 464.
Lery, his dclfription of tlie courage and fero-

city of [the 'I'olliliiiil)os, i. 477.
Limo, the city of, in P'cu, founded by Pi-

zarro, ii. i)14.
Logwood, th, comnliodity that iv\s import-

:arce to tile p)rotinctl <f llonduras ind
Yucatan, ii. 3 1. 'olicy of tlie Splli-
ards to dcle.i t ilt lrgilli tiadel i, 332.
Louis, St. k il, of l'i r ice, Iis cmban.ly to

the chan of tile T'l'itl, i. *.
Lozano, his account of the nietliod of mak-

ing war ainuolg the lnati'vs of (Gran Cliaco'
i. 476.

A 2

L.qi7e,

Luque, Hernando de, a priet, associates with

Pizarro in his Peruvian expedition, ii. 150.

M.

Madeira, the island of, first discovered, i. 45.
Madoc, prince of North Wales, flory of his

voyage and discovery of North America
examined, i. 436.
Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gi-

gantic size of the Patagonians, i. 303.
The existence of this gigantic race yet to
be decided, 305.463. His introduRion tothe
court of Castile, ii; 128. Is equipped with
a squadron for a voyage of discovery, 129.
Saits through the famous strait that bears
his name, 130. Discovers the Ladrone
and Philippine islands, 13i. Is killed, ibid.
Mignct, its property of attraaing iron known

to the ancients, but not its polar inclina-
tion, i. 4. Extraordinary advantages re-
fulting from this discovery, 35.
Malo, St. account of its commerce with Spa-

nifh America, ii. 407.
Manco Capac, founder of the Peruvian em-

pire, account of, ii. 164. 306.
Mandiville, Sir John, his eaflern travels, with

a character of his writings, i. 34.
Manila, the colony of, eablifhed by Philip

II. of Spain, ii. 426. Trade between,
and South America, 427.
Mlnkind, their disposition and manners form-

ed by their situation, i. 267. Hence re-
semblances to be traced in very distant
places without communication, 268. Have
uniformly attained the greatest perfecion
of their nature in temperate regions, 415.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, h.s extraordinary

travels i the East, i. 33.
Alarefl, Gabriel, his account of the country

between the Illinois and Machillimakinac,
i, 472.
Alarina, Donna, a Mexican slave, her hiflory,

ii. 12.
Alatimns Tyrius, his erroneous position of

China, i. 430.

ANllrtyr, Peter, his sentiments on the firnl dif-
- covery of America, i. 439.
Mle/lizo, in the Spanillh American colonies,

difiiictijn between them and I\ulattues,
ii. 3C8.

Metals, useful, the original natives of Ame-

rica, totally unacquainted with, i. 334.
Mexicans, their account of their own origin,

compared with later discoveries, i. 280.
Defcriptions'of their historical pitures,48>.
Various exaggerated accounts of the num-
bers of human viflims sacrificed by them,
483. Their language furnished with re-
fpet6ful terminations for all its words, ii.
477. How they contributed to the upport
of government, 478.
Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the

coaf of, ii. Ir. His interview with two
Mexican officers, 13. Information sent
to Montezuma, with some Spanish presents,
15. Montezuma fends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 6.
State of the empire at that time, 17. The
Zempoallans court the friendship of Cortes,
28. Several caziques enter into alliance
with Cortes, 30. Charaaer of the na-
tives of Tlafcala, 36. The Tlafcalans re-
duced to sue for peace, 42. Arrival of
Cortes at the capital city, 51. The city
described, 52. Montezuma acknowledges
himfelfa vassal to the Spanish crown, 66.
Amount of the treasure collected by Cortes,
68. Reasons of gold being found in such
small quantities, 68. The Mexicans en-
raged by the imprudent zeal of Cortes, 70.
Attack Alvarado during the absence of
Cortes, 84. Their resolute attack on
Cortes when he returned, 87. Death of
Montezuma, 9o. The city abandoned
by Cortes, 93. Battle of Otumba, 97,
The Tepeacans reduced, 102. Prepara-
tions of the Mexicans against the return of
Cortes, c05. Cortes besieges the city
with a flet on the lake, 115. The Spa-
niards repulsed in storming the city, 118.
Guatimozin taken prisoner, 124. Cortes
appointed governor, 135. His fchemcs
and arrangements, 136. Inhuman treat-
ment of the natives, 137. Reception of
the new regulations there, 231. A retro쨌
Ifpc into the form of government, policy,
and arts in, 267. Our information con-
cerning, very imperfecI, 270. Origin of
the monarchy, 271. Number and great-
ness of the cities, 275. Mechanical pro-
fcfEons there diflinguifhed from each other,
276. Dilindion of ranks, 277. Politi-

cal

cal in ftitutions, 279. Power and splendor
of their monarchs, 282. Order of go-
vernment, ibid. Provision for the support
of it, 383. Police of, ibid. Their arts,
284. Their paintings, 286. Their me-
thod of computing time, 290. Their wars
continual and ferocious, ibid. Their fu-
neral rites, 292. Iniperfection of their
agriculture, ibid. Doubts concerning the
extent of the empire, 293. Little inter-
course among its several provinces, 294.
Ignorance of money, 295. State of their
cities, 296. Temples and other public
buildings, 297. Religion of, 302. Causes
of the depopulation of this country, 346.
The small pox very fatal tlere, 348.
Number of Indian natives remaining there,
351. Lift and charafler of those authors
who wrote accounts of the conquest of,
444. Description of the aqueduct for the
supply of the cpital city, 479. See Colonies.

Michael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea,

discovered and named by Balboa, i. 204. The
colony of, established by Pizarro, ii. 63.
Mligrations of mankind, why first made by

land, i. .
Mind, human, the efforts of proportioned to

the wants of the body, i. 314.
Alines of South America, the great induce-

ment to p pulation, ii. 327. Some ac-
count of, 387. Their produce, 389.
The spirit with which they are worked,
390. Fatal effc&s of this ardor, 391.
Evidence of the pernicious eff.ets of la-
bouring in them, 5oo. Of Mexico, total
produceof, to the Spanish revenue, 5 14.516.
Alolucca flands, the Spanish claims on, fold

by the Emperor Charles V. to the Portu-
guefe, ii. 133.
.Alu,,aAic inflitutions, the pernicious effets

of, in the Spanish American colonies, ii.
378. Number of convents there, o51.
Moiojoons, the periodical course of, when

discovered by navigators, i. 19.
A-lo'.tsin, a Dominican preachcr at S. Do-

mingo publickly rcmonfirates againlft the
cruel ticatment of the Indians, i. 215.
Aontezuma, the firfi intelligence received by

the Spaniards of this prince, i. 242. Re-
ceives intelligence of the arrival of Fcr-
nando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 15.
Hlis prcfents to Coite, 16. 1-orbids him

4-

to approach his capital, 7. State of his
empire at this time, ibid. His character,
18. His perplexity at the arrival of the
Spaniards, 19. His timid negociations
with Cortes, 20. His scheme for destroy-
ing Cortes at Cholula discovered, 47. His
irresolute conduct, 50. His first interview
with Cortes, 51. Is seized by Cortes and
confined to the Spanish quarters, 60. Is
fettered, 62. Acknowledges himself a
vassal to the Spanish crown, 66. Re-
mains inflexible with regard to religion,
70. Circumtancesofhis death, go. Account
of a gold cup of his, in England, 479.
Mulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies

explanation of this diftincion, ii. 368.

N
Narvacz, Pamphilo, is sent by Velasquez

with an armament to Mexico, to supersede
Cortes, ii. 74. Takes possession of Zem-
poallo, 79. Is defeated and taken prisoner,
by Cortes, 82. How he carried on his
correspondence with Montezuma, 456.
Natchez, an American nation, their political

inflitutions, i. 344. Causes of their tame
fubmiflion to the Spaniards, 348. Their
religious doctrines, 385.
Navigation, the arts of, very slowly improv-

ed by mankind, i. 2. The knowledge
of, prior to commercial intercourse, ibid.
Imperfections of among the ancients, 4.
More improved by the invention of the
mariner's compass, than by all the efforts
of preceding ages, 35. The fiift naval
discoveries undertaken by Portugal, 40.
Negroes, their peculiar situation under the

Spanifl dominion in America, ii. 369.

Neifoundland, its situation described, i. 448.
New lHolland, rome account of the country

and inhabitants, i. 472.
New Spain, difcovcred and named by Juan

dc Grijalva, i. 241. See IMexico.

N]igno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 15o.
Norwegianr, might in antient times have

migrated to, and colonized America, i.
279. 4 8.
Ngnez Vela, Blasco, appointed viceroy of

leru, to enforce the new regulations, ii.
231; His character, 24. Commits Va-
ca de Cafiro toprifon, 235. Djflenfions

between

,between him and. the court of audience,
237. Is confined, 238. Recovers his li-
berty, 239. Resumes his command, 240.
Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, 241. Is
.defeated and killed by Pizarro, 242.

0
,Ocampo, 'Diego, sent with a fqaadron from

Hispaniola to desolate the cotuntry of Cu-
mana, i. 233. 235.
Ocampo, Sebatian de, first fails round Cuba,

and discovers it to be an ifand, i. i88.
:Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the inter-

cout f between distant countries continued
long a formidable barrier, i. . See Com-
pass, and Nav;gation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to

the Weft Indies, i. 148. His second
voyage, 59. Obtains a government on
the continent, I92.
Olmeda, Father Bartholomew de, checks the

raih zeal of Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico,
ii. 45. Is sent by Cortes to negociate with
Narvaez, 77.
;Orellar.a, Francis, is appointed to the com-

mand of a bark built by Gonzalo Pizarro,
and deserts him, ii. 214. Sails down the
Maragnon, 215. Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, ibid.
Herrera's account of his voyage, 473.
Orgognez, commands Almagro's patty against

the Pizarros, and is defeated and killed by
them, ii. 206.
*Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by

Christopher Columbus, i. 138. The
amazing plenty of fishing, 469. Strange
method of chufing a captain, among the
Indian tribes on the banks of, i. 363.
*Otaheiie, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the

art of boiling water, i. 483.
Otimha, battle of, between Cones and the

Mexicans, ii. 97.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to His-

paniola, i. 159. His prudent regulations,
161. Refutes admillion to Columbus, on
his fourth voyage, 164. his ungenrous
behaviour to Columbus on his shipwreck,
169. 171. Receives him at length and
fends him home, 173. Engages in a war
with the Indiana, 178. His cruel treat-

ment of them, 79. Encourages ctltivation
and manufa&ure, 8 3. His method oftre-
panning the natives of the Lucayos, I86. Is
recalled, 89.

P
Pacific ocean, why, and by whom so named,

ii. 131.
Packet boats, first elablifhment of, between

Spain and her American colonies, ii, 4t5.
Panama, is ettled by Pedrarias Davila, i.

212.
Parmenides, 'the first who divided the earth

by zones, i. 427.
Patagoniars, rome account of, i. 303. The

reality of their gigantic size yet to be de-
cided, 305. 463.
Pedrarias Davila, is ent with a fleet to

supersede Balboa in his governm-ent of
Santa Maria on the isthmus of Iarien, i.
207. Treats Balboa ill, 208. Rapacious
conduc of his men, 209. Is reconciled
to Balboa, and gives him his daughter,
2:10. Puts Balboa to death, 211. Re-
moves his settlement from Santa Maria to
Panama, 212.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived

from the Welch language, i. 437.
Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the

court of Caflile, i. 74. His solemn invo-
cation for the success of Columbus's voy-
age, 82.
Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that

work juflified, i. 421.
Peru, the first intelligence concerning this

country, received by Vasco Nugnez de
Balboa, i. 200. 205. The coast of sirs:
discovered by Pizarro, ii. 156. Pizarro's
second arrival, 16r. His hoflile proceed-
ings againfl the natives, 162. The colony
of St. Michael elablifhed, 163. State of
the empire at the time of this invasion,
ibid. The kingdom divided between Hu-
alcar and Atahualpa, 167. Atahualpa
usurps the government, 168. Huafcar
solicits a iltance from Pizarro, 169. Ata-
hualpa vilits Pizarro, 173. Is seized by
Pizarro, 175. Agreement for hisranfom,
177. Is refused his liberty, 180. Is cru-
elly put to death, 185. Confusion of the
empire on thi.s event, li6. Quito redtcd

by

By Benalcazar, Ir8. The city of Lima
founded by Pizarro, 194. Chili invaded
by Almagro, 95. Insurrection of the
Peruvians, 196. Almagro put to death
by Pizarro, 209. Pizarro divides the coun-
try among his followers, z . Progress of
the Spanish arms there, 212. Francis
Pizarro assassinated, 219. Reception of
the new regulations there, 232. The vi-
ceroy confined by the coult of audience,
238. The viceroy defeated and killed by
Gonz.lo Pizarro, 242. Arrival of Pedro
de la Gafca, 249. Reducion and death
of Gonzalo Pizarro, 257. The civil wars
there not carried on with mercenary fil-
diers, 258. Butneverthelefs gratified with
immenfc rewards, 259. Their proftiion
and luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their con-
tefls, 260. Their xvant of faith, ibid.
Initances, 261. Division of by Gfca
among his followers, 262. A retrofpe&
into the original government, arts, and
manners of the natives, 267. The high
antiquity they pretend to, 303. Their
records, 304. Origin of their civil po-
licy, 306. This founded in reli2ion, 307.
The authority of the Incas abfi;lute and
unlimited, ibid. All crimes there punifihed
capilally, 308. Mild genius of their re-
ligion, 309. Its influence on their civil
policy, 310. And on their military fy'-
temn, 31 . Peculiar fafte of property
there, 312. Diflinction of ranks, 313.
State of arts, 314. Improved state of agri-
oulture, ibid. Their builiings, 3t,. Their
punlic roads, 317. Their bridges, 319.
'Their mode of refining filvcr ore, 320.
W iVoksof elegance, 321. Their civiliza-
tion, nevcrthelefs but imperfect, 322.
Cuzco the only place that had the appea-
rance of a city, ibid. No peset felpara-
tion of profcflions, 3.3. Little commer-
cial intercourse, ibid. Their unwarlike
spirit, 324. Eat their flcfh and fillh raw,
325. 13ties accoiunt of other provinces
under the viceroy of New Spain, 3;2.
Causes of the depopulation of tlii country,
347. The small pox very fatal thcr, 348.
Writers who gave accounts of the con-
quef of, 463. Their mcthod of build-
ing, 487. State of ithe revenue derived

from, by the crown of Spain, S c. See
Colonies.
Peter I. czar of Ruflia, his extensive views

in prosecuting Asiatic discoveries, i. 273.
Phenicians, antient, itate of commerce and

navigation among them, i. 6. Their trade,
how conducted, 421.
Philip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition

aided by his American treafires, ii. 396.
Establishes the colony of Manila, 426.
Philip III. exhaulis his country by inconfi-

derate bigitry, ii. 3)6.
Philppine ifLinds, difcovcred by Ferdinand

Magellan, ii. 13 . A colony established
there by Philip 11. of Spain, 426. Trade
between, and America, 427.
Ph)fic, the art of, in America, why connelced

with divination, i. 390.
Pints, chevalier, his description of the cha-

racleriftic features of the native Americans,
i. 460.
Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a vef-

fcl under Columbus in his first voyage
of discovery, i. 81. Sails to America on
a private adventure with four 짙hips, 18o.
Dilcovers Yucatan, 88.
P'zarr , Ferdinand, is besieged fin Cusco by

the Peruvianis, ii. 198. Is surprised there
by Alinagro, 20r. Escapes with Alva-
r.:do, 20 . Defends his brothcr at the
court of Spain, 210. Is committed to
prison, 211.
Pizarro, FIrancifro, attends Balboa, in his

fettlment on the iflhltius of !)aricn, i. 1(4.

larches under him acrois the iflhnus
vlicrc they !di :'ver the Suth Sa, 04.
His birth, cducationl, alnd eharaetcr, ii. 1.
Aflciates with Alnarn and ])e I.uqiuc,
in a v;yai of dilte'vcry, 150. H-is ill
success, j5. Is recalled, and dlerted
by lmutlt of hi follow. rs, 154. Remains
on the iafiad of GCorgonn for supplies,
ibid. )ifrc,vers the coalft of Peru, 15(6.
Return's to P:in:lma, 157. Goes to Sp.iil
to flicit reinoisrcinenls, s). Procures
the lpeine (onmlland for hirmielf, 59.
Is'aliiltcd with money by Cortes, ibid.
,nials again in 'Pert, 161. Ilia hollile
lroccedillgs a^.iiilt tilhe i ativcs, 162. '. -
tablllics the ololy of St. Mlichael, 1(3.
State of the Peruviall cipirc at tlis tlimnc,

*쨩 ibid.
1-

ibid. Cause of his easy penetrationinto
the country, 168. Is applied to byHu-.
afear, for assistance against his viEtorious
brother Atahualpa, 169. State of his
forces, ibid. Arrives at Caxamalca, 171.
Is visited by the Inca, 173. His perfidious
seizure of him, 75. Agrees to Atahual-
pa's offer for his ransom, 177. Division of
their plunder, 179. Refuses Atahualpa
his liberty, 180. His ignorance exposed
to Atahualpa, 183. Bestows a form of
trial on the inca, 184. Puts him to
death, 185. Advances to Cuzco, 187.
Honours conferred on him by the Spanish
court, 91. Beginning of dissensions be-
tween him and Almagro, 192. His civil
regulations, 193. Founds the city of
Lima, 194. Infurre&ion of the Peru-
vians, 196. Cusco eized by Almagro,
201. Deludes Almagro by negociations,
203. Defeats Almagro, and takes him
prisoner, 206. Puts Almagro to death,
209. Divides the country among his fol-
lowers, 211. The impolitic partiality of
his allotments, ibid. Makes his brother
Gonzalo governor of Quito, 213. Is as-
faffinated by Juan de Herrada, 219.
Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of Quito,

by his brother Francis, ii. 213. His ex-
pedition over the Andes, ibid. Is deserted
by Orellana, 214. His distress on this
event, 216. His disastrous return to Quito,
217. Is encouraged by the people to op-
pose Nugnes Vela, the new viceroy, 236.
Assumes the government of Peru, 238.
Marches against the viceroy, 240. De-
feats and kills him, 242. Is advised by
Carvajal to assume the sovereignty of the
couhtry, 243. Chufes to negociate with
the court of Spain, 244. Consultations
of the court on his conduct, 245. His
violent resolutions on the arrival of Pedro
de la Gafca, 250. Resolves to oppose him
by violence, 251. Marches to reduce
Centeno at Cuzco, 253. Defeats him,
254. Is deserted by his troops on the ap-
proach of Gafca, 256. Surrenders and is
executed, 257. His adherents, menof no
principle, 261.
Plata, Rio de, discovered y Dias de Solis,

i. 213. Its amazing width, 447.

Pliny, the naturalilt, inltanceof his ignorance

in geography, i. 427.
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i.

197. Romantic motive of his voyage,
198.
Population of the earth, flow progress of,

i. .
Porto Bello, discovered and named by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 166.
Porto Rico, is fettled and fubjeaed by Juan

Ponce de Leon, i. I87.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 44.
Portugal, when and by whom the court of

inquisition was first introduced into, i.
429. Portuguese, a view of the circumtances that

induced them to undertake the discovery
of unknown countries, i. 39. 41. First
African discoveries of, 42. Madeira dif-
covered, 45. They double Cape Bojador,
46. Obtain a papal grant of all the coun-
tries they should discover, 49. Cape
Verd Islands, and the Azores discovered,
50. Voyage to the East Indies by Vasco
de Gama, 145.
Potofi, the rich silver mines there, how dif-

covered, ii. 388. The mines of, great-
ly exhausted and fcarccly worth working,
505쨌
Prisoners of war, how treated by the native

Americans, i. 357.
Property the idea of, unknown to the native

Americans, i. 337. Notions of the Bra-
filians concerning, i. 473.
ProtecTor of the Indians, in Spanish America,

his function, ii. 374.
Ptolemy the philosopher, his geographical

descriptions more ample and exa6 than
those of his predeceflbrs, i. 24. His Geo-
raphy translated by the Arabians, 27.
is erroneous position of the Ganges, 424.

Q.
.uctlavaca, brother of Montezuma succeeds

him as king of Mexico, ii. oS5. Con-
dueis in person the fierce attacks which
obliged Cortes to abandon his capital, io5.
Dies of the small pox, 106.
Zuivedo, biflop of Darien, his conference

witli

with Las Casas on the treatment of the
Indianr, in the presence of the emperor
Charles V. i. 230.
.^Qiekfi!vr, the property of the famous mines

of, at Guanacabclica, reserved by the
crown of Spain, ii. 506. The price of,
why reduced, ibid.
Quinquina, or Jesuit's bark, a producion pe-

culiar to Peru, ii. 393.
osi'os, or historic cords of the Peruvians,
some account of, ii. 304.
.uito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana

Capac, Inca of Peru, ii. 166. Is left to
his son Atahualpa, 6-. Atahualpa's ge-
neral revolts after his death, 187. Is re-
duced by the Spaniards uinder Benalcazar,
i88. Benalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo
Pizarro made governor, 23.

R
pa:nioo, his defence of IHanno's account of

the coast of Africa, i. 422.
R.gijrr hips, for what purpose introduced

in the trade between Spain and her co-
lonies, ii. 410. Supersede the use of the
galeons, 411.
Rcigioi of the native Americans, an inquiry

into, i. 378.
Ribar, his account of the political slate of the

people of Cinaloa, i. 474. Of their want
of religion, 484.
.Rio de la Pain, and Tucuman, account of

thoCe provinces, ii. 335.
Rivers, the amazing size of those in America,

i. 249.
RlobiJ&, profcflbr, his remarks on the tem-

ptrature of valious climates, i. 448.
R쩐/dan, Francis, is cft chief juflice in Flif-

paio!a;, by Christopher Columlus, i. 131.
iBecomes ringleader of a mutiny, 140.
Subnils, 43.
Romans, their progress in navigation and dif-

covcry, i. 17. Their military fiirit averlc
to nlc'alliical arts andl cnniniirc, i i.
Niavi,;alirrn anl trade favoured in the pro-
villt'; ilidlcr their governinent, 19. Their
cxtenlive dilcicverics by land, 20. Their
ciipire, and the fcicnccs, ddlruyced togethlr,
25.

VOL. II.

Rubruquis, father, his embassy from France

to the chan of the Tartars, i. 33.
RuJians, Asiatic discoveries made by thein,

i. 273. Uncertainty of, 45.

S
Sanotecas, the rich silver mines there, when

discovered, ii. 388.
San Salvador, discovered and named by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 93.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account of his Hiflory of

the conquest of Peru, ii. 463.
Sanoval, the shocking baibarities executed by,

in Mexico, ii. 137.
Sandoval, Francisco Tcllo de, is fcnt by tie

emperor Charles V. to Me.xico, as vilita-
dor of America, ii. 231. llis moderation
and prudence, ibid.

Savage life, a gtneral cflimate of, i. 402.
SalIs, motive of the native Americans for

takingr them from their enemies, i. 477.
Scrraiuo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains

during his vicc-royally in Americi, ii. 5 16.
Seville, extraordinary increase of its manu-

f.itures by the American trade, ii. 507.
Its trade greatly reduced, ibid. The Anmc-
rican trade removed to Ca'liz, 4)r.
Silver ore, method of rcfiniin itl r.itii:d by

the native Pcruvian, ii. o.
Sonora, late difcovelic (of i h milIns nma!de

thrre by th. Spaniards, ii. 3?.
Sil, American ideas of t ill p r::;li:y o;, i.

387.
Soilh Sea, firfl difcovcted by Vasco N\utncz

de Balboa, i. o0..
Spain, general idea of the polii y of, with r-

gnid to the Aniici'n;, cohlon( , ii. 3?.
Laily interposition of tilt. rl :;U:lnstv
in the clonies, 5

' . l 1! liic A;iic i:'

dominions .f, IiilhjccJld to two vice'Iu\s,
351. A th rd vic -ry)'ally lately clill)hili-
cd, 35. 'I'he coloiics o!, c(iil np:cl w' II
thore C (;rccce and Roieic, ;(,'. Al(-
vintages lhe dlcrivcd fron) her c<.lcic!:,
394, VVhy lie docs not llill dt rive tie
lame, 395. ,ilpid ldecline of trade, '97.
Thlis dcciine inc alcad by thle n:ole t.f
repulating thlie illt'lO llc willl Anllcrica,
400. liltlp!oys guar;la culias t( cllck ill-

. 1 cit

cit trade, 409. The use of register hips
introduced, 410. Establishment of the
company of Caraccas, 413. Enlargement
of commercial ideas there, 414. Free
trade permitted to several provinces, 416.
Revenue dtrived from America, 429. Spe-
cification, 513.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking pof-

session of new discovered countries, i.
443.
Strabo, a citation from, proving the great

geographical ignorance of the ancients, i.
424. His own want of geographical know-
ledge, 427.
Superfition, always connecaed with a desire

of penetrating intothe lecre s of uturity, i.
389.

T.
Tapis, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spain

to Mexico, to supersede Cortes in his
command, but fails in the attempt, ii.
134.
Tartars, the pofibility of their migrating to

America, i. 277.
Tlafcala, in Mexico, characer of the natives

of, ii. 36. Oppose the paflage of the Spa-
niards, 37. Are reduced to lue for peace,
42.
Tobarco, that of Cuba the best avoured of

any in all America, ii. 393.
Toupinambos, account of their ferocious cou-

rage from Lery, i. 477.
'Iradr, free, opened between Spain and her

colonies, ii. 416. Increase of the Spanish
cutoms from this mearure, 510.
Tnr ne winds, the piodical course of, when

discovered by navigators, i. iq.
rJacel'ers, ancient, cha;acltr of their writ-

ings, i, 35.
';rimdad, the ifand of, discoverld by Chrilto-
phcr Columbus on his third voyage, i.
137.
'Tlui/inn, and Rio de la I'lata, account of

ihofe provinces, ii. 335.
7yrc, the commerce of that city, how con-

lduteld, i. 421.
7yI/Jes of Sp.nifil America, how applied by

the court of Spain, ii. 514.

V.

faca de CaJfro, Chriftoval, is ent from Spain

to regulate the government of Peru, ii. 2 o.
Arrives at Quito, 221. Assumes the fu-
preme authority, 222. Defeats young Al-
magro, 223, The severity of his proceed-
ings, 224. Prevents an infurrecifon con-
certed to oppose the new regulations, 234.
Is imprisoned by the new viceroy, 235.
la/verde, father Vincent, his curious ha-
rangue to Atahualpa, Inca of Peru, ii.
174. Gives his fanoion to the trial and
condemnation of Atahualpa, 84.
Yega, Garcilafo de la, charader of his com-

nientary on the Spanish writers concerning
Peru, ii. 465.
Vegetables, their natural tendency to fertilize

the foil where they grow, i. 264.
/elafquez, Diego de, conquers the island of

Cuba, i. 196. 237. His preparations for
invading New Spain, ii. . His difficulty
in chufing a commander for the expedi-
tion, 2. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 3.
His motives to this choice, 4. Becomes
suspicious of Cortes, 6. Orders Cortes to
be deprived of his commission, and arrested,
7. Sends an armament to Mexico after
Cortes, 72.
Venegas, P. his character of the native Cali-

fornians, i. 467.

eienereal disease, originally brought from Ame-

rica, i. 307. Appears to be wearing out,
308. Its first rapid progress, 464.
yenezuela, history of that settlement, ii.

3qo.
Ionice, its origin as a maritime slate, i. 30.

Travels ofMarco Polo, 33.
'erd, islands discovered by the Portuguese, i.

50.
I'iceroys, all the Spanish dominions in Ame-

rica fubjctcd to two, ii. 354. A third
lately cftablilhed, 355. 'Thcir powers,
ibid. A fouith cllahlihed, 42z.
filla, Scgnor, his account of the ftatc of po-

liulation i New Spain, ii. 495. lis de-
tail of thc Spanifli Ancrican revenue,
513. I'll/frgno, Antonio, one of Cortes's foldicrs,

foments a mutiny among his trcos, ii. rio.
Ls difcovcredl by Cortc,, and haii;c, Ill.
1 2 Ulloa,

UVlia, Don Antonio de, his description of

the charaaeriftic features of the native
Americans, i. 460, 461. His reason for
the Americans not being o sensible of pain
as the reft of mankind, i. 479. His ac-
count of the goods exported from Spain to
America, with the duty on them, 516.
Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the northern

parts of the globe discovered by the Ruf-
sians, i. 459.

vW.

llafer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race

of diminutive Americans, i. 301. Com-
pared with flmilar productions in Africa,
302.
Jl'a song of the native Americans, the fcnti-

nients and terms of, i. 478.
I'omcn, the condition of, among the native

Americans, i. 3t8. Are not prolific, 321.
Are not permitted to join in their drunken
fcafs, 399. Nor to wear ornaments. 481.

X.
.,ares, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro,

the earliest writer on his Peruvian expedi-
tion, ii. 463.
Ximenes, cardinal, his regulations for the

treatment of the Indians in the Spanifl
colonies, i. 220. Patronises the attempt
of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 28.

Y.
Yiacatan, the province of, discovered by Pin-

zon and Diaz de Solis, i. 188. Defcrib-
ed, 446. From whence that province de-
rives its value, ii. 331. Policy of the court
of Spain with respect to, 332.

Z.
Zarale, Don Augultine, characer of his

History of the conquef of Peru, ii. 464.
Zones, the earth how divided into, by the

geography of the ancients, i. 22. By whom
fillt lb divided, 427.
Z.numiaraga, Juan de, first biflhop of Mexico,

the dcltioyer of all the ancient records of
the Mexican empire, ii. 271.
L N D OF Tl11 'ICONI) VOI UM F

# ERRATA.

E R R AT Ai

VOL. I.
P. 12o. i, 7z. forf/l, read fall.

z17 . 1 7. for i/-fcrm.'d, read ill-iformcd.,
236. 1. 10. for Pacia,, read Paria.

-* 4 ,, I. , .
str o$, recd '5res.

a 6. . 3. fir y'is, rea.d i; of oits . ....

i5l. . s처. forr> vcuzc, rena Ci'sc. \

v
e VT

4 ,. s1. IS. fur nl;,, read do all. e
l V.Y

V 0 L. 11. R 1 A
I'. ; . 1. for a prcfu , read prsf-na'.

57. . llt. for propi2d, read deermined.

155. . 16. for crcs and hops' vwer, read eyes were.

190go. . ic for cozafe of hse Aldes, read ridge of the Andes.
192. 1. -. folr oZincers, read offence.

i

1 . . o10. for ae, read s.

z5D. 1. i5. dele s.
*56. 1. 16. for cfflec, read in/jich.
3;-; . d. 9 dle St.
333. 1. 15. for cf rt, read in ti.
34 6. 1. 13. folr f'rocsed, rcadfi;ac-b.
368. 1. zz, dele nose.
