RIS T'ORP OF SCOLLANI4I

DURING THXE REIGNS OF
OULEN MARY AND OF, KING JAMES VI,

1 ILL

Isis Acceflion to thc Ci;)isc of ENCLAhM)..
A REVIE1W of the SCOITISH-I HISTORY

previuis to that Perjed;

Ani an APPENDIX cont1ining ORIGINAL PAPERRS

By WILLIAM ROBEIRTSON, D. D,
XINICIPAL OF Tilt UNIVERSITY OF ENTRICVlCII)

AND I13lTORIOORA'HER TO 1I1S MAJ7SY

FOR SCOTLAND,

IN THREE VOLUEIT.S.
With the Au 7110's lIasl Emcndations ;ind Addtitiornsn

VOL. II,

LONDON:

PRINTVT) VOR T. CADILL JUN. ANT W. DAV1s,
(SUvCIYSOat TO MYi. CAMIIL.) IN 711 AXuMAD.

1797.

# BOOK IV.

THE

f.
HISTORR OF SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.
1566.] A s the day appointed for the meeting

of parliament approached, Mary and

her iniiters were employed in deliberating con-
cerning the course which it was molt proper to
hold with regard to the exiled: nobles. Many
motives prompted her to set no bholuds to the ri
gour ofjullice. The ralecontents had laboured
to defeat a fchcme, wlitch her interest conspired
with her paflions in rendering dear to her ; they
were the leaders of the party, whole friedfllip
she had been obliged to court, while he held
their principles in abhorrence; and they were
firmly attached to a rival, whom the had good
reason botl to fear and to hate.

But on the other; hand, several weighty confi-

derations might be lurged. The noblemen, whose
fate was in suspense, were among the molt power-
ful fubjcets in the kingdom; their wealth great,
tlheir connexions extensive, and their adherents
numerous. They were now at mercy, the ob-
jc&ts of compassion, and suing for pardon with
the mott luimble fubmiflion.

In tliofe circumitancca, an act of clemency

would exalt the queen's charafter, and appear no
Icls; splendid among foreigners, than acceltable to

VOL. II. a her

her own fubjets. _Mary herself, though highly in-
cenfed,vwas not inexorable; but the king'srage!sas
ilplacable and unrelenting. They were solicited
in behalf of the fugitives from various quarters.
Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had
been members of the congregation, were not for-
getful of their ancient union with Murray and his
fcllow-ilfferers-s; nor neglectful of their safety,
which they deenmed of great importance to the
kingdom. Mclvi, who at that time pofefend the
queen's confidence, feccnded their solicitations,
And Murray having itooped so low as to court
Rizio, tli it favourite, who was defiFiois offeici-
iilg iis protection against the king, whose dif-
pleasure he had lately incurred, feco'lded the ia-
terceffons of his other friends with the whole of
his influence a. The interposition of Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's
ambafiador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles
was of more weight than all these, and attended
with more fucccs. Throgmorton, out of en-
nuity to Cccil, had embarked deeply in all the
intrigues which were carried on at the Englifk
court, in order to undermine the power and credil
of that minliter. He espoused, for this reason,
the cause of the Scottifli queen, towards whote
title and pretentious the other wai known to bear
little favour; and ventured, in the present critical
junAtlre, to write a letter to Mary, containing the
molt salutary advices with regard to her cotdu&.
He recommended the pardoning of the earl of
Murray and his aflbciates, us a measure no legs
prudent than popular. " An action of this na

i Melv. iaS.

turet,"

ture," fays he, " the pure effec of your Majesty's
generosity will spread the fame of your lenity and
moderation, and engage the Englifl to look to-
wards your aeceflion to the throne, not only
without prejudice, but with desire. By the
fame means, a perse& harmony will be restored
among your own fibjef&s, who, if any rupture
flould happen with England, will serve you with
that grateful zeal which your clemency cannot
fail of inspiring b.'

These prudent remonitrances of Throgmorton,

to which his reputation for wisdom and known
attachment to the queen added great authority,
made a deep impreflion on her spirit. Her
courtiers cultivated this happy disposition, and
prevailed on her, notwithiafnding the king's in-
flexible temper, to sacrifice her own private re-
fentment to the interceflion of her fubjets and
the wishes of her friends c. With this view, the
parliament, which had been called to meet on
the fourth of February, was prorogued to the
seventh of April 1 ; and in the mean time {he was
busy in conlidering the manner and form in
vlich he (hould extend her favour to the lords
who were under disgrace.

Though Mary discovered on this occasion a

mind naturally prone to humanity and capable of
forgiving, (he wanted lirmuefs, however, to rcleil
the influence which was fatally employed to dif-
appoint the effeCt; of this amiable disposition.
About this'time, and at no great distance from
each other, two envoys arrived from the French
king [Feb. 31. The former was intrusted with
matters of mere ceremony alone; he congratu-
bL Allv, 1 9. c Ibid. iz5. d Good, vol. i. 1z4.

u 1 lated

lated the queen on her marriage, and invested
the king with the ensigns of the order of St.
Michael. The inftEtl&ons of the latter related
to matters of more importance, and produced
greater effectsc.

An interview between Charles IX. and his

filter the queen of Spain had been often proposed;
and after many obstacles arising from the oppo-
lition of political interest, was at last appointed
at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis accompanied
her son ; the duke of Alva attended his mtrefs.
Amidst the scenes of public pomp and pleasure,
which seemed to be the sole occupation of both
courts, a scheme was formed, and measures con-
certed, for exterminating theHugonots inFrance,
the proteflants in the Low Countries, and for
suppressing the reformation throughout all Eu-
rope . The ative policy of pope Pius IV. and
the zeal of the cardinal of Lorrain confirmed and
encouraged difpolitions so suitable to the genius
of the Romifll religion, and so beneficial to.their
own order.

It was an account of this holy league which

the second French envoy brought to Mary, cp._
juring her at the fame time, in the name oftlh
king of'France and the cardinal of Lorrain, not
to rcftore the leaders of the protestants in her
kingdomi to power and favour, at the very time
when the catholic princes were combined to du-
itroy that set in all the countries of Europe g.

Popery is a species of false religion. remark-

able for thl strong poffelfion it takes of the heart.
Contrived by men of deep infight in the human

e Keith, 3s. Append. 167.
f 'T'hu. lib. 37. g Melv. z16.

£5 clharacter,

characer, and improved by the experience and
observation of many fucceflive ages, it arrived at
last to a degree of perfeaion which no former
system of superstition had ever attained. There
is no power in the understanding, and no passion
in the heart, to which it does not present objets
adapted to rouse and to interest them. Neither
the love of pleasure which at that time prevailed
in the court of France, nor the pursuits of am-
bition which occupied the court of Spain, had
fecirce them from the dominion of bigotry.
Laymen and courtiers were agitated with that
furious and unmerciful zeal which is commonly
confidered as peculiar to ecclefiaflics; and kings
and ministers thought themselves hound in con.
science to extirpate the protestant doctrine,
Mary herself was deeply tin&ured with all the
prejudices of popery; a paflionate attachment to
that fuperfition is visible in every part of her'
chai-aiter, and runs through all the seenes of her
life: she was devoted too with the utmost sub-
milfion to the princes of Lorrain, her uncles;
and had been accustomed from her infancy to
lilten to all their advices with a filial refpet.
The rofpect of restoring the public exercise
of her own religion, the pleafutre of complying
with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the
French monarch, whom the present situation of
lter affairs in England made 'it necelfary to court,
tctnterbalanced all the prudent considerations
which had formerly weighed with her. She in-
fIantly joined the confederacy, wvhich hadtecei '
formedd for t'lLe etrutiion of the protcitints, and '
altcred tihc whole plan of ler condu& with re- '
gard to Murray and his adherents h /', ''
-

' See Append. No. XIV.

a33 e/ *L'", ,, .TQo" ^

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever fincc
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prolperity did not rife to any great
height, it had, however, suffered no considerable
interruption. A thick and fettled cloud of ad-
verfity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real
enjoy) nent, covers the remainder of her days.

The ffects of the new system which Mary had

adopted werle soon visible. The time of the pro-
rogation of parliament was llortened; and by a
tnew proclamation the twelfth of March was fixed
for its mectiungi. Mary resolved, without any
further delay, to proceed to the attainder of the
rebel lords, and at the famne time determined to
take ronie ifeps towards the re-establishment of
the Romilh religion in Scotland k. The lords of

the

i Keith, ,.6.
k It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that wecharge

the queen with the design of rc-cftablifhing the Roman ca.
tholic reiigion, or at Icalt of exempting the professors of it
fr-m the rigour of those pcnal laws to which they were sub-
jeclcd. HFe ild'cd afterts thai the altars, which fthuld have
been eretled in the chrch of St. Giles, were already pro.
vided, ;94. x. Mary herself, in a letter to the archbishop
of C;al'g.w, her ambafl;,dor in France, acknowlcdges, " that
in thao p.i li:menrt she intended to have done fonme good, with
recpprt to rrlhnring the old religion." Keith, 331. z. The
f ilitual loI dc, i.e. the popiih ecclelfisatics, had, by Ir a u.
thoritv, reltumed their ancient place in that aflembly. Ibidi
3. Slh had jriiled the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith, Apr
peid."167.. 4. She allowei marn to be celebrated in dcll
tnt par's of the kingdom, ibid.; and declared that Ihe would
have inafsI fe tr all men that would hear it. Good. vol. i.

?74. . i. latckwood, who was furnished by the archbihop
of CltafgoA with materials for writing his Martyre de Mfarit
affinns that tie queen intendcd to have pgoiuicd in this par.

liament,

the articles were chosen as ufral to prepare the
batiinefs which was to come before tlle parliament.
They were all persons in whom the queen could
confidi, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of Murray and his party feetned now inevi-
tabMe, and. the danger of the reformed church
imminent, when an event unexpe&edly happened
which saved both. If we regard citler the bar-
harity of that age, when such afts of violence
were common, or the mean condition of the un-
lIappy person who fiffered, the event is little re-
markable; but if we rcsecdt upon the circum-
flances with which it was attended, or upon the
confeqnencec which followed it, it appears ex-
tremely memorable; and the rife and progress of
it deserve to be traced with great care.

Darnly's external accomplishments had ex-

dtcd that ftdden and violent paflion which railed
him to the throne. But the qualities of his mind
correfppnded ill with the beauty of his person.
Of a weak nanddrfanding, and without experience,
conceited at the fame tine of his own abilities,
and ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to
his dilihguiihed merit, all the queen's favour
mnade no rnpreffion on such a temper; All her
gentlencfs could not bridle his imperious and un-
governable 'pirit. All her attention to place
about him persons capable of directing his con-
dllCt, could not prefcrve him from rath and im-
prudent a6tions1. Fond of all the anufement,,
and even prone to al the vices of youth, he be-
came by degrees carclefe of her person, alid a
liament, if not the re.el.iblihmcnt of the catholic religion, at
IcaR fomct)ling for the eaf cofcatholick. Jebb, vol. ii. z04.
i Guud. vol. i. 2il.

ftrangcr

flenger to her company. To a woman, and a
queen, fuchl behaviour was intolerable. The
lower she had slooped in order to raise him, his
belhaviour appeared the more ungenerous and
criminal: and in proportion to the firength of
her firit afle&tion, was the violence with which
her disappointcd passion now operated. A few
months after the marriage, their domestic quarrels
began to be observcd. The extravagance of
)arnlvy's ambition gave rife to these. Initead
of being satisfied with a share in the administration
of government, or with the title of king, which
Mar), by an unprecedented stretch of power, had
conferred on him, he demanded the crown matri-
monial with the molt insolent importunity*".
Though Mary alleged that this gift was beyond
her power, and that the authority of parliament
mult be interposed to bellow it, he wanted either
undertlalnding to comprehend, or temper to ad-
mit, so jult a defence; and often renewed and
urged his requeit.

Rizio, whom the king had firet taken into

great confidence, did not humour him in these
tollies. By this he incurred Henry's displeasure;
and as it was impossible for Mary to behave to-
wards her huffand with the fame affection which
dittingiflled the firti and happy days of their
union, he imputed this coldness, not to his own
.bclhaviour vwhich had so well merited it, but to
the insinuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduet

" Kcith, 329. Id. App. S65, 6iG. Knox, 404. The

cagernels of the king to obtain the Cr wn AMatrimonial is not
surprising, when the extent of the powera which that title
conveyed, as explained in the text and note p. S1, is taken
into con fdcration,

conlirmed

confirmed and strengthened these suspicions. She
treated this stranger with a familiarity, and ad-
mitted him to a share in her confidence, to which
neither his first condition, nor the office fie had
lately bestowed on him, gave him any title. He
was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled
in every business, and, together with a few fa-
vourites, was the companion of all her private
amnfements. The haughty spirit of )arnly
could not bear the intrusion of such an upstart;
and impatient of any delay, and unrertlained by
any semple, he instantly resolved' to get rid of
him by violence.

At the fame time another design, which took

its rife from very different motives, was carrying
on agaiift the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthvcn,
Lindsay, and Maitland, were tie contrivers of
it. In all sori"er commotions they had been
iftl -iy united with Murray, though in the late
infurredion they had deserted him, for various
reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family
of Angus, and, during the minority of the pre-
fcnt carl, aEed as chief of the name of Douglas.
IRthven'was married to the king's aunt. Lind-
fa);'s wife was of the fame blood. All these had
warmly concurred with the queen in promoting
a marriage which did so much honour to the
house of Douglas, and naturally expcted, that,
under a king of their own blood, the chief ma-
nagement o affairs would be committed to them.
Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw that
Murray's opposition to the match i.'ould prove
dangerous and ineffectual; but whoever ruled
at court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents,
to render hirfelf necelfary and of importance.

They

They were all equally disappointed in their ex-
peEations. The king's headitrong temper ren-
dered him incapable of advice. The queen could
not help diltrulting men who had been so long
and so intimately conneaed with Murray, and
gave herself up entirely to such counsellors as
complied with all her inclinations. The return
of that nobleman and his followers was therefore
the only event which could rcefore Morton,
Maitland, and their associates, to their former
ascendant over thc queen's councils. For this
reason, nothing could be more mortifying to
them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, who, after lhe had engaged to
aid Murray with all his interest, was now the
most acive initrumnent in promoting the meafines
which were concerted for the ruin of that noble-
man. This officious zeal completed the dilguft
which they had conceived agaiull him, and in-
spired them with thoughts of vengeance, in no
wife suitable to juitice, to humanity, or to their
own dignity.

While they were ruminating upon their fheleme,
the king communicated his recolution to be aveng-
edof Rizio to lord Ruthven, and implored hls
afilltance, and that of his friinds, towards the
execution of this delign. Nothing could be more
acceptable to them thal this overture. They
law at once all the advantages they would rcap,
by the concurrence of such an associate. Their
own private revenge upon Rizio would pass; they
hoped, for an ad of obedience to the king; and
they did not dcfpair of obtaining the reitoration
of their baniflted fricids, and security for the pro-

teltaut

teftant religion, as the price of their compliance
vitlh his will.

But as Henry was no less fickle than ralTh, they

hesitated for some timc, and determined to ad.
vance no faither, without taking every poflible
precaution for their own safety. They did not,
in the mean time, susser the king's refentmnent to
abatt. Morton, who was inferior to no man of
that iltriguinlg age in all the arts of insinuation
al2d a(ddrtlc, took the young prince under his
nnaiagcmcint. lHe wrought upon his ruling pas-
sion, ambition to obtain the matrimonial crown.
I-l representcd Rizio's credit with the queen to
be the chief and only obstacle to his success in
that demnand. This minion alone, he said, pof-
fcffed her confidence; and out of complailance to
him, her fubjecs, her nobility, and even her
hutbard, were excluded from any participation
of her fccret councils. Under the appearance
of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the king perhaps believed, that a familiarity
of a quite different and very criminal nature
might be concealedl". Such various and com-

plicated

n Of all our hiforians, Buchanan alone avowedly aceufes

Mary of a criminal love for Rizin, 340. 144.. Knox slightly
infitnuates that such a fifpicion was entertanea, 39 . Mel-
vil, in(a converlation with the queen, intimates that he was
afraid her familiarity wi;lh Rizio might be liable to nmifcn-
ftruf&ion, re. The king hilmfelf seems, both by Melvil's
aceount, and by his expoltul3aion with the queen, which
Rutliven mentions, to.have given credit to these suspicions.
Melv 127. Keith, Append. s l, 1r4. That the king's
fulpic ons were strong, is likewise evident from the paper
published, Append. No. XV. But in opposition to thefr. us.
iciolns, and they art nothing moie, we may oblirve that
Raulct the queen's l'tench 1'ccrctafy was dilinillid from

.- .....---. ............
. .. .. - . her

plicated passions raged in the king's bosom with
the utmost fury. He became more impatient
than ever of any delay, and even threatened to
itrike the intended blow with his own hand.
At last preliminaries were fettled on both fides,
and articles for their mutual security agreed
upon. The king engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banished lords, to consent to their
return into Scotland, to obtain for them an
ample remission of all their crimes, and to fitp-
port, to the utmost of his power, the religioa
which was now eftablilhed in the kingdom. On
their parts they undertook to procure the crown
matrimonial for Henry, to secure his right of
fuccetfion, if the queen fiould die before hln
without issue, and to defend that right to the
uttermoit, againif whatever person should pre-
fume to dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any
otherperfon, 1hould happen to be killed in plra

her fervicc, and Rilio advanced to that ofice, in Decem1er
S564. Keith, z68. It was in consequence of this pefor-
ment, that he acquired his great credit with, the queen.
Meiv. ax7. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months
after. Keith, zig9. The queen immediately conceived for
him a palion, which had all the symptoms of genuine and
violent love. Rizio aided this palfion, and promoted th'
marriage with all his Interelt. Melv. rx . During fowne
months after the marriage, thequeten's fondnef6 for Datnly
continued. She roon proved with child. Fronm this enume.
ration of circumitancca, it apneals almost iiponfible that the
queen, unletf we fuppof. her to have becer a woman utterly
abandoned, could carry on any criminal ilntrigue with RiRio.
But the silence of RandolphN the Eoglifll rctdent, a main
abundantly ready tb mention and to aggravate Mary's fault,,
and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Riio»
concealed any thing criminal, ia in itself a fuldicnt vindica.
iiou of her inoeao~cc

fecuting

fecuting the design, the king promised to ac-
knowledge himself to be the author of the
enterprise, and to proteEt those who were em-
barked in it °.

Nothing now remained but to concert the

plan of operation, to chufe the afors, and to
assign them their parts in perpetrating this de-
teltable clime. Every circumstance here paints
and charafterifes the manners and men of that
age, and fills us with horror at both. The
place chosen for committing such a deed, was the
queen's bed chamber. Though Mary was now
in the iixth month of her pregnancy, and though
i Rizio might have been seized elsewhere without
any difficulty, the king. pitched upon this place,
that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of
reproaching Rizio with his crimes before the
queen's face. The earl of Morton, the lord
igllh chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
direcd an enterprise, carried on in defiance of all
the laws of which he was bound to bt the
guardian. The lord Ruthven, who had been
confined to his bed for three months by a very
dalngerous distemper, and who was still so feeble
that he could hardly walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, was intruled with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himself needed to be
;1lpported by two men, he came abroad to com-
nit a murder in the presence of h'is sovereign.

On the ninth of March, Morton entered the

court of the palace with an hundred and sixty
men; and without noise, or meeting with any
rceillance, seized all the gates. While the queen

o Good; vol. i. 266.
VOL. 1i. c waS

was at :supper with the countess of Argyll,
'Rizio,.and a few other persons, 'thejking fud-
denly entered the apartment by a private pas-
sage. At his back was Ruthven, clad in com-
plete armour, and with that ghastly and. horrid
look which long sickness had given him- Three
or four of his moif trusty accomplices followed
him. Such an, unusual appearance alarmed
those who were present. Rizio instantly ap-
rehended that he was the'vi&im at whom the
low was aimed; and in the utmost co0fterna-
tion retired behind the queen, of whom lie laid
hold, hoping that the reverence due to her per.
son might prove some protetion to him. The
conspirators had proceeded too far to be re-
firained by any consideration of that kind.
Numbers of armed men rushed into the chamber.
Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a furious
mien and voice commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, andwhich he
had occupied too long. Mary employed tears,
and entreaties, and threatenings, to save her
favourite. But, notwithstanding all these, he
was torn from her by violence, and before he
could be ,dragged through the next apartment,
the rage of his enemies put an end to his life,
piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds P.

Athol, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confi-

dents of the queen, who had apartments in the
palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account;
but either no violence, was intended againi
them, or the conspirators durlt not fh.d the.

P Scce Append, No. XV,

noblest

F-- ~ ~ ---
- -

)ii
'-~~;UiPrL.P-:r 2rmPlti

7-r~~ l~~~ UW ~rk It~

nolleit blood in the kingdom in the fame illegal
manner with which they had ventured to take
the life of a Itranger. Some of them were
diflnifild, and others made their efeape.

The conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof-

feclion of the palace, and guarded the queen
with the utmoll care. ,A proclamation was pub-
lilled by the king, prohibiting the parliament
to meet on the day appointed ; and meafires
were taken by him for preventing any tumult in
the city . Murray, Rothes, and their follow,
1 i's, being informed of every ftep taken against
lRizio, arriyed at Edinburgh next evening. Mnur-
ry'wivas 'gr;couly r'eceived both by the king
uad queen: by the former, on account of the
articles which had been agreed upon between
thlem; by the latter, becauie Ihe hoped to prc-
vAil on him, by gentle treatment, not to take
part with the murderers of Rizio. Their power
lhe till felt and dreaded; and the insult which
they had offered to her authority, and even to
her pcrfon, so far exceeded any crime lhe could
impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on them, ile became extremely
willing to be reconciled to him. The obliga-
'tions,' however, which Murray lay-uider to
: ,;ii iVWho htadhliazarided- their lies on Ilts account,

ia'lg;;'d him ti labour for thelr safety. The

queen, whlii fcarccly had the liberty of choice left,
was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruthveun
into her presence, and to grant them the pro.
nife of pardon in whatever terms they hoiull;
d(eem necefary for their own security,

1' Keith, Appendix, 1a6.

C 2 The
M

The king, meanwhile, stood astonished at the

boldness and success of his own enterprise, and
uncertain whaz course to hold. The queen ob-
served his irresolution, and availed herself of it.
She employed all her art to disengage him from
his new associates. His consciousness of the in-
Tult which he had offered to so illultlious a be-
nefaCtrefs, inspired hiim with uncommon facility
and complaisance. In spite of all the warnings
he received to distrust the queen's artifices, file
prevailed on him to dismiss the guards which
the conspirators had placed on her person; and
that fame night [March 1 ] he made his efcapc
along with her, attended by three persons only,
and retired to Dunbar. The fcheine of their
flight had been communicated to Huntly and
Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by then:
and several other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate
lay in that corner of the kingdom, and his fol-
lowers crowded to their chief in' such numbers
as soon enabled the queen to set the power of
the conspirators at defiance.

This sudden flgllt filled them with inexpressible

consternation. They had obtained a promise of
pardon; and it now appeared from the queen's
conduit, that nothing more was intended by this
promise than to amuse them, and to gain time.
They ventured, however, to demand the accon-
pliflncent of it; but their messenger was detained
a prisoner, and the queen advancing towards
Edinburgh at the head of eight thousand men,
talked in the higliell flrain of reientment and re-
venge. She had the address, at the fame time,
to separate' Murray and his associates fiom the
confpiratols againit Rizio. Senlible that the

tnlgiol

union of these parties would form a confederacy
which might prove formidable to the crown, fle
(xpreffed great willingness to receive the former
into favour; towards the latter, (he declared her-
self inexorable. Murray and his followers were
no less willing to accept a pardon on her terms.
The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of every
resource, and incapable of refiifance, fled pre-
cipitately to Newcaftlc [March 19], having thus'
changed situations with Murray and his party,
who left that place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even

for cunning, as the earl of'Morton, ever engaged
in a more unfortunate entcrprife. Deserted basely
by the king, who now denied his knowledge of
the conspiracy by public proclamations, and
abandoned ungenerously by Murray and his par-
ty'r?,~ieas obliged to'flSy fron'issilnative country,
to resign the higlhef office, and to part with one
of the molt opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

On her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to

proceed againit those concerned in the murder of
Rizio with the utmost rigour of law. But, in
praise of her clemency, it mull be observed, that
only xwo persons, and these of no considerable
rank, suffered for this crime .

In this conspiracy there is one circumfiance

ivhich, though somewhat detached, deserves not
to be forgotten. In the confederacy between the
I king and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was assassination, the prefcrving of the re-
formed church is, nevertheless, one of the molt
considerable articles ; and the fame men who were
preparing to violate one of the firit duties of

' Mely, ro.: Keith, Appendix, 130. 13$.

C n3. rality,

morality, affected the highctl regard for religion.
History relates these extravagances of the human
mind, without pretending to justify, or even to
account for them ; and regulating her own opi-
nions by the eternal and immutable laws of jultice
and of virtue, points out filch inconliftencies, as
features of the age which lhe describes, and re-
cords them for the initruftion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate

assassination which has occurred, and as we shall
hereafter meet with many other inflances of the
fame crime, the causes which gave rife to a prac-
tice so ihocking to humanity deserve our particu-
lar attention. Resentment is, for obvious and
wife reasons, one of the strongest paflions of the
human mind. The natural demand of this paflion
is, that the person who feels the injury liould
himself inflict the vengeance due on that account.
The permitting this, however, would have been
deftru&ive to society; and punishment would
have known no bounds, either in severity or in
duration. For this reason, in the very infancy
of the social state, the sword was taken out of
private hands, and committed to the magiltrate.
But at irfit, while laws aimed at refiraiinig, they
really strengthened the principle of revenge. The
earliest and moll simple puiifhmcnt for crimes
was retaliation; the offender forfeited limb for
limb, and life for life. The payment of a com-
penfation to the person injured, succeeded to tlie
rigour of the former infsitution. In both thpfe,
the gratification of private revenge was the ob-
je& of law ; and he who suffered the wrong was
the only person who had a right to pursue, to ex-
at, or to remit the punifunclt. While laws

allowved

allowed such full scope to the revenge of one
party, the intereits of. the other were not ne-
gleAcd. If the evidence of his guilt did not
amount to a full proof, or if he re koned himself
to be unjitlly accnfed, the person to whom a
crime was imputed had a right to challenge his
:tdverfary to single combat, and, on obtaining the
vilor'y, vindicated his own honour. In almost
every considerable cause, whether civil or crimi-
nal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of
the innocence, or the property, of the parties.
Jutlice had seldom occalion to use her balance ;
the sword alone decided every conceit. The
passion of revenge was noitrithed by all there
,Means, and grew, by daily indulgence, to be in-
credibly itrong. Mankind became habituated to
blood, not only in times of war, but of peace;
and fiom this, as well as other causes, contrated
an amazing ferocity of temper and of manners.
This ferocity, however, made it ncceffary to dif-
corl-age the trial by combat; to abolish the pay.
inent of compensations in criminal cafes; and to
think of some milder method of terminating dif-
putes concerning civil rights. The punifliments
for crimes became more revere, anid the regula-
tions concerning property more fixed; but the
princes, whose province it was to inflit the one
;tnd to enforce the other, possessed little power.
Great offenders despised their authority ; smaller
ones feltercd themielves under the jirlfdihtion of
those from whose protcdtion the) expeEted im-
iunity. The administration of jultice was ex-
tremnely feeble and dilatory. An attempt to
punifl the crimes of a chieftain, or even of his
vafTals, often excited rebellions and civil wars,

To

To nobles, haughty and independent, among
whom the causes of discord were many and un-
avoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury,
and impatient to revenge it; who deemed it in-
famous to fubnit to an enemy, and cowardly to
forgive him ; who confidered the right ofpunifli-
ing those who had injured them, as a privilege of
their order 2nd a mark of independence; such
flow proceedings were extremely unfatisfa&tory.
The blood of their adversary was, in their opi-
nion, the only thing which could wash away an
affront; where that was nut flied, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became suspect-
ed, and a fain was left on their honour. That
vengeance, which the impotent hand of the
magistrate could not inflic, their own could easily
execute. Under governments so feeble, men
assumed, asin a slate of nature, the right of judg-
ing and redrefling their own wrongs ; and thus
assassination, a crime of all others the most de-
firuEtive to society, came not only to be allowed,
but to be reckoned honourable,

The hiflory of Europe, during the fourteenth

and fifteenth centuries, abounds with detetflblq
instances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly
among the French and Scots, between whom
there was a close intercourse at that time, and a
surprising resemblance in their national charac-
ters. In one fhoufand four hundred and seven,
the only brother of the king of France was mur-
dered publicly in the ftteets of Paris; and so far
was this horrible ation fiom meeting with pro-
per punfllment, that an eminent lawyer was al-
lowed to plead in defence of it before the peers
ps France, and avowedly to maintain the lawful-

Dnfs

ness of assassination. In one thousand four hun-
dred and seventeen, it required all the eloquence
and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail
on the council of Conflance to condemn this
propolition, " That there are some cafes in
which aflaflination is a virtue more meritorious
in a knight than in a squire, and more meritorious
in a king than in a klight t." The number of
eminent perfQns who were murdered in France
and Scotland, on account either of private, or
political, or religious quarrels, during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, is almost incredible. Even
after those causes which firlt gave rife to this
barbarous pra&tice were removed; after the
jurifdition of magistrates and the authority of
laws were better eftablilhed, and become more
universal; after the progress of learning and phi-
los ophy had polilhed the manners, and humamzed
the minds of men, this crime continued in some
degree. It was towards the close of the seven-
teenth century before it disappeared in France.
The additional vigour which the royal autlprity
acquired by the acceflion of James VI. to the
throne of England, seems to have put a fop to
it in Scotland.

The influence, however, of any national cuf-

lom, both on the underiLaiding and on the heart,
;a(d how far it may go towards perverting or
cxtilnglifllung morlal priciples of the greatecl
inllulort.ice, is remiarkable. T'he authors of those
;ges llave perfetly imbibed the sentiments of
tli-ir 'cotempotraries, with regard to aflaffination;
landl they whlo had le-ifue to enflet and to judge,
appiear to be no more Ihocked at this crime, than

L'EiEfaiu> Hli. Conc. de Conlt.

the

the pcrfons who committed it during the heat and
impetuosity of passion. Buchanan describes the
murder of cardinal Beatoun and of Rizio, with-
out cxprelfing those feelings which are natural to
a man, or that indignation which became an his
torian u. Knox, whose mind was fercer and morl
unpolifled, relates the death of Beatoun and of
the duke of Guise, not only without censure, but
with the utmost exultationx. On the othc,
hand, the bishop of Ross mentions the affaffina-
tion of the earl of Murray with some degree of
applause Y. Blackwood dwells upon it with the
most indecent triumph, and ascribes it direftly
to the hand of God z. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal actor in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote
an account of it forne short time before his own
death, and in all his long narrative there is not
one expreflion of regret, or one symptom of com-
punction, for a crime no less diihonourable thanr
barbarous a. Morton, equally guilty of the fami:
crime, entertained the fame sentiments concerning
it; and in his last moments, neither he himself,
nor the rriniflers who attended him, seem to have
conlidered it as an aAcion which called for re.
pentance ; even then he talks of David's/flaughtur
as coolly as if it had been an innocent or com.
mendable deed b. The vices of another age aito-
nili and flock us; the vices of our own becomm.
familiar, and excite litt!e horror C. I return fronm
this digression to the course of tlle hiflory.

The

u Buchan. 9S. 345 x Knox, 334.
y Anders; 3. 4. l Jebb, z. 263,
n Keith, Append. I9i. b Crawf. Mem.,Appenl.
c In the fir(l accoints of Rizio's murder sent to England,
thcre fcem to have been ming'cd (as is ulual in relating ex-

tusordipary

The charm, which had at firlt attached the

queen to Darnly, and held them for some time
il an happy union, was now entirely dissolved-;
and love no longer covering his follies and vices
with its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in
their full dimension and deformityd. Though
Henry published a proclamation, disclaiming any
knowledge of the conspiracy againit Rizio, the
queen was fully convinced, that he was not only
accessary to the contrivance, but to the commis-
lion of that odious crime e. That very power
which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness,
ffhe had conferred upon him, he had employed to
insult her authority, to limit her prerogative, and
to endanger her person. Such anoutrage it was
impossible any woman could bear or forgive.
Cold civilities, secret diftrult, frequent quarrels,
succeeded to their former transports of affection
and confidence. The queen's favours were no
longer conveyed through his hands. The crowd
of expectants ceased to court his patronage, which
they found to avail so little. Amnong the nobles,
fume dreaded his furious temper, others com-
plained of his perfidiousness; and all of them
traordinary events) some circumltances, which afterwards
appeared to befalfe: among o;hers, that a friar named Black,
hid been niail at the fime time with Rizio. Packhurlt
bilhop of Norwich, in communicating this intelligence to his
cl resp)ondent Bullinger, an eminent ieormeddivincofZuich,
exllrffles no condecnation of the murder of Rizio, and ex-
ults over the supposed death of the friar, in terms which, in
our times, will appear.as (hocking as they are puerile:
" Fraterculus quidam, nomnine Black, papiltarum antedig
I.lIus, eodem trnepole in aula occiditul: Sic niger lic ne-
Iulo, migra quoque morte perem'ptus, invitus nigran, subito
defcenditin Orcun." Burn. Hilt. of Reform. iii. App. 360.

d See Appendix, No. XVI. c Keith, 350.

despised

despised the weakness of his understanding and;
the inconstancy of his heart. The people them.
selves observed some parts of his conduEt, which
little suited the dignity of a king. Addided to,
drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that!
age could bear, and indulging irregular paflionis,
which even the licentiousness of youth could not
excuse, he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked:
the queen to the utmost ; and the paflions which:
it occasioned often forced tears from her eyes,'
both in public and private f. Her aversion fLi;
him increased every day, and could be no longer
concealed. He was often absent from court, ap-
peared there'with little splendour, and was truttcd
with no power. Avoided equally by those who
endeavoured to please the queen, who favoureti
Morton and his associates, or who adhered to the,
house of Hamilton, he was left almost alone in a i
neglected and unpitied solitude g.

About this time a new favourite grew into;

great credit with the queen, and soon gajged a i
ascendant over her heart, which encouraged his;
cnterprifing genius to form designs that proved
fatal to hirnfelf, and the occasion of all Mary's
subsequent misfortunes. This was James -He. i
burn, earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and, by his extensive poffeflions and nu.
merous vaflals, one of the muo powerful noblemen
in the kingdom. Even in that turbulent age,
when so many vast plojects were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to a'tion, no man's
ambition was more daring than Bothwvell's,'o,
had recourse to bolder or more lingular expedients

f Kcith, 319. 5 Mclv. 131, &c.,

for

obtaining power h. When almoit every person
ditin&tion in the kingdom, whether papirl or
oteftant, had joined the congregation in op-
sing the dangerous encroachments of theFrench
on the liberties of the nation, lhe, though an
owed protefant, adhered to the queen regent,
d ated with vigour on her lide. Tlle success
ich attended the arms of the congregation
ving obliged him to retire into France, he was
;en into the queen's service, and continued with
rtill the time of her return into Scotland i.
n that period, every ftep of his conduct to-
rds Mary was remarkably dutiful ; and amidil
the shiftings of fartion, we scarcely ever find

holding any course which could be offenlive
her. When Murray's proceedings with regard
her marriage gave umbrage to the queen, ehe
alled Bothwell from that banifliment into which
had been obliged with reluctance to drive
, and confidered his zeal and abilities as the
IL powerful supports of her a!thority. When
conspirators, againit Rizio seized her person,
became the chief initrumenlt of recovering her
ery, and servcd her, on that occasion, with
The enterpilirrlg sp;rit of P.orrhwell w3s To confpicurous
procu:e tii'n Ieveral markls ofl'Jliliicti n duri',g his reli
c in l:r.ince,, H-ardwiclce's ita'e iper., i. 143. Il'}'"g-
ton, the lCnglilh amb.idl(dlo at Par!s, and one us ihc
fa.igcioius niniiiers l.rdloyed by l 'laisbth, points hill
as a perfuii who wai ro be die.ded arnd ob.rrv.-'i. " The
of BotlAcll," frays he in a letter, Nov. z , i 5:,o, " is
,rrd to retuin into icolaind, ant hath made bnaft that
ill do gteAt tiinkis, a,ir live ill Scotilnd in ,ierpite of all

He is a giori,u.., talh, and hazai .uus vourng in:n ; and

cire it were nieer tht his adv.'ritrics Ihould blh have
ye to limn, and allb keep him rhort." lbid. p. 14..
Anders. i, go.
OL,, I1,

despised the weakness of his understanding and
the inconflancy of his heart. The people them-
selves observed some parts of his conduct, which
little suited the dignity of a king. Addited to
drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that
age could bear, and indulging irregular pailions,
which even the licentiousness of youth could not
excuse, he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked
the queen to the utmost; and the paflions which
it occasioned often forced tears from her eyes,
both in public and private f. Her aversion fc-
him increased every day, and could be no longer
concealed. He was often absent from court, ap-
peared there'with little splendour, and was trusted
with no power. Avoided equally by those who
endeavoured to please the queen, who favoured
Morton and his associates, or who adhered to the
house of Hamilton, he was left almost alone in a
negleted and unpitied solitude g.

About this time a new favourite grew into

great credit with the queen, and soon gaiged an
ascendant over her heart, which encouraged his
enterprising genius to form designs that proved
fatal to hinf-lf, and the occasion of all Mary's
fubfcquent misfortunes. This was James Hep-
burn, earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and, by his extensive possessions and nu-
merous vaflils, one of the mull powerful noblemen
in the kingdom. Even in that turbulent age,
when so many vast piojees were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to adion, no man's
ambition was more daring than Bothwell's, or0
had recourse to bolder or more lingular expedients

I Kcitb, 329. S Mclv. 13i, &c,.

for

for obtaining power h. When almost every person
of diftinAion in the kingdom, whether papill or
protestant, had joined the congregation in op-
posing the dangerous encroachments of the French
upon the liberties of the nation, lie, though an
avowed protestant, adhered to the queen regent,
and ated wiith vigour on her lide. The success
which attended the arms of the congregation
| having obliged him to retire into France, he was

l taen into tile queen's service, and continued with
iiher till the time of her return into Scotland i
| From that period, every Itep' of his conduct to-
Y wards Mary was remnarkably dlutiful ; and amidit
all the shiftings of fadtion, we fle.rcely ever find
| him holding any course which could be offenlive
to her. When Murray's proceedings with regard
to her marriage gave umbrage to the queen, the
recalled Bothwell from that baniflment into which
jhe had been obliged with reluitanlce to drive
him, and confidered his zeal and abilities as the
molt powerful supports of her authority. When
the confpiratorA againllt Rizio seized her person,
lic became the chief inltrument of recovering her
liberty, and servcd her, on that occasion, with

' The enterprifigl sp;rit of Pothwell w3s so confpicuoun

as to procu.e ll:a Jevral niarkls IS' lifinCi.i l induriig his refi
deficr in ir.tince. lardrviclce's *ta'c l'.iperr, i. 143. J'hrog-
rnorton, the :nglilh iamb.ilddol at Parls, and one of the
nmiul fag.cionls niniiiiers e:r.i)loyt:d by l.trablethi, points him
our as a perfin who vwai ro be die.ded alnd obCtived. 1" The
rarl of Botiwnllw," fiys he in a letter, Nv. z ', V 5,o, " is
(,cprlrd to retuin into Scotland, anl hath maide boalt that
lie .ill do gleat tlings, al,i live in Scotland in ,derpite of all
nen. IHe is a glorirua, ralh, and lhazaijuus voung man: ; and
tl'erci:fre it wre meet tilt his adv,'rriarics Ihould bnth have
i' Ceye to hiim, and allb keep him Whott." Ib:d. p. j49.

Andere. i. go.
v. ')i,, p, so

so much fidelity and success, as made the deepefl
inpreflion on her mind, and greatly increased the
confidence which she had hitherto placed in himk.
Her gratitude loaded him with marks of her
bounty ; fie raised him to offices of profit and of
trust, and tranfatted no matter of importance
without his advice 1. By complaisance and affi-
duity he confirmed and fortified these disposition ;
of the queen in his favour, and insensibly paved
the way towards that vast projeA, which his im-
moderate ambition had perhaps already conceived,
and which, in spite of many difficulties, and at
the expence of many crimes, he at last accom.
plifhed.

The hour of the queen's delivery now ap-

proached. As her palace was defended only by
a slender guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her
person, at this time, to the insults she might susser
in a kingdom torn by factions and prone to mu-
tiny. For this reason, the privy council adviscd
the queen to fix her residence in the caatle of
Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom,
and the most proper place for the security of hci
person m. In order to render this security mor.
perfect, Mary laboured to extinguilh the dometlic
feuds which divided some of the principal nobles.
Murray and Argyll were exasperated againfl
Huntly and Bothwell, by reciprocal and repeated
injuries. The queen, by her authority and en-
treaties, effe&ed a reconcilement among them,
and drew from them a promise to bury their d;s-
cords in cvcllafting oblivion. This reconcilement
Mary lhad so much at heart, that (he made ii

k And:if. 9S, 93. Melv. 133. Knox, 396.
1 Keuith, 335.

the

the condition on which file again received Murray
into favour .

On the nineteenth of June, Mary was delivered.

of her only son James, a prince whose birth was
happy for the whole island, and unfortunate to
her alone. His accession to the throne of Eng-
land united the two divided kingdoms in one
mighty monarchy, and eftablithed the power of
Great Britain on a firm foundation ; while she,
torn early from her son by the cruelty of her
fate, was never allowed to indulge those tender
parlions, nor to taste those joys which fill the
heart of a mother.

Melvil was instantly dispatched to London with

an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth,
at sirs, in a sensible manner; and the advantage
and superiority which her rival had acquired by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes.
But before Melvil was admitted to audience, (he
had so far recovered the command of herself, as
to receive him not only with decency, but with
excessive cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the
invitation which Mary gave her, to stand god-
mother to her son °.

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence,

ale resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young
prince with great pomp; and for that purpose
sent invitations of the fame kind to the French
king, and to the duke of Savoy, the uncle of
her fi.nmer husband.

The queen, on her recovery, difcovcred no

change in her sentiments with refpel to the
kingP. The death of Rizio, and the counte-

n Keith, 336. Append. 139. Mclv. 138.
1 See Append. No. XVII.

D 2 nance

nance he had given to an aftion so insolent and
unjustifiable, were still fresh in Or memory.
She was frequently pensive and dejeced .
Though Henry sometimes attended at court, and
accompanied her in her progresses through dif.
ferent parts of the kingdom, he met with little
reverence from the nobles, while Mary treated
him with the greatest reserve, and did not susser
him to possess any authority r The breach be-
tween them became every day more apparent .
Attempts were made towards a reconcilement,
particularly byCaftelnau, the French ambassador;
but after such a violent rupture, it was found no
easy matter to bind the nuptial knot anew; and
though he prevailed on the king and queen to
pass two nights together', we may, with great
probability, pronounce this appearance of union,
to which Caftelnau trusted, not to have been
sincere; we know with certainty that it was not
latting.

Bothwell, all this while, was the queen's prime

confident. Without his participation no hulinefs
was concluded, and no favour bellowed. Toge-
ther with this ascendant over her councils, Both-
well, if we may believe the contemporary his-
torians, acquired no less sway over her heart.
'But at, what precise time this ambitious lord first
allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the
place of that duty and respect which a subjet
owes his fovcreign ; or when Mary, infiead of
gratitude for his faithful services, felt a passion of
another nature riling in her bofonm, it is no easy
matter to determile. Such delicate transitions

q Melv. 14i, r Keith, 35o. Melv. 13z.
- Keith, Append. 169. t Ibid. 169.

of

of paflion can be discerned only by those who are
admitted near the persons of the parties, and who
can view the secret workings of the heart with
calm and acute observation. Neither Knox nor
Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble station allowed them'only a ditfant ac-
cess to the queen and her favourite. And the
ardour of their zeal as well as the violence of their
prejudices rendered their opinions rafl, precipi-
tate, and inaccurate. It is by the effeEts of this
reciprocal passion, rather than by their accounts
of it, that subsequent hiitorians can judge of its
reality.

Adventurous as Bothwell's proje& to gain

the queen may appear, it was formed and carritd
on under very favourable circumstances. Maiy
was young, gay, and affable. She poffefl'ed gre; t
fcniibilitv of temper, and was capable of the ut-
most tenderness of affction. She had placed her
love on a very unworthy obje&, who requited it
with ingratitude, and treated her with neglect,
with insolence, and with brutality. All these the
felt and resented. In this situation, the attention
rand complaisance of a man who had vindicated her
authority and prote&ed her person, who entered
ilto all her views, who soothed all her passions,
who watched and improved every opportunity of
illliniating his design and recommending his pas-
iion U, could hardly fail of making an impreflion
on a heart of such a fiame as Mary's.

The haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in

flattery, and accultomed to command, could not
bear the contempt under which he had now fallen,
and the state of infigniicance to which he saw

u Andcrf. i. 93, 94.

D 3 himsef

hiimfelf reduced. But in a country where he wa;
universally hated or despised, he could never hopt
to form a party, which would second any attempt
he might make to recover power. He addressed
himself, therefore, to the pope, and to the kings
of France and Spain, with many professions of his
own zeal for the catholic religion, and with bitter
complaints against the queen, for negle&ing to
promote that interelt X: and soon after, he took
a resolution, equally wild and desperate, of em-
barking on board a nhip which lie provided, and
of flying into foreign parts. It is almoit imi-
pcffible to form any fatisfatory conjecure con-
cerning the motives which influence a capricious
and irregular mind. He hoped, perhaps, to re-
commend himself to the catholic princes on the
continent by his zeal for religion, and that they
wouldemploytheir interefttowardsreinftating him
in the possession of that power which he had loft.
Perhaps he expected nothing more than the com-
fort of hiding the disgrace ullder which he was
now fallen, among tl-angers, who had never been
witnefles of his former prolperity.

He communicated the delign to the Frenchl

;mbatfFador Le Croc, and to his father the earl of
I ennox. They both endeavoured to dissuade him
fiom it, but without fiecefs. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his Ifn, to have loft the queen's confi-
dence, and %who, about this time, was feldonm at
court, instantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had resiled to accom-
pany the queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
likewifc absent fiom court. He arrived there,
however, on the fame day she received the ac"

x Knox, 399.

count

cl'unt of his intended flight. But he was more
than usually wayward and peevilh; and scrupling
to enter the palace unless certain lords who at-
tended the queen were dismissed, Mary was
urlired to meet him without the gates. At lafl
he suffered her to conduct him into her own
apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him
the reasons of the ifrange resolution which he had
taken, and to divert him from it. In spite how.
ever of all her arguments and intreaties he re,
mained silent and flexible. Next day the privy
council, by her direElon, expotlulatcd with him
on the fame head. He persisted, notwitllhand-
ii, in his sullenness and obitinacy ; and neither
,lckgned to explain the motives of his condutt,
nor signified any intention of altering it. As he
left the apartment, he turned towards the queen,
and told her that she should not fee his face
again for a long time. A few days after, he
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as
grounds of his disgust. She herself, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had
lhiprived him of all power; and the nobles, after
lIer example, treated him with open ncglcdt, so
that he appeared in every place without the dig-
nity and splendour of a king.

Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary

than this intended flight of the king's, which
would have spread the infamy of their domefic
quarrel all over Europe. Compassion for a mo-
narch who would then appear to be forced into
txile by her neglet and ill-ufage, might have dif-
poled mankind to entertain sentiments concerning
the causes of their discord, little to her advantage.
In order, therefore, to prepossess the minds of her

allies,

allies, and to screen her reputation from any cen-
sure with which Darnly might endeavour to load
it, the privy council transmitted a narrative of
this whole tranfa&tion both to the king and to
the queen-mother of France. It is drawn wit),
great art, and sets Mary's condu& in the most
favourable point of light Y.

About this time the licence of the borderers

called for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a
court of justice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of
several adjacent counties were summoned to at-
tend their sovereign in arms, according to cuf-
tom z. Bothwell was at that time lieutenant or
warden of all the marches, an office among the
mnolt important in the kingdom; and though
ufilally divided into three diltiin governments,
bestowed by the queen's favour upon him alone.
In order to display his own valour and a&ivity in
the discharge of this trust, he attempted to seize
a gang of banditti, who, lurking among the
marshes of Liddefdale, infested the reft of the
country. But while he was laying hold upon
one of those desperadoes, he was wounded by him
in several places [O&f. i6], so that his followers
were obliged to carry him to Hermitage castle.
Mary instantly flew thither, with an impatience
which has been confidered as marking the anxiety
of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a
queen". Findingthat Bothwell was threatened with'

tro

Y Keith, 345. 347. zIbid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302
a The diflance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is eigh-

teen Scottilh miles, through a country almolt impossible.
The season of the year was far advanced. Bothwell teerm
to have been wounded in a fcuffe, occasioned by the despair
of a finale man, rather than any open infurrcftion of the

5 borderers.

no dangerous symptom, {he returned the fame
day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a jour-
ney, added to the anguish of mind she had sus-
fcred on Bothwell's account, threw her next
morning into a violent fever b. Her life was
despaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of
her constitution, refitted the malignity of her
disease. During the continuance of the queen's
illness, the king, who resided at Stirling, never
came near Jedburgh ' ; and when he afterwards
[Nov. 5] thought fit to make his appearance
there, he met with such a cold reception, as did
not encourage him to make any long stay d.
Mary soon recovered strength enough to return
along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

While ihe resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, not-
withstanding her promise, and even proclamations
to the contrary, not only allowed, but encou-
raged Morton and his associates to remain in
England c. Mary, on the other hand, offered her
plotc'tion to several English fugitives, Each
qilucen watched the motions of the other with a
boldrrers. It does nor appear that the queen was attended
by) any confidrrable train. Had aly military operation bten
r.ccillary, as is fuppol'cd, Good vl. i. 304, i, would hive
i,:cn extremely improper to risk the queen's petfri ill an
c. cdition agaiift thieves. As soon as the queen found
Botllwell to be in no danger, (he instlntly returned, and after
this we hear no more of the infurretlion, nor have we any
proof that the rioters took refuge in Englnrld As there is
nlr f.rther evidence witl refpet to the motives of this extl-
ordinary journey, the reader must judge what degree of credit
is dIue to Knox and Buchanan, who alciibe it to the queen's
'ove of lothwcll.

1b Keith, 351, 351. c Ihid. Append. 133.
' Knox, 400. c Cald. vol. ii. p. 15.

jeialoul

jealous attention, and secretly countenanceed the
pra&ices which were carrying on to disturb tih
administration of her rival.

For this purpose Mary's ambassador, Robert

Melvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely
active and successful. We may ascribe, in a
good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which
appeared in the parliament of England, and
which raised a, storm that threatened Elizabeth's
domcitic tranquillity more than any other event
of her reign, and required all her art and dex-
terity to allay it.

Elizabeth had now reigned eight years with-

out discovering the least intention to marry A
violent dilfemper with which she had lately been
seized having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profpet of all those calami-
ties which are occasioned by a disputed and du-
bious fuccefion, a motion was made, and eagerly
listened to in both houses, for addressing the queen
to provide againit any such danger in times to
come, either by signifying her own resolution to
marry, or by consenting to an at, eitablifhing
the order of succession to the crown . Her love
to her fubjets, her duty to the public, her con-
cern for posterity, it was asserted, not only called
upon, but obliged her to take one of these iteps.
The infuperabfe aversion which she had all along
discovered for marriage, made it improbable that
Ihe would choose the former; and if (he complied
with the latter request, no title to the crown
could, with any colour ofjuftice, be set in oppo-
fition to that of the Scottish queen. Elizabeth
was sagacious enough to fee the remotest confe-

f D'Ewes Journ. of Parl. os5.

queaces

cqucnces of this motion, and observed them with
lhic greatest anxiety. Mary, by refusing so often
to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly
intimated a design of embracing the first promif
illg opportunity for prosecuting her right to the
Englifl crown; and by her secret negociations
ilhe had gained many to favour her title g. All
the Roman catholics ardently wished for her fuc-
ccffion. Her gentleness and humanity had re-
moved many of those apprehensions which the
proteitants entertained on account of her religion.
The court faction, which envied the power of
Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest the administration
olt of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the
Scottish queen in opposition to him. The union
of the two kingdoms was a desirable object to all
v; ie men in both nations; and the birth of the
yoLug prince was a security for the continuance
of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

Under thee. circumstances, and while the na-

til was in such a temper, a parliamentary de-
iliration of Mary's title would have been highly
(itrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled
jlatC of the succession left much in her power.
Her rcfentment alone might have gone far towards
excluding any of the competitors from the crown;
;nd the dread of this had hitherto restrained and
overawed the ambition of the Scottifil queen.
But if this check (hould be removed by the legal
nclknowledgment of her title, Mary would be
more at liberty to pursue her dangerous designs,
;ud to ad without fear or reserve. Her par-
if ins were already meditating schemes for in-
lurredions in different parts of the kingdom h;

g Mclv. 136. h Ibid. 147.

and

and an aft of parliament, recognising the rights
of that princess, whose pretensions they favoured,
would have been nothing less than a signal to
arms; and notwithltanding Elizabeth's just tittl
to the affections of her fubjets, might hate
1haken and endangered her throne.

While this matter remained in suspense in both
houses, an account of it was transmitted to Mary
by Mclvil her ambaf'ador. As (le did not want
advocates for her right, even among those who
were near Elizabeth's person, she endeavoured to
cultivate the disposition which appeared toward;
fettling the rights of fucceflion in her favour, by
a letter to the privy counsellors of England.
She expreflsed in it a grateful sense of Eliza-,
beth's friendship, which (he ascribes chiefly to
their good offices with their sovereign in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live ill
perpetual amity with England, without urging
or pursuing her claim upon the crown any
farther than (hould be agreeable to the queen.
But, at the fame time, as her right of ficccf-
sion was undoubted, fie hoped it would be e:-
amined withl candour, and judged of with im-
partiality. The nobles who attended her wrote
to the Englifl privy council in the fame strain .
Mary artfully gave there letters the air of being
nothing more than a declaration of her own and of
her f'ul)jcEts gratitude towards Elizabeth. B]ut
as lhe could not be ignorant of the jealousy ;ind
fear with which Elizabcth observed the proceed-
ings of parliament, a tlep so uncommon as thii:,
of one p'ince's entering into public correspond-
nce with the privy counsellors of another, could

I Keith, 354. Appcn4, 136,

not

not be otherwise conitrued than as taken with
an intention to encourage the spirit which} had
al-eady been raised among the Engliih. In this
light it seems to have appealed to Elizabeth
herfelfk. But the disposition of her people
rendering it necessary to treat Mary's person
with gIeat decency, and her title with much
regad, file mentioned it to her only in the soft-
eft language.

Nothing, however, could be a more cruel

mortification to a princess of Elizabeth's cha-
racl r, than the temper which both houses of
parliament discovered on this occasion. She
bent all her policy to defeat or elude the-mo-
tion. After allowing the first heat of their
zeal to evaporate, fle called into her presence
a certain number of each house. She soothed
and caressed them; fie threatened and promised;
lie rnemitted subsidics which were due, and re-
fused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off
for that feflion. Happily for her the conduEt
of the Scottifli queen, and the misfortunes
whlici besel her, prevented the revival of such
a motion in any future parliament .

Meantime, in order to prefervc the reputation

cf impartiality, and that lfie minlht not drive
Mary into any desperate measure, Ihe committed
to the Towver one.Thornton, who had published
fo-mcthiiig derogatory to the right of the Scot-
tifnlilne m; and signified lier difpleafpire againlt
a mclm. cr of the houfc of commons, who seem.

k KcIth, 3 7. I)'Ewes Journ. 104-10o.
C,-d.;, `.r. MIlcl. i9. 1ay.irs, 446. mn Camd 401.

VlOL. 1I. E t¢t,

ed, by some words in a speech, to glance at
Mary ".

Amidf all her other cares, Mary was ever so.

licitous to promote the initereit of that religion
which (he professed. The re-establishment of
the Romish doctrine seems to have been her fa-
vourite paflion; and though the design was con-
cealed with care and conducted with caution,
she pursued it with a persevering zeal. At this
time she ventured to lay aside somewhat of her
usual reserve; and the aid which (he expeced
fiom the popith princes, who had engaged in the
league of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a
Itep which, if we confider the temper of the
nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having
formerly held a secret correspondence with the
court of Rome, she now resolved to allow a nun.
cio from the pope publicly to enter her domi-
nions. Cardinal Laurea, at that time bilhop of
Mondovi, was the person on whom Pius V.
conferred this office, and along with him he
lent the queen a present of twenty thousand
crowns ". It is not the characer of the papal
court to open its treasury upon diltant or ima-
ginary hopes. The bulinefs of the nuncio into
Scotland could he no other than to attempt a
reconciliation of that kingdom to the Romish
fee. Thus Mary herself understood it; and in
her answer to a letter which Ihe received from
the pope, after exprefling her grateful sense of
his paternal care and liberality, flie proinifes that
she would bend her whole strength towards the

n Hlyncsi 449. o VitaCu'd. Laur. ap. Burn. vol.iii.
P. 35-

t:-esla'

re-eittablihmnent and propagation of the catholic
faith; that the would receive the nuncio with
tvery poflible demonstration of refpeEt, and con-
cur, with the utmoit vigour, in all his designs
Towards promoting the honour of God, and re-
iflring peace to the kingdoi ; that file would
celebrate the baptism of the prince according to
the ceremonies which the Romish ritual pre-
scribes, hoping that her fuibjeas would be
taught, by this example, again to reverence the
sacraments of the church, which they had so
long treated with conttmpt; and that ihe would
be careful to instil early into her son the princi-
ples of a iincere love and attachment to the ca-
tholic faith P. But though the nuncio was al-
ready arrived at Paris, and had sent over one of
his attendants with part of the money, the queen
did not think the junture proper for his recep-
tion. Elizabeth ewas preparing to fend a mag-
nificent embafly into Scotland, against the time
of the prince's baptifam, and as it would have
been improper to offend her, she wifely contrived,
nnder various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
lis . The convulsions into which the kingdom
was thrown soon after, made it impossible for
him to pursue his journey any farther.

At the very tine that Mary was secretly

carrying on there negociations for subverting
the reformed church, Ihe did not scruple pub-
licly to employ her authority towards obtaining
for its minifitrs a more certain and comfortable
fufiitencer. During this year, Ihe issued feve-

P Cnnxi Vita Marie, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 51.
'I Keith, Append. 135. r Keith, 56, 56z. Knox,40o.

E 2 ral

ral proclamations and acs of council for that
purlpufe, and readily approved of every fchcme
which was proposed for the more effectual pay.
Ient of their Itipends. T'his part of her condut
does little honour to Mary's integrity: and
though jutlified by the example of princes, wlh
often reckon fallehood and deceit among the ne-
ccnary arts of government, and even authorised.
by the pernicious casuistry of the Roman church,
which transfers breach of faith to heretics from
the liit of crimes to that of duties, such diffimu-
lation, however, nuft be numbered among those
blemilhes which never stain a truly great and ge-
nerous charadcer.

December.] As neither the French nor Pied-

montefe ambalfadors were yet arrived, the bap-
tifin of the prince was put of from time to time.
Meanwhile, Mary fixed her relidence at Claig-
iillar . Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the
present temper of her mind, and induced her to
prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-
house. Her averlion for the king grew every
day more confirmed, and wa; become altogether
incurable. A deep melaincholy succeeded to
that gaiety of spirit which was natural to her.
The raflrnefs and levity of her own choice, and
the king's i;gratitude and obltiltacy, filled her
with shame and with despair. A variety of pal.
lions preyed at once on a mind, all whose fen-
fations were exquisite and all its emotions itrolg,
and often extorted floin her tlhe lalt wifli of the
mnfortunate, that life itself might come to an
:llil t.

s Keith, 355. t Ibid. Pref. vii.

But

But as the earl of Bedford, and the count de

Brienne, the English and French ambassadors,
whom file had long expeted, arrived about this
time, Mary was obliged to suppress what passed
in her bosom, and to set out for Stirling, in or-
der to celebrate the baptism of her son. Bed-
ford was attended by a numerous and splendid
train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
iuitable to her own dignity, and the refpe&
with which she affeded, at that time, to treat
the queen of Scots. Great preparations had
been made by Mary, and the magnificence dif-
played by her on this occasion exceeded whatever
had been formerly known in Scotland. The ce-
remony itself was performed [Dec. 17] accord-
ing to the rites of the Romish church. But
neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottilh nobles
who professed the protestant religion, entered
v\'ithin the gates of the chapel u. The spirit of
that age, firm and uncomplying, would not,
upon any inducement, condescend to witness
an ation which it deemed idolatrous.

Hcnry's behaviour at this jun&ture perfecly

discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of
his folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but
confined himself to his own apartment; and as
the queen diflrulled every nobleman who ven-
tured to converse with him, he was left in ab-
solute solitude. Nothing could be more fingu-
lar, or was less expe&ed, than his choofing to
appear in a manner that both published the con-
tempt under which he had fallen, and, by ex-
pofiig the queen's domestic unhappiness to the

u Keith, 36d.

: 3 obferv-

observation of so many foreigners, looked like
a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and to of-
fend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly ; and
notwithstanding all her efforts to assume the
gaiety which fiited the occalion, and which was
ncceffary for the polite reception of her gueifs,
she was fomnetimes obliged to retire, in order
to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow, and give
vent to her tears x. The king still perrifted in
his design of retiring into foreign parts, and
daily threatened to put it into execution Y.

The

x Keith, Pref. vii,
Y Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of king. As tluih
was an indignity not to be borne either by Mary or her hus-
band, it hath been aflerted to be the cause of the king's ab-
fence from the ceremony of his son's bapdifm. Keitn, 360.
Good. 319. But, i. No such thing is to be found among
Bedford's inftrutions, the original of which Itill remains.
Keith, 356. 2. Bedford's advice to the queen by Melvil is
utterly inconfiflent with Camrden's ailertin. Melv. tS3.
Mclvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's initruaions to
Sir Henry Norris, where ihe affirms that fie comrnnded
Bedford to employ his beP olf.ces tow.rds reconciling Mary
to her hulband, which she had attempted to no purpose.
Digges's Compl. Ambaf. p. 3. A paper published Ap-
pend. No. XVIII. proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the
French resident mentions the king's absence, but without
giving that reason for it which has been founded on Cam-
den's words, though, if that had been the real one, it is
h irdly polfible to conceive that he flould have neglected to
mention it. Le Croc's firlt letter is dated December 2, fomc
time iliot to the arrival of the earl of Bedford in Scutland;
and when his infti uctons, either public or secret, could
siardly be known. I.e Croc plainly lfuppofes that the difecrd
between the king and queen was the cauie of his abfencc
from the bap.ilm, and his account of this matter is that
which I have followed. Kreith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his
;ourr, that on account of tht' dilfcrence betsvixt the king and

th
\

The ceremony of witnessing the prince's bap-

tinfm was not the sole business of Bedford's em-
baffy. His inltruftions contained an overture,
which ought to have gone far towards extin-
guifhing those jealousies which had so long sub-
lifted between the two queens. The treaty of
Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned,
was the principal occasion of these. The spirit,
however, which had risen to such an height in
the late parliament, the power of the party
which favoured the Scottish queen's title, the
number and activity of her agents in different
parts of the kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and
induced her to forego any advantage which the
ambiguous and artful expressions in that treaty
might afford her. Nothing was now demanded
of Mary, but to renounce any title to the crown
of England during Elizabeth's life and the lives
of her posterity; who, on the other hand, en-
gaged to take no ftep which might prove inju-
rious to Mary's claim upon the fucceflion z.

Mary could not, with decency, rejeft a pro.

position so equitable; fie insisted, however, that
l:lizabcth fliould order the right upon which
she claimed, to be legally examined and pub-

the queen, he had refifed to hold any further correrpondence
With the former, though ihe appears, in many infiaIcc., to
have been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As the king was
Ii't prceiot at the baptifin, he seems to have becn c eluded
fiom any /hare in the ordinaiy adnii,.i;lration of bufnefs.
'I to ath ofprivy council, one on the loth, and the uther on
the z2fi of December, ale found in Kcith, 52z 'J'hey both
run in the queen's name alone. The king cunms not to have
been present. This could not be owing to liqibeth'. in-
()ruCions to Bedford.
' Kcith, 356.

licly

licly recognised, and particularly that the testa-
ment of Henry VIII. whereby he had excluded
the descendants of his eldest filler the queen of
Scotland, from the place due to them in the
order of succession, might be produced, and co,-
fidered by the Englifi nobility. Mary's mi-
nilters had credulously embraced an opinion,
that this testament, which they so justly con-
ceived to be injurious to their miflrefs, was z
mere forgery; and on different occasions had
'urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would
have suffered considerably by gaining this point.
The original teitament is itill extant, and not
the least doubt can be entertained of its genuine-
ness and authenticity. But it was uot Eliza.
beth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at
nothing more than to keep the question concern-
ing the succession perplexed and undecided,
and by industriously eluding this request, flu
did, in one refpea, real service to Mary's
cause a.

A few days after the baptism of the prine,

Morton and all the other conspirators againit
Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave to retruii
into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto conti.
nued inexorable to every entreaty ill their heliha;K
yielded at lait to the solicitations of Bothwell''.
He could hope for no success in those bold de.
signs on wliclh his ambition resolved to vcnttr.',
without drawing aid from every quarter. b)
procuring a favour for Morton and his afflci.

a Rymer, xv. p. i o. Keith, 358. Note (c). Murdin, 368
b Good. vol. i. 140. Mdlv. 5.4.

at :,

ates, of which they had good reason to despair,
he expeCted to secure a band of faithful and de-
termined adherents.

The king still remained at Stirling in solitude

and under contempt. His impatience in this
situation, together with the alarm given him by
the rumour of a design to seize his person and
confine him to prison , was the occasion of his
leaving that place in an abrupt manner, and re-
tirilg to his father at Glasgow.

Two assemblies of the church were held du.

rng this year [June 25, Dec. 25]. New com-
plaints were made, and upon good grounds, of
the poverty and contempt under which the pro-
cflarint clergy were suffered to languifl. Penu-
riols as the allotment for their fubliltence was,
thcr had not received the least part of what was
due for the preceding year d. Nothing less than
a ;eal, ready to endure and to filffer every thing
for a good cause, could have persuaded men to
allhere to a church so indigent.and io neglecded.
The extrabrdinary expences occasioned by the
prince's haptifm had exhaulted the queen's trea-
fury, and the films appropriated for the sub-
lilltnce of the clergy were diverted into other
channels. The queen was therefore obliged to
prevent the jutt remonlflrances of the aflnmily,
by falling on foime new method for the relief of
the church. Some0 symptoms of liberality, some
ilrctch towards munificence, might have been
rcpc1 ed in an afflignnent which was made with
an1 intention of soothing and silencing the clergy.
. ,:t both the queen and the nobles held salt the

r Keith, Pref. viii. d Ibid. 562.

riches

riches of the church which they had seized. A
um l which, at the highest computation, can
hardly be reckoned equal to nine thousand poundi
fe.rlinge, was deemed sufficient for the mainte-
nance of a whole national church, by men who
had lately seen single monasteries possesed of re-
venues far superior in value.

The ecclesiastics in that age bore the gric,-

ances which affected themselves alone with aiftc
nifhing patience; but wherever the reformed reli-
gion was threatened, they were extremely apt
to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudeIl
manner, their apprehensions of danger. A. il
occasion of this kind was given them, a short
time before the meeting of the assembly. The
ufirped and oppreflive jurifdiftion of the fpiri.
tual courts had been aboliflled by the parliament
in the year one thousand five hundred and sixty,
and commiffaries were appointed to hear 'aid
determine the causes which formerly came unioLr
theircognizancef. Among the few aas of that
parliament to which Mary had paid any regard,
this was one. She had confirmed the authority
of the commissarics, ald had given them iuftruc-
tions for directing their proceedingst, which
are slill of great authority in that court. From
the time of their firit appointment, these judgcs
had continued in the uninterrupted exercise us
their filndion, when of a sudden the queen issued
a proclamation, restoring the archbilhop of St.
Andrew's to his ancient jurifdi&tion, and de
privilng the commiffaries of all authority h.

A motive, which cannot be jultiled, rendeled

the queen not unwilling to venture upon thiu
e Keith, 562. f Ibid. 15z, Ibidz. ., I Knox, q(c.

r:ia!i

rash action. She had been contriving for tome
time how to re-eitablifh the popish religion;
and the reitoring the ancient ecclesiastics to their
former jurisdiction seemed to be a considerable
Rep towards that end. The motive which prompt-
ed Bothwell, to whose influence over the queen
this a&ion must be chiefly imputed', was still
more criminal. His enterpriiing ambition had
already formed that bold design, which he soon
after put in execution; and the use which w.c
shall hereafter find him making of that authority
which the popish ecclesiastics regained, discovers
the reasons of his present conduc in contribut-
ing to revive their power. The protestant clergy
were not unconcerned fpeatators of an event which
threatened their religion with unavoidable de-
ftruaion; but as they despaired of obtaining
the proper remedy from the queen herself, they
addressed a remonstrance to the whole body
of the protestant nobility, full of that ardent
zeal for religion, which the danger to which it
was exposed at that time seemed to require k
What effets this vehement exhortation might
have produced, we have no opportunity of judg-
ing, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another and more tra-
gical nature.

' 1567.] Immediately upon the king's leaving

Stirling, and before he could reach Glasgow, he
was seized with a dangerous distemper The fymp-
oms which attended it were violent and unusual,
and in that age it was commonly imputed to the
effecs of poison . It is impossible, amidit the
i k0x, 403. k Ktith, 567. I Melv. 154. Knox, 40o.

contra-

contradictions of hitorians, to decide with cer-
tainty concerning its nature or its caufea. His
life was in the utmost danger; but after la;.
guifhing for some weeks, the vigour of his
contlitution surmounted the malignity of the
disease.

Mary's negleCt of the king on this occalion

was equal to that with which he had treated
her during her illness at Jedburgh. She no
longer felt that warmth of conjugal affection
which prompts to sympathy, and delights in
all thofc tender offices which sooth and alleviate
sickness and pain. At this juncture, she did

m Buchinan and Knx are positive Ihat the Icing had I',n

poiioned. They mention the black and putrid puttules which
broke out all oier his b,.dy. Buchanan adds, that Abet.
nethy, the king's physician, plainly declared that poison was
the cailufe of tiele l'ymptoms, and that the queeni refuscd to
allow her own physician to attend rim. Buch. 349. Kns.r,
4oi. 2. Blackwood, Caufin, &c. Jcbb, vol. ii. 59. 214. 'f-
fert, that the finall-pox was the disease with which the ,ing
was seized. He is dalled a Pocki/h man in the queen's let.
ter. Good. vol. ii. 5. The ralbn given by FIenchl Pai
for lodging the king at the K;kl; of Field, viz. lelt rhi
young prince fliould catch-the infetion if he Itaid in the .I.
lace, seems to favour this opinion. Anders vol. ii. 193,
(tarte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her hui.
band, that ,hough Ihe ,ever had the finall.-pox herself, lii
ventured to attend himn, vol. iii. 446. This, if it ha. bece
true, would have affbrded a good pretence for not vili;il)
him fooneri but Ma;ry ha.l the small-pox in her infancy.
Sadler's Letters, p. 130. An additional proof of this is ipr.
duced from a poem of Adrian Turnebus, by the publisher o
Ancient Scottish Poems, p. 308. 3. Biffop Lefcy aflirins
that the king's difcalei was the French pox. Keith, 314.
Note (b). In that age, this dileife was esteemed so contl.i
ous, that persons infl'ccd with it wert removed ?ithout ihe
vwall of cities.

lot

not even put on the appearance of this passion.
Notwithltanding the king's danger, (he amused
herself with cxcurfions to different parts of the
country, and fuflered near a month to elapse
before she v;fitled him at Glasgow. By that
time the violence of the distemper was over,
and the king, though weak and languishing,
was out of all danger.

The breach between Mary and her husband

was not occasioned by any of those flight dif-
gults which interrupt the domeflic union, with.
o.lt diflulving it altogether. Almost all the
paffios which operate with greatest violence on
a female mind, and drive it to the most dan-
,crous extremes, concurred in raising and so.
Incnting this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for
the favours file had betlowed, contempt of her
person, violations of the marriage vow, encroach.
nlmnts on her power, conspiracies against her fa-
,u)lrites, jealousy, insolence, and obltinacy, were
lhc injuries of vwhich Mary had great reason to
comillain. She fclt them with the utmolt fen-
ibility ; and, added to the anguish of disappoint-
cl love, they produced those symptoms of de.
li)air which wxv have already described. Her re-
fcntinenlt againit the king seems not to have
albatcd from the time of his leaving Stirling.
In a letter written with her own hand to her
a:;lnlfldor in France, on the day before she
set out for Glasgow [Jan. 20], no tokens of fu..
dil reconcilement appear. On the contrary,
(lih mnentions, with foine bitterness, the king's
ingratitude, the jealouly with which he oh.
lirvcd her aAlons, and the inclination he dif
covcred to dilturb her government, and at the

VOL. nI. p fame

fame time talks of all his attempts with the nt.
most scorn ".

After this discovery of Mary's sentiments, at

the time of her departure from Edinburgh to
Glasgow, a vilit to the king, which had been
negleted when his situation rendered it mo!l
necessary, appears singular, and it could hardly
be expeced that any thing but marks ofjealnufR
and diiruft hould appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; she
not only visited Henry, but, by all her words
and actions, endeavoured to express an uncom-
mon affetion for him-: and though this made
impreflion on the credulous spirit of her husband,
no less flexible on omen occasions, than obstinate
on others; yet, to those who are acquainted
with the human heart, and who know how fel.
dom and how slowly such wounds in domestic
happiness are healed, this sudden transition will
appear with a very suspicious air, and will be
confidered by them as the effet of artifice.

But it is not on suspicion alone that Mary is

charged with ditfimulation in this part of her con.
duct. Two of her famous letters to Bothwcll
were written during her ltay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had
so far succeeded in his ambitious and criminal
design, as to gain an ahfolute ascendant over the
queen ; and in a situation such as Mary's, merit
not so conspicuous, services of far inferior inli
portance, and address much less insinuating than
Bothwell's, may be supposed to {teal impercep.
tibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome

A Kcitl, Pref, vii>,

it. Unhappily, among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity
are, often, neither many nor itrong: nor did the
manners of that court in which Mary had been
educated contribute to increase or to fortify
them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and
Henry II. the licentioufiefs of the military cha-
raaer of that age, and the liberty of appearing
in all companies, which began to be allowed to
women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy
of sentiment, and those polifled manners, which
alone can render liberty innocent, had introduced
among the French an astonishing relaxation in
domeltic morals. Such examples, which were
familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly
fail of diminishing that horror of vice which is
natural to a virtuous mind. The king's beha-
viour would render the firit approach of forbidden
sentiments less, hocking; resentment, and dif-
appointed love, would be apt to represent what-
ever soothed her revenge, as justifiable on that
account; and so many concurring causes might,
ahnoft imperceptibly, kindle a new passion in
her heart.

But whatever opinion we may form with re-

gard to the rife and progress of this paflion, the
letters themselves breathe all the ardour and
tenderness of love. The affefion which Mary
there expresses for Bothwell filly accounts for
evrry subsequent part of her condut; which,
without admitting this circumstance, appears
altogether mylterious, inconsistent, and inexpli-
cablc. That reconcilement with her husband, of
which, if we allow it to be genuine, it is impof-
lible to give any plausible account, is discovercd

F z by

by the queen's own confession to have been mee:
artifice and deceit. As her averflon for her bus-
band, and the suspicious attention with which
fle observed his conduft, became universally
known, her ears were officiously filled, as is
usual in such cafes, with groundless or aggravated
accounts of his actions. By some flie was told,
that the king intended to seize the person of tll
prince his son, and in his name to usurp the go-
vernment; by others fle was aflured that he
resolved instantly to leave the kingdom ; that t
vessel was hired for this purpose, and lay in the
river Clyde ready to receive him Q. The last was
what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring into
a foreign country must have been highly diflo-
nourable to the queen, and would have entirel)
disconcerted Bothwell's measures. While he rc-
fided at Glasgow, at a diltance from her, and ii
that part of the kingdom where the interest of
his family was greateit, he might with more
facility accomplifl his designs. In order, there-
fore, to prevent his executing any stich wild
scheme, it was necessary to bring him to fonlt
place where he would be more immediately undli
her own eye. For this parpofe, flie firit em-
ployed all her art to regain his confidence, and
then proposed to remove him to the neighbour-
hood of Edinburgh, under pretence that there
he would have calier acccfs to the advice of pliy
ficians, and that Ihe herself could attend hilim
without being absent fiom her ion P. The kill
was weak enough to fufl`er himself to be per.
fuaded; and being Itill feeble, and incapabl

0 Keith, Pref. viii. P Good. vel. ii. 8.

)

of bearing fatigue, was carried in a lifter to
Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a

house belonging to the provost of a collegiate
churclh, called Kirk of Field. It stood almoit
ti1pon the fame spot where the house belonging to
the principal of the university now stands. Such
a lituation, on a rising ground, and at that time
ill an open field, had all the advantages of health-
ful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand,
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely proL
per for the commission of that crime, with a view
to which it seems manifsctly to have been chosen,

Mary continued to attend the king with the

niolt afliduous care. She seldom was absent from
him through the day; (le slept two nights in
ihe chamber under his apartment. She heaped
on him so many marks of tenderness and confi-
dence, as in a great measure quieted those sus-
picions which had so long disturbed him. But
while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the
return of his former happiness, he stood on the
,'ry brink of deftru&ion. On Sunday the ninth
of February, about eleven at night, the queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present
:t a maique in the palace. At two next
norning, the house in which the king lay was
ilowtn up with gunpowder. The noise and
lltock which this fidden explosion occasioned,
dlarmed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to
the place whence it came. The dead body of
the king, with that of a servant who slept in the
Iame room, were found lying in an adjacent gar-
den without the city wall, untouched by fire,
and with no bruise or mark of violence.

F 3 Stich

Such was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart

lord Darnly, in the twenty-firft year of his age.
The indulgence of fortune, and his own extern;.i
accomplishments, without any other merit, hadl
raised him to an height of dignity of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and in-
gratitude, he loft the heart of a woman -wh,
doated on him to diflra(tion. His insolence and
inconstancy alienated from him such of the nobl s
as had contributed most zealously towards his
elevation. Hislevity and caprice exposed him t,
the scorn of the people, who once revered him
as the descendant of their ancient kings and
heroes. Had he died a natural death, his cnil
would have been unlamented, and his memory
have been forgotten ; but the cruel circumitancce
of his murder, and the liameful remissness i:
neglecing to avenge it, have made his name to
be remembered with regret, and have renderd(
him the object of pity, to which he had other-
wife no title.

Every one's imagination was at work to gucs

who had contrived and executed this cxecrable
deed. The fufpicioii fell, with almost genelrl
consent, on Bothwell q; and some reflections wcn.
thrown out, as if the queen herself were nl,
ftrangcr to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt thenr
remains the fullest evidence that the nature of tlit
aaion will admit. The queen's known senti-
ments with regard to her huffland, gave a great
appearance of probability to the imputation with
which file was loadedr.

1 Melv 155. Anders. vol. ii. 56.
r See Di(lircation concerning the murder of Ienry DarnTly
and the genuincnchf of Mary's letters to Bothwcll, Appeidi'r.

T ,
~'

Two days after the murder, a proclamation

was issued by the queen, offering a considerable
reward to any person who (hould difeover those
who had been guilty of such a horrid and de-
teltable crime ; and though Bothwell was now
one of the greatest fubje&ts in the kifigdom,
formidable on account of his own power, and
proteted by the queen's Favour, it was impossible
to suppress the sentiments and indignation of the
pcople. Papers were affixed to the most public
ilaces of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and nlaming his accomplices; piltures appeared
to the fame purpose, and voices were heard in the
inicdie of the night,, charging him wvith that bar-
Jnro.ni aftion. But the althlors of these rumours
dtid not confine their acctiiltions to Bothwell
'hlone ; they insinuatcd that the queen herielfwas
.(ccfiary to the crime t. This bold accusation,
,,il:hi so diredtly attacked Mary's reputation,
·licv the attention of her council; and by en-

:',i;:i;lng them in an inquiry after the authors ot
!ctl.' libels, diverted them from fearclhiing for the
,l1;ilelerls of the kilng ". Itcould farcc be cx-
pi.'ted tlhat Mary herself would be extremely
l;o'ucitous to discover those who had rid her of an
ihuflba.d \whol fihe had so violently hated. It

Botllwell's interelt, who had the supreme

'i iti(on of this, as well as of all other afFtirls, to
iiaic :lnd fuipprefs whatever evidence s(hould be
, I' .l:1, and to cover, if pollible, the wllole tranf-
;. . I a under the veil of d:i-rk uifs and of silence.
ii,,l,. inquiry, however, was made, ;ani fomnc
perlns called before the council; but the exa-
inltlation was conducted with the moll ilndecent

Andlrf. vol. i. 36. t Ibid. vol. ii. 156.
l Id. vol. . 3r8.

remit!nef,

remissness, and in such a manner as to let in no
light upon that scene of guilt x.

It was not her own fubjets alone who sus-

pceed Mary of having been accessary to this
unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dilh(.
nourable to her chara&er, owe its rife and pre.
grefs to the jealousy and malice of her factiot,
nobles. The report of the manner and eircum-
stances of the king's murder spread quickly over
all Europe, and even in that age, which w.i
accuitomed to deeds of violence, it excited lli-
versal horror. As her unhappy breach with hce
husband had long been matter of public difcourie,
the first conjetures which were formed with rce
gard to his death, were extremely to her difad-
vantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology
to osier for her condu, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmost diligence,
and expeted that the rigour of her proceeding-
would prove the belt and fullest vindication of
her innocencey.

Lennox at the fame time incited Mary to vn-

geance with incessant importunity. This noblei
man had lhared in his son's disgrace, and bei:g
treated by Mary with neglc&, usually resided at
a distance from court. Roused, however, by an
event no letss hocking to the heart of a father,
than fatal to all his fchcmes of ambition, ihe
ventured to write to the queen [Feb. 21], and
to offer his advice with refpe&t to the most c-f
fcetual method for diifovering and conviding
those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son,
an4 her of a husband. He urged her to prosecute
those who were guilty with vigour, and to bring
x Andcrf. vol. iv. pat ii. 167, 168. Y Kcith, Pref. iX.

thcir

them to a speedy trial ; he declared his own sus-
picion of Bothwell, and of thofe-who were named
as his accomplices; he required that, out of re-
gard to decency, and in order to encourage evi-
dence to appear against them, the persons accufeA
of such an atrocious crime should be committed
to cuitody, or at leait excluded from her court
and presence z.

Mary was then at Seaton, whither flie had

::tired after the burial of the king, whose body
was depolited among the monarchs of Scotland,
in a private but decent mannera. The former
part of the earl's demand could not on any pre
tcnce be eluded; and it was resolved to bring
B0thw'ell immediately to trial. But, instead of
conlining him to any prison, Mary admitted him
into all her councils, and allowed a person, uni-
trrfally reputed the murderer of her husband, to
cnjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
(f a favourite b. The offices which Bothwell
already possessed, gave him the command of all
tlhe south of Scotland. The calle of Edinburgh,
howivec, was a place of so nluch consequence,
that he wilhed earneitly to have it in his own
ui,,mr. The queen, in order to prevail on the
cr;l of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the
pritl of the young prince in his hands, and
illniili.dtely bellowed the government of that
iinl)ortauit fortress upon B13thwell [March 19].
S) inany tieps in her conduecL, inconffltent with
a1ll the rules of prudence and of decency, mult
Lb imputed to an cxcefs either of folly or of love.

Keith, 369, &c. A Anders. vol. i. ^3.
b Anders. vol. i. 40, &c. c Ibid. vol. i. Pref. 64.
Keith, 379.

Mary'.

Mary's known chara&er fully vindicates her from
the former; of the latter, many and striking
proofs soon appeared.

No direct evidence had yet appeared against

Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the
circumstances of a crime in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great im.
portance to hurry over the trial, while nothing
more than general suspicions, and uncertain fur.
mises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of privy council held on
the twenty-eighth of March, the twelfth of April
was appointed for the day of trial. Though the
law allowed, and the manner in which criminal
causes were carried on in that age required, a
much longer interval, it appears from several
circumstances that this (hort space was confider.
ably contraced, and that Lennox had only eleven
days warning to prepare for accusing a person so
far superior to himself both in power and in fa.
'tur 1. No man could be less in a condition to

contend

d The at of privy council, appointing the day of Both.

well's trial, bears date March the 28th, which happened on
aThurfday. Anders. vol. i. 50. The queen's warrant to
the mrjJengtrs, empowering them to summon Lennox to be
present, is dated on the zm;th. Andes . vol. ii. 97. Ie was
filmmoned by public ptoclamation at the zrofs of Edinburgh
on the fame day. Ibid. zoo. He was summoned at Lis
dwelling houses in Clafgow and Dunbarton the 3oth ot
March, the ilt and zd days of April. Ibid. slo. He wa,
summoned at Perth, April ift. Ibid. oin. Though Lennox
resided at that time forty niles oomn Edinburgh, the citationl
might have been given him sooner. Such an unncceflJry
delay affords foime caufc fur suspicion. It is true, Maly,
in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to
Edinburgh the enfuinlg week; this gave him warning fonie

day:

contend with an antagonist who was thus sup-
ported. Though Lennox's paternal estate had
becn restored to him when he was recalled into
Scotland, it seems to have been considerably im-
paired during his banishment. His vassals, while
lie resided in England, had been accustomed to
ibme degree of independence, and he had not
recovered that ascendant over them, which a
feudal chief usually possessed. He had no reason
to expect the concurrence of any of those factiona
into which the nobles were divided. During the
short period of his son's prosperity, he had taken
such iteps as gave rife to an open breach with
i[lurray and all his adherents. The partisans of
slhe house of Hamilton were his hereditary and
mortal enemies. Huntly was linked in the clofeit
confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to the
iil'grace of the nation, Lennox tsood alone in a
cause where both honour and humanity called sot
loudly on his countrymen to second him.

It is remarkable too that Bothwell himself

was present, and fat as a member in that meet.
ing of privy council, which gave directions with
regard to the time and manner of his own trial ;
and he fill enjoyed not only full liberty, but
was received into the queen's prcsence with-the
la.ie diftinguithed familiarity as formerly °.

Nothing could be a more cruel dii'appointment

to the wilhes and resentment of a father, than such

days fboner, that the intended to bring on Ihe trial without
Jd ly. But the prrcife time cou d not be legally or certainly
kn ,wn to Lenni,,x sooner than ten.or twelve days betore the
d.y on which he was required to appear. By the law and
piafice of Scotland, at that time, parties were fanmoned,
,n cafeq of treacon, forty days pr¢cious to the trirl.
* Andcf, vol, i. 50, 51.

t pre-

a premature trial; evvry flep towards which
seemed to be taken by direEions from the person
who was himitlf accused. of the crime, and cal-
culated on purpose to conceal rather than to do.
tet his guilt. Lennox foresaw what would he
the ifiue of this mock inquiry, and with how little
safety to himnielf, or success to his cause, he could
venture to appear on the day prefixed. In his
former letters, though under expreflions the moit
refpe&ful, some symptoms of his dilrufting tli
queen may be discovered. He spoke out now in
plain. language. He complained of the injury
done him, by hurrying on the trial with such
illegal precipitation. He represented once morc
the indecency of allowing Bothwell not only to
enjoy personal liberty, but to retain hi5 former
infuence over her councils. He again requires
her, as fie regarded her own honour, to give foire
evidence of her fircci-ity in prosecuting the nmi
der, by confining the person who was on gool
grounds fufpedted to be the author of it; aiA
till that were done, he signified his own refoli-
tion not to be present at a trial, the malrr:
and circumtnances of which were so irregular anc
unfatisfacorly f.

'Ie seems, however, to have expe&ed littlk

success from this application to Mary; and there.
fore at the falme tile besought Elizabeth to in,
terpofe, in older to obtain such a delay as he
dc;mandled . Nothing can be a stronger prooi
how violently her fu!'Fpe d the one queen, tlhan
his fullbmittiing to i)plore the aid of the other,
who had recatcd his son with the utmost col.
tempt, and hlilnfelf and family with the greatelt

I Aiidcl. vol. i. 5z. g Good. vol. i. 3 .

rigoir

rigour. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to
interpose in thL uTdairs of Scotland, wrote instantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some
time, and urged in such strong terms the fame
-i:-ulncnts which Lennox had used, as might
hlavce convinced her to what an unfavourable con-
iud lliion her conduA would be liable, if sheper-
lifted ill her present method of proceeding h.

Neither her intreaties, however, nor those of

Ltnnox, collld prevail to have the trial put off-
(On tile day appointed Bothwell appeared, but
.,itli such a formidable retinue, that it would
,;lLc been dangerous to condemn, and impoflible
o, ;uni;h him. Besides a numerous body of his

fr'ields and vassals, assembled, according to cuf-
t:o¢m, forom different parts of the kingdom, he
':s attended by a band of hired soldiers, who.
;nil. .ecd with flying colours along the streets of
: :'inburgh i. A court ofjuitice was held with
il: ;lccultomned formalities. An indicstment was
;....
: nted againit Bothwell, and Lennox was
calli(d upon to make good his accusation. In
hI; iname appeared Robert Cunninghlam, one of,
i);i dependants. He excused his malter's ab-
l;; Ic', on account of the floltnefs of the time)
,,lilh prevented his assembling his friends and
v;ifall), without whose afliltancc he could not
with fi:fety venture to set himlclf in oppofitiont
to fitlc a powerful antagonilt. For this reason,.
iKw desired the court to stop proceeding, and pro-
tcliel, that any sentence which lhould be passed
:t that time ought to be deemed illegal and void.
Bothwell, on the other hand, infiited that tlu
h Anderr. Pref. 60. Ser Appendix, No, XIX.

L Andrr vol. i. 1,35.
VOL. IS. O court

Court flould inilantly proceed to trial. One of
Lennox's own letters, in which he craved of the
queen to prosecute the murderers without dela;,

as produci(d. Cunniiighanm's objeetions we,.
ovIr-riuled ; and tlhe jur, confiiling of peers and
barons of the firll rank, found Bothlrell nul
guilty of lhe crime.

No perion appeared as an accuser, not a single

ikitnefs was examined, nor any evidence produced
against him. The jury, under thlcf circumitance:
could do nothing elfc but acquit him. Tli';:
Verdi&t, however, was far from gratifying the
wilhes, or silencing the murmurs of the peopl..
Every circuuifiance in the trial gave grounds f',r
ftificion, and excited indignation ; and the judg-
ment pronounced, initead of being a proof c(
Bothi.vell's iinocence, was efecemed an argumc .
of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were affixed
to different places, expressing the sentiments of tl,
public with the utmolt virulence of language.

The jury themielves seem to have been aware

of the cenlure to which theit proceedings wouldl
be expoied; and, at the fame time that they -ic
turned their verdi&t acquitting Bothwell, the eall
of Caithness protelked, in their name, that noi
crimne should be imputed to them on' that account,
because no acctufrc had appeared, and no proof
was brought of the indicment. He took notiC:
likewise, that the ninth inflend of the tenth of
Felbrillny was menttioned in the inditment, an
the dcty o(n which the mlurder had been commi;-
'ted: a circumitance which discovers the extreme
iuaccuracy of those who prepared the indi&ment;
an(l at a time when men1 were disposed, and not
without reason, to l:e fifpicioua of every thiln,

til;

this small matter contributed to confirm and to
mereafe their filfpicions k

Even Bothweil himself did not rely on the

jidgnment which he had obtained ill his favour, as
; full vindication of his innocence. Immediately
after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cuf-
ton which was not then obsolete, publi!hed a
,vriting, in which he offered to fight in iingle
comb;at any gentleman of good fame who Ihould
p:'cILone to accuse him of being accelary to the
Inurder of the king.

Mary, however, continued to treat him as if

t. had been cleared by the ;noft unexceptionable
:,nd satisfactory evidence. The ascendant he had
.,ii-'mCd over her heart, as well as over her coun-
c'i, was more vitible than ever; and Lennox,

liho could not expect that his own person could
be safe in a country where the murderer of his son
il:dl been absolved, without regard to jullice;
:urd loaded with honours, in contempt of decency.;
fiLx with precipitation towards England'.

Two days after the trial a parliament was held,
[April 14,] at thle opening of which the queen
lifl.iliguifhcd Bothwell, by appointing l im to
carry the sceptre before her'n. Most of the

: paied in this afltimbly were calculated on

)llpofe to ftrcngthen his party, and to promote
i:, d:ihgns. I-Ie obtained the ratification of all
thile pofleions and honours which the partiality
of the queen had conferred upon him; and tlhe
nkt to that cefcd contained the ltroiigeft declaram
lions of his faithful services to the crown in all
imnes pad. The surrender of the caltle of Edirln

lc Both. Trial, Alderf. vol. ii. 97, &c.
I Keith, 373. Note (d). m, bid.

o 2 burghI

burgh llbyiarwas confirmcd. The law of attaindr
againtt Huntly was repealed, and he and his adl -
rents were restored to the honours and eflatts ,
their ancestors. Several of those vwho had been :-
the jury which acquitted Bothwell, obtained rati-
fications of the grants made in their favour; and ;,.
pasquinades daily multipli(-d, a law pafled, whe !-
by those into whose hands any paper of that kln;
fell, were commanded instantly to dedtroy it; a.,
if, through their neglet, it flbould be allowed tc
spread, they were fubjefted to a capital punii.-
ment, in the fame manner as if they had be,
the original authors n.

But the absolute dominion whicll Bothw-li

had acquired over Mary's mind appeared in i1.
cleart'll maniner, by an act in iavour of the p'.
teftant religion, to which at this time fle gave hIrl
aflent. Mary's attachment to the Romish faith
was uniform and fuper-ttitous ; flhe had neverlaid
aside the design, nor loft the hopes, of reftoriilg
it. She had of late come under new engagements
to that purpose, and in consequence of these had
ventured upon forme feps more public and vig(l-
ous than any fie had formerly taken. ]3ut
thdugh none of these circumstances were un.
known to Bothwell, there were powerful nmotivrs
which prompted him at this juncltre to conct.l
ate the good-will of the proteflants, by excrtiil;
himfclf in order to procure for them some ad-
ditional fectrity in the exercifc of their religion.
That which they enjoyed at' present was very pri.
carious, being founded entirely on the royal pro-
clanmation ifluecd ioon after the arrival of thl:
qucen in Scotland, which in cxprcfs terms w.ls

n Keiih, 380.

declared

declared to be only a temporary regulation. From
that period, neither the solicitations of the general
afleniblies of the church, nor the intreaties of her
people, could extort from Mary any conceflion
in favour of the protestant religion, on which Ltn1
profesSors might refi with greater confidence.
This, however, by the more powerfill iifluence
of Bothwell, they now obtained. An ad was
passed in this parliament, repealing all the laws,
canon, civil, and municipal, adverse to the re-
formed religion, and exempting fiuch as had cm.
l.racedit from the penalties to whlich they might
have been subjectcd by ihefe laws, cither on ac-
count of their pafl conduct or present profeIion ;
lIcclaring at the fame time that their persons,
tilates, honours, and benefices were 'taken under
public proteEtion against every court, civil or ec-
clclialtical, that might attempt to moles them on
account of their religious sentiments. Thus the
protellants, inflcad of holding their sacred rights
bv no better tenure than a declaration of royal
:idulgence, which might be revoked at pleasure,
(': ailed legal and parliamentary proteetion in the
cxcrcile of their religion. By prevailing on the
( ;cul to assent to this law, Bothwell seems to have
itltercd hinfelf that lie would acquire such me-
il both with the clergy and with the people,
as might induce them to favour his ambitious
icnlmes, and to connive at what lie had done, or
:i.ighlt do, in order to accomplilh them. Tlir
lrotclulits accordingly, though this acl was far
to)n amounting to a legal eitablilhment of thc
resilr ledl faith, seem to have confidered it as an
additional security of such importance, that it wa,
publiflcd among the laws enaced in a parliament

c 3 held

held towards the close of this year, under very
different leaders°.

Everr

o I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir David Dalrymple,

inr pointig out (Renmakson the Hitl.ry of Scotland, th. o.
a considerable error into whith I had f.filen with refpe t1o
this a'; by supposing it to be so favouratle to the dottl; c

ls the Reformation, that the parliament which met Dec. ..
could fubtlitute nothing frnnge. or more explicit in i;-
iolacr, and thought it sufficient to ratify it woid for wo-!.
i'hi; error I have now colrected ; hit after contidrering i!
aft with particular attention, though I am satisfied that l:
Jleither eltablilied the refirmned relii n or the rel:gi n ot ti,:
Itate, nor abo!ifhcd popery, yet it granted such new a.:d
.'cgat security to the protcltants, as was deemed, in that a'l:,
an acqluifiion of gleat value. The framers of the law st'c;:i
nanircfily to hive viewed it in that light; after rcci;ti',
"t t h.a the queen, since her airival, had attemptrd notilil.g
"contrary to 'he fate of religion which fie found publicly ana
minivcrlfilly Itanding, on which account (he was moil worey
to be served, honoured, and obered, &c."-th aCl goes on.
"h rll:t ads Ilhe intends to continue the Iltme goodnels a'.
gtovernmentc in all tinies coming, the profefobrs of the rcligion
.lurceiail may and (hail have occasion to ptaife God for I,'i
.i:Ipl'y and gracious go ernincnt, &c.: and to the refiod tlh.
'.l,' |.rolcsibrs of the relig;oa .asrefaid may allfue tecinnlelh.
tr li in full surety thereof, and of their lands, lives, &l.
,ii(l may with the better will jcoplrd and hazard thei l:v.:
.inil oiod. in her highlless's fervicc, againll all enemin- :i
her, and to the commonwell of this realm, &c. therefoi; (.:a
sovereign, with the aivice of the whole elt.ttes il pailij.
mnent, &c.'! thrn follow the liatutory clauli: s mcntioned in
*the text. The intentioa of pailling the act ih anpparent, .Il
jit is drawn wilh great art. This art is peculiarly manif'er in
the concluding cl..ule. ln her firit pilula;natioll the Iqueen
had declared, that it inilld conliinle in frce only untdi fIli
Jliould take tinal order conc.riligl religion with the advice
ol parI'iamennt. In this all the intention of taking further
,roecr concerning religion isi mentioned, probably with a view
Io pieale the queen ; but it is worded with luch studied dcx.
ttrity', th,.t the ploietiOI n Granttc by this law is no longle

to

Every ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto
been attended with all the ficcefs which his most

sanguine

t( be regarded as temporary, or depending upon the queen
tillirj filch final order. I'arl. i K. Ja. VJ. c. 31. In the
fitric lig:t of an important acquilition of security to the
iLl;Gimed religion, this aft is represented by the privy council
il a prociamation ifiled May 23, 1567. Keith, 571. Mary's
ril:ip;l adherents, in a paper fiblfribed by them, Sept. 1s,
16:, declare, that the, " by the adviceof the three etates,
i iJ fitisfied the defile of tne whole nobility in an ac con-

t,.l!ing all the points of religion pasi.d in the parliament
leld April 1567." Goodal, ii. 357. The fame is aflerted
t,) ie the intention and effect of this a& ill another public
ai,'er in the year 1 570.. Haynes, 6z r. Th:s act is periectly
,,J.ilirmable to that fyltem of policy by which Bothwell
'\.m, to haie regulated his conduO both betole and after
tli:, time, with a view of griting the protestants, particularly
:i c lergy, by ats of indulgence anid favour. On the 3d
of October I566, when Bothwell's credit was very confider-
able, the queen, in a meeting of privy counlil, where he

r:i present, took measures for securing to the proteltant
ie;, Sy mote regular payment of their stipend ; and on the
2 ztlh of December of that year, granted an assignation of a
-nl. iderable fum to be applied for the support of the minis-
tly. Keith, 360, 361, 362. In a meeting of privy council,
J.lu.,ry 1 ,, 567, when all public tranlfatiuns were entirely
tinduiled by Bothwell, an aR was passed in order to provide
fIr the fulentatiun of miiiliers in boroughs, and Bothwell ie
n.lmed as one of the commiflioners for carrying it into exe-
-liion, with power to impose a tax on such boroughs as had
i, ;niniiters, soir raiting a flipend. Keith, 5-0. In another
rnmrling of privy council, May 23, 1567, the quecn, after
mtentioning the declaration which flhe had maile in te year
r6ri, of her resolution to m:lintain that religion which she
fiound eflablilhed in the k'rgdom, and after taking notice of
wlt.i additional security it had acquired by the late at of
Aipril l9th, with a view of giving Itill farther fatisfacti. n to
thi protestants, the declared that all licences which had bren
otltiined from her by any persons, permitting them to eiercifi:
the rites of popilh worthip, werC now revoked and annulled.

Keith,

sanguine wilhes could expect. He had entirely
gained the queen's heart; the murder of the
king had excited no public commotion ; he had
been acquitted by his peers of any flare in that
crime; and their decilion had been in some fort
ratified in parliament. But in a kingdom where
the regal authority was so extremely limited, and
the power of the nobles so formidable, he duril
not venture on the lait aftion, towards which
all hia ambitious prcjects tended, without their
approbation. In order to secure this, he, immc.
diately after the dissolution of parliament, invited
all the nobles who were present to an entertain.
ment [April 19]. Having filled the house withl
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it
with armed men P, he opened to the company
his intention of marrying the queen, whose con-
sent, lie toldthem, he lhad already obtained; and
demanded their approbation of this match, which,
he said, was no leis acceptable to their fovercign,
than lonourable to himfelfq. Huntly and Sea-

Keith, 57c--572 It cferves to be remarked, thar, favour-
able as all tlel:f ais were lo the rebormation, omnc biflio,,
vibnJe ardent z.a,'fotr the oid idofr. 7res /hilory rrcrdls, were precll t
in those meeting$ of privy councii in which they were pasl'd.
From conlideriig all thele piariciliarb, ooe need not wondde
that a law " anent calling (as its title bears), annulling,
and abrogating of all laws, aSs, and coulltiurions, canonc,
civile, iind municipal, with olher conflitutons, contra:r to
the rcligion now profeflit witlin the realme," confirmed bj
the royal afrent of the queen, should be publiihed armong tihe
ftatules securing the plotcllant religion. We find according-
ly, in a very rare edition of the ats of parliament imprintit
at Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik, printar to the king's
majeltie, 6 day of April 1568, the aa of April 19 infcrtcd
amopg the aats of the rtgcnt's parliament in December.

QGood. vol. U. 141. 'l Ao.crf. vol. i, 94.

t0»»v

ton, who were privy to all Bothwvell's schemes,
;ndl promoted them with the utmolt zeal; the
pFipilh ccclefiaftics, who were abfolntely devoted

, the queen, and ready to sooth all her pas-
;:.i;s; inflantlv declared their fatisfacion with
.-ii it th had proposed. The reft, who creaded
the exorbitant power which Bothwell had ac-

i;rcJd, and ohferved the queen's growing assec-
!i,, towards him in all her a&ions, were 'will-

; to make a merit of yielding to a measure
';icIh they could neither oppose nor defeat.
A,,'ne few were confounded and enraged. But
;:1 ihe end Bothwell, partly by promises and
J;. ttery, partly by terror and force, prevailed on
::il \!who were present to fibfcribe a paper, which
,e'avc a deeper Itain than any occurrence in that
:i; on ..he honour and characer of the nation.

This paper contained the strongest declarations

of Bothwcll's innocence, and the most ample ac;
i a.owlcdgment of his good services to theking-
dom. If any future accusation flould be brought
.i fit him on account of the king's murder, the
fllhfcribers promised to stand by him as one man,
* d to hazard their lives and fortunes in his de-
:nice. They recommended him to the queen as
the moil proper person she could choose for a
iiilland : and if the [hould condescend to beltow
,1 ihiml that mark of her rcgard, they undertook
t11 [roiiote the marriage, and to join him with
;!1 tlhei forces in oppoling any person who en-
.hI',\oulrcd to obftrut it r. Among the fuilfcbribers
'if tiis paper we find some who were the queen's
c (i f confidents, others who were strangers tolher
,on:ils, and obnoxious to her displeasure; rfome

r Andcrrf vol .
i. 177.

who

who faithfully adhered to her through all the ' -
ciffitudes of her fortune, and others who became
the principal authors of her fifferings ; some pai-
fionately attached to the Romish fuperftitior,
and others zealous advocates for the proteftl;t
faith*. No common intcreft can be fuppof.J
to have united men of such opposite principles
and parties, in recommending to their fovcre;iu
a flep so injurious to her honour, and so sati
to her peace. This strange coalition was tlt
effect of much artifice, and muit be confidcrcd!
as the boldefi and molt masterly stroke ,;
Bothwell's address. It is observable, thi;u
amidst all the altercations and mutual reproach;t:
of the two parties which arose in the kig-
dom, this unworthy tranfa&in is seldom Iren.
tioned. Conscious on botl fides, that in this
particular their conduct could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame,
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and w it'i
a tender hand, feeining delirous that it fhouiil
remlain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion.
But as il many persons who, both at that time
and ever atter, poffefled the queen's favour, fill,
fcribed this paper, the suspicion becomes i'roji,z
llhat Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither un-
kno vn to Mary nor disapproved by her .

Tht ie

6 Keith, 382.

Of all the different frylems with regard to this tranfc.

tion, that of Camden scenas to be the leait accurate, and thl
worf founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by
Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his associates in tl;
murder of the king, and that they now wanted to ruin hiln.
He affirms, at the fame time, that the fiibfcriptiins to this
paper were obtained by theli out of fear that Bothwell minlit

lilk

''hefe fiifpicions arc confirmed by the most di-

rect proof. Mclvil at that time enjoyed a conli-
lcrtable share in her favour. He, as well as his
brother, kept a secret correrpondencc in England
with those who favoured her pretensions to that
crowcn. The rumour of her ilnended marriage
with Bothwell having spread early in that king-
dom, excited univerlal indignation ; and Melvil
:eccived a letter from thence, which represented,
in the itrongelt terms, what would be the fatal
effects of ftlch an imprudent ttep. He put this
letter into the queen's hands, and enforced it

fhl in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody fecrer, 404.
!}ur besides the ablurdity of fuppoling that any man's ene-
iieCS wouild contribute towards raising him to such high dig-
n:ty, on the uncertain hopes of being able afterwirds to de-
p ive him of it; belides the impossibility of dccumpliiling
luch a marriage, if it had been either unknown to the queen,
or dilagreeable to her; we may observe that this fuppolition
is deliroyed by tile direct testimony of the queen herself,
.whol acribes the conlent of the nobles to Bothwe'lls airtifice,
v."UJ pur/lhaJed it by gi ,ing them to ur.rdefuiiat that we 'were ton
l:r. t/ireutith. Anders. vol. i. 94. 99. It would have been
l, f mall advantage to Mary, it 'ie could have reprelented the

r ,lent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed.
It is (Hill more furpifing to find Lefiey afribing this paper to
Murr.ly and his faction. Anders. vol i. 26. The bilhop hinl-
tilt vias one of the persons who subscribed it. Keith, 3S3.
Thle kin's commiflioners, at the conference held at York
T: i , pretended that none of the nobles, except the earl of
I :ltly, would fubitrihe this paper till a wan ant from the

'i was producdl, by which they were allowed tn do so:
;. I.:ant they had in their cu(tody, and exhibited. Anders.

v1. v. t

part 2. 5. This differs from Buchanan's account,

wvi fIuplpofcs that all the nobles present subscribed the paper
1 he igth, and that next day they obtained the approba-

1
n of what they lad done, by way of lccurity to them-
';J',.. 355,

with

wvith the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded these remonitrances, but communicated
the matter to Bothwell; and Melvil, in order
to save his life, was obliged to fly fiom court,
whither he durit not return till the earl's rag.;
began to abate ' At the fame time Elizabelli
warned Mary of tle danger and infamy to which
she would expose herfclf by such an indecent
choice: but an advice from her met with ilill
less regard ".

Three days after the riling of parliament Mary

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to
vilit the prince her son. 3bthwell had now
brought his schemes to fill maturity, and evelr
precaution being taken whicl could render it
iafe to enter on the last and decisive ftep, the

u Melv. 156. Accrrding to Melvil, Lord Herries like-

wife temoonltiaed against the maTriage, and conjured t'he
queen, on hIs Inees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dis-
honouraile alliance, i 6. But it has been otfcrvcd, thit
Herries i5 one of the nobles who subscribed the bnrld, April
g9. Kcith, 383. 2. T'hat he is one of the witnefTes to the
marriage articles between the queen and Bothwe'l, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 6 . 3. 'Th.t he fat in council with Bothwell:
May 17. Keith, 3S6. But this remonflrancc of lord f-leri;c
against the mariage happened before thufe made by Melv.l
hiimfelf f, 7. Melvil's remonstrance mufll have happened
some time before the meeting of parliament for after offlnd.
ilg Bothwell, he retired from couurt he allowed his rage
time to subside, and had again joined the queen when the .,is
seized, April z4. 5S. ''he time which mult nave clapirl
by this account of the matter, was perhaps sufficient ro ha\.;
gained Herric:; from being an opposer to become a promotsr
of the marriage. Perhaps Mclvil may have committe., (onc
mitake with regard to this fact, so far as rclates to lord Her-
ries. He could not well be rmiftaken with regard to what
himself did.

x Anders. vol. i. o06,

' , -.
. natural

natural impetuosity of his spirit did not susser
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence
of an expedition against the freebooters on the
borders, he assembled his followers; and march-
ing out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse
[April 24], turned suddenly towards Linlithgow,
met the queen on her return near that place,
dispersed her slender train without refitance,
fe;Led on her person, and conducted her, toge-
ther with a few of her courtiers, as a prisoner
to his caflle of Dunbar. She expressed neither
furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at such ar
outrage committed on her person, and such an
insult offered to her authority, but seemed to
yield without struggle or regret Y. Melvil was
at that tine one of her attendants; and the of-
sicer by whom he was seized informed him, that
nothing was done without the queen's own con-
!int z. If we may rely on the letters published
in Mary's name, the scheme had been communi-
cated to her, and every ftep towards it was
taken with her participation and advice .

Both the queen and Bothwell thought it of

advaltage to employ this appearance of violence.
It atforded her a decent excnfe for her condut;
and while flhe could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, she hoped that her re-
putaition, among forcigners at Icaft, would eft
calc v/ithout ccnfurc, or be expoied to less re-
pruach. Bothwell could not help diltrulting all
the mlethodsl which h;d hitherto been used for
vindicating him from any conckrn in the murder
of the king. Something was till wanting'for

y 'eitlc, 383. z Mclv. 158, a GooI, yQV, ii. 37.
V01«rll (t ,r ·hh

his fccurity, and for quieting his guilty fears.
This was a pardon under the great feal. By
the laws of Scotland the moit heinous crime muit
be mentio.ned by name in a pardon, and then all
lefler ofFences are deemed to be included under
the general claufc, and all other crimes ,whatfoeverb.
To seize the person of the prince is high trea-
son; and Bothwell h)oped that a pardon obtained
for this would extend to every thing of which
he had been accused c.

Bothwell having now got the queen's person

into his hands, it would have been unbecoming
either a politician or a man of gallantry to have
delayed confuimmating his fcaemes. The first
ftep towards this was to have his marriage with
lady Jane Gordon, the carl of Huntly's sifter,
diflolved. In order to accomplish that, in a
manner coniitcnt with the ideas of the queen
on one hand, and with the sentiments of his
countrymen on the other, two different proceflict
became neceflary: one founded on the maxims
of the canon law, the other accommodated to
the tenets of the reformed church. Bothwcll
accordingly commenced a suit, in his own nance,
in the spiritual court of the archbifllop of St.An-
drew's, thejurifdi&ion of which the queen had re-
stored [April 27 , by a fpccial commission grant-
ed for this purpose, and pleaded, that lady Jane
and himfelif being cousins within the prohibited
degrees, and having married without a papal dif-
penfation, their union was null fromt the begin-
iflhg d At the fame time he prevailed with lady

Jaine

b PaIl. 6 Jae. IV. c. 6i. c Anderrt vQl. i. partii. 61.
d In her own time, it'wns utg'cd a. an nggravation of ,le
q.reu'l guilr, that se gavrbcr consent to niatrl the huAIl)ba

, of

Jane to apply to the proteflant court of corn
niflarics for a divorce, on account of his having
b)cn guilty of adultery. The influence of Both-
wcll was of equal weight in both courts. In
the courfc of four days, with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy, the one declared
t e marriage to be illegal and null, the other pro-
tilnnnced a rentence of divorce "

While this infamous tranfaition was carrying on

thc queen resided at IDunbar; detained as a; prison
cr, but treated with the greatest refpel. Soon
alitei Bothwell, with a numerous train of his de-
pendiats, condlu&ed her to Edinburgh [May 3];
but, inftcad of lodging her in the palace of Holy-
rood-hlufe, he conveyed her to the castle, of
:ihich he was governor. The difeontent of the
rc:titon rendered this precaution necessary. In
?!!: houfc unfortified, and of easy access, tlih

es annther woman; and the charge has been often repeated
Ccr. But, according to Mary's owJ ideas, confant to the
i'ri':cil les of her r liiion, the mairiage t' Bothwcll with lady
7 !ir Gordon swa unl.lwful and void, and ihe confidered themr
. ;iinig logether not in the hallowed bonids of mnatrimonyi
1 ii, a tlate of criminal intercourfc. Bothwell's addreffles

,1 liC itruck her proteOlant fublje&L not only as indecent but
f.;:irious, crnn'i not: appear in the fame light to her; and (his
' ; .e pileadlcd in ex tcniiation of the crime ipu tted to her of
). ,';nR lircned to them. But it will not exempt her froml
, e clirge of great irmprudence in this unfiirtiuatnc lIcp. Mary
tw.r well ;cquaintcd vith the ideas of her.fubije&s, and knew
. th' e t:y would Othinkl of her ;giving far fr a moment to the
ct!hip of a niin lately married under ler own eye,, in.the
chrchn: of hlr palace. Appendix, No. XX. .very confi-
dlealion £ioull lhave rlefainrd her from fonning this miiod,
Xviichl to ler peopl : must have appeared odious and /hoclcin.
I(O'lnalc oli tie Hli(iury of Scotla:ld, p. x99, &c.

'X'indCf. i 13. 4pnI. No. XX» . ;.'

H . .. lqueeui

q-eeni might have been refced without difficulty
out of his hands. In a Dlace of (Ireingth {he was
secured from all the attempt; of his enemies.

One finali difficulty itill remained to be fur-

moiil.ted. As the queen was kept in a fort of
captivity by Botllhell, a marriage concluded in
that condition might be imputed to force,: and
be held invalid. li1 order to obviate this, Mary
appeared in the court of fclfion, and, in presence
of the chancellor and other judges, and several of
the nobility, declared that she was now at full
liberty ; and though Bothwell's violence in feiz.
ing her person had at first excited her indigna-
tion, yet his refpedful behaviour since that tinm
had not only appeased her resentment, but de-
termined her to raise him to higher honourss.

What these were, fonn became public. The

title of duke of Orkney was conferred upon Both-
well; and on the fifteenth of May his marriage
with the queen, which had lb long been the ob-
jea of his withes, and the motive of his crimes,
was solemnized. The ceremony was performed
in public, according to the rites of the-protclt-
ant church, by Adam Bothwell, bishop of Ork-
ney, one of the few prelates who had embraced
the reformation, and on the fame day was
celebrated in private, according to the fornlr
prescribed by the popish religion s. The bold-
ness with which Craig, the miniiter who was
commanded to publifl the banns, testified
against the design; the small number of the 'r-
bles who were present at the marriage; and tie
fullen and difrefpe&fful silence of the people

f And. i. 817. Id, 136. ii. 276.

when

when the queen appeared in public; were mani-
fest fyraptoms of the violent and general diflatif-
fAction of her own subje&s. The refusal of Du
Croc, the French ambassador, to be present at
the nuptial ceremony or entertainment, discovers
the sentiments of her allies with regard to this
part of her couduft; and although every other
action in Mary's life could be jufitied by the
rules of prudence, or reconciled to the principles of
virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an incon-
teliable proof of her rafnlnefs, if not of her gtilt.

Mary's first care was to offer some apology

for her condut, to the courts of France and
Elogland. The initruftions to her ambassadors
still remain, and are drawn by a rmaterly hand.
:Bat under all the artificial and faife colouring
ihe employs, it is cafy to discover,, not only that
many of the iteps she had taken were unjuftifi-
able, but that file herself was-confcious that they
could not be justified h

The title of king was the only thing which

was not bellowed utpon Bothwell. Notwith-
Ilanding her attachipent to him, Mary remem-
bered the :inconveniencies which had arisen from
the rafl advancement of her former husband to
tli: l ionour. She agirced, however, that he fliould
i!n, ;u token f conlelt, all tle public writLs if-
i'ted.l i:n her nami . iu lt tlihogh the quccn with-
held f:im him ,the title of king, he: poffeired,
:'.verlrtlilefs, rcg4piopwvcr i i its full extent. The
glucel's perf.uli waa in jhis ,hands; s[he w;as f,-
roulldcdi nmrt' clof('), tu.l.n ever by,his cre;ltllufi:;
nonle of lcr. il>jets !c.l(ldd. , btain audjince witl-
out his pcrmniflioi ; and, unlcfs in his own pre.

I Aud. i, S9. I Good, i.l 60.

H 3 fence,

fence, none but his confidents were pcrmitted to
converse 'with her k. The Scottish monarchs
were accustomed to live among their fubjef&s as
fathers or as equals, without diltruft, and with
little llate; armed guards standing at the doors
of the royal apartment, difficulty of access, dif-
tance and retirement, were things unknown and
unpopular.

These precautions were necessary for securing

to Bothwell the power which he had acquired.
But, without being maifer of the person of tlh
young prince, le esteemed all that he had gained
to be precarious and uncertain. The queen had
committed her son to the care of the earl of
Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman
were too well known to expet that he would be
willing to put the prince into the hands of the
man who was so violently fufpeted of having
murdered his father. Bothwell, however, la-
boured to get the prince into his power, with an
anxiety which gave rife to the blackest suspicions.
All his address, as well as authority, were employ-
ed to persuade, or to force Mar into a compliance
with his demands . And it is no flight prooi;
both of the firmness and dexterity of that noble-
man, that he preserved a life of so much import.
ance to the natibn, from being in the power of
a man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

The eyes of the neighbouring nations were fix.

ed, at that time, upon the great events which
had happened in Scotland during three months;
a king murdered with the utmost cruelty, in tile
prime of his days, and in his capital city; the

k And, i. 136. ! Mclv, x6o, Buch. 361.

ne.rflrl

2. 4$4.~~~Pa~;
.'. ---------

K·

;:ir~'~;3~~ ·~~g~~N~h<K sI~

u- l iII--·~iuj .

.~...eL! .~..... ..~.

L,.·

*~~~r/Al~ *

l~rlrr;
~/.'

rr~~~~~C/I~~~~~~~A/c ,,,mA7~:hY .,,l~l
~l?~s~m

person fufpefed of that odious* crime suffered
not only to appear publicly in every place, but
admitted into the presence of the queen, diftin-
guifhed by -her favour, and. intrusted with the
chief direcion of her affairs; fubjeded to a
trial which was-carried on with most shameless
partiality, and acquitted by a sentence which'
served only to confirm the suspicions of his guilt;
divorced from his wife, on pretences frivolous
or indecent; and after all this, inltead of meet-
ilg with the igrnminy due to his actions, or the
-unnihment merited by his crimes, permitted
)ipenly, and'without opposition, to marry a
queen, the wife of the prince whom he had as-
iaflinated, and the guardian of those laws which
ne had been guilty of violating. Such a quick
ileceflion of incidents so singular and so detefl
uble, in the space' of three months, is not tc
'be found in anvy other hitory. They left, in
thl opinion of fureiginers, a mark of infamy on
the charater of the nation. The Scots were
held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst
hardly appear any where in public; and after
lilffering so nany atrocious deeds to pass with
nlpunnity, thev were universally reproached as
rnf void of courage or of hmnanity, as equally
:rlardlefs of the rcputation of their queen and
ith honour of tlheir countrrv"'

7'hefe reproaclecs ruutifd the nohles, whllo hadl

heecn hitherto arnufed by Bothwell's artilices, or
itirnidated by his powoer. lThe manier in which
)ie exercised the aitholrity wllich hei aIcquired,
his repeated atteinpts to become mntiler of th0

: Andfrr. vol. ' iz, T134. Mcly. 63, See Apprndiy,
io..'; XI.

princL',

prince's person, together with some rash thlreat-
enings against him which he let fall added to
the violence and promptitude of their refolu.
tions. A conliderable body of them afserpblcd(
at Stirling, and entered into an association for
the defence of the prince's person. Argyll,
Athol, Mar, Mortdn, Glencairn, Iome, Lind-
fay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Iirkaidy of
Grange, and Maitland the secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy . Stewart earl of
Athol was remarkable for an uniform and bigot-
ted attachment to popery; but his indignation
on account of the murder of the king, to whom
he was nearly allied, and his zeal for the safety
of the prince, overcame, on this occasion, ill con-
liderations of religion, and uniited him with tec
most zealous proteitants, Several of the other
nobles acted, without question, from a laudable
concern for the safety of the prince and the
honour of their country. But the fpilit which
some of them discovered during the fubfqiueiit
revolutions, leaves little room to doubt, that
ambition or rcfentment were the real motives of
their condut ; and that, on many occafiol:;,
while they were pursuing ends just and necessary,
they were daclated by principles and pafions aih
tgether qnjultiliable.

The frft accounts of this leaguc filled tlih

queen and Bothwell with great coniirnatKn.
They were no strangers to the fcntinenls of the
iation with refpee to their conduct; and thpugl
their marriage had not met with prubic oippoD
tiop, they knew that it had not been carrncd on

Mclv. Ix6. 0 Kcith, 394.

without

without the secret difgufi an triurmurings of
all ranks of' en. They forefai , the violence
wvithi which this indignation would burit out,
after having been so long fippreffed and in or-
t&r to prepare for the fto/'m, Mary issued a pro-
claiation [May 28], requiring her fubjeas to
taike arms, and't6 attend her hui.and by a day
appointed. At the fame time, she publiflied a
fort of manifcfto, in which she laboured to vin.
dicate her government from those imputations
which it had been loaded with, and employed the
firongeft terms to express her concern for the
faiety and welfare of the prince her son. Neither
ofthefe produced any considerable effcft. Her
pri,:lamation was ill obeyed, and her manifesto
met with little credit P.

The confederate lords carried on'their prepa.

rations with no less a&tivity, and with much more
:icceti. Among a warlike people, men of so
nuch power and popularity found it an easy mat-
ter to raise an army. They were ready to inarch
before the queen and Bothwecll were in a condi-
tion to resist them. The castle of Edinburgh
wvas the place whither the queen ought naturally
to 'ave retired, and there her person might have
been perfe&ly fate. But the confederates had
Fillen on means to shake or corrupt the fidelity of

mir James Balfour, the deputy governor, and

1)othwell dml-f not commit to him fuech an imr
portant trust. I-e conducEted the queen to thecaftle
if Borthwick f[une 6], and on the appearance of
{trd Home, with a body of Ilis followers, before
th.tl place, lie fled with precipitation to Dunbar,

PKeith, 387. 395, 396.

and

and was followed by the queen disguised in men's
clothes. The confederates advanced towards
Edinburgh, where Iuntly endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
againlf them. They entered without opposition,
and were intlantly joined by many of the citi-
zens, whofc zeal became the firmest support of
their caufcq.

In order to set their own conduct in th.

most favourable light, and to rouse the pubic
indignation againt Bothwell, the nobles pub.
lifhed a declaration of the motives which had
induced them to take arms. All Bothwell's
pall crimes were enumerated, all his wicked
intentions displayed and aggravated, and every
true Scotchman was called upon to join them i,;
avenging the one and in preventing the otherr.

Meanwhile Bothwell aflembled his forces at

Dunbar; and as he had many dependents in th:-i
corner, lie soon gathered such strength that he
ventured to advance towards the confederate..
Their troops were not numerous; the fuddti-
ness and secrecy of their enterprise gave their
fiiexnds at a diltance no time to join the ; and
as it does not appear that they were fupportic
either with toney or fed with hopes by the quci::
of England, they could not have kept long in t
body. But on the other hand, Bothwetll duri
not rill a delay . His army followed hih.
witlh relutance in. this quarrel, and served him
with no cordial affction; so that his only hope
of success 'was in firpriling the enemy, or n11
t'riking the blow before his own troopis hll
q Keitb, 398. Andes. vol. i. !i8 . Keith, 4,t:

4 leiilure

·kifure to recollea themselves, or to imbibe the
fame unfavourable opinion of his aaions, which
had spread over the reit of the nation. These
motives determined the queen to march forward,
Uwith an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

On the firit intelligence of her approach, the
confederates advanced to meet her [July 15].

iThey found her forces drawn up almolt on the

sic ground which the Englilil had occupied
eu iic the battle of Pinkie. The numbers on
ith fides were nearly equal; but there was
:., equality in point of discipline. The queefi's
i;.iy conlilled chiefly of a multitude, ha!tily
oietobled, without courage or experience in \var.
T he troops of the confederates were composed
<ti <(iCntleten of rank and repu:tation, followed
by their most trusty dependents, who were no
hl:ss brave than zealous r.

Le Croc the French ambassador, who was in

th lfield, laboured, by negociating both Mwith the
,ileen and the nobles, to put an end to the quar-
i ! without the effusion of blood. He repre-
;:nltcd to the confederates the queen's inclina-
;ions towards peace, and her willingness to par-
:ln the offences which they had comnmitted.
Morton replied with warmth, that they had
taken arms not against the queen, but againit
tiic murderer of her huffand; and if he were
Rivcn up to juflice, or banithed from her pre-
cfnce, Ihe flould find them ready to yield the
obedience which is due frbm ftibjets to their
fovereigni Glencairn added, that they did not
come to aik: pardon for. any offinee,. but to pu.

c Paid. VoI, >. 4 38 .q

msih

nifh those who had offended. Such haughty
answers convinced the ambassador, that his ne-
diation would be ineffetual, and that their pas-
lions were too high to allow them to liften to
any pacific propositions, or to think of retreat-
ing after having proceeded so far u"

The queen's army was posted to advantagc,

on a rising ground. The confederates advanced
to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and with
the caution which was natural on that unhappy
field. Her troops were alarmed at their ap-
proach, and discovered no inclination to fight.
Mary endeavoured to animate them; (he wept,
the threatened, file reproached them with cow.
ardicc, but all in vain. A few of Bothwell's
immediate attendants were eager for the c.i-
counter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute,
and some began to steal out of the field. Both.
well attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own in-
nocence, in single combat with any of his advtr-
saries. Kirkaldy of Grange, Munay of Tulli-
bardin, and lord Lindsay, contended for the
honour of entering the lifts againit him. But
this challenge proved to be a mere bravade.
Either the consciousness of guilt deprived Both-
well of his wonted courage, or the queen, by
her authority, sorbad the combat x.

After the symptoms of fear discovercd by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcufablc
had (ie hazarded a battle. To have retreatcI
in the face of an enemy who had already fur-
rounded the hill on which (he flood; with paut

* Keith, 491. x Cold. vo. ih 50.

of

nifh those who had offended. Such haughty
answers convinced the ambassador, that his me-
diation would be ineffecual, and that their pas-
sions were too high to allow them to liften to
any pacific propositions, or to think of retreat-
ing after having proceeded so far ".

The queen's army was posted to advantagc,

on a rising ground. The confederates advanced
to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and with
the caution which was natural on that unhappy
field. Her troops were alarmed at their ap-
proach, and discovered no inclination to fight.
Mary endeavoured to animate them; Ihe wept,
ihe threatened, ile reproached them with cow-
ardice, but all in vain. A few of Bothwell's
immediate attendants were cager for the en-
counter; the reft stood wavering and irresolute,
and some began to fleal out of the field. Both-
well attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own in-
nocence, in single combat with any of his adver-
saries. Kirkaldy of Grange, Munay of Tulli-
bardin, and lord Lindsay, contended for the
honour of entering the lifts againit him. But
this challenge proved to be a mere bravade.
Either the consciousness of guilt deprived Both-
well of his wonted courage, or the queen, by
her authority, sorbad the combat x.

After the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcufeablL
had she hazarded a battle. To have retreatc'l
in the face of an enemy who had already fur-
rounded the hill on which ihe stood; with purt

I Keith, 40o. x Cald. vol. ii. 50

of

.-.-
o ~~~~~~~·

to Eb;.; u ·h.-

-of their cavalry, 'was utterly impraticable. In
' hia :fttuation, she was under the cruel necessity of
- puttifig.-erfelf into the hands of those fubjCets
*who:had taken armn against her. Shedecmanded
tnl interview with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous
manl, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. He, with the consent and in the name
of the leaders of the partv) promised that, on
condition flit would dillifs Bothwell from her
p)rcfence, and gove:n the kingdom by the advice
of her nobles, they would honour and obey her
as their fovereigln f.

During this parley, Bothwell took his laRs

farewell of the queen, and rode off the field with
a fcTw followers. This difinal reverse happened
exactly one month after that marriage which had
tolt him so maniy crimes to accomplih, and which
leaves to foul a ltain on Mary's memory.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary filtrendered

to Kirkaldy, who conducted her toward the con-
tderate armi, the leaders of which received her
with much relpec ; and Morton, in their name,
nlade ample professions of their future loyalty
and obedience . But Ihe was treated by the
common soldiers with the uttioft infolencc and
ildignity. As fle marched along, they poured
tupon her all the opprobrious r,.mcs which are
b(llowed only on the lowelt and molf infamoua
criminals. Wherever flie turned lher eyes, the'
held up before hera ftandard,onwhich was painted
the dead body of the late king,, itretched on the
ground, and the young prince knleelii g before it,
*lid uttering thcfe words, " Judge and revenge

/ Good. vol. ii. 164. Mclv. t65 ; Qood. vol, i;. 165.
voL. aI, l my

my cause, 0 Lord !" Mary turned with horror
froln such a mhockirg fight. She began already
to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter
complaints, fle melted into tears, and could hardly
he kept from finking to the ground. The con-
federates condudted her towards Edinburgh;
and in spite of many delays, and after looking,
with the fondness and credulity natural to the
unfortunate, for fomc extraordinary relief, 1si:
·ar-lived there. The flreets owere covered with
multitudes, whom zeal or curiolity had draiwn
together, to behold fucli an unusual scene. The
q(lcen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dull,
and bedewed with tears, was cxpofed as a spec-
tacil to her own subjeCts, and led to the provost'.,
house. Notwittitanding all her arguments and
intreaties, the fame flandard was can-ied before
her, and the fame insults and reproaches re-
peated z. A woman, young, beautiful, and in
dh'ftefs, is naturally the objec; cf compaflion.
The comparison of their present misery with their
former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
illuitrious sufferers.. Iut the people beheld the
deplorable situation of their sovereign with insen-
fibility; and so 'trong was their persuasion of
her guilt, and so great the violence of their in.
dignation, that the filfferings of their queen did
not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or
procure her that sympathy which is seldom denied
to uilfortunate princes.

sWclv 66! Buc h, 364,

# BOOK V.

BOOK V.

'r 1 E confederate lords had proceedcd to such

' x tr-emities aalinit their sovereign, that it now
iccamlc alrnoil iinp)olible for themc either to Htop

i',!t, or to purfie a 'otlrfe lels violelt. Many
of the nobles had refuscd to concur with them in
thril enterpl i-!; others openly condemned it.
A small circtimitlance might abate that, indcigna-
to;il witk h whicl the multitudc were at prfeint
aIilnated againit the queen, and deprive them of
that popul;ir applanfe *which was the chief lounda-
nion of their power. These conlideratiols in-
lined some of them to treat the queen with great
e.iJity.

But, on the other hand, Mary's affection for

BPotlwell continued as violent as ever; fle ob.
ti!p.itely refused to hearken to any proposal for
diifoiving their marriage, and determined not
to abandon a man, for whose love she had already
facriliced so much a. If they Ihou!d allow her to
recover the supreme power, the tirfl exertion of it
would be to recall Bothwell; and they had rca,
lon, both fron his resentment, from her conduOt,
anti from their own, to expe&t the severest effeili
,o her vengeance. These considerations fiur-
mnounted every other motive; and reckoning
lelnmfclves ahfolved, by Mary's incuralle at-
tatchlinent to Bothwell, from the cngagementu
vi hich they lad come under when the yielded
h1rrlclf a prisoner, they, without regarding tlh
duty whlich they owed her as their queen, and

" Kc;th, 419. 4G, . 449. Mclv. 167. Sec Append.
No. XXI2

z2 without

wi;thout confiltiinrT the iv'e: of the nobles, carriv.
her next eveninig, un.dcr- i firon;- guard, to the
caffle of Jochllvil, and signed a warrant to
Wiill:;m I)ouglas, the owner of it, to detain her
as a prisoner. Thi'l cialfti is iituated in a finall
iLiand, in the miiclte of a lake. Douglas, to
whom it beclonged, xas a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had married the carl of Murray's r.o-
-{her. In tlis plhicer, nder ftrici cuft,.dy, with a
few attenidnl. s, and fubje,"ctd to tlhe inults of a
haughlty wonianr, who hoalled daily of being tit
lawful wife oft James V. TMary fiffercd all the
rigour and inl;lies of captivityb.

Immediately zifter the cqueen's imprisonment,

the confederates .were at the utmotl pains to
ltrengtheni thlir party; they entered into new
bonds of association ; they afiumed the title of
lords of /b. ficrel co0u, il, and without any other
right, arrogated to themfclvc:s the whole regal
authority. One of l.c-ir firlt afts of power was,
to search the city of Edinburgh for such as had
been concer:ied in the murder of the king. This
fliho of zeal ,rained reputation to thcinfelv:s,
and threw an oblique rcficlionl on the queen so-
hier remiflinefs. Several firfpcated pcrlfns were
fc(ized. Captain Blackardder and three other;,
were condemned d

ad xecuted. But no dif.

coverv of importance wns mdle. If we believ;
some hiflorians, they were conviEted by fufifcicicn
evidence. If we give credit to others, their fen-
fence was unjlnfl, and they denied, with their lalt
breath, any knowledge of the crime for which
they fu sised .

i Keiith, 403. Note (b).
c Cald. vol, ii. 53. Crritf. Mem, 35.

Ai.

An unexpedted accident, however, put into the

hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the
flllelt evicence of her guilt. Bothwell having
left in the ca/ile of JEdinhl:!rgh a ca<ket contain-
ing fe-reral fonncts and ltcci;.s written with the
queen ' own h:(ndi hel now f{nt one of his con-
fiicnts to brigr to hin this precious dcp(ill. But
a; his lmzlne;ner rctur'nld, b!e was i;lerlcrpted, and
tic calket seized Iv Mortoi: d. 'Ti'h contenlts of
i. were always prolduced by the partv 's tiht: r.-tit
amriple jultification of their owlv conllildl ; and
t' these they contilnially appealed as Ithie .'iof
:nanfireriable proof of their not having loaded
their sovereign with the imputation of imaginary
ci-illlCs C

But the confederates, notwitliltandihng their

e;xtraordinary success, were till far from being
perfectly at cafe. That so finall a part of the
nobles Ihould pretend to dispose of the person of
iheir sovereign, or to affurne the authority which
bionged to her, without the concurrence of the
rell, was deemed by many of that body to be
niprecerdented and prefimnptuous. Several of
;ltfc were now affiinbled at Hamilton, in order
: detliberate what course they should hold in
til; dlificult conjmli&ure. The confederates made
idame attempt towa.,,!s a coalition with them, but
v.iliolt eTei-t. They employed the mediation
' iIhe aiemnbly of the chLrch, to draw then to a
t"rional interview at Edinburgh, but with no
be tter success. That party, however, though its
rnl:mbers were fornlidable, and the power ofit%

'd Andrrf. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. i. 90.
': Se Di f1rtitjo0i at the cl(d if the Hiltorgy.

J 3 leasders

leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want of
unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murlmurs and complaints, and no
scheme was concerted for obstructing the progress
of t;e confederates t.

There appeared tome profpe&t of danger from

another quarter. This great revolution in Scot-
land had been carried on without any aid from
Elizabeth, and even without her knowlede eg.
Though fle was farfrom beinm difpltafed at feeinc
the affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival,
whom flie hated, reduced to ditlrefs; [he neither
wished that it should be in the power of the one
faciion entirely to suppress the other, nor could
file view the Ateps taken by the confederates with-
out great offence. Notwithftauding the popular
maxims by which she governed her own fiubjedts,
her notions of royal prerogative were very exalted.
The confederates had, in her opinion, encroached
on the authority of their foverelgn, which they
had no right to control, and had offered violence
to her person, which it was their duty to esteen}
sacred. They had set a dangerous example to
other fibijets, and Mary's cause became the com-
mon caufc of princes h. If ever Elizabeth was
influenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland
by the feelings of her heart, rather than by con-
fiderations of interest, it was on this occasion.
Mary, in her present condition, degraded from
her throne, and covered with the infamy attend-
ing an accusation of such atrocious crimes, could
be no longer the objec of Elizabeth's jealousy,
.,ither a,; a woman or as a queen. Sympathy with

i Keith, 4071e r td. h. 14. 41. 415.

a foe

a sovereign in distress seems, for a moment, to
have touched a heart not very susceptible of
render sentiments; and, while these were yet
w:arm, she dispatched Throkmorton into Scot-
land [June3o], with power to negotiate both

;ith the queen and with the confederates. Iil
his infili-ntions there appears, a remarkable folici-
t!de for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputa-
t;on; a:rd the terms upoin which flie proposed to
ic-<llanlilh concord between the queen and her
'f,!jcrts, appear to be so reasonable and well di
;yited, as might have ensured the itfety and hap-
n:irifs of both. Zealous as Throkinolton was to
n.i'mlnplilh this, all his endeavours and address
:ori\ed iiieffetlual. -1He found not only the con-
ii'd-ate nobles, but the nation in gencral, so far
;i¢:ena;tci from the quceIe, anid so much offenided
uwith the indecent precipitancy of her marriage
x itl the reputed murderer of her fornimc husband,
a;; to. he incapable of liltcninll to any propofi.ion
itn hr favnour.

l)iiing the tante of anarchy occasioned by the

inil,riofimelnt of the queen, and the difiolution of

!' ,nfia;bli!lhed government, which afliorded f.dh

;*Itidlc fecole for politicall fpeculation,four different
i'iclcms lhad been proposed for the fettlemenit of
the nitione. One, that Mary (hould be replaced

th'

. e

te throne, but under various and ttriaq

"', lit iens. The second, that file should resign
it!;', crwn to her son, and retiring out of the
}!,'elt!omn, nfould relidc, durig the remaindler of
h(r (lays, either in En land or in France. The,
'il;.l, that Mary should be brought to public
si;I for her Crinmc;, and after conviction, of which
o dcubt was ntcitetainld, should be kept in per-

pctua]

petual imprisonment, The fourth, that after
trial and condemnation, capital punifliment should
Le infli&tel upon her. Throkmorton, though
difpioed, as well by his own inclination as in
conformity to the fpihit of his inftrutions, to
view matters in the light moil favourable to
Mary, informed his court, that the milder
schemes, recommended by Maitland alone, would
undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of the more
Tigorous carried into execution.

Inijuflification of this rigour, the conr,:deraltc.

maintained that Mary's aifeftion for Bothwcll
was iUll unabated, and openly avowed by her;
that ihe rejeetld vwith disdain every proposal fi.r
dilfolviin their marriage ; and declared, that fiic
wiould forego every comfort, and endure any
extremity, rather t!han give her consent to thila
zmeafure. While thbefc w;ere her fentimenta, they
contended', that concern for the public welfare,
as well as attention to t}Lie;.i owni afety, renderedl
: ! neceiTry to put it tout of tlhe queen's power
to reilore a da;ing man, exalpcrattd by recent
injrlies, to hiis forlmer iatLion, wihicl mnll needs
prove fatal to both. l\otwvitft.anding their f£.
licitude to collciliate the good-wil of E-liztbetl,
ith:v foreaiwxcleharly v.'al uldti ibe the efTfet, at
this jui.t ire, of Throk lortol's interpolition in
btehiilf f f thc queen, and tlat (iee, clated with
t.hc 1profpc& of protclioLi, would refuse to liflcn
to the overtures; whi;cl they were about to m;l:.
to her. For tlhi, rcafon they peremptorily dcniil
Tlirolkm;niton ',ccti; to their prisoner ; and whLIL
propolitions be made to tllhm.in her behalf th:e
cither refiLft'd or cludede.

J.eitlh, 417. 4z7,

.Meanwl,,;

i'lnvllawil'; they delib rated withl t)ie utinu.l-

'
. i'.t oncernling telt t'ttleii'cnlt of the natiiin,

t' ,:rci future d;fipol;] of the qucen'sn peli-fn.

. !:, !,ll, obeirvi-ilug that Throkmortoin nl't(!c 1o
'-,], 'c', ii, his liO 'ootiriolna willi them, an. that
i',. ,' iv,;lct lilte'l to lnone o his lenlinld irt Ma-
*-,'( N o)n"'t, tirned towarda that part of tile
., ,ilc'- wlo were afltimbIed at Hamiltoii, incitcd
..i to take arms in order to reltore their quet,
: E, Icrty, and proii;fed to a;lilt themr iln such

!. itempt to the utmost of her power . i]ut

:,, r- dilcovered no greater union and vigour tlhani
.,i,',crily, and, behaving like men who had givtn

'; ll concern either for their queen or their
..I...ry, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part
*,t tli.ir body, whether we confider it with re*
:ri;.tt to numbers or to power, to fettle the go-
vi '!2ment of the kingdom, and to dilpofe of the
ji',:ca's person at pleasure. Many consultations
vri lieeld, and various opinions arose with regard
toi :ich of these. Some seemed desirous of ad-
lnu ig; to the plan on which the confederacy was
:.t I;-it formed; and after puniflhing the murderers
r' thie king, and dissolving the marriage with
:,ilicll; after providing for the safety of the
y·tir prince, and the security of tle prote"tant
<!ilro ; they proposed to re-ellablifil the quet-c
il tle pollcllioll of her legal antillirity. T1'he

eill.'ls with whiich their arms had becln accon-.

'.nrecd, ilfpired others with bolder and more
I.'1 icr:ate thougihtl, and nothing less would fa-
i h.,l mlilmcn thll tlhe trial, the condemnation, and
",idfllnlllit of the queen lIlirfclf, as tle principal

k See Ap.:cnd. No, XXIII.

confp)rator

coiiiairator againfc the life of her hufiand an,
thle safety of ther !:;:i : thl sorn'er wvas M:aii land'
fytern, andl bi-ca tcd loo much of ;. pacific a,.
rmoderate spir:t, to bc .irecab! to the temper o
m'i;h3cs of the parrty. 'rThe lattir was recomnmen;:',
by the clergy, aa:d warnll- adopted by in.aa
la:cs ; but the nobles durfl. rit cr v-o)'d not vt:,
ture or such an unprecedented a::d audacini'
deid n:

lioti partites agreed at ]aflt upon a fcher:.

neithe.r so nroderatc as the one, nor so dari:ny ;
the other. Mary , as to be persuaded cr, for;.
to rel;n i:-;e crown ; the young prince wa. ;,
be proclairrcd king, unc the ea;l of Murray ,i.
to be appointed to govvrn the kingdom, durl..,
his minority, v.it'h tle name and authc!iy ....
regent. With regard to the queen's owl p1:.
son, nothing was determined. It seems to hn.-
been the intention of tliheonfederates to kee I .
in perpetual inprifonment ; buc in order to ;r.
timidate herself, and to overawe her partiiaii
they tiill reserved to themselves the power of iro.
ceedini,- to r.;ore violent extremes.

It was obvious to foresee difficdlties in the

execution of thi. plan. Mary was young, an.
bitious, bigh-fpirited, and accutfomed to corn.
mand. To induce her to acknowledge her oew:
incapacity for governing', to renounce the dig
nity and power which lhe wvas born to enjoy, to

1 Keitl, 420, 4A;, 422. 5S2.
m The intention of putting the queen to death fernr t(

have bcen c:arried on by tihme of her fubjrts: at this ill,t
we often find .l1iz.lbeth boafling that Mary owed her lifc t,;
her Intrpolfitiol) Diges's Compl, Anib. J4j &c. Sc.e Ar-
pend. No. XVIII.

become

become dependant on her own fubjecs, to con-
ellt to her own bondage, and to invest those
piersons whom Ihe confidercd as the authors of
all her calamities with that honour andc aulthority
if which she herself was stripped, were points
hard to be gained. Thefc, however, the con-
;.c;rates attempted, and they did net want
!me'!ins to insure flccefl. Mary hiad endured, for
fccmral weeks, all the lardiiilips and terror of a
prilon ; no profprEt of liberty appeared ; none
uh ile; fulhjeiLs had either taken arms, or so much
n. fi)cited her relief; nlo person, in whom file
c(.iuld confide, was admitted into lher presence;
ct'i: the ambassadors of tlie French king, and
(qu'ci' of England, were reftifcd access to her.
In tlis folirarv slate, wi'tult a ucomuf;llor or a
;;- ild, under tile preiuir'e (of dilrefs and the ;.:.
prelicnlon of danger-, it was natural for a woman
to he:i.ren almost to any overtnrc,. The con-
ftleirates took advantage of her condition and of
hcl fears. 'They empv'ed lord Liidfay, the
tierlccI .zcldot in the party, to coi.niiiilicate tleir
1( ',rnme io the qneen, and to obtain l: r fiibfc:i)-
tiUn to tholc papers which vscrc niecefTary for
reidreing it efi'ccdual. Fle executed hIs cornmir-
fin ,wiLh hailhnief and brltality. Certain death
was bet;fre Mary's eyes if the refuifed to comply
with his demands. At the fami time {he was in-
i.)nmcdl by Sir Robert Melil, in. t.lih namne of
Athol, Maitland, and iirkaldy, the perlfons
am(ongl the confederates who were mol: attentive
1,l her interti}, that a reigrnatieon extorted by fear,
;,id granted during her ir.prifonment, was void

'n Keith, 415.

ia

in lawv andl inrght be revoked as loon as fie rei
co'.eied libc,ty. Throkinorton, by a u;tewhich
lhe found means of conveying to her, fiuggeli,.d
the fame tlhing

; . Deference to their opiuion,

well as concern for her own ftfety, obliged 1:;r
to yield to every tLing which was required, a;,d
to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented to
her. iBy o:e of these, hli letigned the crowi;,
renoun;ccd all (fIare in the government of t1:
kingdom, and consented to the coronation of tlil
youiing ki;ng. By anolher, Ihe appointed tidi
carl of Mulrray regent, and conferred upon h:n
all the powers and privileges of that high ofC;c
CJulyl 24]. By a third, lhei fubflfitted fonc o ; _r
,;oblemciu n n Murr-a's place, if lie ihoull dI'.l':
ithce ]ionou w ichi was ;.ltign)ed for him M., .,
\wh.'l icii fuubfcriib,.d tll :c dels, w\as b:atlitd i;
tears and wliilc (he gave avway, as it were v w;ih
lher own hands, the ftcc;it'c v.hicli f' e had f'wa';. d
so long, file felt . p;anlg of grief and ilndiglnatiol,
one of tlhe fe; ercll, perhaps, swhich can touchI tl
·hulman hea.rt P.

'The confederates endeavoured to give tllli

rcfig; atiJon all tlhe weight and validity in tlisr
po.vcr, by proceccling without delay to crown Lhi
vooun lprince. '1'he ccrlmoy was performed at
Stirling, oni t.le t\:'twenty-ninlth of July, with mucll
folclnnity, il presence of all the nobles of the
'party, a conliderablen i umber of lIccer barons, a.i(
great allr'mbly of the people. From that tinc,
tall puiblic writs were ifiued, and the government
:arricd on in the name of James VI. q

( lcillh, 445. Note (i). Melv. 169.
ii Keh 430u, Crawf., Mcm. 35, ' Kcith, 437.

No revolution so great was ever effeted with

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end,
In a warlike age, and in less time than two
r- onths, a part oi the nobles, who neither pofleffed
Iiec chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the
i-tion, and who never brought three thousand
I'.I into the field, seized, imprisoned, and de-
:Il-oned their queen, and without shedding a single
drop of blood, set her son, an infant of a year
i ,!:, on the throne.

Dulring this rapid progress of the confederates,

t!e eyes of all the nation were turned on. themr
,;tli aitonifhment; and various and contradicory
;pirnions *were sorned concerning the extraor.
di.;iiy steps which they had taken.

Evcen under the ariltocratical form of.govern.

r,.i.nt which prevails in Scotland, said the fa-
vourers of the queen, and notwitlhftnding the
c.icrblant privileges of the nobles, the. prince
j ifelfes conliderable power, and his person is
itr'ated with great veneration, No encroach-
ic.lts nhould be made on the former, and no
;I.jiy offered to the latter, but in cales where
t1', liberty and happiness of the nation cannot be
1.'' ired by any. other means. Such cafes feldon
t'.;ii, and it belongs not to any part, but to the

1,el, or at leall to a majority of tile society, to
;,tl:!c of their exiltenec. 1gv what ation could
i: Ie pretended tlat Mary hatd invaded the rights

eproperty of herl fubjebls, or what scheme had

'i, f'ormned agaiult the liberty and conltitution of
tlt iii'ngdom ?' Were fears, and fafpicions, .and
i.ri:ftlrs, eough to justify the imprifouing and
tlh decpofing a queen, to whom the crown de-
:crndlcd. firo.l so loQg r lace Qs inonarclli ? The

1'i . K prncilnal

principal author of whatever was reckoned cul.
pable in her conduft, was now driven from h(i
presence. The murderers of the king might have
been brought to condign punishment, the safety
of the prince have been secured, and the protest.
ant religion have been established, without wrest.
ing the fccptre out of her hands, or condemning
her to perpetual imprisonment. Whatever right
a free parliament might have had to proceed to
such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its
determinations might have merited, a sentence ,o
this nature, passed by a small part of the nobility,
without acknowledging or consulting the reft of
the nation, must be deemed a rebellion against
the government, and a conspiracy againit the
person of their sovereign.

The partisans of the confederates reasoned veiy

differently. It is evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave consent to the king's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid
a&ion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the powser
and honours which (he has conferred upon hiin,
the manner in which (he suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with whith
The married a man stained with so many crime;,
raise arong suspicions of the former, and put the
latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the
supreme power to continue in the hands of an
ambitious man, capable of the most atrocious
and desperate ations, would have been difgracc-
ful to the nation, dishonourable to the queen, and
dangerous to the prince. Recourse was thcie-
fore had to arms.. The queen had been comn-
palled to abandon a husband so unworthy of hI.
Iell But her aflcftion toward him still con-

tiluilig

tinuing unabated; her indignation against the
authors of this reparation being visible, and often
expressed in the itrongeft terms; they, by refior.
ing her to her ancient authority, would have
armed her with power to destroy themfelvree
have enabled her to recal Bothwell, and. have
afforded her an opportunity of pursuing schemes
fatal to the nation with greater eagerness, and
with more success. Nothing therefore remained,
but by one bold adion to deliver themselves and
thilir country fiom all future fears. The expedient
t}cy had clofen was no less refpeEtful to the royal
blood, than necessary for the public safety.
While one prince was set aside as incapable of
,ovcrning, the crown was placed on his head who
'as the undoubted representative of their an-
;ient kings.

Whatever opinion posterity may form on co.m;

paring the arguments of the two contending
parties, whatever sentiments we may entertain
concerning the jutice or necessity of that courle
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied
that their condut, so far as regarded themfelvesC
.as, extremely prudent. Other expedients, left
rigorous towards Mary, might have been found
for fettling the nation; but, after the injuries
which they had already offered. the queen, there
was none so effectual for securing their own safe.
ty, or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the condut of

the confederates appeared not only wiie, but
just. The king's accession to .the throne was
every where proclaimed, and his authority sub-
mitted to without opposition. Though several
of the nobles were fill assembled at Hamilton,

t 2 and

and seemed to be entering into some combina.
tion against his government, an association for
supporting it was formed, and signed by so many
persons of power and influence throughout the
nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt r.

The return of the earl of Murray, about this

time, added strength to the party, and gave it a
regular and finished form. Soon after the mur.
der of the king, this nobleman had retired into
France, upou what pretence historians do not
mention. During his residence there, he had
held a close correspondence with the chiefs of the
confederacy, and, at their desire, he now returned.
fIe seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office
of regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribcd
tb the scruples either of diffidence or of duty.
Murray wanted neither the abilities nor the am.
bition which might incite,him to aspire to this
high dignity. He had received the first accounts
ofhis promotion with the utmost fatisfaAtion;
but by appearing to continue for some days in
tufpenfe, he gained time to view with attention
the ground on which he was to as&; to balance
the strength and resources of the two contending
factions, and to examine whether the foundation
on which his future fame and success mult refi,
,were found and firm.

Before he declared his final resolution, lit

waited on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a
fifler, and a queen, in a prison, fiom which he
had neither any intention to relieve her, nor ti
mitigate the rigour of her conifinement,. may be
mentioned among the circumstances which dif-

Anders. vol. ii. 231.

cover

cover the great want of delicacy and refinement
hi that age. Murray, who was naturally rough
and uncourtly in his manner', expoftulated so
warmly with the queen concerning her palt
'onddllEt, and charged her faults so home upon
fhr, that Mary, who had flattered herself with
iiore gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
indted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely
t-, despair t. This interview, from which Murray
;.1uld reap no political advantage, and wherein
i,. discovered a spirit so severe and unrelenting,
m,.v be reckoned among the molt bitter ci cum-
!t lnces in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the
ilL)t unjustifiable steps in his conduct.

Son after his return fiom Lochlevin [Aug.
2 ], Murray accepted the office of regent, and be-
;:ii to ad in that charader without opposition.

A midst so many great and unexpeced events,

the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all,
hath been almost forgotten. After his flight
tfin the confederates, he lurked for some time
among his vafTals in the neighbourhood of Dun-
!)ir. But finding it impoflible for him to make
h:id, in that country, againfl his enemies, or evet
to iecure himself from their pursuit, he fled for
lhelter to his kinfinan the bishop of Murray;
an.l when he, overawed by the confederates, was
,ligl;gd to abandon him, he retired to the Ork.
:.y Illes. Hunted from place to place, delerted
1.i his friends, and accompanied by a few re-
a;iincru, as desperate aI hirlfelf, he suffered at
,c the the miferne of infamy and'of want. His
iii:trellnce forced hitm upon a course which added

* KJ;th, 96. t Ibid. 445, 446.

R 3 ta

to his infamy. He armed a few small Ihips,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, cl-
deavoured to procure subsistence for himself and
his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murrl:.
of Tullibardin were fTnt out against him by thll
confederates ; and surprising him while hec rou-
at anchor, scattered his small licet, took a part ;i
it, and obliged him to fly with a single fiip to-
wards Norway. On tlat coast, he fell in witl,
veflel richly laden, and immediately attacked i .
the Norwegians failed with armed boats to i.;
alifitance, and after a defpcrate fight, Botllb i
and all his crew were taken prikoners. His nale.
and quality were both unknown, and he v.:l
treated at firPt with all the indignity and rigot:3
which the odious crime of piracy merited. lis
real charatrer was soon discovered, and thouue.'
it saved him from the infamous death to whi:ch
his associates were condemned, it could neitlih:
procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hard(lli)-
of !lis imprisonment. He languilhed ten ,v,:'
in this unhappy condition; melancholy and d(!
fpair deprived him ofreafon, and at last he end(d.
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and eni.
aflifted by strangers . Few men ever accom
plified their ambitious projeCts by worse mears,
or reaped from them less atisfaition. The ctilv
part of his life was reflfefs and enterprising, fiill
of danger and vicissitudes. His enjoyment ot
the grandetir, to which lie attained by so ninny
crimes, was extremely lhort; embittered by mnu, i
anxiety, and disquieted by many scar3. Il llin

a Melv. 168,

1. !,"'

Ilhter years, he suffered the most intolerable ca-
I mit;es to which tile wretched are fubjest, and
fi;,ni which persons who have moved in so high a
i;:!('c ;ire commonly exempted.

The good effeóts of Murray's accession to the

r'e cncy were quickly felt. The party forming
tf,, the queen was weak, irresolute, and dillnited;

n,.d ;o sooner was the government of the king-
;l.lm rn the hands of a man so remarkable both

f,,r his abilities and popularity, than the nobkls,
i whom it was composed, loft all hopes of gain-
;,i ground; and began to treat separately with
.!, regcnt. So many of them were brought to
;l kllowledge the king's authority, that fearce
.iny appearance of opposition to the cftablifhcd
; )vcrnment was left in the kingdom. Had they
; ihcrcd to the queen with any firmness, it is pro-
I ,iblr, fiom Elizabeth's disposition at that time,
Ti):lt fle would have afforded them such allltance
as niight have enabled them to face their enemies
,I the field. But there appeared so little vigour
-.r harmony in their councils, that (he was dif-
ii:; aged from espousing their cause; and the
i tcnt, taking advantage of their situation, oh.
;gcd them to submit to his government, witlout
I;r:illting any terms, either to thcmfelves or to
. uie (cen X.

Tlhe regent was no lcfs successful in his at-
. nipt to get into his hands the places of Rlrength
;i1 the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor,
i. rndered the catrl of Edinburgh ; and as the
r': \ l( of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell
li: patron, obtained termn of great advantage to

X Keit,, 447. 45o. 463. : i..,ef

hiimfelf. The governor of Dunbar, who dif-
covered greater fidelity, was soon forced to cap;.
tulate: some other small forts surrendered wit.ii
out resistance.

This face of tranquillity in the nation cncou.

raged the regent to call a meeting of parliament
[Dec. 15]. Nothing was wanting to confirm
the king's authority, and the proceedings of the
confederates, except the approbation of this
supreme court; and after the success which had
attended all their measures, there could be little
doubt of obtaining it. The numbers that rc.
forted to an assembly which was called to deli-
berate on matters of so much importance, were
great. The meeting was opened with the ut.
most solemnity, and all its ads passed with much
unanimity. Many, however, of the lords who::
had discovered the warmest attachment to tle
queen, were present. But they had made their
peace with the regent. Argyll, Huntly, and
Herries, acknowledged, openly in parliament,
that their behaviour towards the king had becn
undutiful and criminal Y. Their compliance, il
this manner, with the measures of the regent'i
party, was either the condition on which they
were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof
of the sincerity of their reconcilement.

The parliament granted every thing the con.

federates could demand, either for the safety of
their own persons, or the security of that forim
of government which they had established in tthe
kingdom. Mary''s resignation of the crown 1 a;
accepted, and declared to be valid. The king:

Y Anders. vol. iv. 153. Scc Appendlx, No. XXIV,

authoritie

authority, and Murray's elecAton, were recognised
and confirnied. The imprisoning the queen, and
:1il the other proceedings of the confederates,
wrere pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary
had written to Bothwell were produced, and the
a ;s declared to be accessory to the murder of
the kingz. At the fame time, all the acts of
pr irliament of the year one thousand five hundred
arnd sixty, in favour of the proteflant religion,
were publicly ratified; new Itatutes to the fame
piirpofe were enaced; and nothing that could
ctotribute to root out the remains of popery,
o, to encourage the growth of the reformation,
wvas neglected.

It is observable, however, that the fame par.

fiTronious spirit prevailed in this parliament, as
ini that of the year one thousand five hundred
and sixty. The protestant clergy, notwith-
lhanding many discouragements, and their ex-
treme poverty, had, for seven years, performed
xIl religious offices in the kingdom. The ex.
jedients fallen upon for their fubffitence had
i:itherto proved ineffectual, or were intended to
be Ibf. But notwithstanding their known indi-
,cn<ce, and the warm remonstrances of the as-
feimbly of the church, which met this year, the

dtliainent did nothing more for their relief,
'i:;n prescribe some new regulations concerning
the payment of the thirds of benefices, which
did not produce any considerable change in the
fi(ti;t ion of the clergy.

1568.] A few days after the dissolution of
p.;.iilnent [Jan. 3], fourofBothwell's depvnd-

L Good. vol. ii. 66. Andtrf. vol. ii. ao6.

cuts

ents were convi&ed of being guilty of the king'5
murder, and suffered death as- traitors. Tbeii
confessions brought to light marry circuminancc
relative to the manner of committing that bar.
barous crime ; but they were persons of low rank,
and seem not to have been admitted into thi
secrets of the conspiracy a.

Notwithitanding the universal fubmifilon tc

the regent's authority, there still abounded ir
the kingdom many secret murmurs and cabal
The partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoerec
Murray's promotion an injury to the duke o
Chatelherault, who, as firit prince of the blood
had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to bi
regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sus
ferings began to move many to commiserate he
cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opinions ii
religion dreaded the effe&s of Murray's zeal
And he, though his abilities were great, did no'
possess the talents requisite for soothing the rag,
or removing the jealousies of the different factions
By insinuation, or address, he might have gainel
or softened many who had opposed him; but h
was a stranger to these gentle arts. His virtue
were severe; and his deportment towards hi
equals, especially after his elevation to the re
gency, distant and haughty. This behaviou
offended some of the nobles, and alarmed othier
The queen's fa&ion which had been so carll
dispersed, began again to gather and to unite
and was secretly favoured by some who bal
hitherto zealously concurred with the con
federates b.

* Anders. vol. ii. 16S. b Melv. 179.

Suc.

;s Such was the favourable disposition of the
; I:ion towards the queen, when she recovered
i :.;i liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her

fiiends, than unexpe&ed by her enemies. Se.
i ;ial attempts had been made to procure her

n opportunity of escaping, which some unfore.
f in accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
:.id hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary em-
| ycd all her art to gain George Douglas her
,; -er's brother, a youth of eighteen. As her

! nlnners were naturally affable and insinuating,

3 !.c treated him with the most flattering diftinc-
I ;c-; flie even allowed him to entertain the molt

: .nbtious hopes, by letting fall some expressions,
as if fie would choose him for her hulband c.
At his age, and in such circuminances, it was im-
1 pliible to resist such a temptation. He yielded,
.--I drew others into the plot. On Sunday the
fi:coid of May, while his brother fat at supper,
and the reft of the family were retired to their
d ;:otions, one of his accomplices found means
to fceal the keys out of his brother's chamber,
andl opening the gates to the queen and one of
her maids, locked them behind her, and then
liuew the keys into the lake. Mary ran with
precipitation to the boat which was prepared for
her, ;nd on reaching the Ihore, was received with
the utmost joy, by Douglas, lord Seaton, and fir
James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants,
waited for her. She instantly mounted on horse..
bhac, and rode fill speed towards Niddrie, lord
Sc;inIo's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived there
tiht night, without being pursued or interrupted.

c Kcith, 469. 481. Note.

After

After halting three hours, the set out for HIamlt
ton ; and travelling at the fame pace, fle reac.!it
it next morning.

On the first news of Mary's escape, her frie;ids

whom, in their present disposition, a much fialkel
accident would have roustd, ran to arms. ;n ;
few days, her court was filled with a great alic
splendid train of nobles, accompanied by ful
numbers of followers, as formed an army abov,
fix thousand strong. In their presence flic di
clared that the resignation of the crown, antd lle
other deeds which the had signed during her ini.
prifonment, were extorted from her by fear. Sii
Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; ai;d
on that, as well as on other accounts, a.council
of the nobles and chief men of her part) pru.
nounced all there transactions void and illegal
[Mbay 8]. At the fame time, an association '\ i
firmed for the defence of her person and aut!lo.
rity, and subscribed by nine earls, nine bihhlls,
eighteen lords, and many gentlemen of diltinc.
tion d. Amolg them we find several who Iad
been present in the last parliament, and who liad
stirned the counter-affociation in defence of lle
king's government ; but fch fldden cha;lles
were then so common, as to be no matter ul r'-
proach.

At the time when the queen made her escape,

the regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of
juflice. An event so contrary to their expctla
tions, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a rl'eat
shock to his adherents. Many of them appeared
wavering and irresolute; others began to caery

I FCeith, 475.

on private negotiations with the queen; and
iome openly revolted to her lide. In so difficult
a jmnture, where his own fame, and the being
es the party depended on his choice, the regent's
roft faithful afrociates were divided in opinion.
Some advised him to retire without loss of time,
to Stirling. The queen's army was already strong,
and only eight miles diitant; the adjacent country
WVas full of the friends and dependents of the
Louse of Hamilton, and other lords of the
queen's faftion; Glasgow was a large and un-
fortified town; his own train confilted of no
greater number than was usual in times of
|p.ice; all these reasons pleaded for a retreat.
iut on the other hand, arguments were urged
Qs :,o inconsiderable weight. The citizens of
Glaigow were well affefted to the cause; the
iv fisls of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple, lay
ncar at hand, and were both numerous and full
of zeal; succours might arrive from other parts
of the kingdom in a few days; in war, success
Icpeinds upon reputation as much as upon nun--
't;s; reputation is gained or loft by the' ilrit
)tel) cne takes; on all these considerations, a'rc.
tl:at would be attended with the ignominy of a
fli;l:, and( would at once dispirit his friends, and
ilipirc his enemies with boldness. In such dan-
g ..Cius cxigencies as this, the superiority of Mur.
ray', gciRiu.i appeared, and enabled him both to
hIl's: with wisdom 'and to aft'with vigour. Hle
'ci;:nrcd againll retreating, and fixed his head-
(a lrters at Glasgow. And while he amused the
:' 1, !'ur fume days, by pretending to hearken
ui A;lc ovcrturles whlich Jhe made for accoln-
d;.',rir their differences, he wvas eiployed, wsith

1 ^1.. _1 . ' I, I the

the utmost industry, in drawing together his ad.
herents from different parts of the kingdom.
He was soon in a condition to take the field:
and though far inferior to the enemy in number,
he confided so much in the valour of his troops
and the experience of his officers, that he broke
off the negotiation, and determined to hazard a
battle .

At the fame time [May 13], the queen's gne.
rals had commanded her army to move. Their
intention was, to conduc her to Dunbarton.
caflle, a place of great strength, which the re.
gent had not been able to wrest out of the
hands of lord Fleming the governor; but if the
enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march,
they resolved not to decline an engagement. In
Mary's situation, no resolution could be more
imprudent. A part only of her forces was as.
fembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans
were soon expected; her sufferings had removed
or diminished the prejudices of many among her
fubjecs; the address with which fle furnnounted
the dangers that obitru&ed her escape, dazzld
and interested the people; the sudden conflucn re
of so many nobles added lustre to her cause; Kb
might assuredly depend on the fricndflhip and
countenance of France; she had reason to c i,
pet the protecion of England; her cnermi:s
could not possibly look for support from tlii'
quarter. She had much to hope from purfili),;,
sow and cautious measures; they had every tlhi.gi
to fear.

But Mary, whose hopes were naturally f:t:.
guine, and her pailions impetuous, was so lk; ti.

*c ucham. 369.

.d by her fud4dn transition from the depth of
distress, to such an unusual appearance of profpe-
rtt that flie never doubted of success. Her
Jrnrly, which was alnmot double to the enemy in
i::.;nber, consisted chiefly of the Hamiltons
a:!i their dependents. Of these the archbifllop
of St. Andrew's had the chief dire&Eion, and
hoped, by a viaory, not only to crufl Murray,
tlhe ancient enemy of his house, but to get the
p'rlbn of the queen into his hands, and to oblige
her either to marry one of the duke's sons, or at-
eaift to commit the chief direction of her affairs
to himself. His ambition proved fatal to the
queen, to himself, and to his family .

Mary's imprudence, in resolving to fight, waa
lot greater than the ill condut of her generals in
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
rca;d towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
caikd Langfide Hill. This the regent had the
precaution to seize, and polled his troops in a
small village, and among some gardens and in-
clofires adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
.inn he waited the approach of the enemy, whole
i.periority in cavalry could be of no benefit to
rhl.m on such broken ground. The Hamiltons,
wio composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
the attack, that they put themselves out of
hbcath, and kft the main battle far behind.
1he encounter of the fpearmcn was fierce and
dll'prcate; but as the forces of the Hamiltolls
wce, exposed, on the one flank, to a continued
fre from a body of mafqueteprs, attacked on the

f Ander. vol.iv. 31. Mclv. iSx.

L 2 other

other- by the regent's most choice troops,'and
not supported by the reft of the queen's army,
they were soon bbliged togive grounid, and the
rout immediately became universal. Few vido-
ries, in *a civil war, and among a fierce people,
have been pursued with less violence, or attended
vith less bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the
field: in the flight almost' none were killed.
The regent and his principal officers rode about,
befeeclng the soldiers to spare their countrymn.
The number of prifoters was great, and afiong
them many persons of dtlitin&in. The' regent
marched back t6 Glasgow, and returned public
thanks to God for this great( andi on his lide,
almost bloodless 'vitory g.

During the engagement, Mary ftooc on a hilt

at no great distance, and beheld all that passed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described,. When she iaw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable con.
filion, her spirit; which all her past misfortune.i
had not been able entirely to subdue, funk alto.
gether In the utmost consternation, she began
her flight, and so lively were her impreflioAs of
fear, that (he never elofed her eyes till she reached
the abbey of Dundrcnan in Galloway, full sixty
Scottish miles from the place of battle h

These revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid than singular. In thel short fianc
of eleven days, ihe had been a priifoner at the
mercy of her mofl inveterate enemies; Ihe had
seen a powerful army under her command, and
a numerous train of nobles at her devotion: and

t Keith, 477. h Id. 48.

now

r~~~~~~~~·rm
* -

:"" ii~~~~~~~~i ~

~~~~a~~~~~~i~~~~~~j ~ ~~~~\'.'

-= ',-~ i s-
i'A!

now the was obliged to fly, in the utmoit danger
of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants,
in a corner of her kingdom. Not thinking-her-
fdf ifae even in that retreat, her fears impelled
her to an action, the most unadvised, as well
as the molt unfortunate in her whole life. This
was her retiring into England, a flep which, on
l.aay accounts, ought to have appeared to her
::i;? and dangerous.

Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual

d(tnl!ft and jealousies had arisen between her and
E.lizabeth. All their subsequent tranfastions
i;:(d contributed to exasperate and inflame these
anfflons. She had endeavoured, by secret nego-
:iations and intrigues, to disturb the tranquillity
:f Elizabeth's government, and -to advance her
own pretensions to the English crown. Elizabeth,
v ho pofeffed great power, and asced with less
reserve, had openly supported Mary's -rebellious
lbjeEts, and fomented all the dissensions and
troubles in which her reign had been involved.
The maxims ofpolicy'ftill'anthorifed that queen to
pursue the fame course; as by keeping Scotland in
c. nffion, fli effequally secured the peace of lter
own kingdom. The regent, after his vicory,
!;;id marched to Edinburgh, and not knowing
vthat course the queen had taken, it was several
'a;Ys before he thought of pursuing heri. She
, ight have been concealed in that retired corner,
'itmcng fubjeas devoted to her intereft,until
her party, which was dispersed rather than
rokecn by the late defeat, flould gather such
ictti;gth that the could again appear with safety

i Crawf. Mer. 59.

. $ at

at their head. There was not any danger which
she ought not to have run, rather than throw
herself into the hands of an enemy, from whorn
fne had already suffered so many injuries, and
who was prompted, both by inclination and by
interest, to renew them.

But, on the other hand, during Mary's con-

finement, Elizabeth had declared against the pro-
ceedings of her fubje¢ts, and solicited for htr
liberty, with a warmth whicb had all the appear-
ance of sincerity. She had invited her to take
refuge in England, and had promiscd to il-.r
her in perfoa, and to give her such a recept. n
as was due to a queen, a kinswoman, and :n
allyk. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth mi(;:t
entertain of Mary's deligns while she had pox.i;'
in her hands, she was, at present, the obj&e;,
not of fear but of pity; and to take advanlta.i
of her situation, would be both ungencrous aid
inhuman. The horrors of a prison were si;
in Mary's memory; and if {he (hould fall a if-
cold time into the hands of her fubjEts, t.lire
was no injury to which the prefumnption of fiic.
cess might not embolden tlhem to proceed. 'Io
attempt escaping into France, was dangeroir;
and, in her lituation, alltmo imp(olible; i,!r
could slie bear the thoughts of appearing as 2n
exile and a figitive in that kingdom where fie
had once enjoyed all the splendour of a queer,.
England remained her only asylum; and, in fl:itc
of the entreaties of lord Hcrrics, Fleming, and
tler other attendants, wiho conjured her, even o:1
their knees, not to conlide in Elizabetll:s ]'ro)
* Camd. 42y, Andtrf. vol. iv. 99. 1O. Murdi, 3'().

Illjl;'

miles or generosity, her infatuation was invincible,
and fne refolucd to fly th'ther. Herries, by her
crr mmand, wrote to Lowther the deputy-governor
of Carlille, to know what reception he would
;'i. her; and, before his answer could return,
t:c; fc:r and impatience were so great, that she
,ot into a filher-boat [May I6], and, with about
twenty attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cum-
-rlnnd, and thence the was conducted with

m:

:y marks of rcfpect to Carlile 1.

As soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote

,1 1,lng letter to the queen, reprefentilg, in the
.rolreflt terms, the injuries which Ihe had sus-
' .d from her own fuhjecfs, and imploring that
:lv- and afliftance which her present situation de-
:iandled ". An event so extraordinary, and the
:.!iludt which might be proper in consequence
f it, drew the attention, and employed the
,iloghts, of Elizabeth and her council. If their
cliberations had been influenced by confidera-
'-Ins of justice or generosity alone, they would
..t liave found them long or intricate. A
"'llcen, vanquished by her own fubjct&s, and
th.antencd by them with the loss of her liberty,
Jr of her life, had fled from their violence, and
'I rown herself into the arms of her nearcft neigh-
'out and ally, from whom fle had: received rc-
-;lt<'l aflurances of friendship and protefion;
'il h cil ccumftances entitled her to rcfpea and
on conpaffion, and required that file hiould either
I;r refored to her own kingdom, or at least be
::ft at full liberty to fe k aid from. any other
i :rter. But with Elizabeth and her counfcl.

l .lcth,4S3. Andcr vol. iv. s. JId. 9.

lor2,

lors, the queltion was not, what was molt just o:
generous, but what waS most beneficial to her-
self, and to the English nation. Three differc;,
resolutions might have been taken, with rcga;l
to the queen of Scots. To re-instate her in i,
throne, was one; to allow her to retire iii.;
France, was another; to detain her in Engili; d,
was a third. Each of these drew confequc:uo:
after it, of the utmott importance, which w*z
examined, as appears from papers flill extair,
with that minute accuracy w-hich Elizal).it:
ministers employed in all their consultations i,;-
on affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of t(:e

royal authority in Scotland, they observed, v.t:ii
render her more powerful than ever. The nolub
who were most firmly attached to the Englifli in-
tereti would quickly feel the utmost weight Ao
her refentmcnt. As the gratitude of prince is
seldom Jtrong or lasting, regard to her own i: -
terett might soon efface the memory of her obh:
gations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to rcnwr
the alliance of the Scottish nation with Fran.ce,
and revive her own pretensions to the EnLi;:
crown. Nor was it poflible to fetter and cir-
cuinfcribe the Scottith quecen, by any conditions
that would prevent these dangers. Hecr party
in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any filpport from Englandi
would ipfpire her friends with new zeal and c ui
rage; a single vidory might give them the s;i.c-
riority, wMhrch they had loft by a single dfc,:;,

a Anders. vol. ir. 34' 99. o2.

and

nnd render Mary a.more formidable rival than
cvwr t) Elizabeth.

The dangers arising from suffering Mary to

rertri into France, were no less obvious. The
lrrich king could not refuse his afliftance to-
waids retfonrng hi, filler and ally to her throne-
IlHi:.abeth would, once more, fee a foreign armye
,,i th ifiand, overawing the Scots, and ready to
,;iir her kingdom; and if the commotions in
;rfince, on account ofreligion, were fettled, the
iiiiceos of Lorrain might resume their ambitious
)r,. eifs, and the united forces of France and
-r., rland n'ight invade England where it is
i: :';es and mofl defenceless.

Nothiing therefore remained but to detain her
i. England; and to permit her either to live at
libcr-ty there, or to confine her in a prison.
The former was a dangerous experiment. Her
c-,oirt woould become a place of retort to all the
Ronman catholics, to the difaffec&ed, and to the
ivt-s of innovation. Though Elizabeth assec-

in so represent Mary's pretensions to the

:rliin crown as ill-founded, Ihe was not ig-

rojrant that they did not appear in that light tto
!he nation, and tlat many thought them pre-
f.rable cven to her own title. If the ativity of
icr emilftaies had gained her so many abettors,
l.r owxn personal influence was much more to
lu: cireaded; her beauty, hicr address, her finffer
.tgs, by the admiration and pity which they
vwuuld excite, could not fail of making many
conrvc'rta to her party °.

Q Andcrf. vol. iv, 5s. 6o;

It

It was indeed to be apprehended, that tlh

treating Mary as a prisoner would excite u;li
versal indignation against Elizabeth, and that b5
this unexampled severity towards a queen, who
implored, and to whom she had promised hei
prote&ion, /he would forfeit the praise of juilict
and humanity, which was hitherto due to her
admini{tration. But the Englifl monarchs weit
often so solicitous to secure their kingdom again;d
the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about tlit
means which they employed for that purpFore
Henry IV. had seized the heir of the cri'n!
of Scotland, who was forced, by the vio!.i;c
of a storm, to take refuge in one of the pir:
of his kingdom; and in contempt of the rigl;
of hospitality, without regarding his tendel
age, or the tears and entreaties of his frthlr
detained him a prisoner for many years. Thi!
a&ion, though detested by posterity, Elizabeth
resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was not
more proof than that of Henry had been, agiini
the temptations of interest; and the poffrlio:
of a present advantage was preferred to lth
profpeft of future fame. The fatisfa&ion wlicl'
Ale felt in mortifying a rival, whose beaut)
and accomplishments Ihe envied, had, pcrhapso
no less influence than political considerations,
in bringing her to this resolution. But, at til
fame time, in order to screen herself from tli
censure which this condulc merited, and tn
make her treatment of the Scottilh queen look
like the efl'&t of neceflity rather than of choice,
lhe determined to afrlumc the appearance or cnl
cern for her intercll, and of deep fympatlhy wVtl
her fifle:riugs.

·s,]

With this view, ihe instantly dispatched lord

Scrope [May 20], warden of the welt marches,
and lir Francis Knollys, her vice-chamberlain, to
the fiueen of Scots, with letters full of expref-
f:,! of kindness and condolence. But, at the
'mti time, they had private inftrutions to watch
all her motions, and to take care that (he lhould
ret cfcape into her own kingdomP. On their
arcival, Mary demanded a personal interview
iritli the queen, that (he might lay before her
the injuries which (he had suffered, and receive
from her those friendly offices which she had
been encouraged to expect. They anf-vrj-ed,
that it was with relucance admission into the
pcl;ence of their sovereign was at present denied
il:r ; that while she lay under the imputation of
:i c ine so horrid as the murder of her husband,
ti,,ir mistress, to whom he was so nearly allied,
c:,uld not, without bringing a liaiu upon her
.'.;'!1 reputation, admit her into her prcfence;
b .: a; loon as (he had cleaied herself froni that
aficrlion, they promised her a reception suit.
;lile to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her
di/itifs q.

Nothing could be more artful than this pre-

tiicc; and it was the occafiun of leading the
(i'cnr of Scots into the snare in which Eliza-
bc:hi adl her miniitcrs wilhed to entangle hec.
M.i; c':prefled the utioft surprise at this un.
c:;i':;,:cd manner of evading her rcquelt; but
a" li: could not believe so many profcfiions of
ftnritfihip to be void of sincerity, fie frankly
v!lcred to fubniit her c;tufc to the cognizance of
FP Ainiri. vl. iv. 36. 55.

q
* . 01 i2..$

Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofi
of her own innocence, and of the falsehood ol
the accusations brought against her, as flhoild
fully remove the scruples, and satisfy the de!i,
cacy of the English queen. This was the 'cry
point to which Elizabeth laboured to bring the
matter. In consequence of this appeal of the Scot.
tifli queen, she now confidered herself as the
umpire between her and her fubjeds, and fore.
saw that ihe would have it entirely in her own
power to protrac the inquiry to any length,
and to perplex and involve it in endless difficul-
ties.. In the mean time, she was furnished with
a plausible reason for keeping her at a distance
from court, and for refilling to contribute to-
wards replacing her on the throne. As Mary's
condud had been extremely incautious, and the
presumptions of her guilt were many and strong,
it was not impoflible her fubjests might Umake
good their charge against her; and if this lhould
be the result of the inquiry, (he Would, thence.
forth, cease to be the objec of regard or of
compafnion, and the treating her with coldlnfs
and negledt would merit little censure. In a
matter so dark and mylterious, there was no
probability that Mary could bring proofs of licr
innocence, so inconteited, as to render the co011
dut of the Enlglifl queen altogether culpable;
and, perhaps, impatience under reflrailt, fufi)-
cion of Elizabeth's partiality, or the difeovcrr
of her artifices, might engage Mary in such c.
bals, as would jullily the uling her with grc:itr
rigour.

Elizabeth early perceived many advantlieS
which would arifc from an inquiry into the cill

dudt

du&t of the Scottilh queen, carried on under
1cr dire&ion. There was some danger, however,
that Mary might discover her secret intentions
:oc, soon, and by reccding fiom the offer which
hci had made, endeavour to disappoint them.
Eut even in that event, she determined not to
drop the inquiry, and had thought of several
discreut expedienta for carrying it on. The
'.:ntefs of Lennox, convinced that Mary was
acc.hllTy to the murder of her son, and thiriting
fo)r that vengeance which it was .natural for a
mother to demand, had implored Elizabeth's
jiP ;ce, and solicited her, with many tears, in
he: owwn name, and in her husband's, to
bri:¥g the Scottish quelen to a trial for that
cri mer. The parents of the unhappy prince
ha; a juift right to prefer this accusation ; nor
i,;:hll the, who was their nearest kinswoman, be
conilinlned for listening to so equitable a demand.
Le!uides, as the Scolttfh nobles openly accuscd

arl;ly of the fame crime, and pretended to be

a,'.c to confirm their charge by sufficient proof,
it. would be no difficult matter to prevail on them
to petition the queen of England to take cog-
niza:ice of their proceedings agaillt their fove-
rein ; and it was the opinion of the Englifl
cl iCic), that it would be reasonable to comply
with the requeift. At the fame time, the ob-
illi'c claimi of the fiperiority of England over
';i,, liand began to be talked of; and on that
,',;im: , it was pretended tlat the decision of
l1 conltiet between Mary and her filujests he-
Inll.'t of right to Elizablth1. But though

' Camd, 412. HIayns, 469,

.And. vul. iv. parti. 37. t Ib'd.
VOL. 1l. hI Eliza.

Elizabeth revolved all these expedients in he
mind, and kept them in reserve to be made ufi
of as occasion might require, lhe wished that til
inquiry into Mary's condu& ihould appear tc
be undertaken purely in compliance with liei
own demand, and in order to vindicate her in
nocence; and so long as that appearance coul
be preserved, none of the other expedients v'cn
to be employed.

When Mary consented to submit her canii

to Elizabeth, {he was far from fufpefing tlile
any bad confequmnces could follow, or that ;i)
dangerous pretensions could be founded on he
offer. She expe&ed that Elizabeth herself v. ,lt
receive and examine her defencesu; she mrai:l
to confider her as an equal, for whose fatisfai
tion fle was willing to explain any part of ii\
conduct that was liable to censure, not to ac
knowledge her as a superior, before wholm lii
was bound to plead her cause. But ElizabALt
put a very different sense on Mary's offer. , Sin
cb:fidcred herself as chosen to be judge in 'li
controversy between the Scottish queen and lihi
subje&s, and began to ac in that capacity. Sl,
i:ropofed to appoint commissioners to hear tih
pleadings of both parties, aind wrote to the re,
gentt of Scotliad to impower proper prclioli tc
appear before them, in his name, and to product
what he could allege in vindication of his pirv
ceedings againit his sovereign.

Mary had, hitherto, relied with unaccount

able credulity on Elizabeth's professions of re
gard, and expeced that so many kind fpeclcht

u Andeft. voL iv 10o.

6 ',,ouldl

,o!nld, at lall, be accompanied with some suit-
:,l,1e actions. But this proposal entirely Lnde-
:led her. She plainly perceived the artifice of
i. zabeth's condu&c, and saw what a diminution

- ouild be to her own honour, to appear on a

i,;ai with her rebellious subjects, and to Rand
-oegther with them at the bar of a superior and
iudge. She retraced the offer which fle had
rn.de, and which had been perverted to a pur-
'O:' fco contrary to her intention. She demand-

, with more earnestness than ever, to be

admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote
1 icr [June 13] in a strain very different from
aiilit the had formerly used, and which fully
difcovcrs the grief and indignation that preyed
:i hiLr heart. " In my present situation," fays
.i"', " I neither will nor can reply to the accufa-
on)rs of my fubjets. I am ready, of my own
A.cord, and out of friendship to you, to satisfy
your fciuples, and to vindicate my own con-
iust. My fubjets are not my equals; nor will
1, by submitting my caufc to a judicial trial, ac-
i.lncxlcdge them to be so. I fled into your
;:;? s, as into those of my nearest relation and
n oll perfeCl friend. I did you honour, as I
in1igilied, in choofing you, preferably to any
othlr prince, to be the rtelorer of an injured
(1ucn. Was it ever known that a prince was
HIlarncd for hearing, in person, the complaints of
thii;. who appealed to his justice, against the
f fil. accusations of their enemies ? You admitted
ni, your presence [April 24] my balsard bro-
I'i1r, lwho hIid been guilty of rebellion ; and you
, :I me that honour ! God forbid that I flould
i thilc occation of bringing any ltain upon your re.

M 2 putation !

putation ' I cxpe&ted that your manner of tlr::v
ing me would have added lustre to it. Su.ir
me either to implore the aid of other princes
whcfe delicacy on this head Wvil be less, an
thcl' refentcent of my wrongs greater; or !
me receive from your hand's that afliil[:::.
which it becomes you, snore than any oili i
prince, to grant; and by that benefit ii,;:.
me to yourself in the iidiffoluible ties of gra.t
tude X."

This letter fomewlat disconcerted Elizabeth':

plan, but did not divert her fiom the profecnulor
of it. She laid the matter before the privy co;i..
cii [June 2o], and it was there determined, nA.t
witlhtandino the entreaties and remonftrancc3 ol
the Scottith queen, to go on with the inquiry iTtc
her conduct, and until that were finished, i!
was agreed that Elizabeth could not, confitcent.
ly with her own honour, or with the safety cl
her government, either give her the afillnc
which ihe demanded, or permit her to retiln
out of the kingdom. Left he should liave ;in
opportunity of escaping, while che resided fc
near Scotland, it was thought advisable to re
move her to tome place at a greater diltance
from the borders y.

While the Englilh court was occupied in thef(

deliberations, the regent did not neglec to im.
prove the vicory at Langfidc. That event was
of the utmost importance to him. It not only
drove the queen herself out of the kingdom, but
left her adherents dispersed, and without a leader,
at his mercy. He seemed resolvcd, at firlt, to

Anders. vol, iv. pairt i. 94. Id. ibid. i',t.

plroc(Cd

proceed againit them with the utmost rigour.
Si>: persons of some diftinftion, who had been
aktii prisoners in the battle, were tried and con-
i&cinncd to death, as rebels againit the king's
,-,'eriiincut. They were led to the place of
execution, but by the powerful intercession of
Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamilton of
ivothvellhaxgh was one of the number, who
lived to give both the regent and Knox reason
t, re'pent of this commendable a& of lenity .

Soon after, the regent marched with an army,

cnl:ftlting of four thousand horse and one thou-
ian! foot, towards the welt borders. The
ic.bies in this part of the kingdom were all the
rqj:,:n's adherents; but as they had not force
f,~tlic;ent to obitru& his progress, he mufl either
hliv obliged them to submit to the king, or

_v.e;id have laid waste their lands with fire and

lordl. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was
t~, keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving
tie balance between the two parties, and who
..;is endeavouring to sooth the Scottifli queen by
l;:ctle treatment, interposed at her desire. After
i,..(iing the field two weeks, the regent, in com-
p1i:;ice'to the English ambassador, dismisscd hlis
IuCLes; and an expedition, which might have
plrovcd fatal to his opponents, ended with a iew
;!()s of( fevnitya.

''he resolution of the English privy council,

, ;( regard to Mary's person, was soon carried
IIno execution; and, without regarding her re-
ril(,ntiances or complaints, file was couited to
.;olLon [July 13], a cattle of lord Scroop's, on

· Cald. vol. ii, 9. * Ibid.

M 3 the

the borders of Yorkshire '. In this place, her
correspondence with her friends in Scotland be.
came more difficult, and any profpet of making
her escape was entirely cut off. She now felt
herself to be completely in Elizabeth's power,
and though treated as yet with the refpec due to
a queen, her real condition was that of a pri.
soner. Mary knew what it was to be dtpri,,'c
of liberty, and dreaded it as the worst of a!!
evils. While the remembrance of her late im.
prifonment was still lively, and the terror of a
new one filled her mind [July 28], Elizalbth
thought it a proper juncture to renew her fornir
proposition, that /he would susser the regent andi
his adherents to be called into England, .;
content to their being heard in defence of their
own conduct. She declared it to be far fiom
her intention to claim any right of judging be-
tween Mary and her fubjets, or of degrading
her so far as to require that the fliould anifwvr
to their accusations. On the contrary, Mturray
and his affociateg were summoned to appear, in
order to justify their condu& in treating their
fovcreign so harshly, and to vindicate themselves
from those crimes with which she had charged
them. On her part, Elizabeth promised, swhlt.
ever should be the issue of this inquiry, to eni-
ploy all her power and influence towards re.
placing Mary on her throne, under a few limit a-
tions, by no means unrcafonablc. Mary, !de
ceived by this seeming attention to her dignity
as a queen; soothed, on one hand, by a pro.
inife more flattering than any which Ihe had

b Andcrf. vol. iv. 14. Soe Appendix, No. XXV

hithbiltc

hitherto received from Elizabeth, and urged,' oO
the other, by the feelings which were natural on
.e;ng conducted into a more. interior part of
;ii;I.and, and kept there in more rigorous con-
in.;i;ncnt, complied at length with what Eliza-

btLlth required, and promised to fend commis-
f,;iltrs to the conferences appointed to be held
at Yorkc.

Ii; order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired

no,tlinig so much as to render the union between
til-:n. as close as possible, she shewed a disposition
to rn:kl fomevwhat in one point; with regard to
wh!lich, during all her past and subsequent mifr
f.lrunes, ihe was uniformly inflexible; She ex-
Pr|. ird a great veneration for the liturgy of the
chirchl of England (h e was often present at
r:iiginlus worflip, according to the rites of the
rctlurind church ; made choice of a protefant
cl:gyman to be her chaplain-; heard him preach
a-;ailll the errors of popery with attention and
fc:.ling pleasure; and discovered all the fymp.
Tnli, of an approaching conversion d. Such was
Mary's known and blgotted attachment to the
Popilh religion, that it is impofllble to believe her
i!niccre in this part of her conduct; nor can any
tlilng mark more ltrongly the wretchedness of
icr u nid it ion, and the excess of her fears,than that
tli,. betrayed her into dissimulation, in a matter
c(:icccing which her sentiments were, at all
'!;.r times, scrupulously delicate.
.t this time the regent called a parliament
[Aug. 1 8, in order to proceed to the forfeiture

' Anders, iv. pnrti. p. tl, xz, &-e. to9,, &c. Hayn.c,
.'', Ft. Sta3e Trials, Edit. Hargrave, . 90.
' lindrr. vol. iv. parr i. I£3. iayn, So9* Se Ap-
;:,,*;.':, No. XXVI.

of

of those who refused to acknowledge the king's
authority. The queen's adherents were alarnmd,
andArgyll and Hull tly, whom Mary had appointed
her lieutenants, the one in the south, and the
other in the north of Scotland, began to affenhle
forces to obstruCt this meeting. Compassion for
the queen, and envy at thole who governed in
the king's name, had added so much strength to
the party, that the regent would have found it
difficult to withstand its efforts, But as IMa7
iad submitted her cause to Elizabeth, fle could
not refuaf, at her desire, to command her fi-iend.
to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently
until matters were brought to a decision i;l
England. By procuring this ceflation of Arms,
Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the
regent's fa&ion, as file had formerly given to the
queen's e.

The regent, however, would not content, erel

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of
parliament . But we may ascribe to her influ.
ence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitlanlil,
who laboured to prevent the one half of lis
countrymen from exterminating the other, arLy
appearances of moderation which this parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The mofl violcnt
opponents of the king's government were fI'r.
feited; the reft were allowed still to hope for
favour 9.

No sooner did the queen of Scots frhnbmt hte

saufe to her rival, than Elizabeth required the
regent to fend to. York deputies properly ih
.iluEcd for vindicating his conduc&, in prefcncc

a Anderr. vol. iv. 125.
See A ppendix, No. XXVII. Buch, 37.

c; lI.r cornmiffioiers. It was not witldut hefi;

11 t:lun and anxiety that the regent consented to
.;,' measure. His authority was already efta-
: ,:cd in Scotland, and contirmed by parliament.

' !Ter its validity now to be called in qteftion,

t i.bje.ted to a foreign jurifdiaioni, was ex-
tr::1z!y Imortifyiig. To accule his sovereign

! c lrangers, the-ancient enenmies of the Scot;
: ;::':ne, was an odious talk. To fli' in-this
..-.:ltion was dangecous; to fucceed.in it- was
:cfu-ai;l. But the strength of the adverse
'i..!; i daily incrcafed. He dreaded the inter-
V ''";-p;i of the French king in it, behalf. Inlhis
lin':::ioil, and in a nmatter which Elizabeth haa
so m:,:h at heart, her commands were neither to
be disputed nor disobeyed h.

Thie necessity of repairing in:perfon to- York
r':icli to'the ignominy of the ftep which he was
obi;ed to take. All his associates decliled the
tcice; they were unwilling to expose. themselves
to the odium and danger with which it was easy
to soresec that the discharge of it would. be at-
tended, unless he himself consented to {hare these
in co(tmon with them. The earl of Morton,.Bothl
wcll bishop of Orkney, .Pitcairr cornmendator
of Dlnfermling, and lord Lindsay, were joined
witii him in commiflion.[Sept. i8]. Macgill of'
Rallkcilor, and Balnaves of 1lallhill, two eminent
civilians, George Buchanan, Murrayat faithful
adhlerret, a man whose genius did honour to the
aeC, Maitland, and several others, etre appointed
4o attend them as afriltaits. Maitland owed this
di1titaion to the regent's fear, rather than to his

h Bucb. 37a See Append. No. XXVIlI.

Mffetion.

affe&ion. He had warmly remonitrated againf.
this measure. He wished his country to coniinuc
in friendship with England, but not to become
dependent on that nation. He was desirous of
ye.Rt.abtlhing thequeen in tome degree of power,
not inconfiflent with that which the kinri pof.
sessed; and the regent could not, with fafctv,
leave behind him a man, whose views were 'o
Cr-twary to his own, and who, by his superior
abilities, had acquired an influence in the nati;ol,
ctual to that which others derived from the an.
tiuity and power of their families i

Mary irpowered Lefly bishop of Ross, lo:d

Livingston, lord Bpyd, lord Herries, Gavin Hla.
miiton conmmendator of lCilwinning, Sir Jo:n
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James CocbuIrn
of Skirling, to appear in her name k.

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard dilke

<tNorfolk, Thomas Radcliff earl of Suffex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, her commiifoners to hear both
parties.

The foirth of O&ober was the day fixed for

opening the confireeae. The great abilities of
the deputies on both fides, the dignity of the
judges before whom they were to appear, the
high rank of the pcrfons whofc cause was to be
heard, and the importance of the points in dif.
pute, rendered the whole tranfaaion no lefe il
lufrious than it was singular. The fituatioi in
which Elizabeth appeared on this occaifioll
strikes us with an air of magnificence. lHa
rival, an independent queen, and the heir of a!
ancient race of monarchs, was a prisoner in Ihl

I Burh. 37. Andef.vol. iv. 3. MClv. 86. iS.
k Anduf. vol. iv. 33.

I nl: dii

t hds, and appeared, by her ambassadors, before
her tribunal. The regent of Scotland, who re-
, p!, cfeted the majesty, and possessed the authority

'

t a king, itood in person at her bar. And. the

j :; of a kingdom, whose power her ancestors had
-' oitcr dreaded, but could never subdue, was now

J.i lheri disposal.
: The views, however, with which the several

partie:. consented to this conference, and the iffui

sj to wlch they expe&ted to bring it, were ex.
l treinely different.
! MarIy's chief objea was the recovering of her
i ,I'rncr authority. This induced her to consent

ti o ) meafire against which she had long ftrug-
; led. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for
:!itc-rtaininng hopes of being restored to her
kilgdom; in order to which (he would have
uiiisnglyn made many concellions to- the king's
Ipa;ty ; and the influence of the Englill queen,
ai \wll as hcr own impatience under her present
j itnation, might have led her to many more .
'1Th regent aimed at nothing but securing Eliza-
ibcil's protedion to his party, and seems not to
!::v had the mrolt diltant thoughts of coming
tl aiy compofitiotl with Mary. Elizabeth's
;: : were more various, and ler schemes more
ii:rii:c. Slhe seemed to be full of concern for
i,.ry's honour, and solicitous that (he (hould
l:c ofi theafperlions which blcmifhedher charac-

tn. This Ihe pretended to bc the intention of
;I confercnce ; amuling Mary, and eluding the
lu!ici;:ations of the French and Spani(il ambaf-
!;loir: in her behalf, by repeated promises of atl

Anjacif vol. iv part i. 33, Cood, vol. ii. 3;7.

igling

sifting ber, as soon as ihe could venture to do f0,
without bringing disgrace upon herself. But,
under this veil of friendship and gencroit,,
Elizabeth concealed sentiments of a difOtlic
nature. She expeced that the regent v. cld
-accuie Mary of being accessary to the mrirder
of her husband. She encouraged him, as faras
decency would permit, to take this defpr.,te
Rlep m. And as this accusation might termili-mt
in two different ways, file had concerted meaitiris
for her future conduEt suitable to each of theft,
-f the charge against Mary should appear to be
well founded, lhe resolved to pronounce her In.
worthy of wearing a crown, and to declare that
The would never burden her own confciencc with
the guilt of an adtion so deteflable as the re.
floring her to her kingdom ". If it fliould happcn,
that what her accusers alleged did not amount
to a proof of guilt, but only of mal.admii:;!r,.
tion, ihe determined to let on foot a treaty for
retoring her, but .on such conditions as woucl
render her hereafter dependent not only tii:p!
England, but upon her own fubjets °. As cvi,
ftcp in the progress of the conference, as wcil
as the final rtfult of it, was in Elizabeth's own
power, Ihe would still be at liberty to chole
which of these courses The flould hold; orif
there appeared to be any danger or inconvicnicy
in purflung either of them, file might p(,trolt
the vwhle cause by endless delays, and involve
it in inextricable perplexity.

The conference, however, wvas opened with
much folerrnity. But the very first ftep (lilo.

n And' rs, ol. iv. part ii. . 45. Hayncs, 487.
Andif. vol. iv. patii. . olbiJ'. . iv. i. rtii. I6,

vernd

: .1 it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame,
1r;;tcr than to extinguish, the dissensions and
; ,;!nufities among the Scots. No endeavours
i;, ..fcd to reconcile the contending parties, or

ai, Ti, ,ify the ficrcenefs of their hatred, by
' ib:;! 'l the queen to offer pardon for what was
p :fli or her fubjefts to promise more dutiful
ub. ('cnce for the future. On the contrary,
s :'i;" " scommifioners were permitted to prefer
;a illplaint againlt the regent and his party
i( l. 8 ], containing an enumei ation oftheir trea-

I

, !.:le adions, of their seizing her person byforce
l' arms, committing her to prison, compelling
I- i to resign the crown, and making life of her
| i;i,'s name to colour their usurpation of the whole

',.i .iauthority ; and of all these enormities they
rcqJircd such speedy and effetual redress, as the
;ill;rilcs of one queen demanded from the justice
ui aJ'lother P.

it i\as then expeted that the regent would

!.i'.. difilofed all the ci-cumflances of that un-
I..li:;l crime to whichl he pretended the queen
il.:i bccn accessary, and would have produced
t ,ijcnte in support of his charge. But far fiom
acciLli1lg Mary, the regent did not even anflier

c
I.: :Jplaints brought against himself. He dif-
t:, red a relufitnce at ulndertaking that office,
,!!, llarted many doubts and fcruplcs, with re-
a.II to w\Vlich lh deiand;l id to be rcfolved by

Aihdl)eth hlerfelfq. Ili; rtfcrvc and hcfitation

\.1i no1 less firprifiiing to thle greater part of the
.'gl- )lil lommiflionels thian to his own afibciates.
I niy knew that lie could not vindicate his own

P Anders. vol, iv. partii. z. q Haynes, 479.
'" L. II. N cundua

condu&t without charging the murder upon thi
queen, and he had not hitherto lliow n any c> p,.
orldinary delicacy on that head. An hi,;,,
however, had been fcretly carried on, ;ini } ;j
arrival at York, which explains this m)yllfRi

The duke of Norfolk as, at that timl, tL:

mot. powerful and molt popular inal in Ill;lit]d,
His wife was latcly dead; and le begn aln:,
to form a project, which he aftcrw:ud' 1 ,I
openly avowed, of mounting the throne t ';..
land, by a marriage with the uncen of ;,',.
He iawm the infamy which would be tlir : 1';.
quence of a public acctifation ;ig:inlt Mair. :.dli
how prejudicial it might be to her pretcnli, : ,
the EInglih fr(cceffirlo. I: ordec to save lIa- 'r f
this cruel mortification,. hi appilied to MI.iii 'd,
and exprefled his altonlfilhimei at tfeing a ., ..:
so much reputation for wifdonm, colnclrri:i,. ;.
the regent in a lllafurle lfodifliolini able to i.;.
felx es, to their qcren, .nd to thcir country: ! :!.
mitting the puhlic traiillctioins of the nia:. I! t)
the judgmcnt of fircigners ; and pl;ullifliin :,
ignomilly anrl expoIling the faults of tlheir ',
reign, whlich they were toulnd, in good il/i !, :i
well as in duty, to conccal and to cover. I .
easy for Maitland, wliofe fentimcnts w ere tilte lil:r
with the duke's, to vindicate his own con!ldct.
He afifrcd him, that lie had empioyed all hlii
credit to diflulade his coiityllmen fiom tli:i ntilt
fire ; andt would llill contribute, to the mliinlll
of his power, to divert them fiom it. Tli;, ci.
corn-aged Norfolk to communicate the mattcl to
the regent. He repeated and enforced the f::l¢e
arguments which lie had used with M:tlaiid.
He warned him osille danger to which hle nill

c'Xl,0f(

cI;)ofc himself by such a violent action as the
n iblic accusation of his sovereign. Mary would
livcr forgive a man, who had endeavoured to
si si Cli a lrand of infamy on her character. If
f ,I .cr recovered any degree of power, his de-
i',l o
tiio would be inevitable, and he would

miii),- nmclitt at her hands. Nor would Eliza-

bth ;.TrecI him fromu t)lis, by a public appro.

.:',!:; of his conduct. For whatever evidence
oi MaIy's guilt he might produce, she was re-
i]. cd to give no definitive lentence itr the cause.

' I'r lii only demand that the matter Ihould be

I b)iiilt to a decilion immediately after hearing
ti:. p rof, and he would be fully convinced how
f i.ll. aind inlidious her intentions were, and, by
cojlicqull nce, how improper it would be for him
.o a'ippear as the accuser of his own sovereign .
Tlh candour which Norfolk seemed to discover
iln 'nifc remonrftrances, as well as the truth which
:h'.- contained, made a deep inpreffion on the
: glint. He daily received the strongest affur-
i:,.'a of Mary's willingneis to be reconciled to
himn, if le abitaincd from acculing her of such an
o iiu:s crine, togetller with the denunciations
ot hl-r irreconcilable hatred, if lie ac&ed a con-
tla!y part 1. All these conliderations concurred
ii .tlrmininlg him tb alter his purpose, and to
11.':: trial of the expedient whichl the duke had
., .?lid.

i)} ','manded, therefore [Oet. 9], to be il-

, ',,,,';1: before he lproceededd futher, whtlther tlhe
1.: l;fl coininiflioners avere empowelred to declare
' ',; lv. g17. 11ayncs, 573.

I' erl vol. iv. ,'tl il. 7. Good. Yol, ii. 157. See
. '":,dix, N;u. XXIX.

N 2 telC

the queen guilty, by a judicial ata; whether
they would promise to pass sentence, without
delay; whether the queen fhoiild be kept under
fich restraint, as to prevent her from difiirbinr
the government now established in Scotland; and
wvrhether Elizabeth, if She approved of the pro.
ceedings of the king's 'party, would engage to
prote& it for the future t. The paper containing
these demands was signed by himself alone, with.
out communicating it to any of his attendants,
except Maitland and Melvil u But left so many
precautibns -/hould excite any suspicion of their
proceeding from some consciousness of defeat in
the evidence which he had to produce againRl
his sovereign, Murray empowered Lethington,
lackgill, and Buchanan, to wait upon the duke
of Norfolk, the earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, and to lay before them, not in their pub.
lic chara&ters as commissioners, but as private
persons, Mary's letters to Bothwell, her sonnets,
and all the other papers upon which were founded
the charge of her being accessory to the murder
6f the king, and to declare that this confidential
communication was made to them, with a view
to learn whether the queen of England would
Confider this evidence as sufficient to eftablifi the
truth of the accusation. Nothing could be more
ilatural than the regent's solicitude, to know on
what footing he food. To have ventured on a
ftep so uncommon and dangerous, as the acculing
his sovereign, without previously afcertaiiiing
that he might take it with safety, would have been
unpardonable imprudence;. But Elizabeth, who

t Anderr. vol. iv. part ii. 55. State Trials, i. 91, &c,
Andcrf. vol iv. paitii. 56. Melv. o90.

.'' ' '
'~~~~~~~~ dll

did not expet that he would have moved anyfuch
difficultv, had not empowered her commifioners
to give him that fatisfastion which he demanded.
It Iecame necef{ary to transmit the articles to
iL-Irflf, and by the light in which Norfolkplaced
tlemin, it is easy to fee that he wilied that they
l Ihoulld make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth
ard her minlifters. " Think not the Scots," said
be, " oyer-fcriupulous or precise. Let us view
i tlhilr condu&t as we 'would wilh our own to be
" viwcd in a like situation. The game they
" play is deep; their eltates, their lives, their

honour, are at Itake. It is now in their own
" powr to be reconciled to their queen, or to
"offend her irrecoverably; and in a matter of so

int1ch importance the utmost degree of caution
" is not excessive x."

While the Englifl commissioners waited for

fuller inftruc&ions with regard to the regent's
dIrnanlds, lie gave in an anwer to the complaint
iv.lich had been offered in name of the Scottih
(qteen. It was expressed in terms perfealy con-
formable to the fyltem which he had at that
time adopted. It continued no insinuation of
tie qcejien's being accessory to the murder of her
lulfb;lid ; the bittcrnefs of style peculiar to tlle
agie was considerably abated; and though he
I'ladcd, that the infamy of the marriage with
Btlihvell made it neceffary'to take aims in order
to (dilfolve it; though Mary's attachment to a
min ' so odious juftiiied the keeping her for some
tiinc under reitraint ; yet nothing more was said
on tlhee fibje&s than was barely requilite in his

x Andlrf. vol. iv, 77.

N3 , own

own defence. The queen's coinmiflioner, c;'
not fail to reply Y [sOd. 17]. But wvhill' tic
article with regard to the murder remained t1i1.
touched, these were only flirmilhes at a di.
tance, of no consequence towards ending i[e
contest, and were little regarded by Elizabct!i o
her commiflioners.

The conference had, hitherto, been conitc. rtl

in a' manner which disappointcd Elii.,!,:;il's
views, and produced none of those dilcovt;i-s
which the had expe6ted. The ditlance Ihctc.':l
York and London, and the necessity of colifuii.,g
her upon every difficulty which occurred, :.
ufnned much time. Norfolk's negotiation ''I
the Scottiih regent, however secretly carricl :
was not, in all probability, unknown to a ii.:-
cess so remarkable for her sagacity in penetratiV .
the designs of her enemies, and feeing thbr'i;i
their deepell fchernes z. Inltead, therefo:', ,i
returning any answer to the regent's demi.ai<.
file resolvcd to remove the conferencc to \V'li-
minster, and to appoint new commiffioneils, i.
whom fle could more absolutely confide. Ei,:ll
the queen of Scots and the regent were broi: 'i,l
without difficulty, to approve of titi rd;.
lution a

We often find Mary boasting of the fupcriniirK

in argument obtained by her commillioiicri; ( dll.ii
the conference at York, and how, by the tIll cl'gl
of their reasons, they confounded her advcrfnric,
and fileneed all their cavils b. The difpufe flIoi,
at that time, on a footing which rendered lcr

y Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 64. So. z Good, v.l. ii.

16o. Ande.l; vol. iii. ,4. a Hayncs, 434. Aiidcrf.
vol. iv. 94. b Good. vol. i. 186. 28+. 350.

'iti or)

v:ltory not only apparent, but cafy. Her par-
t! in;r:tion of the guilt of the king's murder was
wle' circumstance upon which her fubjets mult

i'

: I. t. ecd, as a juitification of their violent pro-
;ccdings againlf her; and while they indu/h-ioufly
;a iidcdi mentioning that, her cause gained as
; :itch as that of her adversaries loft by suppress-
' ; this capital argument.

Elizabeth resolved that Mary (hould not cn-

iv - ti,c fame advantage in the conference to be

ii .

it Weltminfter. She deliberated with the

:itJl!:(i anxiety, how flie might overcome' the
r:.: cl's fcruIples, and persuade him to accuse

1-,, iltc'eni. She confidered of the most proper
::l fitj bringing Mary's commissioners to
.i'\wr such an accusation; and as fie forcfaw
.llliL the promises with which it was necessary to
.!illnrc ti'i rcgc-t, and which it was impoflible to
I lln.,;l froln the Scottish queen, would naturally
e!:!)i:i ate her to a great degree, (he determined
ti
: r;-d her morle narrowly than ever; and though
i .i I.croopl had given her no reason to diftrtil
: i;;;illance or fidelity, yet becaufc he was the
I1 '. of Norfolk's brother-in-law, (lie thought it
],.pc,. to remove the queen as soon as poflible to

iT. !II-y in Staffordshire, and commit her to the

1 ;.ing of the earl of Shrewibury, to whomn that
.i!l~: belonged C

Mary began to fufped the design of this fe-

cind conference [OA. z i]; and notwithllanding
le futisfa&tion fie exprcfled at feeing her caule
'ilken more immediately under the queen's own
C).e , fie framed her inflrutions to her com-

I fayncs, 437. d AnderT. vol. iv, part ii. 95.

miflioners

nifioners in fuich a manner, as to avoid bi,,<
brought uunldr the neccifity of answering thlt c-
cufiition of lier subjects, if they mhould hb to
delperate as to exhibit one againit here . lV.sic
suspicions were soon confirmed by a circumill ..n

lt'remnly mortifying. The regent having anr; ,.d

at London, in order to be prelent at the corlt !-
ence, was immediately admitted into Elizalid}'s
presence, and reccived by her, not only itil 1-
fpcit, btlt with affcation. This Mary juflI '! '.
fidered as an open declaration of that (j;i:',
partiality towards her adversaries. In ti, i
emotions of her resentment, nie wrote lu ii;
commifiioners LNov. 22-], and commanded i::
to complain, in the presence of the lngli: .,-
bils, and before the alnbafladors of fort.( .
princes, of the usage (he had hlitllerto met \;li,
and the additional iniurics which fli had !rc.!i,.,!
to apprehend. Her rclbcilious fubjcts \:".
allowed access to the cieen, file was cxeli:!l
fiom her p)resence ; thcy cnjoycd fill libertx, i!,
languinled unlder a long inprifonment; ii!.,
werec encouraged to acilcue her, in defending !i,,-
f:lf file labolred und er ( very ditadvantage. ISo
these reafoni; fie once nore renelwed her demand,
of being admmitted into the queen's prcfili:;
and if that were denied, fie nitfructcdl tltim in
dleclare, that Ihe recalled tile consent wlhich ll ;
had given to the conferenlce at Weltmmfitr,;eai
protelted, that whatever was done there, Ihoulki
be held to be null and invalid f.

This, perhaps, was the moll prudent refiultl
tlon Mary could have taken. The pretences tin

9 Good.vol. ii. 349. f Ibid. vol. ii. 184.

VVliiHI,

;,
iit fie declined the conference were plausible,
: ,.d tlle jln(ture for offering them well chosen.
ilit ether the queen's letter did not reach her

o;nlt cniffrioners in due time, or they suffercd
rt , ilvcs to be deceived by Elizabeth's pro-
' iclions of regard for their miltrefs, and con-

1 Irtcd to the opening of the conference g.

C 'JI',, the comminiloners who had appeared in
I ltru name at York [Nov. 25], Elizabeth now

, rllcd Sir Nicholas Bacon, keeper of the great
f iil, the carls of Arundel and Leicester, lord
C'.1l on, and SirWilliamCecil1' lihe difficulties
w; hl'cll obflruded the proceedings at York were
quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given
t: the regent's demands; nor was he so much
d1ifpofd to hesitate and raise objedRions, as for-
nic:lv. His negotiation with Norfolk had been
difcovcred to Morton by some of Mary's attend-
alts. and he had communicated it to CecilI.
i iH pcrfonal safety, as well as the continuance
, o his power, depended on Elizabeth. By fa-

utilring Mary, she might at any time ruin him,

ai.l by a question which Ihe artfully liarted, con-
zcrrifl-g the person who had a right, by the law

,f .Sctland, to govern the kingdom during.a

n,,,rity, lite let him fee, that even without re.
il .l;g. the queen, it was an easy matter for her
I,lprpivce him of the supreme diretion of
i!;l;k'. These conliderations, which were
powclrfullly seconded by molt of his attendants,
it Iclgthl determined the regent to produce his
accillation against the queen.

Andderf. vol. iii. z5. h Id. vol. iv. part il. 99.
' .lCv. J91. k Haynes, 484.

He

He endea'voured to lessen the obloquyv 'ilt

which he was sensible this action would li at-
tended, by protetiHng, that it was with tlhe nttm-io
reluctance lhc undertook this disagreeable talli;
tihat his party had long fiuffered their condiiX' to
be milcolnftrued, and had borne the

t worll imi;l.

tations in silence, rather than expose the (ir:nlcs
of their sovereign to the eyes of firangers ; bit
that nuow the infolcnce and importunity of the
advcrte faAlion forced them to pbiilifh, what tllry
had hitherto, though with loss to themfelvs, en-
deavoured to conceal . Tlefe pretexts aiL dc.
cent; and the considerations which he mentiuis
had, during some time, a real influence uponi th1
conduc of the party; but since the meeting of
parliament held in December, they had dilfo.
vered so little delicacy and refcrve with reliptc
to the queen's actions, as renders it ilmpolil)le
to give credit to those Rtudied professions. Tile
regent and his aflociates were drawn, it is plcin,
partly by the neceflity of their affairs, and pati tiy
by Elizabeth's artilices, into a situation wli.ic
no liberty of choice was left to them; and tliic
were obliged either to acknowledge tlhlici(.;
to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge il:.y
with having been acccllory to the comm!ili'ci
of murder.

The accusation it elf was conceived in ti,'

fir-oigelt terms. Mary kwas charged, not .li)'
witlh having conltefcdt to tlie mInrdler, bu1t .i
beintg acccfloly to Ilie coillrivance and cxcctiui
of it. Botlhvell, it was pretended, had 1l;a
screened from the purflits of jutlice by lier li'.

1 Andecf. vol. iv. part ii. I "5.

Vil'.,

, u: ; and (he had formed designs no less dalger-
. t);; the life of the young' prince, than iiub

,-si; of the liberties and (onlltitution of the
;: ' !om. If any of these crimes flould be de-
cl,. an offer was made to 1produce the most

,;;,Il' and undoubted evidence il confirmation
:l' charge !n.

.\t til. next meeting of the commiflioners
'K..-. , 29], tlie earl of Lennox appeared before
Uti,',;; land after bewailing the tragical and 11-
':;!r;il amurder of his son, he implored Eliza-
t 1 i.' jiu.[ice against the queen of Scots, whom
.; ;accifed, upon oath, of being the autlhor of
ti!.l: erile, and produced papers, which, a;s ie
5 p' 'cidcd, would make good what he alleged.
'TI entrance of a new actor on the stage, io
(i I)ortinicly, and at a jundture so critical, can
s ..,m'-ic be imputed to chance. This contrivance
u :;. iiniRifeltly Elizabeth's, in order to increase,
I1, ,;iis additional accusation, the infilmy of tle
S tt if l 1queen n.

i;iry's commiflioners e:preflcd the utmotl
i:;: lc and indirllationl at the regcnt's pre-
,I'.i itoi, in lou;ding the Iquecin with ealumnlls,
'ilrI, as they affirmed, flie had so little merit-
cr f )ec. 4]. But, i illetad of attetntjl)intl to
\'! h!;lt e ler lihnlour, by a reply to the chargerc
li1.) lj;ll recoutrfl to anl article in tlc:il iiltilic-
ti;B :, Ilich they had folrmrlly neglctled to mcll-
i1, t111 itS proper place. h'lecy demanded an
.ili:i:ice of Elizabeth ; and having renewed their
liiiltrlc.;' requeli, of a pc itonal interiew,t they

iC"lled, if that were denied her, agtaiwil all the
' :ndcrf. vol. iv. partii. 119. n Id. ibid. 12z.

future

future pnoceedings of the commifloners c A
protestation of this nature, offered juiN at the!
critical time when such a bold accufatioii ha
been preferred againif Mary, and when the lroofl
in support of it were ready to be examined(, ga;e
reason to fufpe6t that she dreaded the evcit ,
that examination. This suspicion received the
ftrongeit confirmation from another circumil: ce;
Ross and Herries, before they were intrc.!tci:d
to Elizabeth, in order to make this protellaiui,
privately acquainted Leiceiter and Cecil, illat
as their milfrefs had, from the beginning, dilf
qovered an inclination towards bringing th'. (!if.
ferences between herself and her iubjeas t, ;in
amicable accommodation, so fle was still delirott,
notwithstanding the regent's audacious tccufa.
tion, that they should be terminated in t:;at
manner P.

Such moderation seems hardly to be compatibll

,wxith the itrong resentment which calumiiat.i!
innocence naturally feels; oi with that eagici:fi
to vindicate itself which it always difcovcrs. In
Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed mill be
conlidered as a confession of the weaknef; of her
caule. The known character of her commis.
fioners exempts them from the imputatioln of
folly, or the suspicion of treachery. Some ticlal
convition, that the condutoftheir mifilri cunli
not bear so itri6t a scrutiny as mull be ma'i intl
it, if they should reply to the accufatioin l"
ferred byMurray agailitf her, seems to be the i1,:
probable motive of this imprudent propolli, 1'
which they endeavoured to avoid it.

o Anderr. vol. iv. part ii. 113. 158, &.
P Ibid. iv. 134. Cabbala, 157.

[td

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afford-
ed her a prentence for rejecing it [Dec. 4]. She
rcprefented to Mary's commiflioners, that, in the
ptrennt junEture, nothing could be so difXonour-
;a)le to their miilrefs as an accommodation; and
that thec matter would seem to be huddled up in
tils manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and

1,> hide her shame; nor was it possible that Mary

cllld be admitted, with any decency, into her
riclsonce, while file lay under the infamy of flch
,i l'bl)ic accusation.
Upon this repulse, Mary's commiflioners with-
-rew ; and as they had decllned anifwering, there
ficcrcd now to be no further reason for the re-
gi:ll's producing tle proofs in support of his
(-,!r'ge. But without getting these into her
hands, Elizabeth's fcllemeas were incomplete;
;;l:d her artifice for this purporf was as meal,
but as successful, as any lhe ]lad hitherto ein-
ployed. She commanded her commilrloners to
tcilify lher indignation and difplealure at the re-
gclet's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty
ift ilubjet, as to accufte his fovelcignl of such
iatrocious crimces. He, in order to regain the
golod opinion of such a powlerfi proteAlrcs, of.
£: 'd to flhew that his acctifatioiis. were not mna-
liiCous, nor ill-grounded. Then were produced
and fiubmitted to the inspection of the Englilh
c(m!nniflionlers, the ats of the Scottilfh parliament
in confirmation of the regent's authority,-illd of
the iqueen's resignation ; the confeflions bs the
perfiOns executed for the king's murder ; and the
ifa' I calcket which contained the letters, son-
tiers, and contrads, that have been so often
inclt ioned.
VOL. , 0O As

As soon as Elizabeth got these into her ic( f

feffioln, file laid them before her privy cou!il
[Dec. q4], to vhlich flie joined, on this occalion,
several noblemenl of the greatest eminence in ltr
kingdom ; in order that they might have an op.
poltunity of confidering the mode in which an
inquiry of such public importance had bliei
hitherto condtled, as well as the amount of tie
cvidence now brought against a person !..I
claimed a preftrable right of succession tr ihc
Englilh crown. In this refpetable assembly ail
the proceedings in the conferences at York and
WtlMitmitfiier were reviewed, and the evidence
produced bL the regent of Scotland againifi his
fovercign wvas examined with attention. In pa:i,
titcular, the letters and other papers said t I.e
writtcn by the queen of Scots, vwere carefilly
compared " for the manner of writing and or-
, thogpny'ilpy," with a variety of letters which
Elizabetth had received at different times from
the Scottilh queen ; and, as the result of a
molt accurate collation, the members of ti,,
privy council, land I)),hlemen conjoined with thl!n,
declared that no dilffrence between these could
he difcosvered 1. Elizabeth, ha\ ing efiablifi (d a
faStt so uiiiifavoural)lc to her rival, began to) l;y
alidte te c.the :tflios of friendlljp and rct'pct
wvhich flie hiad hitlihet: uifed in all her letti') to
the Scottinh queen. Shi nlow wrote to her iln liei
termlil, as if the prefuniptions of her guill l::d
amiounted almofl to certainty; flie blamedl !Itr
so refilliiing to vildicate herself fiom an ai; euli-
tion wllicil could not be left uniiiifwercd, rv'ithl

q Ar.dcrfon, vol. iv. p:lrtii, 170, &c.

out

cnjt a annifeft injury to her cil.-acer; and
!i;ti:ily intimated, that uilefs that wvere lone,
I', ciinge would be made in hlrr trefcnt situ-
;'ion r. She honed that such a discovery of her

. 1,tic:lc!ts woultd intimidite Mary, wlho was
.:id recovere d from the shock of the regent's
; t;l.c on her reputation, and force her to con-
;illi ILr rtfignation of the crown, to ratify
Mn ay's aluthority as legcnt, and to consent that
:.: h, cl-fclfalid her fun lhoild relide in England,
.lJic:' Eniglisl protcAion. This fchelne Fliza-
i h had much at heart ; ihe propoied it both
. Mlary and to her coinniifionirs, and neglectd
' :. argument, nor artilice, that could polfibly
r..onmend it. Mary saw how fatal this would
i'j\JC to her reputation, to her pretensions, and
s .:1 to her personal safety. She rejeted it
;i!noult hcfitation. '" Death," faild he, " is
- : l, dcrt;.lfl lhan such an ignominious (lep.
; !'alhr thlan give away, with my own hands,
- ;liL crown which dcfcendcd to me fiom my

· i;t:cilrs, I will part with life; but the l;dt
,eords I utter, llall be tlofe of a queen of
,: icotland ."
At tlie anic time fie feerns to have been fen.

il!,k. howl open her reputation lay to cenfule,
,,lile lhic fuffcrcd fucl a public aceuflation to

inll:in ualnfned ; and t g

tho he confcrence

t.:l' nIuow disbolve(l, she cmploered her coirnif-
;tu:,T:, to present a reply to the llcgat tio s of
-i;r caienies, in which lhe denied, ill tile hllongelt

nln:m, tile crimes imputed to lier; and recri-

Andleri. vol. iv. part ii. 17qC. Sl . Good. vol. ii. .6o;
s 'lynes, 47,. See Append. No. XXX. Good. vol. ii.

o 2 zminated

minated upoli the regent and his party, by ac.
cufing them of having devised and executed Itle
murder of the king' [Dec. 24]. The recglnt
and his associates asserted their innocence v,'1t|
great warmth. Mary continued to infit ,on a
personal interview, a condition which flie k;ilcv
would never be granted n. Elizabeth urged i,,r
to vindicate her own honour. But it is evidl.lt
from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuge':, to
which both queens had recourse by turns, iliat
Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not dciaii(-t
make any further progress in the inquiry.

1569.] The regent was now impatient to return

into Scotland, where his adversaries were endca.
vouring, in his absence, to raise some commotioTl.
Before he set out, he was called into the 1,;ivy
council [Fcb. 23, to receive a final declaration of
Elizabeth's sentiments. Cecil acquainted h'm,
in her name, that on one hand nothing li;i
been objeted to his condu&, which she c(t!i l
reckon detrimental to his honour, or inconfl;il.t
with his duty; nor had he, on the other lihzid,
produced any thing againlt his fovereigni, ,a
which fhc could found an unfavourable opil:i(a
of her actions; and for this reason, file rclolvd
to leave all the affairs of Scotland precisely il
the fame situation in which fle had ftond thlem
at thu beginning of the conference. Tlh'h quccn'
commillioners were difinifd much in tht ialac
mainner .

After the attention of both nations had leen

fixed io c;rneflly on this conference upwards of
four months, such a conclulion of the whole ap.

tGood. ii. 2S5. u Ibid. z83. Cabbala, '57.
x Cood. ii. 315. 333:

pcar«l

pears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous.
Nothing, however, could be more favourable to
Elizabeth's future schemes. Notwithstanding
her seeming impartiality, fie had no thoughts of
cuntlnluing neuter; nor was Ihe at any loss on
: horn to bestow her proteftion. Before the rc-
gent left London, flie fipplied him with a con-
illerable fum of money, and engaged to lupport
the king's authority to the utmotl of her powc-r.
M:-ly, by her own colduiL, fortified this refoli.-
iion. Enraaged at the repeated instances of Eliza-
beth's artifice and deceit, which she had disco-
vcred during the progress of the conference, and
despairing of ever obtaining anyl succour fiom
h-':, Ihe endeavoured to rouse her own adherents
in Scotland to arms, by imputing filch designs
t; Ellizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to
iil-rire every Scotchman with indignation. Mur-
TryV, Ihe pretended, had agreed to convey the
);irlce ler son illto England ; to fiirlrndrc to
il;.:;abcth the places of greatest strength in the
king!Uion; and to acknowledge the dependence
or lhe Scottifn upon the English nation. In re-
t:!n for this, Murray was to be declared the
l :;'fil heir of the crown of Scotland; and at
I;t. ilienc time the queflion with regard to the
1 ,:;li'il fucceflion was to be decided in favour of
tlh earl of Hartford, who had proinifed to
rn;iry one of Cecil's daughters. An account of
tlice wild and chimerical projcEts was spread
illirhitoufly among the Scots. Elizabeth,
p'rcciving it was calculated of purpose to bring
hilr government into difrepulation, laboured to

Y Good. 3 .
(art, iii. 478.

0 3 dllroy

destroy its effects, by a connter-proclamation,
and became more difgutted than ever with the
Scottifi queen .

The regent, on his return, found the kingdom

in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
queen's adherents, whici had been fuipended in
expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war.
They were encouraged too by the appearance
of a leader, whose high quality and pretensions
entitled him to great authority in the nation.
This was the duke of Chatelherault, who had
resided for some years in France, and was now
sent over by that court with a small supply of
money, in hopes that the presence of the firfi
nobleman in the kingdom would tlrengthen the
queen's party. Elizabeth had detained him in
England, for some months, under various pre-
tences, but was obliged at last to susser him to
proceed on his journey. Before his departure
Mary invested him [Feb. 25] with the high
dignity of her lieutenant general in Scotland,
together with the fantaitic title of her adopted
father.

The regent did not give him time to form

his party into any regular body. He assembled
an army with his usual expedition, and rmarched
to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and
Huntly, who composed the chief part of the
queen's facion, being feated in corners of the
kingdom very dilsant from each other, and
rnany of the duke's dependents having been

Z IJaynes, 500. 503. See Append. No. XXXI.

killed

killed or taken in the battle of Langfide, the
spirit and strength of his adherents were totally
broken, and an accommodation with the regent
was the only thing which could prevent the
ruin of his estate and vassals. This was effected
without difficulty, and on no unreasonable
terms. The duke promised to acknowledge
the authority both of the king and of the
regent; and to claim no jurifdidcion in confe-
quence of the commission which he had received
from the queen. The regent bound himself
t6 repeal the a& which had passed for attainting
several of the queen's adherents; to restore all
who would submit to the king's government
to the possession of their eflates and honours;
and to hold a convention, wherein all the dif.
ferences between the two parties should be set.
tied by mutual consent. The duke gave hostages
for his faithful performance of the treaty: and,
in token of their sincerity, he and lord Herries
accompanied the regent to Stirling, and visited
the young king. The regent set at liberty the
prisoners taken at Langfide l.

Argyll and Huntly reftifed to be included in

ths treaty. A secret negotiaton was carrying
.rl in F.ngland, in favour of the captive queen,
Ivith so much success, that her affairs began to
o-;ir a better aspect, and her return into her
Cwn kingdom seemed to he an event not very
dlillant. The French king had lately obtained
fucli advantages over the Hugonots, that the
cxtintion of that party appeared to be inevit.
nble, and France, by recovering domestic tran.

a Cabba'a, 161. Crawf. Mem. xo6.

quillityt

quillity, w-ould be no longer prevented from
protecting her fiiends in Britain. These circum.
tlances not only influenced Argyll and Huntl,
but made so deep an impression on the duke,
that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute,
and plainly diifovered that he wished to evade
the accomplifhiment of the treaty. The regent
saw the danger of allowing the duke to fliake
himself loose, in this manner, from his engage.
ments; and infiantly formed a resolution equal!5
bold and politic. He commanded his guard.
to seize Chatelherault in his own house in
Edinhtrgh, whither he had come in order to
attend the convention agreed upon; and regard-
less either of his dignity as the iirll nobleman ii:
the kingdom, and next heir to the crown, or :,t
the prornifes of personal security, on which lie
had relied, committed him and lord Herries pri.
foners to the caltle of Edinburgh b. A blow so
fatal and unexpeced dispirited the party. Argyll
filbnlitted to the king's government, and madl
his peace with the regent on very easy terms;

1(and Ilintly, bein left alone, was at lalt obliged
to lal down his arln'.

Soon after April I 6], lord Boyd returned in,

to Scotland, and brought letters to the regent,
both from tlhe Elngflfh and Scottifl queens. A
conventionI was held at Perth [July 21 ], in order
to conicler them. Elizabeth's letter contaiin(d
three different proposals with regard to Mar'
that /lie floould either be rellored to the flli
pollellion of her former authority; or be adl
mitted to reign jointly with the king her son;

b Crawf. Mem. 1 II. Mclv, zQz.
* (51'~~~~~~~0

or at leafi be allowed to reside in Scotland, in
lome decent retirement, without any share in ihe
adminiiitration of government. These overtu rca
were extorted by the importunity of Fenelon tbrc
French ambassador, and have fonie appearauce
of being favourable to the captive queen. Th!ey
were, however, perfe&ly suitable to ElizabeLit's
general fyliem with regard to Scottifi affairs.
A nong propositions so enequal and disproportion-
:!;u, fle easily saw where the choice would fall.
Tlle two former were reje(Red; and long delays
.nimt necessarily have intervened, and many dif-
fculties have arisen, before every circumstance
relltive to the last could be finally adjusted C.

Mary, in her letter, demanded that her mar-

.iage with Bothwell flould be reviewed by Lth
proper judges, and if found invalid, should be
diflblved by a legal sentence of divorce. This
iatal marriage was the principal source of all the
calamities the had endured for two years; a di-
v,,rce was the only thing which could repair the
i'iuries her reputation had suffered by that siep.
It was her interest to have proposed it early;
and it is not easy to account for her long filelnce
with refpe& to this point. Her particular mo-
tive for proposing it at this time began to be sói
well known that the demand was rejeted by tih
cr. vention of eltatesd. They inmputed it not so
i:luch to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to lhei

t Spofwood, a30.
d Ibid. 23 . In a privy council, held July 30, 1 569

t',i dJ'm.lnd was coifidered ; and, of fifty-one membrrs pi .-
Itt, oily fcven voted to comply with the qurcen's lequelt.
M:cords Priv. Counc. MS. in the Lyon Office, p. 14X.

eageirnt'l

;:g.'<rcis to conclude a marriage witll the duke

'This umarlriag was the object of that sec:-;t

negotiation ;il England, which I have already
in.,Jti;nicd. 'Tlie fertile and projecting geniu;
if Maitland fiir-! conceived this scheme. l)uri:;r'
iite conference at York, he communicated i! i,
tlh duke hlimfclf, aud to the bilhop of R;...
'l'!e forinmn readlily closed with a {clelne so .L
tcrr'nl ro hls tambitil:. The latter conlideri .
a;I a probable device for rfttorinlg his miilrcefs :
1;'-ert), and replacing her on hler throne. 5\ ;
was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a ce.,-
iipondence by means of his fitler lady Sc-i,...ip
s;ilrfc from a meafire, which would have rcltLorc
hl.r to her kingdom with fio much fplendii: '.
Tile sudden removal of the conference trma
.York to WTVflminifter suspended, but did not
break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross wive.-
Itill. the duke's prompters, and his agents; awi
many letters and love tokens were exchanged bc-
iween him and the queen of Scots.

But as he could not hope, that under an i.

miniftralion so vigilant as Elizabeth's, fulil .'
intrigue could beI kept long concealed, lie at-
tempted to deceive her by the appearance of
o)penncfs and candour, an artifice which fcldon
fails of success. He mentioned to hle e 'ic t-
nimr wvli ich wvas spread of his niarriagc witli thii
Srol i ill, queenll; he comllailled of it as a rou:lil-
'it'i.; czalmllUy; and dfl'clainicdl all thoughts of t hlt
i;.ind, witlh miany exprefilons full of conlteinlt

( mJd. 419. HJIayne, 573, State Trials, i. 73.

l)0tl,

both for Mary's character and dominions. Jea-
lous as Elizabeth was of every thing relative to
the queen of Scots, she seems to have credited
these profelfions f. But, instead of difcontinu-
illg the negotiation, lie rencwed it with greater
vigourr, and admitted into it new afi!oiates.
Among there was the regent of Scotland. He.
had given great offence to Norfolk, by iii pub-
lic accusation of the queen, in breach of the con-
ceit into which he had entered at York. He
uats then ready to return into Scotland. The
intluence of the duke in the north of England
v as great. The earls of Northumbl)erland and
Weilmnorland, the molt pow:lrful nublcnin in
itht part of the kingdom, threatentd to revenge
upon the regent the iiiiiiris whlich lie had done
htis fovcreign. Murray, in order to feecure a
fiffe return into Srcotlai.d, addrelfld hlinf:lf to
Nor1;lk, and Aft'r fime apology for hi', paIt
conduiit, lhe ilifniiatcd liat the duke'.' fclleme
of miarryiing the qlu-cnl li:; lilter was ino Icfs ac-
c' ilablc to i;iin than hblenlicial to tlith king..
('o)iit; and tlhat lie would concliur with the ult
'i'i! ardour in pro motinlg {h( delirablle an evient .
t.'- folk heard him with the credulity niat:rl.ll to
trl ,fc who are paliioliately hLent upol any dliign.
IH wrote to the two earls to delilt firo; any
ii!lil. attempt againll Murra)y, aid to th.it lie
u'wrl his pallfage throughl the norther coiidites
w\t}i. lut dilturbacice.

l'.ncouraged by Ihis fuccifs in gaining the re-
gent, he next. attcmptt'd to drawi the ELilifi

f Hlaynes, 574. Siate Trials, i. 79, 8o.
g Alelif. iii. 34.

nilblcS

nobles to approve his design. The nation began
to defp)ir of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jea-
lousy kept the question with regard to the right
of succession undecided. The memory of the
civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed
titles of the houses of York and Lancaster, was
ftil! recent. Almost all the ancient nobility had
perished, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deitrufion in that unhappy
contefl. The Scottish queen, though her right
of succession was generally held to be undoubted,
might meet with formidable competitors. She
might marry a foreign and a popish prince, and
bring both liberty and religion into danger. baut,
by marrying her to an Englishman, a zealous
proteifant, the molt powerful and most univer-
sally beloved of all the nobility, an effectual re.
medy seemed to be provided against all tlief
evils. The greater part of the peers, either
directly or tacitly, approved of it, as a fal:tary
projcct. The earls of Arundel, Pembrokc,
Leictller, and lord Lumley, subscribed a letter
to the Scottifli queen, written with Leicelter's
hand, in which they warmly recommended the
match, but iniifled, by way of preliminary, on
Mar y's promise that flle lhould attempt nothing,
in coinfeqcence of her pretensions to the Elglinl
cr\ox.i, prejludicial to Elizabeth, or to her pol-
tenit ; that {he flould content to a league, of-
fcnfive and defensive, between the two king-
doms ; that fle flould confirm the present es-
tablilhment of religion in Scotland; and receive
into favour such of her fubjests as had appeare4
in arnnns againit her. Upon her agreeing to the

znarriagc

marriage and ratifying these articles, they en-
gaged that the Engliih nobles would not only
concur in restoring her immediately to her own
throne, but in securing to her that of England
in reversion. Mary readily coneented to all these
p:-opofals, except the second, with regard to
,whlich she demanded some time for consulting
hier ancient ally the French king h

The whole of this negotiation was induftr;-

oufly concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy
of the Scottish queen was well known, nor
could it be expeted that (he would willingly
omel into a measure, which tended so visibly to
iave the reputation, and to increase the power
of her rival. But, in a matter of so Ipuch
2onfequence to the nation, the taking a few
fLp s without her knowledge could hardly be
reckoned criminal; and while every person con-
cerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, de-
ci.tred that nothing Ihould be concluded without
iobtaining her consent, the duty and allegiance
of fuLb jcts seemed to be fully preserved. The
/ieatct part of the nobles regarded the matter
: tis light. 'Tlofe who conducted the intrigue,
had farther and more dangerous views. They
tiv. the advantages which Mary would obtain
1b this treaty, to be present and certain ; and
:.le ex cuLtion of the pronifies which she came
ilndlr, to be diltant and uncertain. They hlad
e:-ly communicated their fchcme to the kings of
1'iiia;ce and Spain, and obtained their approba.
tion i. A treaty concerning which they con-
sidled foreign. princea, while they concealed it

' Anderson, vol iii. 51. Camd,42o.
i Andel. vol. iii. 63.
VOL. 11. P fiom

from their own sovereign, could not be deemed
innocent. They hoped, however, that the uanil,,
of such a nuinhbr of the chief persons in tilc
kingdom would render it necessary for Elizal(th
to comply ; they flattered themselves that a (in.,-
bination so strong would be altogether irrclii;-
ble; and such was their confidence of fuccl;,
that when a plan was concerted in the nortih ,i
England for refcirlng Mary out of the handls ,i
her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if hlIc
recovered her liberty, her sentiments in his fayrs, :
might change, used all his interedl to difliadc t!:
conipirators from attempting it k.

In this situation did the affair remain, whcn

lord Boyd arrived fiom England; and, bcii. '
the letters which he produced publicly, brout,'.
others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throknmorto:.
to the regent, and to Maitland. These were
full of the moit sanguine hopes. All the noblc.
of England concurred, said they, in favounrl;
the dcfign. Every preliminary was adjicd;
nor was it poffille that a fchemc so deep l .d,
condu&ted with so mucl art, and fupiportcd bolti
by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or '(,
delfated in the execution. Nothing now v.i
wanting lut the concluding ceremony. It J -
pendcd on tlie regent to haften that, by proti!
ing a ftcntence of divorce, which would rcnmvc
the only (lllacle that Htood in the way. 'li
was cxpelctd of him, in conifeqcence of In1
promilc to Norfolk; and if lie regarded eililtr
Ilis interelt or his fame, or even his safety, lic
would not fail to fulfil these engagements 1.

k Camd. 4.o. 1I-laynes, 5o0. Spotfw. 230. S
Appendix, No. XXXII.

.lut

But the regent was now in very different cir-

cilnftances from thole which had formerly in-
duced him to assec an approbation of Norfolk's
fcilemes. He saw that the downfal of his own
power- n muti be the firRl consequence of the duke's
fliccefs; and if the queen, who coniidered him
iis the chief author of all her misfortunes, (hould
recover her ancient authority, he could never
cpcict favour, nor scarce hope for impunity.
No wonder lie declined a ilep so fatal to himself,
and which would have eflablifhed the grandeur
of another on the ruins of his own. This re-
tijl'tl occationed a delay. But, as every other
cilucnilltallce was fettled, the bishop of Ross, in
the name of his miltrefs, and the duke, in per-
Joi', declared, in presence of the French am-
laiiador, their mutual content to the marriage,
and a contract to this purpose was signed, and
intrutled to the keeping of the ambassador '.

The intrigue was now in so many hands, that

;, could not long remain a secret. It began to
ib wlhsifpered at court; and Elizabeth calling
llit dlke into her presence [Aug. 13], cx-
Incffed the iutmolt indignation at his condul,
atill charged him to lay alidc all thoughts of
pri ,rccuting filch a dangerous dclign. Soon after
l.,icelcer, who perhaps had coulntenanced the
[project with no other intention, revealed all the
irclirlmllances of it to the queen. Penmbroke,
Annrlell, Lulnley, and 'I'hrloknol-rtIo, were con-
liln( and examined. Mary was watched more
1il:1 rowly than ever ; and 1-Halings earl of Huln-
tiiltlni, vwhlo pretended to diflute witlt the

in Carte, vol. iii. 486.

.. 2 Scotti l

Scottflh queen her right to the fucceflion, being
joined in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered
her imprisonment more intolerable, by the cx-
cess of hls vigilance and rigour ". The Scottill
regent, threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure,
meanly betrayed the duke; put his letters into
her hands, and fnrnifhed all the intelligence in
his power ". The duke himself retired firit to
Howard-houfe, and then, in contempt of tihe
summons to appear before the privy council,
fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the
imprisonment of his associates; coldly received
by his friends in that country; unprepared fOr
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; ihe
hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed a
second call, and repaired to Windsor [Oft. 3 .
He was first kept as a prisoner in a private houie,
and then sent to the Tower. After being con
fined there upwards of nine months, he was rc-
leafed upon his humble fubmiflion to Elizabltli,
giving her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold
no farther correfpondencc with the queen of
Scots P. During the progress of Norfolk's ne-
gotiations, the queen's partisans in Scotl;la(!
who made no doubt of their iffling in her re-
foration to the throne, with an increase of au-
thority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitlad
was the foul of that party, and the person whole
activity and ability the regent chiefly dreaded.
-He had laid the plan of that intrigue which liad
kindled fucl combustion in England. He con-
tinued to foment the spirit of difaiffection in
Scotland, and had seduccd from the regcit

" Haynes, 515, 516. 5go. 532.
* See Append. No. XXXIII. P Haynes, 525. 50'

lord

,lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his formerl
nfli)ciates. While he enjoyed liberty, the regent
-'(,ild not reckon his own powerfecure. For
thlli reason, having by an artifice allured Maitland
tl Stirling, he employed captain Crawford, one
cf liis creatures, to accuie him of being accessory
to the mnurder of the king; and under that pre-
t, iwe he was arrcfed and carried as a prifoncr to
Ii.Jibulrgh. He would ioon have been brought to
-i!l, but was fa-rd by the friendship of Kirkaldy,
.'c: -nior of the caitle, who, by pretending a war-
i.l't fir that purpose from the regent, got him out
or illc lands of the person to whose care he was
olonlitted, and condudtcd him into the castle,
';,!ich from that time was entirely under Mait.
'.i's comnmand q. The loss of a place of so
;ii ic: iniportalce, and the defection ofa man so
t.mil;tiit soir military lkill as Kirkaldy, brought
tlil rigent into some difreputation, for which,
l),'\,vecr, the success of his ally Elizabeth, about
lli time, abundantly compensatcd.

I'lie intrigue carried on for restoring the

.¥ottilll queen to liberty having been difiovered,
,.i,i difalppointed, an attempt was made to the
i :!.e p1inpofe by force of aris ; but the issue of
;t w\as not more fortunate. The earls of Nor-
iii'lnbcrland and Weltmorland, though little dii-
;i'u llied by their perfolnal abilitie:s, were two

' ile most ancient and powerful of the Englilh
l't'rs. Their ettates it the northern counties
; :re great, and they possesl'd that influence over
t11 inlhabitants, which was herlditary in the
ipular and martial families of Percy and of

q Spotlw. 232.

P 3 Ncvil.

Nevil. They werc both attached to the popi!t!
religion, and discontented with the court, whel-.
new men and a new fyltem prevailed. Ever fin(.:
Mary's arrival in England, they had, warmly
espoused her interest ; and zeal for popery, (p.
position to the court, and commiseration of hcl
fufterings, had engaged them in different plot.
for her relief. Notwithstanding the vigilance ,
her keepers, they held a close correspondeI';
witlh her, and communicated to her all their
designs '. They were privy to Norfolk's icleimlcs;
but the caution with which he proceeded slid
not suit their ardour and impctuofity. The li.
berty of the Scottifhi queen was not their folc
object. T'Ihey aimed at bringing about a chaigc
in the religion, and a revolution in the govern.
rnent of the kingdom. For this reason tlic,
solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the avowed
and zealous patron of popery in that age. No-
thing could be more delightful to the rell(f',
spirit of Philip, or more nccefiary towards facili-
tating his schemes in the Netherlands, than the
involving England in the confusion and miferic'
of a civil war. The duke of Alva, by his di-
redtion, encouraged the two earls, and prolnilcd,
as soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of llrengthl, or
rescued the queen of Scots, that he would supply
them both with money and a itrong body of
troops. La Mothe, the governor of Duniirl:,
in the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports
where it would be most proper to land. And
Chiapini Vitclli, ole of Alva's ablest officers, v.as

r Haynes 595. Mrdin, 44. 6z, &c.

difpatdjlc(

d lpatched into England, on pretence of fettling
fomc commercial differences between the two
Itit;ons; but in reality that the rebels might be
iur-l of a leader of experience, as soon as they
votitmcd to take arms-~.

Thll conduc of this negotiation occasioned

many meetingr s and messages between the two
carls. Elizabeth was informed of these; and
though ihe ffufpeed nothing of their real de-
i;',n, ilh concluded that they were among tl!e
umnber of Norfolk's confidents. They were
fllnnloned, for this reason, to repair to court.
C'tiofious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they
delaye d giving obedience. A second, and more
peremptory order was issued [Nov. 93. This
titv could not decline, wvithout lhaking of' their
al!ciiannce ; and as no time'was left for delibera-
;;on, they inftaiitly erected their itandard against
'* ii- fovercign. The rc-eltabliflhing the catholic
'c lioion; the fettling the order of fuccefion to
th1( crown ; the defence of the ancient nobility;
wctr. tle motives which1 they alleged to justify
ilhir rebellion t. Many of the lower people
1IVcked to them with fuclh arms as they could
)proctre ; and had tle capacity of their leaders
ibci- in any degree equal to the enterprise, it
tn lil lIav soon grown to be extremely formidable.
I'.iizab)clh at'ed wirli prudence and vigour; and
, ; re Irvcd by her fllij.'ets with fidtlily and ar-

,lotlr. On1 tile ilt ruInotllr of all insurrection,
lMary was remtoved to Coventry, a place of
llrii;gth, wlicll could not be taken without a

Carte, vol. ii. 489, 490. CaiUid. 4.'r.
Stlype, vol i. 547.

reiulau

regular siege.; a detachment of the rehcls, wli lR
was funt to rescue her, returled wlithot fuc, ;
Troops were assembled in (iffcrent I)arts o, i,:
kingdom; as they advanced, the maiccontc :it;
retired. In their retreat their numbers dwind(kii
away, and their spirits funk. Despair and in.
ccrtaintv whither to direl- their flight, !
togethe fr fr some time a fliall body of t}E.i-
among the mountains of Northumbrliand; I.:;.
they were at length obliged to diflprfc, anil l! c
chiefs took refuge among the Scoltifh lordc( ..l
The two earls, together with the count..:, .
Nortlhuml erlalnd, wanderilng for some days il,; 'i
wafies rs Liddifdalc. wcre plui(ndered by tll b;: -
ditti [.Dec. 211, exposed to the rigol urf i;'=
season, and l-ft deilii iut of the Ofccfliricr-

i ;i 'i'.

W ietnlmorlanlld was con:ealed by Scot of i;!. -
cleugh and lcr of Feriilher-il, and aftic;!i-i s
conveyed into ilie Netlirlancs. NortIn.i',r-
land was seizcd by the rIl:g t, !who hladi arl i i
witl some troop]s towarids the bo rders to pi': .1
anly inprlllionl thle :rebl I itilt make ol tiio.
ilutilnotlu plro\icllccs .

Anluitl so iiany 'lcrprrilg events, tllhi a'-

fairs of tile ch turch, for Itwo yca.rs, liav' e i1ti;::
efeaped our llotice. Its general affelbl i's ov '
held rcgu!arly ; b i no iu!hell.s of 1iumcli i-
p)ortaince e }ilov.'. thieir .cAttI(tiol. i\:; lI
numiber of tlie piotcllaiit clergy daily ilc:iili (ii
the dclfcie: ncy of tlie fuild.(s lft aplart for tl,'i
I- llfi{lclc c u c ea ne gli:ll. cl, anld was inol't 1tl1-
fihly ft;t. Maniy ellirts were made toward,. 1c
o e:ilgl tlhe anc liclt patrimony of tie churc1li) 1

I Cabbalsl, 171. Caind. 422.

:11

at least as much of it as was possessed by the
popifli incumbents, a race of men who were now
not only useless but burdensome to the nation.
But though the manner in which the regent re-
ceived the addrefles and complaints of the gene-
ral assemblies, was very different from that to
which they had been accuftoined, io effeaual
remnedy was provided; and while they suffered
intolerable oppression, and groaned under ex-
treme poverty, fair words, and liberal promises,
were all they were able to obtain x.

1570.] Elizabeth now began to be weary of

keeping iuch a prisoner as the queen of Scots.
D)uring the former year, the tranquillity of hei
government had been disturbed, firit by a secret
coobination of some of her nobles, then by the
rebellion of others; and she often declared, not
without reason, that Mary was the hidden caue
of both. Many of her own fubjeds favoured or
pitied the captive queen; the Roman catholic
prinecs on the continent were warmly interested
'ii her cause. The detaining her any longer in
].:gland, ihte foresaw, would be made the pre-
ti xt or occasion of perpetual cabals and infuri
rtitions among the former; and might expose
he:r to the hostile attempts of the latter. She
rceulved, therefore, to give up Mary into the
lalds of the regent, after itipulating with him,
liot only that her days (hould not be cut short,
citlhr by a judicial sentence or Ly fccret vio-
lenlce, but that ihe flould be treated in a main
ner suited to her rank ; and in order to secure
ltis obferrvance of this, the required that fix of
the clief noblemen in the kingdom should be

x Cald. vol. ii. 8o, &c.

sent

sent into England as hoflagesY. With..refitii
to the safe cultody of the queen, ihe relied on
Murray's vigilance, whole security, no less thal,
her own, depended on preventing Mary froni
re-aending the throne. The negotiation for
this purpose was carried fomc lengih, whien it
was discovered by the vigilance of the billho I;i
Ross, who, together with the French and
Spanifl ambafladors, remonifrated againMt t!,e
infamy of such an af&ion, and represented thil
surrendering the queen to her rebellious fiubjict:,
to be the fame thing as 'if Elizabcth fliould, ly
ler own authority, condemln her to infLant dcaih.
This procured a delay; and the murder of ti:c
regent prevented the revival of that deligl z.

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh swas tlhe pcrfi

who committed this barbarous ation. lie had
been condemned to death soon after the battle
of Langfide, as I have already related, ald!
owed his life to the regent's clemency. lilt
part of hlis elate had been beltowed upon one
of the regent's favourites, who seized his hotrfc,
and turned out his wifc naked, in a cold niglit,
into tlhe open'fillds, where, before next mon;-
ing, flle became firioufly iiad. This injilly
made a deeper imprlcffion upon him than thle lc-
ncfit which lie lhad received, and fiom that n ,-
ment. hie vowedt to be reve\llgcl nupon the rcgcnt.
Party-rage 1tregtlcl.hncd and ilflamed hi:; private
reeintment. Hii kifinCen the Iamniltons ap)-
plauded the enterprlif. Teli maxims of thall ag
jullitled the molt deiL)cratc : course whiclh lhe coul

Y Hayncs, 514.
Z Carte, vol. iii. 491. AI:dlf. vol. iii. 84.

take

take to obtain vengeance. He followed the
regent for some time, and watched for an op-
po tunity to strike tile blow. He resolved at lall
to wait iill his enemy fliould arrive at Linlith-
gRw\, through wh;ich he was to pass in his way
i;'.,i Stirling to Edinu-rgh. He took his fland
in a wooden gallery, which had a window to-
wv,.l'; the street; spread a feather-bed on the
fl,)r', to hinder the noise of his feet fiom being
i!a;:-d; liiing up a black cloth behind him, thai
1::; fhadlow might not be obfcrved from without;
;l, :;ttLer all this preparaition, calmly expe&ed
tl,- regent's approach, who had lodged during-
thl ;;ighit in a part of the town not far diflant.
S1,;e iudiltilln il nformation of the danger which
t!; lea.eied lim had been conveyed to the regent,
;ianl he paid so much regard to it, that he resolved
1,o return by the fame gatc through whihli he had

c':iCrt:d, and to fetch a cc;mpafs round tile tovn.
s)i ias the crowd about the gate was great, and
hi !inmfelf unacquainted with fear, he proceeded
tlinctly along the ll.ect; and tl.e throng of the
pI iple obliging hiln to move very flwly, gave
the aflaflin time ake

take so true an aim, that lie

iti a himn with a single bullet through the lower
ii:'t of llis belly, and killed the hlorfe ofa gentle-
1nl:,1 wio lode on his other lide. His followers

Kitiilly endeavoii red to break into the hlorle
ii,:ne the blow had co;nl, hut tihel found the
( oir llrongly barricaded ; and befocr it could be
r',( od open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet hoife,
\swich tlood ready or him il at a back pafl'ige,
a I(I w;ia got fluar bl)ciyd tlheir reach. The re-
gI( it died the fiune iiight of his woulnd .

: Iluchan. 3S5. Crawf. Mem. 1z4. Cabbala, 171.

There

There is no person in that age about whom

historians have been more divided, or whose cha-
rader has been drawn with such oppolite co-
lours. Personal intrepidity, military tkill, saga.
city, and vigour in the admininltration of civi}
affairs, are virtues, which even his enemies al-
low him to have possessed in an eminent degrc:.
His moral qualities are more dubious, and ougi!
neither to be praised nor censured without grea'.
refer-e, and many dilinffions. In a fierce adg
hie was capable of using vidory with human.it;.
and of treating the vanquiflled with moderatiol.
A patron of learning, which, among maltiart
nobles, was either unknown, or dcfpifed. Zealoiu
for religion, to a degree which diitinguifhed him1,
even at a time when profcfliois of that kind wtrc
not uncommon. His confidence in his frieln
was extreme, and inferior only to his liberalitv
towards them, which knew no bounds. A d;;-
intererfed palfion for the liberty of tis countly,
prompted him to oppose the pernicious fyftein
which the princes of Lorrain had obliged tile
queen. mother to piu-fie. On Mary's rct'ui
into Scotland he served her with a zeal aili
affcEtion, to which he sacrificed the fi'iendflip, t
!those who were Inoft attached to his pcrfon.
But, on the other hand, hii; ambition was iln-.
modtiate; and events happened that opened ti
him vast projeats, whiclh allured his enterprising
genius, and led him to actions incoufi{tent with
the duty of a fubje&. His treatment of t1i:
queen, to whose bounty he was so much indebted,
was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The depend-
ence on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was difgra,.eful to the nation. lil
tciecived aJd betrayed Norfolk with a bafenefi

7 unwovui

# BOOK VI.

unworthy of a man of honour. His elevation to
fich unexpeted dignity inspired him with new
paflions, with laughtinefs and reserve; and in-
itead of his natural manner, which was blunt and
open, he affetled the arts of difiEmulation and re-
i:einment. Fond, towards the end of his life, of
,fIttery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by
fothing his vanity led him afiray, while his an-
X icnt friends stood at a diflance, and predictcd
ilis approaching fall. But amidit the turbulence
;:id confulion of that faEious period, he dispensed
jiltice with so much impartiality, he repressed
ilic licentious borderers with so much courage,"
:.l'u eltablified such uncommon order and tran-
u.i:lity in the country, that his adminiitration
,:s extremely popular, and he was long and
!,eciioiiately remembered among the commons,
b)y the name of the Good Regent.

BOOK VI.
T'r. unexpe&edh blow, by which the regent

was cut off, Itruck the king's party with

.ll nitmoft conitcrnation. tlizabeth bewailed
his death as thle moRs fatal difalter which could
hlI:c hbefaUal.her kingdom ; and was inconsolable
to a degree that little suited herdignity. Mary't
atdherents exulted, as if now her rcftoration were
not only certain, but near at hand. The infamy
of the crime ziaturally fell on those who ex-
pressed fucbh dCec¢lt joy at'tjie comlijlion of

.. 111. Q At i

it; and as the assassin made his e'cape on a
horfc which belonged to lord Claud Hamiltoi,
and fled dire&ly to Hamilton, where he was
received in triumph, it was concluded that til
regent had fallen a facriiice to the resentment of
the queen's party, rather than to thic revenge o;
a private man. On the day after the murdLr,
Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ferniheril, boti
zealous abettors of the queen's caufc, entered
lEngland in an hostile manner, and plundered and
burnt the country, the inhabitants of which cy>-
pe&ed no inch outrage. If tfe regent had bec;l
alive, they would scarce lhave ventured on ficli
an irregular incur-!i i, nor could it well h:li;.
happened so soon 'fter lis death, lilefs theiy IluJi
been privy to tice crime.

This was noL the only irregularity to wli ii

the anarchy that ullowed tlle regent's death at;.
occalion. Durilng 1i!cli igeneral cOlflion ll, il:
hoped for uniiverfal irn in)iiy, and iroke oult ilto
exceffets of every kilnd. As it iwas iinpoffible L
rclliain tliefe wviilo t a ifettid form of gosc.'l-
meint, ai roul citiol of the nloblc',. v; s theld [1 ''i
12], in order to delibcraite colrtcrllilg tie d..
tion of a regent. The queen's adii'rce.tn; r':l,'
'to be prefi.nt at the Ilectinr!, ;ild pro'olled ;alt ai
its procedilngs. lTe kills own part' wr; it-
refoluite and divided in opln ini. ;Maililad, n hi.1
Kirkaldy had let at lilberty, and who olt;rii;!
from the nobles then :iltembled a d(':laration ;-
quitting himi of the: crin c.nwich had bccnl l;iidl
to his chlarge, en(leavotnrtd to brinlg about ;t
coalition of'lhe two p'nties, by plrcpoling to dl-
irit tile qtue.n to tlhe joint adinillillration of '!i-
vrlllint with her fbui. Elizabitht, adheingll to

hor

her ancient fyfftem with regard to Scottish as-
tairs, laboured, notwitllitanding the solicitations
of Mary's friendsa, to multiply, ild to per-
petuate the fitaions, which tore in pieces the
kingdom. Randolph, whom fie dispatched into
Scotland on the tirlt news of the'regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for fuich services,
Found all parties so exasperated by mutual in-
inies, and lo full of irrecolcileable rancour, that
it colt him little trouble to inflame their animo-
sitv. The convention broke up without coming
to ally agreement; and a new meeting, to whlich
tIe lobles of all parties were invited, was ap-
p;inted on the firlt of May b.

Meantime, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who flill

continued to acknowledge the king's authority,
were at the utmost pains to restore some degree
.if harmony aong their countrymen. They
procured, for this purpose, an amicable con-
ference among the leaders of the two factions.
But while the one demanded the restoration of
the quteen, as the only thing which could re-

l;-il),lifh the public tranquillity; while the other
I'tciemcd the king's authority to be so sacred,
h lbat it was, on no account, to be called in question
<ii impaired; and neither of them would recede
in thl lea{t point from their opinions, they fepa-
ratcd without any piofpeCt of concord. B3oth
erec rendered more averse fiom ieconcileinent,
by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived
ilsolm France with promises of powerful succour
to the queen's adherents ; and as the civil wars

a See Appendix, No, XXXIV.
I Crawv. Mcm. 131. Calderw. ii. 157.

Q 2 In

in that kingdom seemed to be on the point As
terminating in peace, it was expected that Charl,.'
would soon be at liberty to fulfil what he pr,.
mifed. On the other hand, the earl of Sufle.
was assembling a powerful army on the borde--
and its operations could not fail of adding fpiii;
and strength to the king's party c.

Though the attempt towards a coalition of

the facaions proved ineffctual, it contribu'ci
Somewhat to moderate or suspend their ragec:
but they soon began to a& with their uiu l
violence. Morton, the most vigilant and alhi
leader on the king's fide, solicited Elizabeth to
interpose, without delay, for the safety of a party
so devoted to her interest, and which tsood i:
much in need of her affifiance. The chiefs ui
the queen's factions, assembling at Linlithgow,
marched thence to Edinburgh EApril io];
and Kirkaldy, who was both governor of the
castle and provost of the town, prevailed on the
citizens, though with some difficulty, to admit
them within the gates. Together with Kirkal-
dy, the earl of Athole and Maitland acceded
almost openly to their party; and the duke and
lord Herries, having recovered liberty by Kirk.
aldy's favcur, resumed the places which they had
formerly held in their councils. Encouraged by
the acquisition of persons so illnftrious by thceii
birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they pult-
lifled a proclamation, declaring their intention
to support the queen's authority, and feeincd re-
solved not to leave the city before the meeting'
of the approuching convention, in which, by

Crtwf. Mem. 134.

their

thlir numbers and influence, they did not doubt
of securing a majority of voices on their fide d.

At the fame time they had formed a d.elign of

kindlingr war between the two kingdoms. If
they could engage them in hostilities, and revive
tlcir ancient emulation and antipathy, they
hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of
grret advantage to the king's cause, but to
reconcile their countrymen to the queen, Eliza-
i)th's natural and most dangerous rival. With
this view, they had, immediately after the mur-
der of the regent, prompted Scot and Ker to
comimence hostilities, and had since instigated
themn to continue and extend their depredations.
As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one hand, the
(iallgerous consequences of rendering this a
n;ttional qualrel; and resolved, on the other, not
to susser fiuch an insult on her government to pass
with impunity ; flle issued a proclamation, de.
el;tring that file imputed the outrages which had
ccn committed on the borders not to the Scot-
tifll nation, but to a few desperate and itl-defign-
iWg' persons; that, with the former, (he was
rciblved to maintain an inviolable friendlhip,

hlereas the duty which {he owed to her own
fiibjests obliged her to chastise the licentiousness
of the latter%. Suflex and Scroop accordingly
cntered Scotland, the one on the east, the other
on the weft borders, and laid waste the adjacent
countries with fire and sword f. Fame magnified
the number and progress of their troops, arnd
Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe
in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill

d Crawf. Mem. 137. Ctlderw. ii. 176.
c Caldeirw, ii 18. f Cabbala 174,

Q 3 affcae

asse&ted to their cause, retired to Linlithgow
[April 28]. There, by a public proclamation,
they asserted the queen's authority, and sorbad
giving obedience to any but the duke, or the
earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom flle had con.
ftit uted her lieutenants in the kingdom.

T1'v nobles who continued faithful to the king,

though considerably weakened by the defeetiol
of so mainy ..f their friends, assembled at Edin-
burgh on the day appointed [May i]. Thyc
issued a counter-proclamation, declaring such as
appeared for the queen enemies of their countr ;
and charging them with the murder both of lthi
late king and of the regent. They could not,
however, presume so much on their own itrengit
as to venture either to elet a regent, or to takt
the field against the queen's party; but thle a-
fiftance which they received from Elizabth,
enabled them to do both. By her ordc fie r
William Drury marched into Scotland, with a
thousand foot and three hundred horse ; ticl
king's adherents joined him with a confidelrab)l
body of troops, and advancing towards Glasgow,
where the adverse party had already begun hof-
tilities by attacking the carle, they forced tlhei
to retire, plundered the neighbouring country
which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, atlt-
seizing some of their caftlcs, and rafing otht'
returned to Edinburgh.

Under Drury's protecion, the carl of Lcnnoi.

returned into Scotland. It was natural to colln
mit the government of the kingdom to him durli!n
the minority of his grandfoi. Hlis illuftriou:
birth, and alliance with the royal faminly of Eng-
land, as well as of Scotlandj rendtred him wor liy

of that honour. His resentment against Mary
being implacable, and his estate lying in Eng-
land, and his family residing there, Elizabeth
confidered him as a man who, both from incli-
nation and from interest, would at in concert
wilh her, and ardently wifled that he might
fiiccced Murray in the office of regent. But, on
many accounts, (he did not think it prudent to
discover her own sentiments, or to favour his
pretenlions too openly. The civil wars in
France, which had been excited partly by real
and partly by pretended zeal for religion, and
carried on with a fierceness that did it real dif-
honolur, appeared now to be on the point of
crlinug to an issue; and after shedding the befl
blood, and wafting the richest provinces in the
kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ar-
dour that facilitated the negotiations which were
c.;rryillg on for that purpose. Charles IX. was
kltvwn to be a paflionate admirer of Mary's
leaiuty. Nor could lie, in honour, fuiltfr a queen
i. Fiance, and the moll ancient ally of his crown,
t, languili in her present cruel Situation without
; clnmpting to procure her relief. I-Ie had hither.

eo I-en obliged to satisfy himself with remon-

trating, by his ambalfadors, againif the indignity
with which flie had been treated. But If he
vwere once at full liberty to purfile his; inclina..
tions, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread
si om the impetuosity of his temper and the power
of his arms. It therefore became nececlhary for
her to ad with some reserve, and not to appear
avowedly to countenance the choice of a regent,
in contempt of Mary's authority. Thejeafoufy
and prejudices of the Scots required no lets

manage.

management. Had flie openly supported Len-
nox's claim; had flie recommended him to tbh
convention, as the candidate of whom she ap-
proved ; this miglt have roused the independ.
ent spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a dil-
covery of her intention, (fe might have defeat'dl
its ftlceelfs. For these reasons flie hesitated long,
and returned ambiguous answers to all the minc
fages which nle received from the king's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiment-
was at ladl obtained, and an event of an extra-
ordiiiry nature seems to have been the occaleion
of it. Pope Pius V. having issued a bull, whlerei)
1he Cecoii.lmulicatcd Elizabeth, deprived her of
her kingdom, and ablolved her fubje&ts from theic
oath of allegiance, Felton, an Englishman, had t!he
boldness to affix it on the gates of the billfhp
of London's palace. In former ages, a pope,
movcd by his own ambition, or pride, or hi-
gotry, denounced this fatal sentence against ti'
mnol powerful monarchs ; but as the authority
of the court of Rome was now less regarded, i:;;
proceedings were more cautious ; aifd it \w;
only 'iThen they were roused by some poxweril
prince, that the thunders of the church .vere
ever lhard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this
tlep, which the pope had talen5 to a combi;il-
tion of the Roman catholic princes against her,
and filfpected that some plot was formed in
favour of the Scottini queen. In that event, lhe
knew that the tafety of her own kingdom de-
pended on preserving her influence in Scotland;
and in order to tlrengthen this, she renewed her
promises of protecting the king's adherents, cn-
couraged them to proceed to the elefion. of a

regent,

iegent, and even ventured to point out the earl
of Lennox, as the person who had the bell
title. That honour was accordingly conferred
1i1',m him, in a convention of the whole party,
ield on the 12th of Julyg.

The regent's first care was, to prevent the
:ctling of the parliament which the queen's
partv had fumnoned to convene at Linlithgow.
i ii,,Jg effecaed that, he marched againlt the carl
)f iluntly, Mary's lieutenant in the north, and
Tijrccd the garrison which he had placed in
Bircchin to fin-render at dicfretion. Soon after,
:cu made himself malter of rome other castles. Em-
I!)ldened by this successful beginning of his ad-
niiliftration, as well as by the appearance of a
considerable army, with which the earl of Suffex
:uo,:ered on the borders, he deprived Maitland
cf his office of secretary, and proclaimed him,
the duke, Huntly, and other leaders of the queen's
pat ty, traitors and enemies of their country h.

In this desperate situation of their affairs, the

queen's adherents had recourse to the king of
Spain i, with whom Mary had held a close cor.
rcfpondence ever since her confinement in Eng-
,alnd. They prevailed on the duke of Alva to

t wili two of his officers to take a view of the

country, and to examine its coasts and harbours:
:ndl obtained from them a small supply of money
1id arms, which were sent to the earl of I-unt-
ly :. But this aid, so disproportionate to their
cx;igencies, would have availed them little. They
vcrc indebted for their safety to a treaty, which

Slpotfw. z4o. Cald. ii. i86. Sec Append.No. XXXV.
1 Crawf. Mem. x59. Cald. ii. xg8. I See Append,
'.), XXXVI. k1 Andcr. iii. :xz. Crawf. Meni. i'i.

Elizabeth!

Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of
restoring the captive queen to her throne. The
first istles in this negotiation had been taken ;,
the month of May; but hitherto little progref,
was made in it. The peace concluded betweci
the Roman catholics and hugonots in Franc;
an:d her apprehensions that Charles would intcr.
pose with vigour in behalf of his filler-in-li ,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She ass &EiI
to treat her prisoner with more indulgence, li,
liltened more graciously to the solicitations !f'
foreign ambassadors in her favour, and fecmrc:
fully determined to replace her on the throne li'
her ancestors. As a proof of her lincerity, fi;e
laboured to procure a cessation of arms betwct.'i
the two contending fa&ions in Scotland. Ls:;-
nox, elated with the good fortune which hail
hitherto attended his administration, and fatter-
ing himself with an easy triumph over enen;',
whose estates were wafted, and their forces dii.
pirited, refused for some time to come into tl;;
measure. It was not safe for him, however, tou
dispute the will of his proteEtrefs. A cetffii)W?
of hoitilities during two months, to conmmeiii
on the third of September, was agreed upon;l
and, being renewed fiom time to time, it cr,-
tinued till the firll of April next year'.

Soon after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil ,ild

Sir Walter Mildmay to the queen of Scot'.
The dignity of these amnhaflildots, the forllrcr
her prime minilter, the latter clhancellor of tilh
exchequer, and one. of her ablelt colufellois,
tcovinced a ll parties that the negotiation aw'

I Spotfw. 243.

si..,,;,",

frIious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty
was now approaching. The propositions which
they made to her were advantageous to Eliza-
bcth, but such as a prince in Mary's iituationl
had rcafon to txpea. The ratiiication of the
Lrcaty of Edinburgh; the renolucing any pre-
tclfions to the Englifl crown, during Eliza-
beth's own 'life, or that of her poiterity; the
adecring to the alliance between the two king-
doms; the pardoning her fulbje&ts who had taken
arms agaillt her; and her promising to hold no
c'orreipondence, and to countenance no enter-
prift, that might dilturb Elizabeth's govern-
nuirlt; were among the chief articles. By way
,f fcctiity for the aocomplifhlnent of these, they
.lrnanlded that some peifons of rank fihould be
.iv'n as hostages, that the prince her son Ihould
iclide in England, and that a few catlles on the
biclder flhonld be put into Elizabeth's hands.
To some of thefc propoiitions Mary consented;
I;mne the endeavoured to mitigate; and others
'!!e Attempted to evade. In the mean time, hle
* laifinittied copies of them to the pope, to the
knigs of France and Spain, and to the duke of
MIva. She infiluated, that without some timely
:)d vigorous interpolition in her behalf, lile
X'ould be obliged to accept of these ha-d con-
lillons, and to purchale liberty at any price.
*iIt the pope was a dillant and feeble ally, and
; his great efforts at this time againl the
'1 irks, his trcafury was entirely exhllaflcd.
('harlels had already beguln to meditate that
Ccllpiracy againlt the hugonots, which marks
ils reign witl such infnmy; and it required much
ifcillre, and pcrfect truinquillity, to bring that

execrable

execrable plan to maturity. Philip was emplov.
ed in fitting out that fleet which acquired ib
much renown to the Chriitian arms, by the vic-
tory over the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors ir
Spain threatened an infirre&ion; and his sub-
jets in the Netherlands, provoked by much
oppreflion and many indignities, were breakilg
out into openl rebellion. All of them, for tlihc
different reasons, advised Mary, without depend-
ing on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the
belt terms lhe could procuren'.

Mary accordingly consented to many oi

Elizabeth's demands, and discovered a facility
of disposition, which promised tfill further coi-
cetions. But no concession mfe could ha.e
made, would have satisfied Elizabeth, who, i;
spite of her repeated profelfions of sincerity t,
foreign ambassadors, and notwithstanding tic
solemnity with which the carried on the treaty,
had. no other objet in it, than to amuse Mary's
allies, and to gain timen. After having so lo!g
treated a queen, who fled to her for refuge, ;1
so ungenerous a manner, flle could not now ditL
miss her with safety. Under all the difadvan-
tages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, whllic
were extremely formidable. What desperate
effefts of her just resentment might be expedcd.
if the were set at liberty, and recovered hbc
former power ? What engagements could bind
hrr, not to revenge the wrongs which lhe had
fuftired, nor to take advantage of the favour.
able conjunctures that might present themselves?
m Andcrf, vol. iii. 19 I zo, ,' DPl6s, Compl. Aab. 7S.

W;.w

WFas it possible for her to give such security for
her behaviour, in times to come, as might remove
all suspicions and fears ? And was there not good
cavifc to conclude, that no future benefits could
cvicr obliterate the memory of pall injuries ? It
':.as thus Elizabeth reasoned; though she con-
ritied to a& as if her views had been entirely
itferent. She appointed seven of her privy
c.: lfellors to be commiflioners f!r fettling the
:-icles of the treaty; and, as Mary had already
.anmed the bishops of Ross and Galloway, and
iord Lcvingfton, for her ambassadors, she re-
quired the regent to impower proper ptrfons to
.i:ppear in behalf of the king. The earl of
'[o: ton, Pitcairn abbot of l)ulfcrmiililg, and fir
;j:t;ls Macgill, were the persons chosen by the
regenlt. They prepared for their journey as
fClwly as Elizabeth herself could have xwilhed.
At length they arived at London [Fcb. I9,
[,71], and met the cotmmiffioners of the two
<it:ens8. Mary's ambaflfadrs dif(overed the
tiilr.gcft inclination to comply with every tling
tl,:it wvould remove the obstacles wllich tood in.
dirc way of their miltrefs's liberty. But when
Morton and his aflociatcs were callcd upon to
vlidicate their condudt, and to explain the senti-
r'cnt; of their party, they began, injultification
rs their treatiment of the queen, to advance
luch maxims concerning the liiited powers of
piinccs, and the natural right of fibjeAs to
rcit and to control them, as were extremely
fliocking to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal
pric'ogativc, as has been formerly observed, were
vr:y exalted. With regard to the authority
rllich the king now pof'cffcd,l,-4lcy declared

VOL. I, . that

that they neither had, nor could possibly receive
inftrutions, to consent to any treaty that tended
to subvert, or even to impair it in the leait d-..
gree0. Nothing could be more trifling and
ridiculous, than such a reply from the comrn:-
lioners of the king of Scots to the queen ol
England. His party depended absolutely ,n
her protection; it was by persons devoted to hler
he had been feated on the throne, and to her
power he owed the continuance of his rei;rn,
With the utmnot ease she could have bro'.:ght
them to hold very different language; and what-
ever conditions she might have thought fit to
prescribe, they would have had no other cllh'i:
but to fibmit. This declaration, however, f!e
afft:eed to confider as an insuperable difficuli' ,';
and finding that there was no reason to dr',,iJ
any danger from the French king, who had ,i.I
discoverel that eagerness in support of M;a-)
which was expected, the reply made by Morti)n
{Marcli 24] furniflied elr with a pretence i;:l
putting a itop to the negotiation, until the rte, itr
fliould fend ambassadors with more ample po\w; :,
Thlus, after being amuled for ten months wit!
the Ilopes of liberty, tlhe unhappy quccn olt
Scots remaired ander lItriccter cultody tlan c'c.r,
and without any profpetSt of scaping froim it;
while thof! fuLbjcts who lli ll adhiered to h r
were expufld, wit holt ally or protetior, to tlic
rage of enemies, wvhon their success in til;
negotiation rendered fiill more infllent '.

On tlhe day aiter the expiration of the truc'.

tvllich had beenL oblervcd with little cxadlti:

o Cald. ii. 2 . i Diggess , 5i IJa) c 53, 53, 54.
t .'in. iii. n) &c,

''
. HH~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(l

on either fide, captain Crawford of Jordan.hill,
a gallant and enterprising officer, performed ai
service of great importance to the regent, by
surprising the castle of Dunbarton. This was
the only fortified place in the kingdom, of
which the queen had kept pofieffion ever since
the commencement of the civil wars. Its fitua-
tion on the top of an high and almofft in.,cceffible
rock, which rifes in the middle of a plaint
remdered it extremely strong, and, in the opinion
of that age, impregnable; as it commlnnded the
river Clyde it was of great coniequence, and
was deemed the mol proper place in the king.
deom for landing any foreign troops that mghtl
comne to Mary's aid. The ttrength of the place
recndered lord Fleming, the gvrernor, nore fe-
cu'e than he ought to have been, confidering its
importance. A soldier who had served in the
garrison, and had been disgusted by some ill
i!;l!ge, ropofedthe fhede t the regent, en.
deavoulred to demonfirate that itwas practicablce
:icld offered himself to go the foremost man on
tic enterprise. It was thought prudent to risk
2lv danger for so great a prizc. 'caliing.ladders,
i":O whatever else might be neeetfary, were pre-
p;Tl.' with the utnioft secrecy and dispatch.
All the avenues to the caltle were ecized, that
lto intelligence of the design mirght reachl the
governor. Towards evening Crawr fulr mar hed
rr'na Glasgow with a finallbut deteain,' l IJa.1an
j;.y midnight they arrived at the bot,toii .,f the
rock. Tihen moro was set, and the Ilcy, which.
hilhicrto had been extremely clear, was covered
with 1t thick fog. It was where the rock was
hnil;:(t tliat tlhe affailallti made their attcmpts

R; , bbcaitf

because in that place there were few centin-ls,
and they hoped to find them least alert. The
tirft ladder was scarcely fixed, when the weight
and eagerness of those who mounted, brought it
to the ground. None of the assailants were
hurt by the fall, and none of the garrison
alarmed at the noise. Their guide and Craw-
ford ferambled up the rock, and fastened the
ladder to the roots of a tree which grew in a
cleft. This place they all reached with the
utmost difficulty, but were still at a great dif-
tance from the foot of the wall. Their ladder
was made fast a second time; but in the middle
of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen dif-
ficulty. One of their companions was seizcd
with some sudden fit, and clung, seemingly with.
out life, to the ladder. All were at a iland.
It was impossible to pass him. To tumble him
headlong was cruel; and might occasion a (ds-
covery. But Crawford's pretence of mind did
not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall
when the fit was over; and turning the othr
fide of the ladder, they mounted with these over
his belly. Day now began to break, and there
fill remained a high walf to scale; but after fin'-
mounting so many great difficulties, this was soon
accomplihed. A sentry observed the firit man
who appeared on the parapet, and had jut time
to give the alarm, before he was knocked on the
lead. The officers and soldiers of the garrifol;
ran out naked, unarmed, and more solicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making
refiltance. The adfailants ruflied forwa.rda, with
repeated fliouts and with the utmost fury; took

poff(:tliD

pofiCflion of the magazine; seized the cannon
and tirned them against their enemies. 1ortd
'ileining got into a small boat, and fled all alone
i'nta Argylefhire. Crawford, in reward of his
valour and good condut, remained master of the
caflle; and as he did not lose a ingle man in the
enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
-leafire. Lady Fleming, Verac the French
envoy, and Hamilton arclbiiliop of St. An-
drew's, were the prisoners of greatet diitinc-
tClt .4

Verac's charactler prorftecd him from the
uifr,'e which he merited by his ativity in flirriii
i'p ct:Tnies agaiinlt the king. The regentn treated
ti:e lady with great politcnefs and hiumanity.
iuvt a very diff. rent fate awaited the archhifhop;
h: was ca-rried niider a iliron guard to Stirling;
.;nd as he had formerly been attainted by aft of
,arliamcint, he was, without any formal trial,
.-(tUdcmncd to be hanged; and on the fourth
!;, aifter he was taken, the fentcnce was cx:-
cited. An attempt was made to convict him
f being accessary to the murder both of th.

a-ini: and regent, hut these accusations were

ti))potrted by no proof Our hillorians observe,
]lalt le was tlhe firllt biflop in Scotland who died
i ' the hands of the executioner. The high
. i1'bcs he had enjoyed, both in church anri slate,
( ;!,lt to have exempted him from a pulifilmenit
."IliAcd only on the lowest criminals. But his
'al for tile queen, his abilities, and his profef-
i!ll, rendered him odious and formidable to the
;.;Lg's adherents. Lennox hated him as the

q Buchan. 394.

3 pcrfon

pcrfon by whose counsels the reputation and
power of the house of Hamilton were fupportd.
Party rage and personal enmity di&ated that in-
decent sentence, forwhich some colourwas fought,
by imputing to him such odious crimes r.

The loss of l)unbarton, and the revere treat-

ment of the archbifllop, perplexed no less than
they enraged the queen's party; and hostilitics
were renewed with all the fierceness which dii-
appointment and indignation can iniipire. Kirk.
aldy, who, during the truce, had taken care ta
inccrafe the number of his garrison, and to
provide every thing necessary for his deferce,
issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's autho-
rity to be uulawful and usurped; commanded
all who favoured his cause to leave the tow.n
x\ithin fix hours; seized the arms belonging to
the citizens; planted a battery on the iteeple of
St. Giles's, repaired the walls, and fortified the
gates of the city ; and, though the affetions
of the inhabitants leaned a different way, hild
out the metropolis againlt the regent. Th-
duke, IIuntly, Home, Herries, and other chieci
of that faction, repaired to Edinburgh with their
followers; and having received a linall funi of
moncy and some ammunition from France, fomie(!
no contemptible army within the walls. On the
other fide, Morton seized Leith and fortified it;
and the regent joined him with a confidelraie
body of men. While the armies lay so near
each other, daily fcirmiflies happened, and with
various success. The queen's party was not
strong enough to take the field against the regent,

r Spotfwood, 25s.

nor

nor vas hit superiority so great as to undertake
the siege of the caflle or of the town s.

Sone tine before Edinburgh fell into the

hands of his enemies, the regent had summoned
; parliament to meet in that place. In order to
prevent any objcition againit the lawfiluefs of
thle meeting, the members obeyed the procla.
i-,;tion as exadtly as poflible; and assembled
iMay 14] in a house at the head of the Canlon-
.cate, which, though without the walls, lies
;itllin the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy
exerted himself to the utmost to interrupt their
tieeting; but they were so ltrongly guardedl,
hilat all efforts *ere vain. They pafled aui adt
·ttainting Maitland and a few others, and then
'.djourned to the 28th of Alugul t.

Tlhe other party, in order that their proceed-

;;n, might he countenanced by the fame shew of
Ig1il authoiity, hleld a meeting of parliament
ioon after. There was produced in this assembly
declaration by the queen, of the invalidity of
tii.t deed whereby flie had resigned the crown,
,,nd consented to the coronation of her son.
Conformable to this declaration, an ac' was
it1i]d, pronouncing the resignation to have beec
'xtorted by fear; to be null in itself, and in all
;is cfequences; and enjoining all good fib-
jecis to acknowledge the queen alone to be their
!:;wful sovereign, and to support those who
ntcd in her name. The present ellablifhment
,f the protellant religion was confirlmed by
;mnoller itatute; and, in imitation of the adverse
party, a new meeting was appointed on the
2ith of August ".
Cald, i. 233, &c, t Crawf. Mcm. 177. B Ibid.

Meanwhile

Meanwhile all the miseries of civil war defo-

lated the kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends,
brothers, took different fides, and ranged their.-
felve,, upder the standards of the contendintg
fations. In every county, and almost in every
town and village, King's ment and .tteen'rs mrn
were names of diitincilon. Political hatred dif-
solved all natural ties, and extinguifled the
reciprocal good-will and confidence which hd!:l
mankind togetllher in society. Religious 7ytca
mingled itself with these civil ditfinftions, and
contributed not a little to heighten and to inflame
them,

Tie faitions which divided the kingdom were,

in appearance, only two. But in both thtrf
there were persons with views and principles si
different from each other, that they ought to be
diftinguiflhed. With some, considerations of
religion were predominant, and they either ;ad.
liered to the queen, becanfe they hoped by ll'r
means to re-eftablilf popery, or they defendrl
the king's authority, as the bell ftlpport of ile
protestant faith. Among tlefe the oppolition
was violent and irreconcileable. Others wrle
influenced by political motives only, or allured by
views of interelt; the regent aimed at unliting
theie, and did not despair of gaining by gentle
arts many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge
tlhe king's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy
had formed the fame design of a coalition, blt
on filch terms that the queen might be refloted
to some fliare in the government, .ad the king-
dom shake off its dependence . upon England.
Morton, the ablest, the moll ambitious, and tlle
molit powerful man of the king's party, held a

particular

particular course; and moving only as he was
prompted by the court of England, thwarted
every measure that tended towards a reconcile-
mlent of the factions; and as lie itrved Elizabeth
vith much fidelity, he derived both power and
credit fromn her avowed proteEtion.

The time appointed by both parties for the

meeting of their parliaments now approached.
Oirly three peers and two bishops appeared in
t.lt which was held in the queen's name at
Edinburgh. But, contemptible as their numbers
.:ere, they passed an a& for attainting upwards
of twvo hundred of the adverse faction. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid.
The regent had prevailed on the earls of Argyll,
Eglinton, Caffils, and lord Boyd, to acknow-
icdge the king's authority. The three earls
were among the most powerful noblemen in lhe
kiingdom, and had hitlerto been zealous in the
queen's caufc Lord Boyd had been one of
Airry's commissioners at York and Wetlm;intler,
as;d lilce that time had been admitted into all
1,:i. most secret councils. But, during that tur-
bulent period, the conduci of individuals, a&
Wc11 as the principles of fatioiis, varied so often,
tliat the sense of honour, a chief preservative of
con;ilence in charaAclr, was entirely loft; and
mili outt any regard to decorin., iren fuddenlir
iail(tonued one party, and adopted all the
lileiit pafliols of the other. The dcf Ctionl
Ilh'cver, of so nil;ny i),prlons of diiiinioni, not
1,,lyl weakened the queen's pnrty, but added
t'piitation to lher aldverfirics.

After the example of the parli;anent at .Edin
'nrgh, that at Stlrling began iwith friuailg ads

agalu);i

against the opposite faSion. But in the midst of
all the security, which confidence in their own
numbers or diltance from danger could inspire,
they were awakened, early in the morning of
September the third, by the shouts of the enemy
in the heart of the town. In a moment the
houfis of every person of diltintion were fur-
rounded, and before they knew what to think
of so ftvange an event, the regent, the earls of
Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton,
Montrose, Buchan, the lords Sempil, Carthcart,
Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and moiunl (
behind troopers, who were ready to carry them
to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of
this daring enterprise; and if he had not b:*-,
induced by the ill-timed solicitude of his frienads
about his safety, not to hazard his own perfoni
in conduaing it, that day might have termi-
nated the contest between the two factions, and
have restored peace to his country. By his di-
refion four hundred men, under the conmalil
of Huntly, lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott :f
Bucclcugh, set out from Edinburgh, and, lhi
better to conceal their design, marched towards
the south. But they soon wheeled to the right,
and horses having been provided for the infantry,
rode itraight to Stirling. By four in the morn-
ing they arrived there ; not one ,entry was polt-
cc on the walls, not a tingle man was aw;ak,
about the pklce. They met with no refill; irce
from any person whom they attempted to frciz,
except Morton. Ele defending lls house with
obitinate valour, they were obliged to fat it cip
fire, and he did not filrrender till forced out o[
it by the flames, In pecrforming this, fonm timne

Wils

;as confumled; and the private men, unaccuftom-
ed to regular discipline, left their colours, and
Ibgcan to rifle the houses and fhups of the citi-.
zcnu;. The noise and uproar in the town reached
the caflle. The earl of Mar sallied out with
thirty fuldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy, of
whiom almolt none but the officers kept togetler
i,. a body. The townfmcen took arms to aififi.
thlicr governor; a sudden panic firuck the as-
failants ; some fled, some surrendered themselves
lo their own priloners; and had not the hor-
dtrers, who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit,
by carrying off all thle hotrfe within the place,
not a mn;a would have eftaped. If the regent
.::,! ;ot unfortunately been killed, the loss on
tl. king's fide would lhave been as niconfiderable
,; tlie alarm was great. Think on tfh archbiylop
c St. 4mtlreu's, \; as thw v;ord among the queen's
io!ditrs ; and .Lennox fell a facrificc to his me-
nm)u y. The otficer to whom le fuiirendered, en-
d avouring to protet hlim, loll his own life in
:;1; defence. He was slain, according to the ge-

clitl opinion, by command of loid CGland Ha-

n;:ilto,. Kirkaldy lhad the glory of concerting
l li plan with great fccrecy and prudence; but
'Mrton's fortunate obltinacv, .n:d the want of
,ir:iplilic among his troops, dI lprivcd him of sue-
,.I.1o, the only thilng want li:. to r'cider this equal
:) the moil applauded miil.iitr centerprilfs of the

.s so many of the nohles wer'.' allIcmbied [Sept.

;},, llcy proceeded without delity to the eleilion
,f a regent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were

MC MIlv, A'6, Cr.ows. Mcn, Z04.

candi·

candidates for the office. Mar was chfi(,'
by a majority of voices. Amidit all the finr-c
dissentions which had prevailed so long in Scot.
land, he had distinguished himself by his mode.
ration, his hu:nanity, and his difintereftcdncfs,
As his power was far inferior to Argyll's, and
his abilities not so great as Morton's, he was,
for these reasons, less formidable to the other
nobles. His merit, too, in having so lately
rclcued the leaders of the party from imminent
deltrudtion, contributed not a little -to his prc.
fermen t.

While these things were carrying on in Scot

land, the tranfadions in England were no less
intcrekting to Mary, arid frill more fatal to he;'
cause. The parliament of that kingdom, wiich
wet in April, passed an a&, by which it was de-

iared to be high treason to claim any right to

the crown during the life of the queen; to as.
firm that the title of any other pcrfon was better
than hers, or to maintain that the parliament
had not power to fettle and to limit the order
of fuccellion. This remarkable ifatute was\
intended not only for the security of their
own fovcreign, but to curb the reftlefg and
intriguing sp;irit of the Scottifi queen and Lcr
adherents r.

At this time a treaty of marriage between

Elizabeth and the duke of Anjou, the French
king's brother, was well advanced. Both courts
feer:d to desire it with equal ardour, and gave
out, with the utmost confidence, that it could
net fitil (f taking place. Neither of themr, how-

Caimd, 436,

, ~o/,t'

ever, willied it success; and they encouraged it
for no other end, but because it served to cover
or to promote their particular designs. The
whole policy of Catherine of Medicis was bent
towards the accomplishment of her deteftablc
p;ojiet for the destruction of the hugonot chiefs;
; iud by carrying on a negotiation for the marriage
rs her Ion with a princess who was jufly eiteem-
ed the proteftrefs of that party, by yielding some
things in point of religion, and by discovering an
indifference with regard to others, the hoped to
aiinufe all the proteltants in Europe, and to lull
illcep the jealousy even of the hugonots them-
selves. Elizabeth flattered herself with reaping
ailvantages of another kind. During the de-
l lndence of the negotiation, the French could
not with decency give any open afliftance to the
,.cottifh queen; if they conceived any hopes of
iiiccefs in the treaty of marriage, they would of
(. rltrf interest themselves but coldly in her con-
vtrns: Mary herself murt be dcjected at losing
.!1 .ally, whonm he had hitherto reckoned her
null powerful protetor; and by interrupting
;iar correspondence with France, one source, at
lcalt, of the cabals and intrigues Fhich dif-
tutrhed the kingdom would be ftopt. Both
qIecns fulcceeded in their schemes. Cathe-
rine's artifices ilnpofed on Elizabeth, and blinded
the hugonots. The French discovered the ut-
moll indifference about the interest of the Scottifi
queen; and Mary, confidering that court as al-
ready united with her rival, turned for protec-
tion with more eagerness than ever towards the
king of Spain . Philip, whose dark and thought-

% Dies, 1zAt. 148. Camd, 4;4.
Vox,, A, ai ful

ful mind delighted in the mylterv of intrigue,
had held a fecrct correspondence with Mary for
some time, by means of the bilhop of Ross, and
had supplied both herself and her adherents in
Scotland with fmrall fums of money. Ridolphi, a
tilorcntine gentleman, who resided at London
unlder the charatcr of a banker, and who afted
privately as an agent for the pope, was the per.
son whom the bishop intrulted with this nego-
tiation. Mary thought it neceflary likewise to
communicate the secret to the duke of Norfolk.
whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty,
upon his solemn promise to have no farthei intc.-
courc e with the queen of Scots. This promifi,
however, he regarded so little, that he continued
to keep a conltant correfpoidence with the cap-
tive queen ; while fle laboured to uourifh his all-
bitious hopes, and to tlrengthen his amorous at-
tachment by letters written in the fondest care!:
sing itrain. Some of these he must have receivcv
at the very time when he made that solemn pro
rnifc of holding no farther intercourfc with hli.
in coniequence of which Elizabeth reltorcd hir
to liberty. Mary, Rill confiderig him as 1he
future husband, took no Itep in any mattle of
moment without his advice. She early commu-
nicated to him her negotiations with Ridolplhi:
and in a longer letter, which flle wrote to him
.in cyphers", after complaining of the bafeleti
witll which the French court had abandoned hec
interct, file declared her intention of imploring
the assistance of the Spanilh monarch, which \wal

g Haynes, 597, 598. Hardw. State Ippers , i. 190, &'
Digges, Coinplcat Ambaf, 147.

n1/0V

now her only resource; and recommended Ri-
(olphi to his confidence, as a person capable
both of explaining and advancing the scheme.
Tli'e duke commanded Hickford, his secretary,
to decypher, and then to burn this letter; but
u hether he had been already gained by the
coult, or resolved at that time to betray his
maitt r, he disobeyed the latter part of tle order,
:ind hid the letter, together with otler trcafon-
aIble papers, under the duke's own bed.

R idolphi, in a conference with Norfolk, omit.

tu'd none of those arguments, and spared none of
those proniifes, which are the usual incentives to
rebcllio!. The pope, he told him, had a great
li n in readiness to bellow in so good a cause.
'The duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten
thousand men not far from London. The ca-
tholics to a man would rife in arms. Many'of
ihe nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only
a leader. Half the nation had turned their eyes
towards him, and called on him to revenge the
unmlerited injuries which he himfelfhad suffered;
;.nd to rcfcue an unfortunate queen, who offered
lim her hand and her crown, as the reward of
hi tuccefs. Norfolk approved of the design,
and though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter
tf credit, allowed him to use his name in negoti-
sting with the pope and Alva b. The bishop of
Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and
inlpatience to procure relief for his miltrefs, was
apt to run into rafl and defpcrate designs, advised
lhe duke to assemble secretly a few of his; folt
owsle, and at once to seize llizabeth's person,

b Anderl; iii. 16r.

s 3 2lut

But this the duke rejected as a scheme equallv
wild and hazardous. Meanwhile, the Englili
court had.received some imperfet information (,
the plot [AuguiR], by intercepting one of Ri-
dolphi's agents; and an accident happencd,
which brought to light all the circuinlincei of
it. The duke had employed Hickford to traf!'
mit to lord Herries fomc money, which was t,
be dilributed among Mary's friends in Scotland.
A perfou not in the secret was intrusted with
conveying it to the borders, and he fufpedtkil
it fiom the weight to be gold, whereas he lhad
been told that it was silver, carried it diredtly to
the privy council. The duke, lis domettii;c
and all who were privy, or could be fufpectcl
of being privy, to the design, were taken
into custody. Never did the accompliccs in
a conspiracy discover less firmness, or servants
betray an indulgent mailer with greater bast.
ness [Sept. 7]. Every one confcfed the whole
of what lie knew. Hickford gave diredtioln
how to find the papers which he had hidden.
The duke himself, relying at firrf on the fidelity
of his associates, and believing all dangerous pa..
pers to have been deltroyed, confidently affert.l
his own innocence ; but when their depofitionls
and the papers tllenfelves were produced, aU(-
itiflcd at their treachery, he acknowledged hi.s
gnilt, and implored the queen's mercy. Hli
offence was too heinous, and too often repeatcd!
to obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought it nc-
r:ffary to deter her fubjeEts, by his punifluinient.
fronm holding correspon'dence with the queen of
Scots, or her emilaries. Being tried by Ilit
pc;lrsi, hI was found guilty of high treafloi

alldh

and, after several delays, suffered death for the
crime c.

The discovery of this conspiracy produced

many effe&s, extremely detrimental to Mary's
interest. The biNfop of Ross, who appeared,
by the confeflion of all concerned, to be the
prime mover in every cabal against Elizaheth,
was taken into custody, his papers searched,
iiminl'lf committed to the Tower, treated with
the utmolt rigour, threatened with capital pu-
nilfhment, and, after a long confinement, set at
liberty, on condition that he fiould leave the

:kingdom. Mary was not only deprived of a
fri.ant, equally eminent for his zeal and his
nhilities, but was denied from that time the
privilege of having an ambassador at the English
ctort. The Spanifli ambassador, whom the-
icwer and dignity of the prince he represented
e\empted from fuqh insults as Ross had susser-
cd, was commanded to leave Englandd. As
tir'rc was now the clearest evidence that Mary,
trom' resentment of the wrongs file had fiffered,
and impatience of the captivity in which fie
was held, would not scruple to engage in the
lolt hostile and desperate enterprises againlt
tile eftablithed governnlmiit and religion, Ihe be-
-an to be regarded as a public enemy, and was
krpt under a ftri6er guard than formerly, the
nimber of her domeitics was abridged, and no
person permitted to fee her, but in presence of
her keepers*.

At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the
torm which was gathering on the continent

c Anders. 1ii. 149. State Trial, 185.
J Digu*, z63j. 0 Strypc, Aa, ii, 50.

s3 . gaiaft

against her kingdom, began to wilh that tran-
quillity were reitored in Scotland; and irritated
by Mary's late attempt againit her government,
Ihe determined to a&t, without disguise or am-
biguity, in favour of the king's party. This re.
solution she intimated to the leaders of both
factions [Oct. 23]. Mary, fle told them, had
'held fitch a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracies both againit her crown and her lifct
that file would henceforth confider her as un-
worthy of protetion, and would never consent
to restore her to liberty, far less to replace lirr
on her throre. She exhorted them, therefore,
to unite in acknowledging the king's authority.
She promised to procure by her mediation eqitt-
able terms for those who had hitherto opposcd
it. But if they itill continued refracory, ihie
threatened to employ her utmost power to conl-
pel them to fumit f. Though this declaration
did not produce an immediate effeEt; though
lholilities continued in the neighbourhood of
Edinburgh ; though Huntly's brother, fir Adam
Gordon, by his bravery and good conduct, had
routed the king's adherents in the North in many
encoultelrs; yet such an explicit discovery of
Elizabeth's fentimcnts contributed not a little to
animate one party, and to depress the spirit and
hopes of the other g.

1572.] As Morton, who commanded the re-

gent's forces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy flill
held out the town and castle of Edinburgh,

f See Append. No. XXXVII.
B Cild. ii. Sy. z294 Strypej ii, 76.

scarce

isar a day passed without a fkirmifi; and
while both avoided any decisive a&ion, they
liarafftd each other by attacking small parties,
beating up quarters, ald intercepting convoys.
l'hefc- operations, though little memorable in
tlt:.!lelvcs, kept the pallions of both facions in
perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought
them up, at last, to a degree of fury, which
rendered them regardless not only of the laws
of wal, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
wiis it in the field alone, and during the heat of
conbat, that this implacable rage appeared;
both parties hanged the prifonelr which they
took, of vwhatever rank or quality, without mercy,
and; withoirt trial. Great numbers suffered in
tlin;; (hocking manner; the unhappy vidtims were
led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till both fides had smarted severely, that
they discontinued this barbarous practice, so re-
proachful to the chara&er of the nation h. Mean-
wh-lile, those in the town and castle, though they
had received a filpply of money from the duke
of Alva i, began to ifuffer for want of provisions.
As Morton had deltloved all the mills in the
neighbourhood of tlhe city, and had planted
fnall garrisons in all tlhe houlles of ffrength
;iround it, scarcity daily increased. At last all
t.lle miserics of famine wer. felt, and they muit
l,;lve been loon reduced to ficli extremities, as
would have forced them to capitulate, if the
Eliglilh and French ambafladors had not pro-
cured a fiufpenion of holtilities between the two
parties k.
1 Craiwf. Mem. 218. 1zo. i CalO. I i;4 S. k lb. 346.

Thoughl

Though the negotiation for a marriage be.

tween Elizabeth and the duke of Anjou had
been fruitless, both Charles and she were defirou,
of concluding a defensive alliance between il;
two crowns. He confidered such a treaty, not
only as the best device for blinding the protell-
ants, against whom the conspiracy was now al-
rnoft ripe for execution; but as a good precall.
tion, likewise, against the dangerous confe-
quences to which that atrocious measure mi'it
expose him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto rlig:-
ed without a single ally, now saw her king(dom
so tlhrcatencd with intestine commotions, or ix-
posed to invallons from abroad, that she wn.
extremt!y solicitous to secure the afliftance of to
powerful a neighbour. The difficulties ariTing
from the situation of the Scottish queen were
the chief occasions of any delay. Charles d:-
mand cd f(,me terms of advantage for Mary and
her party. Elizabeth refuied to liften to any
proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame
the faint efforts of the French monarch. Mary's
name was not so much as mentioned in the treaty;
and with regard to Scott ifh affairs, a filort article
was inserted [April I l, in general and amihigl-
ous terms, to this purpose: " That the partit-
contracting flall make no innovations in Scot-
land; nor fiiffer any stranger to enter, and to
foment the fa;ions there ; but it fiall be lawful
for the queen of England to chastise, by force (o
arms, those Scots vwho hall continue to harbour
the English rebels now in Scotland'." In con-
fcquence of this treaty, France and England

I Digges, 170. 191 Cnuden, 444 ffaed

afsestci

e

flt'ctd to aFt in colcert with regard to Scotland,
;,,d Le Cr-oc and lir William Drury apprared
tlcre, in the :une of their refpestive fove-
I-en.i. By their mediation, a truce for two
nmolths was agreed upon, and during that time
cifcLrnces were to be held between thle leaders
- tlhe oppolite factions, in order to accommo-
;!:c. thllir differences and retlore peace to the
);;l riomr. This truce afforded a seasonable in-
,f! ;11 f tranqui!lity to the queen's adherents i
1l h)' Soth: but in the North it proved fatal to
i., irncreft. Sir Adam Gordon had frill main-
iai.icd his reputation and superiority there.
5{ c:(.l parties, under different officers, were
; ;a:aintt him. Some of them he attacked in
.il iield ; againlt others lie employed ftratagemi
aid as his courage and condu& were equal, none
of his cnterprifes failed of success. He made
wartoo with tlie humanity which became so gal-
i;tnt a man, and gained ground by that, no lefa
than by the terror of his arms. If he had not
;, en obliged by the truce to suspend his opera-
ticls, hle would in all probability have brought
Tii:lt part of the kingdom to submit entirely to
lihe queen's authority m.

Notvithllftanlilr Gordon's bravery and fuoe
.ifI, 'arv's illtcreft was on the decline. not

A.Iv i l her own kingdom, but among the
l'.,ilillh. Nothing could be more offenhve to

il iat aioll, jec;louls of foreigners, and terrified

.1t lit prolpect of the Spanifl yoke, than her
il:gltiatiioii with the duke of Alva. The par-

li;;l lnt, ;
which met in May, lroceeded againll

m' Caws. Mem.

her

her as the most dangerous enemy of the kinr.
dom; and after a solemn conference between ihc
lords and commons, both houses agreed in lK'i;:
ing in a bill to declare her guilty of high treafoi.
and to deprive her of all right of fucceflion ti.
the crown. This great cause, as it was thcr
called, occupied them during the whole fefflTi,
and was carried on with much unanimity. Eli/,.
beth, though she applauded their zeal, antl ';
proved greatly of the courfl they were t:iak;;,
was iatisfied with shewing Mary what ihe ulii '
expe& from the resentment of the nation ; b);t ,1;
she did not yet think it time to proceed t. .:i,
molt violent extremity againlt her, (he prororl. d
the parliamentn.

These severe proceedings of the Englidi .

liament were not more mortifying to Mary ihan
the coldness and negle& of her allies the French.
The duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came
over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made
a (hew of interesting himself in favour of tlir
Scottilh queen ; but, instead of soliciting for 'lrl.
liberty, or her restoration to her throne, all that
he demanded was a fligll; iitigationl of the rigour
of her imprisonment. Even this 1'mall requell
he urged with so little warmth or importunity,
that no regard was paid to it °

The alliance with France afforded Elizablcth

nmuch iatisfaction, sn(l ihe cxpcted from it a
great increase of security. She now turncid lher
whole attention towards Scotland, wlere the
animofities of the two factiols were still so high,
and so many interfering interelts to be gdju(l-ld,

n D'£wes, Joiau. c6, &c. e Jcbb, ii. 51z

th;it

that a general pacification seemed to be at a great
dilance. But while the laboured to bring them
to folne agreement, an event happened which
iilled a great part of Europe with astonishment
and with horror. This was the massacre of
Paris; an attempt, to which there is no parallel
in the hittory of mankind, either for the long
train of craft and diflimulation with which it was
:onltrived, or for the cruelty and barbarity with
vhichl it was carried into execution. By the
moil solemn promises of safety and of favour, the
i ,tdcrs of the protestants were drawn to court;
a(1d though doomed to deftrution, they were re-
..,ived with caresses, loaded with honours, and
: iared, for seven months, with every possible mark
oif I mlilarity and of confidence. In the midlt of
llhir- security, the warrant for their deftrultioii
,'a- issued by their sovereign [Aug. 24], on
,'.:ife word they had relied; and in obedience
, it, their countrymen, their fellowecitizens,
.nld companliOiis, imbrued their hands in their
.,1 old. Ten thousand protestants, without dif-
.icnionl of age, or sex, or condition, were mur-
:. led in Paris alone. The fame barbarous
,itlcrs were flnt to other parts of the kingdom,
.idl a like carnage ensued. This deed, which
lo piopifl writer, in the present age, mentions
. tliout deteltationl, was at that time applaulcde
;i ;pain ; and at Romni solemn thanklgivings

1. 1'i' oliered to God for its success. But among

:li proteltants, it excited incredible horror; a
ikilcii piulure of which is drawn by the French,
.i'i!)al.fldor at the court of England, in his ac.

ilnt of his firit audience after the maflacre.
" gloomy sorrow," i iays he, " fat on every

call). sorro, ys leA,:*,

face; silence, as in the dead of night, reigntid
through all the chambers of the royal apart.
ment; the ladies and courtiers were ran,,d
on each fide, all clad in deep mourning, ;i!:,
as I passed through them, not one bellowed ;,n
me a civil look, or made tle least return to in;
salutes P."

But horror was not the only passion with which

this event inspired the protestants ; it filled thLli
with fear. They eonlidered it as the prelude ti
iome greater blow, and believed, not wilthloit
much probability, that all the popish priictcs lia'
conspired the deftrution of their fed. This "i)"-
nion was of no finall diflcrvice to Mary't, aIlllii;
in Scotland. Many of her adherents were pl,.
teftants; and, though they wifled her refloiratiin,
were not willing, on that account, to facriiti. t!hc
faith which they profffled. They dreaded lh,
attachment to a religion which allowed its ,.*
taries to violate the molt folenn cngagcnitrcs
and prompted them to perpetrate the molt har.
barous crimes. A general confedercy of tihe
protettants seemcd to theni the only thling tliat
could uphold the reformation againli the lcagiic
which was formed to overturn it. Nor could tlih
present eftabliflment of religion be long nim;!;
tained in Britain, but by a lirict uitiol rSiil
Elizabeth, and by the coiincrirince of blotlh lna
tions, in cfpouling the defence of it as a cominllle
cause q.

Encouraged by this general difpolition to ll;ac

confidence in her, Elizabeth relurned a fricel l
which Ihe had formed during the regellcy of tlin

P Carte, iii. 5zz '1 Diggics, 4.4. 267;

I ;i)

earl of Murray, of fending Mary as a prisoner into
Scotland. :But her sentiments and situation were
,iow very different from what theyhad been during
i er negotiation with Murray. Her animosity
against the queen of Scots was greatly augmented,
i'y recent experience, which taught her that she
bad inclination, as well as power, not only to
liflurb the tranquillity of her reign, but to wreflt
from her the crown ; the party in Scotland fa-
oirIable to Mary was almost entirely broken;
;,!id there was no reason to dread any danger from.
i rrace, which Itill continued to court her friend-
Ihip. She aimed, accordingly, at something very
liffrerit from that which the had in view three
years before. Then The discovered a laudable

,il;citude, not only for the safety of Mary's life,
l,,i for securing to her, treatment suited to her
-alnk. Now flie required, as an exprcfs con-
!i ion, that inmediately after Mary's arrival in

t-;.'land, fle should be brought to public trial;

.lnd having no doubt that sentence- would be
illtl according to licr deserts, ihe insisted tlat,
.,r tlhe good of both kingdoms, it flould be
. ecuted without delay r. No tranlaslion, per-
'Iis, in Elizabeth's reign, merits more severe
(cimlfure,. Eager to ctt ihort the days of a rival,
:ilt obljc both of her hatred and dread, and no
i.!'., ainxitus to avoid the blame to which fuich a
l:cdt of violence might cxpofe her, the laboured,
.itil tnimid and ungenerous artifice, to transfer
'v' odium of it from herself to Mary's ownl
luljcdsi. The carl of Mar, happily for thel ho-
ea,)r of lis country, had more virtue than to

r MurJin, 2az4.
I'OL. 11; 1' liscln

l-ilcn to filch an ignominious proposal; and Eli/:
Betli did not venture to renew it.

While fie was engaged in pursuing this ir

fidious measure, the regent was more hoimr);
ably'employed in endeavouring to negotiate :
general peace among his countrymen. As hi
laboured for this pfrrpofe with the utmost zea!,
and the adverse faction placed entire conficltlii
in his integrity, his endeavonars could hardly h,'"
failed as being successful. Maitland and Ki.:.
aldy came fc near to an agreement with hin,
that scarce any thing remained, except the ifr.
inality of :gr hlg the treaty. But Morton h}a!
,not forgotic:l the disappointment he met wii.i
in his; ireteiifions to the regency; his abilititc,
his wealth, and the patronage of the coinr' :,'
England, gave him greater sway wlth the pait',
than even the regent h mfclf; and he took pileC-
sure i'n thwarting every intafure purfned by hi'l.
H-Ic was afraid that, if Maitland and his alti
ates recovered any fiart in the adminitiratioi,
Ihis own inflllence would be considerably dimn;i;i!
ed; and the regent, by their means, woutld ;.-
quire that afeendant which belonged to his tJ.
tion. With him concurred all those who v .:c(
in poffeflion of the lands whicl belonged to :; '
of the queen's party. H is ambiion, aild ti j
avarice, frul'ttted the regent'% piuts intentitl .
and retarded a blefling so neecflary to the kin
dom, as the eiabl)ilhment of peace .

Such.a difeovery of the felfifhlnefs and a:,l,

tlion whiclh reigned among his party, mnade ia dri'
·ipreffioe on the regent, who loved his ecunlti r

s Mclv-a33. Crawf.'Alcm. 237.

anid wified for peace with much ardour. This
insward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees
brought on a fettled melancholy, that ended in a
diltemper, of which he died on the twenty-ninth
of OFtober. lHe was, perhaps, the only person
il the kingdom who could have enjoyed the
oifce of regent without envy, and have left it
witlhout loss of reputation. Notwithitanding
their mutual animofities, both fa&tions acknowt
l iged his views to be honourable, and his in.
terlicy to be uncorrupted t.

No competitor now appeared againif Morton.

Tihe queen of Englaud powerfully supported his
claim, and notwsitbflanding the fears of the peo.
ple, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleted
rcgrent [November]; the fourth who, in the space
offive years, had held that dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first

of January, this gave him an opportunity of
continuing the negotiations with the opposite
party, which had been set on foot by his prede-
ceflor. They produced no effeas, howrgxe, till
the beginning of the next year,

Before we proceed to these, some events, hi.
therto urtouched, defer.v our notice.

The carl of Nortllumberland, who had been

kept prisoner in Locblevin ever since his flight
into Scotland in the )year one thousand five hun-
died and fi:ty-nine, was given up to lord Huns-
don, governor of Berwick ; and being carried to
York, fuiflred there the punillihent of his re-
bellion. The king's party were so sensible of
tbrir dependence on Elizabeth's protection, tlat

I Crawf. Mem. 2,r.

r . it7

it was scarcely possible for them to rcfufe put-
ting into her hands a person who had taken up
arms against her; but as a fum of money wa;
paid on that account, and liared between Mor-
ton and. Douglas of Lochlevin, the former ,f
whom, during his exile in England, had been
much indebted to Northumberland's friendship,
the abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in fuicl
a manner, to certain deftru&ion, was universally
condemned as a most ungrateful and merccnary
action U.

This year was remarkable for a confideaibcle

innovation in the government of the churcil.
Soon after the reformation, the popifl biflhoi,
had been confirmed by law in poffiefion of rart
of their benefices; but the spiritual jurifdic'iov.
which belonged to their order, was exercised b'
fupe:-i.;tendants, though with more moderate al
thority. On the. death of the archbinlop of St.
Andrew's, Morton obtained from the crovln a
grant of the temporalities of that fee. But as it
was thought indecent for a layman to hold a be-
ncfice to which the cure of fouls was annexed, lic
procured Douglas, re&or of the university of St.
Andrew's, to be chosen archbiihop; and, allot-
ting him a small pcnfion out of the revenues
of the fee, retained the remainder in his ov.n
hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages;
which they r.ight r.:ap from flchl a pra.ticc,
fuipportCe him in the execution of his plan. [t
-;avc great offence, however, to the clergy, who,
initead of perpetuating an order whose name and
power was odious to them, wifled that the rc-

u Crawf. Mei. 55. azz. Cgmd. 445.

Venues

~wnues which had belonged to it might be
employed in supplying such parishes as were still
unprovided with fettled pastors. But, on the
)ne hand, it would have been rash in the clergy
to have irritated too much noblemen, on whom
t.ih very existence of the protestant church in
Scotland depended; and Morton, on the other,
coi!ducted hls fcbcme with ifch dexterity, and
managed them with so much art, that it was at
lait agreed, in a convention composed of the
iladingj men among the clergy, together with a
committee of privy council, " That the name and
oflice of archbilhop and bifliop should be con-
iiniced during the king's minority, and these dig-
liitics be conterred upon the best quaified among
tlhe protcitaint minifers; but that, with regard
to their fipiritual jurisdictions, they fiould be
flbjcct to the general afiembly of the church."
Tihe rules to be observed in their ele&ion, and
zllc persons who were to supply the place, and
ctiio the privileges which belonged to the dean
;,id cliapter in times of popery, were likewise
particularly specificd x. The whole being laid
htcfolm the general assembly, after some excep-
tions to the name of archbyFhop, dean, chapter,
&c. and a proteltation that it flould be con-
lildcred only as a temporary contituti on, until
one more pcrt seC :ould be introduced, it obh
tained the approbation of tlat court r. Even
Knox, who was prevented fiom attending the
:ilclnbly by the ill Iate of his health, thougl he
'Icclaitned loudly againllt tlue limnoiacal p)Iatipn
tt) which Douglas owed his preferment, and

a Cald, ii, 305. Y Id, 354.

T 3 blniamell

blamed the nomination of a person worn out wi:U1
age and infirmities; to an office which requiricd
unilmpaired vigour both of body and mind, fecmn
not to have condemned the proceedings of tlic
convention ; and, in a letter to the assembly, ap-
proved of some of their regulations with reins;-
to the cle&ion of bishops, as worthy of hi ;:
carefully observed ". In consequence of thli li-
fembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in 1i!,
convention, Douglas was installed in his ofir'.:
and at the tame time an archbishop of Glafg!'>w
and a biflhop of Dunkeld were chosen from amcn
the prc eitant clergy. They were all admiittl
to the place in parliament, which belonged t,
the ecclesiastical order. But, in imitation of ;hl-
exami le kt by Morton, such bargains were .,,i..n
with them by different noblemen, as gave thhetl
pofieffion nnly of a very small part of the revenues
belolnging to their fees a.

ioon after the difIolution of this afemblh ,

Kncx, the prime initrument of spreading and
citablifling the reformed religion in Scotland,
endeid his life [Nov. 27], in the fixty-fevcliil
year of lis age. Zeal, intrepidity, difintereltc(i
ness, wtie virtues which he possessed in an erni
nent dr,;ee. He was acquainted too with ti:
tearlr .i .:ultivated among divines in that ag;:
i;,( excelled in that fpecles of eloquence willl!
is calculated to rouse and to inflame . Hii;

mlwaximi,

r Sie Appendix, No. XXXVIll. 4 Spotfw, 61r.
, A liriking description of that fpecice of eloquence tor

which Kn x was diltilguiihed, ia given by one of his con.
ti npurarie,, Mr. James Melville, minilter of Anitruthel.
44* JUL of all the bcncfitet 1 had that year [1571] w"5 tllc

coini;n

i,;aixims, however, were oflen too severe, and
;iu impetuosity of his temper exceflive. Rigid
.il i uncomplyilg hirnmfelf, he shewed no indul-
;' ncc to the infirmities of others. Regardless of
i]he (liiinclions of rank and charater, he uttered
hlis admonitions w;th a a crimony and vehemence,
mlo.ec apt to irritate than toreclaim. This often
tetin yed him into indecent and undutiful expref-
i;ons with rcfpe& to the queen's person and con-
ritlc. Tliolc very qualities, however, which now
le-der Iis charader less amiable, fitted him to be
tihe iitrument of Providence for advancing the
Tcformatioa among a fierce people, and enabled
llm to face dangers, and to surmount opposition,
fiton which a person of a more gentle ipirit
- ;,,ld have been apt to (hrink back. By an ul:.

clmiing of that mol notible Prophet and ApoRfle of our na-
tiin, Mr. John Knox, to St. Andrew's, who, by the faction
ot the queen occupying tih cattle and town of Edinburgh, was
. rinpclled to remove therefra with a number of the best, and
c:hiule: to come to St. Andrews. I heard him teach there the
i ,iplccies of Daniel that summer and the winter following.
I ind my pen and little buike, and took away sic things as I
could clomprehend. In the opening of his text he was no-
'rjte the fiace of half an hour; but when he entered to
pi'Plictiun, he made me so to grue [thrill] and tremble that i
..ould not hald the pen to write.---- -He was very weak. I
Ilw him every da/ of his doctrine go hulie [slowly] and fair,
wi;l a ifrring of marticks about his neck, a tafl' in the one
hild, and good godlie Richart Ballanden holding him up by
tle ixter [under the arm], from the abbey to the parifb kirk;
il lie the said Richart and another fcrvant lifted him up
to thl pulpit, where he behoved to lean at his firll entrie;
int e're he was done with his sermon, he was so active and
vigorous, that he was like to ding kte pltpit in blads [beat the
nulpit to pieces], andflyoutofit." MS. Lifeof Mr. Jamer
Melville, communicated to me by Mr. I'aton of tile Custom,
houfc, Edinbur;h1, p, t4. 2al

weari¢d

wearied application to study and to business, ..
well as by the frequency and fervour of his Ii'u.
lic discourses, he had worn out a constitution n '.
turally robust. During a lingering illiels he l-..
covered the utmoit fortitude; and met the ap.
proaclles of death with a magnanimityinfep 'rabh-
from his character. He was constantly employed
in adts of devotion, ald comforted hirnlelf wi;il
those profpec& of immortality which not oOii,
preserve good men from desponding, but fill t,!..i
wvith exultation in their last moments. The .: rl
of Morton, riho was present at his funeral, pio-
o'iounced his eulogium in a few words, tihn nMur
honourable for Knox, as they came from o-;.
whom he had often censurcd with peculiar I;:.
verity: " There lies He, who never feared t!,
face of man b."

1573.] Though Morton did not desire pea;r

from flich gqnerous motives as the former reg nii
he laboured, however, in good earnest, to elt.t-
blilh it. The public confusions and calamitics,
to which he owed his power and importance .,hcli
he was the only second person in the nation, u n
extremely dctrimental to him, now that he wV.;
raiftod to be tlle firilt While so many of the lo-
bles continued in arms against him, his autlloritv
as regent was partial, feeble, and precari(o;s.
Elizabcth was no lets desirous of extingui/lilll,
the flame which flel had kindled and kept lt.
long alive in Scotland .. She had discovercd i.li
alliance with France, from which Ihe hald (.-
pcctcd such advantages, to be no foundation of
fccurity. Though appearances of friendship tili

b Syotf. z66. Call i, ?, 73. Digges, 299.

^ubilrc·l

subsisted between her and that court, and Charles
daily renewed his protestations of inviolable ad-
herence to the treaty, the was convinced, by fatal
example, how little the ought to rely on the
proiifes or oaths of that perfidious monarch.
Her ambassador warned her that the French held
secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in
Scotland, and encouraged them in their obfti-
naicy d. The duke of Alva carried on his in.
trigues in that kingdom with less disguise. She
was persuaded that they would embrace the first
!erene interval, which the commotions in France
and in the Netherlands would allow them, and.
openly attempt to land a body of men in Scotland.
She resolved, therefore, to prevent their getting
any footing in the island, and to cut off all their
hopes of finding any affiltance there, by uniting
the two parties.

The situation of Mary's adherents enabled the

regent to carry on his negotiations with them to
great advantage. They were now divided into
two factions. At the head of the one were Cha-
!, Ilhrault and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy

a\ ere the leaders of the other. Their high rank,
their extensive property, and the numbers of
rheir followers, rendered the former confiderablc.
The latter were indebted for their importance
to their personal abilities, and to the ftrcngth of
ilih callle of Edinburgh, which was in their pof-
cfTlioln. The regent had no intention to com-
prelend both in the fame treaty; but as lie
dreaded that the queen's party, if it remained cn-
tire, would be able to thwart and cmbarrafi his

tl Diggesj, z96. 31.

adrmirnit.

adminiiflrtation, he resolved to divide and weaken
it, by a separate negotiation. He made the firll
overture to Kirkaidy and his associates, and cr-
deavoured to renew the negotiation with them,
which, during the life of his predeceflibr, had
been broken off by his owu artifices. But
Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and fyftenm ,f
gc('i.'nment, to be very different from those of
t:,' fb;mer regent. Maitland confidered him as
a ;erfl)- i alnd implacable enemy. They received
re.:att:d assurances of protecion from France;
and though the siege of Rochelle employed t',i
French arms at that time, the fame hopes, w-hici
had so often deceived the party, till amul d
them, and they expeced that the obltinacv us
the hugonots would soon be subdued, and ti!:;
Charles would then be at liberty to a& with :;.
gour in Scotland. Meanwile, a supply of mliney
was sent, and if the castle could he held out ii!
XVhitfunday, ffeitual aid wab promised c. Ma;,-
land's genius dcligllt d in forming fclcme. ;!iut
were dangerous; arnd Kirkaldy iponeffdc the i-
trepidity necef:tir i' .r putting them in eXcuticll.
The caill, .e(-y 1kIwii, was so situated, that it
migrht defy all .'_ recgent's power. Eli'ah)etil,
tlhey hoped, xotr!. lot violate the treaty with
France, by fending forces to his afliftaLcc ; and
if the French flioukl be able to land any own-
liderable body of men, it mighlt be pofible to de-
liver the queen fiom captivity, or at lealt
balance the influence of France and England ;:l
(uch a manner, as to rescue Scotland fron) tile
slilhonourable dependence upon the latter, under

T Dis99, 314.. .

vlich it had fallen. This splendid but climer.-
cili proje& they preferred to the fiiendflip of
Morton. They encouraged the negotiation,
iovwever, because it served to gain time; they
pmipofed, for the fame purpose, that the whole
,,f the queen's party fllould he comprehended in
it, and that Kirkaldy should retain the command
of the castle fix months after the treaty was
signed. His interest prompted the regent to
rtjchc& the former; his penetration discovered the
dainger of complying with the latter; and all
-op[es of accommodation vanished f.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began
o fi;e on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the
,.-tinrn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled,
, ::s devoted as zealously as ever to the king's
clife. But as the regent had now set on foot
.t treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, the
ctlation of arms fill continued with them.

They were less scrupulous than the other par-

ty, and listened eagerly to his overtures. The
Illike was naturally uniteady, and the approach
(if old age increased his irresolution, and aversion
to iition. The miseries of civil discord had
.aftliitcd Scotland almost five years, a length of
(iine far beyond the duration of any former con-
t ll'. The war, inftcad of doing service, had beeit
Icitrimental to the queen ; and more ruinous than
iy foreign invasion to the kingdom. In profecut-
iig it, neither party had gained much honour;
tot h had suffered great losses; and had exhauited
their own eflates, in wafting thofc of their ad-
vil'arics. The commons were in the utmofl

Molv. 235, &C.

iniltry,

anifery, and longed ardently for a peace \w'cih
might terminate this fruitless but deltrutl c
qual rel.

A great flep was taken towards this d'firal,'.

event, by the treaty concluded at Perth [Fcu.
231, between the regent on one hand, and Clia
telherault and Huntly on the other, undcr the
mediation of Killegrew, Elizabeth's anmlai.
fadurg. The chief articles in it were thcfe;
that all the parties comprehended in the treatv
fihould declare their approbation of the refoi -i,
religion, now eftablifled in the kingdom; tlil
they ihould submit to the king's government,
and own Morton's authority as regent; that
they flhould acknowledge every thing dolne inl
opposition to the king, since his coronation, to
be illegal; that on both fides the prisoners whlo
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the
eltates which had been forfeited should ber e.
'tored to their proper owners; that the act u,
attainder pased against the queen's adh.:-cLts
fliould be repealed, and indemnity granted .,;
nll the crimes of which they had been gihiltY
since the fifteenth of June one thousand I;,.
hundred'and fixty-feven; anil that the trc;L,,
1hould be ratified by the common confcii us
both parties in parliament h.

Kirkaldy, though abandoned by his afF;,:i;:n:s,

who neither discovered solicitude nor made ,.ne
vision for his safety, did not lose courage, ;i'l
cntertaia any thoughts of accommnodatil: '.

- See Append. No. XXXIX. h Crawvf.,Men. 25!.
i Mclvil, whiofe brother, fir Robert, wvas one of thrfc
wlo joined wiit Kirkaldy in tht dcftnce of the rafic, and

tln

Though all Scotland had now submitted to the
king, he still resolved to defend the castle in the
queen's name, and to wait the arrival of the
promised succours. The regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege.
luit Elizabeth, who determined at any rate to
bring the diflenfions in Scotland to a period,
before the French could find leisure to take part
in the quarrel, soon afforded him fuflicient sup-
plies. Sir William Drury marched into Scot-
lind with fifteen hundred foot, and a confider-
able train of artillery. The regent joined him
with all his forces [April 25]; and trenches

cxre opened, and approaches regularly cnrried
onl against the caf1e. Kirkaldy, though dif-
coLtraged by the lots of a great fum of money,
icmitted to hiln fiom France, and which fell into
tihe regent's hands through the treachery of fir
1.itnes Balfour, the mofl corrupt man of that
tgC, defended himnfelf with bravery, augmented
hy deifptir. Tlhree-and-thirty days he refilted
Ill tile efforts of tie Scotch and Englifll, who
puffled lu their attacks with courage and with
who was himself strongly attached to their party, aflirts that
Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reafonahle tcrmns of conm
'olitlii, but that all. his olfers weic rejcited by the regent.
.',-lv. 240. ,,ut as Elizabeth was, at tlilt lime, extremcly
.Il:'rou; of icftoring peace in Scn.tland, and her amblifador
'.-iilcgrcw, as well as the earl of Rotic,, ui'ed their utiro:t
-"ri.c.voura to periuade Kirkalidy to accede to the tieaty of
!''.rlh, it feemns more c:ldible toimpute tie continuance of
b'.iikil'c to Kirkaldy's obllinacy, his diltruft of Morto,l, or
bi hluic cf foreign aid, than to any other caifc.

'Tiht this was really the cafe, is evidint from the positive
1'flimully of Spotfw. 269, 170. Camd. 44q.. Johnft.
li;t. , 4. Digges, 33,. Crawford's account agrees, in
hr m:iin, with theirs, Mem. 263.'
vOLt . u emulation.

emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, til ih.
fortifications were battered down, and one ei
the wells in the caltle dried up, and the otltrt
choaked with rubbifll. Even then, his fpiri;
was unfubdued, and he determined rather to ,-l'1
gloriously behind the last intreuchment, thai, t,
yield to his inveterate enemies. But his g.ar
rifi. was aiot animated with the fame heroic or
desperate resolution, and, rising in a tnutiny,
forced him to capitulate. He surrendered hin.
[elf to I)ruy [May 29], who promiscd, in tki,
name of his aniltrefs, that he ihould be favo),l
ably treated. Together with him, James Ki.
kaldy his brother, lord Home, Maitland, sEi
Robert Mclvil, a few citizens of Edinburgh.
and about one hundred and iixty soldiers, wvci
made prifonersk.

Several of the officers, who had been kept ir;

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to
accompany them into the Low-countries, aid
entering into the service of the States, added, by
their gallant behaviour, to the reputation for
military virtue, whhiah has always been the cila>
raAeriltic of the Scottish nation.

Thus by the treaty with Chatclherault nml

Huntly, and the surrender of the caitle, Ill
civil wars in Scotland were brought to a perio(d.
When we review the state of the nation, nnd
compare the Itlregth of the two factions, M.i
ry'b partisans amgng the nobles appear, in-li-.
feitly, to have been superior both in numbers
and in power. But these advantages were more
than counterbalanced by others, which thlir

* Cald, i. 408. MSlv, 24o0 Crawf. Mem. 2S.s

antaigoliJ i

laitagoniifts enjoyed. Political abilities, military
ik;il, and all the talents which times of ation
frmt, or call forth, appeared chiefly on the
kiung's lide. Nor could their enemies boafl of
any man, who equalled' the intrepidity of Mur-
ray, tempered with wisdom ; the profotund saga-
cii. of Morton; the subtle genius, and in-
fiutiting address, of Maitland ; or the fuccfsfui
:.dour of Kirkaldy; all of which were, at first,
n.lloyed in laying the foundations of the king's
aut. olirity. Oi the one fide, measures \xcre
:'ncc!'tcd with prudence, and executed with
'iIounr; on the other, their resolutions were
ra1l, and their condun feeble. The people,
;'.imiatcd with zeal for religion, and prompted
i'y indligation againit the queen, warmly sup-
portcd the king's cause. Tbe clergy threw the
. hole weight of their popularity into the fame
flIlc. By means of these, as welU a by the
n;i)'erful intcrpofitior of Englard, the king's
governlment was finally eftablithed. Mary loit
::en that shadow of sovereignty, which, aridl.
.i! her sufferings, fle had hitherto retained
.nlong part of her own fubjcets. As the was
c) longer permitted to have an ainbaffador at
:let co.urt of England, the only nlark of dignity
w'lich lhe had, for some time, enjoyed there,
Uii. inull henceforth be confidered an an exile
l-iilped of all the en(igns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally
Ji(crted or forgotten in the other.

Kirkaldy and his associates remained in DrYtx

r', s custody, and were treated by him with great
,llnlillity, until the queen of England, wliof:
;rilnriclrs they were, flould determine their fate,

Y :} ltortatu

Morton insisted that they mhould susser the
pilnifnlent due to their rebellion and obstinacy;
and declared that, so long as they were allow, a
to live, he did not reckon his own person or
authority secure; and Elizabeth, without re-
garding Drury's honour, or his promises in h-
name, gave them up to the regent's difpol!i.
IHe fir{t confined them in separate prisons; ,id
soon after [August 3], with Elizabeth's c,.i-
sent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, t3
be hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Ma;i-
land, who did not expect to be treated mr,:
favourably, prevented the ignominy of a puiiic
execution, by a voluntary death, and " enidd
" his days," fays Melvil, " after the old Romnlu
ó" fashion 1."

While the regent was wreaking his vengeanc

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewail
their misfortunes in the solitude of her p!-ilsc.
At the fame time her health began to be ml:;i
impaired by confinement and want of exerc".;
At the entreaty of the French ambassador, lu, i
Shrewsbury, her keeper, was permitted to c,:
dut her to ]3uxton-wells, not far fronm TLi, 1
bury, the place of her imprisonment. Ce.il,
who lately had been created baron of Burmlciri,
and lord high treasurer of England, happellcl
to be there at the fame time. Thougli 1:'
miniftcr ever entered more warmly into the
views of a sovereign, or gave ftronecr proofi; ,f
his fidelity and attachment, than this great lnml,
yet such was Elizabcth's diitrutt of every [ia

I Mclv. a42.

i*Un

fin who approached the queen of Scots, that
her suspicions, in consequence of this interview.
eiem to have extended even to him; and, whilk
.iary juitly reckoned him lier nloft dangerous
tuelly, he found ofme difficulty ill perliadling
bis own mistress that he was not partial to thlat.
unhappy queen m"

The duke of Alva was tlhis year recalled from

the government of the Netherland;, where his
haughty and oppressive adminiltration roufd at
spirit, in attempting to subdue whiic;h, Spain
exhausted its treasures, ruined its armies, and
}uill its glory. Requefens, who fuccceded him,
was of a milder temper, and of a lcfs clltcr-
prilng genius. This event delivered Elizabe-th
irorm the perpetual disquietude, occalioned b)y
Alva's negotiation3 with the Scottilh queen,
atud his zeal for her intcreft.

15-74.] Though Scotland -as now fettled in

proiound peace, many of the evils which ac-
company civil war were still felt. Tle reltraints
of law, which, in times of public coufuliuil are
little regarded even by civilized nationsl were
totally ddfpifed by a fierce people, unaccultomed
to a regular adminifltration of jultice. Tie dif-
orders in every corner of the kingdom were
liccome intoleralle ; and, under the protcA.ion
,of the one or the other fiction, crimes of every
ikinii were committed with impunity. The re,
.inll let himself to redress these, and by his
;idull-ry and vigour, order and security twere re-
tll;ablified in the kingdom, But he loft the
repl'tation due to thin important service, by the

Ia Strypc, ii. 248. zS8,

v 3 avarice

avarice which he discovered in performing it;
and his own exations became more pernicious
to the nation than all the irregularities which he
relli-ailed". Spies and informers were every
where employed ; the remembrance of old oF-
fences was revived ; imaginary crimes were in-
vented ; petty trefpafles were aggravated; and
delinquents were forced to compound for their
lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time the current coin was debated0;
licences were fold for carrying on prohibited
branches of commerce; usual taxes were im-
posed on commodities; and all the refinement,
in oppression, from which nations so imperfelly
polished as tle Scots are usually exempted, were
put in pradtice. None of thefl were complairncd
of more loudly, or with greater reason, than ils
injultice towards the church. The thirds of
benefices, out of which the clergy received th.;
fubfitience, had always been slowly and irrneg.
larly paid to colle&tors appointed by the gencral
assembly ; and, during tile civil wars, no p:alymnct
could be obtained in several parts of the king

n See Append. No. XL.
o Ilie con uption of the roin, during Morton's ndmin-.

ftration, was very great. Although the quantity of currcl.r
money coined out of a pound ot bullion was gradually in-
creased by f.rmer princes, the flanlard or finenefl futicred
little alteration, and the mixture of alloy was nearly the
fame with what is now uscd. But Morton mixed a fourth
part of alloy with every pound of silver, and funk, by col -
sequence, the value of coin in proportion. In the )rar
1581, all the money coined by him was c.iled in, and ap-
pointed to be recoined. The ltandard was reltored to thl.
fame purity as formerly. Ruddim, Pref. to Ardcrf.
Pijlom. p. 74,

dom.

dom. Under colour of redressing this grievance,
and upon a promise of afligning every miniiter a
ti'pcnd within his own parish, the regelt ex-
torted from the church the thirds to which.they
had right by law. But the clergy, inilead of
reaping any advantage firom this alteration,
found that payments became more irregular and
diiatory than ever. One minister was com-
monlv burdened with the care of four or tive
parilhes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and
the reecnt's insatiable avarice seized on .the reit
of the fund P.

The death of Charles IX. which happened

this year, was a new misfortune to the Scottifi
quLicn. lienrv III. who succeeded him, had
not the fame attachment to her person; and his
je:'!only of the house of Guise, and obfeqiiiouii
rief, to the queen mother, greatly alienated him
iron her interest.

The death of the duke of Chatelherault

iJlan. 22, t575] nuf Hlikewile be confidered as
foin. loss to Mary. As the parliament had
I.:'qe:tly declared himn nc;t heir to the crow.n,
this entitled himn to great refped anong his
(ountrymlcn, and enabled lhim, more than any
cthelL' person in the kingdom, to counterbalance
the regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the usual interviews be-

iwveca the wardens of the Scottili and English
nai;.::hes, a fcutlle happened, in which the Englifl
clere worited; a few killed on the spot; and fir
.u1[mes Forrester, the warden, with several gentle.
ciM1 W'ho attended him, taken prisoners. But botli
S C:,wf. Mci, 27z. Spotl;a73. Cald, ii. 420*427.

Elizabeth

Elizabeth and the regent were too sensible of the
advantage which resulted from the good under.
standing that subsisted between the two king-
doms, to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

The domestic tranquillity of the kingdom

,ves in some danger of being disturbed by an.
pthel cause. Though the persons raised to the
dignity of bishops possessed very small revenues,
and a very moderate degree of power, the
clergy, to whom the regent and all his meafurs,
were become extremely odious, began to uc
jealoy9 of that order. Knowing that corrup.
tions fleal into the church gradually, undci
honourable iames, and upon decent pretenccs,
they were afraid that, from such small begin-
nings, the hierarchy might grow in time to be
as powerful and oppreflive as ever. The chief
author of these suspicions was Mr. Andrex
Melvil, a man diitinguiflhed by his uncommon
erudition, by the severity of his manners, and!
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up iJ
the retirement of a college, he was unacquaiinted
with the arts of life; and being more attentiv'
to the ends which he pursued, than to the
means which he employed for promoting them,
he often defeated laudable deligns, by the iui.
* etuolity and imprudence with which he carried
them on. A question was moved by him in the
assembly, " whether the office of biflop, as
now exerciscd in the kingdom, were agreeable
to the word of God ?" In the eccleiaftical
judicatories, continual complaints were made of
the bilhops for negleft of duty, many of whicd
their known remiifncfs too well jutlified. Thc
bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidait

inlo his benefice, was found guilty by the as.
i'.lbly. The regent, inriead of checking, con-
is,'ed at these disputes about ecclefiafical go-
vernment, as they diverted the zeal of the
Ecl:rgfrom attending to his daily encroachments
or the patrimony of the chtich q.

r176.] The weight of the regent's oppressive

adminifit-ation had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on
iiiofe in the lower and middle rank; but he
,':fali now to take such fleps as conv;iced the
nt',le:, that their dignity would not long exempt
!,.emn from feeling the effecs of his power. An
,Wccident, which was a frequent cause of dif-
'nfion am('ng the Scottish nobles, occafoned a
dii;lrcice between the earls of Argyll and
JAt h.. A v-.iTal of the former had made frnme
d&prcdations on the lands of the latter. Athol
i.' k ams to punilh the offender; Argyll, to
pi)tc&i hin ; and this ignoble quarrel they were
rcdy to decide in the field, when the regent,
5y interposing his authority, obliged them to
ciflband their forces. Both of themn had been
,;tiltr of irregularities, which, though common,
.'ere contrary to the letter of the law. Of
I'lfe the rege.t took advantage, and resolved
co found on them a charge of treason. This
:!'ign was revealed to the two earls by one of
lorton's retainers. IThe common danger, to
shiclh they were e)posed, compelled them to
forget old quarrels, and to unite in a clolt
Cillfciclracy for their mutual defence. Their
Iiiuntion rendered them formidable; they de-
i^ifcd the fumlmona which the regent gave them

'I Cald, Aflninblies, 1574, &o. Jolhnft. itilL. IS.

ti)

to appear before a court of justice; and he was
obliged to desist from any further prosecution.
But the injury lie intended made a deep im-
preflion on their minds, and drew upon hiir,
severe vengeance r

Nor was he more ruccefsful in an :temrF.

which he made, to load lord Claud i-Tamilton
with the guilt of having formed a coaipiracy
againlt his life. Though those who were sup-
posed to be his accomplices, were seized amd
tortured, no evidence of any thing criminil
appeared; but, on the contrary, many circum-
stances discovered his innocence, as well as thc
regent's secret views, in imputing to him such
an odious delign'.

1577.] Tlle 8cottifh nobles, who were almo4t

equal to their monarchs in power, and treated
by thlem with much diftin&ion, observed thlef
arbitrary proceedings of a regent with the
utmolt indignation. -The people, who, under a
form of government extremely simple, had beea
little accultomed to the burden of taxes, coin-
plained kloIdly of the regent's rapacity. Ald
all began to turn their eyes towards the young
kiig, from whom they expeded the redress of
all their grievances, and the return of a inorc
geltle and more eq:tal ladminiiltation.

anlmes rwas now in the twelfth year of his a[g.

The (queel, soon after his birtlh, had commitlt
himn to the care of the carl of Mar, and durri!,;
the civil wars he had retidcd securely in tlh
caitle of Stirling. Alexander Erlkile, tlha
sobleman's brother, had the chief direcion of

Crawf. Mem. z85i . Ibid. zS7.

lll$

his education. Under him, the famous Buchanan
acted as preceptor, together with three other
waflers, the most eminent the nation afforded
for skill in those sciences which were deemed
recefrary for a prince. As the young king
flcwed an uncommon passion for learning, and
made great progress in it, the Scots fancied that
kibey already discovered in him all those virtues
wxlich the fondness or credulity of fubjets
usually ascribe to princes during their minority.
But as James was till far from that age at which
he law permitted him to assume the reins of
government, the regent did not sufficiently
ittend to the sentiments of the people, nor
iticef how naturally these prejudices in his
faivour might encourage the king to anticipate
that period. He not only neglected to secure
the friendhip of those who were about the
king's person, and who puffefled his ear, but
h:ad even cxafperated fume of them by personal
injurics. Their resentment concurred with the
irmiition of others, in infuling into the king
c: r]y suspicions of Morton's power and designs.
A king, they told him, had often reason to fear,
seldom to love, a regent. Prompted by ambi,
tion, and by interest, lie wonld endcavour. to
klccp the prince in perpetual infancy, at a dif-
t:incc fiom his subjes, and unacquaillted with
bulinefs. A fniall degreq of vigour, however,
w;a sufficient to break tihe yoke. Subjec-s
naturally reverence their ifvcreign, and become
imipatient of the temporary and delegated jurif.
diction of a regent. Morton had governed with
igour unknown to the ancient monarchs of
Scot daud. TlW nation groaned under his opprefr

riwnbi

sions, amn would welcome the first profpe& of
a milder adminihilation. At present the kingy'
name was hardly mentioned in Scotland, i1;,
friends were without influence, and his favouritl
without honour. But one effort would difcol, .
Morton's power to be a.s feeble as it was a!-
bitrary. The fame attempt would put himiilf
in pofeflion of his juit authority, and refeR:
the nation from intolerable tyranny. If he .L'
not regard his own rights as a king, let Li;n
liften, at lealt, to the cries of his people t

These suggestions made a deep impression o:

the young king, who was trained up in a:
opinion that he was born to command. His
approbation of the design, however, was of
small consequence, without the concurrence on
the nobles. The earls of Argyll and At!iJ,
two of the molt powerful of that body, vwetr
animated with implacable resentment agaiisi
the regent. To them the cabal in Stirling-
calle communicated the plot which was on
foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alcx.
ander Erfline, who, lince the death of his
brother, and during the minority of his nephlicw,
had the command of that fort, and the culilo(l\
of the king's person, admitted them fecrefly
into the klng's presence. They gave him tllh
fame account of the inifery of his subje&s, Iulir.
the regent's arbitrary adminillration ; tlhy coin-
plained loudly of the injulice with which thi,.-
fclves had been treated, and besought the king
as the only means for redreffing'tle grievan;ce
of the nation, to call a council of 1ll the noblc.

JAIn'S;

.lnc: consented, and letters were iffied in his
i; I1C for that purpose; but the two earl' took
¢:alc that they fliould be sent only to such as
wicre known to bear no good will to Morton u.

The number of these was, however, so con-

fi.erabie, that on the day appointed, far the
:renter part of the nobles assembled at Stirling;

sivd so highly were they incensed againit Mor-

ion, that although, on receiving intelligence of
Argyll and Athol's interview with the king, he
haid made a feint as if he would relign the re-
rcnccy, they advised thc king [March 24, I5783,
without regarding this offer, to deprive him of
his oflice, and to take the adminitl-ation of go-
ver!nment into his own hands. Lord Glamis the
c.hancellor, and Herries, were appointed to
iignify this resolution to Morton, who was at
that time in Dalkeith, his usual place of refi-
'cnce. Nothing could equal the joy with which
iils unexpected resolution filled the nation, but
the surprise occasioncd by the seeming alacrity
w.'itl which the regent descended fromi so high
t itation. He neither wanted sagacity to forelee
tilh danger of retigning, nor inclination to keep
,oi'eflioll of an office, for the expiration of

hlhicll the law had fixed so distant a term. But

,ill the sources whence the faAion of which he
\ iis head derived their strength, had either failed,
iri, now fipplied his adversaries with the lle.lals
t,! humbnlingl him. The commons, the city of
;tldinhurgh, the clergy, were all totally alienated
i ;rnl him, by his multiplied oppressions. Eliza-
beth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to

u Spots. 278,
VOL, 11, X fend

fen4 a considerable body of troops to the affiii-
ance of the inhabitants of the Netherlands, wvnho
were flruggling for liberty, had little leifurc t.,
attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as she lihi
nothing to dread from France, in whose counci!,
the princes of Lorrain had not at that tile
much influence, she was not displeased, perhaip.,
at. the birth of new faations in the kingdom,
Even those nobles, who had long been joincd
with Morton in fation, or whom he had at-
tached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Liid-
fay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the secretary, Murm:y)
of Tillibardin comptroller, all deserted his fall,
ing fortunes, and appeared in the council at
Stirling. So many concurring circumstances
convinced Morton of his own weakness, aelJ
determined him to give way to a torrent, whlicl
was too impetuous to be refilted. He attencled
the chancellor and Herries to Edinburt gi
[March 12]; was present when the king's ;-
ceptance of the government was proclainmd;
and, in the presence of the people, surrendered
to the king all the authority to which le !li;d
any claim in virtue of his office. This c-ic-
mony was accompanied with fich excessive j(.'
aud acclamations of the multitude, as added, ni,
doubt, to the anguifll which an ambitious fi,;,it
must feel, when compelled to renounce fupic;i,
power; and convinced Morton how entirely hl.
had loit the affeclions of his countrymen. Ht
obtained, however, from the king an ac co-
taining the approbation of every thing done 1 :
him in the exercise of his office, and a pardo;,
in the mofl ample form that his fear or caution
could devise, of all past ofences, crimes, anJ

treasons.

treasons. The nobles, who adhered to the king,
bound themfelvesunder a great penalty,to procure
tlhe ratification of this aft in the firll parliament x

A council of twelve peers was appointed to

aflil the king in the administration of af:airs.
Morton, deserted by his own party, and unable
to Ilruggle with the fadion which governed ab-
ioiutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and
feenied to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be oc-
cuplied only in the amusements of a country lile.
Iii; mind, however, was deeply disquieted with
all the iunafy reflections which accompany dii-
appointed ambition, and intent on schemes tor
-rcovering his former grandeur. Even in this
,ctreat, which the pei,;le called the Lion's d n,
his wealth and abilities rendered him formidabl ;
and the new countellors were so imprudent as to
rouse hlim, by the precipitancy with which they
hallened to strip him of all the remains of power.
They required him to fiurender the ca{tlc of
Edinburgh, which was Itill in his poflli'ion,
I-e reftied at firit to do so, and began to pre-
pare for its defence; but the citizcns of EI.iin.
bulrgh having taken arms, alld rcpulfed part of
t!l:. garrifo ,, whiclh was sint out to gIZarl; a
c{nvoy ot provilios, he was obliged to give up
tl tL iinportar.. fortress without refiltance. This
!icolraged his advcrfaries to call a parliamel t it
inclt at Edinburgh, and to multiply their dc-
ir'rids upnol himn, in such a nlanner, as convinced
lhin that nothing let ; tihan his utter ruin would
iatlify thei; inveterate hatred.

l'heir power and po)ularity, however, began
already to decline. Tlhc chancellor, the able:l

X ipotfw. z78. Crawf. Mem. zS9. Cald. ii. 52z.

xs z .l4

and most moderate man in the party, having been
killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter
between his followers and those of the earl (f
Crawford; Athol, who was appointed his fuc-
ccffor in that high office, the earls of Eglinton,
Caithness, and lord Ogilvie, all the prime f.von-
rites at court, were either avowed papifis, o,
fufpeed of leaning to the opinions of that feet.
In an age when the return of popery was so much
and so justly dreaded, this gave universal alann.
As Morton had always treated the papills with
rigour, this unseasonable favour to persons ofth;la
religion made all zealous protestants remernber
that circuinlance in his adrniniftration with great
praise r.

Morton, to whom none of tlhei: particulari

were unknown, thought this the properjuncture
for setting to work the instruments which he had
been preparing. Having gained the confidence
of the earl of Mar, and ofthe conutefs his mother,
he infinnated to them, that Alexander Erfl.ii;n
had formed a plot to deprive his nephew of tili
government of Stirliing-caftle, and the cllno!i'
of the king's person ; and ealily induced an an-
bitious woman, and a youth of twenty, to (m;-
ploy force to prevent thiis supposed injury. 'f ::
carl repairing fuddcnly to Stirling [April 2(6,
and being admitted as ,lfual into the caltle ithi
his attendants;, seized the gates early in the mni,
ing, and turned out his uncle, who dreaded i
(langer f om his hands. l'lle soldiers of the gan-
son fulinitted to hin) as their governor, and, with
little danger and no cffllion of blood, he became

y Spots. 283.

,~.{t, ,

;ailer both of the king's person, and of the
Frn'trcfs z.

An event so unexpeced occasioned great con
tlcrn;'tion. Tlough Mortn's hand d(ld nt ap-
prtir in the execution, he was uliverially believed
uo be the author of the attempt. Thc new
counlfellors saw it to be necessary, for tlen 'w.wn
iaiiet, to change their measures, and, inftea. of
inuluilng hirn with such imnplac-able resentment, to
enter into terms of accommodation with an ad-
.ri'liy, liill so capable of creating them trouble.
;'ilr were named, on each lide, to adjult their
:ifi'erences. They met not far from Dalkclth;
!iid when they ihad brought matters near a con-
ciulion, Morton, who was too sagacious nrot to
;.nluore the advantage which their fecurit) and
tlicir attention to the treaty afforded him, fct out
ir the night-time for Stirling, and having gtmued
Mlurray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admit-
ttd by him into the calle [May 24. ; and ma-
r:aging matters there with his usual dexterity, he
loon had olre entirely the command of the fort
thain the earl himself. He was likewise admitted
to a feat in the privy council, and acquired aa
omlplete an ascendant in it a.

A/s the time appointed for the meeting of par-

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
ini some anxiety. He was afraid of conducting
*thl yuung king to a city whose inhabitants wcre
so mluch at tle devotion of the adverfc fa&ior.
lc was no less unwilling to leave Jameg4elhiind
t;t Stirling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he
illied a proclamation irl the king's name, challng

i ali ii. 535, a Ibid. iL 536.

t d tl

ing the place of meeting from Edinburgh to
Stirling calUe. This Athol aild his party i,.
presented as a ftep altogether uhconftitutioia!.
The king, said they, is Morton's prisoner; tl,.
prctended counsellors are his slaves ; a parliame:nt,
to which all the nobles may repair without fear.
and where they) m:ay deliberate with freedom, ;
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, aiftc
disorders of such long continuance. But in ;
aifenmbly, called contrary to all form, held witlin
the wall.; of a garrison, and overawed by arnlm'
men, what safety could members exped ? what
liberty could p;evail in debate ? or what bendr:
result to the piub:i: ? The parliament met, ho. -
ever, on the dav appointed [July 25], and nor-
witllitanding the proteitation of the ea,-l of MIon
trofe and lord Lindtay, in name of their party,
proceeded to business. The king's acceptanm'
of the government was confirmed; the aat grantc i
to Morion, for his security, ratified ; some 1e-
gulations, with regard to the numbers and autlio-
rity of the privy couincil wvere agreed upon ; and
a pension for lite granted to the countess of Mar,
who had been so inttrunmental in bringing about
the late revolution ,,

Meanwhile Argyll, Athol, and their followers,

took arms, upon the specious pretence of refcu-
ing the king from captivity, and the kingdom
from opprelfion, James himself, impatiect of'
the servitude in whlich he was held, by a iman
whom he had long been taught to hate, secretly
encouraged their enterprise ; though, at the faime
tinme, he was obliged not only to disavow them

b Cald. i, S47. Parl. 5 Jac 6.

1 if!

;ii public, but to levy forces against them, and
even to declare, by proclamation [Aug. ii],
tlat le was perfei'ly free from any contlraint,
eitler upon his person or his will. Both fides
<l|i'ckly took the field. Argyll and Athol were
.th the head of seven thousand men; the earl of
Angus, Morton's nephew, met them with an
.rnv five thousand itrong; neither party, how-
:'-er, \vis eager to engage. Morton distrusted
tlie fidelity of his own troops. The two earls
were fenfiile that a single viaory, however com-
nilte, would not be decisive; and as they were
ll Ilo condition to underake the liege of Stirling-
e':;!lc, whlere the king was kept, their ltrength
\ >:ill soon be exhausted, while Mo-ton's oxvi
wv.ilt]h, and the patronage of the queen of

iEngland, might furnish him with endless re-
i'iccS. By the mediation of Bowes, whom
Vilzaboeth had sent into Scotland to negotiate
:n accommodation between the two factions, a
:.;ity wsas concluded, in consequence of. which,
A rgvll and Athol were admitted into the king's
pi'.'fncc ; some of their party were added to the
)ri'vy council; and a convention of nobles called,
ill ,inir to bring all remaining differences to au
a:nmicable ilfue c.

As soon as James assumed the rvovernmenr into

ili;; own hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dun-
ir.l.lling to inform Elizabeth of that event ; to
,IFtrc to renew the alliance between the two

":is(loms; and to demand poffellion of the

CiLite which had lately fallen to him by the death
if hlis grandmother the countess of Lennox.

c Crawf. Mcm, 307,

That

That lady's second son had left one daughte:,
Arabella Stewart, who was born in England.
And as the chief objeaion against the preten.
lions of the Scottifl line to the crown of Eng-
land, was that maxim ps English law, which et-
eludes aliens from any right of inheritance with in
the kipgdpm, Elizabeth, by granting this d.-
mand, would have established a precedent i,
James's favour, that mpight have been deelntd
decisive, with regard to a point which it had
been her conitant care to keep undecided. Wit -
out suffering this delicate question to be trim,
or allowing any new light to be thrown on thn,
which she confidered as the great myftcry of h.:
reign, she commanded lord Burleigh, mafltr of
the wards, to fequeltcr the rents of the eftat,;
and by this method of proceeding, gave the
Scottill kipg early warning how nectifaar- it
nwould be to coUit her favour, if ever he hopcd
fpr success in claims of greater importance, b!lt
equally liable to he controverted d.

1579.j After rmany delays, and with irtilir

difficulty, the contending nobles were at Iti
brought to some agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event. Morton, in token
of reconcilement, having invited the leadrrs of
the opposite party to a great entertaiiimilt,
Athol the chancellor was soon after takenl i!!
and died within a few days [Aptil 24]. Ihec
fymptonms and violence of the disease gave rife to
ftrc ng fnfpicions of his being poisoned; and
though the physicians, who opened his body,
(ilkl ed in opinion as to the cause of the diflrm-

pp;'i

per, the chancellor's relations publicly accused
Morton of that odious crime. The advantage
which visibly accrued to him, by the removal of
a man of great abilities, and avcrfe frorm all his
meatilres, was deemed a sufficient proof of his
guilt by the people, who are ever fond of im-
)pti;ng the death of eminent persons to extra-
ordinary causes .

The ofice of chancellor was bestowed upon

Argyll, rhom this preferment reconciled, in a
rrcat measure, to Morton's administration. He
sLid now recovered all the authority which lie
poifeted during his regency, and had entirely
llokcn, or baffled, the power and cabals of his
enemies. None of the great families remained to
be the obje&s of his jealousy, or to obflruf& his
jcligns, but that of Hamilton. The earl of
Arran, the cldeLt brother, had never recovered the
Shock which he received fiom the ill success of
his passion for the queen, aid had now altogether
o,!t ilis reason. Lord John, tile second brother,
vi, in ponfliionl of the family eltate. Lord
C( itid was commendator of Paify; both of
them young men, ambitious and cnterprifing.

Torton dreaded their influence in the kingdom ;
i:l( courtiers hoped to fllare their spoils among
; ':n; and as all princes naturally view tilcir
'iicccflors with jealouify and hatred, it was easy
,) illrfu thele passions into the mind of the
ouling king. A pretelice was at hand to jufiify
lte inoft violent proceedings. The pardon, Itl-
pilated in the treaty of Perth, did not extend to
cJich as were accefrlry to the murder of the re-

c Spotfw. 306.

gents

gents Murray or Lennox. Lord John and hi:
brother were fufpested of being the authors of
both these crimes, and had been included in a
general at of attainder on that account. With-
out summoning them to trial, or examining .
single witness to prove the charge, this attaindtr
was now thought sufficient to subjet them to ail
the penalties which they would have incurred ,by
being formally convicted. The earls of Mortol,,
Mar, and Eglinton, together with the lords Rt! -
ven, Boyd, nnd Catheart, received a commiflio n
to seize their persons and eitates. On a few
hours warning, a considerable body of troops ws
ready, and marched towards Hamilton in hoifile
array. ,-appily the two brothers made thc;r
escape, though with great difficulty. But their
lands were confiscated; the castles of Hamilton
and Draffan besieged; those who defended thet-
puniihed. The earl of Arran, though incapable,
from his situation, of committing any crime, was
involved, by a ihameful abuse of law, in the comn,
mon ruin of his family; and as if he, too, colld
have been guilty of rebellion, he was confined a
close prisoner. These proceedings, so contrar-
to tlhe fundamental principles ofjutice, were all
ratified in the fubfcquent parliament f,

About this time Mary sent by Naud htr fecre.

tatr, a letter to her son, together with fo:i.e
jewels of value, and a veit embroidered with hlI
own hands. But as ffle gave him only the title
of prince of Scotland, the messenger was dif-
inisrd without being admitted into. his prc-
ecncc g.

! Caws. Mem. 311. Spotfy. 306.
i '(wf. Mcmi 314.

Tlil~gl'

Though Elizabeth had, at this time, no pai--

iKcular reason to fear any attempt of the popiih
princes in Mary's favour, flie still continued to

i:i;'d her with the fame anxious care. The ac-
pi;tfition of Portugal, on the one hand, and the
tlfen'.ce of the Netherlands, on the other, fully
t llploycd( the councils and arms of Spain. France,
tu;rn i pieces by inteltine commotions, and under
. \weak and capricious prince, despised and dif-
rt il ed by his own fubjces, was in no condition
to disturb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long
:miufed that court by carrying on a treaty of
ilarriage with the duke of Alenson, the king's
brother. But whether, at the age of forty-five,
lie really intended to marry a prince of twenty;
x;;i ther the pltafire of being flattered and court-

ad, made her lifien to the addrefies of so young

a lover, whom she allowed to visit her at two
:lerent times, and treated with the most dif-
t;;;.gufiihng refpe& ; or whether considerations of
i:ltcre l predonlinated in this as' ell as in every
other tranfaAion of her reign, are problems in
,flito:.y which we are not concerned to resolve.
During the progress of this negotiation, which
a^.s drawn out to an cxtraordinary length, Mary
cinuld expect no assistance fromt the French
'onrt, and seems to have held little correlpond-
Ine with it; and there was no period in her
:ign, wherein Elizabcth enjoyed more perfect
itcuritV.

Morton seems at this time to have been equally
e;:cul;c ; but his security was not so well-founded.
iHe had weathered out one storm, had crushed
his adversaries, and was again in poffeflion of the
iJle direction of affairs. But as the king was

now

now of an age when the character and difi,.i-
tions of the mind begin to unfold theml;ll:,
and to become visible, the finalleft attentioll to
these might have convinced him, that t;.:
was rsEafl! to expect new and more dangcre.
attacks on his power. James early difco-;i:l
that exceflive attachment to favourites, xhi'.
accompanied him through lis whole life. 'I'
pailioil, which naturally arises from inexpeil,, ,i.
and youtlful warmth of lie-rt, was, at his :,,
far from being culpable; nor coiuld it wJm ,,
(x:peced that the choice of the objects, on whonr'
lie placed his affections, liould be made \wi;'
great ikill. Tle mnolt coniderable of them '..:1
Efine Stewart, a native of Fraifce, and son i,f ,
second brother of the earl of Lennox. I4-: -a,
diltinguiihed by the title of lord D'Aubign(', ai
Iftate in France, which defcernded to him trrn
his ancestors, on whom it had been confci; i.
in reward of their xalour and services to til':
French crown. He arrived in Scotland about
this time [Sept. 8], on prpuife to de( ail1t tlr
estate and title of Lennox, to which hli: p:
tended ;, legal righlt. He was received at ilit
by the king with the reipet due to so Ic. ,
relation. The gracefoulnefs of hie person, til'
elegance of his dress, and his courtly ehavil)r,
made a great imprenlion on James, who, evea:i
his more mature years, was little alle to r'c;li
these frivolous charmn ; and lhs :ffie&ion !{v \~
with its usual rapidity and profillion. Witiin
a few days after Stesart's appearance at coiit,
lie was created lord Aberbrothock, soon ;il'i
carl, and then duke of Leninox, governor ot
Dunlbartil n caltle, capt;inl of the guard, !;il

llrd

!C;rd of the bed-chamber, and lord high cham-
berlain. At the fame time, and without any of
the envy or emulation which is usual among can-
didates for favour, captain James Stewart, the
second fonl of lord Ochiltree, grew into great
confidence. But notwithltanding this union,
L,mnnox and captain Stewart were persons of
vers opposite characters. The former was natu-
rally gentle, humane, candid, but unacquaint.
(d with the Hlate of the country, and misled or
ni;linformed by those whom he trusted; not un-
\-orthy to be the companion of the young king
;i) Ilis amnlfcments, but utterly disqualified for
a;!lir;g as a minitter in dirc6ting his affairs. The
itttcr was remarkable for all the vices which
r'-.:der a man folmidlble to his country, and a
ptrnlicious counsellor to his prince; nor did he
,ofcl'fs any one virtue to counterbalance these
vices, unless dexterity in conducting his own
dcligns, and an enterprising courage, superior to
tilc sense of danger, may pass by that name.
I' iclftained by religion, regardless of de-
. iicy, and undiflnayed by opposition, he
aIniicd at objects feeinmingly unattainable; but
1'!idcr a prince void of experience, and blind
to all the defects of those who had gained
lli; favonr, his audacity was filccefsfull; and
lonlours, wealth, and power were the reward
cif his crnies.

lPoth the favouritcs concurred in employing

tlhicr whole address to undermine Morton's credit,
nlliirl alone obltruted their full pofleiflon of
power. As James had been bred up with an
averion for that nobleman, who endeavoured ra-
ther to maintain the' authority of a tutor, than to

VOL. It. Y at

act with the obfeqniotifUefs of a minilter, they
fitond it no difficult matter to azcoinplilh their (i.
sign. Morton, who could no longer keep tih
king flit up within Ihe walls of Stirling-cal]h,
haviing called a parliament to meet at Edilburig!
[OCd. 171, brought him thither. James nnade
his entry into the capital with great folemnitii;
the citizens received hinm with the loudelt acci-
mations of joy, and with many expenllive p--
geants, according to tile mode of that age. After
a long period of thirty-feven years, during wl:ic
Scotland had been fulhjected to the dtrlgci.l
power of regents, or to the feeble goverl-un'.,t
of a woman ; after having lfiffercd all tile n.; -
ries of civil war, and felt tihe iifuleice of forci:(
armies, the nation rejoiced to fee tile fcep
once more in tile hanpds of a king. Fond t(\vi
of that ihadow of authority, which a prii;ce , f
fifteen could poflcfs, the 8cots fattered thle -
icives, that iunion, order, and tranquillity vir'util
now be rettored to the kinlgdomi . James ope ,;il
the parliament with extraorldiary polp, l ,

,
nothing remiarkable paficd in it.

I5ito.l 'lThef delmonlllurtions, however, of ill

peop]le's lovi- and attachment to tliir {bvr' it:!,
eicuiiraged tile favouilites to continue their iili-
inlltions agaiinft Morton ; and as tile king ll1,
resided in tile palace of Hulvronod-llotIc, ;,
wlicli all his f iLbjes had access, thle cl l
againll the earl grew daily Itronger, and tie
intrigue, which occalioned his fall, ripened gva.
dually.

Morton began to be sensible of his dangcl,

and endeavoured to put a hlop to the career ot
Lennox's. preferment, by representing him ;I; t

fQrmidable

' rmida;bie c:nemy to the reformed religion, a
i -t.rI ag-ent in favour cf popery, and a known
.niflh.'v of the house of Guile. The clergy,
.1,r to bltclieve _-*'r rumonr of tili; kind, spre;ad
ti!C alarm among the pcople. But Lennox,
cither ot, o of coniila;lance to his mal}er, or con-
vinccd b' the arguments of some learned divines
;'v-!!nm the lking appointed to initruct him in the
I:';!,ciples of the protestant religion, publicly re-
nmiinced the errors of popery in the church of
St. G(les, and declared himfilf a member of the
clhurch of Scotland, by ligning her confeflion
of faitlh. This, though it did not remove all
{;sipiciois, nor Iilence obme zealous preachers,
abatcd, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation h.

On the other hand, a rumour prevailed that

Morton was preparing to seize the king's person
and to carry him into England. Vhether defpiair
of maintaining his power by any othet means, had
dri ven him to make any overture of that kind to
the Englilh court, or whether it was a calumny
invented by his adversaries to render him odious,
(c;!lnot now be determincd with certainty. As
ih' declared at his death that fueh a detign had
tcver entered into his thoughts, the latter seems
to be moll probable. It afforded a pretence,
hl)wever, for reviving the office of lord chanm-
tcrlaiil, which had been for some time difllfed
Tlihat honour was conferred on Lennox, Alex..
tllder Erlkine, Morton's capital enemy, was his
deputy; they had under themn i band us gentle-

h Crawf, Mem. 319. SpotlvW. 30S.

Y 2 menl

men, who were appointed conflantly to atte;i(
the king, and to guard his perfoni.

Morton was not ignorant of what his ener,.

intended to insinuate by such unusual precaution1,
for the king's safety; and as his last rcfouro
applied to Elizabeth, wh6fe protection had,
often flood him in stead in his grcateft difficulties.
In consequence of this application, Bowes, tlcr
envoy, accused Lennox of pratices against the
peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in lier
name, that he flould instantly be removed froin
the privy council. Such an unprecedented de-
mand was confidered by the counsellors as an
affront to the king, and an encroachment oil
the independence of the kingdom. They ;if
fe&ed to call in question the envoy's powers, and
upon that pretence refused him farther audienc ;
and he retiring in difguff, and without taking
leave, fir Alexander Home was sent to expoftu-
late with Elizabeth on the subject. Afte-
ihe treatment which her envoy had received.,
TElizabeth thought it below her dignity to and
Unit Home into her preftnce. Burleigh, to
whom he was commanded to impart his corn.
mifnion, reproached him with his inafter's ingra.
titude towards a benefatrefs who had placed thl
frown on his head, and required him to advii'
the king to beware of facrilicing the ifriendfllipl
of so necedfary an ally to the giddy humours
of a young man, without experience, andl
.trongly fiufp&ced of principles and attachmeenlj

I Crawf. Mem. 3z0.

illCOlni

irncompatible with the happiness of the Scottish
lnatiOln.

This acculation of Lennox, haftcned, in all

probability, Morton's f.ll. The a&t of indem-
nity, which he had obtained when he religied
thll regency, was worded with such scrupulous
c':aftnefs, asalmoft screened him from any legal
plrof(ietion. The murder of the late king was
tlh only crime which could not, with decency,
hc inserted in a pardon granted by his son.
Here Morton fill lay open to the penalties of
the law, and captain Stewart, who Ihunned no
;,ition, however desperate, if it led to power or
to favour, entered the council-chamber while the

it;' and noblt:swci e assembled [Dec. o],andfall-
ing on his knees, accused Morton of beingacceffary,
or, according to the language of the Scottifhlaw,
,;,' and part, in the conspiracy againit the life
if his najcity's father, and offered, under the
ltial penalties, to verifv this charge by legal
' idcnce. Morton, whi was present, heard this
:.clfttioli with firmness; and replied with a
lildlainful inile, proceeding either fiom con-
temipt of the infamous claracer of his accuser,
or from confcloufilefs of his own innocence,
" that his known zeal in punishing those who
were fufpeAed of that deteltable crime, might
well exempt himself from any suspicion of being
;icefliry to it; nevertheless, he would cheer-
filly submit to a trial, either in that place or ili
iany other court; and doubted not but his own
innocence, and the malice of his enemies, would
tlirn appear in the clearert light." Stewart,
wllo was still onl his knees, began to inquire how
he would reconcile his beltowing so many honours

Y3 on

on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly
knew to be one of the murderers, with his pre-
te.ided zeal against that crime. Morton was ready
to answer. But the king commanded both to
be removed. The earl was confined, firll ot
all to his own house, and then committed
to the cafile of Edinburgh [Jan. 2, 1581',
of which Alexander Erlkine was governor;
and as if it had not been a sufficient indignity
to fubje& him to the power of one of his enemiie,
he was soon after carried to Dunbarton, of
vhich Lennox had the command. A warrant
was likewise issued [Jan. 18] for apprehending
Archibald Douglas; but he, having received
timely intelligence of the approaching danger,
led into Englandk.

The earl of Angus, who imputed there vio-

lent proceedings, not to hatred against Mort,::
alone, but to the ancient enmity between ti,(
houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who be-
lieved that a conspiracy was now formed for tl'v
deftruCion of all who bore that name, was
ready to take arms in order to rescue his kiit.
man. But Morton absolutely sorbad any firl
attempt, and declared that he would rather
fitfcr ten thousand deaths, than bring an im-
putation upon his own chara&ter by seeming to
decline a trial'.

Elizabeth did not fail to interpose, witlh

warmth, in behalf of a man who had contributed
so much to preferlve her influence over Scotland.
The late tranfadions in tllat kingdom had given
her great uneasiness. The power which tol-
k Crawf. Mem. 35. I Johnft. 64. Spotfw, 311.

no!

nox had acquired independent of her was dan-
gcrous; the treatment her ambassadors had met
ivith differed greatly from the refpef with which
the Scots were in use to receive her ministers;
and the attack now made on Morton fully con-
vinced her that there was an intention to sow
the feeds of discord between the two nations,
Inld to fedne James into a new alliance with
France, or into a marriage with some popish
princess. Full of these apprehensions, Ihe order-
ed a considerable body of troops to be assembled
on the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Ran-
dolph as her ambassador into that kingdom.
He addressed himself not only to James, and
to his council, but to a convention of estates,
met at that time. He began with enumerating
the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had
conferred on the Scottish nation, that with-
out demanding a single foot of land for her-
self, without encroaching on the liberties of the
kingdom in the smallest article, fle had, at the
cxpence of the blood of her fubjeets and the
*teaftires of her crown, rcfcumd the Scots from
the dominion of France, eftablifled among them
true religion, and put them in poffefiion of their
ancient rights: that from the beginning of civil
d(nflnfions in the kingdom, ihe had protected
tholc who espoused the king's cause, and by
her affiliance alone, the crown had been pre-
served on his head, and all the attempts of the
adverse faceioi baffled: that an union, unknown
to their ancetlors, but equally beneficial to both
kingdonms, had fubfiited for a l6ng period of
years; and though so many popifl pnnces had
combined to disturb this happy state of things,

her

her care, and their constancy, had hitherto k,--
feated all these efforts: that fle had observed of
late an unusual coldness, distrust, and eflrange-
ment in the Scottish council, which she cotu.!
impute to none but to Lennox, a subject of
France, a retainer to the house of Guise, bi.d
up in the errors of popery, and still filfpededl of
favouring that superstition. Not satisfied wi:ih
having mounted so fast to an uncommon hceilit
of power, which he exercised with all the rash-
ness of youth, and all the ignorance of a
stranger; nor thinking it enough to have de-
prived the earl of Morton of the authority dui
to his abilities and experience, he had confplied
the ruin of that nobleman, who had often ;.:
posed his life in the king's cause, who had con-
tributed more than any other subje&t to pl;ce
him on the throne, to refilt the elcroachmtciL;
of popery, and to preserve the union betwcs'!
the two kingdoms. If any zeal for rcligion
remained among the nobles in Scotland, il
they wished for the continuance of amity vwith
England, if they valued the privileges of thli,
own order, he called upon them, in the name If
his nliftrefs, to remove such a pernicious coiil-
fellor as Lennox firon the prelLnce of the yoiriii
king, to rescue Morton out of the hands of hri
avowed enemy, and secure to him the benefit of
a fair and impartial trial and if force was ncri f-
fary towards accomplifiing a dcfign so fallutiy
to the king and kingdom, he promised tl.in,
the protc&ion of his mistress in the enterlpif.,
and whatever afliftancc they thould demand cither
of men or money m.

nl Cald. iil. 6. Strype, ii. Gzl.

BIht

Buit the'e extraordinary remonstrances, accom-

l;;nied wkith such an unufial appeal from the
king to Iis fubjeets, were not the only means
employed by Elizabeth in favour of Morton, and
adntint Lennox. She pcrfuaded tile prince of
tOrange to fend an agent into Scotland, and
uii, dr colour of complimenting James on account
,f tle valour which many of his fubjeEts had
dJilplaycd in the service of the States, to enter
into a lonl detail of the restless entcrprifes of
;!h popi!h princes againll the protestant religion;
to bcfeecll him to adhere inviolably to the alli-
lnlce with England, the only barrier which fe-
.'urcd his kingdom againfl their dangerous cabals;
;!d, above all things, to distrust the inlinuations
f dhofe who endeavoured to weaken or to diflblve
';:'tt union between the Britifl nations, which all
'! protestants in Europe beheld with so much
pi;iafure ".

[James's counsellors were too intent upon the

ii :t-uction of their enemy to liften to there re-
;!oniftrances. The officious interposition of the
jrince of Orange, the haughty tone of Eliza-
i)cth's message, and her avowed attempt to ex-
:iic fubjets to rebel againlt their sovereign,
v(rce confidered as unexampled infiults on the
lljicfty and independence of a crowned head.
' gecneral and evasive answer was given to Ran.
dilpi. James prepared to assert his own dig-
lit)y with spirit. All those fiufpctcd of favour-
I;;' Morton were turned onu of office, some of
t)elm were required to furrncder themfelvcs pri-
fuicr' ; thle men capable of bearing arms through-

n Cald. iii. 9, See Append. No. XLL

out

o'it the kingdom were commanded to be i in,,..
diness to take the field; and troops were leIi!
;and posted on the borders. The Elng'fi ,i.
baffador, finding that neither the public .iai:-
fefo which he had delivered to the conveiti-:
nor his private cabals with the nobles, could .
cite them to arms, fled in the night-time
of Scotland, where libels againiit him had 1, iL
daily publilhed, and even attempts made uni,;
his life. In both kingdoms every thing wore n;
liotile afpeEt. B3ut Elizabeth, though file w!::
ed to have intimidated the Scottish king by !,
preparations, had no inclination to entci irt"
war with him, and the troops on the bordcers,
which had given such umbrage, were soon i:i-
perfed °.

The greater solicitude Elizabeth difcovcrci!

for Morton's safety, the more eagerly diil
enemies drive on their schemes for his dellri-
tion. Captain Stewart, his accuser, was firn ..!-
pointed ltuor to the earl of Arran, and foonl l:
ter both the title and cltate of his unhapp)
ward, to which he advanced some frivolous cl:.;:;,
were conferred upon him. The new-made 1pt:
was commanded to condu&t Morton from 1)Dn-
barton to Edinburghl; and by that choice til:'
earl was not only warned what fate he milL i:-
pedt, but had llhe cruel mortilic:;tion of secing 1i,
deadly enemy already loaded with honou;rs, in I,.
ward of the malice with which he had contribl)it,
to his ruin.

The records of the court of jfli/cirry at tliii
period arc loft. The account which our liii-

U Crawf, Mem. 3z8 Stripe, ii App. 138.

I'riliii

,ials give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and un-
i'; isfaidory. The proceedings againit him seem
t" have lben carried on with violence. During
'he trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn
;p in different parts of the city. The jury was
oinpotcd of the. earl's known enemies; and
t!)ough hle challenged several of them, his ob-
jeclions were over-ruled. After a short consul-
t;ition, his peers found him guilty of concealing,
;ii(! of being art and part in the conspiracy
;Ia;;iilit the life of the late king. The firit part
i llhe verdic did not ifrprliif him, but he twice
;i-i) ated the words art and part with some vehe-
.':imic, and added, " God knows it is not so."
''! J (loom which the law decrees againIt a traitor,
w;s; pronounced. T'lC king, however, remitted
m: cruel and ignominious part of the fcntence,

a..,!l ;ppointed that he hlould iuffer death next
d.:!, hy being beheaded P.

!)uillg that awful interval, Morton possessed
;. untmolt compofurc of mind. He ftipped
cel.rtilly ; llept a part of the night in his usual
':: ;.n!cr, and tmployed the reft of his time in re-
li.'iols cofterences, and in aCts of devotion with
i )le miiniltcrs of tlhe city. The clergymen who
,irtcided himn, dealt firely with his conscience,
:l.ld prefled his crimes home upon him. What
lit .,feflfd with regard to the crime for which
Ii' suffered, is rcmarkable, and fiuplies, in fom-
iicmilfure, the imperfeclion of our records. He
llnowledged, that on his return fi-rom England,
;!ter the death of Rizio, Botlwell had informed

r Spottlv. 3'4. Jolnfl 65. Crawl: Mem. 332. Cild. iii,
45' A;int's Crianin. Tliljs 388.

him

him of the conspiracy against the king, which
the queen, as he told him, knew of and appnv.
ed; that he solicited him to concur in the e.e
cution of it, which at that time he abfolutciy
declined; that soon after, Bothwcll himself, a;;(l
Archibald Douglas in his name, renewing th;ic.
solicitations to the fame purpose, he had requi-, d
a warrant under the queen's hand, authorizii.,
the attempt, and as that had never been prodric-
ed, he had refused to be any farther concernd
in the matter. " But," continued he, " as i
neither consented to this treasonable at, nor -!:
filled in the committing of it, so it was impof'li
ble for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To wlI( lm
could I make the discovery ? The queen was ti,.
author of the enterprise. Darnly was fuc ;
changeling, that no secret could be safely com-
municated to him. Huntly and Bothwell, wvh.
bore the chief sway in the kingdom, were them-
selves the perpetrators of the crime." Thck
circumstances, it must be confessed, go foine
length towards extenuating Morton's guilt; ard
though his apology for the favour he had ihown
to Archibald Douglas, whom he knew to be onlc
of the conspirators, be far less satisfactory, no
uneasy reflections seem to have disquieted his own
mind on that account . When his keepers toll
him that the guards were attending, and :ll
things in readiness, " I praise my God," said lie,
" I am ready likewic." Arran commandce
these guards; and even in those moments whci
the moit implacable hatred is apt to relent, the
malice of his enemies could not forbear this in-
fult. On the feaffold, his behaviour was calm;

4 Crawf Mema. App. iii,

Ils

his countenance and voice unaltered; and after
some time spent in devotion, he suffered death
with the intrepidity which became the name of
Douglas. His head was placed on the public
gaol of Edinburgh ; and his body, after lying
ill sun-set on the scaffold, covcred with a beg-
garly cloak, was carried by common porters to
thle ufial burial-place of criminals. None of his
ih iends durit accompany it to the grave, or disco-
vcr their gratitude and refpe& by any symptoms
of lorrow r.

Arran, no less profligate in private life, than

ai:d;iciolls in his public conduEt, soon after drew
!:.c attention of his countrymen, by his infalnous
i;l:rriage with the countess of March. Before he

i;iw il:to favour at court, he had been often en.

.:; ained in her husband's house, and without re-
ardiing the lwvs of hospitality or of gratitude,
c:l,-ied on a criminal intrigue witli the wife of
i;is benefaAor, a woman young and beautiful,
!:t, according to the defciption of a cotempo.
1,:'.y Iiftorian, " intolerable in all the impcrkfc-
;itil; incident to her iex.'' inpatient of any
.'aiiunt upon their mutual ldeires, they, with
: .i;al ardour, wiflied to avow their union pub-
:. Ij, and to legitimate, by a marriage, thle off-

iing of their unlawful paifion. 'The countess
I '!ioncd to he divorced froun her lhuiand, for a
: ii]i wrlich nor modell womnan will ever plead.
'.i'hc judges, over-awaed by Arran, pafled feil
i!)tc without delay. This infamous feeie was,
,:,,ilc!udcd by a marriage, solemnised with great
jillip [July 6], and beheld by all ranks of men
..iit the utimolt horror'.

' Crawf. Mcm, 334. Spotlw. 114. , Spotfw. 315.
v'*OL. II. Z . par.

A parliament was held this year [OFt. 24], ,-

the olpening of which forne disputes arose betwc -'
Arran and thc earl now created duke of Lennox .
Arran, haughty by nature, and pulhed on i,;
his wife's ambition, began to assed an equaliiy
witl the duke, under whose protection he h:.l
hitherto been contented to place himself. Afic i
valious attempts to form a party in the councll
againlt Lennox, he found him fixed so firmly ii,
the king's affetions, that it was impossible t.
ihake him; and rather than lose all interest '.!
court, from which lie was banished, he n!.;aie
the moil humble submissions to the favourite, awl,
again recovered his former credit. Thisruptilic
contributed, however, to render the duke 'iill
more odious to the nation. During the co!i,.
luance of it, Arran affected to court the clergy,
pretended an extraordinary zeal for the protest-
ant religion, and laboured to confirm the fufi.;.
cions which were entertained of his rival, as .n
emiflarv of the house of Guise, and a favou,,.r
of popery. As he was supposcd to be acquaii. i
with the duke's.moft secret dclignu, hlis cah;.ll-
nies were liltened to with greater credit than v s,
due to his cliaraCter. To this rivallhip betwvci
I.ennox and Arran, during the continuance ,i'
which each endcavourcd to conciliate the goln),.
will of the clergy, we inult ascribe fevcral a.ts ,ft
this parliament uncommonly favourable to lihe
church, particularly one which albolilhcd the
pradice introduced by Morton, of appoiiilirig
but one nmiiifter to fevcral parilhes.

No notice hath been taken for several ycarls J

ecclefialical aflsairs. While the civil governicil.,t
underwentt lo many extraordinary revolutions, tl,:

..%.... 1

church was not free from convulsions. Two
objeds chiefly engrossed the attention of the
clergy. The one was, the forming a fyfteim of
di;cipline, or ecclesiastical polity. After long
labour, and many difficulties, this systen was at
Lit brought to iome degree of perfeation. The
.fiernmbly iolemnly approved of'it, and appointed
it to be laid before the privy council, in order
to obtain the ratification of it in parliament.
B;lt Morton, during' his administration, and
ihofe who, after his fall, governed the king,
'e're equally unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by itarting difficulties, and
throwing in objeEtions, prevented it from re-
ctiving a legal sanction. The other point in
view was, the abolition of the episcopal order.
The bishops were so devoted to the king, to
xwhom they owed their promotion, that the
funaion itself was by some reckoned dangerous
to civil liberty. Being allowed a feat in par-
iainent. and ditinguifhed by titles of honour,
t . ite not only occasioned many avocations from
titcir- spiritual functions, but soon rendered their
ciiras&er and manners extremely different fiom
thlfe of the clergy in that age. The nobles
;viewed their power with jealouTfy; the populace
conlidered their lives as profane ; and both wish-
cdi their downfal with equal ardour. The per-
foial emulation between Melvil and Adamlon,
a man of learning, and eminent for his popular
(!oquence, who was promoted, on the death of
Douglas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's, min-
lded itfelfwith the passions on each fide, and
ltihlltened them. Attacks were made in every
a;igmbly on the order of bishops; their privileges

z 2 were

were gradually circumscribed; and at last an aL
was passed, declaring the office of bishop, as it
was then exercised within the realm, to have
neither foundation nor warrant in the word of
God; and requiring, under pain of excommuni.
cation, all who now possessed that office, initantly
to resign it, and to abitain from preaching or ad-
miniltering the sacraments, until they should rc-
ceive permission from th'2 general aflembly. Tie
court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy
happening soon after in the fee of Glafgo'.,
Montgomery minister at Stirling, a man vain,
fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the ble-
miihes in his character, to have alienated the people
from an order already beloved, than to reconi,:ilk
them to one which was the object of their hatredi
made an infamous fimoniacal bargain with Lea-
nox, and on his recommendation was chosen
archbifliop. The presbytery of Stirling, of
which he was a member, the presbytery of
Glasgow, whither he was to be translated, the ge-
neral assembly, vied with each other in profecutir'g
him on that account. C158z] In order to fcre.n
Montgomery; James made trial both of gentJl
and of rigorous ineafures, and both were equ:ll!'
ineffetual. The general assembly was jut realdy
to pronounce against him the sentence of excom-
munication, when an herald entered, and coim-
nanded them in the king's name, and under pain
of rebellion, to fop further proceedings. l;vcn
this injunction they despised; and though Mont-
gomery, by his tears and teeming penitence, prO-
cured a fIort refpitc, the sentence was at lait
iflTed by their appointment, and publi(hed in all
the clurcllea throughout the kingdom.

Th1e,.

The firmness of the clergy in a colIc-livc body

was not greater than the boldness; of some indivi-
duals, particutlarly of the minillers of Edin-
burgh. They tiveighed daily againll the cor-
ruptions in the adininillration; and, with the
frcedlom of fpcech admitted into the pulpit in
'!,at age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief
ailhors of the grievances under which the church
and kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their
tur-n, complained to the king of the insolent and
seditious spirit of the clergy. In order to check
the holdnefs of their discou-rses, James iffiled a
'-oclamnation, commanding Iury, one of the
nmol popular -ninillers, not only to leave the
to:vi, but to abstain fiom preaching in any other
place. Dury complained to the judicatories of
t:is incl(rochment upon the immunities of his of-
fice. They approved of the dofcrine which he
h;ad delivered; and he determined to difrcgard
the royal proclamation. But the rnagiltlates
Ic ing determined to compel him to leave the
itvy, according to the king's orders, he was
tfigcd to abandon his charge, after protellinr
}ubiicly at the cross of Edinburgh, againl
t!h violence which was put upon him. The
t cniple accompanied him to the gates with tears
; ni larmentations; and the clergy denounced the
.cng:ence of Heaven againit the authors of this
t ;It'ge' t.

Il this perilous litrlation flood the church,
lie authority of its judicatories called in quedtion,
anil the liberty of the pulpit reitrained, when a

t C^ld. Aflncmb. s576-15^2. Spotfw. z77, &c.

z 3 sudden

sudden revolution of the civil government pro.
cured them unexpeEted relief.

The two favourites, by their ascendant over

the king, pofeffed uncontrolled power in the
kingdom, and exercised it with the utinoft wan-
tonness. James usually resided at Dalkeith, :ir
Kinncil, the feats of Lennox and of Arran, ;n;
was attended by such company, and employe-l
in such .mufements, as did not snit his dignit.-.
The services of those who had contributed mulf
to place the crown on his head were but little re-
membered. Many who had opposed him with
the greatest virulene-, enjoyed the rewards and
honours to which the others were entitled. Ex:-
alted notions of regal prerogative, utterly incon-
filtent with the confiitution of Scotland, being
intilllcd by his fa'vourites into the mind of ti,:
young monarch, unfortunately made, at that early
age, a deep inpreffion there, and became the
source of almost all his subsequent errors in the
government of both kingdoms". Courts of
justice were held in almost every county, the
proprietors of land were called before them, and
upon the slightest neglect of any of the nuine-
rous forms which are peculiar to feudal holdings,
they were fined with unusual and intolerable ii-
gour. The lord chamberlain revived the obfo.
lete jurifdifion of his oifice over the boroughs,
and they were fubjecded to aftions no lues griev-
ous. A design seemed likewise to have becn
formed to exatperate Elizaheth, and to difllvc
the alliance with her, which all good proteftanls

u Cald. iii, 152.

.cdleenn-'

c(tecned the chief security of their religion in
Scotland. A close correspondence was carried
on between the king and his mother, and con-
fiderable progress made towards uniting their
t;iles to the crown, by such a treaty of affoci-
ation as Maitland had projeced; which could
,lt fail of endangering or diminiifliug his au-
thority, and must have proved fatal to those
v-ho had aAed againflt her with greatest vi-
gour x.

All these circumflanccs irritated the impatient

,pirii of the Scottifi nobles, who resolved to
tolrate no longer the insolence of the two mi-
liions, or to stand by, while their presumption
a:,d inexperience ruined both the king and king.
!Jomr. Elizabetl, who, dluring the adminiit ration
;.f the four regents, had the eltire dircttion of
the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of
all influence in that kingdom ever since the death
c* Morton, and ras ready to couutcnancc any
.ttemipt to rfctuc the king out of the hands of
F.avonrites who were leading him into mcafures
f, repugant to all her views. The earls of Mar
; nd Glencairn, lord Ruthven, lately created earl
of Gowrie, lord Lindsay, lord Boyd, the tutor
*f Glanis, the eldest son of lord Oliphant, with
.cveral barons and gentlemen of diltihnion, en.
i, red into a. combination for that purpose; and
i,'; changes in adminiitration, which, among po.
iilhed nations, are brought about slowly and
iilcntly, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
lride age effected suddenly and by violence, the
king's situation, and the security of the favour.

x Cald. iii. 157.

Itesi

ites, encouraged the conspirators to have imme-
diate recourse to force.

James, after having resided for some time in

Athol, where he enjoyed his favourite amufenlet'
of hunting, was now returning towards Edin.
burgh with a finall train. He was invited to
Ruthven castle, which lay in his way; and as ihl
fufpeEted no danger, he wenit thither in hopes of
farther sport. The multitude of strangers whom
he found there gave him some uneasiness; and is
those who were in th'e secret arrived every rm;.
ment from different parts, the appearance of so
many new faces increased his fears. He con-
cealed his uneasiness, however, with the utmoil
care; and next morning prepared for the field,
expecting to find there some opportunity cf
making his efcap. But jull as he was ready
to depart, the nobles entered his bedchamber ill
a body, and presented a memorial againit the
illegal and oppressive actions of his two favouritcs,
whom theyreprefented as moil dangerous enemies
to the religion and liberties of the nation. James,
though he received this remoni2rance with the
complaisance which was ncceffary in his prefect
situation, was extremely impatient to be gone:;
but as he approached the door of his apartment,
the tutor of Glanis rudely flopped him. Tinc
king complained, expoltulated, threatened, ali.!
finding all there without effect, burst into tears:
" No matter," said Glamis fiercely, " better
children weep han bearded men." These words
made a deep impreflion on the king's mind, and
were never forgotten. The conspirators, with-
out regar(lin his tears or indignation, difmitcd
fuIh of his followers as they fufpc&ed; allowed

noine

none but persons of their own party to have ac-
cess to him ; and, though they treated him with
j:-eat refpet, guarded his person with the ut-
riofi care. This enterprise is usually called, by
our hiitorians, The raid of Ruthen Y.

Lennox and Arran were aftonifled to the last

degree at an event so unexpe&ed, and so fatal
to their power. The former endeavoured, but
without success, to excite the inhabitants of
Edinburgh to take arms in order to rescue their
sovereign from captivity. The latter, with his
fuial impetuosity, mounted on horseback the
lomlent lie heard what had befallen the king,
and with a few followers rode towards Ruthven
catle; and as a considerable body of the con.
fpirators, under the command of the carl of Mar,
lay in his way ready to oppose him, he separated
ilimfelf from his companions, and with two
attendants arrived at the gate of the castle. At
the fight of a man so odious to his country, the
indignation of the conspirators rose, and instant
diath must have been the puniflment of his raflt-
ness, if the friendship of Gowrie, or some other
caufle not explained by our historians, had not
saved a life so pernicious to the kingdom. He
w-as confined, however, to the cattle of Stir.
lil;g, without being admitted into the king's
presence.

Ihe king, though really the prisoner of his

own fubjeds, with whose condu& he could not
'ilp discovering many symptoms of difglt, was
obliged to publifli a proclamation, figniiting his
approbation of their enterprise, declaring that he

Cald, iii. 134. Spottw. 320, Mlv. 357.

aits

was at full liberty, without any restraint or
violence offered to his pcrfon; and forbidding
any attempt against those concerned in the Raid
of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing him o~ti
of their hands. At the fame time [Aug. 2S1,
he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before
the twentieth of September z.

Soon after, fir George Carey and Robert

Bowes arrived as ambafladors from Elizabeth.
The pretext of their embassy was to inquire aftlr
the king's safety ; to encourage and countenance
the conspirators was the real motive of it. By
their intercession, the earl of Angus, who, ever
since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in
exile, obtained leave to return. And the acccf-
sion of a nobleman so powerful and so popular
strengthened the faEtion a.

Lennox, whose amiable and gentle qualities

had procured him many friends, and who received
private aflurances that the king's favour towards
him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
first, to pay no regard to a command extorted by
violence, and no less disagreeable to James, than
it was rigorous with regard to himself. 'But
the power of his enemies, who were maiters of
the king's person, who were secretly supported
by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the
clergy, deterred him from any enterprise, the
success of which was dubious, and the danger
certain, both to himself and to his fovercign.
He put off the time of his departure, however,
by various artifices, in expetation either that
James might make his escape from the confpi-

Cald. iii. 135. 1 3S. F Ibid iii. i S.,

;ators,

rators, or that fortune might present some
Inore favourable opportunity us taking arms for
his relief.

On the other hand, the conspirators were cx-

tl-inely solicitous not only to fccure the appro-
bttion of their countrymen, but to obtainl sone
!cz-al fandion of their enterprise. For this
pirpofe they published a long declaration, con-
I;tiling the motives which had induced them to
t:inture on such an irregular Itep, and cidca-
vourcd to heighten the public indignation againlt
the favourites, by representing, in the ltrong:icl.
;olours, their inexperience and insolence, tlheir
cu,:itempt of the nobles, their violation of the
plivilegcs of the church, and their oppression of
:.i p]eople They olligcd the king, who could
r..t with safety refute anv of their demands, to
r;lant them a reniifion in the moil aniple foirm;
;;td rot satisficd with that, they applied to the
::iinmbly of the church [OC. 3], and ealily pro-
Ciil(.d di afl, declaring, " that they had done
" 'ood and acceptable service to God, to their
' iovercign, and to their native country ;" and
r,.iiring all {incerc protcltants to concur with
thln ial carrying forward such a laudable enter-
iic,. In order to add the greater weight to
i,i; act, every minifltr was enjoined to read it
i his own pulpit, and to inflid tlhe ccnfures of

ie church on those who set tllemfelvc, in oppo-
l..ion to so good a cause. A. convention of
, Iltces afllmbled a few days after, pafl'ed aa
.mt to the fume effcdt, and granted full in<
:!ienity to tile conspirators for every thing they
!'td done b.

I Cald, iii. 177. 187. o7o. Spotfw. 322.

Jam'.

James was conducted by them, first to Stir-

ling, and afterwards to the palace of Holyrood-
honfe ; and though he was received every wlce
with the external marks of refpet due to his
dignity, his motions were carefully observed,
and he was under a restraint no less ftric& thes
at the first moment when he was seized by tie
conspirators. Lennox, after eluding many coln.
mands to depart out of the kingdom, was at
last obliged to begin his journey. He lingered,
however, for some time in the neighbourhood of
Edinburgh, as if he had itill intended to maki
some effort towards restoring the king to. liberty.
But eithel from the gentleness of his own dil;
position, averse to bloodshed and the disorders oi
civil war, or fiom some other cause unkno',:;
to us, he abandoned the design, and set oi'
for France, by the way of England [Dec. 30-l.
The king issued the order for his departure witli
no less reludtance than the duke obeyed it; ;l.d
both mourned a separation, which neither of tln !;
had power to prevent. Soon after his arrival '
France, the fatigue of the journey, or thie ..
guilh of his mind, threw hint into a fever.
his lalt moments he discovered such a lirtm ;i .
herence to the protetlant faith, as fully vindica',,
his memory from the imputation of an. att, ..
ment to popery, with which lie had been 11,
charitably loaded in Scotland c. As he was li.
carlieft, and belt beloved, he was, perhaps, tiic
most deserving, though not the molt able, of aill
James's favourites. The warmth and tcndcrncl.
of his malter's aflsction for him was not abald

c SpotfCw 334. Cald. iii. 17z.

i¥

by death itself. By many aEts of kindness and
gtneroiity towards his polterity, the king not
only did great honour to the memory of Len-
nox, but let his own character in one of its moit
fav;ourable points of view.

The success of the conspiracy which deprived

J:ines of liberty made great noise over all Eu-
rope, and at lalt reached the ears of Mary in the
lrifon to which ihe was confined. As her own
experience had taught her what injuries a cap-
irve prince is exposed to fiffer; and as many of
:hl)fe who were now concerned in the enterprise
gainlt lher fol, were the fame persons whlom she
co:nfidered as the chief authors of her own mif-
!ortlles, it was natural for the tenderness of a
mnother to apprehend that the fame calamities

r\;c, ready to fall on lis head ; and such a

p!roJe)ct did not fail of adding to the distress and
!horror of her own situation. In the anguish of
ir- heart, fnle wrote to Elizabeth, complaining
:i the bitteretl terms of the unprcctdented rigour
with which the herself had been treated, and
Icfeecliing her not to abandon her fin to the
imercy of his rebellious fiubj(ets; nor permit him
I) be involved in the fame imisfortunes under

hllicih Ihe had so long groaned. The peculiar
ignour and acrimony of ityle, for vhich this
itttel is remarkable, discover both the high spirit
,f the Scottish queen, unfibdued by her susser-
mIgs, and the violence of her indignation at
lilizabeth's artifices and severity. But it was ill
adapted to gain the end which she had in view,
and accordingly it neither procured any mitiga.
i;on of the rigour of her own confinement, nor
any lutcrpofitoin infavour of the king d.

d Camd. 489.
VOL. 11, AA J583.

1583.] Henry III. who, though he feared

and hated the princes of Guise, was often obliged
to court their favour, interposed with war!mth,
in order to extricate James out of the hands of
a party so entirely devoted to the Englifih i'n-
terest.- He commanded M. de ia Motte Feneloi,
his ambassador at the court of England, to i -
pair to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmol1
endeavours towards placing James in a fi.tuatioln
more suitable to his dignity. As Elizabeth
could not, with decency, refutf him liberty to
execute this commillion, she appointed Davison ti
attend him into Scotland as her envoy, untler
colour of concurring with him in the lncgoniatin,
but in reality to be a spy upon his motions, anid
to obitrut his success. James, whose title tl
the crown had not hitherto been recognised by
any of the princes on the continent, was ex-
tremely fond of such an honourable embassy firon
the French monarch ; and, on that account, :-t
well as for the fake of the errand on which bI
came, received Fenelon with great refpi)c.
[Jan. 7]. The nobles, in whole power the kiln
was, did not relish this interposition of the Frenci,
court, which had long lolt its ancient influenlc
over the affairs of Scotland. The clergy were
alarmed at the danger to which religion would
be exposed, if the princes of Guise should recover
any ascendant over tle public councils. Though
the king tried every method for restraining theli
within the bounds of decency, they declaimeol
against the court of France, againll the princes
of Guise, againi the ambaflador, against enter-
ing into any alliance with filch notorious perse-
cutors of te church of God, with a vehemence
which no regular government would now tole.

ratea

rate, hut which was then extremely common.
TIhe ambassador, watched by 1)avifon, diltrutecd
by the nobles, and exposcd to the insults of the
clergy and of the people, returned into England
without procuring any change in the king's
situation, or receiving any anwver to a proposal
which lie made, that the government flould be
carried on in the joint names of James and the
queen his mother e.

Meanwhile James, though he dissembled with

great art, became every day more uneasy under
his confinement; his uneasiness rendered him con-
tinually attentive to find out a proper opportu-
nity for making his escape ; and to this attention
he at last owed his liberty, which the king of
France was not able, nor the queen of England
willing to procure for him. As the conspirators
had forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept
Arran at a distance from court, they grew fe-
cure; and imagining that time had reconciled
the king to them, and to his situation, they
watched him with little care. Some occasions
of discord had arisen among themselves; and
the French ambassador, by fomenting thefc
during the time of his residence in Scotland,
ha:l weakened the union, in which alone their
iafitly confited f. Colonel William Stewart,
ihe commander of the band of gentlemen who
guarded the king's person, being gained by
allmes, had the principal merit in the scheme for
]illoring his maiter to liberty. Under pretence
if paying a visit to the earl of March, his

'rCald. iii. 207. Spotfw. 234. Murdin, 372, &c. Sec
Appellix, No.XLII. f Caind.48,.

A 2 grand.

grand-uncle, James was permitted to go fi-r,;
Falkland to St. Andiew's [June 27]. That ih
might not create any suspicion, he lodged at 1si 1[
in an open defenceless house in the town, btt
pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no foonn
wuas he entcred with some of his attendants wlx;
he could trust, than colonel Stewart commaiu:,,
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the relt 1;-
his train. Next morning the earls of Argyll,
Hluntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, vi 'i
others to whom the fecrct had been comnuli ;-
cated, entered the town with their followtr',,
and though Mar, with several of the leaders (o
the faction, appeared in arms, they found themn
selves so far outnumbered, that it was in vain to
think of recovering poffellion of the king's pi;
son, which had been in their power fomewll:lt
longer than ten months. James was naturally
of so soft and ducile a temper, that those who
were near his person commonly made a deep iin-
preflion on his heart, which was formed to be
under the sway of favourites. As he remaniiLd
implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators
during so long a time, and at a period of life
when resentments are rather violent tlan laftingl,
they mull either have improved the opportunit iks
of inlinuating themselves into favour Wiith little
dexterity, or the indignation with which this lilt
insult to his person and authority filled him, null
have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and :x-

cefsive. He resolvcd, however, by the advice (if
lir Jalmes Melvil, and his wrilfef counfcllors, t ;tl't
with the utmost moderation. Having called into
his presence the leaders of both fit'aions, the

lcliglh-

neighbouring gentry, the deputies of the adjacent
boroughs, the ministers, and the heads of colleges,
he declared, that although he hadbeen held under
restraint for some time by violence, he would not
impute that as a crime to any man, but, without
remembering the irregularities which had been
so frequent during his minority, would pass a
general ad of oblivion, and govern all his fubjedts
with undiftinguiffiing and equal affe&ion. As an
evidence of his incerity, he visited the earl of
Gowrie at Ruthven-caitle, and granted him a full
pardon of any guilt he had contraced, by the
crime committed in that very place g.

But James did not adhere long to this prudent

and moderate plan. His former favourite, the
earl of Arran, had been permitted for some time
to retide at Kinneil, one of his country feats.
As soon as the king' felt himself at liberty, his
love for him began to revive, and he expressed a
Itron- desire to fee him. The courtiers violently
oppoled the return of a minion, whose insolent
and overbearing temper they dreaded, as much
as the nation deteited his crimes. James, how-
ever, continued his importunity, and promising
that he fliould continue with him no longer than
one day, they were obliged to yield. This in.
terview rekindled ancient affetion ; the king for-
got his promise ; Arran regained his ascendant
over him ; and within a few days reflumed the
exercise of power, with all the arrogance of an
muideferving favourite, and all the ralhnefs pe-
culiar to himfelfh.

The firit effect of his influence was a procla-
mation with regard to thofc concerned in the

g Mclv. 272. h Ibid, 274.

A A 7 Raid

Raid of Rutihven. They were required to ac-
knowledge their crime in the humbleit manner;
and the king promised to grant them a filll par-
don, provided their future condu&t were such as
did not oblige him to remember past mifcar-
riages. The tenor of this proclamation was ex-
tremely different from the ad of oblivion which
the conspirators had been encouraged to expct.
Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on a
promise clogged with such an equivocal con-
dition, and granted by a young prince under the
dominion of a miniter void of faith, regardless
of decency, and transported by the desire of
revenge even beyond tile ufiual ferocity of his
temper. Many of the leaders, who had at firit
appeared openly at court, retired to their own
houses; and, foreseeing the dangerous form
which was gathering, began to look out for a
retreat in foreign countriesi.

Elizabeth, who had all along protected the

conspirators, was extremely difguited with mea.
fures which tended so visibly to their deitruftion,
and wrote to the king a harsh and haughty letter
[Aug. 7], reproaching him in a style very un-
common among princes, with breach of faith
in recalling Arran to court; and with imprudence
in proceeding so rigorously against his best and
motl faithful fibjccts. James, with a becoming
dignity, replied, that promises e;toited by vio-
lence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were
no longer binding, when these were removed;
that it belonged to himn alone to choofc what
ministers he would employ in his lervicc; and

i Mclv. 278. Spotfw. 316. Cald. ii. 330.

, 1,hat

that though he resolved to treat the conspirators
at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it was
necessary, for the support of his authority, that
such an insult on his perfoln flould not pass alto-
gether uncenfured k.

Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed by

Walfiigham her secretary, whom file appointed
her ambaflador to James, and who appeared at
the Scottifil court [Scpt. i], with a splendour
,Ild magnificence well calculated to please and
dlzzle a young prince. Wallingham was ad-
ilitted to fevcial conferences with James him-
flwf, in which lie insisted on the fame topics
crotained in the letter, and the king repeated
!ii, former answers.

After fuffcring several indignities from the

arrogance of Arran and his creaturts, he re-
turned to England,. without concluding zhy new
trct.y with the king. Wafingham was, ;..xt
t, Burleigh, the minister on wihom the chief
wrJight of the Engiifh admininflration relied; and
'\licl a person of his rank slept so far out of the
ordinary road of business, as to undertake a long
itrney il Iiis old age, and under a declining
ii:te of health, some affair of confequenice swas
fupllofed to he the canfe, or some important
Ivenct was expIftCed to he the effect, of this
lt-aftire. But as nothing con'hpicuous either
occaGfioned or followed this emibafly, it is pro-
!al)le that Elizabeth had no other intention il
cliployilng this fagacions miniler, than to dif-
cover, with exactllefs, the capacity and difpo-
fition of the Scottilhl Jingl, who vwas now arrived

k Melv. z79.

at

at a time of life when, with some degree of cer-
tainty, conje&tures might be formed concerning
his charater and future conduEt. As James
poffefled talents of that kind, which make a
better figure in conversation than in ation, he
gained a great deal by this interview with the
Englifl secretary, who, notwithstanding te!.
cold reception which le met with, gave filch :;ii
advantageous reprefintation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, hencefor-

ard, with greater decency and respect1.
Elizabeth's eagerness to protedt the confpi

rators rendered James more violent in his pro-
ceedings againit them. As they had all refufled
to accept of pardon upon the terms which h-
had offered, they were required, by a new pro-
clamation, to surrender thenlfelves prisoner-.
The earl of Angus alone complied; the reft
either fled into England, or obtained the king's
licence to retire into foreign parts. A conven-
tion of eflates was held, the members of which,
deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthwcn
to have been guilty of high treason; appointed
the a& passcd last year approving of their con-
u&t to be expunged out of the records; and
(ngaged to support the king in prosecuting the
fugitives with the utmost rigour of law.

Theo colfpirators, though far from having

done any thing tha;t was uncommon in that age,
amongl mutinous nobles, and iunder an unsettled
Ilate of government, mult be acknowledged to
hlve been guilty of an a&t of treason againit

i Melv. 5 3. Cald. iii, js8. Jebb, ii. 536.

cliir iovercign ; andi Jamci, who conlfdered
tilhir conduft in this light, !lad good tcafon to
boalt of his clemelcy, when he o.rcred to par-
don them upon th}eir cnfeiiingl their crime.

utit, on the other hland, it mutt be allowed
that, after the king's volilntarIy prinife of a
rcitcral obl irii, they had some reason to corn-
ilai. of breach of flith, and, without the molt
i!;ipardonabil imprudence, could not have put
t','ir lives in Arran's power.

1584.] The intcreit of the church was con.

I':terably afleded by thel! contrary rcvolutions.
ilile the conspirators kept poffefIion of power,

eic clergy not only recovered, but extended
il(I- privileges. As they had forin'rly declared
l1' hiicrarchy to be unlawful, they to;,k lome
!,,ld measures towards x;:ei-nlinhating the epif-
cupal order out of the church; and it was
.'wing more to Adamson's dexr.crity in perplex-
ing and lengthening out. the process for that
Jlrpu)fe, than to their own want of zeal, that
ti;cy (lid not deprive, and perhaps excommuni-
:.'t, all the bilhops in Scotland. When tile
'.1n11 recovered his liberty, things put on a very
diilclrcnt afpeEt. The favour bestowed upon
Arrain, tile enemy of every thing decent and
licrecd, andl ti e rigorotu prosecution of those
i:,h)]les who had been the mofl zealous defctiders
or the proteltant cause, were confidered as sure
rrcfages of the approachinlg ruin of the chiircli.
' iTe clergy could not conceal their apprehen.
lions, nor view this impending danger in fileice.
l)uiy, who had been reltlord to his oflice as
,,lie of tlhe miniltcrs of Edilnburgh, openly
,pphladed the Raid of 1ruihvn in tlle .pulpit,

*at

at which the king was lo enraged, that, nr,i-
wvithftanding some symptoms of liss ful)mifior,
he commanded him to resign his charge in the
city. Mr. Andrew Melvil, being fummonll
before the privy council, to answer for thi
docrine which he had uttered in a sermon a;
St. Andrew's, and accused of comparing the
present grievances of the nation with tihol
under James III. and of intimating obliquely
that they ought to be redreflfd in the faln'
manner, thought it incumbent on him to behar.
with great firnnefs. HIe declined the jurifdic-
tion of a civil court, in a cause which lie man;i-
tained to be purely ecclefiatlica!; the presbytery,
of which he was a membctr, had, as he col-
tended, the sole right to call him to account
for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither the
king nor council could judge, in the firit in.
stance, of the doatrine delivered by preachers,
without violating the immunities of the church.
This exemption from civil jurifdiation was s
privilege which the popish ecclesiastics, admii.
able judges of whatever contributed to incrcaile
the lustre or power of their body, had lonii
struggled for, and had at last obtained. If tlhe
fame plea had now been admitted, the prorl-f
tant clergy would have become independent on
the civil magiflrate; and an order of men tx-
tremely useful to society while they inculcate
those duties which tend to promote its happinefi
and tranquillity, might have become no less perl
nicious, by teaching, without scar or control,
the most dangerous principles, or by exciting
their hearers to the molt delpcatle and lawlls
actions. The king, jealous to excels of lini

rP:lo;c ;

prcroloative, was alarmed at this daring en-
croiachilrent on it; and as Melvil, by his learn-
iil and zeal, had acquired the reputation and
allhority of head of the party, lie resolved to
pTnmif him with the rigour which that pre-emi-
nence rendered neceihary, and to difeourage, by
a timely level-ty, the revival of fuich a danger-
ous claim. Melvil, however, avoided his rage,
1,y flying into England; and the pulpits re-
!i.tlded with ,oniplaiiis that the king hal
cxtingunished the iight of Icarning in tlh king-
!,lnn alndi dleprivcd the church of the ablest and
il, it faithful glariian of its liberties and dif-
. ip!inc "'

' licfe violent declamations of the clergy

.,, ;:it the measures of the court xere cx-
,!.iltly acceptable to the people. The con-
tlirators, though driven out of the kingdom,
i'll poflcffed great influence there;, and as they
il:td every thing to fear from the resentment of
., ,uuig prince, irritated by the furious counfiis
.t A-rran, they never ceased soliciting their
,h!lierents to take arms in their defence. Gow-
:;n, the only person among them who had sub-
.ii;,tcd to the king, and accepted of a pardon,
f;,:n repented of a itep which loit him the
!cm of one party, without gaining the con,
tillice of the other; and, after fufilring many
i:..rtiiications fiom the kin,;'s neglect and the
ilsiglhtinefs of Arran, he was at llit commanded
t, leave Scotland, and to relide inl France.
V'hile he waited at Dundee for an opportunity
to iumbark, he was informed that the earls of
\ ..,us, Mar, and the tuttJr of Glamris, had

" Siotfw. 33 .
3'. Ci iii. 304.

copc rtcd

concerted a scheme for surprising the cattle of
Stirling. In his situation, little persuasion w;t.
necclfary to draw him to engage in it. Under
various pretexts he put off his voyage, and i;iv
ready to take arms on the day fixed by tl;
colnfp)irators for the execution of their enterprifc.
lHis lingering so long at Dundee, without any-
apparent reaion, awakened tile uflpicion of ti;c
court, proved fatal to himfellf, and difaploiuitcel
tlie success of the conspiracy. Colonel Willsi:i,
Stcwart surrounded the honfe where he lodlg-(l
with a body of soldiers, and, ill spite of hi;
rjliltance, took him prisoner. Two days after,
Angus, Mar, and (Glamis seized the c;afllt i'
Stirling, and erecing their Ia;nidard tlere, pl;-
lifhed a manifell o, decl.ring that they toi(k
arms for no other reason but to remove froml the
king's prefencc a minioln v.wo liad acquiric(l
poiwer by the moif unworthy afions, and \,!ii
cxercifed it with the molt intolerable infoller c.
The account of Gowric's imprifoniment llirick
a damp upon tllcir spirits. 'iThey imnputed it to
treachery on his part, and fufpecctd, tlhit as lis
had formerly diferted, he had now betrliv. l
them. At the famle tine 1'li/aletlh hlvi.r
neglected to filpl)r them in (di'C time withl
umin of money, whiich flie hlad prolifed to tlicii,
and their friends and vaifltls coming ir. flow'l,
they appeared irrei;lute and dilheartened ; aiod
as tie king, who ad¢ed with great vigour, ai-(
vallced lovwards tllein at tle llead of t welty
thousand men, tley fled precipitately towardi
England, and witl difficulty made tlleir escape".

n Home's I-lift. of House of DouSl. 376. Spotfw. 30,
Caldcrw. iji. 324s &'c

9 Thi's

'This ralh and feeble attempt produced fucl.
ctects as usually follow disappointed confpi-
racies. It not only hurt the cause for which it
wats undertaken, but added strength and!-repu-
tation to the king; confirmed Arran's power;
a,;d enabled them to purfne their measures witht
more boldness and greater llccefs. Gowrie was
the first victim of thei* refee;tment. After a
very informal trial, a jury of peers found him
guiit of treason, and he was publicly beheaded
:It Stirling.

T'o hiumble the church was the king's next

{t.p. But as it became ueceflary, for this pur-
:oic, to call in the aid of tie legislative autho-
i y, a parliament was haitily funmoned [May
-21: and while so manv of the nobles were
i.iiflied out of the kingdom, or forbidden to
. ,pear in the king's presence: lwhile Arran's
ii ;iitinicfs kept some at a dillance, and ilti-
i i;iated othersl; the meeting conliftcd only of
1lich as were absolutely at the devotion of the
(; 1i rt. In order to conceal the laws which were
ti.li)1ng fiom the knowledge of the clergy, the
i., is of the articles were sworn to secrecy ; and
v liCen some of the minilers, who either sus-
l ted or wvcre informed of the danger, deputed
.<' of their number to declare their npprehten-
i!nas to the king, lie was feizel at the palacec
!;;itr, and carried to a dillant prison. Others,
Itcmlnpting to enter the parliament-houfc, were
Icstlued adinittattce ; and such laws were paired,
a;; totally overturned the conttitution and dif-
iiline of the church. The refuling to ac-

9 Cald. iii. 365.
Yvo, n. D1 .i knowledge

knowledge the jurisdiction of the privy council;
the pretending an exemption from the authority
of the civil courts; the attempting to diminijh the
rights and privileges of any of the three eftatet
in parliament, were declared to be high treason
[May 22]. The holding assemblies, whether ci\
or eccleliaitical, without the king's permiflfion or
appointment; the uttering, either privately or
publicly, in sermons or in declamations, arv
false and scandalous reports against the king, hi:-
anceltors, or minilters, were pronounced capital
crimes P.

When these laws were publi(hfed at the crolt

of Edinburgh, according to the ancient cuftoii,
Mr. Robert Pont, ininiiter of St. Cuthbert's
and one of the lords of session, solemnly pr,;-
telled againtt them, in the name of his brethrer,
because they had been passed without the knov.-
ledge or consent of the church. Ever since tih'
Reformation, the pulpits and ecclefiatical juii-
catories had both been esteemed sacred. In tlte
former, the clergy had been accuftolned to ccl-
sure and admonish with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrolled an(l
independent jurifdiftion. The blow was now
aimed at both these privileges. These nwv
tlatutl vwere calculated to render churchmen as
inconsiderable as they were indigent: and as tih
;Ivarice of the nobles had ftrilped them of the
wealth, the king's ambition was about to de.
prive them of thle power, whicl once belongul
to their order. No wonder the alarm was 1iih-
verlfl, and the complaints loud. All the lmi

1 I'arl. 8 Jac. VI.

nillter

# BOOK VII.

nifters of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and
fled into England. The most eminent clergy.
men throughout the kingdom imitated their
example. Desolation and aftonifliment appeared
in every part of the Scottish church; the people
bewailed the loss of pastors whom they esteem-
ed; and full of consternation at an event so
unexpefted, openly expressed their rage against
Arran, and began to fufpet the king himself
to be an enemy to the reformed religion 4.

BOOK VII.
Wv II! E Scotland was torn by intestine sac-

tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the

rumour of a projec in agitation for setting
Mary at liberty. Francis Throkmorton, a
Chelhire gentleman, was fufpeaed of being
deeply concerned in the design, and on that
suspicion he was taken into custody. Among
his papers were found two lifts, one of the
principal harbours in the kingdom, with an
account of their situation, and of the depth of
water in each; the other, of all the eminent
Roman catholics in England. Thin circum-
stance confirmed the suspicion against him, and
some dark and desperate conspiracy was sup.
poed just ready to break out. At sirs he
boldly avowed his innocence, and declared that
the two papers were forged by the queen's

q Spotfw. 133.

B 2z minifera,

miniters, in order to intimidate or ensnare him;
and he even endured the rack with the utmost
fortitude. But being brought a second time to
the place of torture, his resolution failed him,
and he not only acknowledged that he had held
a secret correspondence with the queen of Scots,
but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade England. The duke of Guise, he said,
undertook to furnish troops, and to conduct the
enterprise. The pope and king of Spain were
to supply the money necessary for carrying it
on; all the English exiles were eager to take
arms; many of the catholics at home would he
ready to join them at their landing; Mendozn,
the Spaniih ambassador, who was the life of the
conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the
spirit of difaffeEtion among the English, or in
hastening the preparations on the continent; and
by his command, he made the two lifts, the
copies whereof had been found in his pofleflfion.
This confession he retraced at his trial; returned
to it again after fentencc was pafled upon him;
and retracted it once more at the place of exe-
cution a.

To us in the present age, who are affifed in

forming our opinion of this matter by the light
which time and history have thrown upon the
designs and characters of the princes of Guise,
many circumstances of Throkmorton's consef-
lion appear to be extremely remote from truth,
or even from probability. The duke of Guise
was, at that junture, far from being in a situ
ation to undertake foreign conquelfs. Without

a Hollinglhcad, 1370.

either

either power or office at court; hated by the
king, and persecuted by the favourites; he had
no leisure for any thoughts of disturbing the
quiet of neighbouring states; his vast and am-
bitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the
foundation of that famous league which lhook
the throne of France. But at the time when
Elizabeth deteted this conspiracy, the close
union between the house of utife and Philip was
remarkable to all Europe; and as their great
enterprise against Henry III. was not yet dif-
closed, as they endeavoured to conceal that
under their threatenings to invade England,
Throkmorton's discovery appeared to be ex-
tremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew
how ardently allsithe parties mentioned by him
wished her downfall thought that ihe could not
guard her kingdom with too much care. The
indifereet zeal of the Englilh exiles increased her
tears. Not satisfied with incessant outcries against
l!er severity towards the Scottilh queen, and her
rLuel persecution of her catholic fubjets, not
h inking it enough that one pope had threatened
ihr with the sentence bs excommunication, and
nMotler had actually pronounced it, they now
btgan to disperse books and writings in which
tlicy endeavoured to persuade their dilciples, that
II would be a meritorious aftion to take away
!her life; they openly exhorted the maids of ho-
nour to treat her as Judith did Holofernes, and,
by I'lch an illustrious deed, to render their own
.:;lies honourable and sacred in the church
t.hioughout all future ages . For all these

b Camd. 497.

a 3 reason,,

reasons,' Elizabeth not only inflited the punifih-
ment of a traitor on Throkmorton, but com-
manded the Spanish ambaflador instantly to leave
England; and that flie might be in no danger o!
being attacked within the island, {he detcrminec
to use her utmost efforts, in order to recover
that influence over the Scottifl councils, which
Ihe had for some time entirely loft.

There were three different methods by which

Elizabeth might hope to accomplilh this; eithti
by furnilhing such effe&ual aid to the banified
nobles, as would enable them to resume the chi;f
direEtion of affairs; or by entering into such a
treaty with Mary, as might intimidate her ion,
who being now accuflomed to govern, would liot
be averse from agreeing to any terms rather than
resign the sceptre, or admit an aflociate in the
throne; or by gaining the earl of Arran, to re-
cure the direRion of the king his master. 'IIc
last was not only the eafiell and fpeedielt, but moli
likely to be successful. This Elizabeth refolvt r
to pursue ; but without laying the other two altc:.
gether aside. With this view she sent Davison,
one of her principal fcretaries, a man of abilit;c,
and address, into Scotland. A minister so venial
as Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and
holding his power by the most precarious of ill
tenures, the favour of a youug prince, accepitd
Elizabeth's offers withoutl hesitation, and dee tn t
the acquisition of her protetion to be the moll
solid foundation of hns own greatness. Soon
after [Aug. x43] he consented to an interview
with lord Hlunfdon, the governor, of Berwick,
and being honoured with the pompous title of
licuten:nt general for the king, lie appeardl at

tihe

the place appointed with a splendid train. In
Hunfdon's presence he renewed his promises of
an inviolable and faithful attachment to the Eng-
lifli interest, and assured him that James should
enter into no negotiation which might tend to in-
terrupt the peace between the two kingdoms;
and as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame
fears and jealouites concerning the king'; mar-
riage, which had formerly disquieted her with re-
gard to his mother's, he undertook to prevent
James fiom listening to any overture of that
kind, until he had previously obtained the queen
of England's confentc.

The banished lords and their adherents soon

felt the effe&ts of Arran's friendihip witL England.
As Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge
in her dominions, and several of her miniiters were
of opinion that flhe ought to employ her arms in
defence of their cause, the fear of this was the
only thing which restrained James and his fa-
vourlite from proceeding to such extremities
againit them, as might have excited the pity or
ildignation of the Englifll, and have prompted
them to exert themselves with vigour in their be-
half. But every apprehenlion of this kind being
now removed, they ventured to call a parliament
CAug. 22], in which an a& was paused, attaint.
ing Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number
of their followers. Their estates devolved to the
crown, and according to the praaice of the
Scottish monarchs, who were obliged to reward
the fatioln which adhered to them, by dividing
with it tile spoils of the vanquilhed, James dealt

CalV. iiil 491, Melvy 315. SceAlpFnd. No. XLII.

Out

out the greater part of these to Arran and his
aflbciates d

Nor was the treatment of the clergy less rigor-

ous. All ministers, readers, and professors i;
colleges, were enjoined to subscribe, within
forty days, a paper testifying their approbation
of the laws concerning the chnl-ch enated in las
parliament. Many, overawed or corrupted by
the court, yielded obedience; others flood out.
The ftip:nds of the latter were sequestered, foni
of the more active committed to prison, and
numbers compelled to fly the kingdom. Such
as complied, fell under the suspicion of asing
from mercenary or ambitious motives. Such as
adhered to their principles and suffered iniconfe-
quence oi it, acquired high reputation, by giving
this convincing evidence of their firmness and
finccrity. The judicatories of the church were
alnoft entirely suppressed. In some places fcarct
as many minifeers remained, as to perform the
duties of religious worihip; they soon funk in
reputation among the people, and being prohi-
bited not only firom discoursing of public afi:ail ,
but obliged, by the jealousy of the adminiltra-
tion, to frame every fentimcnt and expression
in such a manner as to give the court no offence,
their sermons were deemed languid, insipid, and
contemptible; and it became the general opi-
nion, that together with the moit virtuous of
the nobles and the molt faithful of the clergy,
the power and vigour of religion were now bamlih-
efl out of the kingdom c.

d Culd. iii. 5z7. e Ibid iii. 589.

Meanwhile,

Meanwhile, Elizabeth was carrying on one of

those fruitless negotiations with the queen of
Scots, which it had become almost matter of
form to renew every year. They served not only
to amuie that unhappy princess with some prof-
pcct of liberty; but furnifled an apology for
eluding the solicitations of foreign powers in her
behalf; and wereof use to overawe James, by
hewcing him that Ihe could at any time let free
a dangerous rival to dispute his authority. These
treaties the suffered to proceed to what length
Ihe pleased, and never wanted a pretence for
breakiing them off, when they became no longer
nceefrary. The treaty now on foot was niat,
pLrhaps, more iincere than many which preceded
it; tile ieafons, however, which rendered it inef.
iEtual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton, ajefuit, was failing from Slanders
twa;ds Scotland, the thip on board of which he

a;its a paflenger happened to bc chaled i.* pirates,
who, in that age, often infcited the na.o,(w tfeas.
Crichton, in great confufio.i, tore in pieces iome
papers in his cultody, and threw tlltm away;
hut by a very extraordinary accident, the wind
blew them back into the inip, and they were im-
mecdiately taken up by some of the pallengers,

l'ho carried them to WTade, th, clerk bt the
pri'y council. HeI, with great indulhy and pa-
tience, joined them together, and they were
iounid to contain the account of a plot laid to
M.iic been formed by the king of Spain and the
dlkei of Guise, for invading England. The
ic)ile were not yet recovered from the fear and
ilxicty occalioned by the conspiracy in which

Throk-

Throkmorton had been engaged, and as h;,;
discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by ad.
ditional evidence, not only all their former ap.
prehensions recurred, but the consternation be-
came general and excessive. As all the dangers
with which England had been threatened for
some years flowed either immediately from Mary
herself, or from such as made use of her name to
justify their infurreEtions and conspiracies, tlii
gradually diminiflfed the compafiion due to her
lituacion, and the English, inltead of pitying,
began to fear and to hate her. Elizabeth, under
whose wife and pacific reign the English enjoyed
tranquillity, and had opened sources of wealth
unknown to their ancestors, was, extremely hi.
loved by all her people; and regard to lih
safety, not less than to their own interest, ani-
mated them against the Scottish queen. In order
to discourage her adherents, it was thought ne-
cefflry to convince them, by some public deed,
of the attachment of the Englifli to their own
sovereign, and that any attempt againlt her life
would prove fatal to her rival. With this view
an afociation was framed [O&t. 19], the fubfcril-
ers of which bound themselves by the most folenml
oaths, " to defend the queen againit all her cne-
miesS foreign and dometic ; and if violence fhoutd
be offered to her life, in order to favour the title
of any pretender to the crown, they not only
engaged never to allow or acknowledge the per.
son or persons by whom, or for whom, ilch a
detestable at fliould be committed, but vowed,
in the pretence of the eternal God, to prosecute
such person or persons to the death, and to pur.

fil.

sue them with their utmost vengeance, to their
utter overthrow and extirpationf." Persons of
all ranks fuiblcribed this combination with the
greatest eagerness and unanimity g.

Mary contidered this aflociation, not only as

an avowed design to exclude her from all right
of succession, but as the certain and immediate
forerunner of her deltru&tion. In order to avert
this, mIe made such feeble efforts as were still in
her power, and sent Nau6, her fecrctary, to
court, with offers of more entire resignation to
the will of Elizabeth, in every point, which had
been the occasion of their long enmity, than all
her sufferings hitherto had been able to extort h
But whether Mary adhcred inflexibly to her pri-
vileges as an independent sovereign, or, yielding
to the necessity of her situation, endeavoured, by
conceflfions, to sooth her rival, file was equally
iiifitccefsfuil. Her firmness was imputed to ob-
Itiiincy, or to the secret hope of foreign assistance;
her conceflions were either believed to be insincere,
or to flow from the fear of foine imminent danger.
HIer present willingness, however, to conply
with any terms was so great, that Walsingham
uairmnly urged his miltrefs to come to a final
agreement with her1. But Elizabeth was per-
Iuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the aflo-
ciation which had rendered her so paflive and
compliant. Site always imagined that there was
Iometling mysterious and deceitful in all Mary's
a'iolls, and fufpceted her of carrying on a dan-
g:crous correspondence with the English catho-

f State Trials, i. 2. . g Camd. 499.
b Id. ib. t See App. No. XLIV.

lics,

lies, both within and without the kingdom.
Nor were her suspicions altogether void or
foundation. Mary had, about this time, wri-
ten a letter to fir Francis Inglefield, urging him
to ha{{en the execution of what she calls the
Greal PZot or Designment, without hesitating i,:
account of any danger in which it might involi,
her life, which flie would moit willingly I,,.
with, if, by that sacrifice, the could procure i,-
lief for so great a number of the oppressed chil-
dren of the church k. Initead, therefore, of
hearkening to the overtures which the Scolt li
queen made, or granting any mitigation of ,;e
hardships of which she complainedl, Elia
reful';ed to take her out of the hands of ti,:
earl of Shrewsbury, and to appoint fir An;i:
Paulct and fir Druc Drury to be her keeper:
Shrewlbury had discharged his trunt with grlct.
fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the firie
time, had treated Mary with gentleness inI
refpe&, and had always fwectened harlll col;-
mimnds by the humanity with which he put tlici
in execution. The fame politcnefs was not !
be expe&ted from men of an inferior rank, whl(
revere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recoml
mendation to that employment, and the only
merit by which they could pretend to gain si.
vour or prcferment.

As James was no lets eager than ever to d'(

prive the banfihed nobles of Elizabeth's pri-
te&ion, he appointed the masser of Gray hi;
ambassador to the court of England, and in-
trulted him with the condut of a negotiation

k Strype, ii. 246. I Camd. 500.

for

for that purpose. For this honour he was in-
debted to the envy and jealousy of the earl of
Arran. Gray poifeffed all the talents of a cour-
tier; a graceful person, an insinuating addrcfs,
boundless ambition, and a reftlels and intriguing
spirit. During his residence in France, he had
been admitted into the mos intimate familiarity
with the duke of Guise, and, in order to gain
his favour, had renounced the protestant reli-
gion, and profel'ed the utmost zeal for the cap-
tive queen, who carried un a secret correspond-
ence with him, from which she expe&ed great
advantages. On his return into Scotland, he
paid court to James with extraordinary afliduitv,
and his accompliflinents did not fail to make
their usual imprcflion on the king's heart. Ar-
ran, who had introduced him, began quickly to
dread his growing favour; and flattcring himself,
that absence would efflice any sentiments of ten-
dernefs, which were forming in the mind of a
young prince, pointed him out, by his malicious
praises, as the molt proper person in the king-
dom for an embassy of such importance; and
contributed to raifc him to tllhat high dignity, in
order to halten his fall. Elizabeth, who had
an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper
initrumcnts for carrying on her deligns, endea-
voured, by carefles, and by prefncts, to secure
Gray to her interelt. The fermer flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied hit
profufcnefs, which was itill greater. H-le aban-
doned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's
direEtion, and not only undertook to retain the
king under the influence of. England, but ated
a:; a spy iipok the Scottifi queen, and betrayed

ioL. 11, C tQ

to her rival every secret that he could draw
from her by his high preteniions of zeal in her
fervicrc "

Gray's credit with the English court was ex-

tremely galling to the bani(hed nobles. Eliza-
btth no longer thought of employing her power
to reitore them; {he found it easier to govern
Scotland by corrupting the king's favourites;
and, in compliance with Gray's solicitations, she
commanded the exiles to leave the north of Enl.
land [Dec. 31], and to remove into the heart of
the kingdom. This rendered it difficult for them
to hold any correspondence with their partisans
in Scotland, and almolt impossible to retiiirn
thither without her permission. Gray, by gain-
ing a point which James had so much at heart,
riveted himself more firmly than ever in his fa-
vour; and, by acquiring greater reputation, be-
came capable of serving Elizabeth with greattr
filccefs ".

1585.] Arran had now possessed for some

time all the power, the riches, and the honours,
that his immoderate ambition could deiire, or tie
fondncfs of a prince, who set no limits to iih
liberality towards his favourites, could befto,v.
Tile office of lord chancellor, the highellt aidt
molt important in the kingdom, was confcrnd
upon him, even during tlhe life of the earl of
Argyll, who succeedcd Athol in that dignity 0:
and the public beheld, with iflolillh2ciit and in-
dignation, a man educated as loldier of fortulnc,
ignorant of law, and a contemner ofjutfice, al'-

n' Strype, ii. 3lc . hlelv. 3P6. n C ld. iii. 64,.
o' Crwt. O(tlic. of State, ApI. 4. 7.,

*pui:ittd'

pointed to prelide in parliament, in the privy
council, in the court of feflion, and intrusted
with the supreme difpoial of the property of his
rcelow-fubjets. He was, at the fame time, go-
v,-rnor of the castles of Stirling and Edinburgh,
the two principal forts iin Scotland ; provoit of
the city of Edinburgh: and as if by all these
na' eumniated dignities his merits were not fuffi-
;:cintly rcompenfed, he liad been created lieu-
tenant general over the whole kingdom. No
(crfon was admitted into the king's presence
wi.hc it lis permiflion; no favour could be ob-
;liled but by his mediation. James, occupied
;with youthfill amulfements, devolved upon him
the whole regal authority. Such unmerited ele-
vation incrcafed his natural arrogance, and ren-
dered it intolerable. He was no longer content
"vith the condition of a fubjeft, but pretended
to derive his pedigree from Murdo duke of
Albany; and boasted openly, that his title to
the crown was preferable to that of the king
hilnfelf. But, together with these thoughts of
rovalty, he retained the meanness suitable to
hiis primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and was exceeded only by that
.£f his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made
hlrielf a party in almost every fitit which came
to bt decided, employed her influence to corrupt
or to overawe the judges, and almost openly dic-
tated their decifionsP. His rapaciousness as a
miniiier was insatiable. Not fatislied with the
revelnues of so many offices ; with the eflate and
honours which belonged to the family of ]Ha.

PCald, iii. 33r. Scotftrvet's Staggering State, 7.

c 2 mIiltonl

mnilton; or .with the greater part of Gowrie's
lands, which had fallen to his (hare; he grasped
a- the possessions of fcveral of the nobles. He
required lord Maxwell to exchange part of hi;
cilate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil ; and br-
catufe e was unwillilng to quit an ancient inhcii,-
ance for a poffeffiin io precarious, he stirred up
againl0 him his hereditary rival, the laird of John-
tlon, and involved that corner of the kingdo!l:
in a civil war. He committed to prison the ca¥l
of Athol, lord HIome, and the master of Caffi';
the firit, hecaufe he would not divorce his xvi't
the daughter of the earl of Gowric, and ental!
his eltate on him; the second, because he waV
unwilling to part with some lands adjacent to o:ic
of Arran's estates; and the third, for refilling
to lend him money. His spies and inforrn!:-s
filled the whole country, and intruded themfelvcs
into every company. The neareit neighbotur
distrusted and feared each other. All familiar
society was at an end. Even the common inter-
courses of humanity were interrupted, no mira
knowing in whom to confide, or where to utter
'his complaints. There is not perhaps in history
an example of a minister so universally deteftabie
to a nation, or who more jutly deserved its de-
tellation q.

Arran, notwithstanding, rcgardlcfs of the fce:-

timents, and despising the murmurs of the pcop!:,
gave a loose to his natural temper, and proceedili
to ascs f.ill more violent. )avid Home of A .
gaty, and Patrick his brother, having received
letters from one of the banifled lords, about pi-

', Spotlw. 37, 338.

v¥is

vate business, were condemned and put to death,
for holding correspondence with rebels. Cunning-
hame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains,
two gentlemen of honour and reputation, were
accuscd of having conspired with the exiled nobles
to seize the king's person. A lingle witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their
innocence was unanswerable; their accuser hin-
self not long after acknowledged that lie had been
suborned by Arran; and all men believed the
charge against them to be groundless; they were
found guilty, notswih [landing, and suffered the
death of traitors [Feb. 9].

About the fame time that these gentlemen

were puniflied for a pretended conspiracy, Eliza-
beth's life was endangered by a real one. Parry,
a doator of laws, and a member of the house of
commons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a
resolute spirit, had lately been reconciled to the
church of Rome; and fraught with the ezal of
a new convert, lie offered to demonitrate thle
sincerity of his attachment to the religion which
he had embraced, by killing Elizabeth Cardinal
Allen had publithed a book, to prove the murder
o: ari excommunicated prince to be not only
la\wful, but a meritorious acion. The pope's
nuncio at Venice, the jesuits both thllre and at
P'aris, the Englilh exiles, all approved of the
dl:lign. The pope himself exhorted him to per.
fcvrre; and granted him for hli; encouragement,
a plinl;a indulgence, and remiflion of his fins.
Cardinal di Como wrote to him a lcttcr to the
faime purpose. But though lie often got access

' Spotfw. 338. Cald. iii, 794.

c 3 to

to the queen, fear, or some remaining sense of
duty, restrained him from perpetrating tie
crime. Happily, his intention was at last dil-
covered by Nevil, the only person in England to
whom he had communicated it; and having him.
self voluntarily confessed his guilt, he suffered the
punifliment which it deserved S [March z].

These repeated conspiracies againit their so-

vereign awakened the indignation of the Engliil
parliament, and produced a very extraordinary
statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
queen of Scots. By this law the association in
defence of Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was
further enacted, " That if any rebellion (hall ie-
" excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted
" to the hurt of her majeity's person, by or jcr
"any person pretending a title to the crown,
" the queen shall empower twenty-four person-,
' by a commiflion under the great feal, to exa.
" mine into, and paIs sentence upon such of.
" fences; and after judgment given, a proclama-

tion liall be il'ued, declaring the persons wholn

" they tind guilty, excluded from any right v'
:' the crown ; and her majesty's subjec'ts 1a,'
" lawfully purfie every one of them to tl!h
" deatli, with all their aiders and abettors: ;.l'

if any design against the life of the quc,.t!
"take effe&t, the persons by or for whom fin I,

a deteltable aCt is executed, and tlreir iffic:,

" being in any wife aflenting oi privy to t!:-
"f ime, iliall be disabled for ever from pretending,
" to the crown, and be pursued to death in til
4 like manner'." This aft was plainly klvelYC

* State l'trils, vol. i. 103. t ]bidi i. Iz3.

at

at the queen of Scots; and whether we confider it.
as a voluntary exprefion of the zeal and concern
of the nation for Elizabeth's fafctv, or whether
we impute it to the influence which that artful
princess preferyed over her parliaments, it is no
easy matter to reconcile it with the general prin-
ciples ofjuftice or hunanity. Mary was therehy
rendered accountable not only for her own aftions,
but for thofc of otlhers; in consequence of which,
fle might forfeit her right of fucceflion, and even
her life itself.

Mary jutly confidered this aft as a warning

to prepare for the worfl extremities. Elizabeth'&
minliters, it is probable, had resolved by this time
to take away her life; and suffered books to be
publilhcd, in order to pertuade the nation that
this cruel and unprecedented measure was not
only necessary but just ". Even that short period
of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardflhip and indignity
\h>ich it was in their power to inflit. Almoit
all her servants were dismissed, the was treate(l
no longer with the refpet due to a queen;
;i:ld, though the rigour of seventeen years im-
Ijifonment had broken her conltitution, file
w\i, confined to two ruinous chambers, cfarcely
llabiable, even in the middle of funiner, by
reeafon of cold. Notwithtlanding the fcanti-
ness of her revenue, file had been accultomed to
dilirihbute regularly fomne alms among the poor
in the village adjoining to the calite. Plaulet
now reftifed her liberty to perform this pious
and hunane office, which had affordcd hel r great

U. Strypc, iii. z99.

consolatiun

consolation amidlt her own sufferings. The castle
in which the resided was converted into a com-
mon prison; and a young man, fufpeted of
popery, was confined there, and treated under
her eye with such rigour, that he died of the ill
usage. She often complained to Elizabeth of
these multiplied injuries, and expoitulated as be-
came a wonan and a queen; but as no political
reason now obliged that princess to amuse her
any longer with fallacious hopes, far from grant.
ing her any redress, the did not even deign to
give her any anfwcr. The king of France, clofel-
allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for
affillance againit his rebellious fiubjects, was afraid
of espousing Mary's caule with any warmth; and
all his solicitations in her behalf were feeble, for-
mal, and inefficacious. But Caitelnau, the French
ambassador, whose compassion and zeal for th"
unhappy queen supplied the defects in his inftruc.
tions, reinonftrated with such vigour against the
indignities to which flie was expoled, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her
removed to Tuthbury ; though the: was continrti
the greater part of another winter in her prei;.lt
wretched habitation x.

Neither the insults of her enemies, nor th,

neglet of her friends, made fucl an impre-fion c i
Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James Ihal
hitherto treated his mother with filial refpet, alii
had even entered into negotiations with her,
which gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it
was not the interell of the Englllh queen that liis
good correspondence Ihould continue, GiCiy,

x Jcbb, vol. ii. 576-598.

vh<,

wlo, on his return into Scotland, found his fa-
vour with the king greatly increased by the fuc-
cess of his embassy, perfuatded him to write a
harlh and undutiful letter to his mother, in which
he expressly refufvd to acknowlecge her to be
queen of Scotland, or to conlider his affairs as
conneEted, in any wife, with her's. This cruel
rerquital !f her maternal tenderness overwhelmed
Mlarv witli forrovw and dl-pair. " Was it for

th!is'," ihad Tle, in a letter to the French am-

b:tflfdor l[March 34], " that I have endured so
" much, in order to preserve for him the inherit-

alice to which I have a jult right ? I am

"fa farom envying his authority in Scotland. I
" desire rlo power there; nor wish.. to set my
' foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the
"pleasure of once embracing a son, whom I have
" hitherto loved with too tender affecion.

Whatever lie either enjoys or expecs he de-

Si rived it from me. From him I never received
" afiillance, supply, or benefit of any kind. Let
" not my allies treat him any longer as a king:
'l he holds that dignity by my consent; and if

a speedy repentance do not appease my juit

" refentniieit, I will load him with a parent's
" curse, and surrender my crown, with all my
" pretenflions, to one who will receive them with
" jra:;itulde, and defend. themi with vigour ".'
The loie which James borte to his mother, whom
hl had never known, and whlom he had been
carly taught to confider as one of the moltl a!atn-
dlnnud perions of her sex, cannot be supposed cver
to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
Y Murdin, 566. Jebb,ii. 571, Sec Appcnd. No.XLV.

Iains

pains to regain her favour. But whether ht.
indignation at his undutiful behaviour, added t'
her bigoted attachment to popery, promptc.
Mary at any time to think seriously of diiinhe;ri
ing her son; or whether these threatening.
were uttered in a sudden sally of difappointr'
affection, it is now no easy matter to determin;.
Some papers which are still extant seem to render
the forimer not improbable z.

Cares of another kind, and no less difquietllg,

occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm whic'j
ihe had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an
end; and fich Ntorms were gathering in evL:v
quarter, as filled her with just alarm. All tli:
neighbouring nations had undergone revolutiol
extremely to her disadvantage. The great qluaii
ties which Henry III. had displayed in his
youth, and which raised the expectations of liis
fubjets so high, vaniflied on his ascending t e
throne; and his acquiring supreme power tecum,;
not only to have corrupted his heart, but to ha.c
impaired his underfianding. He soon loft the
esteem and affecion of the nation; and a life d;-
vided between the auiterities of a fuperltitio-i;
devotion, and the extravagancies of the inmii
dissolute debauchery, rendered him as contempt-
ible as he was odious on account of his rapacioif.
ness, his profusion, and the fondncfs with whiic
he doated on many unworthy minions. On thil
death of his only brother, those sentiments of
the people burst out with violence. Henry hadl
)o children, and though but thirty-two yclis5
of age, the fucceflon of the crown was already

z Sec Append. No. XLVI.

confidcLret

confidered as open. The king of Navarre, a
distant descendant of the royal family, but the
undoubted heir to the crown, was a zealous pro-
teftant. The profpe& of an event so fatal to
their religion, as his ascending the throne of
France, alarmed all the catholics in Europe ; and
induced the duke of Guise, countenanced by the
pope, and aided by the king of Spain, to appear
as the defender of the Romilh faith, and the
asserter of the cardinal of Bourbon's right to the
crown. In order to unite the party, a bond of
confederacy was formed, distinguished by the
name of the Holy League. All ranks of menjoined
in it with emulation. The fpiritfpread with the
irrcfiltible rapidity which was natural to religious
pailions in that age. The deftrustion of the re-
formation, not only in France, but all over Eu-
rope, seemed to be the object and wifl of the
whole party; and the duke of Guise, the head
of this mighty and zealous body, acquired au-
thority in the kingdom, far superior to that which
the king limfelf poffefled. Philip II. by the
conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the
caival power of Spain, and had at lalt reduced
ulnder his dominion all that portion of the con-
tincnt which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun-
taiiis, and which nature seems to have defsined
no form one great monarchy. William prince of
Orange, who firlt encouraged the inhabitants of
die Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whofl
wisdom and valour formed and protcdted the
rling commonwealth, had fallen by the hands
,ofan alrafin. The superior genius of the prince
o)f Parma had given an entire turn to the fate of
tLe war in the Low Countries; all his cnterpiifes,

concerted

concerted with consummate fliill, and executed
witl equal bravery, had been attended with
success; and the Dutch, reduced to the last ex-
tremity, were on the point of falling under the
dominion of their ancient malter.

None of-thofe circumitances, to which Eliza-

beth lad hitherto owed her security, existed any
longer. She could derive no advantage from
the jealousy which had fubilfted between France
and Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy
with the duke of Guise, lad an equal sway in
the councils of both kingdoms. The hugonot,
were unable to contend with the power of the
league ; and little could be expeced from any
diverlion which they might create. Nor was it
probable that theNetherlands could long employ
the arms, or divide the itrength of Spain. In this
situation of the affairs of Europe, it became ne-
celfary for Elizabeth to form a new plan of con-
dutt ; aI her wifdomn in forming it was not
greater than the vigour with which flie carried it
on. The measures most suitable to her natural
temper, and which fhle had hitherto purfiled.
were cautious and safe ; tlofe which Ihe nowv
adopted were enterpriling and hazardous. She
preferred peace, but was not afraid of war, and
was capable, when compelled by neceflity, nJt
only of lefentding herTflf with lpirit, but of at-
tacking her enemies with a boldness which avertrd
danlger fiom her own dominions. She iinmidi-
ately furnilhed the Illgonots with a conlidetlall,'.:
fiupply in money. She carri:d on a private c:-
gotiationl with HeInry 111. who, though coil-
pelled to joiln tit' leaguel, hated the leadcrs of tl,
and willid for tlheir delltrucion. She openly

iiindi.'i'

unil'rtook thle protecion of the Dutch common-
wealth, and sent a powerful army to its affilaice.
SheL endeavoured to form a general confederacy
of the protefant princes, in opposition to the
popill league. She determined to proceed with
tile utmoif rigour again ft the queen of Scots,

lhoife fufferilgs and rights afforded her enemies
a specious pretence for invading her dominions.
She resolved to redouble her endeavours, in order
to effelt a closer union with Scotland, and to ex-
tend and perpetuate her influence over the
cotuncils; of that nation.

She found it no difficult matter to induce moll

of the Scuttifi courtiers to promote all her de-
lig;iS. Gray, ill John Maitland, who h)ad been
at(vanced to the office of fccretary, which his
brother formerly held, fir Lewis BI:llenden, the
i:trice clerk, who had succeeded Gray as the
king's retident at London, were the persons in
,lwhomn flie chiefly confided. In order to dirce.
alnd quicken their motions, The dispatched lir
EiLdward Wotton along with Bellenden into Scot-
ILaid [May 29]. This man was ga), well-bred,
;rid entertaining ; he excelled in all the exercifi;c
for which James had a pafiion, and amtufed the
young kinl by rclating the adventures vwhich lle
i;id met with, and the ohfervations he had made
tring a long residence in foreign countries ; but
irlider the veil of these fuperlicial qualities, he
concealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He
Iol grew into high favour with Jaimes, and
lwhile he was seemingly attentive only to pleasure
and rliverfions, he acquired influence over the
public counceils, to a degree which was indecent
for a llranger to pollefs '.

d Melv. 317.
VOL. 1 1. DD Osothing,

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable

to the nation, than the proposal which he mac
of a stria alliance between the two kingdoms, jl
defence of the reformed religion. The rapid and
alarming progress of the pbpifh league seemed to
call on all protestant princes to unite for the pr'.
servation of their common faith. James embraced
the overture with warmth, and a convention o[
citates [July 29] empowered him to conclun
such a treaty, and engaged to ratify it in par-
liament t. 'The alacrity with which James c,,-
curred in this measure must not be wholly afcrib d
either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's addret;.:
it was owing in part to Elizabeth's liberality.
As a mark of her motherly affecion for t!;.
young king, ffie fettled on him an annual penlit:
of five thousand pounds; the fame fum which
her father had allotted her before flie afccnd.:d
the throne. This circumstance, which Ihe to,,,
care to mention, rendered a fum, which in th;;
age was far from being inconsiderable, a uci'
acceptable present to the king, whose revenuls,
during a long minority, had been almnot totally
dissipated .

But the chief object of Wotton's intriguiLs

was to ruin Arran. While a minion so odiclso
to the nation continued to govern the kilr,
his altiflance could he of little advantage ti
Elizabeth. And though Arran, ever linc cc i
interview witlh Hunfdon, had appeared r..-
tremlly for her interel, she could place no greaL
confidence in a man whose condu&t was io c.t
pricious and irregular, and who, notwitllllaldiiiii

b Siotfw. 339. C;ld. iii, 505.

l,;c

his protestations to the contrary, still continued
a secret correspondence both with Mary and with
the duke of Guise. The banished lords were at-
tached to England from affection as well as prin-
ciple, and were the only persons among the Scots
whom, in any dangerous exigency, fle could
thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London,
they had been summoned thither, under colour
of vindicating themselves from his accusations,
but, in reality, to concert with him the most pro-
per measures for restoring them to their country.
\Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured to
ripen it for execution; and it was greatly fa-
cilitated by an event neither uncommon nor con-
liderable. Sir John Forster, and Ker of Ferni-
herit, the Englifli and Scottifl wardens of the
middle marches, having met, according to the
custom of the borders, about midsummer, a fray
arose, and lord Ruffel, the earl of Bedford's
eldellt son, happened to be killed. This scuffle
was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to
confider it as a design formed by Ker, at the in-
sligation of Arran, to involve the two kingdoms
in war. She insisted that both should be delivered
up to her; and though James eluded that de-
mnand, he was obliged to confine Arran in St.
Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. During his
ablenlce fiom court, Wotton and his associates
carried on their intrigues without interruption.
By their advice, the banifled nobles end'cavoured
to accommodate their differences with Jord John
a;ul lord Claud, the duke of Chatclherault's two
sons, whom Morton's violence had driven out: of.
t le kingdom [Oft. 16]. Their cmnmon fuflir-
!igg3, and common interest, induced both parties

DD 2 to

to bury in oblivion the ancient discord which
had ftbfifted between the houfcs of Hamilton
and Douglas. By Elizabeth's permission, they
returned in a body to the borders. of Scotland.
Arran, wvho had again recovered favour, insisted
on putting the kingdom in a pofturc of defence;
but Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, fccretly
thwarted all his measures. Some neceflary order!,
they preven;:ed from being iffied ; others they
rendered ineffeatual by the manne! of executiolln
and all of thlem were obeyed slowly, and witlh
reluctance d.

Wotton's feltile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more daageroiis plot. HI
had contrived to seize the kirng, .and to carry
him by force into IEgla;,.l. But the design war
happily discovered; and, iu: order to avoid thi:
punihment wiich his trcac :ery merited, he de-
parted without taking !ea',. c.

Meanwhile the har,iflecd lords hastened the

execution of their entcrprife ; and as their friends
and vassals were now ready to join them, they
entered Scotland. Whrverver they came, they
were welcomed as the deliverers of their country,
and the moll fervent prayers were addressed to
Heaven for the success of their arms. They ad-
vaiced, without losing a moment, towards Stir-
ling, at the head, often thousand men. The king,
though he had. aflembled an army fupcmior in lunli.
ber, could not. venture to meet them in the field,
with troops whose loyalty was extremely dubious
and who at best were far from being hearty ii
the caius ; nor was either the town or castle pro

d Spotfw. 340. C Mclv. 335.

v.ici

vided for a siege. The gates, however, of both
were sint, and the nobles encamped at St. Ni-
nian's. That fame night they surprised the
town [Nov. 2], or more probably it was be-
trayed into their hands; and Arran, who had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save
himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning
they iiiveitcd the castle, in which there were not
prlviioins for twenty-four hours; and James
was ncceflitated immediately to hearken to
terms of accommodation. They were not so
elated with fiucefs as to urge extravagant de-
nalnds, nor was the king unwilling to make every
reasonable concession. They obtained a pardon,
in the most ample form, of all the offences which
tlhey had committed; the principal forts in the
kingdom werc, by way of security, put into their
hands ; Crawford, Montrose, and colonel Stew-
art, were removed from the king's presence ; and
a parliament was called [Dec. 1o], in order to
ellablifh tranquillity in the nation f.

Though a great majority in this parliament

'onfilled of the confederate nobles and their ad-
1,lrents, they were far from discovering a vindic-
uIe spirit. Satisfied with procuring an act, re-
iloring them to their ancient honours and eltates,
and ratifying the pardon granted by the king,
they seemed willing to forget all pall errors in
tI1h adminillration, and spared James the mortifi-
caltion of feeing his minitters branded with ally
Iulblic note of infamy. Arran alone, deprived
of all his honours, itripped of his borrowed
spoils, and declared an enemy to his country by

I Cald, iii, 795.

D D3 public

public proclamation, funk back into obscurity,
and muff henceforth be mentioned byhis primitive
title of captain James Stewart. As he had been,
during his' unmerited prosperity, the objet of
the hatred and indignation of his countrymen,
they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all
his sufferings mitigate their resentment in the
least degree.

The clergy were the only body of men who

obi ained no redress of their grievances by thi.
revolution. The confederate nobles had all
along affected to be confidered as guardians of
the privileges and discipline of the church. In
nll their manifestos they had declared their rc
Solution to reitore these, and by that popula;
pretence had gained many friends. It was now
natural to expea some fiuit of these promifec,
and some returns of gratitude towards many of
the most eminent preachers who had fufferc(!
in their cause, and who demanded the repeal of
the lavwspafled the preceding year. The king,
however, was resolute to maintain these laws in
fill authority; and as the nobles were extremely
solicitous not to difgruit him, by infilfing on anyl
difagrecable request, the claim, of the church in
this, as well as in many other instances, were
sacrificed to the interest of the laity. The nwil
nilfers gave vent to their indignation in the Lpul-
pit, and their impatience under the difappoilll
ment broke out in some exprelfions extremely
difi'frpe6tful even to the kiUg himself g.

586.]' The archbishop of St. Andrew's, too,
felt the cffcts of, their anger. The provinci;al

kg Spotfw. 343,

fin',!

fynod of Fife fumtmoned him to appear, and to
2Ianser for his contempt of the decrees of former
a.liemblies, in prcfuming to exercise the functions
t)f a biflop. Though he refutled to acknowledge
the jurifdicion of the court, and appealed from
it to the king, a sentence of excommunication,
equally indecent and irlcguilar, was pronounced
agaillt him. Adalnfon, with no left; indecenc,
thundered his archiepifopal excommunication
;tga;inft Melvil and forne other of his opponents.

Soon after [April 13], a general altfmbly was

held, in which lle king, with lome difficulty,
:)obtained an ad, permitting the name and office
of billop itill to continue in the church. The
;?:ower of the order, however, was considerably
rttrenchled. The exercise of di'scipline, and the
;infpecdion of the life and dotrine of the clergy,
were committed to prelbytcries, in which bishops
ihould be allowed no other pre-eminence but that
of presiding as pepetilal moderators. They
tlhiefelves were declared to be subjed, in the
lame manner as other pallors, to the jurifdifion
ot tll general afmllbly. As the difctflion of the
archbilliop's appeal might have kindled unusual
heats in the alfrinbly, that aflailr was terminated by
a coinpromife. He renounced any claim offi lre-
macy over the churcl, and promised to demean
hiimfelf fiitably to the claacitelr of a bishop, as
descricd by St. Paul. The affernbly, without
examiining the foundations of the sentence of cx-
conmmunmicatio, declared that it fiollld be held
of no effedt, and reltored him to all the privilegcs
which be enjoyed before it was pronounced.
Notwitliflanding the extraordinary tendernels
flncwn for the honour of ill fynod, and the de-

licacy

licacy and refpc& with which its jurifdicaion w;t,
treated, several members were so zealous as to
proteit against this decision h.

The court of Scotland was now filled witl

persons so warnmly attached to Elizabeth, that
the league between the two kingdoms, which lind
been proposed last year, met with no interruptiow,
hut from D'Efneval, tle French envoy. Jamc<
himself firlit offered to renew the negotiatiocn
Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable oppor-
tunity to flip, and iullantlydilpatched Randolpil
to conclude a treaty, which fihe so much dctii-ci
[July 5]. The danger to which the protett;lln
religion was exposed, by the late combination c;'
the popifi powers for its deftrEtion, and the nc-
ceffity of a ftrit confederacy among those wiio
had embraced the reformation, in order to ol-
iftiEt their pernicious designs, were mentiolln.
as the foundation of the league. The chief ar-
ticles in it were, that both parties should bind
themselves to defend the evangelic religiol;
that the league Ihould be offensive and defenfioc
against all who flall endeavour to disturb the
exercise of religion in either kingdom; that if
one of the two parties be invaded, the other,
notwithstanding any former alliance, flould nol,
dire.tily or indiretly, aflift the invader; thlit it
England he invaded in any part remote from
Scotland, James Ihould aiffit the queen with twr
thousand horfc and five thousand foot; that it
the enemy landed or approached within lixty
miles of Scotland, the king should take the field
with his whole forces, in the fame manner as
he would do in defence of his own kingdom.

b Cald. iii. 894. Spotfw, 346.

li1zabeth,

Elizabeth, in return, undertook to aA in defence
,f Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the
fain time fle assured the king that no Itep should
l)e t:tkcn, which might derogate in any degree
fI-:,m his pretenlions to the Elngliih crowni
Eiizablethl expressed great f;!tisfaction with a
t:-:xlv, vwhich rendered Scotland an useful ally,
ILiitc:al of t dangerous neighbour, and afforded
ha.'r a degree of security on that fide, which all
hle anci ors had aimed at, but noneof them
had been able to obtain. Zeal for religion,
zogctler with the blessings of peace, which both
kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable pe-
riod, had so far abated the violence of national
aiiipathy, that the king's conduA wvas uni\ erfally
acceptable to his own people k.

The acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at thia

time, exposed James to much and deserved cen-
sure. This- man was deeply engaged in the can.
fpiracy against te life of the king his fatler.
Both Morton and Binny, one of his own fert
vants, who suffered for that crime, had accused
him of being present at the murder'. He had
,.fcaped punimhment by flying into England, and
James had often required Elizabeth to deliver
up a person so unworthy of her proteaion. He
now obtained a licence, fiom the king hliinfelf,
to return into Scotland ; and after undergoing
: mock-trial, calculated to conceal, rather than
to detet his guilt, lie was not only taken into
favour by the king, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable cllharaer of his
ambialhdor. 'James was now of such an age, that

i Spotfw. 35T. k (amdd. il.
! Sec Appenld. No. XLVII. Arnot, Crim, 1'rials) 7, &c.

!i, ·

his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in
excuse for this indecent tranfaation. It muff hb
imputed to the excessive facility of his temper,
which often led him to gratify his courtiers at .lhe
expence of his own dignity and reputation 'n.

Not long after, the inconsiderate affetion of

the Englifl catholics towards Mary, and their
implacable resentment againit Elizabeth, gn c
rife to a conspiracy which proved fatal to the
one queen, left an indelible llain on the reput,!-
tion of the other, and presented a fpe&acle to
Europe, of which there had been hitherto no
example in the history of mankind.

Doctor Gifford, GilbertGifford, andHodgfon,

priells educated in the seminary at Rheims, hard
adopted an extravagant and enthusiastic notion,
that the bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth w;as
dicated immediately by the Holy Ghost. This
wild opinion they initilled into Savage, an officcir
in the Spanish army, noted for his furious zeal
and daring courage ; and persuaded him that no
service could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to
take away the life of an excommunicated heretic.
Savage, eager to obtain the crown of martyrdom,
bound himfelfby a folern vow to kill Elizabeth
[April 26]. Ballard, a pragmatical pricft of that
seminary, had at that time come over to Paris,
and solicited Mendoza, the Spanifl ambaffadlor
there, to procure an invasion of England, while
the affairs of the league were so proiperous, ani,
the kingdom left naked by fending so many ni
the queen's best troops into the Netherlanls.
Paget and the Engliflb exiles demonltrated tlh

m Spotfw. 3)8. Cald. iii. i17.

fri·lt

fruitlessness of such an attempt, unless Elizabeth
were first cut off, or the invaders secured of a
powerful concurrence on their landing. If it
could be hoped that either of these events would
happen, effetual aid was promised; and in the
mean time Ballard was sent back to renew his
intrigues.

He communicated his designs to Antliony

Babington [May 15], a young gentleman in
Derbylhirc, of a large fortune and many amiable
qualities, who having contracted, during his
residence in France, a familiarity with the arch-
bfihop of Glatgow, had been recommended by
him to the queen of Scots. He concurred with
Paget, in cuifidering the death cf Elizabeth as
a neccflary preliminary to anyinvalion. Ballard
gave him ihopes that an end would soon be put to
her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who
\.aS iow in London ,waiting foi an opportunity
to ltrikc the blow. But Babington thought the
attempt of too much importance, to rely on a
single lhand for the execution of it, and proposed
that five resolute gentlemen should be joined with
,Savage in an enterprise, the fucccfs of which
was the foundation of all their hopes. He
oflered to find out persons willing to under-
iake tile service, whose honour, secrecy, and
courage they might safely trust. He accord-
ingll pcned the" matter to Edward Windsor,
'iThomas Salifflury, Charles Tilncy, Clidioc
T'ichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers, Ro-
beit lanrwe.ll, John Cllarnock, Henry Dun,
John Jones, and lRobert Pol!) ; all of them,
exCep!t Polly, wovic bultling forw'ard zeal intro-
'luccd hinl nlto tleir focicty, gcntlcmen of good

fmrnlires,

families, united together in the bonds of privi,
fiieldllhip, llrenigtthened by the more powert'i
tie of religious zeal. Many confiiltatioins wci.
htld ; their plan of operations was at lalt fettlcdi;
and their dlifncrtenlt part:s alfigned [Jiune]. j)i-
bington lhniltlf was appointed to rescue lt,:
queen of Scots; Salisbur-y, witll some otlcl'.,
undertook to xcCite several counties to tal!
arms ; the murder of the queen, the molt dangte;-
ous and important service of all, fell to JTi,'!
bourne and SaLvae, wihli four ailociates. 8,
totall) had tllrir bigoted prejudices extiiguifil-d
t!e principle'; us lhoulour, and the ftritiments ,,
lhumanlity suitable to their rank, that, with'or
scruple or cc(ill)uncion, tlIh- undertook ,.,.
.tc'tion which is viewed with hoirror, even wbi?;
conlnitted ly the meaneit and inm!lt profligatce
mankind. Thils attempt, on tie contrary, "i
peared to tlhen no less honourable than it \;'
desperate; and in oider to perletluate the 1n -
mory of it, they had a pi'tiurc drawii contalinlili
tlhe portraits of tle lix allfiins, with that ot
Blal]iblglion in the middle, tand a motto intilnatillr
tllut they were jointly embarked in some hazali
ots dclign.

ri
Th ctliifpiators, as akppears by this wRaliitlo

and inmptrudtt inllitalce of vanity, feein to Ia;ln
tlhought a dilcovery hardly poflible, and neither
dilhutultcd tie fidelity of their companlins, in l
doubted the Ifccefb of their undertaking. SBut
wli!ec they believed that their machinations i\etc
carried on witl the molt profound and impnl)c-
trable fccrcey, ever)y tep they took 'was fumll'
ki,own to Wallingham. Polly was one of 11i;
lpies, and lhad entered into the conspiracy, will

9 ' 1O

no other deiign than to betray his associates.
Gilbert Gifford too, having been sent over to
England to quicken the motions of the confpi-
rators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him sure intelligence of all their projeds.
That vigilant minister immediately imparcted the
diicoveries which he had made to Elizabeth; and
without communicating the matter to any other
of the counsellors, they agreed, in order to un-
deritand the plot more perfectly, to wait until it
was ripened into some form, and brought near
the point of execution.

At lalt, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and

criminal to expose her own life, and to tempt
Providence any farther. Ballard, the prime
mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrested
[Aug. 4]. His associates, disconcerted and
ltruck with altonifiment, endeavoured to save
tlieinfelves by flight. But within a few days,
11 of them, except Windsor, were seized in dif-
ferent. places of the kingdom, and committed to
tle Tower. Though they had undertaken the
part, they wanted the firm and determined spirit
of aflfliins; and, influenced by fear or by hope,
;tt once confefled all that they knew. The in-
dignation of the people, and their irnpatience to
revenge such an execrable combination againit
thl life of their fovcrcign, hastened their trial,
and all of them suffered the death of traitors
[ Sept. 20] ".

Thus far Elizabeth's condu&t may be pro-

tnounced both prudent and laudable, nor can fle
be accuscd of violating any law of humanity, or
of taking any precautions beyond what were ne-

n Camd. 55, State Trials, vol. i. 1lo.
VOL. 11. E L ceffary

ceffarv for her owni fafet. But a tragical scc:-
followed, with regard to which posterity will p.
a very different judgment.

The frantic zeal of a few rafli young men ;ic

counts fiiffici:ntly for all the wild and wnicki
designs which tlhe had formed. But this \.
not the light in wiich Elizabeth and her mi!i.
fters chose to place the conspiracy. They w il!,
to perfiade tlhe nation, that Babington and i::
associates Ihould be conlidered merely as iifi.
ments employed by the queen of Scots, the r-,'
though secret author of so many attempts da;ai,.i
the life of Elizabeth, and the peace of her ki;:c.
doms. They produced letters, which thl. ,::
cribed to her, in fulpiort of this charge. 'lil;,
as they gave out, had come into their lhandl, iL,
the following lingular and mytlerions mctlh,d o;
conveyance. Gifiord, on his retuln into 1'':.
land, had been trusted by some of the exiles wx: i
letters to Mary ; but in order to make a trial c;
his fidelity and addrrfs, they were only blank pi.-
pers made up in that form. These being 'f;t'l\-
delivered by him, he was afterwards emplosyed
without .farther.' icruplc. WValfilin am inp.':
found means to gain this man, he, by the p-
million of that miniltcr, and the connivancc ,:
Paulet, bribed a tradtlfman in the neighborlli(, i
of Chartley, whither Mary had been convclvii!,

lwho dcpolitcd the lttters in a hole in the wval lt
thlt callle, covered with a loose Itone. Th'I'll
they were taken by the queen, and in the fllrc
mnnncr her anfivrs returned. All these were
carried to Wallingham, opened by him, drcy.
phered, lealed again so dextcroufly that the 1fiiud
could not be perceived, and then tranfinitted to

tli¢

the persons to whom they were directed. Two
letters to Babington, several to Mcndoza, Paget,
Englefield, and the Englih fuigitives, were pro-
curel by this artiiice. It was given out, that in
thele letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and
even of tle affalati on; that (he dire&ed them to
proceed with the utrnolt circumfpe2ion, and not
to take arls until foreign auxiliaries were ready to
ioin tihem; that (he recommended the earl ofArun-
decl, his b others, and the young earl of Northum.
berland, as proper persons to condu&c and to add
reputation to their enterprise; that Ihe admifed
them, if poilible, to excite at the fame time Iome
commotion in. Ireland; and above, all, besought
them to concert with care the means of her own
escape, suggesting to them several expedients for
that prupofe.

All these circumitances were opened at the

trial of the conspirators; axd while the nation
was under the influence of those terrors which
the association. had raited, and the late danger
had augmented, they were believed' without hc-
(itation or inquiry, and spread a general alarm.
Mary's zeal for her religion was well known;
and in that age, examples of the violent and.
sanguinary fpirlt which it inspired were numerous.
All the cabals against the peace of the kingdom
lor many years had been carried on in her name;
;nd it now appears evidently, said the Englifl,
t11i: the safety of the one queen is incompatible
with that of the other. Why then, added they,
llhould the tranquillity of England be sacrificed for
the fa;ke of a itranger ? Why is a life so dear to
the nation exposed to the repeated alfaults of an
exafpcrated rival ? The cafe supposed in the as-

F E 2 fociation

fociation has nok, happened, the sacred pei-
son of our sovereign has been threatened, alii
why flould not an injured people execute that
just vengeance which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable th;an

these to Elizabeth and her minitters. Tliy
thiemfelves had at firif propagated them among
the people, and they now served both as an apo.
logy and a motive for their proceeding to such
extremities against the Scottifi queen as thly
h3ad long mcditated. The more numerous the
injuries were which Elizabeth had heaped oli
Mary, the more lhe feared and hated that un-
happy queen, and came at lalt to be perfuad.d
that there could he no other security for her oMvn
life, but the death of her rival. Burleigh a-d
Walsingham had promoted so zealously all Eli.
zabeth's meafilres with regard to Scottifl affairs,
and had adted with so little reserve in opposition
to Mary, that they had reason to dread the mtil
violent effects of her resentment, if ever the
Thould inount the throne of England. From thi;
additional consideration they endeavoured, witli
the utmotl earnestness, to hinder an event so fa1t :
to themselves, by confirming their mistress's fear
and hatred of the Scottifil queen.

Meanwhile, Mary was guarded with unluftal

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her
ignorant of the difeovery of the conspiracy. ;i.
Thlomas Gorges was at lalt sent from court ti
acquaint her both of it, and of the imputaltioll
with which fie was loaded as accefl..ry to tlat
crime ; and he surprised her with the account
jult as fle had got on horfehack to ride out alolg
with her keepers, Site was itlrLck with alito!lifl.

Inll lt,

ment, and would have returned to her apartment,
but /he was not permitted; and in her absence,
her private closet was broke open, her cabinet
and papers were seized, feaie4, and sent up to
court. Her principal domestics too werearrefted,
and committed to different keepers. Nau and
Culie, her two secretaries, the 6ne a native of
France, the other of Scotland, were carried prH.
foners to London. All the money in her cufto
dy, amounting to little more than two thousand
pounds, was Lecured O. And after leading her
about for some days, from one gentleman's house
to another, fte was conveyed to Fotheringay,
a strong castle in Northamptonflire P.

No farther evidence could now be expeted

against Mary, and nothing remained but to de-
cide what should be her fate. With regard to
this, Elizabeth, and those minifterg in whom 'he
chiefly confided, fcem to have taken their refolu-
tion; but there was still great variety of senti.
ments among her other counsellors. Some
thought it fuflicent to dismiss all Mary's attend'
ants, and to keep her under such close restraint,
as would cut off all possibility of corresponding
with the enemies of the kingdom ; and as her
conllitutioll, broken by long confinement, and
her spirit, deje&ed with ob many forrbws, could.
not long support such an additional load, the
queen and nation would loon be delivered from
all their fears. But though it might be easy to
Iccure Mary's own person, it was impofible to
diminifl the reverence which, the Roman catho-
lics had for her name, or to cxtinguilh the com-

o See Appendix, No. XLVIII. P Carmd. 517.

s 3 paIIia

paflion with which they viewed her sufferings
while such fentirnents continued, infurre&Eicn:
and invasions would never be wanting for her re-
lief, and the only effect of any new rigour would
be to render these attempts more frequent antd
mnore dangerous. For this reason the expedient
was rejeEted.

A public and legal trial, though the most un-

exampled, was judged the molt unexceptionable
method of proceeding ; and it had, at the fame
time, a semblance of justice, accompanied with
an air of dignity. It was in vain to search thi,
ancient records for any statute or precedent to
jliftify such an uncommon tep, as the trial of a
foreign prince, who had not entered the kilg-
dom in arms, hut had fled thither for refulg,
The proceedings against her were founded on tili
as of last parliament, and by applying it in tlii,
mpanner, the intention of those who had framied
that severe flatute became more apparent q.

Elizabeth rcfolved that no circumfftance of

pomp or solemnity fllould be wanting, whiclI
could render this tranfa&ilon fich as became rln,
dignity of the person to be tried. She appointcd(
by a commiflion under the great feal, forty p'l-
sons, the most illustrious in the kingdom by thiir
birth or offices, together with five of tile judgc.,
to hear and decide this great cause. M;ny dlif-
ficultles were started by the lavWyers about the
namne and title by which Mary should be ar-
raigned; and 'while the eflentials of justice were
si grossly violated, the empty forms of it wecre
the objec&s of their care. They at length agrecd

q( CarJd. 519. Jolhnt. Hist. 113,

tlhat

that Ihe (hould be styled " Mary, dgughtr, aind

h leir of James V. late, king of Scots, com-
monly called queen of Scots and dowagei, of
"France r'.

After the many indignities which the had late-

ly fifft-red, Mary could no longer doubt. but
that her destruction was determined. . She ex-
peaed every moment to end her days by poison,
or by some of those secret means ufuall y em-
ployed againit captive princes. Left the malice
of her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived
her of life, flhould endeavour likewise to blait her
reputation, (he wrote to the duke of Guise, and
vindicated herself, in the strongest terms, from
the imputation of encouraging or of being ac-
ccfary to the conspiracy for aflnTFinating Eliza-
beth s. In the solitude of her prison, the strange
rclohltion of bringing her to a public trial had
:ot reached her ears, nor did the idea of any
tling so unprecedented, and so repugnant to re-
gal majesty, once enter into her thoughts.

On the eleventh of October, the cominifion-

(ri appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fothcriin-
gay. Next morning they delivered a letter from
tlheir sovereign to Mary, in which, after the bit-
terest reproaches and accusations, fle informed
her, that regard for the happinefa of the nation
had at last rendered it necessary to make a public
inquiry into her conduit, and therefore required
her, as lhe had lived so long under the protetion
of t he laws of England, to luibmit now to the trial
which they ordained to be taken of her crimes.
Mary, though furprjfed at this meaflgc, was

Stryp, iii. 360. * Jclb, ii. z83.

neither

neither appalled at the danger, nor unmindful of
her own dignity. She protested, in the most so-
lemn manner, that he was innocent of the crime
laid to her charge, and had never countenanced
any attempt against the life of the queen of Eng-
land; but at the fame time refused to acknow-
ledge the jurifdi&tion of her commifiioners. " I

came into the kingdom," said she, " an inde-
"pendent sovereign, to implore the queen's as.

fiftance, not to subjec myself to her authority.
Nor is rny spirit so broken by its past misfor-

' tunes, or so intimidated by present dangers,
" as to sloop to any thing unbecoming the ma-
" jefty of a crowned head, or that will disgrace
" the ancestors from whom I am descended, and

the son to whom I (hall leave my throne. - If

" I must be tried, princes alone can be my peers.
"The queen of England's fubjeEts, however
" noble their birth may be, are of a rank infc-
" rior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this
, kingdom I have been confined as a prisoner.
" Its laws never afforded me any protetion.
" Iet them not now be perverted, in order to
" take away my life."

'he commiflioners employed arguments and

intreaties to overcome Mary's resolution. The)
even threatened to proceed according to the
forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on
account of her contumacy in refusing to plead;
rhe persisted, however, for two days, to declinK
their jurifdiation. An argument used by Hat-
ton, the vice-chamberlain, at last prevailed. He
told her, that, by avoiding a trial, (he injured
her own reputation, and deprived herself of the
only opportunity of letting her innocence in a

clear

clear light; and that nothing would be more
agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
(queen their miitrefs, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that she had been unjultly load-
ed with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible should impose

on the unwary queen, or that flie, unaffilled at
that time by any friend or counsellor, should not
he able to deteEt and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest ministers. In a situation
equally melancholy, and under circumstances
nearly similar, her grandson, Charles I. refuted,
with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the
usurped jurifdition of the high court of juitice;
and polterity has approved his condud, as suit-
able to the dignity of a king. If Mary was less
constant in her resolution, it must be imputed
solely to her anxious desire of vindicating her own
honour.

At her appearance before the judges [Od.

14], who were feated in the great hall of the
caflle, where they received her with much cere-
mony, she took care to protest, that, by conde-
Ifcncding to hear and to give an answer to the ac-
cufatiols, which lhould he brought againit her,
lhe neither acknowledged the jurifdiaion of the
court, nor admitted of the validity and juflice
of thfte atis by which they pretended to try her.

The chancellor, bya counter-proteflation, en-
deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.

Theln Eliz.abeth's attorney and solicitor opened

the charge againit her, with all the circumstances
of the late conspiracy. Copies of Mary's Icttersi
to Mnculoza, Babington, Englefield, and Paget,
were i)roduccd. Dabington's confession, those

Qo

of Ballard, Savage, and the other confpiratoir
together with the declarations of Nau and Curk
her secretaries, were read, and the whole ranger
in the moil specious order which the art of thl
lawyers could devise, and heightened by ever;
colour their eloquence could add.

Mary listened to their harangut's attentively.

and without emotion. But at the mention t',
the earl of Arundel's name, who was then cor-
fined in the Towver, she broke out into this tende;
and generous exclamation.: " Alas, how much
" has the noble house of Howard suffered for
" my fake!"

When the queen's counsel had finised, Malr

stood up, and with great magnanimity, and equ;il
presence of mind, began her defence. She be.
wailed the unhappiness of her own situation, that
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which
fle had suffered treatment no less cruel than un-
merited, fie was at last loaded with an accufa-
tion, which tended not only to rob her of her
right of succession, and to deprive her of life it-
self, but to transmit her name. with infamy to
future ages: that, without regarding the facreu
rights of sovereignty, flhe was now lubjefted to
laws fiamed againit private persons ; though a;:
anointed queen, commanded to appear before the
tribunal of fubjets; and, like a common crimin;i!,
her honour exposed to the petulant tongues (r
lawyers, capable of wresting her words, and (,i
misrepresenting her ations: that, even in tli;
dishonourable Situation, she was denied the privi-
leges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to
undertake her own defence, without the prefeuce
of any friend with whom to advise, without the

aid

aid of counsel, and without the use of her own
paptrs.

She then proceeded to the particular articles

-in the accusation. She ahiblutcly denied any
correipondence with Babington or Ballard:
copies only of her pretended letters to them were
produced; though nothing lets than her hand-
writing or subscription was sufficient to convict
ler of such an odious crime: no proof could
be brought that their letters were delivered into
her hands, or that any answer was returned by
her diredion : the confessions of wretches co;-
demned and executed for such a deteltable aCtion,
swer of little weight; fear or hope might ex-
,,art from them many things inconsistent with
truth, nor ought the honour of a queen to be
!tained by such vile testimony. The declaration
of her secretaries was not more conclusive: pro-
mises and threats might easily overcome the
:clolution of two itrangcrs; in order to screen
themselves they might throw the blame on her;
but they could dilcover nothing to her preju-
dice, without violating, in the first place, the
oath of fidelity which they had sworn to her;
anld their perjury, in one inftancc, rendered them
unworthy of credit in another: the letters to the
Spanish arbafiador were either nothing more than
copies, or contained only what was pcrfeCtly in-
noccnt: ," I have often," continued lhe, " made
" such efforts forl the recovery of my liberty, 'as
"arc natural to a human creature. Convinced,
" by the fad experience of so miany years, that
' it was vain to expe& it from the justice or
" generosity of the queen of England, I have
" timlucntly solicited foreign princes, and called

9 , '" upoa

" upon all my friends to employ their whole
" interest for my relief. I have likewise c,,-
" deavoured to procure for the Englifli catholics
" some mitigation of the rigour with which they

are now treated ; and if I could hope, by nvl

" death, to deliver them from oppreflion, 1 amn
"willing to die for their fake. I wish, how-
" ever, to imitate the example of Esther, not of
" Judith, and would rather make intercession
" for my people, than Ihed the blood of the
" meanest creature, in order to save them. I
" have often checked the intemperate zeal of
" my adherents, when either the severity of
"their own persecutions, or indignation at tilt
" unheard-of injuries which I have endured, we:r,
"apt to precipitate them into violent councils,
" I have even warned the queen of dangers t.,
" which these harsh proceedings exposed her-
" self. And worn out, as I now am, with care~
" and sufferings, the profpet of a crown is
"not so inviting, that I should ruin my)foul
" in order to obtain it. I am no itranger to
" the feelings of humanity, nor unacquaiintc
" with the duties of religion, and abhor tih
" detestable crime of affaflination, as equally
" regugnant to both. And, if ever I have girci
4 confint by my words, or even by my thouglils,
"to any attempt against the life of the queen of

England, far from declining the judgment of

" men, I lhall nut even pray for the mercy of
" God .",

Two different days did Mary appear befurc
the judges, and in every part of her behasiuoai

t Camd. 52o, &c.

maintniicd

maintained the magnanimity of a queen, tempered
with the gentleness and modefly of a woman.

The commiffioners,byElizabetlh's express com-

mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any fen-
tence, to the ftar-chamberin Weflminfier [Oct
253. When assembled in that place, Nau and
Curle were brought into court, and confirmed
their former declaration upon oath; and after
reviewing all their proceedings, the commiffioneir
unanimously deelared Mary " To be acceflary to
" 3abington's conspiracy, and to have imagined
' diverse matters tending to the hurt, death,
" and deftrution of Elizabeth, contrar-y to the

express words of the statute made for the fe-
curity of the queen's life "."
It is no easy matter to determine whether the

injuflice in appointing this trial, or the irregu-
larity in conduding it, were greatest and molt
flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim
authority over an indepcndent queen ? Was
Mlry bound to comply with the laws of a foreign
kingdom? How could the fubjc&s of another
prince become her judges ? or if such an insult
on royalty were allowed, ought not the common
f irms of juflice to have been obfcrved ? If the
ttlirnony of Babington and his associates were to
c plicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a
fie w wceks, and by confronting them with Malry,
ovrwlelm her with the full convicion of her
crines ? Nau and Curie were both alive, where.
fore did not they appear at Fotheringay, ald for
what reason were they produced in the Itar-
clhamber, where Mary was not present to hear

u Camd. 515.
VOL. II. F f what

what they deposed ? Was this suspicious evidc:..
eiu':gh to condemn a queen ? Ought the ncan..:;
criminal to have been found guilty upon fuec
feeble and inconclusive proofs ?

It was not, however, on the evidence proa

duced at her trial, that the senten'ce againit M I:r
wras founded. That servcd as a pretence to ji.-
tify, but was not the cause of the violent ili;>
taken by Elizabeth and lier minilters towa;:s
her ditnrttion ; and was employed.to give foi:le
appearance ofjuftice to what was the offspring o!
jcalou'ly and fear. The'nation, blinded with rL-
lentmrent agaialt Mary, and solicitous to fccuie
the life of its own fovcreign from every daln:tr,
obl'irved no irregtularities in the proceedings, J';'
attended to no defests in the proof, but graipI
at the suspicions and probabilities, as if they iha
beenl irrefragable deionifrations.

T'le parliament met a few days after fen tc]:(.,

waa pronounced against Mary. In that illuftri.:s
assembly more tenlper and difcrnlment tha!:: :.
to be found among' tle people miight have bcc's
expected.' Botlh btlds and coimmons, howe,:,
were equally !nder the domlinion of popular 1r.-
judices and paflioin, and the faime excefis c.
zeal, or of tear, which prevailed in the natic'.,
are apparent in all their proceedings. They ('-
tered with impatience upon an inquiry into ,;;c
conl])ilrcy, and the daiiger which threatened ;h:
quccrn's li, ais well as the peace of the kingril;l.
5.11 thie lpapers which had been produceid .;
I'otllerilgay were laid before themn; aild ;f:r
maly violent invec&ives against the queen (.
;Scots, botlh iCouLs unanimnoufln r;tified the pro-
cqdilngs, of the conuissioiwrs by whliv Ihe h;il

* n t *y';a

been tried, and declared the sentence againRf
her to be just and well-founded. N-ot satisfied
with this, they prelented a joint address to the
queen, beseeching her, as fle regarded her own
safety, the preservation of the proteflant religion,
the welfare and wifihes of her people, to publill
the fcntence; and without farther delay to in-
ilid on a rival, no less irreclaimable than danger-
ous, the oiinhmitiient which she had merited by
so m:!r:y criimes. This request, dic y

tcd by fears

unworthy of that great assembly, was enforced
by reasons ftil! more Unwvorthy. They were
drawn not frcm justice but from conveniency.
The moot rigorous confinement, it was pretended,
could not curb Mary's intriguing spirit; herad-
dress was foiund, by long experience, to be an
overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all
her keepers: the. severest penal laws could not
reilraji her adherents, who, while they believed
her person to be sacrcd,. would despise any
danger to. which thcmfelves alone were exposed :
fiveral foreign princes were ready to second their
altenpts, and waited only a proper opportunity
for invading the kingdom, and aflerting the Scot-
?ihl queen's title to the crown. Her life, they
coitended, was, for tlhee reafous, incompatible
vih h Elizabeth's safety; and if she were sparcd,
out of a false clemency, the queen's pcrfon, the
reliion and liberties of the kingdom, could not
he one mnomelt secure. Necellity required that
flie fliuld be sacrificed in order to preserve these;
and to prove this sacrifice to be no less just than
neceeIary, several examples in hifory were pro-
duccd, and many texts of scripture quoted; but

F v 2 both

both the one and the other were misapplied, anc
diltorted from their true meaning.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptabl.

to Elizabeth, than an address in this itrain.. i
extricated her out of a situation extremely eam
barraffing; and without depriving her of the
power of sparing, it enabled her to punill he:
rival with less appearance of blame. If ft.'
chose the former, the whole honour would rr,
dound to her own clemency. If she determinclt
on the latter, whatever was rigorous might no-,
seem to be extorted by the solicitations of her
people rather than to flow from her own inclina-
tion. Her anfwcr, however, was in a style whicl
she often used, ambiguous and evasive, under the
appearance of openness and candour; full of such
professions of regard for her people, as served to
heighten their loyalty; offuch complaints of Ma-
ry'a ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their
indignation; and of such insinuations that her own
life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive
their fears. In th d, sue besought them to save
her the infamy and the pain of delivering up ;
queen, her nearest kinswoman, to. punifiment;
and to confider whether it might not still lc
possible to provide for the public security, withonu
forcing her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

The true meaning of this reply was easily un-

deritood. The lords and commons renewed thei'
former requelt with additional importunity,
which was far fiom being either unexpeactd cr
offensive. Elizabeth did not return any anl' er
more explicit; and having obtained such a poblil
iantion of her proceedings, there was no loi,' r

any

any reason for. protracing this scene of difinmu-
lation; there was even some danger that her
feigned difficulties .nght at last be treated as real
ones; file therefore prorogued the parliament,
and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal
of her rival's fate x,

All the princes in Europe observed the .pro-

ceedings against Mary with astonishment and
horror; and even Henry III. notwithstanding
his known aversion to the houfe.of Guife,-was
obliged to interpose in her behalf, and to appear
in defence of the common rights of royalty.
)Aubefpine his resident ambassador, and Bellievre,
who was sent with an extraordinary commiflion
to the fame purpose [Nov. 2.1], interceded for
Mary with great appearance of warmth. They
employed all the arguments which the cause na-
turally suggestld; they pleaded from justice,
from generosity, and humanity; they inter-
mingled reproaches and threats ; but to all thcfc
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable ; ;lid
having received some intimation of IHenry's real
unconccrn about the fate of the Scottifl quten,
and knowing hisasitipathy to all the race ofGuifc,
The trniled that these loud remonitrances would
be followed by no violent resentment Y.

Sihe paid no greater regard to the solicitations

of the Scottifli king, which, as they were urged
with greater sincerity, merited more attention.
Though her commiflioners had been extremely
caretful to footlI James, by publishing a declar-
ation, that their sentence againfl Mary did, in no
degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
X Camd, 526. D'Pwes, 375. Y Cand. 531.

' F F 3 any

any title which he formerly possessed; he beheld
the indignities to which his mnther had been ex.
posed with filial concern, and with the sentiments
which became a king. The pride of the Scottifl
nation was roused, by the insult offered to the
blood of their monarchs, and called upon him to
employ the moit vigorous efforts, in order to
prevent or to revenge the queen's death.

At first, he could hardly believe that Elizabeth

would venture upon an acion so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of
princes lcfs sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at
other times, Ihe was so remarkably jealous. But
as soon as the extraordinary iteps which fluc
took discovered her intention, he dispatched fir
William Keith to London; who, together with
Douglas his ambaflador in ordinary, remonftrat-
ed, in the ftrongefl terms, against the injury
done to an independent queen, in subjecting
her to be tried like a private person, and by laws
to which fie owed no obedience; and besought
Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by susser-
ing a sentence unjuit in itself, as well as dif.
honourable to the king of Scots, to be put ii;ti
execution 2.

Elizabeth returning no answer to there re-

monstrances of his anmb;fiador, James wrote to
her with his own hand, complaining in the bitter-
.cl terms of her condut', not without threats that
both his duty and his honour would oblige hin
to renounce her friendfluip, and to a& as became
a son when called to revenge his mother's wrongs'.

z See Append. No. XLIX. Murdin, 573, &c. Birch.
lem. i. 5z. a Birch, Memi. 5. A.

At

At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who
promised to stand by him in so good a cause.
He appointed ambassadors to France, Spain, and
Denmark, in order to implore the aid of these
courts; and took other steps towards executing
his threats with vigour. The high strain of his
letter enraged Elizabeth to such a degree, that
the was ready to dismiss his ambassadors without
any reply. But his preparations alarmed and
embarrassed her ministers, and at their entreaty
she returned a soft and evasive anfver, promising
to liftcn to any overture from the king, that
tended to his mother's safety; and to iufpend
the execution of the sentence, until the arrival of
new ambafladors from Scotland b.

Meanwhile, she commanded the sentence

against Mary to be publiflhed [Dec. 6], and for-
got not to inform the people, that this was ex-
torted from her by the repeated entreaty of both
honfes of parliament. At the fame time Ihe
dispatched lord Buckhuift and Beale to acquaint
Mary with the sentence, and how importunately
the nation demanded the execution of it; and
though ihe had not hitherto yielded to thcfe
folicitationM, fle advised her to prepare for an
event which night become neceflary for securing
the protcftant religion, as well as quieting the
rminds of the people. Mary received the'meflfge
not only without symptoms of fear, but with
cxpreflions of triumph. " No wonder," said
nhe, 4 the Engliflh fould now thirst for the blood
" of a foreign prince, they have often offered
"' violence to their own monarchs. But after

b Spotfw. 251. Cald. iv. 5.

s« so

" so rany sufferings, death comes to me as a
"' welcome deliverer. I am proud to think that
" my life is deemed of importance to the catholic
"religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing
" to die C."

After the publication of the ftenene, gary

was flripped of every remaining mark of royalty
The canopy of hate in her apartment was pulled
down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap.
proached her person without any ceremony; and
even appeared covered in her presence. Shocked
with these indignities, and offended at this gross
familiarity, to which she had never been accuf
tomed, Mary once more complained to Elizz-
beth; and at the fame time [)Dec. 19], as her
last request, entreated that flie would permit her
servants to carry her dead body into France, to
be laid among her ancestors in hallowed ground;
that some of her domeflics might be present at
her death, to bear witness of her innocence,
and firm adherence to the catlolic faith ; that all
her fervanlts might be suffered to leave the king.
dom, and to enjoy those finall legacies which
file Ihould bestow on them, as teflimonies of her
affetion ; and that, in the mean time, her al-
moner, or some other catholic pries, might be
allowed to attend her, and to assist her in pre.
paring for an eternal world. She besought her,
in the name of Jesus, by the foul and memory ft
Henry VII. their common progenitor, by thelr
near consanguinity, and the royal dignity witll
which they were both inveRted, to gratify her in
these particulars, and to indulge her so faras to

c Camd .58. Jcbb,zg9.

signify

signify her compliance by a letter under her own
hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever delivered
to Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was re-
turned, and no regard paid to her requests. She
was offered a protestant biflop or dean to attend
her. Them she rejeted, and without any
clergyman to dirEt her devotions, lhe pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of
death, which she now believed to be at no
great distance .

1.87.] James, without losing a moment, sent

new ambassadors to London [Jan. I]. These
were the master of Gray, and fir Robert Mclvil.
In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they
offered that their manlae would become bound
that no conspiracy should be undertaken against
her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with
Mary's consent; and for the faithful performance
of this, would deliver some of the most con-
fiderable of the Scottifl nobles as hostages. If
this were not thought sufficient, they proposed
that Mary Should resign all her rights and pre-
tenfons to her son, from whom nothing in-
jurious to the protestant religion, or inconsistent
with Elizabeth's fiifety, could be feared. The
former proposal Elizabeth rejeEed as insecure;
the latter, as dangerous. The amhaf.adors were
then iithlru&ed to talk in a higher tone; and
Melvil executed the commiflion with fidelity and
with zeal. But Gray, with his nufual perfidy, de-
ceived his mafier, wllo trusted him with a ne-
gotiation of so much importance, and betrayed
the queen whom he was employed to save. He

d Camd, 528. Jcbb, ii. 295.

cncou-

elcouraged and urged Elizabeth to execute tlhe
1; i.:ence againil her rival. I-e often repeated
t':e old proverbial feitence, " The dead cannot
"' bite." And whatever llould happen, he un-
dertook to pacify the king's rage, or at least to
prevent any violent effects of his refentmente'

Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the

symptoms of the moif violent agitation and dif-
quietude of minld. She shunned society, she
was often found in a melancholy and musing
pollure, and repeating with much emphasis thtce
sentences which fie borrowed from lome of tlhe
devices- then in vogue; lut ser aut feri; r.-
Jiuiare .feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparer.:
uneafilefs must be imputed to dissimulation; it
was impossible, however, that a princess, natu-
rally so cautious as Elizabeth, Ihould venture on
an aftion, which might expose her memory to
infamy, and her life and kingdom to danger, with-
out reflecing deeply, and hesitating long. The
people waited her determination in suspense and
anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal shotid
fibfidc, rumours of danger were artfully invent-
ed, and propagated with the utmost industry.
Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was accused
of having suborned an assassin to murder the
queen. The Spanilh fleet was said by some to
be already arrived at Milfordhaven. Others as-
fiirned that the duke of Guise had landed with a
strong army in Suffex. Now, it was reported
that the northern counties were up in arms;
next day thai the Scots had entered England
with all their forces; and a conspiracy, it waa

C Spotfw. 351. Mu din, 568. SecApp. No. L.

whispered,

whispered, was on foot for seizing the queen anid
burning the city. The panic grew every daiy
more violent; and the people, aftonilhed and
enraged, called for the execution of the sentence
againil Mary, as the only thing which could
reitore tranquillity to the kingdom f.

While these fenlliments prevailed among her sub-

jeAs, Elizabeth thought nle might safely venture
to strike the blow, which (he lad so long nmeditat-
et. She commanded Davilon [Feb. l], one of
the secretaries of Itate, to bring to her the firtal
warrant; and her behaviour on that occasion
plainly (hewed, that it is not to humanity tlhat
we must afcribc her forbearance hitherto. At
the very moment (he was tigning the writ which
gave up a woman, a queen, and her own nearclt
relation, into the hands of the executioner, (le
was capable of jelting. " Go," fays (he to Da-
vifon, " and tell Walllingham what I have now
*' done, though I am afraid he will die for grief

when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was

how to secure the advantages which would arise
from Mary's death, without appearing to have
given her consent to a deed so odious. She often
hinted to Paulet and 1)rury, as well as to fomne
other courtiers, that nonw was the time to dif-
cover the sincerity of their concern for her :afety,
and that Ihe cxpl)ced their zeal would extricate
hsr out of her present perplexity. But they
wvere.wifc enough to seem not to underlland her
meaning. Even after the.warrant was signed,
fle conmm andecd a lettler to be written to Paulet,
in leli ambiguous ternms, conplaining, of his ilt

I Camd, 533, 53 '

inflnncfi

miffnefs in sparing so long the life of her capital
enemy, and begging him to remember at lail
what was incumbent on him as an affetionate
subjet, as well as what he was bound to do by
the oath of association, and to deliver his fovc-
reign from continual fear and danger, by short-
ening the days of'his prisoner. Panlet, though
rigorous and harih, and often brutal in the dif
charge of what lie thought his duty, as Mary's
keeper, was nevcrthelefs a man of honour and in-
tegrity. He rejeced the proposal with disdain;
and lamenting that he flould ever have been
deemed capable of a&ing the part of an afafliin,
he declared that the queen might dispose of his
life at her plcafire, but that he would never
stain his own honour, nor leave an everlaftilg
mark of infamy on his posterity, by lending his
hand to perpetrate so foul a crime. On the re-
ceipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extremely
peevish; and calling him a dainty and prerij
fellow, who would promise much, but perform
nothing, she proposed to employ one Wingfiecl,
who had both courage and inclination to strike
the blow g. But Davison remonitrating againfl
this, as a deed dilhonourable in itself, and of dan.
gerous example, she again declared her intention
that the fentehce pronounced by the commirn
fioncrs ihould be executed according to lai';
and as she had already signed the warrant, fle
begged that no farther application might be made
to her on that head. By this the privy counsel.
lors thought thenfclves sufficiently authorised to
proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by

I Biogr. Britsa. article Davion.

2C!U

zt eal for the queen's safety, or instigated, as is
more probable, by the apprehension of the dan-
ger to which they would themselves be exposed,
if the life of the queen of Scots were spared, they
nffembled in the council chamber; and by a
letter under all their hands, empowered the earls
of Shrewibury and Kent, together with the high
flieriff of the county, to fee the sentence put in
execution h.

On Tuesday the seventh of February, the two

earls arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded ac-
cess to the queen, read in her presence the war-
rant for execution, and required her to prepare
to die next morning. Mary heard them to the
end without emotion, and crofing herself in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Gholt, " That foul," said ihe, " is not
" worthy the joys of Heaven, which repinec
"because the body mult endure the Itroke of the

executioner; and though I did not expef
' that the queen of England would set the firif
:' example of violating the sacred person of a
" sovereign prince, I willingly submit to that

w' which Providence has decreed to be my lot ;"

and laying her hand on a bible, which happened
to be near her, she foletnly proteted that Ihe
was innocent of that conspiracy which Babington
had carried on against Elizabeth's lifei. She
then mentioned the reqnelts contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfaftory
answer. She entreated with particular earnestness,
that now in her lalt moments her almoner might
be suffered to attend her, and that she might enjoy
h Camd. 53,4 Strypc iii. 36x. 364, t Jobb, ii. 301.

VOL. II. O
G the

the consolation of those pious ilftitutions ni,.
fcribed by her religion. Even this favour, w\in .l!
is usually granted to the vilest criminal, was abl-
lutely denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation, vW(r

bathed in tears, and though overawed by iii
presence of the two earls, vith difficulty fli.-
pressed their anguifi; but no sooner did lKcn
and ShrewLbury withdraw, than the- ran ,,
their liftrefs, and burst out into the most p,.;-
lionate expressions of tenderness and for:' ..
Mary, however, not only retained perfe&t ,:i.i
pofure of mind herself, but endeavoured to ii,.
derate their excessive grief; and falling on i.:
knees, with all her doinellics round her, il
thanked Heven that her sufferings were :iu.>
so near an end, and prayed tllat (he might hc
enabled to endure what still remained with ,i.-
cency and with fortitude. Th'le greater part ls
the evening file employed in fettling her worliilv
affairs. She wrote her teftlanent with her c,.
haud. Her money, her jewels, and her clot! ,
fihe diftrihuted among her servants, accordinlg t.
thlir rank or merit. She wrote a Ilort Itclli
to the king of France, and another to the diil:
of Guise, full of tender hut marnCanilnous .finti
ments, and recommtended her fotul to their pray, 1,
and her aflii,.ted iervants; to their prlntec.tio i.
At filpper she ate temperatcly, as ufial, l(il
conversed not only w\itlh afe, but witlh clc.i-
fulness ; fle drank to every one of her fervalls,
and anted their forgivencfs, if ever fli: had f;aild
in anly part of.her tluty towards them. At lir
wontedl tille file went. to ed, and fiept calmlyl a
few liourm. Early ia the morning lke rctli:'

i1o si

into her closet, and employed a confidei-able
tilne in devotion. At, eight o'clock the high,
i herift and his officers entered ler chamber, and

found her iHll kneeling at tile altar. She imme-
g diately itarted up, and with a majeflic mien, and

a coulntenance undismayed, and even cheerful,
| advanced towards the place of execution, lcaningl

on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed
in a mourning habit, but with an elegance and
splendour which Ihe had long. laid aside, except
on a few felival days. An Agntus Dei hung by
a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her
girdle; and in her hand Ihe carried a crucifix of
ivsory At the bottom of the itairs the two earls,
attended by several gentlemen from the neigh-
bouring counties, received her; and there fir
Andrew Melvil, the master of her household,
who had been secluded for some weeks from her
pi lcernce, was permitted to take his last farewel.
At the fight of. a mitlrefs w*hom he tenderly
loved, in such a situation, he melted into tears;
and as he was bewailing her condition, and
complaining of his owp hard fate, in being ap-
pointed to carry the account of such a mournful-
event into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not,
" good Melvil, there is at present great caufc
" for rjoicing. Thou shalt this day fee Mary
" Stewart delivered fiom all her cares, and fucll

an end put to her tedious sufferings, as she
has long expected. Bear witness that I die

" conllant in my religion ; firm in my fidelity
" towarlds Scotland; unchanged in my as-
"feclion to France. Commend nme to my foin.
"Tell him I have done nothing injurious to his
" kingdom, to hli honour, or to his rights;

; z 2 and

" and God forgive all those who hae .thirsted,
" without cause, for my blood."

: With much difficulty, and after many entrea.
ties, she prevailed on the two earls to allow Mel'
vil, together with three of her men servants and
two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold.
It was ere&ed in the fame hall where fie had
been tried raised a little above the floor, and
covered, as'well as a chair, the cushion, and block,
with black cloth. Mary mounted the lteps with
alacrity, beheld all this apparatus of death with
an unaltered countenance, and signing herself
with the cross, The fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice,
to which she listened with a careless air, and like
one occupied in other thoughts. Then the dean
of Peterborough began a devout discourse, suit-
able to her present condition, and offred up
prayers t6 Heaven in her behalf; but the declared
that The could not lh conscience hearken to the
one, nor join with the other; and kneeling
down, repeated a Latin prayer. When the dean
had finished his devotions, {he with an audible
voice, and in the English tongue, recommended
unto God the affliced Rate of the church, and
prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a long
life and peaceable reign to Elizabeth. She
declared that the hoped for mercy only through
the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image
fhe'now willingly shed her blood; and lifting
up and kissing the crucifix, ile thus addrefld
it: " As thy arms, O Jesus, were extended
" on the cross; so with the outstretched arns
" of thy mercy receive me, and forgive my

rt fins."

Sle

I- / . {'· · · :

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

c... i.·-
· ~ o.7Ao a~

She then prepared for the block, by taking

off her veil and upper garments ; and one of the
executioners rudely endeavouring to afflift, Ihe
gently .checked him, and said, with a smile, that
Ilie had not been accustomed to undress before so
imanv fpeftators, nor to be served by such valets.
\i itl caln but undaunted fortitude {he laid her
neck on the block; and while one executioner
held ier hands, the other, at the second stroke,
' cut ofl her head, which falliig out of its attire,
;i: dicvercd her hair already grown quite grey with
"i cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up

Itlll Itl eaning with blood, and the dean crying

:: out, "' So perill all queen Elizabeth's enemies,"
, thr ca!rl of Kent alone answered Amen. The
rt.$n of the fpe&taors continued lilent, and'
drovnlwd in tears; being incapable, at that mo-
mient, oi any other sentiments but those of pity
or aidmiration k.

Slchl was the tragical death of Mary queen of

Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two
ironthls, allniofl nineteen years of which lfe
patilld in captivity. The political parties which

cwere formed in the kingdom, during her reign,
have fubHiltled under various denominations, ever
jince that time. The rancour, with which they
were at first animated, hath defctnded to fuc-
:ceding ages, and their prejudices, as well as
their rage, have been perpetuated, and even aug-
Inil.ted. Among hiltorians, who were under
tihe dominion of all these passions, and who have
cither aferibed to her every virtuous and amiable

Camd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jebb,ii. 30o. Strype, li.
3'3. See Append, No. LI.

G 3 quality,

quality, or have imputed to her all the vices of
which the human heart is susceptible, we search
in vain for Mary's real chara&er. She neither
merited the exaggerated praises of the one, nor
the undiftinguilhed censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost

elegance of external form, Ihe added those ac.
compliflments which render their unpreflion irre.
fiftible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly,
and capable of speaking and of writing with equal
ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent
in all her attachments; because her heart was
warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contra.
dition; because she had been accustomed from
her infancy to be treated as a queen. No firan.
gcr, on some occasions, to dissimulation; which,
in that perfidious court where she received her
education, was reckoned among the necessary arts
of government. Not insensible of flattery, or
unconscious of that pleasure with which almost
every woman beholds the influence of her own
beauty. Formed with the qualities which we
love, not with the talents that we admire; fle
was an agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious
queen. The vivacity of her spirit not sufficiently
tempered with found judgment, and the warmth
of her heart, which was not at all times under
the reitraint of discretion, betrayed her both into
errors and into crimes. To fay that Ihe waM
always unfortunate, will nog account for that
long and almost uninterrupted fuccefiion of ca-
lamlties which besel her ; we must likewise add,
that Ihe was often imprudent. Her passion for
DarMly was rash, youthful, and exceflive; an4
though the fuddcn transition to the opposite cx.

trczmcs

W treme, was the natural effet of her ill-requited

love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and bru.
tality; yet neither there, nor Bothwell's artful
address and important services, can justify her
attachment to that nobleman. Even the man-
ners of the age, licentious as they were, are no
apology for this unhappy paflion; nor can they
K induce us to look on that tragical and infamous

scene which followed upon it, with less abhor-
rence. Humanity will draw a veil over this part
of her characer which it cannot approve, and
may, perhaps, prompt some to impute some of
her actions to her situation, more than to her
difpolitions; and to lament the unhappiness of
the former, rather than accuse the perverseness
of the latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both ia
degree and in duration, those tragical distresses
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and
commiseration and while we survey them, we
arc apt altogether to forget her frailties, we think
of her faults with less indignation, and approve
of our tears, as if they were Ihed for a person who
had attained much nearer to pure virtue.

With regard to the queen's person, a circum-

stance not to be omitted in writing the history of
a female reign, all contemporary authors agree
in ascribing to Mary the utlmoQt beauty ofcounte.
nance, and elegance of £hape, of which the hu-
man form is capable. Her hair was black, though,
, according to the fashion of that age, the fre-
jquently wore borrowed locks and of different
colours. Her eyes were a dark grey; her com-
plexion was exquilitely fine; and her hands and
arms remarkably delicate, both as to Ihspe and
colour. Her taturc waa of an height that rose

to

to the majestic. She danced,. Ihe walked, and
rode with equal grace. Her taste for music was
jift, and the both sung and played upon the lute
with uncommon fcill. Towards the end of her
life, long confinement, and the coldness of the
houses in which fle had been imprisoned, brought
on a rheumatism, which often deprived her of the
use of her limbs. No man., fays Brantome, ever
beheld her person without admiration and love,
or will read her htilory without sorrow.

None of her women wnere suffered to come near

her dead body, which was carried into a room
adjoining to the place of execution, where it lay
for some days, covered with .a coarse cloth tor,"
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold,
'the aprons of the executioners, and every tlihn:
ltained with her blood, were reduced to aihc,.
Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to
be buried in the cathedral of Peterborough witl
royal magnificence. But this vulgar artifice w';,
employed in vain ; the pageantry of a pompciin
funeral did not efface the memory of tllofe in-
juries which laid Mary in her grave; jainl:,
ioon after his accession to the Elngllifl tlirol,
ordered her body to be removed to Wdltminltlir-
abbey, and'to be depoiited among the moniilar' ;
of England.

Elinabeth affecacd to receive the aceounts (;f

Mary's death with the moll violent emotions i,,
furprifie and of concern. Sighll,tcars,lamentatiol',
and mourning, were all emplovyed to difplav the
reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of difimulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elinabeth's proceedingi(
aguahit the life of the Scottish qucen. The coni.

millon

tmiffion for bringing Mary to a public trial wag

L leemingly extorted from her by the entreaties of
her privy counsellors. She delayed publishing
the lentence again t her till she was twice solicited
', by both hoifes of parliament. Nor did fle lign,

the warrant for execution without the utmost
apparent reluctance. One feene more of the
boldell and most solemn deceit remained to be
exhibited. She undertook to make the world
believe that Mary had been put to death without
| her knowledge, and against her will. Davison,

i who neither fifpe&ed her intention nor his own
danger, was her instrument in carrying on this
artifice, and fell a viEtim to it.

It was his duty, as secretary of slate, to lay

before her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and, by her command, he carried it
to the great feal. She pretended, however, that
/he had charged him not to communicate what
fle had done to any person, nor to susser the
warrant to go out of his hands, without her ex.
press permission ; that, in contempt of this order,
he had not only revealed the matter to several of
her ministers, but had, in concert with them,
anembled her privy counsellors, by whom, with-
out her content or knowledge, the warrant was
iflued, and the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent
imrpowered to put it in execution. Though
Davison denied all this, and with circumftancec
which bear the ftrongclt marks of truth and cre.
idibility; though it can scarcely be conceived that
'her privy council, composed of the persons in
whom the molt confided, of her ministers and fa.
vourites, would artimble within the walls of her
palace, and venture to tranfaft a matter of to

much

much importance without her privity, and con-
trary to her inclination; vet so far did she carry
her dissimulation, that with all the signs of dil-
pleafurc and of rage, she banished nmolt of her
counsellors out of her presence; and treated
Burleigh, in particular, so harfhlv, and with such
marks of disgust, that he gave up himfclf for
loft, and in the deepest afiti&ion wrote to the
queen, begging leave to resign all his places, that
he might retire to his own estate. Davison she
inilantly deprived of hi office, and committed him
a close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after
brought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber
[March], condemned to pay a fine of ten thuu-
sand pounds, and to be imprisoned during the
queen's pleasure. He la.nguihed several years in
confinement, and never recovered any degree of
favour or of power. As her jeaiouiy and fear
had bereaved the queen of Scots of life, in older
to palliate this part of her condu&, Elizabeth
made no scruple of facrificingi the reputation and
happiness of one of the mo.i virtuous and able
men in her kingdom.

This solemn farce,. for it deserves no better

name, furniihcd Elizabeth, however,- with an
apology to the king of Scots. *As the prospect
of his mqther's danger had excited the king's
filial care and concern, the account of her death
filled him with grief and resentment. His sub-
jects felt the dilhonour.done to hin) and to the
nation. In order to south both, Elizabeth in-
ilantly dispatched Roberl Carn, one of lord

I Camd. 536. Strype, iil. 3e7. See Append. No. LII.
Cabala, 19z, &c,

IIuntdon's

IHunfdon's sons, with a letter exprefling her ex-
iretme affliction on account of that Iniferable
accident, which, as (ie prete:lded, had happened.
far contrary to her appointment or itntnti;n.
Tames would not perlit her !teflenguer to entci-
Scotland ; and with some difficulty received a
m:ni:norial which he isnt from Berwick. It con..
tained the tale concerning Davison, dressed up

;'cili all the circuminflnces which tended to e::

culpate Elizabeth, and to throw the -vhole blame
on his rashness or treacherl. Such a defence
gane little fatisfation, and was c,;:dired as
mockery added to insult; and many .f ';: no-
bles, as wi:ll as the kin', breathed no>thil; bLt
revenet. Elizabeth was extremnelv ifliiit us t(o
paifty them, and ile wanted neithel able in fru-
!meats, nor plausible reasons, in order to accori-
,lihl this. Leicester wrote to the ki;n-, .d
\Vallhfighlam to iccretary ,ahtiand. 1'} T re-
presented the certain de[truction to vilchl Ja!ne'
,.'.o-ld expose himself, if, I.t the forces of Scot-
! rd alone, he ,hoold venture to attack a king-
c..1 so ar

f ir ipexio- in power ; that the hlifory

cf palt ages, as well as h:s ,ncthelr' fad expe-
prience, Inight convince hi!n, ti at othin- could
he mnotr danrerous, or deccS f',;, than dependence
On foi;;cn aid; that tlhe Iinr us France wvould
ievie' v.'ilh to ife the i Eriiia kiii-don.; united
cnder one monarch, fIr coint',ihit to invelt a
p-lic.e so nearil allied to the lioiife of Guise
'iti tuch flornidabl power; tli:t IPhilip might
be a il mre acti:e allv, but would cl r:aS:nl prove
a more dangerous olle, and, under ipretence of
::iiltin:g hlim, would illert his owvi right to the
1nlglilh crolw:b, which he alraltJy began openly

s*

to claim ; that the fame statute, on which the
sentence of death againit his mother had been
founded, would juitify the excluding him from
the succession to the crown ; that the Englifi,
naturally averse from the dominion of strangers,
would not fail, if exasperated by his hostilities,
to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth was
disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother
had suffered, by her tenderness and affe&ion to-
wards the son ; and that, by engaging in a fruit-
less war, he would deprive himlelf of a noble
inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendflip,
he must infallibly obtain. These representations,
added to the confcioufncfs of his own weakness,
to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous
spirit of fomc of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity
of others, and to the influence of that facion
which was entirely at Elizabeth's devotion, con.
vinced James that a war with England, however
just, would in the present juncture be altogether
impolitical. All these considerations induced
him to lisle his resentment; to appear satisfied
with the puniflunent inflicted on Davison; and
to preserve all the semblances of friend(hip with
the Englilh court"'. In this manner did the
cloud whicl threatened such a itorm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal,
remain unavenged by any prince; and whatever
infamy Elizabeth might incur, (he was exposed
to no newdanger on that account.

Mary's death, however, proved fatal to thn:

master, of Gray, and loft him the king's favour,
whichhe had for some time ponfeffed. He was

m S'otfw, 36t, CAld. iT, 13, 14. Strype, bii. 377.

become

ijcomce a:; odious to the nation as favourites, who
acquire power without lner'ii, and exercise it
w\'it out. diiretidnll, lifially are. The treacherous
part lwhich he h;id ai'led during his late cnibaffy
wvas no lfecICt andL !ii'cd james, who at lengiIt
came to the lknoledgc of it, \ith ;;ioiilihment.
T'l'i.: :ju:;.cr observcd til' liymptoinns of diforuit
ariing ili the kiig's mind, his enemlies fc;ecld the

;opportunitV, and fir i\ili.im

,t t.I,!lt, in revenge

of the perllidy with. Whichl Griv lhad bctrayed
his bruotlir captain Jamcs, p.blicli accilcd him
iifore a convention of inobles [i.oy 10], not
only of having contributed, by his ;idice and
ftiggerfions, to .akle away the life of tlh quCleen,
but ofho!dingcoireipond'nlce nvitli pi;pi!h !rinces,
In order to fu!uvcit the religii ni' ctl;)!i!hiid in tilc
ki!gdlom; Gray, unfuipp)urle by hle ki:lig, de-.
Ilfered by all, and coulfiots of li!s ow:i guilts
mdle i feeble da

c fncci I.Ic wa;: condemned to

perpetual banilillenCt, a pUi.iricnlt very uncqual
to his crimes. But the k:'in r was uni/iling to
alIndo(1l oiln wmhom lie had once favuulei f)
highly, to the rigour of juflice, rnd lold Ha-
nk!tonl, hlis ntsr relation, !:wd thie other unbles
v\hdo lad littl}y returned fi-omn exile, in ,,ratitude
itr the zeal w-.ili hi]lie he had iLrrved them,
interceded warmly ii his behialf.

I-Haing tilu:r accompliflled the detlruftion of

One of ilib esncinics, cailjtin Jarries Stewart
thought the junaturi favournblc for polfccuting
IJis revenge on tlleni all. He lingled out fecrt:-
tary Maitland, the nmolt cminent both t ior abilities
andc ernity to him ; and offered to prove that he
vws no les acceflhry than Gray to the' queen's
death1, and had eveu forined a delign of dclivring

VOL. tX. 1t H up

up the king himrelf into the hands of tlhe Eng-
lifh. But time and abifence had, in a great mea-
fore, cxtinguifhcd the king's afft'aion for a
miilon wiho so little delerved it. All the courtiers
combined againftl hinm as a common enemy ; and
instead of gaiining his point, he had the mortifica-
tion to 'ee the office of chancellor co;ifcened upon
lMaitland, who, together ith that dignity, en-
joyed all tie power and influence of a prime
minister.

In the afTembly of the church, which met thii'

year, tle 'lime hatred to the order of bishops,
and the famte jealouiy and fear of their encroach-
ments, appeared. But as the king was now of
full age, and a parliamelnt was finr.1ont1l on that
occasion, the clergty *etluained satisfied with ap-
pointing rome of theii nvnlhei to rerertfellt their
grievanices to that court, fr'm, wh!ich great things
were cxpesced.

Pre\ ious to hin, mectin ; of lpaiamcnt, Jamce

:rttemnliptt (. work wonlh o.,f ut kiiig. 'llhe deadly
,£tl'ds - hIiel! i' iuf ilci betv-relin rmanv of the great
s.u.ii'ui, ;,;,1:d whic' v.

cr tr:afilitted from tnee

;e:-.ra;;:.;;. to aslothll', \ .ilt':i,.cd the strength ot
the ki igdoni '.; c'.tribtu;'d, mo1re than any othe:
cirnic:mtl[ncec, to r:tl(;:'.. n ielrcee and barbarous
Ipirit alilOlung;lt: hobl's ; and proved the occasion
o*f many dili,!Ucr:; ; llitnlclvcs; and to tlhilr
cot!Mtry. Atter i:liy prep.aratory neggtiations,
he inivirc' tfh co> telnd'illr; p;artiec; to a royal cn-
etiriimtltet in the p]alauc<r 1-loly-rood-louit;
and parl.' by hIs aitilorn. y, .ir'tly by llis en-
treatcies, obtaincd tl,e ir pi'ronil' to bury hllcir
dicllCtious itl perpetual obliJvi:o. ; rom t hence he
condlflled them, In i'. u Tni p rncidlo, througlJ

the itreets of Edinjburgh, marching by pairs,
each hand in hand with his enemy. A collation
of wire and fveetmnats was prepared at the pub-
lic cross, and there they drank to each other,
with all the tii;is of reti;procal forgivcneifs and of
'future friceldihip. Thle icople, who were prelciit
at a fpeclacle so unusual, conceived the molt
fauguine hopes of feeing concord and f'anquiliity
citablifled in every part of the kiLgdom, and
tcftified their fatisfathiun by repeated acclina'-
tions ". Unhappily, the effets of this recon-
*ciliation were not correspondent either to the
pious endeavours of the .king, or to the fond
wifiles of the people.

The firt care of the parliament was the fe.

curity of the protestant religion. All the laws
,7afled in its favtour, since the reformation, were
ratified; and a new and revere one was ena&ed
againfi seminary priefis and Jesuits, whose refi.
less indultry in making proselytes, brought miany
of them into Scotland about this time. £wo aSts
of this parliament deserve more particular notice
on account of the coinfecq:leui. with which tiley
were followed.

l'he one refpefed the lalnds of the church.

As the public icvenlues were not fuffici;lnt' or
dtfraying the kling's ordinary charges; as the
amillntiiltratio of theO government became more
complicated and n ore cxpenlive; as James. was
nrtturally profuse, and a. tranger to eeconomny'
it was neceflhay, on all these accounts, to provide
forne fund proportioned to his' exigencies. But
no conitlderable iun could be levied' on the Borm..

n S.pofwo. 1(4. C.ld,iv. 13.

1 II 2 mons,

up the king hiilfelf into the hands of the Eng-
lihl. But time and ablence had, in a great mea-
furc, cxtingui'f.d the king's afl'etion for a-
minion who so little dlefrved it. All the courtiers
combined against limnl a a conlmon enemy ; and.
instead of ganinin his point, he had the mortifica-
tion to fee the office of chancellor conferTed upon
Maaitland, wlio, together with that dignity, en-
joyed all the power and influencec )f a prime
minitler.

In the assemb'ly of the church, which met thi:'.

year, the fame hatred to the order of bilhops,
and the famne jealoui5y and fear of tlhei encro-ach-
ments, appearted. But as tle king was now of
full agc, and a pIarliaamelt was funi'oned on t!at
occasion, the clergsv rtained fati;fied with ap-
pointing finme of theii nitiliel to reiprei'nt their
grievances to that court, fn'i w\v'ichl g-eat things
vwre cxpe!Led.

Preil.,ins to tili;. i'ne'iin of pa'iiament, Jarmei

:attliempt l ;!. w\rk w oirthy ,l f -a kiig. lThe deadly

r'e Ids'5<lhic s i/t~iiultd

cbctcV;rc rlnun of the great

!.'.;.nii:.:, ~;.i.. whic'il v. rC tr::nfii itted frori (.ie
,<;:ic:ic-. oi;;* anoii]..:, t. :!

t he si rength o

.et k'.gdnoi s ; tctn riiLircdn, more thain any otlie
circ::mnl[,,nce, to S:'-;'i:'. . a fierce and balrbarous
Jpiritl ;Iion; t Inol .l'; t lnand proved tlhe occalion
,,f
O arny dhldtc,.';; :1, t.f'l'h'cnl ; and to theil
co,)Iitry, A.tcr itIairy prepiar;tty 0vg(2tiatoniis,
he iulvi:'.l The CO>,e:indii;.u l;ltic; to a royal cin-
;',t;tihlulc:.-t in the pala;.i o( I'lly-rood-holiofe;

' and parilJ by hlis .uil'ilr.y, plrt' by his en-

treatiec, obtainedl ti.cir protriii to bury lhceir
dii'entitilon illn pirpetia;l O>hlivion. i itom thence he
coIlndulnid th"!n, {i ii.ti:'1 t prncetiio, througt

tlTv:

the fireets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs,
each la;ld in hand with hi; enemy. A collation
of wi:te and fwevetmeats was prepared at the pub-
Lc cross, aud there they drank to each other,
wi'th all the fiils of rccJirocal forgivcness and of
'future fricllii.dip. 'li' people, whlo were preltill
at a fpeftacle lo unusual, conceived the nmofl
faIguine hopes of feeinr concord and fanquiliity
efltblifhed in every part of the kirgdom, anl
tetified their fatisfaftiun by repeated acc!ama-
tions ". Unhappily, the cffets of this recon-
ciliation were not correspondent either to the
nious endeavours of the king, or to the fond
w.ithes of the people.

The first care of the parliament was the fe-
lcurity of the proteianti religion. All the lavs
pasTed in its favour, since the reformation, were
ratified; and a new and severe one was enaced
against seminary priclts and Jesuits, whole refl.
less industry in making profe!ytes, brought manyv
of them into Scotland about this time. £wo a&s
of this parliament deserve more particular notice
<on account of the confiqeu;eals with which tley
were followed.

The one refpcted the lands of the church.

As the public rcvenluee were not fufficicnt' 'r
der:lyili the kilg's ordin'r charges; us tie
ailni;litr'ation of the govemrnment became more
complicated and more expenlive ; as Janmes was
naturally profuse, and a Itranger to ceconomy';
it was necelfrly, on all there accounts, to provide
fomc fund proportioned to his exigencies. But
0ro conlitderabc i'mr could be levied on the cosi.

"n po!fw. 1G4. C.ll. iv. 13.

Ii II mnons,

mcns, who did not enjoy the benefit of an ex.
tensive corimerce. The nobles were uinacclf-
tomned to bear the burden of heavy taxes. Tlhe
revenues ofthe church wei-e tlieonlyfolurcc whence
a proper supply could be drawn. N\otwithftand.
ing all the depredations of the laity since the
reformation, and the various devices which thc)
had employed to seize the church lands, fomc
considerable portion of them remained frill un-
alienated, and wvere held either by the bishops
who pofcfked the benefices, or were granted to
laymen d'lurv pleasure. All these lands were,
in this parliarment, annexed, byone general law °,
to the crown, agnd the ling was empowered to
apply the rents of them to his own lufe. The
tithes'alone were reserv'e for the maintenance of
the rerfons who fetred the cure, and the prin-
cipal mnailfionl-otife, witl a few acres of land, by
way of glebe, allttfed for their residence. By
this great"acccffioo'of property, it is natural tn
conclude that the, king must have acquired a val.
increase of power, and the infitlence of tlc nobles
have 'fiffered a piop'6rtional diminution. The
very rerc-'ie of this seems, however, to Ihave een
ihe cafe. AlmcnoL all' grants of chtircth-ndLs,
prior' th tliis a&, xere tller.y' chnfirmnid; :ad
titles,' whiich ere' formerly reckoned precalioul.',
derived 'thiice the faanEtion 'of .i)rllarneltaly
anthority. Jariies was likewifle alttliorilcd d inii
a limnited time, to maike new alien tiotil ;! and:{illim
was tihe facility of his tempeL:,-eve. rceady ti yleld
to the folicitationn of his 'erva'its,; anli tW' gratify
their most extravagant demands, lthat nut only

o Parl. II Jac. VI. c. ?,.

u .n.

dlurilng the time limited, but throughout his
whole reignl, lie was continually employed in
bcilowi ig, and his parliame.t in ratifying,
grants of thlis kind to his nobles; ience little
.adi:antage accl ied to -the cro.wjn frqm that which
mnighlt lItve hbeni so, valuable an adrition t.o its re-
venues. 'lLe bishops, howvever, wereegreat sus-
ererls by the law. -But, t ,ths j.untuie ic;ithcr
be kcing n,or his rninituers. were solicitous 'about
thle ilterelft .of an order of .men, odious to the
people., and perflcuLed by tlhe clegy. Their
enemnies promoted the law ,with tlih utmol zeal.
The prolped of Ihanig ili their spoils induced
all parties to conft.nt to it:; and after a Rtep lo
fatal to. the wealth and povwer of the dignified
clergy, it was no difficult matter to introduce
that chauge in the government of !lhe church
which soon after took place P.

The change whicih the other flatute produced

in the civil conflitution was no less remarkable.
Under the feudal fyitem, every freeholder, or
imrmediate vaflal of the crown, had a right to
be present in parliament. These freeholders
were originally few in nunber, but po.flcnfed of
great and extenlive property. By degrees there
valt poflelions were divided by the proprietors
themselves, or parcelled out by the prince, or
i'plit by other accidents. The number of free.
holders became greater, and their 'condition
;more unequal; helidcs the ancient baroins, wlo
preserved theilr estates and their pouir niripair-
cd, there trofe another ordlr, wvhpfe rights were
;hc fiun, though their wealth 'an influence

p Spotfw. 365.

H3 weIe

were far inferior. .But,'t in rude ages, wheni the
trt.of government was extremely imlperfed&, when
parliaEmelts :weie seldom aflembled, and delibe-
T-atrdc ou mratters little interetiug to .a martial
lpebple,':'few tof the eIur barols took' the;r
fceats,,-iand the ':ho6lc parlianmentary juriildi',tion
'*iv cs exercised. by the greater barons, in con-

iintnca.wl ith the, ecclesiastical order. ame; Ir.
4fond, of- .imitating the forms of the Englilh
conftltttioln,' t which he hld been' long ac-

irftomcd, and delirous of providing a coun-

'terpoife.to the powrer of the great nobles, pro-
curedman al in the year one thousand four hun-
dred and twenty-1c-en, dispensing with the per-
obnal attendance: of.tle lei.fe barons, and cmln-
powering those in each county to chife two com-
missioners to reprefcnt them in parliament.
-.'ilis.ilaw,: like man, other regulations of that
.=-ife:prince, produced ;little efifec. All the
kings xafiala continued, as formerly, posit ll.d of
a right to be pre'ent i hi parlianentl ; bu't, uillefs
'in. onme xctiaordinalr conitn u rels, thle greatcr
.baroila alone attinded.' But, by means. of the
:ieformitaioni th<e conlti.tution had undergone a
.great::langc. ' Thc lri'cocratical power of the
..mi(lla;:haid been. much iMlirenfed, and the in-
:Jflhnce.::f ;tlc .eccldi flicaal order, which the
* rro:&n uiu.ally:cmprloyeod to check their usurp-

aTio's;: and. to. .balance ththi hority, had di-
anipiifhil in: proportion. :Miany of ithe abbics
:nAlplrric;s lhad been ereted 'into tempotal pecr-
,'*i;rac; 'aRnd ile, protef. n't 'bifiops, an.indigent

raod;f'incmn, .aintodiounsto the nation, were far
I'fin.l..ponffuingtlhle':twight, and credit which their
;:y;ideccclirs 'crived firom their own:exorbitalt

'5 vealt h!,

wealth, and the superstitious reverence of the
p:-ople; In this situation, the cinghad recourse
td the expedieit employed by James I. and: ob-
tained a law reviting the fattite of one thousand
four hundred and twenty..f even,; and from that
time the commons of Scotland have sent their
repi-efentatives to parliament. An aft, which
tended so visibly to abridie their authority, did
not pass without opposition from many of the
nobles. But as the king had a right to fumrmol
the lefelr barons to attend in perfoil, others were
apprehentive of feeingt the 1hotue iilled with a,
multitude of his dependents, and consented the
more williniglv to a law which laid.them .undev
the reIit-ii:ion of appearing only by their rcpre-
fentatives.

15SnS. The -ear one thousand five hundred

and eighty-eight began with an universal expet-
ation throughout al 'Europe, that it was to be
dillinguifihed by wonderful events and revolu-
tions. Several altrologers, according to the ac-
counts ofcontemporary historians, had predi&e&d
tils;; and the lituation of affairs in the two prin.
cipal kingdolms of Europe was such, that a fa,
griciols obl2erver, without any supernatural in-
telligence, might have haaarded the prediction,
and have foreseen the approach of some' grand
crilis. In Fiance, it was evident from the as-
tonilhing progress of the league, conduclcd by a
leader whose ambition was reltrained by no
scruples, and whose genius had hitherto fur-
mounted, all diificulties ; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of
Henry III. that either that monarch lmuft sub-
mit to abandon the .hrone of whill hle was un-

' worthy,

-c'lthy, or by some sudden and daring blow cut
off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the
beginning of the year, the duke of Guise drove
his master out of his capital city, and forced him
to conclude a peace, which left him only the
fnadow of royalty: and before the year expired
the hlniielf fell a viftim to the resentment and
fear of Henry, and to his own security. In
Spain the operations were such as promised
fometliing till more uncomnnon. During three
years Philip had employed all the power of his
European dominions, and exhaulled the treasures
of the Indies, in vait preparations for war. A
fleet, the greatest that had ever appeared in the
ocean, was ready to fail from Lifbln, and a
numerous land army was afl'embled to embark on
board of it. Its destination was still unknown,
though many circumstances made it probable
thitt the blow was aimed, in the firlt place,
agIainll England. Elizabeth had long given
feciret aid to tile revolted prqvin;'es in the Low
Ciotinriies, and now openly afitided them her
protc'tion. A numerous body other troops
vwas in thhir service; the earl of Leicelier com-
nllauded their 'anries; Ihe had great sway in the
ci;vilfg'ovcrnmcnt of the republic; and some of
it' m61t considerable towns were in her polfeffion.
lHe'r'flects lad insulted the coalts of Spain, in-
tercpteld the galleons fromn the Weft Indies,
an'd thireatecned the colonies there, Roused by
o lmany injllics, allured by views of ambition,
aud'anlimttd by a fuperfittious zeal for propa-
g.tir'g tlle Romi1h. religion, Plilip resolved not
,ohly'b b tinvadel, but to' conqluer England, to
wlich his dCefcCtt frdm the hvaufe of Lancaster,

and

and the donation ofspopc Sixtus V. gave hipn irl
his own opinion a double title, ..

Elizabcth law the danger. approach,, and 'pe-

pared to encounter it. The ieafiires for the de-
fience of her kingdom were concerted and carlied,
on w-it the wisdom and vigour which ditlinguifl.-'
ed her reign. Her chief care was to secure te
friendhilp of the king of Scots. She hid treated
th= qucen his mother with a rigour unknown
among princes; flie had often used himfelfharfh-
ly, and with contempt, and though he hac:
hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of
these injuries, lhe did not believe it to be al-
togethetr extinguiihed, and was afraid that, in her
present situation, it might burst out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprise,
courted James with the utmost assiduity. He
excited him to reverge his mother's wrong; he
flattered him with the hopes of sharing his con-
quefls; and offered him in marriake his daughter
the infanta Isabella. At tle fame time, Scot-
land fwiarnmd with prieits, his emiflaries, who
seduced fore of the nobles to popcry, and cor-
rupted others with bribes and prortifes. Huntly,
Errol, Criawford, wee' the heads of a fatioli
which openly efpoufled the interest of SpainL.'Iort.
Maxwe\vll, atriving fromn that court, began to as:
felmllc his follownves, and to take arms, that le,
might be rendy to join the Spaniards. 'In order
to counterbalance all theft, Elizabeth made 'the.
warmnelt profelionas of fiieindnlip to, the king;
and Aflfb, iher ambaflhador, entettaiilcld him with
magnificent Ilopes and ploinifes. Ie, allured himn,
tllai. his right of filc:cflion to the crown fiounld
bc jlblicly acknowvledged in England; that he

ihould

should be created a duke in that kingdom; that
hec should be admitted to some fin:re in the gc-
vernment; and receive a considerable pension an-
nually. James, it is probabil, was too well ac-
quainted with Elizabeth's -n'ts, to rely ent'rely
on these proniies But hce undcrfwood his own
initeirc. in the present junc&ure, and pursued it
with nuch lteadintfs. He rcje&ced an alliance
with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit
into his prcfence an ambassador from the pope.
He seized colonel Semple, an agent of the
prince of Parma. lie drove many of the semi-
nary priests out of the kingdom. He marched
suddenly to Dumfries, disperscd Maxwell's fol-
lowers, and took him prisoner. In a convention
of the nobles, he declared his resolution to ad-
here inviolably to the league with England ; and,
without listening to the suggestions of revenge,
determined to ant in concert with Elizabeth,
aga'nft the common enemy of the protestant
faith. He put the kingdom in a polture of de-
fence, and levied troops to obilhrut the landing
of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army
to Elizabeth's afliftance, and told her ambaf-
fador, that he expeted no other favour from
the king of Spain, but that which Polyphemus
had promised to Ulysses, that when he had de-
voured all his companions, he would make him
his lat morrfl'q.

The zeal of the people, on this occasion, was

not inferior to that of the king; and the extra-
ordinary danger, with which they were thrcat-
ced, fIu'ggelted to them an extraordinary exp.c

' C9md. 544. Johnlt. 139. Spotfw. 360.

dienm

dient for their security. A bond was framed
for the maintenance of true religion, as well as
the defence of the king's person and govern-
ment, in opposition to all enemies, foreign and
domeltic. This contained a confelTion of thji
proteltant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of popery, and the moit foimn prorniefs,
;n the name, and through the strength of God,
of adhering to each other in flupporting the
former, and contending againit the latter, to the
utmost of their power r. The king, the nubles,
the clergy, and the people, subscribcd wvith equal
alacrity. Strange or uncommon as such a com-
bination may now appear, many circi;:'litaincc';
contributed at that time to recommend it, and
to render the idea familiar to the Scots. When
ronfed by any extraordinary event, or alarmed.
by any public danger, the people of Israel were
accustomed to bind themfelvcs, by a solemn co-
venant, to adhere to that religion which the
Almighty had eftablilhed among them; this the
Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it
became them to imitate. In tbat age, no con-
fiderable enterprise was undertalenl in Scotland,
without a bond of mutual defence, whicdl all
concerned reckoned neccffary for their security.
The form of this religious confederacy is plainly
borrowed from thofc political ones, of which so
many inltances have occurred; the articles, itipi.
lations, and peculiar mo'des of exprefion, arc
':xatly the faime in both. Alniolt all the con,
!iderable popill p-ilces were hclle ,joied in, a
league for extirpating the reformed religion, and

r D.ulop's Collut. of Confcfl. vol, ii. icS.

nothing

nothing could be more natural, or seemed mor:
efficacious, than to enter into a counter-afbocia.
tion, in ordet to oppose the progrefs;,of.tidtt
formidable conspiracy. To thefc cauc's did the
covenant, which is -becbme so famous irrhifltory,
owe its origin. It was renewed at different
times during the reign.of James. It was re-
vived with great fplcmnnity, though with .cnifi-
derable alterations, in the yreair ofe thousand fix
hundred and thirty-eight. I:t vwas adopted. by
the Englishs ii the year onc tlhoufntd si; hunIdred
and fortytlthre,, and. enforced .by the ¢ivil.and
ecclefiaffical authority of hoth, kingdomns;. .The
political purposes to which it was then maade
ftbfervient, and the violent and unc6nftitutioni;!
measures which it was then employed to promote
it is not- our province to explain. , But it the
junsture in which itw as first intirodiced,,wve Ina,
pronounce it to have been a prudent and lidudabkl
device sot the defence of the religion andliber-
ties of the nation; rioi were the terms in wl icl
it was 'conceived, other than might hiare tec:
expecced from men alasrmed with: the impendinl*
danger of popeir, 'ald threatened, xwiith an iny;-
sion b) the mofl bigt.ed ain'd mol' powtirful prilU
in Europe.

Philip's eagernefs;to eonquer Eingfild ,did no

infpir fiim e fher;with the vigour oi'difpai;h n:

icef'ary to ehfiure the iuceefs of so iighty a.n c'l-

tet-prife. I4Is hiece, 'wh'ii. oug.ht, ti,,have, iled 1

;

'p'ii, 'ditt 'not' enitr the. tfirglifh.c hannIel till
'th' iniiddte 6of: Jilllyr;'t It'hov'i n'ed,ma.,d 4aysoll
thile cbif, idi cieticlior ó/beg1 (joila l tinc

" ~* '!~

'
. pnrince

prince of Parina, who was blocked up mi the'
ports of Flauders by a Dutch fquadrol. Conti-
nual disasters pursued the Spaniards, during that
time; fitcceflive Rorms and batles, which are
well known, conspired with :thiir own ill. con-
duct to disappoint their entetprife. And, .by
the blelfing of Providence, which watched with
rematkable care over the protestant religion and
the liberties of Britain. the Englifli valol.- scat-
tered and destroyed the Armado,,on whiclh Phiiip
had arrogantly bestowed the name of Invincible.
After being driven out of the E: glil e fes, their
hlattered ships were forced to steer tieir.coijrfe
toward Spain, round Scotland apd Irdand.
Many of them suffered fhiipwrcck. on .these
dangerous and unknown coafls, Though James
kept his subje&t under arms, to watch the mo-
tions of the Spaniards, and to prevent tlhir
landing in an hostile manner, lie received with
great humanity seven hundred who were forced
ashore by a tempest, and after fapplying them
with necelfarits, permitted them to return into
their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth

sent an am-bassador to congratulate with .,mnes,
a:id to compliment him on0 the firlnnefs and g.
nerofity he had discovercd dmuing a cbnjtUduitle
so dangerous. But none of Allily'a. promises
were any lotger remembered; .that niniifstr was
even aeoifed of having exceeded htis powlves, bY
his too libetal offers; and confciuus of hiJ own
.falfchobd, ot alhauted of being difoyqi4ed byh; isi
court, lie witldrev fecrctly out of Scot.iand,1.

t Johnd. 134, Cam;. 54 Mu din, 635. 78g.
YOL, I.. 11 . 589.]

r58:9. Philip, convinced by fatal experience

vs his own rafinefs in attempting the conqueii
,f .'gland. by a naval armament, equipped at
so great a distance, and fubjeted in all its ope-
rations, to the delays, and dangers, and nncer-
tnintier, riling from seas and winds, resolved to
make lis at.tack in another form, and to adopt
th!e plan' whilC the princes of Lorrain had long
r.cditated, of invading England through Scot-
land. A bodv of his troops, he imagined, might
be ealilv xwifted over from the Low Countries to
that kingdom, and if they could once obtain
footing, or procure afiftance there, the frontier
of Engli nd was open and defenceless, and the
northern col:.ties full of Roman catholics, w-Lo
wo!ld receive them with open arms. Meanwhile,
a deecent might be threatened on the southern
ionn't,H' which woulld divide the English army, dif.
tract their councils, and throw the whole king-
(iom into terrible convullfons. In order to pre-
pare the vway for the execution of this design, lhe
reinittcd a confidtrable fum of money. to 1luc%,
a femrinary priest in acotland, and employed hir;,
together witli Hay, Crcigliton, and Tyrie,
Scottish Jefiits, to gain over as many persons of
dillinstion as poflible to his interelt. Zeal for
popery, and the artful iniiiiations of these
*eni;laries, ,induced fetveial noblemen to favour a
ineafure whidch ended so

i m:lifeitly to thle 3de-

itru'tion of their country. IHuntly, though the
kingllad lately given Iim in marriag'e the daughter
of his favourite the duke of Lennox, continued
warmly attichted to the Roinifh church. Craw-
ford and Errol were animated with the zeal of
new converts. They all engaged in a correspond-

CIeclC.

ence with the prince of Parma, and, in their
letters to him, offered their service to the king
of Spain, and .undertook, with the aid of fix
thousand men, to render him master of Scotland,
and to bring so many of their vassals into the.
field,..that he should be able to enter England
with a numerous army. IFrancis Ste;wart, grand-
son of Jamea V. ", whom the kin.; had created
earl of Bothwell, though influenccd by no motive
of religion, for he Jitll adhered to the proteit;lnt
iitit,. was. prompted merely by caprie, and the
reitielHkefs of his nature, to join in this treason-
aible correfpon!lence.

All these letters were intercepted in England.

;..izahbth, alarmed at the danger which threat-,
enrid her own kingdom, fentthliem immediately
to the king [Feb. 17j, and, reproaching hilm
,with his former lenity towards tIhe popifl party,
called upon him to check this formidable con,
fpiracy by a proper severity. But James, though
tirmly attached to the protellant religion, though
profoundly versed in the theological controversies
between the reformers and the church of Romne;
though he had employed hirnlelf, at that earl-
period of life, .in writing a commentary onl the
Rcvelations, in which h: laboured to prove the
rppe to be antichrilt, had nc 'ertlhelefs adopted
already thofl: maxims concer;inlg the treatilnnlt
of the Roman catholics, to. which :he adhllred
through the reft of his life. The Roman altho-
lic; were at that time a powerful andativ.:e. party
in England; they were far;fi'om being aln ii.'

" He wai thl lin of Job' I'rior of Coldirlglain, ne of
ja,'Ic.'s natural c.ldilcu.

i I , zconlfider,,

.considerable fa&ion in his owni kingdom: The
pope and 'king of Spain were ready to take part
in' all their .niaehinations, and to.fecond, every
effort of -their 'bigotry. Thc opposition of'fuch
a body to -his fucceflion to the c-own.of England,
added to the averseness of the Eng-lish from the
government of.Rrangers, might create him many
difficulties. In order to avoid these, he tlought
it necessary to sooth rather than to irritate the
Roman catholics, and to reconcile them to his
fucceflion, by the hopes of gentler treatment, and
some mitigation of the rigour of those laws,
which were now in force against them. This
attempt to gain one party by promises of in-
dulgence and ats of clemeicy, while he ad-
hered with all the obstinacy of a disputant to the
do&rines .and tenets of the other, has given an
air of mystery, and even of contradi&ion, to this
.part of the king's characer. The papilts, with
the credulity of a fe& struggling to obtain
power, belieeed his heart to be wholly theirs;
and the protestants, with the jealousy inseparable
from thole who are.already in pofeflion of power,
viewed every at of lenity as a mark of indiffer-
ence, or a tymptom of apoltacy. In .order to
please both, lames often aimed at an excessive
tetinement, niugle.d with djfirimulation, in which
he i1magined'the pcrfteion of goveroment and of
kinsrcraAt to confilt.

ilis behaviouw on this occasion was agreeable

to these general maxims . Notwithstanding the
folicitationsa of tlhe queen of England, enforccd
by tlie . ealous remonitrances of his own clergy.
' ihort imprifominent was the only ptunifhmeot 1h
ntf!liaed upon Iu'ntly and his aflfciates. Bnt

he foonh)iad~reafon to repei .a&~{ qs denci
s* inQnisest. wjth: the digiity of goyernment.
The, sint use which the coiifpjir-tors inikde of their
liberty was,tp ailtirble theii.foll(swers,i guid, -uwder
pretence of removing, chauclellak Maitlapdl, atU
~ih-initer, bult wvnimlydcvoted to~the.Elgliig)
iilittj-c fkroni-tixe kin -910uucsu lsilsaiid. prpiFciipe,
they attempted to feue Jagms himfelf.:&r T.his
attempt bcing defeated,, pi tly by MaitIavd's
vigilance, and 1partly by thei 9w1u il-'-'pdu&,
they were-foireeJ, to retire, tg& the 2North,: jere
zhey opcy.y erae.I :th J and4oftrpbei~on.
But as the kiing's governient wa3 nr4geteraly
InpeP01arj ori hir mnnisei: O djR,'t~ejpown
valals joinied them flgowly, -and disouvrted ea1
in the catife. The king3 in1 ~e ppsp,i.advaic- n

ith rne wvith furch foi es he tould fiddeuly

levy, they duin-t not rLiy sP much .on~the: sijreihy
of the troops, ri'bich, thouirgh fnpeijonii tinmkerr
sol~lowedi thtem w~ith~ r1it~lancse; astD hazar~·a
batt1t~ ; b~t> suffering tberm.to - 4ifpcrf9, thc!y
.sirrendered to the kingi ;aud tin-ew- -thcfcilv es
Jon hIs mnercy, H-untly, rrol, r, ~ia~wfQl:diac
I3t~hwcl, wers ai1 hi-ougiht cto a polk~lrjatl.l
Re~peated ii~rs of t~reason were easdypisoved ag~.nst

[~cl, I'he hilng, how~-vecr, did ~o~ai.qny

.kntence to be~pruiollurccj * 4In(1, aftcr,~keqpijig
themn ai few' mon(~ths, inl (0ihiin~l ents, 'hO. topk~
JIng"SA at the approatis ok: hiji iaitr~'~g~i,:o rctp
tjieni .a it liberty Z*: ·: " I ·.. ·:: ,!·

b.a tJt ms but. sicrinl defmentla-it.ofpe r hc any
eipate n)%nareila of otactnd ilp ti .pdireginti i
them, '£he how, (;rdidvnotrpllmit, 4n

as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the two
kingdidms would have expired with him; as the
call of Arrau, the prcfumptive heir to the
throne, was lunatic; the king's marriage was,
on all these accounts, an event which the nation
wvifnid for with the utmost ardonr. le himself
was no less deiirous of accomplishing it; and had
madc overtures for that purpose to the eldelt
daughter of Frederick II. king of Denmark.
But Elizabeth, jealous of every thing that would
render the acccflion of the house of Stewart more
acceptable to the Englifli, endeavoured to per,
plex James, in the fame manner she had done
Mary ; and-employed as many artifices to defeat
or to retard his marriage. His minillers, gained
by bribes and promises, seconded her intention;
and though several different ambassadors were
lent from Scotland to Denmark, they produced
powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so
extravagant, that Frederick could not believe
the king to be in earnest; and fufpeaing that
there was some design to deceive or amuse him,
gave his daughter in marriage to the duke of
Brunswick. Not discouraged by this difhppoint-
mcnt, which he imputed entirely to the conduct
of his own ministers, Jamxea made aldrefles to
the princess Anne, Frcderick's fccond daughter.
Though Elizabeth endeavoured to divert him
from this by recommending Catherine the king of
Navarre's lifter, as a more advantageous match;
though Ihe prevailed on the privy council of
Scotland to declare against. the alliance with Den«
mark, lie perfited in his choice ; and defpairin
,of overcoming the obttinacy of his owIn mIl-
ti rs ia any otner manner, he fccrctly entouraged

the

the citizens of Edinburgh to take arms. They
threatened to tear inpieces the chancellor, whom
they accused as tile person wlhofe artifices had
hitherto disappointed the wifiles of the king
nid the expectations of his people. In confe-
quence of this, the earl marifchal was sent into
Denmark at the head of a splendid embaf'-.
Ile received ample powers and infli uOtions, drawn
with the king's own hand. The marriage articles
were quickly agreed upon, and the young queen
ftt fail towards Scotland. Jnnmcs made great
preparations for her reception, and waitcj her
landing with all the impatience of a lover ; when
the unwelcome account arrived. lhat a violent
tecnpeft had arisen, which drove back her Hfect to
Norway, in a condition lo fllattered, that there
was little hope of its putting again to sea before
the spring. This unexpectd dilfppointment lie
felt with the utmointt feniibilitv. Je instantly
fitted out fonie ships, a:nd, witllout coml i;nincat-
ing his intention to any of his council, fiiled(in
person, attended by the chancellor, several noble-
men, and a train of three hlundred pcrfons,'in
quclt of his bride. He arrived safely in a fIiall
harbour near Upflo [O&. 22], where the queen
tlen resided. There the mar iage was f0Iemnized
[Nov. 24] ; and as it would lhave been ralh to
trull. tolife boillcroius seas in the wilter feaifon,
James accepted the invitation of tlie court of
D)enmark, and rcp'iing to Copeinhigcl, palihd
several months there, amiinit continual fe;ltinar
and amusements, in which both the queen and
hinfclf had great delight Y.

Y Mclvil, 352. $Sotfw. 377. Muldin,'637.

No

No event in the king's life appears to be a

vider deviation from his general character, thaw
this sudden sally. His son Charles I. was capable
of that excessive admiration of the other sex,
which arises from great sensibility of heart,
heiigltened by elegance of taste ; and the ro-
mantic air of his journey tp Spain suited such
a dilfpoftion. But James was not ftifceptible of
any refined gallantry, and always expressed that
contempt for the female chara&er which a pe-
dantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is
apt to infpiie. He was exasperated, however,
and rendered impatient by the many obstacle,
which had been laid in his way. He wasanxious
to fcclne the political advantages which lie ex-
peted from marriage ; and fearing that a delay
might afford Elizabeth and his own ministers an
opportunity of thwarting him by new intrigues,
he suddenly took the resolution of preventing
them, by a voyage from which he expe&ted to
return in a few wvecks. The nation seemed tw
applaud his conduEt, and to be pleased with this
a.ppearance of anorous ardour in a young prince.
Notwithitanding his absence so long beyond the
tim he eexpec'ed, the nobles, the clergy, and the
peoplc. vied with one another in loyalty and
pbedi nce ; and no period of the king's reign
i as I more remarkable for tranquillity, or more
free from any eruption of those factions which so
eften. dillurbed the kingdol -

EN D OF T»E l S vFE |

BRD. l'_AN__
