THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY and of KING JAMES VI,

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIx containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

rRINCIPAL OF THI VNIVERSITI' OF IDINBURGHI, AND

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

A N E W E D I T I O N.
WITI EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

VOL. I.

BASIL:
Printed and fold by J. J. T U R N SE g,

M D CCXCI.

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

PREFACE

TO THE

FIRST EDITION.

I Delivcr this book to the world with all the
diffidence and anxiety natural to an Author on
publifliing his first performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order
to render it worthy of the public approbation, it
is, perhaps, prudent to conceal, until it be known
whether that approbation lhall ever be bellowed
upon it.

But as I have departed, in many inflanccs,

from former hiltorians, as I have placed facd in
;t different light, and have drawn characers with
new colors, I ought to account for this conduc
to my readerq; and to produce the evidence, on
which, at the distance of two centuries, I pre-
fiuine to contradict the testimony of less remote,
or even of contemporary historians.

The transactions iln Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againfi cach
othlr with the flhrccfl po!itical hatred, ci:lbt;cicd

VOL. I. a

by religious zeai. Each of these produced hitor-
an, of confideroble merit, who adopted all their
fenti.nnrt. a d':lTed all their actijs. Truth
vas et -he ffic obl,?t of these aior: Blinded
by pr'jndic-,, rdl bi:ated bv the part which they
themfelvce had ;ct-(d in the scenes they describe,
they wi(o': an apolony for a faction, rather than
the hifors f thcir country. Succeeding liflorian5
have followed these guides almoll implicitly, and
have repeated their errors and mifreprefeniations
But as the fame paflions which inflamed partie!
in that age have descended to their poflerity; a!
almost every event in Mlary' reign hIs becnm(
the obiec of doubt or of dispute; the eager fpirii
of controversy soon difcovcred, that without form
evidence more authentic and more impartial that
that of such Hiltorins , none of the points it
que(tion could be decided with certainty. Record
have therefore been farclied, original p;lpers havi
been produced, and public archives, as well a
the repoli:nrie of private men. have been ranfarke(
by the zeal and curion'y of writcr of (ifferen
pirtie;. The attention of Cecil to colled whateve
rela:ed to that perio , in whicli he aded si
confp;cinnu; a pir, ha.th prrvidcd fc! an immenf
store or ,rl 7r i piper; for ii'uir.!rtr.g this par
of r't 1' !g,:li a'.. Sottf ft.

G rv at are alinf

fu:fi te. t

to lri-fv thli. u' 'V 'v. ii)y of ;:: Anti

qu.i'la. Sir RobSrt Ct.i . w
h i'e !brnry i; no

the property of the Public) made great and valua.
ble additions to Cecil's collecion; and from this
mry lzine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala,
Anl:!cTon, Keith, Havnes, Sorbes, have drawn
rrnol of the papers which they have printed. No
J11itory of Scotland. that merits any degree of

t io'1, h pp(arerd since there collccdions were

lbiilinflh!. By confilting them, 1 have been
cu ile(d, in many irRfinces, to correc the inaccu-
racie of former Hliftorians to avoid their miflakes,
and to detect their mifieprefentations.

But many important papers have escaped the

notice o those induftrous Collectors, and after all
they have produced to light, much fill remained
in (d.rknef, unobserved or unpublilied. It was
my duty to search for thefc, and I found this
unpleasant task attended with considerable utility.

The library of the Faculty of Advocates at

Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland,
but copie5 of others no less curious, which have
1)cen prefcrved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
rc:tant in the Public Offices in England. Of all
thlef the Crltnri; of that library were pleased to
aiiow me the perusal.
Though the riti;n Mufumr be not yet open

to the Public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging difpofl.
ticn ii well known, procured me access to that
noble collcdion, which i worthy the magnificence
of a grcla and policled nation.

TI.::t valt and cm .,'; collection of papers relat-

i: tc ti: 1i.1 of l'!:z.:heth, which V'as made
bv I.'. Olu! o , and of which he publiOtd only
t\o Vo .i.n;c-, h.vi'r h.ccn purchaf:-d since his

c..(th, r,, t'l Lord \ '.,:ount Koyflon , his Lord.
flip . suo good as to allow inc the use of
fc urt.cn i o.unli c. in quarto, containing that part
cf them which is conneced with my subject.

Sir .l:..::.nder Dick communicated to me a very

xall'ab!' coilection of or;ginal papcrs, in two large
voliTmes. 'I

I 'y relate chiefly to the reign of James.

51 'v c.f t;h n are marked with Archbiflp Spots

v, .' h.':: i: and it appears from fevcral pafTagcs
i: 1 i.l'ory, that he had perused them with
C rc..t :.,itci lol;

'Tir. Caiderwood , an eminent Preflnyterian

Clcci;' --'" of the lafrt century, compiled a History
of S.(.:'.:.d fioin the beginning of the reign of
J.ai r. \. to t!c (!..th of James VI. in fix large
\olI:ncs: whlcriL. -

i,. has inserted many papers of

co::.fcuc::-c . vhi h are no where elfc to be
found. shi, ii Itory has not been publiifcd, bt!

a copy of it, which fiill remains in manuscript in
the poffeflion of the church of Scotland, was put
into my hands by my worthy friend the Reverend
Doctor George Wifhart, principal Clerk of the
church.

Sir David Dalrymple not only communicated to

me the papers which he has collected relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy; but, by explaining to me
his sentiments with regard to that problematical
palTage in the Scottifl hiflory, has enabled me to
place that tranfalion in a light which dispels much
of the darkness and confusion in which it has been
hitherto involved.

AMr. Goodall, though lhe knew my sentiments

with regard to the conduct and charactcr of Q(Ucn
Milary to be cxtremely different from his own,
connm nicated to nc a volume of mannurcripts in
1i. polfellion, which contains a grct inumbc' ns
x.luable papcls copied from the or inini'l i:n ti
Cuttonian Library and al'pcr Ollice, by tle late
!'cercnrl IlMr. Crawford , Regius Profcffor of
( himrch liftory in the univcrfity of Edinburgh.
1 I:kciwife received from him the original Regiltcr
.,i lettcrs kept by the Regent Lenox during his
.i(' iniliration.

1 have consulted a!l thr.f papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any use towards illufrat.
ing that period of which I write the history.
With what success I have employed them to con.
firm what was already known, to acertain what
was dubious, or to determine what was con.
troverted, the Public muff judge.

I might eafly have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in
size to the most bulky collecion of my predecef.
fors. But I have satisfied myself with publishing a
few of the moll curious among them, to which
I found it neceTfary to appeal as vouchers for my
own veracity. None of these, as far as I can
recolled, ever appeared in any former collection

I have added a Critical Dissertation concerning tht

murder of King Henry, and the genuineness of the
Queens letters to Bothwtl. The fads and obferva.
tions which relate to Mary's letters, I owe to
my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks
to the Signet, who hath examined this point with
his usual acuteness and industry.

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

PREFACE

TO THE

ELEVENTH EDITION.

IT is now twenty- eight years fiace I published
the Hifory of Scotland. During that time I
have been favored by my friends with several
remarks upon it; and various ftridures have been
made by persons; who entertained sentiments
different from mine, with refpef to the tranf.
actions in the reign of Queen Mary. From.
whatever quarter information came, in whatever
mode it has been communicated, I have confi.
dered it calmly and with attention. Wherever
I perceived that I had erred, either in relating
events, or in delineating characers, I have,
without hesitation, correted those errors. Where,
ever I am satisfied that my original ideas were
just and wellfounded, I adhere to them; and
refting upon their conformity to evidence already
produced, I enter into no discussion or contro.
verfy in order to support them. Wherever the

opportunity of consulting original papers eithet
in print or in manuscript, to which I had not
formerly access, has enabled me to throw new
light upon any part of the History, I have made
alterations and additions, which, I flatter myfelfj
wfll be found to be of some importance,

COLLEGE OF EDINBURGH,

MARCH Sth, 1787.

.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
HIST.O R Y

0 1
or
S C OT L AN D.

BOOK I
Containing a Reiew of the SCOTTISH Hijtory

pretiouJ to the death of JAMa V.

THE first ages of the Scottish history are dark' BO O K
nd fabulous. Nations, as well as men, arrive I.
t maturity by degrees, and the events, which The otgi,

! . of Pation

happened during their infancy or early youth, rabblous
annot be recolleded, and deserve not to be- md bDum'
remembered. The gross ignorance which anciently
overed all the North of Europe, the continual
igrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent and
leftrutive revolutions which these occasioned,
ender it impossible to give any authentic account
f the origin of the different kingdoms now es
ablilhed there. Every thing beyond that flhors
)eriod to which well attested annals reach, is
)bfcure; an immense space is left for invention

occupy; each nation , with a vanity infe.'
arable from human nature, bath filled that

VOL. L B

o o K void with events calculated to display its own an
I. tquity and luRre. fiflory, which ought tc

record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets oui
with retailing fitions and absurdities.

ti~..of The Scots carry their pretensions to antiquit)
the sC. as high as any of their neighbours. Relying up

on uncertain legends, and the traditions of thei
bards, ill sore uncertain, they reckon up;
series of kings several ages before the birth o
Christ; and give a particular detail f the oc
currences which happened in their reigns. Bui
with regard to tbe Scots, as well as the othel
northern nations, we receive the earliest account!
on which we can depend, not from their own, bui
D. . from the Roman authors. When the Romans un

der Agricola, first carried their arms into the north
er parts of Britain, they found it possessed by the
Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people; and
having repulsed, rather than conquered them.
they ereeted a trong wall between the firths ol
Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif
ficulty of defending such a distant frontier, con
traded the limits of the Roman province in Bri
tain, by building a second wall, which ran be
tween Newcastle and Carlisle The ambition ol
succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover what
Adrian had abandoned; and the country between
the two walls was alternately under the dominion
of the Romans, and that of the Caledonians. About
thebeginning of the fifth century, the inroads ofthe
Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans,

in order to defend the centre of their empire, to o o .
recal those legions which guarded the frontier-
provinces; and at that time they quitted all their
conquests in Britain.

Their long residence in the island had polished, A. . 421.

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri.
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the
Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impoflible long to
preserve the memory of pas events.

North-Britain was, by their retreat, left un.

der the dominion of the Scots and Pits. The
former, who are not mentioned by any Roman au-
thor before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celte or Gauls: Their
affinity to whom appears from their language,
their manners, and religious rites; circumfRances
more decisive, with regard to the origin of na.
tions, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales
of ill informed and credulous Annalists. The
Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending thenm
selves by degrees, landed at laR on the coast op.
pofite to that ifand, and fixed their habitations
there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several
ages, carried on between them and the Pids. At
length, Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth King of the
Scots (according to their own fabulous authors) . . sis.
obtained a complete vidory over the Pids, and
united under one monarchy, all the country, from
the wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean The
kingdom, henceforward, became known by its

B2

* o-o x present name, which it derived from a people who

I. at first fettled there as RIrangers, and remained

long obscure and inconsiderable.

iletr of From this period the history of Scotland would
Scodaud
,, ..rd merit some attention, were it accompanied with
oke. any certainty. But as our remote antiquities are

involved in the fame darknes with those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown
almoR an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfadions. This was occasioned by the mali.
cious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch
called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that the kingdom was held as a fief ol
the crown of England, and fubjeded to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to eftab.
lihl his claim, he seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poffeflion by force, or fraud, of many historical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity
or freedom of the kingdom, he carried some ol
them into England, and commanded the reft to be
burned'. An universal oblivion of pals tranf.
adions might have been the effed of this fatal
event, but some imperfet Chronicles had escaped
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important fads relating to Scotland; and the
traditions concerning recent occurrences were frelb
and worthy of credit. These broken fragments
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, colleced with a pious industry, and from

.Inn s, Eflay 552.

them gleaned materials which he formed into B op9
a regular hiltory. His work was received by his L
countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied
the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom.
It was copie.1 in many monasteries, and the thread
of the narrative was continued by different monks,
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, John Major and Hetor
Bocthius published their histories of Scotland, the
former a fuccind and dry writer, the latter a co-
pious and florid one, and both equally credulous.
Not many years after, Buchanan undertook the
fame work; and if his accuracy and impartiality
had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance of
his taste, and to the purity and vigor of his Ryle,
his history might be placed on a level with the
moR admired compositions of the ancients. But;
inflead of rejecting the improbable tales of Chro-
nicle.writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn
them; and hath clothed, with all the beauties and
graces of fiction, those legends, which formerly
had only its wildness aid extravagance.

The history of Scotland may properly be divided Fourre.

into four periods. The first reaches from the ori- emark be
gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. so5qtihb
The second from Kenneth's conquest of-,the, Pids, hion".l
to the death of Alexander II. The third extends
to the death of James V. The last, from thnme to
the accefion of James VI. to the crown of ngland.

The firft.period is the region of pure fable aid
conjeture, and ought tO he totally negleted:, or

B3

0 oO t present name, which it derived from a people whb

. at first fettled there as strangers, and remained

long obscure and inconfidcrable.

H'~r f From this period the history of Scotland would
,riij merit some attention, were it accompanied with
hwcwm. any certainty. But as our remote antiquities are

involved in the fame darkness with those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown
amos an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfadions. This was occasioned by the mali.
cious policy of Edward L of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch
called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that the kingdom was held as a fief of
the crown of England, and fubjeded to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to elab.
lifi his claim, be seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poffeflion by force, or fraud, of many historical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity
or freedom of the kingdom, he carried some of
them into England, and commanded te relf to be
burned'. An universal oblivion of past tranl
adions might have been the effedt of this fatal
event, but some imperfect Chronicles had escaped
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important fads relating to Scotland; and the
traditions concerning recent occurrences were fresh
and worthy of credit. There broken fragments
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
entury, colleded with a pious industry, andfrom

Innes, 'Efay s2.

hem gleaned materials which he foimed into Bog i
regular history. His work was received by his L
ountrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
ould be had to more ancient records, it supplied
e place of the authentic annals of the kingdom.
t was copied in many monasteries, and the thread
f the narrative was continued by different monks,
rough the subsequent reigns. In the beginning
fthe sixteenth century, John Major and Hedor
oethius publilhed their histories of Scotland, the
rmer a fuccinC and dry writer, the latter a co.
ious and florid one, and both equally credulous.
ot many years after, Buchanan undertook the
me work; and if his accuracy and impartiality
ad been, in any degree, equal to the elegance of
is taRe, and to the purity and vigor of his styles
is history might be placed on a level with the
oR admired compositions of the ancients. But,
nftead bs rejecing the improbable tales of Chr-
icle-writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn
hem; and hath clothed, with all the beauties and
traces of fiction, those legends, which formerly
bad only its wildness ad extravagance.

The history of Scotland may properly be divided youre.
nto four periods. The first reaches fro* the ori. mr abthe
in of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. sciotib,
rhe second from Kenneth's conqueR of-,thei Pidt, uao-
o the death of Alexander II. The third extends

the death of James V. The las, from thn~ to
e accelflon of James VI. to the crown of Fngland.
The firftperiod is the region of pure fable add
OjeCture, and ought't6 be totally negeied:,;or

B3

Boo0 abandoned to the industry and credulity of an

s. tiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second

period, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually
increasing; and the events which then happened
may be ightly touched, but merit no particular
or laborious inquiry. In the third period, the his
tory of Scotland, chiefly by means of records
preserved in England, becomes more authentic:
not only are events related, but their causes and
dse&s explained; the cbaraacers of the aors are
dilplayed; the manners of the age described;- the
revolutions in the constitution pointed out; and
here every Scotsman lhould begin not to read only,
but to fiudy the history of his country. During
the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so
mingled with those of other nations, -its situation
in the political state of Europe was so important,
its influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was so vifibte, that its history becomes
an objet of attention to foreigners; and without
some knowledge of the various and extraordinary
revoiutions which happened there, they cannot
form a just notion with refpea either to the molt
iH rious events, or to the charaders of the nmof
diftioguilbed personages in the sixteenth century.

a ,mo The following bihtoy is confined to the la of
-f t* imrd these periods: To give a view of the political slate

of the kingdom dring that which immediately
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book
The i~rfed knowledge which firangers have of
the aais of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots-
mo tkhemelves have imbibed with regard to td

various revblutions in the government of their coini- B O O
try, render such an introduction equhlly 'ieeffary x.
to both.

The period from the death of Alexander III;
to the death of James V. contains upwards of to
centuries and a half, from the year ne itrbd'ratd
two hundred and eighty-fix, t tie ear oiii
thousand five hundred and forty-two. ' ."

It opens with the fam6us cottrovcrd co hrt!' Rit ofrtb

ing the independence of Scotland. 'Befbr:'tls cem'"O '
union of the two kingdoms, this as a qulelfion'obf tfh inde
much importance. If the one crowrt had bced pendenceof
confidered not as imperial and indepen dent " sbui t'o
as feudatory to the other, a tre;ty ds uhi6to dr
not have been concluded on equal trms,' aidfv'eiy
advantage which the dependent kingdom piteurd,'
must have been deemed the concefion of a Sovreeign
to his valfal. Accordingly,tabout 'the beginiti'
the present century, and' hile'a teaty bf'nidrinle:
tween the two kingdoms was? negociating, this'cott
troverfy was agitated with allthieteat which natirona
animofities naturally inspire. What was then a subjec
of serious concern, the union of'the two kingdoisahad
rendered a matter of mere cuiiofty . But though the
objeds which at that time^waimedald interested both
nations, exist no longer, tqucfioi which-appeated
so momentous to our anceftbrs ,' iahhttbe altpgetct.
indifferent or uinftru'tive to ius' '
' Some of the northern countis oi Engiaand were
early in the hands of the Scqti, Kings, who, 'at
far back as the feudal customs can be traced-, ditd
these poffefions fthe Kings of England, and did

B4

' oO homage to them on that account. This homage,

due only for the territories which they.held in
England, was in no wife derogatory from tht
royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal
ideas than that the fame person Ihould be both a
Lord and a Vassal, independent in one capacity,,
and dependent in another '. The Crown .9
England was, without doubt, imperial and ind.-
pe~t, though the Princes who wore it were,
far many ages, the vaflals of the Kings of France;
ad, in consequence of, their poCffefibns in ta
kigdomi, bound to perform all the services which
a,udal Sovereign has a title to exa& The faoae
.rs'iu, condition of the Monarchs of Scotland&
free And independent as Kings of their own couni
try., but, as polriffing Englimf territories, vassal
to te King of England .The Englilh Monarchs,
sisid. with their; legal and uncontroverted
risgh, werc, during a long period, neither ca.
paile,. nor bad aoy. toughts of usurping motre
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being

' A vry ingula proof ofthis occurs in the French hifobq

Arpnfoddtbhevicomte of the cityofBorges to Philip I. wbo
da-hoie itothe coiut FrSancre for' part ofthere lands,
bicb beld of that Notleman,, A. D. 1ieo. I believe that ,r
a-pl E i.of* Kii' homage to one of his own subjet,:
- p be oMt withe hloric either ofEngland or Scotland;
Plipltei aboliled this price in France, A. D. I; . ta
w Abri Cbrool. Soim at imilar to this, isa chartero
& Ab bot fMeltro , .' i S s, conftiting lames V.'he
Bail r Stewarf dftA^ObUb y, vietigin him ll the po~ti

pertained to that o~ce, and requiring him to be aJ

a>
to te Abbot for is ,aercile of the fame. Arcbi:
pai. Ei,:.

divided by them into many fniall kingdoms, was o oK
in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot. I.
land, united at that time under one Mbnarch.
And though these petty principalities were' gra-
dually formed into one kingdom, the tiigning
princes, exposed to continual invasions of the
Danes, and often subjected to the yoke of those
formidable pirates, seldom turned their arms to-
wards Scotland, and were little able to.eftablilh
new rights in that country. The first Kings of the
Norman race, busied with introducing their. own
laws and manners into the kingdom which they
had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
On the throne which some of them poffcTed by
a' very dubious tite, were as little felicitous to
acquire new authority, or to form new preten.
sions in Scotland. An unexpected calamity, that
besel one of the Scottifl Kings first encouraged
the Englilh to think of bringing his kingdom' ur
der dependance. William firnamed the Lion be.
ing taken prisoner at! Alnwick, Henry II. as the
price of his liberty, not only extorted from .him
in exorbitant ransom, and a promise to furrendcr
the places of.greateft strength in his dominibns
but compelled him to do homage for his who
kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, f-.b
emnly renounced this claim of homage, aid ;ab
olved William from the hard conditions-which
ienry had imposed. Upon the death of Aldx.
nder III. near a century after, Edward L aaik
ng himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland,
cquired an influence in that.kingdom which no

50 English Monarch before him ever possessed, and,

.1- imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather

than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the
claim of fovereigoty to which the former had
pretended.

esaeos Margaret. of Norway, Grand-daughter of Alexc
di ai ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive
i~Lne him. The right of fuccefion belonged to the de.

fceudaots of David Earl of Huntingdon, third son
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for
the crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel,
Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the grand-
ion of Margaret the eldest daughter. Acordift
to the rules of fuccefiion which are now eftabfil/-
ed, the right of Baliol was preferable, and, not.
withstanding Brace's plea of being nearer in blood
to Eadr David, Baliol's claim, as the reprefentativ
of his mother and grandmother, would be deemed
inconteftible. But in that age, the order of fd-
cefion was not afoertained with the fame pi.
cifion. The question appeared to be no lets intri.
cae, than it was iportant. Though the prejudice
of the people, and perhaps the laws of the king.
In, favored Bruce, each of the rivals was sup.
prted by a powerful faction. Arms alone, it was
feared, must terminate a dispute too' eighty for
the laws to decide. But, in order (' avoid the 'i
frits of a civil war, Edward was cholen umpire,
*od both parties agreed to acquiesce in his deereei
Uis had well nigh proved fatal tb the indepeindI
eni of Scotland; and the nation by its eagi-

ness to guard against a civil war, was not only ex- BOO
pored to that calamity, but almost fubjeted to a 1.
foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, enter-
prifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed. in Scotlaid, and the ambitio
of competitors ready to sacrifice their, country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited
him first to seize, and then to subjed the kingdom.
The authority of an umpire, which had been un-
warily beltowed upon him, and from which the
Scots dreaded no dangerous consequences, en.
abled him to execute'his schemes with the greater
facility. Under pretence o examining the quef
tion with the utmost solemnity, he fummored all
the Scottibh Barons to Norham, and havinggained
Iome, and intimidated others, he prevailed on all
who were present, not excepting Bruce and Balio'
the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland to be
a fief of the Engliih Crown , and to swear sealy
to him as their Soziereign or Liee Lord. This ftep
led to aother still more important. As it.wa
vain to pronounce a sentence which he 'had- noe
power to execute, Edward demanded possei aoft
the kingdom, that he mightibe able'to deliverit t
him whose right flould be found preferable; and
such was the pusillanimity of 'the nobles, and tdi
impatient ambition of the competitors, that- both
aitented to this strange demand, and Gilbert d<
Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only tii
who refused to surrender the castles in, his crltody
to the enemy of his country. Edward finding

0 0 Baliol the moll obsequious and the leaf formi.
L dable of the twocompetitors, soon after gave judge.

ment in his favor. Baliol once more profelred
himself the vassal of England, and submitted to
every condition which the Sovereign whom he
had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe.

Edward, having thus placed a creature of hi

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
the nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to col.
clude that his dominion was now fully eftablillied.
But he began too soon to assume the master; his
new vassals, fierce and independent, bore with
impatience a yoke, to which they were not accutf
towed. Provoked by his haugbtwefs, even the
passive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Ed-
ward, who had no longer use for fch a pageant
King, forced him to resign the Crown, and opedly
attempted to seize it as fallen to. bimfelf by the
rebellion of his vassaL At that critical period
arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom the
fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed
many fabulous ads of prowess, though his -al
alor, as well as integrity and wisdom, are such
as needs not the heightenings of fiction. He, al
most single, ventured to take arms in defence- of
the kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit
of his countrymen. At last, Robett Bruce, the
gradfon of him who ood in competition- wih
Bliol, appeared to assert his own 'ights, and to
vindicate the honor of his country. The nobles,
adfamed of their former baseness,, and enraged at

the many indignities offered to the nation, crowd- a o o
ed to his standard. In order to crulh him at 1.
once, the English Monarch entered Scotland, at
the head of a mighty army. Many battles were
fought, and the Scots, though often vanquifled,
were not subdued. The ardent zeal with which
the nobles contended for the independence of
the kingdom, the prudent valor of Bruce, and
above all a national enthusiasm inspired by such a
cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Edward, and
counterbalanced all the advantages which he de-
rived from the number and wealth of his sub-
jeds. Though the war continued with little
intermiflion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept poffelion of the throne of Scot-
land, and reigned with an authority not inferior to
that of its former Monarchs.

But while the sword, 'the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employ.
ed to terminate this controversy, neither Edward
nor the Scots seemed to difIruft the jultice of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records,
and from these produced, in their own' favor,
such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer.
able. The letters and memorials addressed by
each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced
as the common father, and often appealed to as
the common judge of all Christian Princes, are flill
extant. The fabulous tales of the early Britith
history; the partial testimony of ignorant Chroni.
clers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the
proofs on which Edward founded his title to the

0 o sovereignty of Scotland; and the homage done by
1. the Scottifl Monarchs for their lands in England

is preposterously supposed to imply the fubjedion
of their whole kingdom '. Ill founded, however,
as their right was, the Englilb did not fail to re-
vive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between the
two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indignation. To this we must impute
the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national anti.
pathies were excited, not only by the usual cir.
cumftances of frequent hoftilites, and reciprocal
injuries; but the nglifl confilered the Scots as
vaflals who bad presumed to rebel, and the Scots,
in their turn, regarded the Englilh as usurpers
who aimed at enslaving their country.

usoe. At the time when Robert Bruce began his reign
e tth in Scotland, the fame form of government was

E ,, eftablilhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. This
ka h surprising similarity in their confRitution and laws

demonstrates that the nations which overturned
the Roman empire, and ereded these kingdoms,
though divided into different tribes, and diftin.
guided by different names, were either derived
originally from the fame source, or had been
placed in similar situations. When we take a view
of the feudal system of laws and policy, that flu-
pendou. and singular fabric ereced by them, the
sirs objed that frikes us is the King. And when
we are told that he is the sole proprietor of all the
'Andafn's Hifridcal Eay concerning the Independcy, c.

lands within his dominions, that all his fubjets BOOK;
derive their poffefions from him, and in return 1.
consecrate their lives to his service; when we heat
that all marks of diflindion, and titles of dignity,
flow from him as the only fountain of honor: when
we behold the moll potent peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign
and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him
a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclu,
sion, however, would be more ralh, orworfe found-
ed. The genius of the feudal government was purely,
ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty,
and with many appearances of despotic power, a
feudal King was the most limited of all Princes.

Before they sallied out of their own habitations orgin of
o conquer the world, many of the northern na- 'Ghe',',"d
ions seem not to have been fibjed to the govern- meat. and
nent of Kings '; and even where monarchical go- it atilo.

critcal cc.

ernment was eRlablifhed, the Prince possessed but binu.
ittle authority. A General rather than a King, his
ilitary command was extensive, his civil jurifdicion
almoR nothing'. The army which he led was not
ompofed of soldiers, who could be compelled to
rerve, but of such as voluntarily followed his fland-
rd '. These conquered not for their leader, but for
themselves; and being free in their own country, re-
nounced not their liberty when they acquired new
ettlements. They did not exterminate the ancient in-
habitants of the countries which they subdued, but

* Cat lib. vi. c. 21.
' Tacit de Mor. Germ. c. 7. rr.
Caf. ibid.

s o o K seizing thegreater part oftheirlands, they took theii

L persons under protecion. The difficulty of main

taining a new conqueRt, as well as the danger of being
attacked by new invaders, rendering it necessary to
be always in a posture ofdefence, the form of govern.
ment which they eftablifled was altogether mili.
tary, and nearly resembled that to which they had
been accustomed in their native country. Their
general fill continuing to be the head' of the co.
lony, part of the conquered lands were allotted'to
him: the remainder, under the name of bhfickia
or yfi, was divided amongst his principal officers.
As the common safety required that tfe officers
Ihould, upon all occasions, be ready to appear in
arms, for the common defence, and lbould continue
obedient to their General, they bound themselves
to take the field, when called, and to serve him
with a number of men, in proportion to the ex.
tent of their territory. These great officers again
parcelled out their-lands among their followers,
and annexed the fame condition to the grant.
A feudal kingdom was properly the encampment of
a great army; military ideas predominated, mi-
litary subordination was eftablilbed, and the pof.
fefion of land was the pay which soldiers received
for their personal service. In consequence of there no.
tions, the possession of land was granted during plea-
sure only, and Kings were elecive. In other words,
an officerdifagreeable to his General was deprived of
his pay, and the person who was mof'capable of con.
dudingan army was chosen to command it. Such were
thcfirtrudiments, orinfancy of feudalgovernment.

But

But long before the beginning of the four. BzooK,
teenth century, the feudal system had undergone 1.
many changes, of which the following were the
most considerable. Kings formerly elective, were
then hereditary; and fiefs, granted at first during
pleasure, defcenled from father to son, and were
become perpetual. These changes. not less ad.
vantageous to the nobles than to the prince, made
no alteration in the ariltocratical spirit of the feu-
dal constitution. The King, who at a distance Gental
eemed to be inveted with majefly and power, caures
ppears, on a nearer view, to pofffs almost none mited the
f those advantages which belltow on monarchs power of
heir grandeur and authority. His revenues were t'r f"edal
anty; he had not a flanding army; and the
urifdiction he possessed was circumscribed within
ery narrow limits.
At a time when pomp and splendor were little Ttefr rte.
nown, even in the palaces of kings; when the nu wler
fficers of the crown received scarcely any flary '
efides the fees and perquisites of their office;
hen embassies to foreign courts were rare; when
rmies were composed of soldiers who served
ithout pay ; it was not necessary that a king
iould posses a great revenue; nor did the con.
ition of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes
o be opulent. Commerce made little progress
n the kingdoms where the feudal government
vas efRabliflhed. Institutions, which had no
ther object but to inspire a martial spirit, to
train men to be soldiers, and to make arms the
Dnly honorable profefflion, naturally discouraged
VOL. L C

*o 00 the commercial arts. The revenues, arising from

g. the taxes imposed on the different branches of

commerce, were by consequence inconsiderable;
and the prince's treasury received little supply
from a source, which, among a trading people,
flows with such abundance, and is almost inexhauft.
bie. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;
such a burden would have appeared intolerable
to nmn who received their estates as the reward of
their valor, and who confidered their service in
the field as a full retribution for what they pof.
sessed. The king's demefntc, or the portion of land
which he still retained in his own hands unalienat.
ed , furnilbed subsistence to his court, and defrayed
the ordinary expense of government '. The only
fated taxes which the feudal law obliged vasals to
pay to the king, or to those of whom they held
their lands, were. three; one when his eldest son
was made a knight; another when his eldest daugh.
ter was married; and a third in order to ransom
him if he hould happen to be taken prisoner. Be.
fides these, the king received the feudal casualties
of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vaflals.
And, on some extraordinary occasions, his sub.
jetd granted him an aid, which they diflinguilhed
by the name of a benwolence, in order to declare
that he received it not in consequence of any
right, but as a gift, flowing from their good
will . All these added together, produced a

' Craig. de Feud. lib. i. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Glodf
Woc. Dominicum.

D Cnge, voc. Auxilium.

evenue, so scanty and precarious, as naturally in. B oo
cited a feudal monarch to aim at diminishing the I,
xorbitant power and wealth of the nobility, but
instead of enabling him to carry on his schemes

ith full effet, kept him in continual indigence,
nxiety, and dependence.
Nor could the king supply the defec of his They hbd
evenues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary ° ""di
roops and standing armies were unknown, as
ong as the feudal government fubfiRed in vi.
gor Europe was peopled with soldiers. The
vaffas of the king, and the fub-vaffals of the
arons, were all obliged to carry arms. While
he poverty of princes prevented them from for.
ifying their frontier towns, while a campaign
ontinued but a few weeks, and while a fierce and
mpetuous courage was impatient to bring every
uarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
vihout pay, and with little discipline, was fuffi.
jent for all the purposes both of the security and
f the glory of the nation. Such an army, how.
ver, far from being an engine at the king's dif.
ofal, was often. no ess formidable to him, than
o his enemies. The more warlike any people
ere, the more independent they became; and
he fame persons being both soldiers and fubjeds,
ivil privileges and immunities were the confe.
uence of their viftories, and the reward of their
artial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary
rmies, under our present forms of government,
ften render the tyrants of their own people, as
ell as the scourges of mankind, were commonly,

Ca

B o 0 K under the feudal constitution, the most indulgent

l. of all princes to their fibjeas, because they flood

mot in need of their alfiftance. A prince, whom
even war and victories did not render the matter,
of his own army, possesscd hardly any. hadow of
military power during times of peace. His dif-
banded soldiers mingled with his other fubjets;
not a single man received pay from him; many
ages elaped even before a guard was appointed
to defend his person ; and destitute of that great
instrument of dominion a tanding army, the au.
thority of the king continued always feeble, and
was often contemptible.

T-.ir lrir Nor were these the only circumtances which
I' "i," contributed towards depressing the regal power.

By the feudal system, as has been already ob.
served, the king's judicial authority was extremely
circumscribed. At first, princes seem to have been
the supreme judges of their people, and, in
person, heard and determined all controversies
among them. The multiplicity of causes soon
made it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the
king's name, decided matters that belonged to
the royal jurifdidion. But the Barbarians, who
over-ran Europe, having destroyed most of the
great cities, and the countries which they seized
being cantoned out among powerful chiefs, who
were blindly followed by numerous dependants,
whom, in return, they were bound to proteCt from
every injury; the administration of justice wal
greatly interrupted, and the execution of any
legal sentence became almost impracticable,

Theft, rapine, murder, a disorder of all kinds i o O0
prevailed in every kingdom of lIurope, to a de- 1.
gree almoR incredible, and scarce compatible
with the fubfifence of civil society. Every of-
fender heltered himself under the protection of
some powerful chieftain, who screened him from
the pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to
punli a criminal, often required the union and
effort of half a kingdom '. n -order to remedy
these evils, many persons of daftindion were in.

A remarkable instance of this occurs in the following hiC.

tory, so late as the year one thousand five hundred and
fixty-one. Mary, having appointed a court of juhftce to be
held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less than eleven
counties were summoned to guard the person, who was to
at as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions, p. 2 t 4.
The words of a proclamation, which afford such a convincing
proof of the feebleness of the feudal government, deserve our
notice. - "Andbccaufe it is necessary for the executionof her
Highness' commandments and service, that her justice be well
accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the
concurrence of a good power of her faithful fibhjes, -
Therefore commands and charges all and fundry-Farls, Lords,
Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen,
dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every one
of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and houfhold-men,
well bodin in feir of war in the most fubftantiofs manner,
(i. e. completely armed and provided,) and with twentydaye
victuals to meet and to pals forward with him to the borough
of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the aid space of
twenty days, and to receive such diretion and commands,
as shall be given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name,
for quietness of the country; and to put the fame in execu.
tion under the pain of losing their life, lands, and go d,"
Keith's Hifl. of Scotland, 198..

C3

3 00 0 trufed with the administration of justice within

L their own territories. But what we may presume

was, at first, only a temporary grant, or a personal
privilege; the encroaching spirit of the nobles gra,
dually converted into a right, and rendered here,
ditary. The lands of some were, in process ol
time, ereded into Baronies, those of others into
·tRaStei. The jurifdidion of the former was
extensive; that of the latter, as the name implies,
royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whe
thcr civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom
the lord of the regality appointed; and if the
king's courts called any person within his terri
tory before them, the lord of regality might put
a top to their proceedings, and by the privilege
of rpledgin, remove the cause to his own court,
and even punish his vasal, if he submitted to a
foreign jurifdidion ': Thus almost every quef
tion, in which any person who resided on the
lands of the nobles was interefled, being deter.
mined by judges appointed by the nobles them.
selves, their vassals were hardly sensible of being,
in any degree, subjed to the crown. A feudal
kingdom was split into many small principalities,
almost independent, and held together by a feeble
and commonly an imperceptible bond of union.
The king was not only Rripped of the authority
annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but
his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the
los of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
that age ,due to the person who adminiflrted jufticec

* GCraig. ib. iii Dieg. 7.

In the fame proportion that the king funk in oo s

power, the 'nobles rose towards independence. I.
Not satisfied with having obtained a hereditary
right to their fiefs, which they formerly held
during picafure, their ambition aimed at some.
thing bolder, and by introducing entails, endea.
voured, as far as human ingenuity and invention
can reach that end, to render their poffeflions
unalienable and everlasting. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance transmitted to
them from their ancestors, but none to diminish
it; time alone, by means of marriages, legacies,
and other accidents, brought continual acceflons
of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like a
river, became considerable from the length of its
course, and as it rolled on, new honors and new
property flowed fucceflively into it. Whatever
Influence is derived from titles of honor, the
feudal barons likewise poffcffed in an ample
manner. These marks of diftindion are, in their
own nature, either official or personal, and being
annexed to a particular charge, or beRfowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illustrious cha.
raters, ought to be appropriated to these. But
the son, however unworthy, could not bear to be
stripped of that appellation, by which his fa-
ther had been diftinguifled. His presumption
claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles of
honor became hereditary, and added new luRre
to nobles already in poffeflion of too much power.
Something more audacious and more extravagant
still remained. The supreme direction of all affairs,

C4

Ifoo0 both civil and military, being committed to the

b great officers of the crown, the fame and safety

of princes, as well as of their people, depended
upon the fidelity and abilities of these officers.
But futh was the preposterous ambition of the
nobles, and so fuccef.ful even in their wildest
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all
the kingdoms where the feudal institutions pre.
vailed , mos of the chief offices of Rate were
annexed to great families, and held , like fiefs,
by hereditary right. A person whole undutiful
behaviour rendered him odious to his prince, or
whose incapacity exposed him to the contempt of
the people, often held a place of power and truR
of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland,
the offices of Lord Justice General, Great Cham.
berlain, High Steward, High Conflable, Earl
MVarlhal, and High Admiral, were all hereditary;
and in many counties, the office of Sheriff was
held in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power was so great, could not fail of being
turbulent and formidable. Nor did they want
instruments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands, which they parcelled
out among their followers, supplied them with a
numerous band of faithful and determined vas.
óis; while that which they retained in their
own hands, enabled them to live with a princely
plendor. The great hall of an ambitious baron
was often more crowded than the court of his
overeign. The frong casks in which they resided,

afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and a o o
seditious. A great part of their revenue was spent I.
upon multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers.
And if at any time they left their retreat to
appear in the court of their sovereign, they were
accompanied, even in times of peace, with a vast
train of armed followers. The usual retinue of
William the sixth Earl of Douglas, confided of
two thousand horse. Those of the other nobles
were magnificent and formidable in proportion.
Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their
proper rank, such potent and haughty barons
were the rivals, rather than the fubjets of their
prince. They often despised his orders, insulted
his perron , and wrested from him his crown.
The history of Europe, during several ages,
contains little else, but the accounts of the wars
and revolutions o'ccasioned by their exorbitant
ambition.

But, if the authority of the barons far exceeded Their power

its proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, greater i
we may affirm that the balance which ought to than in any
be preserved between a king and his nobles was other king.
almost entirely loft in Scotland. The Scottili tdm.
nobles enjoyed, in common with those of other
nations, all the means for extending their authority
which arise from the ariftocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they pofelfed
advantages peculiar to themselves: the accidental
sources of their power were considerable; and
singular circumstances concurred with the spirit of The parte.
the conffitution to aggrandize them. To enumerate "tO'" n f

OOK the molt remarkable of these, will serve both to
L explain the political state of the kingdom, and

to illnftrate many important occurrences, in the
period now under our review.

Tretatm 1. The nature of their country was one cause
oft* of the power and independence of the Scottilf

nobility. Level and open countries are formed
for servitude. The authority of the supreme
magistrate reaches with eare to the most distant
corners; and when nature has ereded no barrier,
and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
are soon deteted and punilhed. Mountains, and
fens, and rivers set bounds to despotic power,
and amidst thele, is the natural feat of freedom
and independence. In such places, did the
Scottish nobles usually fix their residence. By
retiring to his own cafle, a mutinous baron
could defy the power of his sovereign, it being
almost impradicable to lead an army, through
a barren country, to places of difficult accefi
to a single man. The fame causes which checked
the progress of the Roman arms, and rendered
all the efforts of Edward I. abortive, often pro.
teted the Scottilh nobles from the vengeance
of their prince; and they owed their personal
independence, to those very mountains and
marlhes which saved their country from being
conquered.

The roan IL The want of great cities in Scotland con.
"iberi. tributed not a little to increase the power of the

nobility, and to weaken that of the prince.
Wherever umbers of men assemble together,

order must be established, and a regular form BO OX
of government instituted, the authority of the L
magistrate muf be recognized, and his decisions
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws
and subordination take rife in cities; and where
there are few cities as in Poland , or none as
in Tartary, there are few or no traces of a well-
arranged police. But under the feudal govern.
ments, commerce, the chief Bdeans of assembling
mankind, was neglected; the nobles in order
to trengthen their influence over their vassals,
resided among them, and seldom appeared at
court, where they found a superior, or dwelt in
cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland,
the fertile countries in the South lying open to
he Englih, no town situated there could rife to
e great or populous amidst continual inroads
nd alarms: the residence of our monarchs was
ot fixed to any particular place; many parts of
he country were barren and uncultivated; and
n consequence of these peculiar circumstances,
added to the general causes flowing from the
nature of the feudal institutions, the towns in
Scotland were extremely few, and 'very inconfi.
derable. The vassals of every baron occupied a
diflind portion of the kingdom, and forn*d a
separate and almost independent society. Instead of
giving aid towards reducing to obedience their
reditious chieftain, or any whom he took under his
protection, they were all in arms for his defence,
and obftrured the operations of justice to the
atmoft. The prince was obliged to connive at

-s o o K criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles,

- conscious of this advantage, were not afraid to

offend; and the difficulty of punishing almost
assured them of impunity.
'k it". 11. The- division of the country into clans

bad no fiall ffeet in rendering the nobles con.
fiderable. The-nations, which over-ran Europe,
were originally divided into many spall tribes;
and when they 'came to parcel out the lands
which they had conquered, it was natural for
every chieftain to beRlow a portion, in the first
place, upon those of his own tribe or family.
These all held their lands of him; and as the
safety of each individual depended on the general
'union, these small societies clung together, and
were distinguished by some common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the
introduction of surnames, or en.jpig armorial. But
when these became common, the delendants and
relations of every chieftain assumed the fame
name and arms with him; other vassals were
proud to imitate their example, and by degrees
they were communicated to all those who held
of the fame superior. Thus clanlhips were formed;
and. in a generation or two, that consanguinity
which was, at first in a great measure, imaginary,
was believed to be real. An artificial union was
converted into a natural one; men willingly
followed a leader, whom they regarded both
the superior of their lands, and the chief of the
lilomd, and served him not only with the fidelity
f ~afialsr but-with the affetion of friends.. 4

the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such B 0 0 K
unions, as we have described, imperfectly formed; ,
but in Scotland, whether they were the produc-
tion of chance, or the effec of policy, or intro.
duced by the Irilh colony above mentioned,
and strengthened by carefully preserving their
genealogies both genuine and fabulous, clanlhips
were universal. Such a confederacy might be
overcome, it could not be broken; and no
change of manners, or of government, has been
able, in some parts of the kingdom, to dissolve
associations which are founded upon prejudices
so natural to the human mind. How formidable
were nobles at the head of followers, who,
counting that cause just and honorable which
their chief approved, rulhed into the field at
his command, ever ready to sacrifice their lives
in defence of his person, or of his fame ? Against
such men, a king contended with great difadvan.
tage; and that cold service, which money pur-
chafes, or authority extorts, was not an equal
match for their ardor and zeal.

IV. The smallness of their number may be The fial
mentioned among the causes of the grandeur of .umber of

th, nobles.

the Scottilh nobles. Our annals reach not back
to the first division of property in the kingdom;
but so far as we can trace the matter, the origin.
al. poffeflions of the nobles seem to have been
eftenfive. The ancient Thanes were the equal*
and the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls
and barons, who succeeded them, were mailers
of territories no less ample. France and England,

o 0 countries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to
L a numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a

kingdom neither extenive nor rich, could not
contain many such overgrown proprietors. But
the power of an aristocracy always diminishes, in
proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude; irrefifible if cen-
tered in a few. When nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly resemble those of the people;
they are roused only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend; and submit to many arbi-
trary and oppressive ads, before they take arms
againfR their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more fenible, and more impatient;
quick in difcering, and prompt in repelling
danger; all its motions are as sudden, as those of
the other are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme
jealousy with which the Scottish nobles observed
their monarchs, and the fierceness with which
they opposed their encroachments. Even the
virtue of a prince did not render them left
vigilant, or less eager to defend their rights;
and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the splendor
of his vidtories, and the glory of his name,
was upon the point of experiencing the vigor
of their refftance, no lefi than his unpopular
descendant James III Besides this, the neat
alliance of the great families, by frequent inter.
marriages, was the natual consequence of thlt
{mall number; and as consanguinity was, in
those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the
kindred of a nobleman intereetcd themselves in

his quarrel, as a common cause; and every con B o o
telt the king had, though with a single baron, L
soon drew upon him the arms of a whole confe-
deracy.

V. Those natural connexions, both with their Theitaleat

equals and with their inferiors, the Scottilh nobles and combia
strengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar d
to themselves, was at lear more frequent among
them, than in any other nation. Even in times of
profound peace, they formed associations, which
when made with their equals, were called leagues
of mutual defence; and when with their inferiors,
bonds of anrent. By the former, the contrating
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each
other, in all causes, and againf all persons. By the
latter, protetion was Ripulated on the one hand,
and fidelity and personal service promised on the
other ". Self.prefervation, it is probable, forced
men at first into these confederacies; and while
disorder and rapine were univeifal, while govern.
ment was unsettled, and the authority of laws little
known or regarded, near neighbours found it necef-
fary to unite in this manner for their security, and
the weak were obliged to court the patronage of
the frong. By degrees, these associations became
so many alliances offensive and defensive against the
throne; and as their obligation was held to be more
acred than any tie whatever, they gave much
umbrage to our kings, and contributed not a little

othe power and independence of the nobility.
" A3 e. PL 1424. t 41. Parl ISi.

O OK In the reign of James II. William the eighth
L earl of Douglas entered into a league of this

kind with the earls of Crawford, Koss, Murray,
Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Balveny, and othtr
powerful barons; and so formidable was this
combination to the king, that be had recourse
to a measure no less violent than uijuft, in order
to dissolve it.
ie ftqmt VI. The frequent wars between England and

th Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the

power of the nobility. Nature has placed no
barrier between the two kingdoms; a river, al
mos every-where fordable, divides them toward!
the eaR: on the weft they are separated by at
imaginary line. The slender revenues of oui
kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing
garrisons in the towns on the frontier ; noi
would the jealousy of their subje&s have per
mitted such a method of defence. The barons
whofc eates lay near the borders, confidere
themselves as bound both in honor and ii
interest to repel the enemy. The wardenships o
the different marches, offices of great power anm
dignity, were generally bestowed on them. Thi
gained them the leading of the warlike countie
in the south; and their vassals, living in a flat
of perpetual hotility, or enjoying at bes ai
insecure peace, became more inured to war thai
even the reft of their countrymen, and mor
willing to accompany their chieftain in his mol
hardy and dangerous enterprises. It was th
valor, no led than the number of their follower

that'
*

that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles in B o a
the northern and midland counties were often dutiful i.
and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs
always found it impracticable to subdue the mutinous
and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all our
domcftic quarrels, those who could draw to their
fide the inhabitants of the southern counties, were
almost sure of viaory; and conscious of this advan-
tage, the lords who poffelfed authority there, were
apt to forget the duty which they owed their so-
vereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of subjects.

VIL The calamities which besel our kings The fr.
contributed more than any other cause to diminilh q.cet mi

-, , . ,

'

, norides

the royal authority. Never was any race of mo- which haP.
narchs o unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix pened in
successive princes, from Robert III. to James VI. scotald.
not one died a natural death; and the minorities,
during that time, were longer, and more fre-
quent, than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James V. we
reckon ten princes; and seven of these were called
to the throne while they were minors, and almost
infants. Even the molt regular and belt eab-
li(hed governments feel sensibly the pernicious
effets of a minority, and either become languid
and inacive, or are thrown into violent and unna-
tural convulsions. But, under the imperfect and
ill-adjufted system of government in Scotland,
these effets were still more fatal; the fierce and
mutinous spirit of the nobles, unreRsrained by the
authority of a king, scorned all fubjedtion to the
delegated jurifdiclion of a regent, or to the feeble

VOL. 1. D

O0 0 commands of a minor. The royal authority was cir.

. cumfcribed within narrower limits than ever; the

prerogatives of the crown, naturally inconsiderable,
were reduced almoR to nothing; and the ariftocra.
tical power gradua!ly rose upon the ruins of the
monarchical. Left the personal power of a regent
1hould enable him to a with too much vigor,
the authority annexed to that office was sometimes
rendered inconsiderable, by being divided; or, if
a single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and
the heads of the more illustrious families, were
seldom raised to that dignity. It was often conferred
upon men who possessed little influence, and excited
nojealoufy. They, conscious of their own weak.
nes, were obliged to overlook some irregularities,
and to permit others; and, in order to support their
authority, which was destitute of real Rrength,
they endeavoured to gain the moR powerful and
aaive barons, by granting them poffeflions and
immunities, which railed them to Rill greater power.
When the King himself came to assume the reins
of government, he found his revenues wafted or
alienated, the crown-lands seized or given away,
and the nobles so accustomed to independence,
that, after the ruggles of a whole reign, he was
seldom able to reduce them to the fame Rate in
which they had been at the beginning of his mi.
nority, or to wref from them what they had usurped

a e, nts during that time. If we take a view of what hap.
vmIrbki pened to each of our kings, who was so unfortu.
obk d r. nate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and
if ack importance of this obfcrvation will fully appear.
ainontid

The minority of David II. the son of Robert B o o K

Brucc, was difturhed by the pretensions of Edward i.
Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and 1319.
on the support of some difaffeded barons among David .
the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at first attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and Baliol took possession of
the throne. A small body of the nobles, however,
continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol out of Scotland ; and after an absence of
nine years, David returned from France, and took
the government of the kingdom into his own
hands. But nobles, who were thus wafting their
blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a
right to the undisturbed possession of their ancient
Privileges; and even some title to arrogate new
,nes. It seems to have been a maxim in that age,
:hat every leader might claim as his own, the ter.
itory which his sword had won from the enemy.

reat acquisitions were gained by the nobility in

:hat way: and to there the gratitude and liberality
As David added, by distributing among such as
Idhered to him, the vas polfeflions which fell to the
:rown by the fotfeiture of his enemies. The family
As Douglas, which began to rife above the other
nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented both
its power and its property, during his minority.
James I. was seized by the English during the r4or
Continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained JameI
prisoner almost nineteen years. During that pe-
iod, the kingdom was governed, first by his uncle,
obert duke of Albany, and then by Murdo, the

Da

00 K son of Robert. Both these noblemen aspired to
I. the crown; and their unnatural ambition, if we

may believe molt of our historians, not only cut
lhort the days of Prince David, the King's elder
brother, but prolonged the captivity of James. They
flattered themselves that they might ep with less
opposition into a throne, when almost vacant: and,
dreading the King's return, as the extinction of their
authority, and the end of their hopes, they carried
on the negociations for obtaining his liberty with
extreme remissness. At the fame time, they negleded
nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles
to approve of their scheme. They slackened the
reins of government; they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon ; they suffered the mo
irregular ads of power, and even wanton instances
of oppreflion, to pass with impunity; they deat
out the patrimony of the crown among those whol
enmity they dreaded, or whose favor they ha(
gained; and reduced the royal authority to a sati
of imbecility, from which succeeding monarch
labored in vain to raise it.

437. During the minority of James II. the admin
;L.am tration of affairs as well as the custody of

King's person were committed to Sir Willa
Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingflon. Ji
lousy and discord were the effeds of their conjun
authority, and each of them, in order to strength
himself, bellowed new power and privileges u
the great men, whose aid he courted. While
young earl of Douglas, encouraged by their
visions, ereded a fort of independent principal

ithin the kingdom; and forbidding his vassals B 0 0 K
o acknowledge any authority but his own , he I.
reated Knights, appointed a privy council, named
officers, civil and military, assumed every ensign
of Royalty, but the title of King, and appeared
n public with a magnificence more than royal,

Eight persons were chosen to govern the kingdom 1460o
during the minority of James 111. Lord Boyd, how. Jais ll.
ever, by seizing the person of the young King, and
by the ascendant which he acquired over him, soon
engrossed the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious projec of raising his family to the fame pitch
of power and grandeur with those of the prime no-
bility; and he effected it. While intent on this, he
relaxed the vigor of government, and the Barons
became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and
independence. The power, which Boyd had been at
so much pains to acquire, was of no long conti-
nuance, and the fall of his family, according to
the fate of favorites, was sudden and deftrudive; but
upon its ruins, the family of Hamilton rose, which
soon attained the highest rank in the kingdom.

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was James v.

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or protected either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more re-
gular factions, and disregarded more than ever
the restraints of order and authority. The French
had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their
interest, raised to be regent. This was the duke
of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of

D3

J o o K James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the mos

I. eminent of all the Scottilf peers who survived thi

fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measure
during the firfl years of his adminiflration ; and thi
intrigues of the Queen Dowager, siser of Henry VllI
rendered the latter part of it no lees feeble. Thougt
supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles defpifec
hi- authority, and, regardless either of his threat
or his entreaties, peremptorily refuted, two fevera
times, to enter England, to the borders of whici
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandoned
his troublesome tation, and, retiring to France
preferred the tranquillity of a private life s to at
office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat
Douglas, Earl of Angus became mailer of thi
King's person, and governed the kingdom in hi!
name. Many efforts were made to deprive him o
his usurped authority. But the numerous vassal!
and friends of his family adhered to him, becaufi
he divided with them the power and emolument
of his office; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas; he exercised, without the title
of regent, a fuller and more absolute authority
than any who had enjoyed that dignity; and the
ancient, but dangerous, pre-eminence of the
Douglases seemed to be restored.

To these, and to many other causes, omitted

or unobserved by us, did the Scottilh nobility
owe thdt exorbitant and uncommon power, ol
which instances occur so frequently in our his
tory. Nothing however demonstrates so fully the

extent of their power, as the length of its duration. B o o
Many years after the declension of the feudal sys. 1.
ters in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when
the arms or policy of Princes had, every where,
shaken, or laid it in ruins, the foundations of that
ancient fabric remained, in a great measure, firm
and untouched in Scotland.

The powers which the feudal institutions vefled The power

in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the dl t noble
Princes of Europe, who longed to possess, Something became ir.
more than a nominal and precarious authority. Their tolerable o
impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III.
of England, Edward II. and some other weak
Princes, into rash and premature attempts against
the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
disappointed or perished. Princes, of greater abili-
ties, were contentto mitigate evils which they could
not cure; they fought occupation for the turbulent
spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars; and allowed
their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expedi-
tions, which, if they brought no other advantage,
secured at lealt domestic tranquillity. But time and
accidents ripened the feudal governments for def-
trudion. Towards the end of the fifteenth century, The at.
and beginning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of t',pt'o

humble the

Europe attacked, as if by concert, the power of nobles ruc.
their nobles. Men of genius then undertook with eferfu in

Prance anti

success, what their unflilful predecessors had at- in England.
tempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the molt
prolound and the moRl adventurous genius of that
age, began, and in a ingle reign almost com-
pleted the scheme of their deftruaion The sure

D4

S o 0 x but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England

L produced the fame effet. The means, indeed,

employed by these monarchs were very different
1 be blow which Lewis rruck was sudden and
fatal. I he artifices of Henry resembled those flow
poisons, which waste the conftituton , but become
not mortal till ome ditant period. Nor did they
produce consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly
added to the crown whatever he wrested from
the nobles. Henry undermined his Barons, by
encouraging them to fell their lands, which
enriched the commons, and gave them a weight
in the legislature unknown to their predecessors.

Bit Ath But while these great revolutions were carrying
lies coats.

e t"o on in two kingdoms with which Scotland was
athe intimately conneced, little alteration happened
-tuL there; our Kings could neither extend their own

prerogative, nor enable the commons to encroach
upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only retained
most of their ancient privileges and poffefions,
but continued to make new acquisitions.

oir ips This was not owing to the inattention of our
d"pm Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were
tke roal abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the

t"-~. nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble thit

order. They did not, however, possess means sus
ficient for accomplilbing this end. The resources
of our monarchs were few, and the progress which

Otina they made was of course inconsiderable. But as
'."" t- the number of their followers, and the extent of
F, their jurifdition, were the two chief circum-

(ances which rendered the nobles formidable; ip

rder to counterbalance the one, and to restrain B O O
he other, all our Kings had recourse to nearly .
he fame expedients.
I. Among nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpo Encourage

dircord a.

ibed manners, surrounded with vassals bold and ong the
icentious, whom they were bound by interelt and nobler.
onor to protect, the causes of discord were many
ad unavoidable. As the contending parties could
eldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any
common superior or judge, and their impatient spirit
would seldom wait the flow decisions of justice,
their quarrels were usually terminated by the sword.
The offended Baron assembled his vassals, and wafted
the lands, or lied the blood of his enemy. To
forgive an injury, was mean; to forbear revenge,
infamous or cowardly ". Hence quarrels were

" The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the

manners, but, what is more remarkable, by the laws of thoet
ages. If any person thought the prosecution of an injury offered
to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publicly to desist from demanding venge.
ance; but the fame laws, in order to punish his cowardice,
and want of affetion to his family, deprived him of the right
of fucceflion. Henaults Abrege Chronol. p. 8. Among the
AngloSaxons, we find a singular institution distinguished by
the name of fodalitium a voluntary association, the object
whereof was the personal security ofthofe who joined in it, and
which the feebleness of government at that time rendered
necelary. Among other regulations, which are contained in
one of these ill extant, the following deserves notice:

If any aflociate hall either eat or drink with a person who
c has killed any member of thefodalititm, unless in the pre.

fence of the King, the Bishop, or the Count, and unless he
can prove that he did not know the person, let him pay a

" great fine. " Hicks Diliert. EpiRolar. apud Thefaur. Lng,
" Septentr. vol. i. p. 21,

o t transmitted from father to son, and, under the name
L of dead yftuds, subsistcd for many generations, with

unmitigated rancor. It was the interest of the crown
to oment rather than to extinguilh there quarrels;
and by scattering or cherishing the feeds of discord
among the nobles, that union, which would have
rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which mufl
at once have annihilated the prerogative, was effec
tually prevented. To the fame cause, our Kings were
indebted for the success with which they ome.
times attacked the molt powerful chieftains. They
employed private revenge to aid the impotence ol
public laws, and arming against the person who had
incurred theirdifpleafure, those rival families which
wilhed hisfall, they rewarded their service by Iharing
among them the spoils of the vanquilbed. But this
expedient, though it served to humble individuals,
did not weaken the body of the nobility. Those who
were now the instruments of their Prince's vengeance
became, in a hort time, the objects of his fear.
Having acquired power and wealth by serving the
Crown, they, in their turn, set up for independence:
and though there might be a fluctuation of power,
and of property; though old families fell, and new
ones role upon their ruins; the rightsof the aristocracy
remained entire, and its vigor unbroken.

rtu te II. As the adminiltration of justice is one of the
i'a~ t

i mos powerful ties between a King and his fubjeds,

if, all our monarchs were at the utmost pains to circum-
'nna scribe the jurisdiction of the Barons, and to extend

that of the crown. The external forms of fubordi-
nation, natural to the feudal fyRfem, favored this

attempt. An appeal lay from the judges and courts B 0 0

o

of the Barons, to those of the King. The right, I.
however, of judging in the first instance, belonged
to the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat
the effect of appeals, as well as of many other feudal
regulations. The royal jurifdition was almost con-
fined within the narrow limits of the King's demef.
nes. beyond which his judges claimed indeed much
authority, but polleffed next to nne. Our Kings
were {enfible of these limitations, and bore them
with impatience. But it was impofllible to overturn
in a moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to
strip the nobles, at once, of privileges which they
had held so long, and which were wrought almoR
into the frame of the feudal constitution. To ac-
complifh this, however, was an object of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other
inltances, towards a more regular and perfedc po-
lice. He made choice, among the eRates of par.
liament, of a certain number of persons, whom
he diftinguilbed by the name of Lords of Setfion,
and appointed them to hold courts for determin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and
forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased
to name. Their jurisdiction extended to all mat-
ters which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of
parliament, their decisions were final. James II.
obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which
hould be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring
the right of jurifdilion to be unalienable for tho

*o o future James 11. imposed severe penalties upon

L those judges appointed by the Barons, whole de.

cifions Ihould be found on a review to be unjult; and
by many other regulations, endeavoured to extend
the authority of his own court ". James IV. on pre.
tence of remedying the inconveniencies arising from
the hAort terms of the court of Session, appointed
other judges called Lords of Daily Council. 1 he Scfison
was an ambulatory court, and met seldom: the
Daily Council was fixed, and fat constantly at Edin.
burgh; and though not composed of members of par.
liament, the famepowers which the Lords of Session
enjoyed were veifed in it. Atlaft James V. erected a
new court that Rill subsists, and which he named the
Colege of ,ufiice, the judges or Senators of which were
called Lords of Council and Sjion. This court not only
exercised the fame jurifdidion which formerly be.
longed to the Session and Daily Council, but new
rights were added. Privileges of great importance
were granted to its members, its forms were prefcrib.
ed, its terms fixed, and regularity, power, and
splendor conferred upon it. ". The persons confti.
tuted judges in all these different courts had, in many
refpeds, the advantage of those who presided in the
courts of the Barons; they were more eminent for
their skill in law, their rules of proceeding were
more uniform, and their decisions more confiltent
Such judicatories became the objecs of confidence,
and of veneration. Men willingly submitted their

" A 26 P. 14(9. A 94 P. 149;. Ad 99 P. 1497.
' Keiit, App. 74, &c.

property to their determination, and their encroach. B O 0 I
ments on the jurifditions of the nobles were popu- .
lar, and for that reason successful. By devices of a
similar nature, the jurifdidion of the nobles in
criminal causes was restrained, and the authority
of the court of Juficiary extended. The crown, in
this particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority; and the King,
whose jurifdidion once resembled that of a Baron,
rather than that of a sovereign ", came more and

" The mol perfet idea of the feudal system ofgovernment

may be attained by attending to the state of Germany, and to
the history of France. In the former, the feudal iftitutions
still fubift with great vigor; and though altogether abolished in
the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved,
that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled,
with more certainty and precision, than those of any other
country in Europe, to trace it rife, its progress, and revo-
lutions. In Germany, every principality may be confidered as
a fief, and all its great Princes as aflals, holding of the Em-
peror. They possess all the feudal privileges: their fiefs are
perpetual; their jurisdictions within their own tcrritories
separate and extensive; and the great offices of the empire are
all hereditary, and annexed to particular families. At the fame
time the Emperor retains many of the prerogatives of the feudal
monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretensions are innumer.
able, and his power small; his jurifdition within his own
demesnes or hereditary countries is complete; beyond the
bounds of there it is almost nothing; and so permanent are
feudal principles, that although the feudal system be overturned
in almost every particular state in Germany, and althorgh the
greater part of its Princes have become absolute, the original
feudal constitution of the empire still remains, and ideas peculiar
to that form of government direct all its operations, and deter-
mine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations with regard

0 0 K more to be confidered as the head of the COin.
L munity, and the supreme dispenser of ju(tice to

his people. Ihefe acquisitions of our Kings,
however, though comparatively great, were in
reality inconsiderable; and, notwithtanding all
their efforts, many of the separate jurifdidion
poffeled by the nobles remained in great vigor;
and their final abolition was reserved to a distant
and more happy period.

ibor But besides these methods of defending their

rig'st . prerogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which
ps, o may be confidered as common to all our Princes,
hbHlg we lhall find, by taking a review of their reigns,
C-M~hi that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert

Bruce to James V. bad formed some particular
system for deprefling the authority of the nobles,
which was the object both of their jealousy and
terror. This condu& 'bs our monarchs, if we
reft satisfied with the accounts of their historians

to the limited jurifdidtion of kings under the feudal govern
ments, ae greatly illutrated by what happened in France.
The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of Charlemagne
encouraged the Peers to uurp an independent jurifdiion.
Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was seized
by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the throne, A. D. 987,
he kept poffefion of his private patrimony the Contd of Paris;
and all the jurifdifion which the Kings his fucceffurs exercised
for some time, was within its territories. I here were only
four towns in France, where he could establish Grands Bailis,
or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and baillges
belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French
monarchs had recourse for extending their jurifdidion, were
exadly similar to those employed by our Princes. Henault's
Abrege, p. 617, &c. De l'Efprit des Loix, liv. o. chap. so, &6.

must be confidered as flowing entirely from their B 00t
efentment againlt particular noblemen, and all I.
heir attempts to humble them, must be viewed

the sallies of private pafilon, not as the confe.
uences of any general plan of policy. But, though
me of their aions may be imputed to those
afions, though the different genius of the men,
he temper of the times, and the state of the na.
ion, necessarily occasioned great variety in their
chemes; yet, without being chargeable with ex.
efive refinement, we may affirm that their end
as uniformly the fame; and that the projec of This prov.
educing the power of the aristocracy, sometimes ie byot re
vowed, and pursued with vigor; sometimes; eents in
oncealed, or seemingly suspended; was never th reigop
together abandoned.
No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles Roert
an Robert Bruce. Their valor conquered the Bruce.
ingdom, and placed him on the throne. His
ratitude and generosity bestowed on them the
nds of the vanquilhed. Property has seldom
ndergone greater or more sudden revolutions,
an those to which it was subjed, at that time,
Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the efataes
f molt of the ancient Scottifl Barons, granted
hem to his English subjes. These were expelled
y the Scots, and their lands seized by new masters.
midst such rapid changes, confusion was unavoid-
ble; and many polfeffed their lands by titles ex.
remely defective. During one of those truces
etween the two nations, occasioned rather by
eir being weary of war, than desirous of peace,

o o Robert formed a scheme for checking the grov*in
I. power and wealth of the nobles. He summoned

them to appear, and to Thow by what rights thej
held their lands. They assembled accordingly,
and the question being put, they Itarted up, a
once, and drew their swords, By these", aid
they, "we acquired our lands, and with these we
a will defend them. " The King, intimidated by
their boldness, prudently dropt the proje&d But
deeply did they resent this attack upon their order,
that, notwithstanding Robert's popular and splendid
virtues,it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy again
his life.
!aitj. David his son, at first an exile in France, as

wards a prisoner in Englaad, and involved in con
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to attend
to the internal police of his kingdom, or to thini
of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
k~ntIL Our historians have been more careful to relate

the military, than the civil tranfadions of the reigl
of Robert I. Skirmilhes and inroads of litdt
consequence they describe minutely; but with t
gard to every thing that happened during feveri
years of tranquillity, they are altogether filet.
ra.,m.L The feeble administration of Robert III. mu

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, ofi
mean genius, and of a frail and ficklv cnftitution,
was not a fit person to enter the lift with adio
.and martial Barons, or to attempt wresting froe
them any of their rights.
JaSl. The civil. tranfadions in Scotland are betty

known since the beginning of the reign of JamesL

and

d a complete series of our laws fpplies the BO.O x
eted of our historians. The' Englilh made some L
menIl( for their injulice in detaining that Prince
pirfoner, by their generouc care of his education.
)vrng hit lone residence in England , he had an
l)portulity of observing the feudal system in a
nore advanced slate, and refined from many of
he imperfedions which ill adhered to it, in his
wn kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but
ot independent; a King powerful. though far
mm absolute; he saw a regular administration of
overnment; wife laws enadted ; and a nation
ourilhing and happy, because all ranks of men
ere accustomed to obey them. Full of these
deas, he returned into his native country, which
resented to him a very different scene. The
oyal authority, never great, was now contempt.
ble, by having been so long delegated to regents.
'he ancient patrimony, and revenues of the
rown, were aimo totally alienated. During his
ong absence the name of King was little known,
tnd less regarded. The licence of many years had
enrierrd the nobles independent. Univeifal anar-
chy prevailed. The weak were exposed to the' ra-
pine and opprellion of the strong. In every corner"

A contemporary Monkish writer describes these cal

mities very feelingly, in his rude latin. In diebus illis,
non erat lex in Scotia, fed qu:libet potentiorum juniorem
opprelfit; et totum regnum suit unum latro-inium; homici.
di , deprredationes. incendia, et cetera maleficia reman.
ferult ipunita ; et jultitia relegata extra terminos rigii
exulavit. Chartular. Moray. apud Inaue tflay, vol. i. p. 2ta.

VOL. . E

0oo K some barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and

neither feared the King, nor pitied the people.

James was too wife a Prince to employ open force

to corred such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor
the times would have borne it. He applied the gender,
and less offensive remedy of laws and statutes. Ina
parliament held immediately after his return, he gain
edthe confidence of his people, by many wife laws,
ending visibly to re-eftablilh order, tranquillity, and
juftice,in the kingdom. But, at the fame time that he
endeavoured to secure these blessings to his fubjeds,
be discovercd his intention to recover those pofl'
sons of which the crown had been unjustly bereaved;
and for that purpose obtained an at, by which hewo
empowered to summon such as had obtained crown.
lands during the three las reigns, to produce the
rights by which they held them ". As this statute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which
paued in a fubfequenc parliament, aimed a dreadful
blow at their power. By it the leagues and combine
tions, which we have already described, and which
rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, wee
declared unlawful ". Encouraged by this success in
the beginning of his enterprise, James's nextftep wa
ftil bolder and more decisive. During the fittingd
parliament, he seized, at once, his cousin Murdo
Duke of Albany, and his sons; the Earls of Dougls
Lenox, Angus, March, and above twenty otb
peers and barons of prime rank. To all of them, how
ever, he was immediately reconciled, except

" Ad. 9. P. 424.
" A. ;o. P. 424.

Albany, and his sons, and Lenox. These were tried B o o t
by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is L
now unknown. Their execution Rruck the whole
order with terror, and their forfeiture added vast
poffellions to the crown. He seized, likewise, the
earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different
pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him by inheritance.
The patience and inadivity of the nobles, while
the King was proceeding so rapidly towards aggran.
dizing the crown, are amazing. The only obftruc.
tion he met with was from a flight infurre&ion
headed by the Duke of Albany's youngest on, and
thal was eatily foppreffed. The splendor and presence
of a King, to which the great men had been long
uImuccuftomed , inspired reverence: James was a
Prince of great abilities, and conducted his opera.
tioos with much prudence. He was in friendibip with
England, and closely allied with the French King:
He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un.
ifual security and happiness under his adminiRra.
tion: And all his acquisitions, however fatal to
the body of the nobles, had been gained by at.
tacks upon individuals; were obtained by deci-
sions of law; and being founded on circum.
stances peculiar to the persons who suffered,
mieht excite murmurs and apprehensions, but
afforded no colorable pretext for a general rebel.
lion. It was not so with the next attempt which
the King made. Encouraged by the facility with
which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body
of the nobility, and which the events fliof

E a

o0 K some barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and
I. neither feared the King, nor pitied the people.

James was too wife a Prince to employ open force

to correl such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor
the times would have borne it. He applied the gentler,
and less offensive remedy of laws and flatutes. Ina
parliament held immediately after his return, he gain.
ed the confidence of his people, by many wife laws,
ending visibly to re-eftablilh order, tranquillity, and
juRice, in the kingdom. But, at the fame time that he
endeavoured to secure these blessings to his fubjeds,
be discovercd his intention to recover those pofrcl

mans of which the crown had been unjustly bereaved;
and for that purpose obtained an a&t by which hown
empowered to summon such as had obtained crown
lands during the three last reigns, to produce the
rights by which they held them ". As this statute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which
passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful
blow at their power. By it the leagues and combine.
tions, which we have already dfcribed, and which
rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, wen
declared unlawful ". Encouraged by this success i
the beginning of his enterprise, James's nextftep wo
flill bolder and more decisive. During the fittingd
parliament. he seized, at once, his cousin Murdo
Duke of Albany, and his sons; the Earls of Dougla
Lenox, Angus, March, and above twenty ote
peers and barons of prime rank. To all of them, how
ever, he was immediately reconciled, except

" Ah. . 9 .
P 424.

A .
o. P. 424

Albany, and his sons, and Lenox. These were tried BOO K
by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is L
now unknown. Their execution struck the whole
order with terror, and their forfeiture added vast
poffllions to the crown. He seized, likewise, the
earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different
pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him by inheritance.
The patience and inactivity of the nobles, while
the King was proceeding so rapidly towards aggran.
dizing the crown, are amazing. The only obftruc.
tion he met with was from a flight infurredion
headed by the Duke of Albany's youngest son, and
that was ealily fippreffed. The splendor and presence
of a King, to which the great men had been long
unaccul(omed , inspired reverence: James was a
Prince of great abilities, and conducted his opera.
tions with much prudence. He was in friendIhip with
England, and closely allied with the French King:
He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un.
usual security and happiness under his adminitra.
tion: And all his acquisitions, however fatal to
the body of the nobles, had been gained by at.
tacks upon individuals; were obtained by deci.
sions of law; and being founded on circum.
iances peculiar to the persons who suffered,
mieht excite murmurs and apprehensions, but
afforded no colorable pretext for a general rebel.
lion. It was not so with the next attempt which
the King made. Encouraged by the facility with
which he had hitherto advanced , he ventured
upon a meafare that irritated the whole body
of the nobility, and which the events flho

E3

4 0 0 K either to have been entered into with too muct

I* precipitancy,.or to have been carried on with too

much violence. The father of George Dunbat
Earl of March had taken arms against Robert IIL
the King's father; but that crime bad been pardon.
ed, and his lands restored by Robert Duke of Al
bany. James, on pretext that the regent had ex.
ceeded his power and that it was the prerogative
of the King alone to pardon treason, or to alienate
lands annexed to the crown, obtained a sentence,
declaring the pardon to be void, and depriving
Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the great men held
lands by no other right than what they derived
from grants of the two Dukes of Aibany. Such a
decision, though they had reason to expect itin con.
sequence of the statute which the King had obtained,
occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was,
at present, the only sufferer, the precedent might
be extended, and their tites to possessions, which
they confidered as the rewards of their valor,
might be fubjeded to the review of courts of
law, whole forms of proceeding, and jurifdicion,
were in a martial age little known, and extremely
odious. Terror and discontent spread faRl, upon
this discovery of the King's intentions; the com-
mon danger called on the whole order to unite,
and to make one bold Rland; before they were
iripped successively of their acquisitions, and
reduced to a Rate of poverty and insignificance
The prevalence of these sentiments among the
nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the
friends or followers of those who had been the

chief fiifferers under the King's administration, to B 0 0
form a conspiracy against his life. The first uncer- l,
tain intelligence of this was brought him, while
he lay in his camp before Roxburgh castle. He
durst not confide in nobles, to whom he had given
so many causes of disgust, but inltantly dismissed
them and their vaLTals; and, retiring to a monas-
tery near Pcrth, was soon after murdered there,
in the most cruel manner. All our historians men-
tion, with aftonilhment, this circumstance of the
King's dffbanding his army, at a time when it was
so necelTary for his preservation. A King, fay they,
surrounded with his Barons, is secure from secret
treason, and may defy open rebellion. But those
very Barons were the persons whom he chiefly
dreaded ; and it is evident from this review of his
adliniftration, that he bad greater reason to appre-
bend danger, than to expect defence from their
hands. It was the misfortune of James, that his
maxims and manners were too refined for the age
in which he lived. Happy! had he reigned in a
kingdom more civilized; his love of peace, of
juflice, and of elegance, would have rendered
his schemes successful; and instead of perishing
because he had attempted too much, a grateful
people would have applauded and seconded his
efforts to reform and to improve them.

Crichton, the most able man of those who Jue ir.

had the direcion of affairs during the minority
of James II. had been the minister of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling
the nobility. He did not relinquilh the design,

E3

o
0 o and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the
I, fame sentiments. But what James had attempted

to effet slowly, and by legal means, his son and
Crichton pursued with the impetuosity natural tc
Scotfmcn, and with the fierceness peculiar to thai
age. William the sixth Earl of Douglas was the
firt vidim to their barbarous policy. That younj
nobleman (as we have already observed) contemn
ing the authority of an infant prince, almost openly
renounced his allegiance, and aspired to independ
once. Crichton, too high spirited to bear such ai
insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to juftici
io powerful an offender, decoyed him by many pro
mises to an interview in the castle of Edinburgh
and, notwitbftanding these, murdered both him an(
his brother. Crichton, however, gained little by thi
ad of treachery, which rendered him univerfall]
odious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was n(
letspowerful, and no less formidable to the crown
By forming the league which we already mention
ed with the Earl of Crawford and other Barons, hi
had united againfi his Sovereign almost one half o
his kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fami
fare which had been fatal to. the former Earl
Relying on the King's promises, who had nor
attained to the years of manhood, and havinj
obtained a fafe-condud under the great feal, hi
ventured to meet him in Stirling castle. Jame
urged him to dissolve that dangerous confederac
into which he had entered; the Earl obftiRatell
refused; If you will not," said the enrage
monarch, drawing his dagl;, S This hall;" an

tfabbed him to the heart. An iction so unworthy no 0 0
of a King filled the nation with aftonifhmenc, and i.
with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms with
the utmost fury, and dragging the fafe-condud,
which the King had granted and violated, ata hor.
fe's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt the
town, and threatened to besiege the cafle. An
accommodation, however, ensued; on what terms is
not known. But the King's jealousy, and the new
Earl's power and resentment, prevented it from being
of long continuance. Both took the field, at the head
of their armies, and met near Abercorn. Thatof the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far superior
to the King's, both in number and in valor; and a
single battle must, in all probability, have decided
whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas was
henceforth topoffefs the throne of Scotland.But,while
his troops impatiently expeted the signal to engage,
the Earl ordered them to retire to their camp; and Sir
James Hamilton of Cadyow, the person in whom
he placed the greatest confidence, convinced of
his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or
of his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted
him that very night. This example was followed
by many; and the Earl, despised or forsaken by
all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and
obliged to depend for his fubfifence on the friend,
Ihip of the King of England. The ruin of this
great family, which had so long rivalled and over.
awed the crown, and the terror with which such
an example of unsuccessful ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for some time, from

E4

OO opposition; and the royal authority remained un.
I. controlled and almost absolute James did not

susser this favorable interval to pars unimproved;
be procured the consent of parliament to laws
more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the aristocracy,
than were ever obtained by any former or fubfe.
quent monarch of Scotland.

By one of there, not only all the vast poffefions

of the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown,
but all prior and future alienations of crown lands
were declared to be void, and the King was em.
powered to seize them at pleasure, without any pro.
cess or form of law, and oblige the possessors to refund
whatever they had received from them ". A dreadful
instrument ofoppreflion in the hands of a Prince!

Another law prohibited the wardenship of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; reltrained, in
several instances, the jurifdition of that office;
and extended the authority of the King's courts".

By a third, it was enaced that no Regality, or

exclusive right of administering justice within a
man's own lands, flould be granted in time to
come, without the consent of Parliament"; a con.
dition which implied almoR an express prohibi-
tion. Those nobles who already possessed that
great privilege, would naturally be solicitous to
prevent it from becoming common, by being be.
flowed on many. Those who had not themselves
attained it, would envy others the acquisition of

" As. 41. P. 145. ' Ibid. At. 42.
' Ibid. Ad. 4j.

such a flattering diftintion; and both would con- B o o K
cur in rejecing the claims of new pretenders. 1.

By a fourth ad, all new grants of hereditary

offices were prohibited, and those obtained since
the death of the laR King were revoked ".

Each of these Ratutes undermined some of the great
pillars on which the power of the aristocracy refted.
During the remainder of his reign, this Prince pur-
sued the plan which he had begun, with the utmost
vigor; and had not a sudden death, occasioned by the
splinter of a cannon which burf near him at the siege
of Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted
neither genius nor courage to perfet it: And Scot-
land might, in all probability, have been the first
kingdom in Europe which would have seen the
subversion of the feudal system.

James III. discovered no less eagerness than his fa- James i

ther or grandfather to humble the nobility, but far
inferior to either of them in abilities and address, he
adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his reign was
disastrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu-
dal governments, the nobles were not only the King's
minilters, and possessed of all the great offices of power
or of trust; they were likewise his companions and fa-
vorites, and hardly any but them approached his per-
son, orwereentitled to his regard. But James, who
both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an
unusual distance, and bellowed every mark of confi-
dence and affetion upon a few mean persons, of-pro-
fellions so dishonorable, as ought to have rendered
them unworthy of his pretence. Shutup with thefc i

Acd. 44.

o o K his carle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in pub.
I. lic, and amused himself with architedure, music,

and other arts, which were then little esteemed.
The nobles beheld the power and favor of these
minions with indignation. Even the sanguinary
neafures of his father provoked them less than
his neglec Individuals alone suffered by the
former; by the latter, every man thought himself
injured, because all were contemned. Their dif
content was much heightened by the King's re.
calling all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices,
legalities, and every other concession which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and which had
been extorted during his minority. Combinations
among themselves, secret intrigues with England,
and all the usual preparatives for civil war, were
the effeas of their resentment. Alexander Duke
of Albany, and John Earl of Mar, the King's
brothers, two young men of turbulent and ambi.
tous spirits, and incensed against James, who
treated them with the fame coldness as he did the
other great men, entered deeply into all their ca-
bals. The King deteted their designs, before
they were ripe for execution, and, seizing his two
brothers, committed the Duke of Albany to Edin-
burgh cafle. The Earl of Mar having remon-
ftrated with too much boldness against the King's
condu,. was murdered, if we may believe our
historians, by his command. Albany, apprehen-
five of the fame fate, made his escape out of the
castle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honor, or indignation at his meafurcs,

ere perhaps the motives which'firlf induced him to B o o t
oin the malecontents. But James's attachment to fa. h .
orites rendering him every day more odious to the
obles, the profped of the advantages which might be
erived from their general difaffedion, added to the
efentment which he felt on account of his brother's
eath, and his own injuries, soon inspired Albany
ith more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He con.
luded a treaty with Edward IV. of England, in
hich he assumed the name of Alexander King of
cots; and in return for the alliftance which was pro-
ifed him towards dethroning his brother, he bound
imfelf, as soon as he was put in poffeflion of the
ingdom, to swear fealty and do homage to the Eng.
ilh monarch, to renounce the ancient alliance with
rance, to contract a new one with England, and to
urrender some of the strongest castles and mofl valu.
ble counties in Scotland ". That aid, which the
Duke so basely purchased at the price of his own
honor, and the independence of his country, was
puncually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester
with a powerful army conducted him towards Scot-
land. The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James
to implore the assistance of those nobles whom he had
folongtreated with contempt. Someof them werein
close confederacy,with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event which would restore their
order to its ancient pre-eminence. They eemed,
however, to enter with zeal into the measures of
their sovereign for the defence of the kingdom
:" Abercr. Mart. Atch. V.. p . 443.

o o against its invaders ", and took the field, at the

bead of a powerful army of their followers, but
with a fironger disposition to redress their own
grievances, than to annoy the enemy; and with
a fixed rfolution of punishing those minions,
whose infolnce they could no longer tolerate.
This resolution they executed in the camp near
Lauder, with a military dispatch and rigor.
Having previofly concerted theirplan, the Ears
of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost
all the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly
entered the p.,rtmenc ,f their sovereign, seized
all his favorites except one Kamfay, whom they
could not tear from ht King, in whose arms he
took shelter, and, without any form of trial,
hanged them inflantly over a bridge. Among the
mort remarkable of those who had engrossed the
King's affetion, were Cochran, amafon, Hommil,
ataylor, Leonard, a smith, Rogers, a musician, and
Torfifan, a fencing-maRer. So despicable a reti
nue discovers the capricioufrefs of James's cha
rader, and accounts for the indignation of the
nobles, when they beheld the favor, due to them,
bellowed on such unworthy objects.

James had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his command, and, difmifling it, Ihat
himself up in the castle of Edinburgh. After va.
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honors were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to
have regained his brother's favor, by ome im-
portant services. But their friendlhip was not o

'* Black Ars, foL 6.

ong duration. James abandoned bimfelf, once more, o o i
o the guidance of favorites; and the fate of those I.
who had suffered at Lauder, did not deter others from
;ourting that dangerous pre-eminence, Albany, on
retext that an attempt had been made to take away
is lite by poison, fled from court, and, retiring to
is caftleat Dunbar. diev thither a greaternutmberof

lonls thanattended on the King himself At the fame

ime, he renewed his former confederacy with Ed-
ward the Earl of Angus openly negociated that infa-
nous treaty; other barons were ready to concur with
t; and if the sudden death of Edward had not preven.
ed Albany's receiving any aid from England, the
rown of Scotland would probably have been the re-
ard of this unworthy combination with the enemies'
fhis country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning
nScotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
at he could not reside there in safety; and flying
ir to England, and then to France, he seems from
hat time to have taken no part in the affairs of his na-
ive country. Emboldened by his retreat, the King
nd his Ministers multiplied the insults which they of-
red to the nobility. A anding guard, a thing un.
known under the feudal governments, and incon.
iftent with the familiarity and confidence with which
nolnirchs then lived amidR their nobles. was raised
or the King'. defence, and the command of it given
o Ramfvy, lately created arl of Bothwell, the
ame person who had so narrowly efaped when his
:ompan on. were put to death at I auder. As if this
trecaution had not been sufficient a proclamation
vas issued, forbidding any person to appear in arms

o o within the precinds of the court"; which, ata time
L when no man of rank left his own house without a

numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in ed
fed, debarring the nobles from all access to the
King. James, at the fame time, became fonder
of retirement than ever, and, funk in indolence
or superstition, or attentive only to amusements,
devolved his whole authority upon his favorites
So many injuries provoked the most confiderabl
nobles to take arms, and having persuaded r
obliged the Duke of Rothesay, the King's eldel
Ion, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at their
head, they openly declared their intention of de
priving James of a crown, of which he had dit
sovered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannock.
burn; but the valor of the Borderers, of whoa
the army of the malecontents was chiefly corn
posed, soon put his troops to flight, and he bin
self was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indo.
lence, immoderate attachment to favorites, ad
all the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in hi
whole condut ;. but the character of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjufily affixed to
him by our historians. His neglec of the noble
irritated, but did not weaken them; and their
discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two
brothers, and their unnatural confederacies with
England, were sufficient to have diturbed a mon

!' Fcreris, 398.

vigorous administration, and to have rendered a B 0'o x
prince of superior talents unhappy. I

T he indignation which many persons of rank ex.
prested against the conduct of the conspirators, to.
gether with the terror of the sentence of excommuni.
cation which the Pope pronounced againIt them,ob.
liged them to use their victory with great moderation
and humanity. Being conscious how deteflable the
crime of imbruing their hands in the blood of their
sovereign appeared, they endeavoured to regain the
good opinion of their countrymen, and to atone for
the rrarmentof the father, by theirloyalty and duty
towards the son. They placed him instantly on the
throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in
acknowledging his authority.

James IV. was naturally generous and brave; James n
he felt, in a high degree, all the palfions which
animate a young and noble mind. He loved
magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager
to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient
and hereditary enmity between the King and
noble; seems almost entirely to have ceased. He
envied not their splendor, because it contributed
to the ornament of his court; nor did he dread
their power, which he confidered as the security of
his kingdom, not as an objec of terror to himself.
This confidence on his part met with the proper re-
turn of duty and affection on theirs; and, in his war
with England, he experienced how much a King,
beloved by his nobles, is able to perform. Though
the ardor of his courage, and the pirit of chivalry,
rather than the prospect of any national advantage,

i o were the motives of that expedition; such was the

L zeal of his fubjeats for the King's glory, that he was

followed by as gallant an army, as ever any of his
ancestors had led upon English ground. But
though James himself formed no scheme danger.
ous or detrimental to the aristocracy, his reign
was diftinguilbed by an event extremely fatal to
it; and one accidental blow humbled it more
than all the premeditated attacks of preceding
Kings. In the rahl and unfortunate battle of
Flowden, a brave nobility chose rather to die than
to desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thir.
teen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an
incredible number of barons, fell with the King ".
The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly,
felt this difafer, and if a Prince of full age had
then acended the throne, their contRernation and
feebleness would have afforded him advantages
which no former monarch ever possesed.
IX v. But James V. who succeeded his father, was

an infant of a year old; and though the office of
regnt was conferred upon his cousin the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprise, a native
of France, and accustomed to a government
where the power of the King was already great;
though he made many bold attempts to extend
the royal authority; though he put to death
Lord Home, and banished the Earl of Angus,
the two noblemen of greatef influence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under
his administration. A ranger to the manners,

* Abet. n. 54o.

th,

the laws, and the language of the people whom B o o K
he was called to rule, he aed, on some occasions, I.
rather like a viceroy of the French King, than the
governor of Scotland; but the nobles afterted their
own privileges, and contended for the interest of
their country with a boldness, which convinced him
of their independence, and of the impotence of his
own authority. After several unfuccefftil rug.
gles, he voluntarily retired to France; and the King
being then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed
that he fliould assume the government, and that
eight persons hould be appointed to attend him
by turns, and to advise and assist him in the ad-
minifration of public affairs. The Earl of Angus,
who was one of that number, did not long remain
ftisfied with such divided power. He gained some
of his colleagues, removed others, and intimidated
the reft. When the term of his attendance expired,
he ill retained authority, to which all were obliged
to submit, because none of them was in a condi-
tion to dispute it. The affection of the young King
was the only thing wanting, to fix and perpetuate
his power. But an ative and high-fpirited Prince
submitted, with great impatience, to the restraint
in which he was kept. It ill suited his years, or
disposition, to be confined as a prisoner within his
own palace; to be treated with no refped, and to
be deprived of all power. He could not, on some
occasions, conceal his resentment and indignation.
Angus foresaw that he had much to dread from
thele; and as he could not gain the King's heart,
he resolved to make sure of his person. James was

VOL. I. F

0 0o K continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and con.
I. sidents; many eyes watched all his motions, and

observed every ftep he took. But the King's eager.
ness to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance. He
escaped from Falkland, and fled to the carle of
Stirling, the residence of the Queen his mother,
and the only place of frength in the kingdom
which was not in the hand of the Douglases. The
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their
hatred to Angus, and others by their refped for
the King, crowded to Stirling; and his court was
soon filled with persons of the greatest diftindion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpeed
revolution, resolved, at first, to make one bold pul
for recovering his authority, by marching to Stir
ling at the head of his followers; but he wanted
either courage or strength to execute this refolutioa
In a parliament held soon after, he and his adher
ents were attainted, and after escaping from many
dangers, and enduring much misery, he was at
length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

James had now not only the name, but, thoug

extremely young, the full authority of a King He
was inferior to no prince of that age in gracefilnt
of person, or in vigor of mind. His underflanding
was good, and his heart warm; the former capabl
of great improvement, and the latter susceptible o
the beR impreiflons. But, according to the usual att
of Princes who are called to the throne in thei
infancy, his education had been negl'eed. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter, tha2
to infruA him. It was the interef of those who

governed the kingdom, to prevent him from know- B o o x
ing too much. The Earl of Angus, in order to 1.
divert him from bufine%, gave him an early taste for
fich pleasures as afterwards occupied and engrossed
him more than became a King. Accordingly, we
discover in James all the features of a great but
uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent pas-
sions, implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of
power, and the utmost rage at disappointment. On
the other, love to his people, zeal for the punilh-
ment of private oppressors, confidence in his favor-
ites, and the most engaging openness and affability
of behaviour.

What he himself had suffered from the exorbitant
power of the nobles, led him early to imitate his
predecessors, in their attempts to humble them. The
plan he formed for that purpose was more profound,
more fyltematic, and pursued with greater conltancy
and Readiness, than that of any of his ancestors: And
the influence of the events in his reign upon those of
the subsequent period, render it neceflary to explain
his conduct at greater length, and to enter into a
more minute detail of his aions. He had penetra-
tion enough to discover those defects in the schemes
adopted by former Kings, which occasioned their
miscarriage. The example of James I. had taught him,
that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people, and
that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to
be fulbdued by these alone. The effeets of the violent
menaures of James II convinced him, that the oppref-
sion of one great family is apt either to excite the fufpi-
cion and resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich

F2

00 with its spoils rome new family, which would soon

. adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally

formidable to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end
of James III. that negled was still more intolerable to
the nobles than oppreflion, and that the Ministry of
new men and favorites was both dishonorable and
dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he felt that
the authority of the crown was not sufficient to
counterbalance the power of the aristocracy, and
that, without some new accession of strength, be
could expea no better success in the truggle than
his ancestors. In this extremity, he applied himself
to the clergy, hoping that they would both relilb
his plan, and concur, with all their influence, in
enabling him to put it in execution. Under the
feudal government, the church, being reckoned a
third eate, bad its representatives in parliament;
the number of these was considerable, and they
poleffed great influence in that aflembly. The super.
ftition of former Kings, and the zeal of many ages
of ignorance, had bellowed on ecclesiastics a great
proportion of the national wealth; and the authority
which they acquired by the reverence of the people,
was superior even to that which they derived
from their riches. This powerful body, however,
depended entirely on the crown. The Popes, not-
withstanding their attention to extend their ufurpa.
tions, had negleced Scotland as a distant and poor
kingdom , and permitted its Kings to exercise
powers which they disputed with more confider.
able princes. The Scottish monarchs had the sole
right of nomination to vacant bilhoprics and

abbeys "; and James naturally concluded, that B o o
men who expected preferment from his favor, I.
would be willing to merit it, by promoting his
defiggs. Happily for him, the nobles had not yet
recovered the blow which fell on their order at
Flowden; and if we may judge either from their
conduct, or from the character given of them- by
Sir Rlph Sadler the Englilh envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience in
business, and incapable of aing either with una.
nimity, or with vigor. Many of the clergy, on the
other hand, were diftinguitbed by their great abili.
ties, and no less by their ambition. Various causes
of disgust had arisen between them and the nobles,
who despised their character, and envied their
power, or their wealth. By asing in concert with
the King, they not'only would gratify him, but
avenge themselves, and hoped to aggrandize their
own order, by depressing those who were their sole
rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and, sensible that a
person so far superior to the other nobles in abilities
might create many obstacles which would retard or
render ineffecual all his schemes, he solemnly
swore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland; and, notwithstanding the repeated
solicitations of the King of England, he adhered
to his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then

' Epift. Reg Scot. . 97, &c. Aft i2. P. 4o.

F3

o 0 K proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh,
.L Stirling, and other catles and to fill his magazines

with arms and ammunition. Having taken these pre.
cautions by way of defence. he began to treat the
nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve. Those
offices. which they were apt, from long poffeflion,
to confider as appropriated to their order, were
now betlowed on ecclesiastics, who alone possessed
the King's ear, and, together with a few gentlemen
of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated hig
lchemes, were intruded with the management f
all public affairs. These minifiers were chosen with
judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun who soon became
the mos eminent among them, was a man of fuperiot
genius. They served the King with fidelity, they
carried on his measures with vigor, with reputation,
and with success. James no longer concealed his
distrust of the nobles, and suffered no opportunity
of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were
aggravated into real crimes, and punilbed with
severity. Every accusation against persons of rant
was heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt
was examined with rigor, and every trial proved
fatal to those who were accused: The banishing
Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons extremely
frivolous, the beheading the eldest son of Lord
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt,
and the condemning Lady Glamis, a sifter of the
Earl of Angus. to be burnt for the crime of witch
craft, of which even that credulous age believed
her innocent, are monuments both of the King's
hatred of the nobility, of the severity of hi

government, and of the retches he made towards B o K
;:bfolute power. By these ads of authority, he tried .
the fpirlt of the nobles, and how much they were
willing to bear. Tlheir patience increased his con-
tempt for them, and added to the ardor and boldness
with which he pursued his plan. Meanwhile they
observed the tendency of his schemes with concern,
and with resentment; but the King's sagacity, the
vigilance of his ministers, and the want of a proper
leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures
for their defence, and impossible to act with becom-
ing vigor. James and his counsellors, by a false ftep
which they took, presented to them, at length, an
advantage which they did not fail to improve.

Motives, which are well known, had prompted
Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and
to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
system of reformation satisfied none of his fubjeds.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so
far, others murmured because he proceeded no far-
ther. By his imperious temper, and alternate perse-
cutions of the zealots for Popery, and the converts
to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formida-
ble to both. Henry was afraid that this general
diffatisfacion of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the friendlhip of the king of Scots, and endeavoured
to engage him in an alliance against England. lie
resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effeds of
their negociations, by entering into a closer union
with his nephew. In order to accomplih this, he

F4

X 0 0 I transmitted to James an elaborate memorial, repre

. senting the numerous encroachments of the fee of

Rome upon the rights of foyereigns"; and that he
might induce him more certainly to adopt the fame
mealures for abolishing papal ururpation, which had
proved o efficacious in England, he sent ambafla.
dors into Scotland. to propose a personal interview
with him at York. It was plainly James's interelf
to accept this invitation; the assistance of so power.
ful an ally, the high honors whichwere promised
him, and the liberal subsidies he might have oh.
tained, would have added no little dignity to hi
domestic government, and must have greatly facili
tated the execution of his favorite plan. On the
other hand, a war with England, which he had
reason to apprehend, if he rejeded Henry's offen
of friendlbip. was inconsistent with all his views
'Tis would bring him to depend on his barons; an
army could not be raised without their affiRance:
To call nobles incensed against their prince into
the field, was to unite his enemies, to make them
sensible of their own strength, and to afford then
an opportunity of revenging their wrongs. James,
who was not ignorant that all these consequences
might follow a breach with England, listened at
first to Henry's proposal, and consented to th
interview at York. But the clergy dreaded at
union, which must have been eablilhed on th
ruins of the church. Henry had taken great pain
to infuse into his nephew his own sentiment

" Stryp, ccdlef. . Ap.
i .

concerning religion, and had frequently solicited B o o K
him, by ambalfadors, to renounce the usurped . *
dominion of the Pope, which was no less dithon.
orable to princes than grievous to their fubjets.
The clergy had hitherto, with great address,
diverted the King from regarding these solicitations.
But, in an amicable conference, Henry expect-
ed, and they feared , that James would yield
to his entreaties, or be convinced by his argu-
ments. They knew that the revenues of the church
were an alluring object to a Prince who wanted
money, and who loved it; that the pride and
ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indignation of the
nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence to the
people; that the Protestant opinions were spreading
faf throughout the nation; and that an universal
defetion from the eftablilbed church would be the
consequence of giving the smallest degree of encou-
ragement to these principles. For these reasons,
they employed all their credit with the King, and
had recourse to every artifice and insinuation, in
order to divert him from a journey, which must
have been so fatal to their interest They endea.
voured to inspire him with fear, by magnifying
the danger to which he would expose his person,
by venturing so far into England, without any
security but the word of a Prince, who having
violated every thing venerable and sacred in re.
ligion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way
of compensation for the fums which he might
have received from Henry, they offered an an-
nual donative of fifty thousand crowns ; they

O K promired to contribute liberally towards carryinj
L on a war with England, and flattered him wid

the profped of immense riches, arising rom th
forfeiture of persons who were to be tried ano
condemned as heretics. Influenced by these confida
ations, James broke his agreement with Henry
who, in expecation of meeting him, had alread]
come to York; and that haughty and impatien
Monarch resented the affront, by declaring wa
against Scotland. His army was soon ready to in
vade the kingdom. James was obliged to hav
recourse to the nobles, for the defence of his domi
nions. At his command, they assembled their fol
lowers; but with the fame dispositions which hal
animated their ancestors in the reign of James IIl. an
with a full resolution of imitating their example, b]
punilhing thofeto whom they imputed the grievance
of which they had reason to complain; and i
the King's Ministers had not been men of abili
ties, superior to those of James III. and of con
fiderable interest even with their enemies, wb
could not agree among themfclves what vicim
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have beei
as remarkable as that of Lauder, for the darin]
encroachments of the nobility on the prerogativ
of the Prince. But though his ministers wer
saved by this accident, the nobles had soon an
other opportunity of discovering to the Kinl
their diffatisfation with his government, an(
their contempt of his authority. Scarcity of po
visions, and the rigor of the season, havinl
obliged the Englilh army, which had invade(

Scotland, to retire, James imagined that he B o o K
ould attack them, with great advantage, in 1.
heir retreat; but the principal barons, with an
bflinacv and disdain which greatly aggravated
heir disobedience, refused to advance a ftep be-
ond th: limits of their own country. Provoked by
is insult to himself, and suspicious of a new confpi-
acy againf his ministers, the King inftantlv disband-
d an army which paid so little regard to his orders,
nd returned .ibruptly into the heart of the kingdom.
An ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could
ot brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes
f success had been rafli, and his despair upon a
lifappointment was excessive. He felt himself
ngaged in an unnecessary war with England,
which, intead of yielding him the laurels and
riumphs that he expected, had begun with such
circumtances, as encouraged the insolence of
his fubjedts, and exposed him to the scorn of
his enemies. He saw how vain and ineffectual
all his projecs to humble the nobles had been,
and that, though in times of peace a Prince may
endeavour to depress them, they will rife,
during war, to their former importance and dig-
nity. Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled
his bosom by 'turns. The violence of these pas-
sions altered his temper, and, perhaps, impaired
his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and re-
tired. He seemed, through the - day, to be
swallowed up in profound meditation, and,
through the night, he was disturbed with those
visionary terrors which make impreflion upon a

B o x weak understanding only, or a disordered fancq

L In order to revive the King's spirits, an inroa

on the western borders was concerted by his m
nifters, who prevailed upon the Barons in th
neighbouring provinces to raise as many troop
as were thought necessary, and to enter the eni
my's country. But nothing could remove th
King's aversion to his nobility, or diminilh hi
jealousy of their power. He would not even ir
truf them with the command of the forces whic
they had assembled; that was reserved for Olivt
Sinclair his favorite, who no sooner appeare
to take poflfefion of the dignity conferred upo
him , than rage and indignation occasioned a
universal mutiny in the army. Five hundre
Englifl, who happened to be drawn up in fight
attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred t
the King, and contempt of their general, pro
duced an effec to which there is no parallel ii
history. They overcame the fear of death, anl
the love of liberty; and ten thousand men fli
before a number so far inferior, without ftrikii]
a single blow. No man was desirous of a victory
which would have been acceptable to the King
and to his favorite; few endeavoured to sav
themselves by flight; the Englilh had the choic
of what prisoners they pleated to take; and al
most every person of diftindion, who was en
gaged in the expedition, remained in thei
hand ". This aftonilhing event was a. new proo

"According to an account of this event in the Hamiltm
MSS. about thirty' were killed, above a thousand were ake

o the King of the general difaffeaion of the no. B o o K
ility. and a new discovery of his own weakness , .
nd want of authority. Incapable of bearing these
epeated insults, he found himself unable to revenge
hem. The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded
o the furious transports of rage, which the first
ccount of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
iolent paions, which are the enemies of life, preyed
pon his mind, and wafted and consumed a youthful
nd vigorous constitution. Some authors of that age
mpute his untimely death to poison; but the dif.
ases of the mind, when they rife to a height,
re often mortal; and the known effects of dif.
ppointment , anger, and resentment, upon a
anguine and impetuous temper, sufficiently ac.
ount for his unhappy fate. " His death ( fays
rummond) proveth his mind to have been
aifed to a high strain, and above mediocrity;
e could die, but could not digest a disaster."
ad James survived this misfortune, one of
wo things mufl have happened: Either the
iolence of his temper would have engaged him
penly to attack the nobles, who would have
und in Henry a willing and powerful pro.
edor, and have derived the fame assistance from
im, which the malecontents, in the' succeed-
,g reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in
hat cafe, a dangerous civil war must have been
the certain consequence. Or , perhaps, necef.

prisoners, and, among them, a hundred and sixty persons of
condition, Vol. ii. 86. The small number of the English
prevented their taking more prisoners.

B o o fity might have obliged him to accept of Henry'

I. offers, and be reconciled to his nobility. In tha

event the church would have fallen a sacrifice u
their union; a Reformation, upon Henry's plan
would have been eftablilhed by law; a great par
of the temporalities of the church would hav
been seized; and the friendship of the King an
Barons would have been cemented by dividin1
it; poils.

Such were the efforts of our Kings towards reduc

ing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If the
were not attended with success, we muf not, so
that reason, conclude that they were not condud
ed with prudence. Every circumstance seems t
have combined against the crown. Accident
events concurred with political causes, in renderin
the bes concerted measures abortive. The assassin;
tion of one King, the fhdden death of anothb
and the fatal despair of a third, contributed n
less than its own natural strength, to prefen
the ariftocracv from ruin.

Amidst these struggles, the influence whic

ouJ Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a ci
cumftance seemingly inexplicable, and whic
merits particular attention. As these alfemblil
were composed chiefly of the nobles, they,
are apt to imagine, must have didated all the

The atm- decisions; but, instead of this, every King foun
ordium i
h,.tce of them obsequious to his will, and obtained fuc
the cotl, laws, as he deemed necessary for extending h
pa^ , authority. All things were conduced there wit

dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of t

hitorians, do we find an instance of any opposition B o o K
formed against the court in Parliament, or mention of I.
any difficultyin carrying through the measures which
were agreeable to the King. In order to account for
this singular fad, it is necessary to inquire into the
origin and constitution of Parliament.

The genius of the feudal government, uniform The earon

in all its operations, procured the fame effeds in of it
small, as in great societies; and the territory of a
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom.

le posseed the right of jurifdidion, but those who

depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
allift both in palling and executing his sentences.
When affembledon these occasions, they eflablihed
by mutual consent, such regulations as tended to
the welfare of their small society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Supe-
rior, as his neceflities required. Change now a
single name: In place of Baron, substitute King,
and we behold a Parliament in its first rudi-
ments, and observe the first exertions of those
powers, which its members now possess as
Judges, as Legislators, and as dispensers of the
public revenues. Suitable to this idea, are the
appellations of the King's Court ", and of the
Kinq's Great Council, by which Parliaments were
anciently distinguished ; and suitable to this,
likewise, were the constituent members of which
' Du Cange, voc. Curia.

0 'O K it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms,
1. such as held of the King in chief were bound,

by the condition of their tenure, to attend and
to aflift in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a
privilege, but a service ". It was exaded like.
wife, of Bilhops, Abbots, and the greater eccle.
fiaftics, who, holding vast poflefions of the
Crown, were deemed subjed to the fame bur.
den. Parliaments did not continue long in this
state. Cities gradua!iy acquired wealth , a con.
fiderable lhare of the public taxes were levied
on them, the inhabitants grew into estimation,
and, being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a
place in Parliament was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or
to impose such a burden on a whole community,
every borough was permitted to chute one or
two of its citizens to appear in the name of the
corporation; and the idea of representation was
first introduced in this manner. An innovation,
still more important, naturally followed. The
vassals of the crown were originally few in num.
ber, and extremely powerful; but as it is impot
fible to render property fixed and permanent;
many of their poffeliions came, gradually, and
by various methods of alienation, to be split and
parcelled out into different hands. Hence arofi
the diftintion between the Greater and the Lejl
Barons. The former were those who retained
their original fiefs undivided, the latter were thi

"Id. voc. Placitum, col. 1i9. Magna Charta, art. 14
As. Jac. I. 142$. cap. 2S. new

new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both B o O K
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services, L
tnd, of consequence, to give attendance in Par.
iament. To the Leffcr Barons, who formed no
Inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable griev.
nce. Barons fomecimes denied their tenure, bor.
)ughs renounced their right of electing, charters
were obtained containing an exemption from at.
iendance; and the anxiety with which our ancef-
ors endeavoured to get free from the obligation
)f fitting in Parliament, is surpassed by that only
ith which their posterity solicit to be admitted
here. In order to accommodate both parties, and,
it once, to secure to the King a sufficient number
Ds members in his great council, and to fave-his
vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expe-
dient was found out. The obligation to personal
attendance was continued upon the Greater Barons,
Irom which the Lesser Barons were exempted, on
condition of their electing, in each country, a certain
number of Rprtfentatives, to appear in their name.
Thus a Parliament became complete in all its
members, and was composed of Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, of Knights of the hires, and of
Burgeftes. As many causes contributed to bring
government earlier to perfection in England, than
in Scotland; as the rigor of the feudal institutions
abated sooner, and its defects were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the
ther; England led the way in all these changes,
nd Rurgeffes, and Knights of the hire, appeared
in the Parliaments of that nation, before they
VOL. I. G

oo were heard of in ours. Burgesses were firt admit
L ted into the Scottish Parliaments by Robert Bruce";

and in the preamble to the laws of Robert IL
they are ranked among the conRituent memben
of that assembly. The Lesser Barons'were indebted
47. to James I. for a statute exempting them fro

personal attendance, and permitting them to eld
representatives: The exemption was eagerly lai
hold on; but the privilege was so little value4
that, except one or two instances, it lay negled
during one hundred and sixty years; and JamesV
first obliged them to fend representatives regular
to Parliament ".

A Scottilb Parliament, then, confiRed a

ciently of Great Barons, of Ecclefiafics, and
few repreentatives of boroughs. Nor were th
divided, as in England, into two houses,
composed one assembly, in which the L
Chancellor presided'*. In rude ages, when

Abercromby, i. 6.

" Efays on Bri Antiq. fs. IL Dalrymp. Hi.
Fed. Prop. ch. 8.

' In England, the Peers and Commons seem early

have met in fepaate houses; and James I. who was
of imitating the Englilt in all their cftoms, had rol
an intention of introducing iome considerable din
beween the Greater and LIsser Barons in ~Sodand ;atlkt
determined that their consultations should tt be caried
~nder the diretion of the fame Prcfident; &r by his Ia
A. D. 1 27, it is provided, "that out of the Commlnlit
of all the fiires hall be coren a wife and expert m
called the common Speaker of the Parliament, who Ihall
poe all and sundry neds and aufe pertaining to the Corem

cience of government was extremely imperfet Bo o
among a martial people, unacquainted with the I.
rts of peace, strangers to the talents which make
figure in debate, and despising them, Parlia.
ents were not held in the fame estimation as at
relent; nor did haughty Barons love those courts,
which they appeared with such evident marks

ofinferiority. Parliaments were often hastily assem-
led, and it was, probably,; in the King's power,
y the manner in which he issued his writs for that
urpofe, to exclude such as were avcrfe from. his
easures. At a time when deeds of violence were
ommon, and the reftraints.of law and decency
ere little regarded, no man could venture with
fety to oppose the King in his. own court. The
Great Barons, or Lords of Parliament, were ex
remely few; even so late as the beginning of the
ign of James VI." they amounted only to fifty.
ree. The Ecclesiastics equalled them in number,
d being devoted implicitly to the Crown, for
afons which have been already explained, ren.
red all hopes of vidory in any fRruggle desperate.
or were the nobles themselves so anxious, as
ight be imagined, to prevent ads of Parliament
vorable to the royal Prerogative; conscious of
eir own strength, and of the King's inability to
rry these ads into execution without their con.
rrence, they trulted either to elude, or to contemn
thle Parliament or general council." No such Seaker,
would seem, was ever chosen; and by a subsequent law
Chancellor was declared perpetual President of Parliament.
And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40.

G.

o o K them; and the statute revoking the Kings pro.
L perty, and annexing alienated jurifdidions to the

Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated
and despised as often, is a anding proof of the
impotence of laws, when opposed to power. So
many concorring causes are sufficient, perhaps,
to account for the ascendant which our King;
acquired in Parliament. But, without having
recourse to any of these, a single circumnfance,
peculiar to the conRfitution of the Scottilh Par
liament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto
avoided, will abundantly explain this fad, seem.
ingly so repugnant to all our reasonings concerning
the weakness of the King, and the power-of the nobles

As far back as our records enable us to tra

the confitution of our Parliaments, we find a
committee, diftinguilhed by the name of Lords c

rticles. It was their business to prepare, and to
digest all matters which were to be laid befon
the Parliament. There was rarely any bufifne
introduced into Parliament, but what had pad
through the channel of this committee; ever
motion for a new law was first made there, aa
approved of, or rejedted by the members of t
what they approved was formed into a bill, ad
presented to Parliament;. and it seems probable
that what they rejeded could not be introduce
into the house. This committee owed the extn
ordinary powers veRsed in it, to the military ge
nius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub
mit to the drudgery of civil bufioets, too impt
tuous to obfcrve he forms, or to enter into th

etails necessary in conduding it, they were glad to B o o 1
lay that burden upon a small number, while they L
themselves had no other labor than simply to give,
or to refuse their assent to the bills Which were pre-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not
only diredted all the proceedings of Parliament, but
possessed a negative before debate. That committee
was chosen and constituted in such a manner, as put
this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that our Kings once had
the sole right of nominating the Lords of Articles ".
They came afterwards to be elected by' the Parlia.

" It appears from authentic records, that a parliament

was appointed to be held March 12,1 S 66, and that the Lords
of Articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before
the assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly elected
so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to con-
clude, that the Prince alone poffelfed the right of electing them.
There are two different accounts of the manner of their elec-
tion at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the arch-
bilhop of Glasgow: "We, accompanied with our nobility for
" the time, pall to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding
" of our Parliament on the 7th day of this inllant, and
" elected the Lords Articulars." If we explain these words,
according to the firict grammar, we muf conclude that the
Queen herself elected them. It is, however, more probable
that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then present with
her, viz. her privy counsellors, and others, elected the
Lords of Articles. Keith's His. of Scotland, p. )3 . The
other account is Lord Ruthven's, who expressly affirms that
the Queen herself elected them. Keith's Append. 126. Whe-
ther we embrace the one or the other of these opinions, is of no
consequence. If the privy counsellors and nobles attending
the court had a right to elet the Lords of Articles, it was
equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had
had the sole nomination of them.

G3

B OO ment, and consisted of an equal number out of each

L state, and most commonly of eight Temporal and

eight Spiritual Lords, of eight representatives of bor.
oughs, and do the eight great officers of the Crown
Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics, together with
the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the
King's devotion, and it was scarce poflible thatthe
choice could fall on such Temporal Lords and Bur.
gefes as would unite in opposition to his measure
Capable either of influencing their election, or d
gaining them when eleted, the King commonly
found the Lords of Articles no less obsequious to
his will, than his own privy council, and, by
means of his authority with them, he could put a
negative upon his Parliament before debate, as well
as after it; and what may seem altogether incredible,
the most limited Prince in Europe acually pot
.fefed, in one instance, a prerogative which the
most absolute could never attain ".

" Having deduced the history of the committee of Lors

of Articles as low as the subject of this preliminary boot
required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to rome of my readei
to know the subsequent variations in this singular inftitudoa,
and the political use which our Kings made of these. Wbl
Parliaments became more numerous , and more confiderabl
by the admifion of the representatives of the Leser Baron,
the preferring their influence over the Lords of Articla
became, likewise, an object of greater importance to our Kingr
James Vt on pretence that the Lords of Articles could not find
leisure to confider the great multitude of affairs laid befor
them, obtained an at, appointing four perfonsto be nanl
out of each estate, who should meet twenty days before the
commencement of Parliament *, to receive all supplications, &

* A& 2::. P. 1594.

To this account of the internal conffitution of BOOK
Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of I.
the political state of Europe at that period, where state of Eu.
the following history commences. A thorough pe at the
knowledge of that general system, of which every of the ix.
kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re. teent cten.
quilite towards understanding the history of a nation, tor.
and rejecting what they thought frivolous, hould engross in
a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of
Articles. No provilion is made in the ad for the choice of this
felec body, and the King would, of course, have claimed
that privilege. In tf6; , when Charles I. was beginning to
introduce those innovations which gave o much offence to
the nation, hpdreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and
in order to prevent that, an artifice was made use of to fecpre
the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The Temporal Peers
were appointed to thufe eight Bishops, and the Rifhops eight
Peers; these sixteen met together, and elected eight Knights
of the Shire, and eight Burgeftes, and to there the Crown-
officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight
persons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland
were become by that time, attached to the court, there,
it is obvious, would be the men whom the Bishops would
chufe, and of consequence the whole Lords of Articles were
the tools and creatures of the King. This practice, so incon-
lillent withliberty, was abolished during the civil war: And
the flatute of James VI. was repealed. After the Restoration,
Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only
a temporary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then,
converted into a anding law. "For my part," fays the
author from whom I have borrowed many of these particulars,
" I hould have thought it less criminal in our Restoration Par-
"liament, to have openly bestowed upon the King a nega-
" tive before debate, than, in such an underhand artificial

manner, to betray their condiments, and the nation."
Etlays on Brit. Antiq. . It is probable, however, from

G4

10 0 K than an acquaintance with its peculiargovernmentand

L laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend domet

ticoccurrences and revolutions; but without the for.
mer, foreign tranfations must be altogether myfteri.
ous and unintelligible. By attending to this, many
dark pafages in our history may be placed in a clear
light; and where the bulk of historians have fee
only the effet, we may be able to discover the cause.

The subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring
kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in
the political Rate of Europe. Kingdoms, which
were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled
out among nobles, acquired firmness and strength,
by being united into a regular monarchy. Kings
became conscious of their own power and import.
ance. They meditated schemes of conqueR, and
engaged in wars at a difance. Numerous armies
were raised, and great taxes imposed for their
fnbfiftence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in confant pay; that service grew to be
honorable; and cavalry, in which the strength of
a letter of Randolph's to Cecil, to Aug. 6o, printd
in the Appendix, that this Parliament had some appeanat
of ancient precedent to justify their unworthy condo&
Vanios quefions concerning the constituent members of the
Scottish Parliament; concerning the era at which the Repro
fentatives of Boroughs were introduced into that afembly;
and concerning the origin and power of the Committee of
Lords of Articles, occur, and have been agitated with gra
warmth. Since the sirs publication of this work, all thef
disputed points have been confidered with calmnef and a
curacy in Mr. Wights Inquiry into the Rife and Propgr
f Paliament , &c. 4toEdit. p. 7. tc.

European armies had hitherto consisted, though BOOK
proper enough for the Ihort and voluntary ex- 1.
curfions of Barons who served at their own ex-
penfe, were found to be unfit either for making,
or defending any important conquest.

It was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a' trial of their new fRrength. The division of
that country into many small ates, the luxury of
the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms,
invited their more martial neighbours to an easy
prey. The Italians, who had been accustomed to
mock-battles only, and to decide their interior quar-
rels by innocent and bloodless vitories, were aston.
ilhed, when the French invaded their country, at
the fight of real war; and as they could not resist
the torrent, they suffered it to take its course, and
to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy supplied the
want of strength. Necessity and felf-prefervation led
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern
politics, by teaching them how to'balance the
iower of one Prince, by throwing that of another
into the opposite scale. By this happy device, the
liberty of Italy was long preserved. The scales were
poised by very (kilful hands; the smalleR variations
were attended to, and no Prince was allowed to
retain any superiority, that could be dangerous.

A System of conduct, pursued with so much

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre.
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe

o o K rendered it so necessary, that it soon became a
1. matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.

Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honorable spies,
authorized by the mutual jealousy of Kings, resided
almoR contantly at every different court, and had
it in charge to watch all its motions. Dangers were
foreseen at a greater difance, and prevented with
more ease. Confederacies were formed to humble
any power which rose above its due proportion.
Revenge or felf-defence were no longer the only
caues ofhoftility, it became common to take arms
out of policy; and war; both in its commencement
and in its operations, was more an exercise of the
judgment, than of the paflions of men. AlmoR
every war in Europe became general, and the most
inconsiderable ates acquired importance, becadfe
they could add weight to either scale.

Francis L who mounted the throne of France

in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen,
and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial Crown
in the year one thousand five hundred and nine-
teen , divided between them the strength and
affedions of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity
was not owing solely either to personal jealousy, or
to the caprice of private paflion, but was founded
so much in nature and true policy, that it sub
filled between their posterity for several ages
Charles succeeded to all the dominions of the
house of Austria. No family had ever gained so
much by wife and fortunate marriages. Byao
quifitions of this kind the Austrian Princes rose,

in a short time, from obscure Counts of Hapsburgh, B o O K
to be Archdukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, 1.
and were in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a
fort of hereditary right. Besides these territories in
Germany, Charles was heir to the crown of Spain,
and to all the dominions which belonged to the
house of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces
engrossed, at that time, the riches and com-
merce of one half of Europe; and he drew from
thrm,on many occasions, those immense fums,
which no people without trade and liberty are
able to contribute. Spain furnilhed him a gallant
and hardy infantry, to whose discipline he was
indebted for all his conquests. At the fame time, by
the discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth
was opened to him, which all the extravagance
of ambition could not exhaust. These advantages
rendered Charles the first Prince in Europe;
but he wished to be more, and openly aspired
to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long
concealed; but it grew up without observation,
to an unexpected height and vigor. He pof.
sessed, in an eminent degree, the charaderiftic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom
he was allied. In forming his schemes, he dif-
covered all the subtlety and penetration of Ferdi-
nand his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obstinate and inflexible perseverance which has
ever been peculiar to the Austrian blood; and in
executing them, he could employ the magnani.
mity and boldners of his Burgundian ancestors

n oO His abilities were equal to his power, and neither

I. of them would have been inferior to his designs,

had not Providence, in pity to mankind, and in
order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis 1. to de.
fend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were
les extensive, but more united than the Em.
peror's. His fubjeds were numerous, active, and
warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of their King.
To Charles, power was the only obje& of desire,
and he pursued it with an unwearied and joylet
industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and ele.
gance with his ambition; and though h peg.
leted some advantages, which a more phlegmatic
or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
active and intrepid courage supplied all his defecs,
and checked or defeated many of the Emperor's
designs.

The ref of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert
it, had recourse to the expedient which they
had often employed with fuccefc. They endea
voured to divide the power of the two contending
Monarchs into equal scales, and, by the union of
several small fates, to counterpoise him whose
power became too great. But, what they con.
certed 'with much wisdom, they were able to ex-
ecute with little vigor; and intrigue and refine-
ment were feeble fences against the encroachment
of military power.

On the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held B 0 o K

the balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger I.
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dignity
and in power; and the advantageous situation of his
dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immense
wealth, and absolute authority, rendered him the
natural guardian of the liberty of Europe. Each of
the rivals courted him with emulation; he knewit
to be his interest to keep the balance even, and
to restrain both, by not joining entirely with either
of them. But' he was seldom able to reduce his
ideas to practice; he was governed by caprice
more than by principle; and the passions of the man
were an overmatch for the maxims of the King.
Vanity and resentment were the great springs of
all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily found
the way, by touching these, to force him upon
many rash and inconsistent enterprifis. His reign
was a perpetual series of blunders in politics; and
while he eeemed himself the wisest Prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those who found
it necelfary, and could submit, to flatter him.

In this situation of Europe, Scotland, which

had hitherto walled her strength in the quarrels
between France and England, emerged from her
obscurity, took her station in the system, and be-
gan to have some influence upon the fate of dif-
tant nations. Her assistance was, frequently, of
consequence to the contending parties, and the
balance was often so nicely adjusted, that it was
in her power to make it lean to either fide. The
part assigned her, at this juncture, was to divert

0 o K Henry from carrying his arms into the continent
I. That Prince, having routed the French at Gui.

negat, and inveRted Terouenne, France attempted
to divide his forces, by engaging James IV. in
that unhappy expedition which ended with hiu
life. For the fame reason Francis encouraged and
aflifted the Duke of Albany, to ruin the families ol
Angus and Home, which were in the interelt ol
England, and would willingly have persuaded tin
Scots to revenge the death of their King, and to
enter into a new war with that kingdom. Henr
and Francis having united not long after againt
the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings,
that the Scots should continue inactive; and
long tranquillity was the effect of their union
Charles endeavoured to break this, and to embar.
rals Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this
end, he made great advances to James V. flattering
the vanity of the young Monarch, by eleding
him a Knight ofthe Golden Fleece, and by offering
him a match in the Imperial family; while, in
return for these empty honors, he demanded i
him to renounce his alliance with France, and to
declare war againlt England. But James, who had
much to lose, and who could gain little by cloling
with the Emperor's proposals, rejected them with
Decency, and keeping firm to his ancient allies,
left Henry at full liberty to a upon the continent
with his whole strength.

Henry himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of bis ancestor with regard to Scot
land, He held its power in such extreme contempt

that he was at no pains to gain its friendflip; B o K
but, on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, 1.
by reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown
of England to the sovereignty over Scotland. But
his own experience, and the example of his ene-
mies, gave him a higher idea of its importance.
It was impoflible to defend an open and extensive
frontier, against the incursions of an active and
martial people. During any war on the continent,
this obliged him to divide the fRrength of his
kingdom. It was necessary to maintain a kind of
army of observation in the north of England; and
after all precautions, the Scottish borderers, who
were superior to all mankind in the practice of irre-
gular war, often made successful inroads, and spread
terror and desolation over many counties. He fell,
at las, upon the true secret fpolicy, with refped
to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little
penetration to discover, or too much pride to
employ. The situation of the country, and the
bravery of the people, made the conquest of
Scotland impoflible; but the national poverty, and
the violence of fation, rendered it an easy matter
to divide, and to govern it. He abandoned, there-
fore, the former design, and resolved to employ
his utmolt address in/executing the latter. It had
not yet become honorable for one Prince to receive
pay from another, under the more decent name of
a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame arguments
have been good in courts, and of weight with
ministers, factious leaders, and favorites; What
were the arguments by which Henry brought over

0o K so many to his interest during the minority
i James V. we know by the original warrant fill

extant ", for remitting considerable fums into
Scotland. By a proper diftributior of these, many
persons of note were gained to his party, and a
fadion which held secret correspondence with
England, and received all its diredions from thence
appears henceforward in our domestic contests. I
the sequel of the history, we Iball find Heny
laboring to extend his influence in Scotland. i
successors adopted the fame plan, and improved
upon it The affairs of the two kingdoms became
interwoven, and their interests were often the fane.
Elizabeth divided her attention almost equally
between them, and the authority which fTe inhb
rited in the one, was not greater than that which
he acquired in the other.
" Brn. Hillt R. voL i p. 7.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK II.

TH
HISTORY

0 I
COT LAND.

B O O K II.

ARY Queen of Scts, the daughter bfJamesV. B o O K
d of Mary of Guise, was born a few days before I.
e death of her father. The situation in which he Birth or
ft the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men with Mar"'' De
e profped of a turbulent and difarous reign. and fiAeof
war against England had been undertaken with- th' k"i-g
ot necessity, and carried on without success.
any persons of the first rank had fallen into the
ands of the English, in the unfortunate rout hear
e frith of Solway, and were still prisoners at
ondon. Among the reft of the nobles there was
ttle union either in their views, or in their assec-
ons; and the religious disputes occasioned by
ie opinions of the reformers, growing every day
ore violent, added to the rage of those fationl
ihich are natural to a form of government nearly
iriftocratical.

The government of a Queen was unknown in
;cotland, and did not imprint much reverence in

VOL. 1. H

z o o x the minds of a martial people. The government

L. of an infant Queen was til more deflitute of real

authority; and the profped of a long and feeble
minority invited to fadion by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
against the disorders of a minority, by conimitting
to proper pefons the care of his daughter's educ.
tion, and the administration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold
that they would quickly burst into a orm, he
was so little able to disperse them, or to defend
his daughter and kingdom against the imminent
calamities, that, in mere despair, he abandoned
them both to the mercy of fortune, andleft open
to every pretender, the office of Regent', which
he could not fix to his own fatisfadtion.

prieions Cardinal Beatoun, who had for many yean
of Cardil been confidered as prime miniter, was the sirs who
&to to cdaimed that high dignity; and in support of hi

pretensions, he produced a testament'; which he
himfqlf had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other right, instantly assumed the
title of Regent. He hoped, by the afitance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the fapport of the
whole popish fation, to hold by force, what he
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favorite of the nation
Those among the nobles who wilhed for a.Refonrnn
tion in religion dreaded his severity, and othen

'Sadler's Lett. 6. Haynes, State Papers, 486.

tonfidered the elevation of a Churchman to the Do oK
hihiclt office in the kingdom as a depreflion of. il.
themselves. At their instigation, James Hamilton
Fa-l of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, roused
hillfelf from his inadivity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that flation, to which proximity of
bloo!l ave him a natural title. The nobles, who arI or r.
tcre nifembled for that purpose, unanimously con- raee'no"t
f ired on him the office of Regent; and the public
voice applauded their choice '.

No two men ever differed more widely in difp- Character f
s{,;o. and charater, than the Earl of Arran and BeU
i: , linal Reatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of

In:o Icrate ambition; by long experience he had
luied address and refinement; and ifolence
rew upon him from continual success. His high
lition in the church placed him in the way of

'eat civil employments; his abilities were equal to
i!e greatest of these; nor did he reckon any of them
to be above his merit. As his own eminence was
founded upon the power of the church of Rome,
he was a zealous defender of that fuperftitioi,
an(d for the fame reason an avowed enemy t the
doctrine of the Reformets. Political motives alodn
determined him to support the one, or to oppose
the other. His early application to public business
kept him unacquainted with the learning and con;
troverfies of the age; he gave judgiilmnti howevet,
upon all points in dispute, with a precipitkheby
violence, and rigor, which contemporary hiorians
mention with indignation.

E pift Reg. Scot. vol. ii p. jo8.

Ha

o o The charaCer of the Earl of Arran was, in
IL almost every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. e
of Arr. was neither ifcdcd with ambition, nor inclined

to cruelty: The love of ease extinguilhed the for.
mer, the gentleness of his temper preserved him
from the latter. Timidity and irresolution were his
predominant failings, the one occasioned by his
natural constitution, and the other arising from a
consciousness. that his abilities were not equal to
his station. With these dispositions he might have
,enjoyed and adorned private life; but his public
condud was without courage, or dignity, or
consistence. The perpetual slave of his own fears,
and, by consequence, the perpetual tool of those,
who found their advantage in pradifing upon
them. But as no other person could be set in
aoppofition to the Cardinal, with any probability
of success, the nation declared in hbis favor with
such general consent, that the artifices of his rival
could not withstand its united strength.

Sctn of The Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffeflion of
,ithr ,,ad his new dignity, when a negociation was opened
tX .thaud. with England, which gave birth to events of the

·most fatal consequence to himself, and to the
kingdom. After the death of James, Henry V1L
was no longer afraid of any interruption froi
.Scotland to his designs against France; and immay
diately conceived hopes of rendering this security
,ppetual, by the marriage of Edward his only
son with the young Queen of Scots. He c04
municated his intention to the prisoners taken a
Solway, and prevailed on them to favor it, by

the promise of liberty, as the reward of their Bo o
ficcefs. In the mean time he permitted them to I..
return into Scotland, that, by their presence in
the Parliament which the Regent had called, they
might be the better able to persuade their coun-
trymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause,
intrulted to such able and zealous advocates,
could not well miss of coming to a happy issue.
All those who feared the Cardinal, or who desired
a chnge in religion, were fond of an alliance,
which afforded protection to the doctrine which
they had embraced , as well as to their own
persons, against the rage of that powerful and
haughty Prel.te.

But IHenry's rough and impatient temper was In condne
incapable of improving this favorable conjuncture. by himklf,
Addrcfe and delicacy in managing the fears, and
follies, and interefls of men,.were arts with which
he was utterly unacquainted. The dfigns he had
formed upon Scotland were obvious from the
marriage which he had proposed, and he had
not dexterity enough to disguise, or to conceal
them. Intead of yielding to the fear or jealousy
'f the Scots, what time and accidents would soon
ave enabled him to recover, he, at once, alarmed
and irritated the whole nation , by demanding
hat the Q(lueen's person flould be immediately
committed to his cufRody, and that the govern-
rent of the kingdom Ihoild be put into his hands
uring her minority.
Heniy could not have prescribed more ignomi- Odinusto
nous conditions to a conquered people, and it is the Scots,

H3

s o 0 K no wonder they were rejected, with indignation,

IL by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with

thnugh ii England at the price of their own liberty. The
purt accept-
ed bl h~ parliament of Scotland, v, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; desirous ol
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the
March 2i, Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner,

1543- from any opposition to which he might have given

rife; consented to a treaty of marriage and of
union, but upon terms somewhat more equal
After some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by
which his ambassador endeavoured to carry off the
young Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into Englan
Henry was obliged to give up his own propofa
and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented
that the Queen Ihould continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any lare in t
government of the kingdom. On the other ba
the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign in
England as soon as fie attained the full age
ten years, and instantly to deliver fix persons,
the first rank, to be kept as hostages by Henry
the Queen's arrival at his court.

'TForwed b The treaty was frill so manifetly of advanta
the ';cnt. to England, that the Regent loft much of

public confidence by consenting to it. The Ca
dinal, who had now recovered liberty, watce
for fuck an opportunity of regaining credit, a
he did not fail to cultivate and improve this to

opored by utmost. He complained loudly that the Regent h
the cri~. betrajed the kingdom to its molf inveterate enemi

and fcrificed. its honor to Lis own abiioan

foretold tie extinction of the true catholic religion, B o.-at
tier the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic;. 11.
tit above all, he lamented to fee an ancient
ingdom conoenting to its own servitude, dcfcend,
ig illto the ignominious fiation of a dependent
province ; and, in one hous, the weakness or
reachery of a single man surrendering every thing
r which the Scottil nation had fruggled and
light during so many ages. These remonstrances
the Cardinal were not without effect. They
ere addressed to prejudices and passions which
e deeply rooted in the human heart. The fame
tred to the ancient enemies of their country,
efame jealousy of national honor, and pride of
dependence, which, at the beginning of the
resent century, went near to prevent the Scots
om consenting to an union with England, upon
rmns of great advantage, did, at that time,
dce the te hole nation to declare .against the
liance which had been concluded. In the one
riod , a hundred and fifty years of peace
tween the two nations, the habit of being sub-
ded to the fame King, and governed by the
me maxims, had considerably abated old animo-
ies, and prepared both people for incorporating,
the other, injuries were still freflh., the wounds
both ides were open, and, in the warmth of
fentment, it was natural to seek revenge, and to
averse from reconcilement. At the union in
e thousand seven hundred and reven, the wisdom
parliament despised the groundless murmurs
cafioned by antiquated prejudices; but in one

H4

i o o x thousand five hundred and forty-three, the con.

1i. plaints of the nation were better founded, and urged

with to zeal and unanimity, which it is neither julf
nor ffe a disregard. A rafi measure of the King of
England added greatly to the violence of this national
animosity. The Scots, relying on the treaty of
marriage and union, fitted out several hips for
France, with which their trade had been inter.
rupted for some time. These were driven by
stress of weather to take refuge in different ports
of England; and Henry, under pretext that they
were carrying provisions to a kingdom with which
he was at war, ordered them to be seized and
condemned as lawful prizes'. The Scots, aftoniied
at this proceeding of a Prince, whose interest it
was manfeftly, at that junaure, to court and
to sooth them, felt it not only as an injury, but
as an insult, and expressed all the refetment
natural to a high. spirited people '. Their rage

' Keth, ;2. t4. Epit. Reg. Scot. ii App. ;1 . Hamiltoa
MSS. vol. i 185.

* In the 1SS. Colledion of Papers belonging to the Duke

of Hamilton, Sir Ralph Sadler describes the spirit of the
Scots as extremely outrageous. In his letter from Edin.
burgh. September , i14t: "The fay of the ships ha
broueht the people of this town, both men and women, and
efpeciaUy the merchants, into rfch a rage and fury, that the
whole town is commoved againfi me, and swear great oaths,
that if their Ihips are not restored, that they would have their
amends of me and mine, and that they would set my house
here on fire over my head, so that one of us Ihould not escape
alive; and also it hath much incensed and provoked the
people againt the Governor, aying, that he bath colored A

rnfe to such a height, that the Englih ambaf- B o o
fador could hardly be proteted from it. One spirit 11.
seemed now to animate all orders of men. The
clergy offered to contribute a great fum towards
preserving the church from the dominion of a
Prince, whose system of Reformation was so fatal
to their power. The nobles, after haviig mortified
the Cardinal so lately in such a cruel manner,
were now ready to applaud and to second him, as
the defender of the honor and liberty of his country.

Argyll, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power-. H excite
ful Brons declared openly against the alliance almo1 tLhe

whole a-

with England. By their affiflance, the Cardinal tiaogaina
seized on the persons of the young Queen and her the English.
mother, and added to his party the splendor and
authority of the royal name '. He received, at
the fame time, a more real accession to his

peace with your Majesty only to undo them. This is the
unreasonableness of the people wich live here in such a beast.
ly liberty, that they neither regard God nor Governor; nor
yet juftide, or any good policy, doth take place among them;
assuring your Highness that, unless the ships be delivered,
there will be none abiding here for me without danger." Vol.
I. 4 i. In his letter of September , he writes, that the rage
of the people (till continued so violent, " that neither I nor
any of my folks dare go out of my doors; and the Provost
of the town, who hath much ado to flay them from aflault-
ing me in my houre, and keepeth watch therefore nightly,
hath sent to me sundry times, and prayed me to keep my-
self and my folks within, for it is scant in his power to re-
press or refill the fury of the people. They fay plainly,
I liall never pass out of the town alive, except they have
their hips restored. This is the rage and beastliness of this
nation, which God keep all honest men from." Ib. 471.

Keith's Hil. of Scot 30

0 o K firength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl
11. of Lenox, whose return from France he had

earnefily solicited. This young nobleman was
the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton.
He had many claims upon the Regent, and pre.
tended a right to exclude him, not only from fuc.
ceeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of the
possession of his private fortune. The Cardinal
flattered his vanity with the profpe& of marrying
the Queen Dowager, and affeIed to treat him
with so much refpec, that the Regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

This suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland
some time before the Earl of Lenox, and aed
in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural
brother of the Regent, with whom he bad great
credit; a warm partisan of France, and a zealous
defender of the etablifhed Religion. He took
hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and en-
deavoured to bring about a change in his feni.
ments, by working upon his fears. The desertion
of the nobility, the disaffection of the clergy, and
the rage of the people; the resentment of France,
the power of the Cardinal, and the pretensions of
Lenox, were all represented with aggravation,
and with their mos threatening afpe.

Mean while, the day appointed for the ratification

of the treaty with England, and the delivery of the
hoflages, approached, and the Regent was till
undetermined in his own mind. He aded to the
ft with that irresolution and inconfitence which

is peculiar to eak men when they are so unfor- B OOK
tuiate as to have the chief part in the conduct of ii.
dilficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he ratified- Ob;ges the

Re.ent to

the treaty with Henry ', and proclaimed the Car- re1'n,,,tIl
dinal, who frill continued to oppose it, an enemy the friend.
to his country. On the third of September, he th
fletly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
Cardiinl at Callendar, renounced the friendbip of
Enlilglaid, and declared for the interests of France'.

henry, in order to gain the Regent, had not

fli.rced the mofl magnificent promises. He had of-
flrcd to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldclt fonl, and to constitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.
But, upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be
lefc conliderable than he had imagined, the Eng-
lil monarch began to treat him with little refpcd.
' he young Queen was now in the cuflody of his
enemies, who grew every day more numerous
and more popular. They formed a separate court
at Stirling, and threatened to clet another Regent.
The French King was ready to afford them his
protetion, and the nation, out of hatred to the
English, would have united in their defence. In
this lituation, the Regent could not retain his au-
thority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty,,
to preserve the appearances of good faith with
England, he was obliged to throw himself into
the arms of the party which adhered to France.

Rvmer, Soed. xv. p. 4.
Sadler , 339. 356. Hamilton ISS, i. 470, &Q.

B 0 K Soon after this sudden revolution in his polit.

i1. cal principles, the Regent changed his sentiments

bdA t* a. concerning religion. The spirit of controversy was
lam then new and warm ; books of that kind were

eagerly read by men of every rank; the love of
novelty, or the conviction of truth, had led the
Regent to express great eReem for the writings of
the Reformers; and having been powerfully sup.
ported by those who had embraced their opinions,
he, in order to gratify them, entertained, in his
own family, two of the most noted preachers of
the Protestant dotrine, and, in his firR Parlia-
ment, consented to an ad, by which the laity
were permitted to read the Scriptures in a language
which they understood'. Truth needed only a fair
hearing to be an over-match for error. Absurdities,
which had long imposed on the ignorance and
credulity of mankind, were detected and exposed
to public ridicule; and under the countenance of
the Regent, the Reformation made great advances.
The Cardinal observed its progress with concern,
and was at the utmost pains to obfiru it. He repre.
rented to the Regent his great imprudence in giving
encouragement to opinions so favorable to Lenox's
pretensions; that his own legitimacy depended upon
the validity of a sentence of divorce,. founded on
the Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to
be called in question, he weakened his own title
to the fucceflion, and furnished his rival with the
only argument by which it could be rendered

' Keith, p. 6, ;7.

doubtful . These insinuations made a deep im. Bo
prelflons on the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at 11.
the profpet of fich imaginary dangers, was as
much startled as the Cardinal could have wihed;
and his zeal for the Protestant religion was not
long proof against his fear. He publicly abjured
the doctrine of the Reformers in the Franciscan
church at Stirling, and declared not only for the
political, but the religious opinions of his new
confidents.

The Protestant doctrine did not susser much by

his apoflacy. It had already taken so deep root in
the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity
could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the eftablilhed reli.
gion. The Reformers were persecuted with all the
cruelty which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the pu.
nilhment of its enemies; but they suffered with a
spirit so nearly resembling the patience and for-

' The pretensions of the Earl of Lenox to the fucceflion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to ,imes Lord Hamilton, whom ames IIl. created
Earl of Arran on that account. Elizabeth, a daughter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lenox,
and the present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was
likewise the grandson of the Princess Mary. But his father
having married Janet Beatoun the Regent's mother, after
he had obtained a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former
'ife, Lenox pretended that the sentence of divorce was
unjuR, and that the Regent being born while Elizabeth
Home was Rill alive, ought to e conlidered as illegidiate.
C;aws. Peer. 19a.

z o o K titude of the primitive martyrs, that more ere

11. converted than terrified by such fpeclacles.

R&an.B The Cardinal, however, was now in possession
tcarofIs of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex.
dir c:o ercifed all the authority of a regent, without the
*f -i. envy of the name. He had nothing to fear froni

the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconflancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trulled by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lenox were the
only thing which remained tc embarrass him. He
had very successfully made ule of that nobleman
to work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but
as he no longer food in need of such an infiru.
ment, he was willing to get rid of him with do
cency. Lenox soon began to fufpec his intention;
promises, flattery, and respect, were the only re.
turns he had hitherto received for substantial ser.
vices; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could nd
longer be concealed, and Lenox, instead of at.
taining power and dignity himself, saw that e
had been employed only to procure these for an.
other. Resentment and disappointed ambition urged
him to seek revenge on that cunning prelate,
who, by sacrificing his interest, had so ungener
oufly prchafed the Earl of Arran's friendlip.
He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and
declared for the patty at enmity with the Cardinal,
which, with open arms, received a convert who
added so much lustre to their cause.

The two facions which divided the kingdom
were Rill the fame, without any alterations in their

views or principles; but, by one of those strange B 0 o K
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they 11
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the partisans
of France and the defenders of Popery, and Lenox
in the fame station with te advocates for the Englilh
alliance, and a reformation in religion. The one
labored to pull down his own work, which the
other upheld with the fame hand that had hitherto
endeavoured to destroy it.

I.enox's impatience for revenge got the art of
the Cardinal's activity. He surprised both him and
the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh with a
numerous army; and might easily have crulhed
them, before they could prepae for their defence.
But he was weak enough to liften to proposals for
an accommodation; and the Cardinal amused him
so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such a length,
that the greater patt of the Earl's troops, who
served, as is usual wherever the feudal institutions
prevail, at their own ekxpenfe, deserted him; and in
concluding a peace, instead of giving the law, he
was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to
retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfortunately.
One body of his troops was cut to pieces, and the
test dispersed; and with the poor remains of a ruined
party, he must either have submitted to the con-
queror, or have fled out of the kingdom, if the
approach of an Englilh army had not brought him
a flort relief.

Henry was not of a temper to bear tamely the in- ua,, fn.
dignity with which he had been treated, both by vaes S
the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who, at

i

o o K the time when they renounced their alliance with
II. him, had entered into a new and ftricer confederacy

with France. The rigor of the season retarded for
[ome time the execution of his vengeance. But iu
the spring, a considerable body of infantry which
was defined for France, received orders to fail sot
Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was
appointed to join it by land. The Regent and
Cardinal little expeced such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employ.
ment for all Henry's forces and, from an unac.
countable security, were wholly unprovided sot
the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of Hert.
ford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age,
commanded this army, and landed it, without

Ma, 3. opposition, a few miles above Leith. He was quickly
"* mnafter of that place; and marching directly to Edin.

burgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plun.
dering the adjacent country, the richest and mol
open in Scotland, he set on fire both these towns,
and upon the approach of some troops gathered
together by the Regent, put his booty on board
te fleet, and with his land forces retired safely to the
Englilb borders, delivering the kingdom, in a fe
days, from the terrorof an invasion, concerted wit
little policy, carried on at great expense, and attended
with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquet
of Scotland, he gained nothing by this expeditiona
if the marriage he had propored, wat Rill in his view,
he loft a great deal. Such a rough courtlhip, as the
Earl of Huntly humorously called it, difguted the
whole nation; their aversion for the match grew into

abhorrence;

bhorrence; and, exasperated by fd many indig- n o o
ities, the Scots were never at any period more 1i.
tached to France, or more alienated from Enig-
and.
The Earl of Lenox alone ili pite t the Re-
nt and French King, continued a cotrelpond-
ce with England, which ruined his own inteiret,
ithout promoting Henry's '. Many of his own
vasals, preferring their duty to their country
efore their affection to him, refused to concur in
ny design to favot the public enemy. After a
w feeble and nfdccefsful attempts to disturb
the Regent's administration, he was obliged to
y for safety to the court of England, where Henry
rewarded services which he had the inclination
but hot the power to perform, by givinig him il
iarriage his niece the Lady Margaret Douglas.
his unhappy exile, however, was destined to be
the father of a race of kings. He saw his for
Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland to
the perpetual excluflon of that rival who now
triumphed in his rin. rdOi that time, his pof
erity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was call out as a criminal.,
and by the other received as a fugitive.

Meanwhile hostilities were continued by both 1 ~,ce
nations, but with little igor on either fide;
The hifloriahs of that age relate minutely the
circumstances of several lkirmilhes and inroads,
which, as they did not produce any considerable
:ffd, at this distance of time deserve no remen*a

'Pmner, xv. p. 22,
UoL. L.

B O O X brance ". At last an end was put to this langi

and inadive war, by a peace, in which England

' Though this war was distinguished by no important or d

five adion; it as, however, extremely ruinous to individui
There ftil remain two original papers, which give m fomeida
of the mieries, towhich rome of the moftrtilecountiesinth
kingdom were expolcd, by the sodden and defrutiveincufi
ofthe bordere The firftems tobe the report madeto
by the Englih wardensofthe marches, forthe year 1544,i
co~a their exploits from the d of July to the 7lt d
November. The account it gives of the diferent inroads,
Forrar,as they are called, isvery minute; andin conclua,
the fum total of mischief they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, ftedes, barnekyns, parife-churche;

bafel.houfs, caf don or burnt 1

Soot slain . 4
Friaes taken $ Id
Not, i. c.horned cattd, taken * o l
Sheep . . 1,491
Nag and geldings . ,(
Goats . . so
Bols of ea . . .
lIffigega; . houflould rniture, ot reckoned.

Haynes's Sat Papes, 41t

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Erl

Hertford, between the 8th and 2 d ofSeptember, s 4; t

oanative more geral,butit appears that he had burnt, rafi
an deroyed in the conties of Bewick d Roxburgh oly,

Monateries and Friar-houfe 1

ftles,towes, and pila .

Market town .

illages . . 41
Milns . .I
Hopita, .

All the wre re c ddwn or bunmt Haynes, ;. As the Sca
were no lek ftilful in the pradice of itegulr war, we I
conclude that the damage which they did in England was nt
inconsiderable; and that their raidr were no left waefil
the forray of the Englilh.

France, and Scotland were comprehended. Henry OO
labored to exclude the Scots from the benefit of this tI
treaty, and to reserve them for that vengeance,
which his attention to the affairs of the continent
had hitherto delayed. But although a peace with
England was of the last consequence to Francis .
whom the Emperor was preparing to attack with all
his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chose
rather to purchase Henry's friendship with difadvan.
tage to himself, than to leave them exposed to danger.
By yielding some things to theintereft, and more to
the vanity of that haughty Prince; by.fubmifion,
flattery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
have the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

An event which happened a hort time before the murs
the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more tier Lft'a
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun
had not used his power with moderation, equal
to the prudence by which he attained It, Not-
withRanding his great abilities, he had too many
of the pafirons and prejudices of an angry leader
of a facion, to govern a divided people with
temper. His relentment against one party of the
nobility, his insolence towards the reft, his feve,
tity to the Reformers, and ,' above all, the bar.
barous and illegal execution of the famous George
Wilbart, a man of honorable birth and of pri-
mitive fandtity, wore out the patience of a fierce
age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting
to gratify the public wilh by his deftrudtion.
Private revenge , inflamed and fanfified by a

BO 0 K false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this want

1.^ Norman Lefy, the eldest son of the Earl of

Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal wig
injultice and contempt. It was not the tempa
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. As the profeflion of his ad
verfary screened him from the effets of what is
called an honorable resentment, he resolved tq
take that fatisfadion which he could not demand
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the
singular courage and condud with which he put i
in execution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at tin
time, resided in the cafle of Saint Andrew's,.whici
he had fortified at great expense, and in theopinio
of the age bad rendered it impregnable. His retinu
was numerous, the town at his devotion, and t
neighbouring country full of his dependents Ii
this situation, sixteen persons undertook to fupri
his castle, and to aaflinate himself; and their f
cess was equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early

Mat v). in the morning they seized on the gate of thecafi
'w'- which was set open to the workmen who wve

employed in finishing the fortifications; and har
ing placed sentries at the door of the Cardinal'
apartment, they awakened his numerous domcleti
one by one, and turning them out of the cal
they , without noise or tumult , or .violent
to any other person , delivered their country
though by a mos unjustifiable ation, from
ambitious man, whose pride was insupportable
the nobles., as his cruelty and cunning were
great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, Boo I
d to the French interest in Scotland. The fame 11.
cal for both continued among a great party in The Regent
he nation, but when deprived of the genius and vain to 'i
uthority of so Ikilful a leader, operated with less the mu.
ffe. Nothing can equal the conternation which de'",.
blow so unexpected occasioned' among such as
ere attached to him; while the Regent secretly
noyed an event, which removed out of his way
rival, who had not only eclipsed his greatness,
t almost extinguished his power. Decency,
owever, the honor of the church, the importu.
ity of the Queen Dowager and her adherents,
is engagements with France, and, above alt
hefe, the desire of recovering his eldest son, whom
he Cardinal had detained for some time at Saint
ndrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who toge-
her with the castle, had fallen into the hands of
he colnfpirators, induced him to take arms, in
irder to revenge the death of a man whom he hated.
He threatened vengeance, but was unable to
xecute it. One part of military science, the art of
ttacking fortified places, was then imperfectly
nderftood in Scotland. The weapons, the difcip.
ie, and impetuosity of the Scots, rendered their
rmies as unfit for sieges, as they were active in
he field. A hundred and fifty men, which was
he greatet number the conspirators ever assembled,
iCifted all the efforts of the Regentfor five months ",
in a place which a single battalion, with a few bat.
tering cannon, would now reduce in a few hours..

"Epif. Reg. Scot. . 179.

la.

a O O This tedious siege was concluded by a true* T!

as. Regent undertook to procure for the confpiratoi

an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in pa
liameot; and upon obtaining these, they engage
to surrender the cafile, and to set his son at liberty

It is probable, that neither of them were si

cere in this treaty. On both ides, they sough
only to amuke, and to gain time. The Regeot
bad applied to France for assistance, and expedc
soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On th
other band, if Lefly and his associates were o
at first incited by Henry to murder the Cardinal,
they were, in the sequel, powerfully fupporte
by him. Notwithbfanding the silence of cottm
porary biftorians, there are violent prefumptioi
of the former; of the latter there is undoubtd
certainty ". During the siege, the conspirators b
received from England supplies both of money ad
provisions; and as Henry was preparing to renn
his proposals concerning the marriage and the uniol
be had projeced, and to second his negociatio
with a numerous army, they hoped, by concurrnm
with him, to bein a fiation, in which they weiM
no longer need a pardon, but might claim a rewad
Jam~sa, The death of Henry blasted all these hopes. 1

"47. happened in the beginning of next year, asti

a reign of greater splendor than true glory; bb
ling, though not aive; opprefive in doedl
government , and in foreign politics wild d
irregular. But the vices of this Prince were mont
beneficial to ind, th the virtues of otble

" Keith, 6.

is rapaciousness, his profusion, and even his B o O
ranny, by deprefling the ancient nobility, and IL
yadding new property and power to the Corn.
ns, laid or rengthened the foundations of

he Britilh liberty. His other paflions contri.
uted no less towards the downfal of Popery, and
he eRablilhment of religious freedom in the
tion. His resentment led him to abolilh the
wer, and his covetofneifs to seize the wealth
the church; and by withdrawing these supports,
ade it easy, in the following reign, to overturn
e whole fabric of fuperfition.
Francis I. did not long survive a Prince, who-
ad been alternately his rival and his friend; but
is filcceffor Henry II. was not neglecful of the
rench interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Tronp a
ble body of men, under the command of Leon rive fr'a
trozzi, to the Regent's aiftlance. By their long Fra
xperience in the Italian and German wars, the
rench had become as dexterous in the condut of
eges, as the Scots were ignorant and as the
ldnefs and despair of the conspirators could not
efend them against the superior art of there new
fTailants, they, after a short resistance, furren. Force tri
ered, to Strozzi, who engaged, in the name of cstItnts.
he King his master, for the security of their to fir,.
ives; and, as his prisoners, transported them into ""t
trance. The castle itself, the monument of Bea-
toun's power and vanity, was demolilhed , in
obedience to the canon law, which, with admi-'
rable policy, denounces its anathemas even against.
the houses in which the sacred blood, of a Cardi,

14

o o nal happens to be Ihed, and ordains them to a
11, laid in ruins .

The archbishopric of St. Andrew's was beltow,

ed by the Regent upon his natural brother lobh
Hamilton, Abbot of Paisley.

N t hbach The delay of a few weeks would have saved the
44 E. conspirators. 'Those ministers of Henry VIIL. who

bad the chief diredion of affairs during the minority
of his on Edward VI conduded themselves, with
regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late
maiter, and resolved to frighten the Scots into a
treaty, which they had not abilities or addrA
to bring about by any other method,

But before we proceed to relate the events which

their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we Ihall flop
to take notice of a circumstance unobserved by
cotemporary biftorians, but extremely remarkabl
for the discovery it makes of the fentlments and
spirit, which then prevailed among the Scots. Tbo
coonpirators against Cardinal Beatoun found t
Regent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's;
and as they needed the protection of the Engli,
it was to be feared that they might endeavour to
purchase it, by delivering to them this importati
prize. The presumptive heir to the crown in the
hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, wis
a dreadful profpe& In order to avoid it, the Parli
ment fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By an
ad made of purpose, they excluded " the Regent'
' eldest son from all right of succession, public
q or private, so long as he ubuld be detained a

r Burn. Hit. Ref. . H.

a prisoner, and substituted in his place, his other B o o K
a brothers, according to their seniority, and in failure II.
a of them, those who were next heirs to the Re.
a gent "." Succeflion by hereditary right is an idea
so obvious and so popular, that a nation seldom ven.
tures to make a breach in it, but in cafes of extreme
neceflity. Such a necessity did the Parliament discover
in the present fituatlon. Hatred to England, founded
on the memory ofpaft hostilities, and heightened by
the smart of recent injuries, was the national paflion.
This dictated that uncommon statute, by which the
order of lineal succession was so remarkably broken.
The modern theories, which represent this right
as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to
be violated upon any consideration whatsoever,
seem to have been then altogether unknown.
In the beginning of September, the Earl of seo."I"d

invadle by

Hertford, now Duke of Somerset, and Protedor th Engli,r
of England, entered Scotland at the head of
eighteen thousand men, and, at the fame time, a
feet of sixty flips appeared on the coals, to second
his land-forces. The Scots had for some time
observed this storm gathering, and were prepared
for it. Their army was amoft double to that of
the enemy, and posted to the greatest advantage
on a rising ground, above Muffelburgh, not far
from the banks of the river Elke. Both these
ircumfrances alarmed the puke of Somerset, who
sw his danger, and would willingly have extri-
cated himself out of it, by a new overture of peace
"EpiR. Reg. Scot. 2. S9

1 0 K on conditions extremely reasonable. But this mo.
11. deration being imputed to fear, his proposals were

rejeded with that scorn which the confidence of
success inspires; and if the condud of the Regent,
who commanded the Scottilh army, had been in
any degree equal to his onfidence, the deftruion
of the Englill mut have been inevitable. They
were in a situation precisely similar to that of their
countrymen under Oliver Cromwell in the follow.
ing century. The Scots had chosen their ground
so well, that it was impossible to force them to give
battle; a few days had exhausted the forage and
provision of a narrow country; the fleet could only
furnish a scanty and precarious fubiftence; a retreat
therefore was necessary; but disgrace, and perhaps
ruin, were the consequences of retreating.

On both these occasions, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the Englifb, and
precipitated their own country into the utmofi
danger. The undisciplined courage of the private
men became impatient at the fight of an enemy.
_tdle i The General was afraid of nothing, but that the

ty. Englilh might escape from him by flight; M

s~ -IU leaving his strong camp, he attacked the Duke ol
o. s47. Somerset near Pinkey, with no better fuccef that

his rafinefs deserved. The Protedor had drawt
up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had no'
the advantage of ground on his fide. The Scol
tilb army confifed almost entirely of infantry
whose chief weapon was a longfpear, and for tha
reason their files were very deep and their rank
cloec. They advanced towards the enemy in thrce

great bodies, and, as they passed the river, were a o o x
considerably exposed to the fire ofthe Englilh fleet, ii.
which lay in the bay ofMuffelburgh, and had drawn
near the Ihore. The Englilb cavalry, flutbed with
an advantage which they had gained in a (kirmif some
days before, began the attack with more impetuosity
than good condud. A body so firm and compadt as
the Scots, easily resifted the impreflion of cavalry,
broke them, and drove them off the field. The
Englilh infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire
in flank from four hundred foreign fusileers who
frved the enemy, and to their cannon, which were
planted behind the infantry on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and closeness of their order
making it impossible for the Scots to sand long in this
situation, the Earl of Angus, who commanded the
vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground, and
to retire towards the main body.But his friends unhap-
pily mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into
confusion. At that very instant, the broken ca.
valry having rallied, returned to the charge; the
foot pursued the advantage they had gained; the
profpet of vicory redoubled the ardor of both:
And in a moment the out of the Scottish army
became universal and irretrievable. The en.
counter in the field was not long nor bloody;
but in the pursuit, the Englilh discovered all the
rge and fierceness which national antipathy,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by re.
ciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit
t continued for five hous, and toa great ditance.

a O O K All the three roads by which the Scots fled, were

11. firewed with spears, and swords, and targets, and

covered with the bodies of the slain. Above ten thou.
sand men fell on this day, one of the most fatal Scot.
land bad ever seen. A few were taken prisoners, and
among there some persons of difinAion. The Pro.
te°or had it now in his power to become master of a
kingdom, out of which, not many hours before, he
was almost obliged to retire with infamy".

" The following palTage in a curious and rare journal of

the Protetor's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Pat.
ten, who was joined in commillion with Cecil, as Judge
Marlhal of the army, and printed in 48, deserves our no.
tice; as it gives a jus idea of the military discipline of the
Scots at that time. " But what after I learned fpectia
touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well
of going to offend, as of Randing to defend, have thought
necelfary here to utter. Hackbutters have they few or none,
and appoint their fight mos commonly always a-foot They
come to the field well frnihed all with jack and skull, dag.
ger and buckler, and swords all broad ard thin, of exceeding
good temper, and universally Co made to fice, tharas I nevet
law none so good, so I think it hard to devise the better.
Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice
or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their
array towards joining with the-enemy, they cling and thrul
so near in the fore rank, floulder and shoulder together, with
their pikes in both their hands straight afore them , and their
followers in that order so bard at their backs, laying thei
pikes over their foregoers houlders, that, if they do aa
undiscovered, no force can well withstand them. Standingat
defence they thrust shoulders likewise so nigh together, the
fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, oop low before, thae
fellows behind holding their pikes with both hands, and
terewith in their left their hucklers, the one end of thei

But this vitory., however great, was of no real B o o K
utility, for want of kill, or of leisure, to improve ii.
it. very new injury rendered the Scots more Theirvi-
averse from an union with England; and the Pro. tory of little

benefit to

tedor neglected the only mefaure which would It Englisl
have made it nceffary for them to have given
their consent to it. He amused himself in walting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty catles; whereas, by fortifying a few places
which were accellible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the Englilb, and, in a ort
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his
terms, or have submitted to bis power. By fuchi
an improvement of it, the victory at Dunbar gave
Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other effec but to precipitate
the Scots into new engagements with France.
The situation of the Englifl court may, indeed,
be pleaded in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's
condut. That cabal of his enemies, which oc-
cafioned his tragical end, was already formed;
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly
undermined his power and credit at home. Self
pike against their right font, and the other against the enemy
breat-high; their followers crossing their pike points with
tem forward; and thus each with other od high as pace and
place will susser, through the whole *ard, so thick, that as
taily hall a bare finger pierce through the fiin of anangry
hedge.hog, as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other
Curious particulars are found in this journal, from which Sir
]hn Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scotch ike or spear was appointedtby
A44P. 1471, to be fix ells; i. a. eighteen feet fix inclet.

o o K preservation, therefore, obliged him to prefer hij
iu. fety before his fame, and to return witholt

reaping the fruits of his vicory. At this time, how.
ever, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by
which be fel was not yet ripe for execution; and
his prefnce suspended its effect for fme time. The
supreme power still remaining in his hands, he
employed it to recover the opportunity which he
Apri, mIs. had loft. A body of troops, by his command, feiz.

edand fortified Haddingtoun, a place, which, on
account of its distance from the sea, and from any
Englil garnfon, could not be defended without
great expense and danger.

Frnmi Mean while the French gained mote by ti
S~ io a defeat of thei alies, than the Englinh did by teil
dioier siom

irFn~u v~ty. After the death of Cardinal Beatun,

Mary of Guise, the jcen Dowager, took a con
fderable Ihare in the direction of affairs. She wau
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
ihe French interest and, in order to promote iti
improved with great dexterity very event which
_ccred. The spirit and strength of the Scots. w
brokea at Pinkey; and in an affaebly of tiobl
which met at Stirling to consul upon the fituatiod
of the Kingdom, all eyes were turned towards
France, no profpcd of safety appearing but in abif
ane from thence. But Henry I. being then at peac
with England, the Queen reprefcnted that they
could not exped him to take part in their quartlt,
but pon views of personal advantage; and tha
without extraordinary conceflions in his favor, no
allifiance, in proportion to theirprefcntexigeocis

could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation B o o I
powerfully seconded these representations of the j1.
Queen. What often happens to individuals, took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
were swayed entirely by their paffioos; and in order
togratify them, they deserted theirformer principles,
and disregarded their true interest. In the violence of
resentment, they forgot that zeal for the independence
of Scotland, which had prompted them to reje& the
proposals of Henry VII. and by offering, voluntarily,
their young Queen in marriage to the Dauphin, eldest ad to offer

their Queen

son of Henry II. and, which was Rill more, by propo- in Marriage
sing to fend her immediately into France to be edu. to the Dan.
cated at his court, they granted, from a thirit of phi'
vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon
any consideration of their own safety. To gain at once
such a kingdom as Scotland, was a matter of no small
consequence to France. Henry, without hesitation,
accepted the offers of the Scottish ambassadors, and
prepared for the vigorous defence of his new acqui.
fition. Six thousand veteran soldiers, under the com-
mand ofMonfieur Defse, aflifted by fame of the bet
officers, who were formed in the long wars of Fran.
cis 1. arrived at Leith. They served two campaigns in
Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former fame.
But their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
oon becomingjealous of their designs, negleed to
upport them with proper visor. The caution of the
Englilh, in aing wholly upon the defensive pre.
vented the French from attempting any enterprise
of consequence; and obliged them to exhaust
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under

oo K many disadvantages. Their efforts, hdwever,
u. were not without some benefit to the Scots,

by compelling the Englilh to evacuate Had,
dingtoun, and to surrender several fnall forts,
which they possessed in different parts of the
kingdom,

But the effeds of there operations of hi

troops were Rill of greater importance to the
French King. The diversion which iley occa.
sioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne ot of thi
hands of the Englilh; and the influence of i
army in Scotland obtained the concurrence of
Parliament with the overtures which had beu
made to him, by the assembly of nobles at Sti.
ling, concerning the Queen's marriage with the
Dauphin, and her education at the court
France. In vain did a few patriots remonftnle
against such extravagant concessions, by which
Scotland was reduced to be a province of France;

th.tt and Henry,from an ally, raised to be masterrd
fort- the kingdom; by which the friendlhip of France
clude. became more fatal than the enmity of England;

and every thing was fondly given up to the One
that had been bravely defended against the otbet
A point of so much consequence was baltily d
cided in a Parliament aftembled in the camp bo

Ju. , fore Haddingtoun: The intrigues of the Quea
i's Dowager, the eal of the clergy, and refentmet

against England, had prepared a great party
the nation for such a ftep; the French Genaa
and Ambassador, by their liberality and promifei
gained ever many more. The Regent hilif

4as

was weak enough to stoop to the offer of a peffioh B o O I
from France, together with the title of Duke of iu.
Chatellierault in that kingdom. A considerable majo-
rity declared for the treaty, and the interest of a
faction was preferred before the honor of the nations

Ilaving hurried the Scots into this ralh and arlyent to

e educatct

fatal resolution, the source of many calamities to inFrce.
themselves and to their sovereign, the French
allowed them no time for refledtion or repentance.
1he fleet, which had brought over their forces
was still in Scotland, and, without delay, convoyed
the Queen into France, Mary was then fix years
old, and by her education in that court. one of the
politelt, but mol corrupted in Europe, Ile acquire4
every accomplishment that could add to her charms
as a woman, and contracted many of those prejudi-
ces which occasioned her misfortunes as a ueen.:

From the time that MIary.was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to uffer
the war in Scotland to languish. The recovery of4he
Boulonnois was the objed which thehreph King
had mol at heart; bu a flightdiverfion in, ritaint
was futlicient to divide the-attention and ftrenrgth
of the Englili, whole domestic factions deprived
both their arms and councils of their accuftQmed
vigor. The government. of England h'd:turnder.
gone a great revolution. The Duke of 'Soerfet's
power had been acquired with too much vio/tnce,
and was exercised with too little mnodration; I.to
be of long continuance. Many good qialities,,
added to great love of his;country ,i!,could not
atone for his ambition i usurping the ible direition

VOL. I. K

!oo of affairs. Many of the molt eminent courtiers

.1L combined against him; and the Earl of Warwick,

their leader, no less ambitious, but more artful
than Somerset, conducted his measures with so
much dexterity, as to raise himself upon the ruins
of his rivaL Without the invidious name of
Protedor, he succeeded to all the power and
influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be necessary for the
eftabliflment of his new authority, and the exec.
tion of the vast designs he had conceived.
pcr.om. Henry was no stranger to Warwick's situation,

and improved his knowledge of it to good pup
pose, in conducting the negociations for a genel
peace. He prescribed what terms he pleased to
the Englilh Minister, who scrupled at nothing,
however advantageous to that Monarch and hi
mak m. allies. England consented to restore Boulogne ad

'"50 its dependencies to France, and gave up all pr

tenfions-to a treaty of marriage with the Quea
of Scots, or to the conquest of her country. A
few fiall forts, of which the Englilh troops had
hitherto kept possession, were rafed; and peace
between the two kingdoms was etablilbed on it
ancient foundation.

Both the British nations loft power, as well

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was ao
both fides a war of emulation and' resentment,
rather than of interest; and was carried on undo
the influence of national animofities, which were
blind to all advantages. The French, who enterl
into it with greater coolncls, conducted it Wi

more skill; and by dexterously availing themselves B o o K
of every circumstance which occurred, recovered t.
possession of an important territory which they had
loft, and added to their monarchy a new king-
dom. The ambition of the Englilh Minister be-
trayed to them the former; the inconfrderate rage
of the Scots against their ancient enemies beltowed
on them the latter; their own address and good
policy merited both.

Immediately after the conclusion of the peace, The'Scot
the French forces left Scotland, as much to their jealou of
own fatisfadion, as to that of the nation. The Scots thbFrencb.
fonn found, that the calling to their aflitance a
people more powerful than themselves, was a dan-
gerous expedient. They beheld, with the utmost
impatience, those who had come over to protet
the kingdom, taking upon them to command in
it; and on many occasions they repented the rash
invitation which they had given. The peculiar
genius of the French nation heightened this difgut,
and prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke, be-
fore they had well begun to feel it. The French
were, in that age, what they are in the present,
one of the moRl polilhed nations in Europe. But it
is to be observed, in all their expeditions into
foreign countries, whether towards the south or
north, that their manners have been remarkably
incompatible with the manners of every other
people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own
cufoms, because they want knowledge and taste
to ditfcoer the reasonableness and propriety of
tuftoms which difier from them. Nations, which

K

o hold the first rank in politeness, are frequently no
II. less tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so in

the ancient world; and the French are the fame in
the modern. Full of themselves; flattered by the
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to
confider their own modes as the standards f
elegance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aide
the'diftinguilhing minners of their own nation, ot
to make any allowance for what may differ frod
hieii'among others. For this reason, the behaviour
of their armies has, on every occasiOn, been infup
portable to strangers, and has always exposed thea
to hatred, and often to deftrulion. In that age,
they over-ran Italy four several times by the
ralor, and loft it, as often, by their infolentt
The Scots, naturally an irascible and high.fpirit
people, and who, of all nations, can least ba
the most diftint'infinuation of contempt, were not
of a temper to admit all the pretensions of fud
assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation wet
soon visible; they seconded the military operation
of the French troops with the utmost coldnct;
their disgust grew insensibly to a degree of idigi
tion that could'hardly be restrained; and on occt
sion of a very flight accident, broke out with sati
violence. A private French soldier eneaging in e
'idle quarrel with a citizen of Edinburgh, bo
nations took arms. with equal rage, in defenct
of their countrymen. The Provost of dinburek
his son, and fevtral citizens of diftindion, wetr
'killed in the fray; aidd the French were obliged to
avoid the fury of the inhabitants', by retiring oit

of the city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of B o o x
lFrance and Scotland, and the long intercourse of 11.
good offices between the two nations, an aversion
for the French took its rife at this time among the
Scots, the effects whereof were deeply felt, and
operated powerfully through the subsequent period.

From the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing rogrer of
has been said of the state of religion. While the ati Refom.
war with .ngland continued, the clergy had no
leisure to molell the Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expect any thing
more than connivance and impunity. The new
doctrines were Rill in their infancy; but during
this fiort interval of tranquillity, they acquired
ftiength, and advanced by large and firm steps,
towards a full etablifhment in the kingdom. The
first preachers against Popery in Scotland, of whom
several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for
learning Their acquaintance with the principles of
the Reformation was partial, and at second hand;
some of them had been educated in England; all
of them had borrowed their notions from the books
publiflhed there; and, in the first dawn of the new
light, they did not venture far before their leaders.
But, in a hort time, the doctrines and writings of
the foreign Reformers became generally known;
the inquisitive genius of the age pressed forward in
quest of truth; the discovery of one error opened
the vay to others; the downfal of oneimpofture
drew many after it; the whole fabric, which
'giorance and superstition had ereced in times of

K3

B o o K darknef, began to totter; and nothing was want

II. ing to complete its ruin, but a daring and active

leader to dired the attack. Such was the famous
John Knox, who, with better qualifications of
learning, and more extensive views than any of
his predecessors in Scotland, poflefed a natural
intrepidity of mind, which fet,him above fear. He
began his public ministry at St Andrew's in the
year one thnufand five hundred and forty seven
with that success which always accompanies a bold
and popular eloquence. Instead of amusing himself
with lopping the branches, he struck diretly at
the root of Popery, and attacked both the dotrine
and discipline of the etablihed church, with a
vehemence peculiar to himself, but admirably suited
to the temper and withes of the age.

An adversary so formidable as Knox, would

not have easily escaped the rage of the clergy,
who observed the tendency and progress of hi
opinions with the utmost concern. But, at first he
retired for fafetv into the castle of St. Andrew's
and while the conspirators kept poffeflion of it,
preached publicly under their protection. The
great revolution in England, which followed upon
the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than
the zeal of Knox, towards demolilhing the Popil
church in Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains
and lightened the yoke of Popery. The miniftel
of his son Edward VI. cast them off altogether,
ard eRablflhed the Protestant religion upon almot
the Lime footing whereon it now stands in that
kingdom. The influence of this example reached

Scotland, and the happy effects of ecclefiaRfical BOOK
liberty in the one nation, inspired the other with 1i.
an equal desire of recovering it. The Reformers
had, hitherto, been obliged to conduct themselves
with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a distance
from court; they gained credit, as happens on
the firit publication of every new religion, chiefly
among persons in the lower and middle rank of
life. But several noblemen, of the greatest diftinc-
tion, having, about this time, openly espoused
their principles, they were no longer under the
necellity of ating with the fame reserve; and
with more security and encouragement, they had
likewise greater success. The means of acquiring
and spreading knowledge became more common,
and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period,
grew every day bolder and more universal.

Happily for the Reformation, this spirit was
fill under some restraint. It had not yet attained
lirmnefs and vigor, sufficient to overturn a system
founded on the deepest policy, and supported
by the most formidable power. Under the present
circumtances, any attempt towards action must
have been fatal to the Proteflant doctrines; and
it is no small proof of the authority, as well
as penetration of the heads of the party, that
they were able to restrain the zeal of a fiery and
impetuous people, until that critical and mature
junCture, when every ftep they took was decisive
and successful.

Mleanwhile their cause received reinforcement

K4

0 0 from two different quarters, whence they never
11. could have expeted it. The ambition of the house

of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of England,
hastened the subversion of the Papal throne in
Scotland; and by a singular disposition of Provi.
dence, the persons who opposed the Reformation
in every other part of Europe with the fiercerf
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in
that 'kingdom.

TbrQ Qen Mary of Guise pofefled the fame bold and

.Dowt agpiring spirit which diftinguifed her family. Rut
afts to aspiring spirit which disinguilhed her family. But
teofficeof in her it was softened by the female charader,
epi"L and accompanied with great temper and addref

Her brothers, in order to attain the high objetd
at which they aimed, ventured upon such daring
measures as suited their great courage. Her design
upon the supreme power were concealed with the
utmoR care, and advanced by address and refine
ments more natural to her sex. By a dexterous
application of those talents, he had acquired a
considerable influence on the councils of a nation
hitherto unacquainted with the government of
women; and, without the smallest right to any
share in the administration of affairs, had engrossed
the chief direction of them into her own hand&
But Lhe did not long reft satisfied with the enjovy
ment of this precarious power, which the fickle'
nef. of the Regent, or the ambition of those who
governed him, might so easily disturb; and
b-gan to set on foot new intrigues, with a dcfig
of undermining him, and of opening to herselfs
way to succeed him in that high dignity. He

brotherc entered warmly into this scheme, and B 0 K
fupnorr'd it with all their credit at the court of 11.
France. I he French King willingly concurred in
a mefiire, by which he hoped to bring Scotland
entir lv under management, and, in any future
brnml with England, to turn its whole force upon
th.t kingdlon.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Quti'e l)owager had only one of two ways to
chule; either violently to wrest the power out of
the hands of the l*gent, or to obtain it by his
cnnfent. Under a minority, and among a warlike
and factious people, the former was a very uncer.
tain and dangerous experiment. The latter ap-
peared to be no less impracticable. To persuade a
man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme power;
to descend to a level with those, above whom
he was raised; and to be content with the second
place where he hath held the firfi, may well pals
for a wild and chimerical project. This, however,
the(ueen attempted;and the prudence of the attempt
was sufficiently justified by its success.

The Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, to-
gether with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his administration, raised the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people
apainft him , to a great height; and the Queen
lecrctly fomented these with much industry. All
who wished for a change met with a gracious re-
ception in her court, and their spirit of difaffedion
was nourilhed by such hopes and promises, as,
in every age, impose on the credulity of the

o o faaious. The favorers of the Reformation b

Lt ing the mos numerous and spreading body

-Ca the the Regent's enemies, he applied to them, with
eDsmRu.- particular attention; and the gentleness of herdi

position, and eeming indifference to the religiot
points in dispute, made all her promises of pr
teclion and indulgence pals upon them for fincen
Finding so great a part of the nation willing t
fall in with her measures, the Queen let out fc
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter
a. zio. and took along with her tfe noblemen whb

possessed the greatef power and creditamongthei
countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of an elegan
court, flattered by te'civilities of the Frend
King, and the carelfes of the house of Guise, and in
fluenced by the seasonable distribution of a few favon
and the liberal promise of many more, they wer
brought to approve of all the Queen's pretension

While Ibe advanced by there flow but sure steps

the Regent either did not foresee the danger whid
threatened him, or neglected to provide against i
The firt discovery of the train which was laid
came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie
of Kinaird, and Panter Bilhop of Ross, whon
the Queen had gained over to her interest, an
then employed as the moft'proper instruments so
obtaining his consent. The overture was madeto
him in the name of the French King, enforced by
proper threatenings, in order to work upon hi
natural timidity, and sweetened by every pro
mise that could reconcile him to a proposal so dil
agreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation

his French title, together with a considerable pen. B o 0O
sion, the parliamentary acknowledgment of his right u.
of fucceflion to the Crown, and a public ratiica-
tion of hi, condud'during his regency, were offered
him. On the other hand, the displeasure of the French
King, the power and popularity of the Queen' Do.
waer, the difaffedion of the nobles, with the
dinger of an after.reckoning, were represented in
the flrogeft colors.

It was not poflible to agree to a proposal so
extraordinary and unexpected, without some pe-
vious firLggle; and had the Archbfllop of St. An.
drew's been present to fortify the irresolute and
pafive spirit of the Regent, he, in all probability,
would have rejeced it with disdain. Happily for
the Queen , the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate
could, at this time, be no obftruaion to her views.
He was lying at the point of death, and in his absence,
the influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible
temper counterbalanced several of the strongest
paflions in the human mind, and obtained his con-
sent to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

After gaining a point of such difficulty with DeC. tI
o much ease, the Queen returned into Scotland,
in full expecation of taking immediate possession
of her new dignity. But, by this time, the Arch-
ilhop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that dif.
temper, which the ignorance of the Scottish phy.
itans had pronounced to be incurable. This he
owed to the afiflance of the famous Cardan, one
ot those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of
whom Italy produced so many about this period.

3 00 K A bold genius led him to ome useful difcoverie,

11. which merit the esteem of a more discerning age;

a wild imagination engaged him in those chime.
rical sciences, which drew the admiration of hit
contemporaries. As a pretender to astrology and
magic, be was revered and consulted by all Eu
rope; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he
was but little known. The Archbilhop, it is pro
bable confidered him as a powerful magician, when
be applied to him for relief i but it was his know.
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to
cure his disease ".

Together with his health, the Archbilhop re.

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dilhonorable
promise, which he had been educed by the artifie
of the Queen to grant. However great her surprise
and indignation were, at this frefl instance of hi
incontancy, the was obliged to dissemble, that lK
might have leisure to renew her intrigues with al
parties; with the Protestants, whom he favored
and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to
whom she rendered herself agreeable by various arts;
and with the Regent himself, in order to gain whoi
The employed every argument. But whatever imprd
sions her emissaries might have made on the Regent,

" Ca-dan himself was more desirous of being confidered

an ARrologer than a Philosopher; in his book De Genital
we find a calculation of the rchbifhop's nativity, from whid
be pretends both to have predicted his disease, and to ha
effeced his cure. He received, from the Archbilhop, a rewI
of 18oo crowns. A great fum in that age. De vita fiap. 3.

it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate B o o K
the Archbilhop. Under his management, the nego- II.
ciations were spun out to a great length, and his
brother maintained his fRation with that address
and firmness, which its importance so well merited.
The universal defection of the nobility, the grow-
ing power of the Protestants,' who all adhered to
the Queen Dowager, the reiterated solicitations of
the French King, and, above all, the interposition
of the young Queen, who was now entering the
twelfth year of her age, and claimed a right of no-
minating whom he pleased to be Regent ", obliged
him, at last, to resign that high office, which he the Regent
had held many years. He obtained, however, the to refgn his
fame advantageous terms for himself, which ha office.
been formerly stipulated.

It was in the Parliament which met on the telnt She obtain
of April, one thousand five hundred and firty.four, he Regen-
that the Farl of Arran executed this extraordinary y
resignation; and at the fame time Mary of Guise
was raised to that dignity, which had been so long
the object of her withes. Thus, with their own ap-
probation, a woman and a stranger was advanced
to the fpreme authority, over a fierce and tur.
bulent people, who seldom submitted, without re-
luctance, to the legal and ancient government of
their natisce Mlonarchs.

W\hile the Queen Dowager of Scotland contri- Reforma.
butcd so much towards the progress of the Refor- 'ton co"ti.
mation, by the protection which he afforded it, mate grfea
from motives of ambition; the Englilh Queen, by progr".
" Lefley, do reb. get. Scot. ap. Jebb. i. 187.

0 0 x her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom wilt
Is. persons aive in promoting the fame cause. lary
JIv 5. ascended the throne of England, on the death ol

her brother Edward, and soon after married Phi
lip 11. of Spain. To the perfccuting spirit of the Ro
milh fuperfition, and the fierceness of that age, O
added the private resentment of her own and of ha
mother's sufferings, with which lhe loaded the re
formed religion; and the peeviblnef, and severity o
her natural temper carried the acrimony of all theft
passions to the utmost extreme. 1 he cruelty of ha
persecution equalled the deeds of those tyrants wil
have been the greatest reproach to human nature
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pan
with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelent
ing Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to mii
gate the rigor of her proceedings. Many amoo
the most eminent Reformers suffered for the dot
trines which they had taught; others fled from th
storm. To the greater part of thrfe, Switzerland ad
Germany opened a secure asylum; and not a fcv,
out of choice or necffity, fled into Scotland. Wha
they had seen and felt in England, did not abat
the warmth and zeal of their ind'gnation again
Popery. 1 heir attacks were bolder and more fui
cefsful than ever; and their doctrines made a api'
progress among all ranks of men.

These dodrines, calculated to rectify the pi

nions, and to reform the manners of mankind
had hitherto produced no other effets; but they loo
began to operate with greater violence, and prove
the occaion, not only of subverting the etablil

religion, but of Ihaking the throne, and endan- B 0 0 K
geriug the kingdom. The causes which acilitated 1.
the introduction of these new opinions into Scot. A view of
land, and which disseminated them so fall through the pouliet
the nation, merit, on that account, a particular which con.
and careful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the tributed tom
greatest events in the history of mankind, and, in wds that
whatever point of light we view it, is inftrudive
and interesting.

The revival of learning in the fifteenth and fix-
teenth centuries roused the world from that lethargy
in which it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been so long reltrained.
and venturing to move in a larger sphere, pushed
its inquiries into every subjed, with great boldness
and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of
exercising their reason, than religion was one of
the first objects which drew their attention. Long
before Luther publifled his famous Theses, which
ilook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the imposture
andlabfurdity of the established superstition. That
ubtle and refined people, satisfied with enjoying
thole dicoveries in secret, were little disposed to
aflume the dangerous characer of Reformers, and
Concluded the knowledge of truth to be the pre.
ogative of the wife, while vulgar minds muff be
verawed and governed by popular errors. But,
nimated with a more noble and disinterested,
al the German Theologian boldly ereded the

BO OK ft andard of Truth, and upheld it with an uncob

iI. querable intrepidity, which merits the admiratioa

and gratitude of all succeeding ages.

The occasion of Luther's being first difgulle

with the tenets of the Romifb church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened inte
an irreparable breach, is known to every one
who has been the leaf conversant in hiltoq.
From the heart of Germany his opinions spread,
with aftonilhing rapidity, all over Europe; and,
wherever they came, endangered or overturnd
the ancient, but ill-founded system. The vij
lance and address of the court of Rome,co
operating with the power and bigotry of tk
Austrian family, suppressed these notions on thi
first appearance, in the southern kingdoms
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north,
ritated by multiplied impofirions, could ncith
be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued
the fame force; and encouraged by some Princ
from piety, and by others out of avarice, it eaf
bore down the feeble oppolition of an illitr
and immoral clergy.

The superstition of Popery seems to have grol

to the most extravagant height in those countri
which are situated towards the different ext
mities of Europe. The vigor of imaginatil
and sensibility of frame-, peculiar to the inhabl
ants of southern climates, rendered them fuicc
tible of the deepelt imprefions of fiperfliti
terror and credulity. Ignoran6e and barbari
:were no less favorabk to the progress of the fa

spirit,

pirit, among the northern nations. They knew BOOl
little, and were disposed to believe every thing. The 1l.
most glaring absurdities did not lhock their gross
underltandings, and the most improbable fictions
were received with implicit aflent and admiration.

Accordingly, that form of Popery, which

prevailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted
and illiberal kind. Those dodrines which are
molt apt to hock the human understanding, and
those legends which farther exceed belief, were
proposed to the people without any attempt to
palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever call
in question the reasonableness of the one, or the
truth of the other.

The power and wealth of the church kept

pace with the progres of uperftition; for it is
the nature of that spirit to observe no bounds in
its respect and liberality towards those whose
characer it eteems sacred. The Scottilh Kings
early demonstrated how much they were under
its influence, by their vast additions to the im-
munities and riches of the clergy. The profuse
piety of David I. who acquired on that account
the name of Saint, transferred almost the whole
crown-lands, which were at that time of great
extent, into the hands of ecclefiaflcs. The ex,
ample of that virtuous Prince was imitated by
hts successors. The pirit pread amo g all ot.
d-rs of men, who daily loaded the prieflhood
with new poffeflions. The riches of the church
all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
'is one of those countries, wherein they had

VOL. I. L

*o ox farthest exceeded the jut proportion. The Scob

II. tilh clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on

land; and as there is no reason to think that, i
that age, they would be loaded with any unequl
lhare of the burden, we may conclude that, by
the time of the Reformation, little less than one
half of the property in the nation had fallen into
the hands of a society, which is always acquiring,
and can never lose.

The nature too, of a considerable part of thei

property, extended the influence of the clergy
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of th
church; church-lands were let in lease at an caf
rent, and were pofeffed by the younger sons, ad
defcendarts:of the heft families ". The connexio
bet*een fuprior and vassal, between landlord ad
tenant, crated dependencies, and gave rife tou
union of great advantage to the church; and in.elti
mating the ifluence of the Popilh ecclefiaticsova
the nation, these, as well as the real amountd
their revenues, touf be attended to, and tak
into the account.

This extraordinary (hare in the national propert

ras accompanied with proportiocable weight in th
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time, when th
number ofthe teniporal Peers was extremely fmi
and iweh the lesser Barons and representatives
orougtldom attended Parliaments, the Ecd
fiaftics formed a considerable body there. It appea
from the ancient rolls of Parliament, and fronmt
manner of chufing the Lords of Articles, that t

" Keith, at. Not. (b)

proceedings of that high court must have been, in a Bn o o
great measure, under their direcdion ". .
,

The reverence due to their sacred character,

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed
not a little towards the growth of their power. The
dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Popifll
clergy are remarkable, both as causes and: effeds of
that dominion which they had acquired over the
reft of mankind. They were regarded by the credu-
lous laity as beings of a superior species; they were
neither subjed to the fame laws, nor tried by the fame
judges ". Every guard, that religion could supply,
was placed around their power; their poffeflions and
their persons; and endeavours were used, not without
fucceft, to represent them all as equally sacred.

The reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derive from
religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a jufA taste, were altogether unknown; in
place of these were fubflituted fludies, barbarous
and uninftrudive; but as the Ecclefiafcs alone

" SpotE. Hilt. of the Church of Scotland, 49.
' How far this claim of the clergy toexemption from lat

jurifdicion extended, appears from a remarkable tranfaditi
in the Parliament held in r (46. hen that court was pro-
teeding to the' forfeiture of the murderers of Cardinal Bea-
toun, and were about to include a priet, who was one of the
Tffaflns, in the general fentece of condemation , odious as
the crime was to ccleliafics, a delegate ppRed in their
name, and repledge: or claimed exemptionqrtf ' from the
Judgment of Parliament, as ajiritual man. This claim was
fuained ; and his name is iot inserted in the Ad of .or.
feiture. Epilt. Reg. Scot. ii 3o. 36i.

L a

o OKl. were conversant in them, this procured them

-4. eteem; and a very slender portion of knowledge

drew the admiration of rude ages, which knew
little. War was the sole profeflion of the nobls,
and hunting their chief amusement; they divided
their time between there: unacquainted with the
arts, and unimproved by science, they disdained
any employment foreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and addres,
than bodily vigor. Wherever the former were
neceflary, the clergy were intruted; because they
alone were properly qualified for the trust. Almot
all the high offices in civil government devolved,
on this account, into their hands. The Lord
Chancellor was the first subjed in the kingdom,
both in dignity and in power. From the earlieR
ages of the monarchy, to the death of Cardind
Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that high offict;
and of these, forty- three had been Ecclefiatis".
The Lords of Seflion were supreme Judges in d
matters of civil right; and by its original confl
tutien, the President and one- half of the Senaton
in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law d
celibacy; and undifirated by those cares, and
unincumbered with those burdens, which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their orde
became their only objet, and they were at fll
leisure to pursue it.

Cra£ Offic. of Stat.

The nature of their fundion gave them. access to B o o O

all persons, and at all seasons. They could employ i.
all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror and
of consolation, which operate most powerfully on
lie human mind. They haunted the weak and the
credulous; they besieged the beds of the sick and,
of the dying. They suffered few to go out of the
world without leaving marks of their liberality to.
the church,and taught them to.compound with the
Almighty for their fins, by beftowiug riches upon
those who called themselves his servants.

When their own indultry, or the Iuperftition of
mankind failed of producing this effect, the Eccle.
fiafics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. When a person died inteflatc, the disposal
of his effects was vetted i the Biflop of the dio-
cefe; after paying his funeral charges and debts,
and ditfributing among his kindred the fums to
which they were refpedively entitled, it being
presumed that no Christian would have chosen to
leave the world without destining some part of
his substance to pious uses ". s men are apt to
trust to the continuance of Life with a fond confi,
dence, and childifbly Ibun every thing that forces
them to think of their mortality, many die with-
out fettling their affairs by will ; and the right
ofadminiftration, in that event, acquired by the
clergy, must have proved a considerable source
both of wealth and of power to the church.

Essays on Brit. Antiq, 174. Annals oEScotland, bySi!
David Dalrymple, VoL i. Append. No. ii.

LS

1ooK At the fame time, no matrimonial or tefb

IL mentary cause could be tried but in the piritual

courts, and by laws which the clergy themselves
had framed. 1 he penalty, too, by which thedeci.
sions of these courts were enforced, added to their
authority. A sentence of excommunication was no
lss formidable, than a sentence of outlawry. It
was pronounced on many occasions, and against
various crimes: And besides excluding those,
upon whom it fell, from Chriltian privileges, i
deprived them of all their rights as men, or a
citizens; and the aid of the secular power con.
curred with the superstition of mankind, in ren.
dering the thunders of the church no less de
ftrudive than terrible.

To there general caufs may be attributed the

immense growth both of the wealth and power of
the Popilb church; and without entering into any
more minute detail, this may serve to difcove
the foundations on which a ftrudure so ftupn.
dons was erected.

But though the laity had contributed, by their

own superstition and profuseness, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and emi.
nence, they began ,- by degrees, to feel and to
murmur at their encroachments. No wonder
haughty and martial Bar6ns should view the power
and polefions of the church with envy; and re.
gard the lazy and inacive character of church
men with the utmost contempt; while, at the
fame time, the indecent and licentious lives of
the clergy gave great and juR offence to the peoplt

and conCiderably abated the veneration which they B o 0 K
were accustomed to yield to that order of men. 1.

Immense wealth, extreme indolence, gross

ignorance, and, above all, the evere injunction Qs
celibacy, had concurred to introduce this corrup-
tion of morals among many of the clergy, who
presuming to much upon the fubmilfion of the
people, were at no pains either to conceal, or to
disguise their own vices. According to the ac-
counts of the Reformers, confirmed by several
Popifl writers, the mol open and scandalous
diflolution of manners prevailed among the Scottilh
clergy ". Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame piblic
pomp which is due to a legitimate child, cele.
brated the marriage of his natural daughter with
the Earl of Crawfurd's son "; and, if we may
believe Knox, e publicly continued to the end
of his days a criminal correspondence with her
mother, who was a woman of rank. The other
prelates seem not to have been more regular and
exemplary than their Primate ".

"Winzet. ap. Keith Append& 02. 2to Lefl. te Reb.

Gest. Scot. 212.

" The marriage articles, subscribed with his own hand, in
which he calls her my daughter, Keith, p. 42.

A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy

is found in the public records. A greater number of letters.
of lgitimation was granted during the first thirty years after
the Reformation, than during the whole period that has
clapsed since that time. These were obtained by the sons of
the Popish clergy. The Ecclefiafics, who were allowed to.
eain their benefices, alienatedthem to their children; who,

L4

O 0 K Men of such charaAers ought, in reason, to
11. have been alarmed at the first clamors raifd

against their own morals, and the doftrines of the
church, by the Protestant preachers; but the
Popish Ecclesiastics, either out of pride or igno.
rance, neglected the proper methods for silencing
them. Infead of reforming their Jives, or di
guising their vices, they affeed o despise the
censures of the people. While the Reformers,
by their mortifications and aufterities, ende.
*voured to resemble the first propagators
Christianity, the Popilb clergy were compared to
all hose persons who are most infamous in hiflory,
for the enormity and scandal of their crimes.

On the other hand, instead of mitigating the

rigor. or coloring over the absurdity, of the
established docrines; intead of attempting to
'found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them
to reason ; they left them without any other sup
port or recommendation, than the authority of the
church, and the decrees of councils. The fable
concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage,
and the merits of the faints, were the topics, on
wvhich they mfifted in their discourses to the
people; and the duty of preaching being Itk
wvholly to Monks of the lowes and molt illiterat
orders, their compositions were still more wretched

when they acquired wealth, were desirous that the fain f
illegitimacy might no longer remain upon their families. h
Ketib' Catalogue of the Scottish Bisbops, we find several il
stances of such alienations of church- lands, by the Popi
incumbent, to their natural children.

and contemptible, than the subjed on which they in- B o o t
fiRfed.W bile theReformers were attended by crowded 11.
and admiring audiences, the Popish preachers were
either universally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in order
to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imprudent and unfucceisful. As many doctrines
of their church had derived their credit, at first,
from the authority of false miracles, they now en.
deavoured to call in these to their aid ". But those
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpi.
cious admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darknes and of ignorance, met with a very
different reception, in a more enlightened period.
The vigilance of the Reformers detected these im-
poflures, and exposed not only them, but the cause
which needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

As the Popish Ecclefialtics became more and
more the objedls of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the Reformers were listened to as so
many calls to liberty; and besides the pious in-
dignition which they excited against those corrupt
dodtrines, which had perverted the nature of true
Chr;ti.iniry; besides the zeal which they inspired
for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of re-
ligion; thPy gave rife also, among the Scottilh
nobles, to other views and paflions. They hoped
to flake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion,
which they had long felt to be oppreflive, and
which they now discovered to be unchristian.
' Spotfwood, 69.

o o They expeced to recover possession of the church
II. revenues, which they were now taught to confida

as alienations made by their ancestors, with a
prfufion no less undifcerning than unbounded.
They flattered themselves, that a check would be
given to the pride and luxury of the clergy,
who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themselves within the sphere peculiar to their i.
cred characer. An aversion for the eftablilhed
church, which flowed from so many concurring
causes, which was raised by considerations ol
teligion, and heightened by motives of policy,
spread faR through the nation, and excited a fpiri
that burp out, at last, with irresistible violence

Religious considerations, alone, were fufficicat

to have roused this spirit. The points in contro
verfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happiness of mankind, and
lffential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in orde
to eablih them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effed of some wild and
enthufiatic frenzy in the human mind, this a5
tempt to account for the eagerness and zeal with
which our ancestors embraced and propagated the
Protestant dodrines, by taking a view of the po
litical motives alone which influenced them, and
by mbowing how naturally these prompted then
to ad with so much ardor, will not, perhaps, be
deemed an unnecessary digression. We now r
tarn to the course of the history.

The Queen's elevation to the office of Regnt

seems to have transported her, at first, beyond the B o o K
known prudence and moderation of her character. 11.
She began her adminiltration, by conferring upon ,ss.
foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; The Qeen
a ep which, both from the inability of firangers Regret e
to discharge these offices with vigor, and from mi.mni;i.n
the envy which their preferment excites among with fime

llnpopula

the natives, is never attended with good confe. 'mPrum.
quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and
intrudled with the management of the public re.
venues; Bonot was appointed Governor of Ork.
ney; and Rubay honored with the cultody of the
Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chancellor ". It
was with the highest indignation, that the Scots
beheld offices of the greatest eminence and author.
ity dealt out among firangers ". By these pro.
motions they conceived the'Queen to have offered
an insult both to their understandings and to
their courage; to the former, by supposing them
unfit for those ations, which their ancestors had
filled with so much dignity; to the latter, by
imagining that they were tame enough not to
complain of an affront, which, in no former age,
would have been tolerated with impunity.

While their minds were in this disposition, an
incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highelt degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-

' Lefl, de Reb, Gest. Scot. 189.

The resentment of the nation againf the French rose to

such a height, that an ad of Parliament was pased of pur-
pose to restrain or moderate it. Pari: 6. Q. Mary, c 60.

i o i lois and Plantagenet, the French had been ao
uL customed to embarrass the Englilb, and to divide

their strength by the sudden and formidable incu
sions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these inroad&
were seldom attended with any real advantage t
Scotland, and exposed it to the dangerous refentmmo
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
less tracable than formerly, and scrupled, any lo&
ger, to serve an ambitious ally at the price ofthbai
own quiet and security. The change, too, which.wa
daily introducing in the art of war, rendered the I&
ance of the Scottiib forces of less importance to tk
French Monarch. For these reasons, Henry havingio
solved upon a war with Philip IL and forefeeingth
the Queen of England would take part in her h1
band's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to sectet
in Scotland, the aliftance of ome troops, whid
would be more at his command than an undi
ciplined army, led by chieftains who were alms
independent In prosecution of this design, bi
under pretence of relieving the nobles from tb
expcnfe and danger of defending the borden,
gits the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament,

register the value of lands throughout the king
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to ap
ply that revenue towards maintaining a body d
regular troops in conRant pay. A fixed tax upa
land, which the growing expense of govea
ment bath introduced nto almost every part
Europe, was unknown at that time, and feee
altogether inconsistent with the genius of feud
government Nothing could be more liocki0

o a generous and brave nobility, than the intrult. BOOK
ng, to mercenary hands, the defence of those 1i.
erritories which had been acquired, or preserved,
y the blood of their ancestors. They received
his proposal with the utmost diffatisfadion. About
hree hundred of the lesser Barons repaired in a
ody to the Queen Regent, and represented
heir sense of the intended innovation, with
hat manly and determined boldness which is
natural to a free people, in a martial age. Alarm-
d at a remonstrance delivered in so firm a tone,
and upported by such formidable numbers, the
QOeen prudently abandoned a scheme, which
he found to be universally odious. As the Queen
erfelf was known perfecly to undesnd the cir.
umftances and temper of the nation, this mea-
lure was imputed wholly to the suggestions of her
oreign counsellors; and the Scots were ready to
roceed to the mos violent extremities againt them.
The French, instead of extinguihfing, added Attemp to

egage the

el to the flame. They had now commenced Kingdom Il
ho[tilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed * w*with
on the Queen of England to reinforce his army Esl"L
with a considerable body of her troops. In order
to deprive him of this aid, Henry 'had recourse, as
he projected, to the Scots; and attempted to ec
cite them to invade England. But, as Scotland
had nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's
charater, who, far from any ambitious scheme of
disturbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied
n endeavouring to reclaim her heretical subjes;
the nobles, who were assembled by the -Queen

so o0 Regent at Newbattle, listened to the folicitati
u. of the French Monarch with extreme coldnes,

and prudently.declined engaging the kingdom il
an enterprise £o dangerous and unnecessary. Wbh
she could not obtain by persuasion, the Quct
Regent brought about by a stratagem. Notwith
Randing the peace which (ubfilfed between the tw
.kingdoms, lhe commanded her French soldiers
rebuild a small fort near Berwick, which was p
.pointed, by the lal treaty, to be rafed. Th
garrison of Berwick sallied out; interrupted tW
work; and ravaged the adjacent country. Thi
insult routed the fiery spirit of the Scots, i
.their promptness to revenge the least appearanc
.of nationalinjury, dissipated, in a moment, t
wife and pacific resolutions which they had sola d
formed. War was determined, and orders i.
ftantly given for raising a numerous army. Bd
before their forces could assemble, the ardor
their indignation had time to cool, and the Ent
lih having discovered no intention to push tk
war with vigor, the nobles resumed their pacifi
fyRfem, and resolved to sand altogether upon
:i:. defcnfive. They marched to the. banks of it

Tweed, they prevented the incursions of the enc
-my; and having done what they thought ffu
cient for the safety and honor of their country,
the Queen could not induce them either by d
cntreaies, or herartifices, to advance another ftl

While the Scots persisted in their inaivityi

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French tronfi
who pofIffed entirely the confi4cnce of the 9ucd

Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to B o o K
engage the two nations in hoRilities. Contrary to II.
the orders of the Scottilh General, he marched
over the Tweed with his own soldiers, and in.
vested Werk, a garrison of the English. The
Scots, inRtead of seconding his attempt, were en.
raged at his presumption. The Queen's partiality
towards France had long been fufpeced; but it
was now visible that he wantonly sacrificed the
peace and safety of Scotland, to the interest of
that ambitious and assuming ally. Under the
eudal governments, it was in camps that sub.
eds were accustomed to address the boldest re.
on(lrances to their Sovereigns. While arms were
n their hands, they felt their own strength; and
t that time all their representations of grievances
arried the authority of commands. On this occa.
ion, the reentment of the nobles broke out with
uch violence, that the Queen, perceiving all at-
mpts to engage them in adion to be vain, ab.
ptly dismissed her army, and retired with the ut.
R fIh ame and disgust; having discovered the im-
tence of her own authority, without effecing any
hing which could be of advantage to France ".
It is observable, that this first instance of con-
tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no d.
ree, be imputed to the influence of the new opi-
ions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to
he Regency had been principally supported by
hose who favored the Reformation, and as he
ill needed them for a counterpoise to the Arch.
. Strype's Memor. iiL Apend. 374. Lefley, r96.

B o o biflop of St. Andrew's, and the pattifans of th

11. houe of Hamilton; Ihe continued to treat them

with great refped, and admitted them to no is
considerable {hare in her favor and confidence. Ki.
kaldy of Grange, and the other surviving confpi
raters againlt Cardinal Beatoun, were, about ti
time, recalled by her from banihnment; and, through
her connivance, the Protestant preachers enjoyd
an jnterval of tranquillity, which was of great ai
vantage to their cause. Soothed by these inRanca
of the Queen's moderation and humanity, t
Protestants left to others the office of remonftraipg;
and the leaders of the opposite fation set them the
firt example of disputing the will of their Sovereip

TiQ.,.,. As the Queen Regent felt how limited and ps
:miage carious ber authority was, while it depended o0
rith the
DaOphi. the poise of there contrary fadions, Ihe end

voured to eftablifi it on a broader and mno
secure foundation, by hafening the concludof
of her daughter's marriage with the Dauph
Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in th
bloom of youth; and considerable .is the territ
ries were, which lhe would have'added to th
French Monarchy; reasons were not wanting a
dissuade Henry from completing his first plan d
marrying her to his son. 'I he constable Inlo
morency had employed all his interest to deld
an alliance, which reflected so much lustre on dt
Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the in
pofibility of maintaining order and tranquilli
among a turbulent people, during the abfenc
their Sovereign; and for that reason, had advihs

Henry

Henry to belfow the young Queen upon one of the B O iO
Princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, lli
might prefzrve that kingdom an useful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would
become a mutinous and ungovernable province".
But, at this time, the ConRable was a prisoner ii
the hands of the Spaniards; the Princes of Lorraid
were at the height of their power; and their inflti-
eCce, seconded by the charms of the young Queed,
triumphed over the prudent, but envious, remoi-
lianccs of their rival.

The French King accordingly applied to the Dec. t,

Parliament of Scotland, which appointed eight of 'S
its members " to represent the whole body of the -
inaion, at the marriage of the Queen. Among the
persons on whom the public choice conferred this
honorable character, were some of the most avowed
and zealous advocates for the Reformation; by
ivhih may be eflimated the degree of refpedC and
p,,pul.rity which that party had now attained it

kie kingdom. The infirudions of the Parliament
to those Commiflioners fill remain ', and do honor
to the wisdom and integrity of that assembly. At
the fame time that they manifelted, with rerped
to the articles of marriage, a laudable concern for
the dignity and interest of their Sovereign, they
employed every precaution which prudence could

"ich'. Mlem. is.
V' \iz The ArchbifGlop of Clasgow, the B;flop of Ros, the

Binp f Ork':ey. the Earls ofRothes and Cuafils, Lord Fleming,
lord Ietun. the Prior of Sc. Andrew's, and John Ertkine o Dun.

K"eith, Append. 13.
Vui. M. M

0 o

O didate, for preserving the liberty and independence
IL of the nation, and for frcuring the fucceflion of

the Crown in the house of Hamilton.

~nia.e of With regard to each of these, the Scots obtained
the Fre' whatever satisfaction their fear or jealousy could
age mqn. demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and the

King of France ratified every article with the
molt solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds
in form, under their hands and feals. But on the
part of France, all this was one continued scene
of studied and elaborate deceit Previous to these
public tranfadions with the Scottilb deputies, Mlary
had been persuaded to subscribe privately three
deeds, equally unjust and invalid; by which,
failing the heirs of her own body; she conferred
the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inherit
ance or succession might accrue to it, in free gift
upon the crown of France, declaring all promise
to the contrary, which the necellity of her affirs,
and the solicitations of her subjes had extorted,
or might extort from her, to be void and of no
obligation ". As it gives us a proper idea of the
charader of the French court under Henry II. we
may observe that the King himself, the Keeper of
the Great Seals, the Duke of Guise, and the
Cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons engagedia
conduding this perfidious and diflionorable proje&
The (ueen of Scots was the only innocent afor
in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperi
ence, her education in a foreign country, and her

" Corps Diplomat. ton. v. 2z. Keith, 73.

deference to the will of her uncles, murf vindicate BOO

0

her, in the judgment of every impartial person, AL
flom ay imputation of blame on that account.

This grant, by which Mary bestowed the inherit.
ance of her kingdom upon ftranFers, was concealed
with the utmost care from her fubeci. They seem,
however, not to have been unacquainted with the
intennion of the French to overturn the settlement
of the fucceflion in favor of the Duke of Chatel-
herault. The zeal with which the Archbishop of
St, Andrew's opposed all the measures of the Queen
Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and
suspicions of that prudent prelate on this head",

The marriage, however, was celebrated with great April t4b
pomp; and the French, who had hitherto affected l8'
to draw a veil over their designs upon Scotland,
began now to unfold their intentions without any
disguise. In the treaty of marriage. the deputies
h.ld agrced that the Dauphin Ihould assume the name
of iing of Scotland. This they considered only as an
honorary title; but the French labored to annex to
it ome fold privileges and power. They nfifted
that the Dauphin's title hould be publicly recog-
ifed; that the C(olon ,,trimt n;a thould be conferred
upon him; and that all the rights pertaining to the
lulband of a (leen flould be vested in his person.
Bv the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heress kept poffellou of her estate during his own

'About this time the French seem to have had some defigu

of evivirn the Earl of Lenox's pretensions to the fuccefion,
in order to itinidate and alarm the Duke of Chatelherawu^
lsrncs i. S 9. Forbes's Colltt. vol. i. 189.

M

o o life, if he happened to survive her and the children
n. born of the marriage ". This was called the courte!

of Scotland. The French aimed at applying this rul,
which takes plice in private inheritances, to thb
fuccelion of the kingdom; and that seems to e
implied in their demand of the Crown Matrimoni!,
a phrase peculiar to the ScottiSh historians, and
which they have negleced to explain ". As tlx
French had reason to expedt difficulties in carrying
through this measure, they began with founding
the deputies who were then at Paris. The EngliA
in the marriage-articles between their Queen and
Philip of Spain, had let an example to the age,
of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with whic
a foreigner hould be admitted so near the thront
Full of the fame ideas, the Scottili deputies had,

" Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 8.
7 As far as I can judge, the husband of the Queen,

the grant of the Crown Matrimonial, acquired a right
afiTme the title of King, to have his name stamped upon t
.current coin, and to ign all public infiruments together i
the Queen. In consequence of this, the fubjets took an A
of fidelity to him. Keith, Append. 20. His authority becam
in some measure, co-ordinate with that of the Queen; an
without his concurrence, manifested by signing his name,
public deed seems to have been conlidered as valid. By l
oath of fidelity of the Scottilh Commillioners to the Dauphi
it is evident that, in their opinion, the rights belonging tot!
Crown Matrimonial fubfiRed only during the continuance
the marriage. Keith, Append. 20. But the conspirators agai
Rizio bound themselves to procure a grant of the Oci
Matrimonial to Darnley during all the days of his lif. Il6
Appin. iso. Good. i. 227.

n the oath of allegiance to the Dauphin, expressed B o a x
;hemfelves with remarkable caution". Their answer l.
wIs in the fame spirit, respectful, but firm; and
jifcovcred a fixed resolution of consenting to no-
thing, that tended to introduce any alteration in
the order of fucccflion to the crown.

Four of the deputies " happening to die before
they returned into Scotland, this accident was
unlvelflly imputed to the effects of poison, which
wvil fppofed to have been given them by the
emi!iar-ies of the house of Guise. l'he historians of
all nations discover an amazing credulity with refped
to rumors of this kind, which are so well calculated
to please the malignity of some men, and to gratify
the love of the marvellous which is natural to all,
that in every age they have been swallowed without
examination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots fliould easily give credit to a
fulpicion, which received such firong colors of
probability, both from their own resentment, and
from the known character of the Princes of Lorrain,
fn little scrupulous about the justice of the ends
vhich they pursued, or of the means which they
employed. For the honor of human nature, it muff,
llwever, be obfcrved, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to
p;ove that it was committed. But the Scots of
that age, influenced by national animofities and
"Keith Append. 20.

The Biflop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl
of Cafils, and Lord Fleming.

I 3

j o o K prejudices, were icapable of examining the circuim

I1. fiances of the cafe with calmness, or of judging

concerning them with candor. All parties agreed
in believing the French to have been guilty of
this deteflable ation; and it is obvious how much
this tended to increase the aversion for them, which
was growing among all ranks of men.

The Rt.at Notwithlanding the cold reception which their
preails o proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial met with
,,t to from the Scottilh deputies, the French ventured to
rrt it. move it in parliament. The partisans of the houft
o".' ' of Hamilton, suspicious of their designs upon the

fuccellion, oppofc it with great zeal.-But a party,
which the feeble and nRetady condud of their
leader had brought under much difrepotation, was
little able to withItand the influence of France,
and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded,
on this occasion, by all the numerous adherents
of the Reformation. Besides, that artfil Princefd
drefled out the French demands in a less ofenfive
garb, and threw in so many limitations, a seered
to render them of small consequence. These either
deceived the Scots. or removed their scruples: and
in compliance to the Queen, they passed an atd
conferring the Crwtn Matrimonial on the Dauphin;
and, with the fondest credulity, trusted to the
frail security of words and flatutes, against the
dangerous encroachments of power ".

' The A of Parliament is worded with the utmot care

with a view to guard against any breach of the order offucrl
sion. But the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a foleml
proteftaion to secure his own right. Keith, 76. It is'plan

\

The concurrence of the Protestants with the B O 0O
Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so accept- II.
able to France, while the Popifl clergy, under Co`tiu

to court the

the influence of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, Protctnt.
oppo[ed it with so much violence'", is one of
those singular circumfiances, in the conduct of
parties, for which this period is so remarkable. It
may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dexterous
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the
moderation of those who favored the Reforma.
tion. The rroteftants were, by this time, almoR
equal to the Catholics, both in power and in
number; and, conscious of their own strength,
they submitted with impatience to that tyrannical
authority with which the ancient laws armed the
ecclefiaRics against them. They longed to be
exempted from this oppreflive jurifdicion, and
publicly to enjoy the liberty of profefling those
opinions, and of exercising that worlhip, which so
great a part of the nation deemed to be founded
in truth, and to be acceptable to the Deity. This
indulgence, to which tile whole weight of priestly
authority was opposed, there were only two ways
of obtaining. Either violence must extort it from
the relucant hand of their Sovereign, or by prudent
compliance they might exped it from her favor.
or her gratitude. The former is an expedient for

that he furpeafed the French of having ome intention to set
afge his right of fucceflion; and, indeed, if they had no
defigr of that kind, the eagerness with which they urged
their demand, was childish.
" Melv. 47.

M4

B o o K the redref. of grievances, to which no nation hb

II. recourse suddenly; and fubjeds seldom venture

upon refinance, which is their last remedy, but
in cafes of extreme necefliiy. On this occasion the
Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
bv th.'ir zeal in forwarding the (ueen's designs,
they hoped to merit her protecion. This difpo(i.
tion the Queen encouraged to the utmolf, and
amused them so artfully with many promises, and
some concessions, that, by their aflliftace, h
firmountcd in Parliament the force of a national
and laudable jealoufv, which would, otherwise,
have Iwayed with the greater number.

Another circumstance contributed somewhat to

acquire the Regent such considerable influence
in this Pa liament. In Scotland, all the blliop.
ric, and those abbeys which conferred a title to
a feat in 'arliament, were in the gift of the
Crown ". From the time of her acceflion to the
Regency, the Q(ueen had kept in her own hands
almost all thc.e which became vacant, except
such as were, to the great disgust of the nation,
beftewed upon foreigners. Among these, her
brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the
abby-s of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the nmo
wealthy foundations in the kingdom ". By this
condud , he thinned the ecclesiastical bench",

' See Book .
* Lefley, ao2.
4 It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, whicl

Ileey calls a very full one, that only seven Bilhops ant
sixteen Abbots Were present.

which was entirely under the influence of the B o o
Archlbilhop of St. Andrew's, and which, by its 11.
numbers and authority, ufially had great weight
in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give, at that time, of little consequence.

The Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior
of St. Andrew's, one the most powerful, and
the other the mofi popular leader of the Pro.
tenlants, were appointed to carry the Crown and
other ensigns of royalty to the Dauphin. But
from this they were diverted by the part they were
called to ad in a more interesting scene, which
now begins to open.

Before we turn towards this, it is necefary to Eli,.aleth
oblerve, that on the seventeenth of November, fucte" tn

ithe Crown

o'e thousand five hundred and fifty.eight, Mary otEngland.
of Engl.nd finished her short and inglorious reign.
Her liter Elizabeth took poleffion of the throne
without opposition; and the Protestant religion
w.va, once more, eltablifhed by law in England.
The accession of a Queen, who, under very dif.
ficult circumItances, had given strong indications
of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel,
rendered her reign so illustrious, attracted the eyes
of all Europe. Among the Scots, both parties ob.
served her first motions with the utmost solicitude,
as they easily foresaw that he would not remain
lone an indifferent fpedator of their tranfations.

Undler many discouragements, and much op-
pression, the Reformation advanced towards a full
tftabliflment in Scotland. All the low country.
the molt populous, and, at that time, the mlt

00 L warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinlurd
II. with the Protestant opinions; and if the fame im

prelfions were not made in the more difbnt conu.
ties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpofi.
tions among the people, but to the fcarcityof
preachers, whole moR indefatigable zeal could not
satisfy the avidity of those who desired their infiruc
tions. Among a people bred to arms, and as prompt
as theScots. to adtwith violence ;and in an age, when
religious paflions had taken such prong poffefonof
the human mind, and moved and agitated it wit
so much violence, the peaceable and regular demean.
our of o numerous a party is aftonilhing. romlhe
death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the first who fufferd
in Scotland for the Proteflant religion, thirty year
had elapsed, and during so long a period no viola
tion of public order or tranquillity had proceeded
from that fed"; and though roused and irritated
by the molf cruel excesses of ecclefiaflical tyranny,
they did, in no infiance, transgress thoft bounds
of duty which the law prescribes to fubjeds. Be
fides the prudence of their own leaders, and the
protection which the Queen Regent, from politi
cal motives, afforded them, the moderation of th
Archbiflop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific
difpnfition. That Prelate, whole private life con.
temporary writers tax with great irregularities

' The murder of Cardinal Beatoum was occasioned b;

prrivte revenge, and being contrived and executed b!
fixeen persons. only, cannot, with jiufice, be impe
to the whole ProtefRant party.

"Knox, Buchanan, Keith, 208.

governed the church, for some years; with a BOO
temper and prudence of which there are few exam- ii.
pies in that age. But some time before the meeting
of last Parliament, the Archbiflop departed from
those humane maxims by which he had hitherto
regulated his condut; and whether, in spite to the
(Queen, who had entered into so close all union
with the Proteflants, or in compliance with the
importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the
rage of persecution against the Reformed; sentenced
to the flames an aged priest, who had been con-
vided of embracing the Protestant opinions; and
summoned several others, fufpeded of the fame
crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy,
which was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

Nothing could equal the horror of the Pro-

teflants at this unexpected and barbarous execu-
tion, but the zeal with which they espoused the
defence of a cause that now seemed devoted to
dellrucion. They had immediate recourse to the
OQueen Regent; and as her success in the Parlia-
ment, which was then about to meet, depended
on their concurrence, Ihe not only heltered them
from the impending storm, but permitted them
the exercise of their religion with more freedom
than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with
this precarious tenure, by which they held their
religious liberty, the Protestants labored to
ender their poffeflfon of it more secure and in-
dependent. With this view they determined to
petition the Parliament for some legal protetion
gainft the exorbitant and oppressive jurifdicioa

0 o 0 x of the ecclesiastical courts, which Aby their arbi
I. trary method of proceeding, founded in the canon

law, were led to sentences the molt hfocking to
humanity, by maxims the mors repugnant to ju.
tice. But the Queen, who dreaded the effect of
debate on this delicate subjed, which could not fail
of exciting high and dangerous palfions, prevailed
on the leaders of the party, by new and more solemn
promises of her protecion, to defilt from any appli
cation to Parliament, where their numbers and in.
fluence would, in all probability, have protured
them, if not the entire redress, at least some mitiga.
tion of their grievances.

They applied to another alfembly, to a conv.

cation of the Popilh clergy, but with the fame il
success, which hath always attended every propoal
for reformation, addressed to that order of men. To
abandon nusurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has,o0
some occasions, offered to truth; but from any foci.
ty of men, no such effort can be expected. The corrup
tions of a society, recommended by common utility,
andjuftified by universal practice, are viewed, by is
members, without (hame, or horror; and reform
tion never proceeds from themselves, but is alway
forced upon them by some foreign hand. Suitableto
this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was the behaviou
of the Convocation in the present conjuncture. Al
the demands of the ProtefRants were rejected wid
contempt; and the Popith clergy, far from endei
vouring, by any prudent concessions, to sooth an
to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted tb

doctrines of their church, concerning some of the a o o it
molt exceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigor, Il.
wlichi gave new offence ". Asis.

During the fitting of the Convocation, the Pro-

tellants first began to suspect some change in the Re.
get's diifpofition towards them. Though joined with
themn for many years byinterelt,and united, as they
c :ceiv'ed, by the firongeft ties of affeAion and of
,ratitude, he discovered, on this occasion, evident
symptoms, not only of coldness, but of a growing
dt(gult and averGion. In order to account for this, our
hillorians do little more than produce the trite obfer.
vations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter
the character, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen,
fay they, having reached the utmolt point to which
her ambition apired, no longer preserved her accufi
tomned moderation, but, with an insolence usual to
t!;e fortunate, looked down upon those by whose
alliRtlnce fle had been enabled to rife so high. But it
i, neither in the depravity of the human heart, nor
in the ingratitude of the Queen's disposition, that we
must search for the motives of her present conduct.
These were derived from another, and a more remote
source, which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfac.
tions, we hall endeavour to open with some care.

The ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had Ambitiour
been no less successful than daring; but all their views of the

Princes o!

fclhmes vwere distinguished by being vast and un- orrai' n
bounded. Though strangers at the court of France,
their eminent qualities had raised them, in a short
time, to a height of power, superior to that of

"Keith, 8r.

g 0 o K all other subjes , and had placed them on a levd

II. even with the Princes of the blood themfelve,
nss. The church, the army, the revenue, were unde

their diredion. Nothing but the royal dignity re.
mained unattained, and they were elevated to a near
alliance with it, by the marriage of the Queen o
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their
own vanity, and to render their niece more wor.
thy the heir of France, they set on foot her claim
to the crown of England, which was founded oa
pretences not unplaufible:

The tragical amours and marriages of Henry VII

are known to all the world. Moved by the capri
ces of his love, or of his resentment, that impatient
and arbitrary Monarch had divorced, or beheaded
four of the fix Oueens, whom he married. In orde
to gratify him, both his daughters had been declared
illegitimate by AA of Parliament; and yet, with tha
fantastic inconsistence which diftinguilbes his chanr
ter, he, in his last will, whereby he was impow.
ered to fettle the order of succession, called both
of them to the throne upon the death of their
brother Edward; and, at the fame time, paffin
by the posterity of his eldeR ifter Margaret Queen
of Scotland, he appointed the line of fuccelfion to
continue in the descendants of his younger fiter,
the Duchess of Suffolk.

In consequence of this destination, the validiq

whereof was admitted by the Englifl, but neve
recognised by foreigners, Mary had reigned i
England without the leaRf complaint of neigh
bouring Princes. But the fame causes, wbid

facilitated her accession to the throne, were obfta- B o ot
ties to the elevation of her sifter Elizabeth, and t1.
rendered her pofeffion of it precarious and insecure.
Rome trembled for the Catholic faith, under a
Proteftlat Queen of such eminent abilities. ' he
fame fupcrflitious fears alarmed the court of Spain.
France beheld, with concern, a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many preten.
ion, occupied by a rival, whose birth, in the
apinion of all good Catholics, excluded her from
my legal right of fucceflion. The impotent hatred
of the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of
Philip II. would have produced no sudden or for-
midable effet. The ardent and impetuous ambition
f the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, go-
verned the court of France, was more decisive, and
Mor: to be dreaded. Instigated by them , Henry, They per

'

r 1f',,t l ade Airy

boon after thedeath of Mary, perfuadedhis daughter. to airue
n.law, and her bulband, to alfume the title of King *t' tito e
nd Queen of England. They affeded to publifli this Eagi.
:0 all Europe. They used that flyle and ap-
tlltion in public papers, some of which Itill re.
amn ". The arms of England were engraved on their
:oin and plate, and borne by them on all occasion.
So preparations, however, were made to support this
mpolitic, and premature claim. Elizabeth was al.
'eady tedted on her throne; ile poffelfed all the intre-
i'dity of pirit,and all thearts of Policy, which were
lecteffry for maintaining that Ration. England was
!rowing into reputation for naval power.The marine
f France had been utterly neglected and Scot.
" lAderC Diplon. Scor. No. 68. and 164.

s o o K land remained the only avenue by which the te

IL ritories of Elizabeth could be approached. It wa
l'9 on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorai

n"."ó to determined to make their attack "; and, by ufinj
IL the name and pretensions of the Scottilh Queen,

they hoped to rouse the English Catholics, formi
dabl at that time by their zeal and numbers, an
exasperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, o&
accotut of the change which fie bad made in dt
national religion.

., otti t It was vain to exped the aftaance of the Scotti
,i,. ectr. Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all Europt
bFtatodc eRetemed the guardian and defender of the reformd
^ut is faith. To break the power and reputatioh of bhit
stist party in Scotland, became, for this reason, a nect

fary Rep towards the invaflon of England. With ti
the Princes of Lorrain resolved to open theirflhcm
And as persecution was the only method for fuppr*
sing religious opinions, known in that age. or dic
tated by the despotic and fanguinarv spirit of the R
miih fuperfition, this, in its utmofR violence, the
determined to employ. The Earl of Argyll, ti
Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the parn
were marked out by them for immediate deftru
tion '; and they hoped, by punilhing them, i
intimidate their followers. lnftrudions for this pu
pose were sent from France to the Queen Rt
gent That humane and sagacious trincefs co
demned a measure, which was equallv viol'
and impolitic. By long reidence in Scotland, 0

' Sorbes, Collect i. 251. 269. 279. 40o4
Sorbes, i. a. d

d become acquainted with the eager and impa. B o o
int temper of the nation; fle well knew the 11.
,ver, the number, and popularity of the Protestant lisp
eatrs, and had been a witnef to the intrepid and
nconqucrable relblution which religious fervor
uld iafpire. What, then, could be gained by
ifinig this dangerous spirt, which, hitherto, all
he arts of policy had scarce been able to restrain ?
If t once broke loose, the authority of a Regent
WoIld be little capable to subdue, or even to
oderate its rage. If, in order to quell it, foreign
,rces were called in, this would give the alarm to
hewhole nation, irritated already at the excelfive
ower which the French polfefled in the kingdom,
nd suspicious of all their designs. Amidst the

ck vwhich this might occasion, far from hoping
o exterminate the Protestant dotrine, it would be
well if the whole fabric of the eftablilhed church
ere not lhaken, and perhaps overturned from the
[indation. These prudent remonstrances made no
mprellion on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
exible in all their resolutions, they infied on the
full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
pafonately devoted to the interest of France, and
eady, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opi.
iOns to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared
execute their commands with implicit sub-
liflin "; and, contrary to her own judgment,
nd to all the rules of found policy, The became
e inltrument of exciting civil commotions in

Mlelv. 48. Mem. de Caftlenau, ap. Jebb. vol. ii. 446.
VOL. I. N

B 0 K Scotland, the fatal termination of which he fore.

II. saw and dreaded.
Is». From the time of the Queen's competition for
uPit "t the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, te
conduct Popifl clergy, under the direcion of the Arch.
wit trrd bithop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in op.
teu.' pofiion to all her measures. Her first ftep toward

the execution of her new scheme, was to regain
their favor. Nor was this reconcilement a matte
of difficulty. The Popilh ecclesiastics, separated
from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy,
the boldest and most successful invention of humni
policy; and combined among themselves in theclo
fel and molt sacred union; have been accustomed,
in every age, to sacrifice all private and particuhr
passions to the dignity and interest of their order.
Delighted, on this occasion, with the profped of
triumphing over a fadion, the encroachments of
which they had long dreaded, and animated wit
the hopes of re-eltablifling their declining grandeur
on a firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled te
memory of past injuries, and engaged to second
the Queen in all her attempts to check the progrei
of the Reformation. The Queen, being secure of
their alliflance, openly approved of the decreesof
the Convocation, by which the principles of th
Reformers were condemned; and at the fame time
she issued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to
observe the approaching festival of Easter according
to the Romijh ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake th
Queen's intentions, the Protestants, who saw tl

danger approach, in order to avert it, employed B o o0
the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of II.
London, to expostulate with her concerning this ass.
change towards severity, which their former ser-
vices had so little merited, and which her reiterated
promises gave them no reason to expet. She,
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her
sleolution of extirpating the Reformed religion out
of the kingdom. And, upon their urging her former
engagements with an uncourtly, but honet bold.
ness, the so far forgot her usual moderation, as to
utter a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal
condition may be to entertain it, prudence ihould
teach them to conceal as much as possible. " The
promises of Princes, fays he, ought no to be too
carefully remembered, nor the performance of them
exa&ed, unless it suits their own conveniency."

The indignation, which betrayed the Queen Smumosi
into this rash exprefflon, was nothing in comparison h""ei

preache ri

of that with which he was animated, upon hearing appear be
hat the public exercise of the Reformed Religion t"' er.
bad been introduced into the town of Perth. At
nce, he threw off the malk, and issued a man.
ate, summoning all the Protestant preachers in
he kingdom to a court of justice, which was to

held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The
rtelants, who, from their union, began, about
is tme, to be diltinguilhed by the name of the
ongregation, were alarmed, but not intimi.
ted by this danger; and instantly resolved not
abandon the men to whom they were indebted
the moll valuable of all blellings, the knowledge

Na

X o o K of truth. At that time there prevailed in Scotland;

11. with refped to criminal trials, a cutom, introduced,
aSs. at first, by the institutions of vassalage and clanlip,

and tolerated, afterwards, under a feeble govern.
ment; persons accused of any crime were accosm
panied to the place of trial by a retinue of their
friends and adherents, aflembled for that purpok
from every quarter of the kingdom. Authorized by
this ancient practice, the. Reformed convened, in
great numbers, to attend their pallors to Stirling
The Queen dreaded their approach with a traia
so numerous, though unarmed; and in order to
prevent them from advancing, lhe impowered
John Erkine of Dun, a person of eminent authority
with the party, to promise, in her name, thatke
would put a stop to the intended trial, on condi
tion the preachers and their retinue advanced no
nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced himself
of the Queen's sincerity, served her with the utmol
zeal. And the Protestants, averse from proceeding
to any ad of violence, liktened with pleasure tofo
pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few
leaders of the party, remained at Perth; the
multitude, which had gathered from different
parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and retired to
their own habitations.

Bmks a But, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the
P-.wle on Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to cal
ad relied. to trial the persons who had been summoned, and

upon their non-appearance, the rigor of jultice
took place, and they were pronounced outlaw
By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with rtl

dignity, and so inconfiltent with that integrity oot i

hclh llhoull prevail in all tranfaclions between 1X.
Sovercigns and theirfubjeds, the Queen forfeitedthe iss,
tdeem and confidence of the whole nation. Tho
l'rn:ftants, fliocked no less at the indecency with
which flie violated the public failh, than at the
danger which threatened themselves, prepared
bollly for their own defence. Erkine, enraged
at having ben made the instrument for deceiving
his party, instantly abandoned Stirling, and re.
pairing to Perth , added to the zeal of his affo-
rites, by his rcprcfentations of the Queen's in.
flexible resolution to suppress their religion.

The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded Th;s or,.
his rprefentntions: He having been carried a pri- ""rrcti"'T
tlner into France, together with the other persons at Peih.
taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon, made his
escape out of that country ; and residing sometimes
in lEnland, sometimes in Scotland , had, at last,
been driven out of both kindoms by the rage of the
Popili clergy, and was obliged to retire to Geneva.
Thence he was called by the leaders of the Protestants
in Scotland; and, in compliance with theirfolicit.
alions, he set out for his native country, where
he arrived a few days before the trial appointed
at Stirling. He hurried infantly to Perth, to,
hure with hi. brethren in the common danger,
or to alliFt them in promoting the common,
raufe. While their minds were in that ferments
vhilch the ueen's perfidiousness and their own,
danger occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and
! a vehement harangue againIt idolatry, infamed

'N3

3 o K the multitude with the utmost rage. The indi

II. cretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox'
zr». sermon, was preparing to celebrate mass, and began

to decorate the altar for that purpose, precipitatd
them into immediate adion. With tumultuary, but
irresistible violence, they fell upon the churches in
that city, overturned the altars, defaced the pi&ur,
broke in pieces the images; and proceeding n,
to the monasteries they, in a few hours, laid thoe
sumptuous fabrics almost level with the ground
This riotous infurredion was not the effet of any
concert, or previous deliberation: Censured by t
reformed preachers, and publicly condemned by
the perions of most power and credit with the
party, it must be regarded merely as an accident
eruption of popular rage ".

The Rcept But to the Queen Dowager these proceeding
-'--t appeared in a very diferent light. Besides their im
tm. nifeft contempt for her authority, the Proteloan

had violated every thing in religion which e
eltemed venerable or holy; and on both these a.
counts, (he determined to inflic the fevereR venp
ance on the whole party. She had already drw
the troops in French pay to Stirling; with thce,ad
what Scottiih forces she could levy of a sudden, lt
marched diredfly to Perth,in hopesof furprifnmgtb
Protefant leaders before they could assemble thb
followers, whom, out of confidence in her difinp
nuous promises, they bad been ralhly induced todi
miss. Intelligence of these preparations and meac

" Kno=, Hft. 57, 18. ,
-i

&'TK;vI

,^~~

was soon conveyed to Perth. The ProteRfants B OOK
would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by ad- Ix.
dreffcs both to herself, and to the persons of ,.
greatest credit in her court; but finding her inexora-
ble, they, with great vigor, took measures for
their own defence. Their adherents, animated with
zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves
in so good a cause, flocked in such numbers to
Perth, that they not only secured the town from
danger, but, within a few days,-were in a con-
dition to take the field, and to face the Queen,
who advanced with an army seven thousand strong.

Neither party, however, was impatient to en.
gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men whom the fervor of religion raised
above the sense of fear or of danger. The Pro.
teftants beheld with regret the Earl of Argyll, the
Prior of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent
persons of their party, ftiH adhering to the Queen;
and destitute of their aid and counsel, declined
hazarding an aion, the ill success of which
might have proved the ruin of their cause. The
profped of an accommodation was for these rea.
sons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll and
the Prior, who were the Queen's commissioners
for conducing the negociation, seem to have been
sincerely desirous of reconciling the contending
facions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving un.
expetedly with a powerful reinforcement to the
Congregation, augmented the Queen's eagerness
for peace. A treaty was accordingly concluded, A treaty
nwhich it was fIipulated, that both armies Ihould Cu"cluded.

N4

B o o K be dilbanded, and the gates of Perth set open tothe

11. Queen; that indemnity Ibould be granted to thein.
z5s. habitants of that city, and to all others loncerned in

the late infurredcion; that no French garrison hIould
be left in Perth, and no French soldier ifould ap.
proach within three miles of that place; and that a
Parliament fIould immediately be held, in order to
compose whatever differences might fliH remain",
May 9. The leaders of the Congregation, diftruMful o

the Queen's sincerity, and feible that concessions,
sowing not from inclination, but extorted by te
recellity of heraffairs, could notlongremain in forc.
entered into a new association, by which they bound
themselves, on the first infringement of the prefeot
treaty, or in the least appearance of danger to
their religion, to reassemble their followers, and o
take arms in defence of what they deemed the cauk
of God, and their country ".

srok. s, The Queen, by her conduc, demonfirated
i egi'.L there precautions to be the result of no groundlt6

or unnecessary fear. No sooner were the Proteant
forces dismissed, than he broke every article
in the treaty. She introduced French troops into
Perth, fined fme of the inhabitants, banitd
others, removed the Magistrates out of office, and,
on her retiring to Stirling, fte left behind her a
garrlfon of fix hundred men, with orders to al.
low the exercise of no other religion than the
Roman Catholic. The situation of Perth, a
place at that time of (ome strength and a toW

" Keith, 89.
" Knox, s3t

the molt proper of any in the kingdom for the B oo K
flittiol of a garrison, seems to have allured the 11.
(ieen to this unjultiliable and ill-judged breach nt,.
olf public faith; which Ihe endeavoured to co-
lor , by alledging that the body of men left at
Plerli was entirely composed of native Scots,
though kept in pay by the King of France.

'I he Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold;
it was now apparent, that not only the religion,
but the liberties of the kingdom were threat-
ened; and that the French troops were to be era.
ployed as instruments for subduing the Scots, and
wreathing the yoke about their necks. Martial as
the genius of the Scots then was, the poverty of
their country made it impossible to keep their ar-
mies long assembled; and even a very small body
of regular troops might have proved formidable to
the nation, though confifing wholly of soldiers.
But, what number of French forces were then in
Scotland, at what times, and under what pretext
they returned, after having left the kingdom in one
thousand five hundred and fifty, we cannot, with
any certainty, determine. Contemporary hiltorians
often feleC, with little judgment, the circumftan.
ces which they transmit to posterity; and with re-
sped to matters of the grcateft curiosity and im-
portance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
dark. We.may conjecture however, from some
palages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots
in French pay amounted 'at least to three thou.
sand men, under the command of Monsieur
D'Oyfel, a creature of the house of Guise and

o o x they were oon augmented to a much more so.
!I. midable number.
is. The Queen, encouraged by having so confider.

able a body of well disciplined troops at her com.
mand, and instigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that ra
action, once more threw the nation into the mod

.e pr*. dangerous convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and

-ut b. Prior of St. Andrew's instantly deserted a court,
.a. where faith and honor seemed to them to be n

longer regarded; and joined the leaders of the
Congregation, who had retreated to the easter
part of Fife. The Barons from the neighbouring
counties repaired to them, the preachers roused
the people to arms, and wherever they came, the
ame violent operations which accident had occs
sioned at Perth, were now encouraged out of policy.
The enraged multitude was let loose, and churche
and monasteries, the monuments of ecclefialic
pride and luxury; were sacrificed to their zeal.

In order to check their career, the Quee,

without losing a moment, put her troops in no
tion; but the zeal of the Congregation got t
ftat, once more, of her vigilance and adtivit
In that warlike age, when all men were accutom
ed to arms, and on the leaR profped of dange
were ready to run to them, the leaders of th
Protestants found no difficulty to raise an armn
Though they set out from St. Andrew's with
hender train of a hundred horse, crowds flocke
to their standard from every corner of the contr

through which they marched; and before they reach- Ba o x
ed Falkland, a village only ten miles distant, they II.
were able to meet the Queen with superior force ". 11.

The Queen, surprised at the approach of so
formidable a body, which was drawn up by its
leaders in such a manner as added greatly in ap-
pearance to its numbers, had again recourse to ne.
gociation. She found, however, that the preferva.
tion of the Protestant religion, their zeal for which
had at sirs roused the leaders of the Congregation
to take arms, was not the only object they had now
in view. They were animated with the warmest
love of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in
imminent danger from the attempts of the French
forces; and these two passions mingling, added re-
ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with They aim
more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation at d",miR
filled the human mind with more liberal and ge- ^, religious
nerous sentiments concerning civil government. gdrcces.
The genius of Popery is extremely favorable to
the power of Princes. The implicit submission to
all her decrees, which is exated by the Romilh
Church, prepares and breaks the mind for political
servitude; and the dodtrines of the Reformers, by
overturning the established system of superstition,
weakened the firmest foundations of civil tyranny.
That bold spirit of inquiry, which led men to re
jed theological errors, accompanied them in other
Iciences, and discovered everywhere the fame
manly zeal for truth. A new study, introduced as
the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of
"Knox, I41.

BOO liberty. Men became more acquainted with th

11. Greek and Roman authors, who described exqui
3'r9 site models of free government, far superior to thb

inaccurate and opprelive fyfttm eftablilbed by
the feudal law; and produced such illustrious ex.
amples of public virtue, as wonderfully suited
both the circumstances and spirit of that age.
Alany, among the most eminent Reformers, were
themselves considerable masters in ancient learn
ing; and all of them eagerly adopted the maxims
and spirit of the ancients, with regard to govern
ment ". The mos ardent love of liberty accor
panied the Protestant religion throughout all its
progress; and wherever it was embraced, it roused
an independent spirit, which rendered men attcon
tive to their privileges as fubjeds , and jealous
of the encroachments of their sovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Reformation, infued
generous sentiments concerning government into
the minds of their hearers; and the Scotti Barons,
naturally free and bold, were prompted to afrit
their rights with more freedom and boldness tha
ever. Infeid of obeying the Queen Regent, whb

" The exceflive admiration of ancient policy was the occ

sion of Knox's famous book concerning the Gbovrnnlut o
IVomen, wherein, conformable to the maxims oftheancim
lgillators, which modem experience has proved to bell
fonded, he pronounces the eleation of women to the suprem
authority, to be utterly destructive of good government..1
principles, authorities, and examples, were all drawn fa
ancient writers. The fame observation may be made wid
regard to Buchanan's Dialogue, De JJre RegniapudSotos.
is founded, not on the maxims of feudal r but of ancient e
publican government.

had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they B o O K
demanded not only the redress of their religious Il.
grievances, but, as a preliminary toward fettling 'sss.
the nation, and securing its liberties, required the
immediate expulfiou of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power to make
so important a conceflion without the concurrence
of the French Monarch; and as some time was re-
quilite in order to obtain that, she hoped, during
this interval, to receive such reinforcements from
France, as would insure the accomplishment of
that design which he had twice attempted with
unequal rength. ]Meanwhile, he agreed to a Jane 3.
cessation of arms for eight days, and before the
expiration of there, engaged to transport the
French troops to the south fide of the Forth; and
to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who fIould
labor o bring all differences to an accommmoda-
tion. As Ihe hoped, by means of the French troops,
to overawe the Protestants in the southern counties
the former article in the treaty was punetually execut-
ed; the latter having been inserted merely to amuse
the Congregation, was no longer remembered.

By tlefe reiterated and wanton inflances of per. A Second
fidy, the Queen loft all credit with her adversaries; ty v"io.
and no safety aplpearing in any other course, they
aain took arms with more inflamed resentment,
alld with bolder and more extensive views. The
removing of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country situated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
lubjeded to the insolence and exactions of the gat.

, o o rifon which the Queen had left there, implored th

lj. assistance of the Congregation for their relief. Thi
iss. ther they marched, and having, without effet,

required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms o
the former treaty, they prepared to besiege itin form
The Queen employed the Earl of Huntly and Lord
Erlkine to divert them from this enterprise. Buthe
wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so
often, they could deceive no longer; and without
listening to her offers, the Protestants continued the
siege, and soon obliged the garrison to capitulat.

After the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured

to seize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,
from its command of the only bridge over th
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of th
Congregation, having intelligence of her design,

Raiii prevented the execution of it, by a hasty march
mrac id thither with part of their forces. The inhabit.
the r ants, heartily attached to the cause, fat open t
tte.a them the gates of their town. Thence they ad

vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edin
burgh, which the Queen, on their approach, aban.
doned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbr.

The Proteflant army, wherever it came, kim

dled, or spread the ardor of Reformation, and td
utmost excefles of violence were committed upo
churches and monasteries. The former were fpoilc
of every decoration, which was then esteemed
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt
at this distance of time, to condemn the furio
zeal of the Reformers. and to regret the overthroi
of so many stately fabrics, the monuments of ou

anceflors magnificence, and among the noblest B 0o0
ornaments of the kingdom. But amidst the vio- ].
lence of a Reformation, carried on in opposition ss9s.
to lcgal authority, some irregularities were un-
avoidable; and perhaps no one could have been
permitted more proper to allure and interest the
multitude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the
eltablifhed church. How absurd soever and ill.
founded the speculative errors of Popery may be,
some inquiry and attention are requisite towards
discovering them. The abuse and corruptions,
which had crept into the public worhlip of that
church, lay more open to observation, and by
friking the senses, excited more universal disgust.
Under the long reign of Heathenifim, fuperftion
eems to have exhausted its talent of invention,
o that when a superstitious spirit seized Chris-
ians, they were obliged to imitate the Heathens
n the pomp and magnificence of their ceremo.
ies, and to borrow from them the ornaments
ad decorations of their temples. To the pure
ad simple worship of the primitive Christians,
here fuccecded a species of splendid idolatry,
early resembling those pagan originals, whence
t had been copied. The contrariety of such ob-
1trances to the spirit of Christianity, was almost
he firfl thing, in the Romilh system, which awak-
ned the indignation of the Reformers, who apply-
ng to these the denunciations in the Old Test-
aent against idolatry, imagined that they could
ot endeavour at suppressing them with too
uch zeal. No talk could be more acceptable

a O 0 K to the multitude, than to overturn those feats of

11. superstition; they ran with emulation to perform
"9*. it, and happy was the man whose hand was moR

.adventurous and successful in executing a work
deemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labor to
restrain this impetuous spirit of Reformatior. Irr,
gular and violent as its sallies were, they tended
diredly to that end which they had in view; for,
by demolishing the monalleries throughout the
kingdom, and setting at liberty their wretched in
habitants they hoped to render it impossible evd
to rebuild the one, or to reaffiemble the other,

But amidst these irregular proceedings, a circumi

fiance, which does honor to the conduct and human'
ity of the leaders of the Congregation, deserves no
tice. They so far restrained the rage of their follow,
ers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of theRoman Catholics were expofedtoany
personal insult, and not a single man suffered death "

At the fame time, we discover, by the facility

with which these great revolutions were effeded,
how violently the current of national favor an
towards the Reformation. No more than three
hundred men marched out of Perth under te
Earl of Argyll and Prior of St. Andrew's "; with
this inconsiderable force they advanced. But
wherever they came, the people joined them in I
body; their army was seldom less numerous than
five thouland men; the gates of every town were
thrown open to receive them; and, withou

Lesey, ap. Jebb, ol. i. 231.
Kcith '94. ftriki·

riking a ingle blow, they took pofeffion of the B o o K
capital of the kingdom. II.

This rapid and atonilhing success seems to have l"9.
encouraged the Reformers to extend their views, Jun 'z9

td to rife in their demands. Not satisfied with their

rft claim of toleration for their religion, they now,
penly, aimed at eftablilhing the Protestant doctrine
n the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they deter.
ined to fix their residence at Edinburgh; and, by
heir appointment, Knox, and some other preachers,
aking possession of the pulpits, which had been
bandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed
gainfl the errors of Popery with such fervent zeal,
s could not fail of gaining many proselytes.
In the mean time, the Queen, who had pru
ently given way to a torrent which Tie could
it resist, observed with pleasure that it now
egan to fibfide. The leaders of the Congrega.
on had been above two months in arms, and
y the expenfs of a campaign, protracted so
ong beyond the usual time of service in that age,
ad exhaufed all the money, which a country,
here riches did not abound, had been able to
upply. The multitude, dazzled with their fuc.
if, and concluding the work to be already done,
tired to their own habitations. A few only of
he mere zealous or wealthy Barons remained
ith their preachers at Edinburgh. As intelligence
procured in civil wars with little difficulty,
h wever was tranfated at Edinburgh was soon
nown at Dunbar. The Queen , regulating her
wn condud by the situation of her adversarics
VoL. I. 0

Xo o K artfully amused them with the profped of an i.

11. mediate accommodation; while, at the fame tint
IS5S. she, by studied delays, spun out the negociation

for that purpose to such a length, that, in tl
end, the party dwindled to an inconsiderable nun
ber; and, as if peace had been already re-eltablihtd,
became careless of military discipline. The Queen,
who watched for such an opportunity, advanced,
unexpe&edly, by a sudden march in the night wit
all her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh,
filled that city with the utmost coniternation. Th
Protestants, weakened by the imprudent difperio
of their followers, durst not encounter the Frcei
troops in the open field; and were even unabl
to defend an ill-fortified town against their affaul
Unwilling, however, to abandon the citizenst
the Queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by faciq
the enemy's army, to gain time for colleting thi
own associates. But the Queen, in spite of all t
resistance, would have easily forced her way in
the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a ti
bad not procured her admission without the effufio
of blood.
' Their dangerous situation easily induced ti
leaders of the Congregation to liften to any ovr
turcs of peace; and as the Queen was lookingdai
for the arrival of a strong reinforcement si
France, and expected great advantages from
cessation of arms, fTe also agreed to it upon
unequal conditions. Together with a suspension
boftilities, from the twenty-fourth of July tot
tenth of January, it was stipulated in this tru

that, on the one hand, the Proteflants hould open B o o K
the gates of Edinburgh next morning to the Queen II.
Recent; remain in dutiful fubjedtion to her go- lily
verinnent; abstain from all future violation of reli.
gious houses; and give no interruption to the
eftablifled clergy, either in the discharge of their
filntions, or in the enjoyment of their benefices.
On the other hand, the Queen agreed to give
no molestation to the preachers or profcffors of
the Protestant religion; to allow the citizens of
Edinburgh, during the celfation of hoflilities, to
enjoy the exercise of religious worlhip according
to the form most agreeable to the conscience of
each individual; and to permit the free and public
proferfion of the Protestant faith in every part of
the kingdom ". The Queen, by these liberal con-
ccflions in behalf of their religion, hoped to sooth
the ProteRants, and expected, from indulging their
favorite paflion, to render them more compliant
with refped to other articles, particularly the ex-
pulfion of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining
thi body of men, rendered them, more and more,
the objecs of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of them was therefore demand.
d anew, and with greater warmth; but the Queen,
aking advantage of the difirefs of the adverse
pay, eluded the request, and would consent to
nothing more, than that a French garrison hould
otbe introduced into Edinburgh.
"Keit, 98. Maitland, Hilt. of Edinb. 6, 7.

0

a o o x The desperate state of their affairs imposed o

1. the Congregation the necefity of agreeing to thi
"LS* -article, which, however, was very far from giving

them fatisfation. Whatever apprehensions the Scot
had conceived, from retaining the French force
in the kingdom, were abundantly jultified du.
ing the late commotions. A fnall body of thoe
troops, maintained in constant pay, and rendered
formidable by regular discipline, had checked ti
progress of a martial people, though animated
with zeal both for religion and liberty. lhe fmlw
eft addition to their number, and a confiderabe
one was daily expected, might prove fatal to pub
lic liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to e
danger of being reduced from an independent king
dom, to the mean condition of a province, anne.
cd to the dominions of its powerful ally.

In order to provide against this imminent cb

mity, the Duke of Chatelberault, and Earl d
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce,
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congr
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, l
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of th
party which adhered to the eftablihed churk
They had followed the Queen, during the Ill
commotions, and having access to observe mon
narrowly the dangerous tendency of her council
their abhorrence of the yoke which was preparil
for their country, surmounted all other confidcn
tions, and determined them rather to endange
the religion which they professed, than to gil
their aid towards the execution of her prcicino

deflrznc. They proceeded farther, and promised to B o o R
Argyll, Glcncairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, 11.
who were appointed to meet them, that if the 'ss
Queen flould, with her usual insincerity, violate
any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse to
gr.tify the wishes of the whole nation, by difmif-
fin; lir French troops, they would, then, instantly
oin with their countrymen in compelling her to
i mnciure, which the public safety, and the pre-
rvation of their liberties, rendered necessary ".
About this time died Henry 11. of France; jult July 9.
when he had adopted a system with regard to the
airs of Scotland, which would, in all proba.
ility, have refRored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom ". Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in fa-
vor, and the Conflable Montmorency, by the
fliftance of the Duchess of Valentinois, recovered
that ascendant over the spirit of his makfer, which
is great experience, and his faithful, though often
unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the infurredions in Scot.
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal
[ Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant counsels
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
f moderation, men, whose minds were possessed
vith that jealousy which is inseparable from the
Move of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardor
thich accompanies religious zeal. Montmorency,
n order to convince Henry that he did not load
is rivals with any groundless accusation, prevailed

linox, iS4, " MIelT. 49.

03

o o to have Melvil", a Scottifi gentleman of his retinue,
11. dispatched into his native country, with inltruaions
·ss. to observe the motions both of the Regent and

of her adverfarie;; and the King agreed to regulat
his future proceedings in that kingdom, by Md
vil's report.

Did hftory indulge herself a these speculations,

it would be amusing to inquire what a differe
direction might have been given, by this refol.
tion, to the national spirit; and to what a differ
ent issue, Melvil's report, which would haveset
the condut of the malecontents in the most favor
able light, might have conducted the public di
orders. Perhaps by gentle treatment, and artfol
policy, the progrcfs of the Reformation migk
have been checked, and Scotland brought to deb
pend upon France. Perhaps, by gaining poffellio
of this avenue, the French might have made thti
way into England. and, under color of fuppn
ing Mary's title to the Crown, they might not only
have defeated all Elizabeth's measures in favor d
Reformation, but have re-eftablifbed the Romai
Catholic religion, and destroyed the liberties of thl
kingdom. But, into this boundless field of fancy
and conjeture, the hiltorian mull make no excuo
sions; to relate real occurrences, and to explain thir
real causes and effects, is his peculiarand only provinat

Aceffioa of 'Ihe tragical and untimely death of the French
Frt2ncis i. Monarch put an end to all moderate and paife
to the Crowa
of Frae. measures with regard to Scotland. The Duke d

Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon tn

"The Anchor of the Mernoirs.
p

accefion of Francis II. a prince void of genius, B o o

nam without experience, assumed the chief direc- il.

tion of lFrench affairs. Allied so nearly to the xss5.
throne, by a marriage of their niece the Queen
of Scots with the young King, they now wanted
ut little of regal dignity, and nothing of regal
poer. This power did not long remain inative
n their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi.
ion, which they had planned out under the for.
er reign, were again resumed; and they were
nbled, by poffefling such ample authority, to
purue them with more vigor, and greater proba-
!ity of fucccfs. They beheld, with infinite regret
e progress of the Proteflant religion in Scotland;
nd, fenfble what an unfurtnountable obstacle it
would prove to their designs, they bent all their
rength to check its growth, before it rose to any
reater height. For this purpose, they carried on
heir preparations with all possible expedition, and
ncouraged the Queen their sifter to expet, in a
lort time, the arrival of an army, so powerful,
sthe zeal of their adversaries, however desperate,
ould not venture to oppose.
Nor were the Lords of the Congregation either
gnorant of those violent counsels, which pre:
ailed in the court of France since the death of
enry, or careless of providing against the danger
hich threatened them from that quarter. he
cccfs of their cause, as well as their personal
aty, depending entirely on the unanimity and
[ior of their own resolutions, they endeavour.
d to guard against division, and to cement

04

I Q 0 1 together more closely, by entering into a ide

i. bond of confederacy and mutual defence. To
is9. pcrfons concurred in this new aflociation, who

brought a great accefilon both of reputation and d
power to the party. These were the Duke of Cb
telherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arr
-hbis young nobleman, having resided some ya
in France, where he commanded the Scottiih guar
bad imbibed the Protestant opinions conceraingmr
ligion. Hurried along by the heat of youth, and i
zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments witd
refped to the points in controversy, which did no
suit the temper of a bigotted court, intent, at tt
junaure, on the extinction of the Protefantreligion;
ji order to accosmplib which, the greatest excefl
of violence were committed. The church was i
fcred to wreak its utmost fury upon all who we
fufpcted of heresy. Courts were ereaed in differto
parts of France, to take cognizance of this crime,
and by their sentences, several persons of dilfio
tion were condemned to the iames.

But, in order to ifpire more univeral tenor

the Princes of Lorrain resolved to fele, for a
sacrifice, ome person, whose fall might convint
all ranks of men, that neither splendor of binli
nor eminence in ation, could exempt from p
pifiment, those who should be guilty of this
pardonable transgression. The Earl of Arran W
the prfon destined to be the unhappy vidir"
As he was allied to one throne, and the n
tfmptive heir to another as he poHefed the fid

ThuI. lib. xxij p. ¢4. EdiL Fancof

rank in his own country, and enjoyed an honor- OOl
able Ration in France; his condemnation could not II.
fall of making the desired imprellion on the whole '55
kingdom. But the Cardinal of Lorrain having let
fill some exprefllons, which raised Arran's ufpici.
ons of the design, he escapcd the intended blow
by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment,
all prompted him to seek revenge upon these per.
fecutors of himself and of the religion which ha
profcffed; and as he passed through England, on
hi' return to his native country. Elizabeth, by
hopes and promises, inflamed those pallions, and
fcnt him back into Scotland, animated with thq
ftme implacable aversion to France, which possessed
a great part of his countrymen. He quickly corn. Earl ofArr
municated these sentiments to his father the Duke 'teisah 't.
of Chatelherault, who was already extremely dif.
gufled with the measures carrying on in Scotland;
and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be
governed in every inflance by those about him,
he now stiffered himself to be drawn from the
Queen Regent; and, having joined the Congrega.
tinn, was confidered, from that time, as the head
of the party.

But with refped to him, this dillindion was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St. An.
drew's, was the person who moved and auated
the whole body of the Proteltants, among whom
he possesed that unbounded confidence, which his
frenuous adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities, so justly merited. He was the natural son
of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erlkine; and

o o K as that amorous Monarch had left several othen
IL a burden upon the Crown, they were all defined
s9s1 for the church, where they could be placed in

stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had
been conferred upon James: But, during so busy
a period, he soon became disgusted with the
indolence and, retirement of a monastic life; and
his enterprising genius called him forth, to a
principal part on a more public and confpicuoui
theatre. The scene in which he appeared, required
talents of different kinds: Military virtue, and
political discernment, were equally necessary in
order to render him illustrious. There he polfelfed
in an eminent degree. To the mos unquestionable
personal bravery, he added great (kill in the art
of war, and in every enterprise his arms were
crowned with success. His sagacity and penetratiod
in civil affairs enabled him, amidst the reeling and
turbulence of facions, to hold a prosperous coure
while his boldness in defence of the Reformation
together with the decency, and even severity
his manners, secured him the reputation of being
sincerely attached to religion, without which i
was impossible, in that age, to gain an afenda
over mankind.

It was not without reason, that the Quee

dreaded the enmity of a man, so capable
obftrud her designs. As (he could not, with all 1
address, make the least impression on his fidelity td
his.affociates, hIe endeavoured to lessen his infl
snce, and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy

and diflrut, by insinuating that the ambition of the B o O
Prir asp;rd beyond the condition of a fubieft, and 11.
aimed at nothing less than the Crown itself. "S

An aculnation so improbable gained but little
credit. Wlhitever thoughts of this kind, the pre.
fumption of unexpedted success. and his elevation
tothe high.t dignity in the kingdom, may be
alledged to have inspired at any subsequent period,
it is certain that, at this junaure, he could form
no such vafl design. To dethrone a Queen, who
was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no aion by which he
tould forfeit the esteem and affection of her sub-
ts; who could employ, in defence of her rights,
e forces of a kingdom, much more powerful
han her own; and to substitute, in her place, a
rfon whom the illegitimacy of his birth, by the
praice of all civilized nations, rendered incapable
f any inheritance, either public or private; was a
rojec so chimerical, as the moit extravagant
mbition would hardly entertain, and could never
nceive to be praticable. The promise too, which
Prior made to Melvil, of residing conflantly
nFrance, on condition the public grievances were-
Frefed ; the confidence reposed in him by the
pke of Chateherault and his son, the presumptive
tiri to the Crown; and the concurrence of almoR
I the Scottish nobles, in promoting the measures
which he gave offence to the French court,
far towards his vindication from those illegal
"Mhelvil, 54.

o o and criminal designs, with the imputation of which
t1. the Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load hin.
M9- The arrival of a thousand French soldiers corn.

Tp ar.
rive fr p'nfated, in some degree, for the loss which the
Frnce ,al Queen sustained by the defetion of the Duke d
f_ ~LEU. Cbatelherault. These were, immediately, co.

manded to fortify Leith, in which place, m
account of its commodious harbour, and its fita.
tion in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a
plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the
bead-quarters of her foreign forces. This unpopul
meafur , by the manner of executing it, wa
rendered till more unpopular. In order to bring
the town entirely under their command, the French
turned out a great part of the ancient inhabitantu
and taking possession of the houses, which thy
had obliged them to abandon, presented to the
View of the Scots, two objecs equally irritating
and offensive; on the one hand, a number of their
countrymen expelled their habitations by violence
and wandering without any certain abode; on the
other, a colony of foreigners, fettling with their
wives and children, in the heart of Scotland,
growing into strength by daily reinforcements and
openly preparing a yoke, to.which, without some
timely exertion of national spirit, the whole king
dom mufl, of necefity submit.

Teprrote.- It was with deep concern that the Lords of the
a.n "o.- Congregation beheld this bold and decisive flep
thi, taken by the Queen Regent: Nor did they hefiut

a moment, whether they flould employ their whole
firength, in one generous effort, to rescue thi

religion and liberty from impending deftrudtion. B 0 it
But, in order to justify their own condu6t, and to II.
throw the blame entirely on their adversaries, they '5',
resolved to preserve the appearances of decency and
refped towards their superiors, and to have no
recourse to arms, without the moRs urgent and
apparent necessity. They joined, with this view, ses. h
in an address to the Regent, representing, in the
frongeft terms, their dissatisfaCtion with the measures
she was pursuing, and beseeching her to quiet the
fears and jealousies of the nation, by desisting from
fortifying Leith. The Queen, conscious of her pre-
sent advantageous .situation, and elated with the
hopes of frelb succours, was in no disposition for
lifening to demands, utterly inconiRftent with her
views, and urged with that bold importunity,
which is so little acceptable to Princes".

The suggestions of her Frthch counsellors con- TheRelen
tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still farther dir,^I',
from any scheme of accommodation. As the Queen ,tmmc.
was ready on all occasions, to discover an extra.
ordinary deference for the opinions of her country-
men, her brothers, who knew her secret difappro.
bation of the violent measures they were driving
on, took care to place near her such persons as
betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many
adions, which her own unbiaffed judgment would
ibve highly condemned. As their success in the
present juncture, when all things were hastening
towards a crisis, depended entirely on the Queen's
frmnefs, the Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly
"i Haynes, 1l.

p O OK to the influence of their ordinary agents; but, in

li. order to add the greater weight to their councils,
a"*. they called in aid the Ministers of Religion; and

by the authority of their sacred character, they
hoped effectually to recommend to their siser, tht
system of severity which they had espoused ". With
this view, but under pretence of confounding the
Protestants by the Wkill of fucb able mailers in co
troverfy, they appointed several French divine t
reside in Scotland. At the head of these, and w
- the character of legate from the Pope, was Pelle
Bilbop of Amiens, and afterwards Archbilhop a
Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot ", fervil
devoted to the house of Guise, and a pro
instrument for recommending or executing
most outrageous measures.

Amidt the noise and danger of civil arms

these Dodors had litle opportunity to display the'
address in the use of their theological weapo
But they gave no small offence to the nation
one of their actions. They persuaded the Qu
to seize the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh
which had remained, ever since the late truce,
the hands of the Protestants; and having, by
new and solemn consecration, purified the fab
from the pollution with which they fuppefed
profane ministrations of the Proteftantq to ha
defiled it, they, in direct contradicion to one artic
in the late treaty, re-eftabliled there the rites
the Romilh church. This, added to the indifferen

Ltfle, 2 *c. Catlenau, ap. Jcbb, voL ii446. 471
" Davila, Brantome.

isdeven contempt, with which the Queen received B o o S
their remonstrances, convinced the Lords of the II.
Congregation, that it was not only vain to expeCt 1ss'.
any redress of their grievances at her hands, but
absolutely necelfary to take arms in their own
defence.

The eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, Theytake
as well as every consideration of good policy, thr 'o
prompted them to take this bold ftep without dfence,
delay. It was but a small part of the French auxi.

ries which had as yet arrived. The fortifications
Leith, though advancing fast, were ill far
om being complete. Under there circumP.ances
diadvantage, they conceived it possible to
rprife the Queen's party, and, by one sudden
d decisive blow, to prevent all future bloodlhed
nd contention. Full of there expecations, they
vanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numer-
s army. But it was no easy matter to deceive oaobser
adversary , as vigilant and attentive as the
neen Regent. With her usual sagacity, he both
refaw the danger, and took the only proper
urfe to avoid it. Inflead of keeping the field
inlf enemies, superior in number, and formida.
on a day of battle, by the ardor of their
Irage, he retired into Leith, and determined
tintly to wait the arrival of new reinforcements.
ight and unfinilhed as the fortifications of that
n then were, fie did not dread the efforts of
army, provided neither with heavy cannon,
with military flores, and little acquainted with
method of attacking any place forufied with

wOOK more art than those ancient towers, ereted al

11. over the kingdom, in defence of private propert
t'Zt against the incursions of banditti.

Nor did the Queen, meanwhile , negkd to

have recourse to those arts, which Ihe had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries.
By private solicitations and promises, he Shook
the fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By opn
reproach and accusation, he blasted the reputation,
and diminished the authority of others. Her emi.
saries were every where at work, and, notwithltand
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then
animated the nation, they seem to have labored
not without success. We find Knox, about tbi
period, abounding in complaints of the lukewam
and languid spirit which had begun to fprad
among his party ". But if their zeal slackened a
little, and suffered a momentary intermifflion, i
soon blazed up with frelh vigor, and rose to
greater height than ever.

eaew teir The Queen herself gave occasion to this, by
otm~.a the reply which lTe made to a new remonstrance

from the Lords of the Congregation. Upon thit
arrival at Edinburgh, they once more represented
to her the dangers arising from the increase of itb
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and be
other measures, which they conceived to be dc
trnedive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom;
and in this address they spoke in a firmer tont,
and avowed, more openly than ever, their refnlI
tion of proceeding to the utmost extremities, i

? Knox, i80. o

order

order to put a flop tofuch dangerous edcroachments. B 0 K
To a remnftrance of this nature, and urged with n.
so much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no iS9.
les vigorous and explicit. She pretended that he bt' withot
was not accountable to the confederate Lords for
any part of her conduct; and upon no reprefen.
tation of theirs, would Ihe either abandon meafu;es,,
which flhe deemed necelfary; or dismiss forces,
which (le found useful; or demolish a fortification,
which might prove of advantage. At the fame time,
fle required them , on pain of treason, to dilband
the forces which they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious style founded

laillily to Scottilh nobles, impatient, from their
national character, of the slightest appearance of
injur; accustomed even form their own Monarchs,
to the most refpedful treatment; and polfefling,
nder an ariftocratical form of government, such
bhare of power, as equalled, at all times, and
[fen controlled that of the Sovereign. They were
nfible, at once, of the indignity offered to them-
elves, and alarmed with this plain declaration of
he Queen's intentions; and as there now remained
ut one ftep to take, they wanted neither public
pirt nor resolution to take it.
But, that they might not seem to depart from Deliberate
he eftablilhed forms of the constitution, for which, ""O'""eng

the course

ven amidst their most violent operations, men which tII
ways retain the greaterl reverence, they as. ought to
embled all the Peers, Barons, and Represent. tk'.

0|. z.

tivce of buroughs, who adhered to their party,
VOL.. P

BOOK These formed a convention, which exceeded in

11. number, and equalled in dignity, the usual meet.
S'"' ings of parliament. The leaders of the Congren

tion laid before them the declaration which the
Queen had given in answer to their remonstrance;
represented the unavoidable ruin, which the ma.
fures fle therein avowed and justified would bring
upon the kingdom; and requiring their diredion
with regard to the obedience due to an admini
tration so unjust and oppreflive, they submited
to their decision a question, one of the most deli
cate and interefling that can poflibly fall under the
consideration of ftbjeds.

This assembly proceeded to decide, with no

less dispatch than unanimity. Strangers to thole
forms which protrac business; unacquainted wit
hde arts which make a figure in debate; and much
more fitted for ation than discourse: A warlike
people always haften to a conclusion, and bring
their deliberations to the Ihorteft issue. It was the
work but of one day, to examine and to resolve
this nice problem, concerning the behaviour d
fubjeds towards a ruler who abuses hispower. But,
however abrupt their proceedings may appear, they
were not destitute of solemnity. As the determin
tion of the point in doubt was conceived to be
no less the office of divines than of laymen, the
former were called to afift with their opinion.
Knox and Willox appeared for the whok
order, and pronounced , without hesitation
both from the precepts and examples in cnp
ture, that it was lawful for fubjeds not only
I.

o refit tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of B o O g
hat authority, which, in their hands, becomes il.
In initrument for detroying those whom the Al. iSs.
nighty ordained them to protet. The decision of
lerfons revered so highly for their sacred cha.
ater, but more for their zeal and their piety,
lad great weight with the whole assembly. Not
tified with the common indiscriminate manner
f finifying confcnt, every person present was
iled in his turn to declare his sentiments, and
fig up in order, all gave their suffrages, with- Thv dt.
tonedinfenting voice, for depriving the Queen Queen of
the office of Regent, which he had exercised e ffice o
much to the detriment of the kingdom ".
This extraordinary sentence was owing no less Themo.
the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. tie of
the aR of deprivation, religious grievances are dia.
ghly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach.
ents of the Queen upon the civil conflitution are
oduced, by the Lords of the Congregation, in
der to prove their conduct to have been not
llyjuft, but necessary. The introducing foreign
op< into a kingdom, at peace with all the
rid; the seizing and fortifying towns in differ-
parts of the country; the promoting firangers
offces of great power and dignity; the debaf.
the current coin '; the Subverting the ancient

Knox, IR4.
The flandard of money in Scotland was continually
ing. In the i 6th of James V. A. D. i 2 9, a pound weight
i. vhen coined, produced I o pounds of current money.
under the Queen Regent's administration, A. 1). a S 6, a

Pa

B O O K laws; the imposing of new and burdensome taxe;

1I. and the attempting to subdue the kingdom, ad
i9s. to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated as

of violence, are enumerated at great length, ad
placed in the strongest light. On all these accounu,
the Congregation maintained, that the nobles,
counsellors by birth-right to their Monarchs, a
the guardians and defenders of the constitution
bad a right to interpoef; and therefore, l
virtue of this right, in the name of the King ad
Queen, and with many expressions of duty
fubmiflion towards them, they deprived the Quo
Regent of her office, and ordained, that, for thefutn
no obedience should be given to her commands

Violent as this adtion may appear, there wa

not principles in the confRitution, nor precedm
in the history of Scotland, to justify and to
thorize it. Under the ariltocratical form of gov
ment eftablilbed among the Scots,. the power

pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy w s
Ciderably increased, produced 44.1. current money. In iss
a pound weight of fiver, when coined, produced 91. s ;
in s c 6, it produced 1 11. current money. Ruddiman. P
ad Anders Diplomat. Scotixe, p. o, i, from which i
pears, that this complaint, which the malecontenri
repeated, was not altogether destitute of foundation.

' M. Caftelnau, after condemning the dangerous

cils of the Princes of Lorrain, with regard to the affin
Scotland, acknowledges, with his ufoal candor, that
Scots declared war against the Queen Regent, rather
a desire of vindicating their civil liberties, than from a5yl
tive of religion. Mem. 446.

he Sovercign was extremely limited. The more B 0

o .

onfi(lerablc nobles were themselves petty princes, ii.

dolleing extensive jurifdiCions, almost independ- IS.

nt of the crown, and followed by numerous vas.
I, who, in every contest, espoused their chief.
iin's quarrel, in opposition to the King. Hence the
any instances of the impotence of regal authority,
hich are to be found in Scottish history. In every
cg, the nobles not only claimed, but exercised
he right of controlling the King. Jealous of their
rivileges, and ever ready to take the field in de.
nce of them, every error in administration was
bfersved , every encroachment upon the rights of
he arifocracy excited indignation, and no prince
ver ventured to transgress the boundaries which the
whad pefcribed to prerogative, without meeting
fifance, which flook, or overturned his throne.
ncouraged by the spirit of the constitution, and
ountenaniced by the example of their ancestors, the
ordlsofthe Congregation thought it incumbent on
hem, at thisjundure, to inquire into the mal-admi.
ifsration of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their
ountry from being enslaved or conquered, by depriv-
g her of the power to execute such a pernicious
cheme.
The a of deprivation, and a letter from the
ords of the Congregation to the Queen Regent,
re till extant ". They discover not only that
afculine and undaunted spirit, natural to men
apable of so bold a resolution; but are remark.

'
nox , 184.

P3

J 0 0 K able for a precision, and vigor ofexpreflioonwhic

IL we are furprlfed to meet with in an age so unpo
919. lilbed. The fame observation may be made wid

refpet to the other public papers of that period
The ignorance or bad taste of an age may rende
the compositions of authors by profession obfcuc,
or affeded, or absurd; but the language of bufinA
is nearly the fame at all times; and wherever me
think clearly, and are thoroughly intercted,tel
express themselves with perspicuity and force.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK III.

THE
HISTOR Y

0 o
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IIL

THE Lords of the Congregation soon found, B 0 0 X
that their zeal had engaged them in an undertak- ill.
ing, which it was beyond their utmost ability to TbrC9.
accomplilh. The French garrison, despising their gregation
numerous but irregular forces, refuted to surrender involtd in

dicffiultis.

Leith, and to depart out of the kingd6m; nor
were they sufficiently kilful in the art of war to
reduce the place by force, or possessed of the ar-
tillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage,
yet being accustomed to decide every quarrel by
a battle, were firangers to the fatigues of a long
campaign, and soon became impatient of the severe
and constant duty which a siege requires.The Queen's
cmllfaries, who found iteafy to mingle with their
countrymen, were at the utmost pains to heighten
their disgust, which discovered itself at first in mur-
murs and complaints, but on occasion of the want of

P4

B O O money for paying the army, broke out into optc

ili. mutiny. The mol eminent leaders were' hard]y
'"s. secure from the unbridled insolence of the fol

diers; while some of inferior rank, interposing too
raihly in order to quell them, fell victims to their
rage. Discord, consternation, and perplexity, reigned
in the camp of the Reformers. The Duke, thei
General, funk, with his usual timidity, under tlK
terror of approaching danger, and dfcovered rm
nifeft symptoms of repentance for his rafbnef, in
espousing such a desperate cause.

iplyi to In this situation of their affairs, the Congreg.
Elizaet tion had recourse to Elizabeth, from whole pro.
for aflift.
aUR. tedion they could derive their only reasonable

hope of success. Some of their more sagacious
leaders, having foreseen that the party might pro
bably be involved in great difficulties, had early
endeavoured to secure a resource in any such exi
gency, by entering into a secret correfpondenc
with the court of England '. Elizabeth, aware of
the dangerous designs which the Princes of Lo.
rain had formed against her Crown, was early
sensible of how much importance it would be,
not only to check the progress of the French i
Scotland, but to extend her own influence in tha
kingdom '; and perceiving how effecually ti
present infurredions would contribute to retard or
defeat the schemes formed against England, i
litened with pleasure to these applications of tb

'Bum. Hist Ref. . Append. 278. Keith, Append. :2
See Append. No. r.

malecontents, and gave them private assurances of B o o x
powerful support to their cause. Randolph ', an 11.
agent extremely proper for'conduding any dark lis.
intrigue. was dispatched into Scotland, and refid-
ing secretly among the Lords of the Congregation,
obfcrved and quickened their motions. Money
seemed to be the only thing they wanted at that
time; and it was owing to a seasonable remittance
from England', that the Scottish nobles had been
enabled to take the field, and to advance towards
Leith. But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the
Scots, and studious to preserve appearances with
France, her subsidies were bestowed at first with
extreme frugality. The subsistence of an army,
and the expenses of a siege, soon exhausted this
penurious supply, to which the Lords of the
Congregation could make little addition from their
own funds; and the ruin and dispersion of the
party must have instantly followed.

In order to prevent this, Cockburn ofOrmifton she rends
was sent, with the utmost expedition, to the go- them a
vernors of the town and castle of Berwick. As of money.
Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest
importance on the Scottilh frontier, Sir Ralph
Sadler and Sir James Crofts, persons of confider.
able figure, were employed to command there,
and were intrusted with a discretionary power of
supplying the Scottish malecontents, according to
the exigency of their affairs. From them Cockburn

Keith, Append. 29.
'nox, 214, Keith, Append. 44,

oo00 received four thousand crowns, but little to tk
in. advantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwdl,
is5. by the Queen's infligation, lay in wait for him on
,w,,d.i his return, dispersed his followers, wounded him,

and carried off the money.

This unexpeded disappointment proved fatal to

the party. In mere despair, some of the more zealous
attempted to assault Leith; but the French bat
them back with disgrace, seized their cannon, and
pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on
the point of entering along with them. All the
terror and confusion, which the profped of pillage
or of massacre can excite in a place taken by Rlorm,
filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants
fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; the force
of the Congregation were irresolute and dismayrd;
and the Queen's partisans in the town openly infultd
both. At last, a few of the nobles ventured, to
face the enemy, who, after plundering some boue
in the suburbs, retired with their booty, and
delivered the city from this dreadful alarm.

A second kirmifl, which happened a sei

days after, was no less unfortunate. The French
sent out a detachment to intercept a convoy of
provisions which was designed for Edinburgh.
The Lords of the Congregation having intelli
gence of this, marched in all hafe with a cons
derable body of their troops, and falling upon
the enemy between Reftalrig and Leith, with
more gallantry than good condut, were almoR
surrounded by a second party of French, who
advanced in order to support their own men. n

this fituatinn, a retreat was the only thing which B O OK
could save the Scots; but a retreat over marshy It.
ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in in».
number, could not long be conducted with order. A
small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse They retire
and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it was f11om Itilt

i, coata-

entirely owing to the over-caution of the French, ion.
that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

On this second blow, the hopes and spirits of

the Congregation funk altogether. They did not
think themselves secure even within the walls of
Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire to
some place at a greater distance from the enemy.
In vain did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few
others, oppose this. cowardly and ignominious
flight. he dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the sense of honor, and zeal for the
cause. At midnight they set out from Edin- Novemb.6.
burgh, in great confusion, and marched without
halting till they arrived at Stirling'.

During this last infurretion, the great body

of the Scottish nobility joined the Congregation.
The Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only
persons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
asiRed her in defending Leith '. Bothwll openly
favored her cause, but resided at his own house.
The Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty
policy which dfltinguilhes his charadler, amused
the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had
engaged to assist, with many fair promises, but

Keith, Append. 1-4 . ' Keith, Append. 3 i.

O 0 K never joined them with a single man'. The Ead
in. of Morton, a member of the Congregation, flue
119. tuated in a Rate of irresolution, and did not ad

heartily for the common cause. Lord Erskine,
Governor of Edinburgh Castle, though a Protefa,
maintained a neutrality, which he deemed becoin.
ing the dignity of his office; and having been
intrufed by Parliament with the command of the
principal fortress in the kingdom, he refolvedthat
neither faction hIould get it into their hands.

Maid.tu A few days before the retreat of the Cong.
r~"wo from gation, the Queen suffered an irreparable lob
the oQueen
Dowaer. by the defedion of her principal Secretary, Wi

liam Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for te
Reformed religion, together with the warm r
monstrances against the violent measures which
the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so mud
to her resentment, and to that of her Fretnc
counsellors, that he, fufpeting his life to be i
danger, withdrew fecrety from Leith, andfledt
the Lords of the Congregation '; and they., wid
open arms, received a convert,, whose abiliti
added both strength and reputation to their cauk
Maitland had early applied to public business a
mirable natural talents, improved by an acquaint
ance with the liberal arts; and, at a time of life
when his countrymen of the fame quality we'
following the pleasures of the chafe, or serving
adventurers in the armies of France, he was a
mitted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and pi

Keith, Append. i;. Knox, 22.. ' Knox, 92

upon a level with persons of the mos confum- B 0 0 K
mite experience in the management of affairs. im.
He possessed, in an eminent degree, that intrepid 1,9.
spirit, which delights in pursuing bold designs,
and was no less maftcr of that political dexterity
which is necessary for carrying them on with
fucccf. But these qualities were deeply tinc-
tured with the neighbouring vices. His address
sometimes degenerated into cunning; his acute-
lnef bordered upon excess; his invention, over-
fertile, suggested to him, on some occasions,
chimerical systems of policy, too refined for the
genius of his age or country; and his enter-
piig spirit engaged him in projects vast and
splendid, but beyond his utmolt power to exe-
cute. All the contemporary writers, to whatever
faction they belong, mention him with an admira-
tion, which nothing could have excited but the
greatcft superiority of penetration and abilities.

The precipitate retreat of the Congregation

increased to such a degree the terror and con-
fufon which had seized the party at Edinburgh,
that, before the army reached Stirling, it dwindled
toan inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox,
however, still remained undaunted and erecd, and
having mounted the pulpit, he addressed, to his
desponding hearers, an exhortation which won-
derfully animated and revived them. The heads
of this dfcourfe are inserted in his history , and
afford a striking example of the boldness and

' Knox, 193.

B O o K freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers,

Ill. as well as a specimen of his own kill in chufing
iss9. the topics moR fitted to influence and rouse his

audience.

The Loms A meeting of the leaders being called, to con.
f tkt Co fider what course they should hold, now that their
ppnly ari own resources were all exhausted, and their de.
to Eliza firudion appeared to be unavoidable, without f.

reign aid, they turned their eyes once more to
England,' and resolved to implore the assistance of
Elizabeth towards finishing an enterprise, in which
they had so fatally experienced their own weakness,
and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as
the mot abk negociatortof the party, was em.
ployed in this embassy. In his absence, and during
the inactive season of the year, it was agreed to
dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatiguesof
a campaign, which had so far exceeded the usual
time of service. But, in order to preserve the
countries most devoted to their interest, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders, retired
into Fife. The Duke of Chatelherault, with the
reft, fixed his residence at Hamilton. There was
li!tle need of Rlaitland's address or eloquence to
induce lizabeth to take his country under her pro
teation. She observed the prevalence of the French
counels. and the progress of their arms in Scotland,
with great concern; and as he well foresaw the
dangerous tendency of their schemes in that king.
dom. she had already come to a resolution with
regard to the part he herrelf would a, if their
power. there ihould grow Rill more formidable.

In order to give the Queen and her Privy Council B o o g
a full and diftind view of any important matter Ill.
which might come before them, it seems to have ' s.
been the pracice of Elizabeth's ministers to prepare Mhic
memorials, in which they clearly stated the point termined
under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the beto ift
tondud which they held to be mods reasonable, and
proposed a method for carrying their plan into exe-
ution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir
WVlliam Cecil with his own hand, and submitted
by the Queen to the consideration of her Privy
Council. fIill remain "; they are entitled, " A hort
difculfion of the weighty matter of Scotland,"
nil do honor to the industry and penetration of that
reat inifter. The motives which determined the
ueen to espouse so warmly the defence of the
congregation, are represented with perspicuity and
orce; and the consequences of suffering the French
o eftblifl themselves in Scotland, are predidced
ith great accuracy and discernment.
He lays it down as a principle, agreeable to
he laws both of God and of nature, that every
)ciety hath a right to defend itself, not only from
resent dangers, but from such as may probably
nfue; to which he adds, that nature and reason
ach every Prince to defend himself by the fame
beans which his adversaries employ to distress
im. Upon these grounds , he establishes the
ight of England to interpose in the affairs of

"Burn. vol. iii. Append. 281. Sorbes, i. 387. &c.
iith, Append. 24.

B O o K Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that king.

II. dom, at which the French openly aimed. The
I»S9. French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable

enemies of England. HoRfilties had subsistcd be
tween the two nations for many centuries. No
treaty of peace, into which they entered, had eve
been cordial or sincere. No good effed was therefore
to be expeced from the peace lately agreed upon,
which being extorted by present necessity, would
be negligently observed, and broken on the flightell
pretences. In a very Ihort time, France w6uld .
cover its former opulence; and though now draind
of men and money by a tedious and unfuccelhd
war, it would quickly be in a condition forading,
and the reftlels and martial genius of the people
would render adion necessary. The Princes of Lor
rain, who at that time had the entire diredion d
French affairs, were animated with the most virulent
hatred against the Englilh nation. They openly
called in question the legitimacy of the Queena
birth, and by advancing the title and pretensions
of their niece the Queen of Scotland, fludied to
deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view,
they had labored to exclude the Englilh from tk
treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavourd
to conclude a separate peace wh Spain. They
had persuaded Henry I. to permit his daughter
in-law to alfume the title and arms of Queen d
England; and even since the conclusion of th
peace, they had solicited at Rome, and obtaind
a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegi
mate. Though the widom and moderation a

the

the Constable Montmorency had, for some time, B o OK
checked their career, yet these restraints being now iII.
removed by the death of Henry 1. and the disgrace ms».
of his miniiter, the utmost exceTfes of violence were
to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed
with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter
whence they can attack England with moll advan-
tage. A war on the borders of that country exposes
France to no danger, but one unsuccessful action
there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
government of England. In political conduct, it is
childish to wait till the designs of an enemy be
ripe for execution. The Scottih nobles, after their
utCmol efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
and far from expelling the invaders of their liber.
ties, they behold the French power daily increasing,
and mull at last cease from strugglin.g any longer in
a contelf so unequal. The invading of England
will immediately follow the reduction of the Scottilh
malecontents; by the abandoning of whom to the
mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a way
for her enemies into the heart of her own king.
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquest. Nothing therefore re-
mained but to meet the enemy while yet at a dif.
tance from England, and by supporting the Con-
gregation with a powerful army, to render Scot.
lind the theatre of the war, to crush the defignr
of the Princes of Lorrain in their infancy, and,
by such an early and unexpected effort, to expel
the French out of Britain, before their power had
lne to take root, and grow up to any formidable

VOL. 1. Q

o o K height. But as the matter was of as much import.
Ilj. ance as any which could fall under the consideration
ts9. of an English Monarch, wisdom and mature counft

were necessary in the sirs place, and afterwards
vigor and expedition in conduct; the danger wva
urgent, and, by losing a single moment, might
become unavoidable ".

These arguments produced their full effedt upoi

Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme degre
of every pretender to her Crown, and no less anxion
to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of be
fubjectb. From these motives she had aded, in grant.
ing the Congregation an early supply of money;
and from the fame principles (he determined, in thei
present exigency, to afford them more effetual aid
One of Maitland's attendants was iuftantly difpatck
ed into Scotland with the fIrongeft assurances d
her protection, and the Lords of the Congregatioa
were dfired to fend commiflioners into Englando
conclude a treaty, and to fettle the operations
the campaign with the Duke of Norfolk ".

th.e Qu. lMeanwhile, the Queen Regent, from whoa
uer-er no motion of the Congregation could long 1
mndewhiie concealed, dreaded the success of this negociati01
Frech with the court of England, and foresaw how litde
troop . she would be able to relift the united effort of th

two kingdoms. For this reason (he determined,
if possible, to get the start of Elizabeth; and by

" The arguments which the Scots employed, in order

obtain Elizabeth's afliaarce, are urged with great force,
a paper of Aaitland's. See Appendix, No. II.

Keith, 114. Rymer, xv. p. S69.

venturing, notwithftandihg the inclemency of the B o o x
winter season, to attack the maleconteuts in their Ill.
resent dispersed and helpless situation, Ihe hoped igs,
oput an end to the war, before the arrival of
heir 'Englifl allies.
A considerable body of her French forces, who
ere augmented, about thi, time, by the arrival of
he Count de Martigues, with a thousand veteran
oot, and some cavalry, 'were commanded to march
o Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth, they
roceeded along the coalt of Fjfe, detfroying and
nnd(ering, with excessive outrage ,the houses and
nds of those whom they deemed their enemies. Fife
vs the mos populous and powerful county in the
ing'lom, and mos devoted to the Congregation,
ho had hitherto drawn from thence their most
onfiderable fapplies, both of men and provisions;
nd therefore, besides punilhing the difaffedcion of
he inhabitants, by pillaging the cuntry, the
rench proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's,
ml to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle the
intinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
lion of a port situated on the main ocean ".
But on this occasion, the Prior of St. An.
rew's, Lord Ruthven, Kiikaldy of Grange, and
few of the mos aive leaders of the Congrega.
on, performed, by their bravery and good con-
lid, a frvice of the utmost importance to their
arty. Having afrcmbled fix hundred horse,
ey infeLted the French with, continual incur.
ons, beat up their quarters, intercepted their
" lynes, 221 , &C.

B 0 K convoys of provisions, cut off their raggling

III parties, and so harassed them with perpetual alanrm
.s6. that they prevented them for more than thir

weeks from advancing ".

At last the Prior, with his feeble party, T

constrained to retire, and the French set out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coaf towark
InuaL is. St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a few mild

when, from an eminence, they descried a powerfl
fleet Rteering its course up the Frith of Forth. As
they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf was, at tb
time, preparing to fail for Scotland with a num.
rous army, they hastily concluded that these lbip
belonged to him, and gave way to the most in.
moderate transports of joy, on the profpedolti
long-expeded succour. Their great guns wet
already fired to welcome their friends, and I
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival among
their enemies, when a small boat from theoppolit
coast landed, and blasted their premature and Io0t
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was t
fleet of England which was in fight, intendedl
the aid of the Congregation, and was soon to b
followed by a formidable land-army

The Eglish Throughout her whole reign, Elizabeth v
aen arni cautious , but dccifive; and by her promptitiu
,_.a,. in executing her resolutions, joined to the delib

ration with which hIe formed them, her adminilt
tion became remarkable, no less for its vigor,
than for its wildor. No sooner did she dete
mine to afford her protecion to the Lords of tI

I" Kox, 30. " Ibid. so3.

Congregation, than'they experienced the activity, B o O K

well as the extent of her power. The season of the iI.
ear would not permit her land.army to take the t6.
eld; but left the French should, in the mean time,
eceive new reinforcements, The instantly ordered a
rong squadron to cruise in the Frith of Forth. She
cems, by her inftrudions to Winter her Admiral,
o have been desirous of preserving the appearances

friendlhip towards the French ". But these
re only appearances; if any French fleet Ihould
ttempt to land, he was commanded to prevent it,
y every act of hostility and violence. It was the
ght of this squadron, which occasioned at first so
nuch joy among the French, but which oon in-
pired them with such terror, as saved Fife from the
ieds of their vengeance. Apprehensive of being
ut off from their companions on the opposite Ihore,
hey retreated towards Stirling with the utmolt
recipitation, and, in a dreadful season, and through
oads almost impafable, arrived at Leith, harassed
nd exhausted with fatigue ".
The Englilh fleet caR anchorin the road of Leith,
nd continuing in that fiation till the conclusion of
eace, both prevented the garrison of Leith from
ceiving succours of any kind, and considerably
Militated the operations of their own forces by land.
Soon after the arrival of the Englith squadron, They cou.
eCommiffioners of the Congregation repaired culilt
o Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of England.
orfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union with Feb. 7.

Keith, Appendix 45. Haynes, 2z3.
Knox, o03.

B O O K Elizabeth, which was of to great advantage to tbe

Ill. cause. To give a check to the dangerous and rapid
IS60. progrefs.of the French arms in Scotland, was the

professed design of the contracing parties. In orde
to this, the Scots engaged never to susser any clol
union of their country with France; and to defend
themselves to the uttermost against all attemptsd
conquest. Elizabeth, on her part, promifedtoel.
ploy in Scotland a powerful army, for their aflilfane,
which the Scots undertook t join with all thei
forces; no place in Scotland was to remain in tie
bands of the Englih ; whatever should be take
from the enemy was either to be rafed, or kept
by the Scots, at their choice; if any invasion hould
be made upon England, the Scots were obliged to
aflift Elizabeth with part of their forces; and to
ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty,
they bound themselves to deliver hostages toEliza
beth, before the march of her army into Scotland;
in con'lufion, the Scots made many proteRatiom
of obedience and loyalty towards their own Queen,
in every thing not inconsistent with their religion,
and the liberties of their country .

The Englih The Englail army, confifing of fix thoulaH
ige to l foot, and two tioufand horse , under the command
Leith of Lord Gray of Wilton, entered Scotland arly
April" in the Spring. The members of the Congrep

tion .fiembled from all parts of the kingdomto
meet their new allies; and having joined thel
with great multitudes of their followers, they al
vanced together towards Leith. The French

Knox, :27. Haynes, 23, &c.

were little able to keep the field against an enemy so B o o K
much superior in number. A firong body of troops, 111.
dellined for their relief, had been fcattcred by a 1560.
violent form, and had either perished on the coflt
of Frince, or with difficulty had recovered the ports
of that kingdom ". But they hoped to be able to
defcnd Leith, tiltill he Princes of Lorrain Should make
good the magnificent promises of assistance, with
which they daily encouraged them; or till scarcity
of provisions flould constrain the English to retire
into their own country. In order to haften this latter
evnct, they did not neglect the usual, though bar-
bmirus precaution for diftrefling an invading enemy,
by burning and laying waste all the adjacent coun-
try ". The zeal, however, of the nation,, frustrated
th,'ir intentions ; eager to contribute towards re.
moving their opprcffors, the people produced
their hidden flores to support their friends; the
nctihbouring counties supplied every thing necef-
iry, and far from wanting subsistence, the Eng.
if) found, in their camp, all forts of provisions
t a cheaper rate than had for some time been
;nown in that part of the kingdom".

On the approach of the Englilh army, the

Queen Regent retired into the castle of Edin.
buigh. Her health was now in a declining state,
A d her mind broken and depressed by the mif-
ortunes of her administration. To avoid the
anser and fatigue of a siege, he committed
hIif'lf to the protetion of Lord Frfkine. This
r'ilcman still preserved his neutrality, and by

MI m. de Castel. 450. Knox, 225. "Ktox, ibid.

04

B o o his integrity, and love of his country, merited

All. equally the esteem of both parties. He received
isso the (Queen herself with the utmost honor and refpe&

but took care to admit no such retinue as might
endanger his command of the castle ".

a 5
s. A few days after they arrived in Scotland, th

English invested Leitb. The garrison, shut up
within the town, was almost half as numerous a
the army which fat down before it, and by an
obstinate defence protracted the siege to a great
length. The circumstances of this siege, related by
contemporary biltorians, men without knowledge
or experience in the art of war, are often obscure
anl imperfect, and at this distance of time are ot
considerable enough to be entertaining.
aril i. At first the French endeavoured to keep pot

feflion of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far
ditant from the town, but were beat from it with
great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottifi cavalry. Within a few days, the Frelnc
bad their full revenge; having sallied out withl
lrong body, they entered the Englifl trencbts,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at leaR double the number they had los in th
former (kirmi;l. Nor were the Englilh more fou
iate in an attempt which they made to take tbh
place by assault; they were met with'equJ courage,
may . and repulsed with considerable loss. From the detail

of these circumstances by the writers of that age, it i
cafy to observe the different characters of the Frnch
" Forb:s's Collea. vol. i. o53. Keith. S22.

and Engliih troops. The former, trained to war, B 0 0 t
under the aive reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. il.
defended themselves not only with the bravery, a
but with the skill of veterans. The latter, who had
been more accustomed to peace, still preserved the
intrepid and desperate valor peculiar to the nation,
but discovered few marks of military genius, or
of experience in the practice of war. Every mis.
fortune or disappointment during the siege mufl
be imputed to manifelR errors in condud. The
success of the besieged in their ally was owing
entirely to the security and negligence of the
Englilh; many of their officers were absent; their
soldiers had left their stations; and the trenches
were almofR without a guard". The ladders, which
had been provided for the assault, wanted a great
deal of the necessary length; and the troops
employed in that service were ill supported. The
trenches were opened, at first, in an improper
place; and as it was found expedient to change
the ground, both time and labor were loft. The
veaknefs of their own Generals, no less than the
frength of the French garrison, rendered the
progrcf of the Englilh wonderfully flow. The
long continuance, however, of the siege, and the
los, of part of their magazines by an accidental
fire, reduced the French to extreme distress for
Want of provisions, which the profped of relief
made them bear with admirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French
prn'racled the siege so far beyond expectation, the

IIL)ncs, 294. 298. 30o, &.

m o o K leaders of the Congregation were not idle. By ney

IlI. associations and confederacies, they labored
i60o. unite their party more perfedly. By publicly ratif

ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they ende3
voured to render the alliance with England firn
and indissoluble. Among the subscribers of tht
papers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and fomr
others, who bad not hitherto concurred with tb
Congregation in any of their measures . Severalo
these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, llil
adhered to the Popilh church; but on this occasion
neither their religious sentiments, nor their forme
cautious maxims, were regarded; the-torrent o
national resentment and indignation againlt tb
French hurried them on ".

otDt uda The Queen Regent, the infirument, rather tha
the Qr the cause of involving Scotland in those calamitit
Dowar. under which it groaned at that time, died durinj
Jme 0o. the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pofelfa

qualities more capable of rendering her adminifn
tion illustrious, or her people happy. Of mud

'Bumn. vql. iii. 287. Knox, a22. Haynes, 26r. 261.
" The dread of the French power did on many occali

surmount the zeal which the Catholic nobles had for td
religion Beiides the presumptive evidence for this, arii
from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hilt. ofthe Reform
tion, vol. iii. 28t. and publilhed by him, App. p. 278;
inftrutions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beot'
all doubt, that many zealous Papilts thought the alliance id
England to be necessary for preserving the liberty and indepd
nce of the kingdom. Keith, 8. Hluntly himself bega"n
correspondence with Elizabeth's MiniRters, before the mal
of the Englilh army into Scotland. Haynes's State Papm
26t. 26;. See Append. N'. 111.

discernment, and no less address; of great intrepi. Bo Ic
dity, and equal prudence; gentle and humane, ill.
without weakness; zealous for her religion, with. '6C.
out bigotry; a lover of justice, without rigor. One
circumltance, however, and that, too, the excess
of a virtue, rather than any vice, poifoued all these
great qualities, and rendered her government
unfortunate, and her name odious. Devoted to
the intcrelt of France, her native country, and
attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers,
with molt paflionate fondness; (he departed, in
order to gratify them, from every maxim which
her own wisdom or humanity would have approved.
She outlived, in a great measure, that reputation
and popularity which had smoothed her way to
the highest flation in the kingdom; and many
examples of falihood, and some of severity, in
the latter part of her adminiltration, alienated from
her the affections of a people, who had once placed
in her an unbounded confidence. But, even by her
enemies, these unjustifiable actions were imputed
to the facility, not to the malignity of her nature;
and while they taxed her. brothers, and French
counfdlors, with rafinefs and cruelty, they still
allowed her the praise of prudence and of lenity ".
A few days before her death, ihe desired an inter-
view with the Prior of St..Andrew's, the Earl of
Argyll, and other chiefs of the Congregation. To
thcm he lamented the fatal issue of those violent
conncils, which Ihe had been obliged to follow;
and, with the candor natural to a generous mind,

B' uchan. 324.

B0 0 o conreffed the errors of her own administration, an,

Ill. begged forgiveness of those to whom they bad bee
*sa. hurtful; but, at the fame time, Ite warned them

amidt their struggles for liberty, and the Ihock o
arms, not to lose fight of the loyalty and fubjeiol
which was due to their sovereign". The remainde
of her time the employed in religious meditation
and exercises. She even invited the attendance o
Willox, one of the most eminent among tb
Reformed preachers, listened to his inftrufion
with reverence and attention", and prepared so
the approach of death with a decent fortitude.

M.tim ot Nothing could now save the French troops, fhu
te Frc up in Leitb, but the immediate conclusion of;
to coaclude
.re. peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from th

continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused thei
party in Scotland with continual expectations c
the latter, and had thereby kept alive their hope
and their courage. But at last, the situation o
France, rather than the terror of the Englilh arms
or the remonstrances of the Scottilh malecontent
constrained them, though with reluctance, to tun
their thoughts towards pacific councils. Th
Protestants in France were, at that time, a part]
formidable by their number, and more by th
valor and enterprising genius of their leaden
Francis II. had treated them with extreme rigor
and discovered, by every ftep he took, a fettle
resolution to extirpate their religion, and to nil
those who professed it. At the profpedt of thi

' Lesey, de Rebus Get. Scot. 2.2. "Knox, 2S.

danger to themselves, and to their cause, the oo
Protestants were alarmed, but not terrified. Animat- i1.
ed with zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they as0
not only prepared for their own defence, but re-
solved, by some bold aion, to anticipate the
schemes of their enemies; and as the Princes of
Lorrain were deemed the authors of all the King's
violent measures, they marked them out to be the
firtl victims of their indignation. Hence, and not
from any disloyalty to the King, proceeded the
famous conspiracy of Amboise; and though the Mach f,
vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lorrain
discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy
to observe new storms gathering in every province
of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with all
the fury and outrage of civil war. In this situation,
the ambition of the House of Lorrain was called off
from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend
the honor and dignity of the French crown, and
inilead of fending new reinforcements into Scotland,
itbecame necessary to withdraw the veteran troops
already employed in that kingdom ".

In order to conduct an affair of so much import. The ecDc;il
ance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made io"r" that
choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and of the p"ur"'e.
Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the for-
er, were reckoned inferior to no persons of that
ge in address and political refinement, Elizabeth
ppofed to them Ambassadors of equal abilities;
Cecil her Prime Minister, a man perhaps of the
' Leney, 224.

i o i greatest capacity who had ever held that office; ant

iI. Wotton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the at
id. of negociating under three successive Monarch!

The interests of the French and Englifb court
were soon adjusted by men of so great 'dexterity ii
business; and as France easily consented to wit[
draw those forces, which had been the chief occa
sion of the war, the other points in dispute, betweea
that kingdom and England, were not matterso
tedious, or of difficult discussion.

The grievances of the Congregation, and thi

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress
employed longer time, and required to be treatt
with a more delicate band. After so many opa
attempts, carried on by command of the King am
Queen, in order to overturn the ancientconftitu
tion, and to suppress the religion which they bh
embraced, the Scottish nobles could not think them
themselves secure, without fixing some new barrie
against the future encroachments of regal power
But the legal feps towards accomplishing this wen
not so obvious. The French Ambassadors confidere
the entering into a treaty with fubjedct, and wid
rebels, as a condescension unsuitable to the dignit
of a Sovereign; and their scruples on this hear
might have put an end to the treaty, if the imp&
tience of both parties for peace had riot fuggehti
an expedient, which seered to provide for th
security of the subjec, without derogating frol

Anricesof the honorof the Prince. The Scottish nobles agreed
rLeomr on this occasion, to paps from the point of rih

and privilege, and to accept the redres- of t

grievances as a matter of favor. Whatever additi. Boor
onal security their anxiety for personal safety, or li.
their zeal for public liberty, prompted them to 56W
demand, was granted in the name of Francis and
Alary, as as of their royal favor and indulgence.
And left conceflions of this kind hould seem pre-
cariouS, and liable to be retracted by the fame
power which had made them, the French Ambaffa.
dor agreed to insert them in the treaty with
Elizabeth, and thereby to bind the King and
(Ocen inviolably to observe them ".

In relating this tranfadion, contemporary hifto.
rians have confounded the concessions of Francis
and Mary to their Scottif subjeCts, with the treaty
between France and England; the latter, besides
the ratification of former treaties between the two
kingdoms, and stipulations with regard to the time
nd manner of removing both armies out of Scot-
and, contained an article, to which, as the source
f many important events, we hall often have
ccaiion to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her
rown is thereby acknowledged in the strongest
lims; and Francis and Mary solemnly engage
either to affuine the title, nor to bear the arms of
jing and Queen of England in any time to come";
Honorable as this article was for Elizabeth her. July 6.
fe, the conditions he obtained for her allies the
cots were no less advantageous to them. Monluc
nd Kandan contented, in the name of Francis and

Keith, 114, &c.
Ibid. . lymer xv. p. 8. $91, &c. Haynes,
i~-i -64.

o o Mary, that the French forces in Scotland hlouh
lit. instantly be sent back into their own country,an
iUo. no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into th

kingdom without the knowledge and consent o
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith at
Dunbar lhould immediately be rafed, and nona
fort be erected without the permifion of Pari
ment; that a Parliament hIould be held on tb
first day of AuguR, and that assembly be deemi
as valid, in all refpeas, as if it had been called b]
the express commandment of the King and Queen
that, conformable to the ancient laws and cuRst
of the country, the King and Queen Ibould w
declare war, or conclude peace, without the co
currence of Parliament; that, during the Qued'
ablence, the administration of government fboul
be vested in a council of twelve persons, to b
chosen out of twenty-four named by Parliament
seven of which council to be elected by A
Queen, and five by the Parliament; that het
after, the King and Queen should not advano
foreigners to places of trust or dignity in the kinl
dom, nor confer the offices of Treafurtr
Comptroller of the Revenues upon any ecclfiaf
that an at of oblivion, abolishing the guilt a
memory of all offences committed since the 6d
of March one thousand five hundred and fifq
eight, should be passed in the ensuing Parliamiil
and be ratified by the King and Queen; that t
King and Queen (hould not, under color c
punithing any violation of their authority durl
that period, seek to deprive any of their flubd

of

of the offices, benefices, or efates which they B n o K
now heldl; that the redress due to churchmen, for Ill.
the ijuies which they had fuflained during the isca
late inforretions, Ihould be left entirely, to the
cognizance of Parliament. With regard to reli.
gious controveriies, the Ambassadors declared that
they would not presume to decide, but permitted
the Parliament, at their firfl meeting, to examine
the points in difference, and to represent their
enfe of them to the King and Queen ".
To such a memorable period did the Lords of the The cffea
ongregation, by their courage and perseverance, of it
onduc an enterprise, which, at first, promised a
cry different issue. From beginnings extremely
eble, and even contemptible, the party grew
y degrees to great power; and being favored by
any fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
heir own Queen, aided by the forces of a more
onfiderable kingdom. The sovereign authority was,
y this treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of
e Congregation; that limited prerogative, which
e Crown had hitherto poTeffed was almost en-
irelyaanihilated; and the ariftocratical power, which
ways predominated in the Scottihf government,
lecaie fipreme and incontrolable. By this treaty,
DO, the influence of France, which had long been of
ouch weight in the affairs of Scotland, was greatly
iminilied; and not only were the present encroach.
tents of that ambitious ally restrained, but, by con.
derting with England, protection was provided
tainft any future attempt from the fame quarter. At
'Keirh, 17, &c.
VOL.1. R

So It the fame time, the controversies in religion bein left
IIL to the consideration of Parliament, the Protefbnti

might r ckon upon obtaining whatever decision was
mol favorable to the opinions which they prnfelffd

A ,ew days after the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and Engliih armies quitted Scotland

A Ai,. 1 he eyes of every man in that kingdom were
aU kCid. turned towards the approaching Parliament. A meet.

ing, summoned in a manner so extraordinary, at such
a critical jundure, and to deliberate upon matters of
b much consequence, was expeced with the
ptmoft anxiety.

A Scottiif Parliament, suitable to the ariflocrn.

tical genius of the government, was properly an
aftembly of the nobles. It was composed of BRif
ops, Abbots , Barons, and a few commifionecr
of boroughs, who met all together in one houfe.i
The Lesser Barons, though possessed of a right to
be present, either in person, or by their repre.,
fentatives, seldom exercised it. The expense of
attending, according to the faflion of the times,
with a numerous train of vassals and dependants;
the inattention of a martial age to the forms andl
detail of civil government; but above all, the,
exorbitant authority of the greater obles, who
had drawn the whole power into their own hands,
made this privilege of so little value, as to be
almost negleded. It appears from the ancient,
roll,. that during times of tranquillity, few coa
milioners of boroughs, and almost none of the
Leser Barons, appeared in Parliament. The or,
dinary administration of government was aban

doned, without scruple or jealousy, to the King Bo o K
and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary ll.
conjundures, when the struggle for liberty was 16Q.
violent, and the spirit of opposition to the Crown
rose to a height, the Burgesses and Lesser Ba-
tons were routed from their inactivity, and flood
forth to vindicate the rights of their country.
The turbulent reign of James 11I. affords exam-
pies in proof of this observation ". The public'
indignation against the rash designs of that weak'
and illadvifed Prince, brought into Parliament,
beides the greater nobles and prelates, a confider-
able number of the Lesser Barons.
The fame causes occasioned the unusual conflu-
tnce of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
met on the sirs of AuguR. The universal paillon
br liberty, civil and religious, which had seized the
lation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned
pecators of an assembly, whoe ads were likely to
prove decisive with refpec to both. From all corn.
is of the kingdom men flocked in, eager and de-
ermined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the
ame cause, which they had defended with their
words in the field. Besides a full convention of Peers,
remporal and Spiritual, there appeared the reprefen-
itives of almot all the boroughs, and above a hun-
led Barons, who, though of the lesser order, were
tntlemen of the firR rank and fortune in the nation ".
The Parliament was ready to enter on bufinets
ith the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started
tncerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No
"Keith, 147 " Ibid. 146.

R 2

J0 0 K Commilioner appeared in the name of the King

ill. and Queen, and no signification of their consent
lsa and approbation was yet received. These were

deemed, by many, ellential to the very being of
a Parliament. But, in opposition to this fen
tirent, the express words of the treaty of Edin
burgh were urged, by which this assembly was
declared to be as valid, in all refpeds, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express coni
tmand of the King and Queen. As the adherent
of the Congregation greatly outnumbered their
adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Thei
boldest leaders, and those of moR approved zeal,
were chosen to be Lords of the Articles, who
formed a committee of ancient use, and of grea
importance in the Scottifl Parliament ". The d
liberations of the Lords of the Articles wer
carried on with the moR unanimous and aiv
zeal. The ad of oblivion, the nomination o
twenty-four persons, out of whom the council. in
trusted with supreme authority, was to be eleded;
and every other thing prescribed by the late
treaty, or which femed nesffary to renderit e

t prooed- fedtual, palsed without dfpute or delay. Tht
s witrh article of religion employed longer time, and wa

R~- attended with greater difficulty. It was brough

into Parliament by a petition from those who ha

" From an original letter of Hamilton, Archbishop

St. Andrew's, it aopears. that the Lords of Articles e
chosen in the manner afterwards appointed by an 'd I
Parliament, 6tl. Keith, p. 48'. Spotfwood fermsl
sonder this to have been the common practice. Hil. 14

idopted the principles of the Reformation. Many B 0 o g
dnctriiies of the Popish church were a contra. II.
diction to reason, and a disgrace to religion ; its tZ6Ot
discipline had become corrupt and oppressive;
and its revenues were both exorbitant and ill.
applied. Against all these, the Proteltants re-
monlfrated with the utmost asperity of flyle,
which indignation at their absurdity, or expe-
rience of their pernicious tendency, could inspire;
and encouraged, by the number as well as zeal
of their friends , to improve such a favorable
juntdure, they aimed the blow at the whole fabric of
Popery; and besought the Parliament to interpAfe
its authority for retifying these multiplied abuses ".
Several prelates, zealously attached to the an-
cient fuperflition, were present in this Parliament.
But during there vigorous proceedings of the Pro.
trants, they flood confounded , and at gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause They deemed it impoflible to refit or
divert that torrent of religious zeal, which was
Iill i its full strength; they dreaded that their
ppofition would irritate their adverfaiies, and
xcite them to new adts of violence; they hoped
at the King and Queen would soon be at leisure
put a flop to the career of their insolent fib.
ti, and that, after the rage and havoc of the
reent orm, the former tranquillity and order
nIud be restored to the church and kingdom.
Ihy were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the doc.
ne, and even the power of the church, in order

RQ

B 0 O K to enrure the safety of their own persons, and to

III. preserve the possession of those revenues which

a were Rill in their hands. From whatever motives

they aed, their silence, which was imputed to
the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded matter of
great triumph to the Protestants, and encouraged
them to proceed with more boldness and alacrity ".

The Parliament did not think it enough to con.

demn those dotrines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the fane.
tion of their approbation to a Confession of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachers"
.and composed, as might be expeced from such a
performance at that jundure, on purpose to ex-
pose the absurd tenets and pra&ices of the Romilh
church. By another ad, the jurifdidion of the
ecclesiastical courts was abolilhed, and the caufa,
which formerly came under their cognizance,
were transferred to the decision of civil judges ".
By a third statute, the exercise of religious
worlhip, according to the rites of the Romil
church, was prohibited. The manner in which
the Parliament enforced the observation of this
law discovers the zeal of that assembly; the firRf
tranfgreflion fubjeaed the offender to the for
feiture of his goods, and to a corporal punillb
meat, at the discretion of the judge; banilfi
ment was the penalty of a second violation of the
law; and a third at of disobedience was declar-
ed to be capital ". Such strangers were men, at
that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the

"Knox, 2S. "Id. ibid. '"Keith, iS2. "Knox, 2(t

laws of humanity; and with such indecent hafle 0o 0 1
did the very person, who had just escaped the ri- Iii.
gor of ecclefialtical tyranny, proceed to imitate 110'
those examples of sev.erity, of which they them.
selves had so justly complained.

The vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturn. Withrtgpr
ed, in a fLw days, the ancient system of relhgion, 'he rev

'

which had been eftablilhed so many ages. In re- church.
forming the doctrine and discipline of the church,
the nobles kept pace with the ardor and expecta-
tions even of Knox himself. But their proceed-
ings, with rfped to these, were not more rapid
and impetuous than they were flow and dilatory,
when they entered on the consideration of eccle-
fiaftlcal revenues. Among the lay members, some
were already enriched with thefpoils of the church
and others devoured in expectation the wealthy
benefices which il: remained untouched. The al-
teration in religion had afforded many of the dig-
nified ecclesiastics themselves an opportunity of
gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demo.
lition of the monasteries having set the Monks at
liberty from their confinement, they inRtantly dif-
perfed all over the kingdom, and commonly be-
took themselves to some secular employment.
Ihe Abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to em-
brace the principles of the Reformation from con-
viclion, or so cunning as to espouse them out of
policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity,
andl, except what he allowed for the subsistence of
a few superannuated Monks" , applied them

l Keith, 4r,6 Append. s90, 191.

R4

B O O entirely to his own use. The proposal made by the

elI. Reformed teachers, for applying these revenues
t5e. towa,ds the maintenance of Ministers, the edu.

cation of youth, and the support of the poor, was
equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They
opposed t with the utmost warmth, and by their
numbers and authority easily prevailed on the
Parliament to give no ear to such a disagreeable
demand ". Zealous as the first Reformers were,
and animated with a spirit superior to the low con.
fiderations of interest , they beheld these early
symptoms of feltifhnefs and avarice among their
adherents with amazement and sorrow; and we find
Knox expressing the utmost sensibility of that con.
tempt, with which they were treated by many from
whom he expeced a more generous concern for the
fuccels of religion, and the honor of its Miniters ".

Theliditr A Difficulty hath been started, with regard to
of his P- the ads of this Parliament, concerning religion.
ed in e-L This difficulty, which at such a distance of time
tia. is of no importance, was founded on the words

of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Par.
liament was permitted to take into consideration
the state of religion, and to signify their senti-
mcnts of it to the King and Queen. But, inflead
of presenting their desires to their Sovereigns,
in the humble form of a supplication or addrels,
the Parliament converted them into so many as;
which, although they never received the royda
affenr. obrained, all over the kingdom, the
weiglht and authority of laws. In compliance
with their injunctions, the established system of

*' See Append. No. IV. '" Knox,239. 6.

religion was every where overthrown, and that B 0 K,
recommended by the Reformers introduced in its IIt.
place. The partiality and zeal of the people over- s6o.
looked or supplied any defet in the form of these
adts of I'arliament, and rendered the observance
of them more universal than ever had been yielded
to the ftatites of the most regular or constitutional
assembly. By those proceedings it must, however,
be confessed that the Parliament, or rather the na-
tion, violated the last article in the treaty of Edin.
burgh, and even exceeded the powers which belong
to fbjeds. But when once men have been accuf-
tomed to break through the common boundaries
of fubjedions, and their minds are inflamed with
the paffons which civil war inspires, it is mere
pedantry or ignorance to measure their conduct by
those rules, which can be applied only where go.
vernment is in a ate of order and tranquillity. A
nation, when obliged to employ such extraordi-
nary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself
of every thing which can promote this great end;
and the neceflity of the cafe, as well as the im-
portance of the objec, justify any departure from
the common and eflabliflied rules of the constitution.

In consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh. as Ambar,.
vwell as by the ordinary forms of business, it be- ors rent
came neccffary to lay the proceedings of Parlia- 'ntt
ment before the King and Queen. For this pur- France.
pose, SirJames Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John,
Ivas appointed to repair to the court of France.
After holding a course so irregular, the leaders
of the Congregation had no reason to flatter

BOOK themf-lves that Francis and Mary would ever

IlL. opprove their condud, or confirm it by their royal
s0o. arfent. The reception of their Ambassador was,no

other than they might have expeded. He was treated
by the King and Queen with the utmost coldntfs,
and dfmiffed without obtaining the ratification of
the Parliament's proceedings. From the Princes of
Lorrain, and their partisans, he endured all the
scorn and insult which it was natural for them to
pour upon the party he represented .

md t E. Though the Earls of Morton. Glencairn, and
Cb.t~. Maitland of Lethington, the Ambalfadors of the

Parliament to Elizabeth their Protedtrefs, met
with a very different reception; they were not
more successful in one part of the negociation in.
trufed to their care. The Scots, sensible of the'
security which they derived from their union with
England. were delirous of rendering it indissoluble.
With this view, they impowered there eminent
leaders of their party to testify to Elizabeth their
gratitude for that seasonable and effedual aid which
she had afforded them, and at the fame time to
beseech her to render the friendship between the
nations perpetual, by condescending to marry the
Earl of rran, who, though a subjed, was nearly
allied to the royal family of Scotland, and, after
Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Eli-

abeth listened with the utmost fatisfadion, and

" Kox, 2st. Buch. ;27. State Papers publilhed b
itd lairdwicke, vol. i. p. 2 , &c.

encouraged the Scots, in any future exigency, to B o0 O
hope for the continuance of her good offices; with ll.
regard to the latter, she discovered those senti- U60.
ments to which he adhered throughout her whole
reign. Averse from marriage, as some maintain
through choice, but more probably out of policy,
that ambitious Princess would never admit any
partner to the throne; but delighted with the en-
tire and uncontrolled exercise of power, lhe facri.
siced to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of tranf.
mitting her Crown to her own posterity. The mar.
riage with the Earl of Arran could not be attended
with any such extraordinary advantage, as to
shake this resolution; Ihe declined it therefore, but
with many expressions of goodwill towards the
Scottish nation, and of refped for Arran himself'.

Towards the conclusion of this year, diftin- The deat
guiled by so many remarkable events, there hap- f Fran"
pened one of great importance. On the fourth
of December died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble
confitution, and of a mean underflanding. As he
did not leave any iflue by the Queen, no incident
could have been more fortunate to those who,
during the late commotions in Scotland, had
taken part with the Congregation. Mary, by
the charms of her beauty, had acquired an entire
acendant over her hulband; and as he transferred
all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lor-
rain, Francis followed them implicitly in whatever
track they were pleased to lead him. The power
of France, under such direction, alarmed the

Burn. . Append. 308, Keith, 154, &a.

o O K Scnttifh malecontents with apprehensions of danger,
II. no less formidable than well founded. The intestine
uso. disorders which raged in France, and the season.

able interposition of England in behalf of the Con.
gregation, had hitherto prevented the Princes of
Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland
into execution But under their vigorous and de.
cifive administration. it was impofible that the
commotions in France could be of long continu.
ance, and many things might fall in to divert
E lizabeth's attention for the future, from the affairs
of Scotland. In either of these events, the Scots
would stand expnfed to all the vengeance which
the resentment of the French court could inflil
The blow, however long suspended, was unavoid.
able, .nd must fall at last with redoubled weight.
From this profped and expectation of danger, the
Scots were delivered by the death of Francis; the
ancient confederacy of the two kingdoms had al-
ready been broken, and by this event the chief
bond of union which remained was dissolved. Ca.
therine of Medicis, who, during the minority of
Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the entire
direcion of the French councils, was far from
any thoughts of vindicating the Scottisb Queen's
authority. Catherine and Mary had been rivals
in power during the reign of Francis II. and had
contended for the government of that weak and
unexperienced Prince; but as the charms of the
wife easily triumphed over the authority of the
mother, Catherine could never forgive such a
disappointment in her favorite passion, and beheld

now, with secret pleasure, the difficult and per. B O
plexing scene on which her daughter-in-law was lIt.
about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the 16s
sorrow which so fad a reverse of fortune could
occasion; flighted by the Queen-mother"; and
forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear Mary r-
only in the funfliine of prosperity, retired to Rheims, tie, of
and there, in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid kranc.
her indignation. Even the Princes of Lorrain were
obliged to contract their views; to turn them from
foreign to domestic objects; and inRead of forming
vafl projets with regard to Britain, they found it
necessary to think of acquiring and eftablilbing an
interest with the new administration.

It is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,
which, on all these accounts, the death of the
French Monarch excited among the Scots. They
regarded it as the only event which could give
firmnnes and flability to that fy(tem of religion and
government, which was now introduced; and it
is no wonder cotemporary historians should ascribe
it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and
happiness of kingdoms, in those situations where
human prudence and invention would utterly de-
fpair ".

About this time, the Protestant church of Scot. Eftabish;
land began to assume a regular form. Its principles m"'t of

PreshyteriaB

had obtained the fandion of public authority, church go-
and some fixed external policy became necessary vertPu".
for the government and preservation of the infant

Henault, 340. Cafllen. 4. " Inox, 1$.;

O OK society. The model introduced by the Reformers
ill. differed extremely from that which bad been long

e ftablifled. The motives which induced them to
depart so far from the ancient system, deserve
to be explained.

The licentious lives of the clergy, as has been

already observed, seem to have been among the
first things that excited any suspicion concerning
the truth of the doctrines which they taught, and
roused that spirit of inquiry, which proved fatal
to the Popifi system. As this disgust at the vices
of ecclesiastics was soon transferred to their per.
sons, and Ihifting from them, by no violent tran.
fition, fettled at last upon the offices which they
enjoyed; the effects of the Reformation would
naturally have extended not only to the doctrine,
but to the form of government in the Popifl church;
and the fame spirit which abolished the former,
would have overturned the latter. But in the ar.
rangements which took place in the different king-
doms and tates of Europe in consequence of the
Reformation, we may observe something imilar
to what happened upon the first eftablibmentof
Christianity in the Roman Empire. In both periods,
the form of ecclesiastical policy was modelled, in
some measure, upon that of the civil government.
When the ChriRian church was patronized and eRa-
blilhed by the fRate, the jurifdiion of the various,
orders of ecclesiastics . diftinguilhed by the names
of Patriarchs, Archbiflops, and Bishops, was
made to correspond with thevarious divisions of the
Empire; and the eccleiaftic of chief eminence

ill each of there possesed authority, more or left BOO I
cxtenfive in proportion to that of the civil ma. Ill.
gifirate who presided over the fame dilfrit. When *io.
the Reformation took place, the Episcopal form
of government, with its various ranks and degrees
of subordination, appearing to be most confident
with the genius of Monarchy, it was continued,
with a few limitations, in everal provinces of
Germany, in England, and in the northern king:
doms. But in Switzerland, and ome parts of the
Low Countries, where the popular form of go.
veroment allowed more full scope to the innovat.
ing genius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence
of order in the church was destroyed, and an
equality eltablilbed more suitable to the spirit of
republican policy. As the model of Episcopal
government was copied from that of the Christian
church as etablilhed in the Roman Empire, the
situation of the primitive church, prior to its efta-
blilhment by civil authority, seems to have fug-
gelled the idea, and furnilhed the model of the
latter system, which has since been denominated
Prbbyterian. The first Christians, oppressed by con-
tinual persecutions, and obliged to hold their reli.
ginus assemblies by Realth, and in corners, were
contented with a form of government extremely
simple. The influence of religion concurred with
the sense of danger, in extinguishing among them
thfpirit of ambition, and in preserving a parity of
rank, the effect of their sufferings, and the cause
of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions
Were received among many Protestants of that age

o o x with incredible submission, was the patron and
111. restorer of this scheme ofecclefiaftical policy. The
1140. church of Geneva, formed under his eye and by his

direction, was deemed the most perfect model of this
government; and Knox, who, during his residence
in that city, had fludied and admired it, warmly
recommended it to the imitation of his countrymen.

Among the Scottilb nobility, some hated the

persons, and others coveted the wealth of the dig.
nified clergy; and by abolishing that order of men,
the former indulged their resentment, and the lat.
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people,
inflamed with the mot violent aversion to Popery,
and approving of every scheme that departed far.
theft from the pratice of the Romilh church, were
delighted with a fyfRem so admirably suited to
their predominant passion: while the friends of
civil liberty beheld, with pleasure, the Protefant
clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that
fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their prede.
ceffors had reared with so much art and industry;
and flattered themselves, that by lending their aid
to Itrip churchmen of their dignity and wealth, they
might entirely deliver the nation from their exor.
bitant and oppressive jurifdidion. The new mode
of government easily made its way among men,
thus prepared, by their various interests and pi
sions, for its reception.

But, on the irt introduction of his fyftRe,

Knox did not deem it expedient to depart alto
gether from the ancient form ", Intead ol

" Spotfwood, i58.

Bilbops,

Biflops, he proposed to eftablilh ten or twelve so 0 K
Superintendents in different parts of the kingdom. Il

hcfe, as the name implies, were impowered. to lRs
infpe the life and dodrine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the
church, and performed several other parts of tm
Episcopal function. Their jurifdidion, however,
extended to sacred things only; they claimed no
feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the
dignity or revenues of the former Biflopc.

he number of inferior clergy,, to whom the

care of parochial duty could be committed, was
Rill extremely small; they had embraced the prin
ciples of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public corcao.
tions, they were scattered, merely by cancc
over the different provinces of the kingdom;
and, in a few places only were formed into re.
gular classes or ocieties. The firt general as. Daimb.
fembly of the church, which was held this:year,
bears all the marks of an infant and unformed
society. The members were but few in number,
and of no considerable rank; no uniform or
confident rule seems to have been obftiXvd'i
tieding them. From a great part of the. king
dom, no representatives appeared. In the name
of some entire counties, but one person was
present; while, in other places, a single towa
or church sent several members, A convention'
l feeble and irregular, could not possess. extensive
authority; and, conscious of their own weak.
aes, the members.put an tad to their debiats,

VOL. I. S

. 00 without venturing upon any decision of much

II1. importance .
cN«. In order to give greater Itrength and confitence

to the Prelbyterian plan, Knox, with the aflilance
of his brethren, composed the first book of dii
Cipline, which contains the model or platform of
the- intended policy '. They presented it to a
convention of estates, which was held in the be.
ta. s. ginning of this year. Whatever regulations were

proposed with regard to ecclesiastical discipline
ad jurisdiction, would have easily obtained the
fandion of that assembly; but a design to recover
the patrimony of the church, which is there in.
finuated, met with a very different reception.

In vain did the clergy display the advantages

which would accrue to the public, by a proper
application of ecclesiastical revenues. In vain did
they propose, by an impartial distribution of this
fund, to promote true religion, to encouragelearn.
ing, and to support the poor. In vain did they
even intermingle threatenings of the divine di.
pleaure againRt the unjust detainers of what was
appropriated to a sacred use. The nobles held
fa the prey which they had seized; and beltowing
upon the proposal the name of a devout imagination,
they affeded to confider it as a projed altogeth
visionary, and treated it with the utmost scorn ".

Tb QC : This convention appointed the Prior of St

i.nti o

,. lndtew's to repair to the Queen, and to invitu
Stdani. hO to return into her native country, and to aun

." KXth, 4. '* SpotC sa. ' .Knox, sS6.

the reins of government, which had been too B0o 0
long committed to other hands. Though some 111
of her subjects dreaded her return, and others zrz.
foresaw dangerous consequences with which it
might be attended ", the bulk of them desired it
with so much ardor, that the invitation was given
with the greatest appearance of unanimity. Bui
the zeal of the Roman Catholics got the art of
the Prior in paying court to mYary; and Lefly,
afterwards Bllhop of Ross, who was commissioned
by them, arrived before him at the place of her
residence ". Leny endeavoured to infuse into the
Queen's mind suspicions of her ProteRant fubjeds,
and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into
the arms of those who adhered to her own religion.
For this purpose, he insisted that she Ibould land
at Aberdeen; and as the ProteRant doctrines had
made no considerable progress in that part of the
lingdom, he gave her alfurance of being joined,
in a few days, by twenty thousand men and flat-
tered her, that with such an army, encouraged
by her presence and authority, she might easily
overturn the Reformed church, before it was firmly
fettled on its foundations.

But at this junture, the Princes of Lorrain

were not disposed to liRen to this extravagant and
dangerous proposal. Intent on defending them.
selves against Catherine of Medicis , whose in-
fidious policy was employed in undermining their
exorbitant power, they had no leisure to attend to

" See Append V.
'. Lleny 227.

Sa

o o the affairs of Scotland, and. wiihed their niece to
lil. take possession of her kingdom with as little dil
'56* turbance as possible. The French officers, too,

who had served in Scotland, dilfiaded Mary from
all violent measures; and, by representing the
power and number of the Protestants to be irre.
fiftible, determined her to court them by every
art; and rather to employ the leading men of that
party as her miniRfers, than to provoke them, by
a fruitless opposition, to become her enemies '
Hence proceeded the confidence and affedion with
which the Prior of St. Andrew's was received
by the Queen. His representation of the Rate of
She kingdom gained great credit; and Lefly be.
held, with regret, the new channel in which court.
favor was likely to run.

Another Convention of Elates was held in May.
bThe arrival of an Ambaflador from France, seems

to have been the occasion of this meeting. Ha
was infirued to solicit the Scots to renew their
ancient .alliance with France, to break the ne
confederacy with England,. and to restore the
Popilh ecclesiastics to the poffeion of their reve
nues, and the exercise of their fundtions. It is no
easy matter to form any conjecure concerning the
intentions of the French court, in making they
extraordinary and ill-timed propositions. They
were rejeaed with that scorn whichmight well bave
been cxpcded from the temper of the nation".

In this Convention, the Protestant Clergy did
not obtain a more favorable audience than formerly

M Mdv. 6. " Knox, s69. 273.

and their profped of recovering the patrimony of B 0 O K
the church Rill remained as distant and uncertain ml.
as ever. But, with regard to another point, they iwi.
found the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated.
The book of discipline seemed to require that the
monuments of Popery, which still remained in
the kingdom, hould be demolilhed "; and,
though neither the fame pretence of policy, not
the fame ungovernable rage of the people, re-
mained to jultify or excuse this barbarous havoc,
the Convention, confidering every religious fabric
as a relid of idolatry, passed sentence upon them
by an at in form; and persons the most remark-
able for the activity of their zeal; were appointed
to put it in execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches,
libraries, records, and even the sepulchres of the
dead, perished in one common ruin. The Itorm
of popular insurrection, though impetuous and
irrefitible, had extended only to a few counties,
and soon spent its rage; but now a deliberate and
universal rapine completed the devaluation of every
thing, venerable and magnificent, which had e.
caped its violence ".
t In the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re- Ma't beinp
turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, g), it"
splendor, and gaiety of a polite court, Die still
fondly lingered in France, the scene of all there
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the
barbarism of her own country,. and the turbulence
of her fubjets, which presented her with a vry

' Spotrwood, ias. " Ibid. 74.

S3

O Or different face of things. The impatience, however,
JlL of her people, the persuasions of her uncles, but
IU. above all, the studied and mortifying neglectwith

which lhe was treated by the Queen-mother, forced
her to think of beginning this disagreeable voyage",
But while ihe was preparing for it, there were
sown between her and Elizabeth the feeds of that
personal jealousy and discord, which embittered the
life. and Ihortened the days of the Scottilh Queen.

odds. The ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh
^,. , was the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity;
ad UIza. the true causes of it lay 'much deeper. Almo
btL every article in that treaty, had been executed by

both parties with a scrupulous exadnefs. The
fortifications of Leith were demolilhed, and the
armies of France and England withdrawn within
the appointed time. The grievances of the Scot.
tiu malecontents were redressed, and they had
obtained whatever they could demand for their
future security. With regard to all these, Mary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth
to urge, the ratification of the treaty.

The sixth article remained the only fonrc of

contef and difficulty. No Minister ever enter
more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign,
or pursued them with more dexterity and fucce
than Cecil. In the conduct of the negociation
at Edinburgh , the found understanding of this
able politician had proved greatly an overmatch
for Monluc's refinements in itrigue, and hd

Brantome, Jebb, vol, ii, 481.

artfully induced the French Ambassadors, not BOOK
only to acknowledge that the Crowns of England m.
and Ireland did of right belong to Elizabeth alone, Issi,
but also to promise, that in all times to come,
Alary hould abstain from using the titles, or
bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

The ratification of this article would have been
of the molt fatal consequence to Mary. The crown
of England was an objec worthy of her ambition.
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and
importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many,
her title was eeemed preferable to that of Eli.
2abeth. Among the English themselves, the Ro.
man Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and aive party, openly espoused this
opinion; and even the Protestants, who supported
Elizabeth's throne, could not deny the Queen
of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper op-
portunity to avail herself of all these advantages,
could not, in the course of things, be far dilfant,
and many incidents might fall in, to bring this op.
portunity nearer than was expeCed. In thefecircum,
fances, Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute,
would have loft that rank which e had hitherto
held among neighbouring Princes; the zeal of her
adherents muRl have gradually cooled; and fie
might have renounced, from that moment, all
hopes of ever wearing the Englifl Crown ".

None of there beneficial consequences escaped
the penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this

" Haynes, 373, &c.

S4

S 0 O r afon, had recourse to every thing by which he

Il. could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottilh
s. Queen into a compliance with her demands; and

if that Princefi had been o unadvised as to ratify
the ralh concellions of her Ambassadors, Eliza.
beth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad.
vantage, which, under her management, rmuR
have turned to great account. By such a renun.
ciation, the queltion with regard to the right of
fucceflion, would have been left altogether open
and undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth
might either have kept her rival in perpetual anxiety
and dependance, or, by the authority of her Par.
liament, she might have broken in upon the order
of lineal fuccefion, and transferred the Crown to
some other dfcendant of the royal blood. The
former condud lIe observed. towards James VI.
whom, during his whole reign, e held in per.
petual fear and fubjeeion. The latter, and more
rigorous method of proceeding, would, in all pro.
bability, have been employed against Mary, whom,
for many reasons, lhe both envied and hated.

Nor was this ftep beyond her power, unprece

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the
constitution of England. Though fuccefilon by
hereditary right be an idea so natural and so po
pular, that it has been eftahlilhed in almofR very
civilized nation, yet England affords many me
morable instances of deviations from that rule.
The Crown of that kingdom having once bee
seized by the hand of a conqueror, this invited
the bold and enterprising in every age to iitau

such an illutrious example of fortunate ambition. B 0 0 i
From the time of William the Norman, the regular ill.
course of descent had seldom continued through "61.
three successive reigns. Those Princes, whose in-
trigues or valor opened to them a way to the throne,
called in the authority of the great council of the
nation to confirm their dubious titles. Hence par.
liamentary and hereditary right became in England
of equal consideration. That great assembly claimed
and adually possessed a power of altering the order
of regal fuccefion; and even so late as Henry VII.
an ad of Parliament had authorized that capricious
Monarch to fettle the order of fuccelfion at his
pleasure. The Englilh, jealous of their religious
liberty, and averse from the dominion of firangers,
would have eagerly adopted the paflions of their
fovereigi, and might have been easily induced to
exclude the Scottirh line from the right of succeed-
ing to the Crown. These seem to have been the
views of both Queens, and these were the difficul-
ties which retarded the ratification of the treaty
of Edinburgh.

But, if the sources of their discord were to be
traced no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alteration in the words of it might have brought
the present question to an amicable issue. The inde-
finite and ambiguous expreflion which Cecil had
inserted into the treaty, might have been changed
into one more limited, but more precise; and Mary,
instead of promising to abstain from bearing the
title of Queen of England in all times to come,
might have engaged not to aflume that title, during

m o o x the life of Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful

IlL pofterry'.
ai«r. Such an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for some time, the prosecution
of her title to the nglifl Crown, Ihe had not
however relinquifed it. She determined to revive
her claim on the first profpet of success, and was
unwilling to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
not to take advantage of any such fortunate occur.
rence. Nor would the alteration have been more
acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it,

" This expedient for terminating the diffrence beten

Elizabeth and Mary was o obvious. that it could not fail of
presenting itself to the view of the Englifl Miniters. "hre
hath been a matter secretly thought of ( fays Cecil in a lent
to Trokmorton, July 4, 6 i), which I dare communicat
to you, although I mean never to be an author thereof; and
that is, if an accord might be made betwixt our Mirhef and
the Scottiih Queen, that this Ihould by Parliament in Scotlnd
&c. surrender unto the Queen's Majesty all matter of claim, am
unto the heirs of her body; and in consideration thereof, th
Scottish Queen's interetl hould be acknowledged in deful
of heirs of the body of the Queen's Majesty. Well, God fm
our Mistress a husband, and by time a son, that we may hop
our posterity Ihall have a masculine fucceflion. This matte i
too big for weak folks, and too deep for imiple. The Quen'
Majelty knoweth of it." Hardw. State Pap i. 174. Bt k
regard to every point relating to the fuccefion, Elizabeth
so jealous, and so apt to take ofnce thather moftconfidenti
Ministers durst not urge her to advance one lep fartherthan h
herself chore to go. Cecil, mentioning some scheme aboutt
fucceflion if the Queen hould not marry or leave ilfue, add
with his usual caution: This song hath many parts; but,
my part, I have no fl llbutin plain song." Ibid. J17

would have tacitly recognised the right of her rival B O O K
to acend the throne after her decease. But neither m1.
the Scottish nor JFngl-il Queen durst avow these l".
secret sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery
of an inclination to disturb the tranquillity of Eng-
land, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands,
might have proved fatal to Mary. Any suspicion of
a design to alter the order of fucceflion, and to set
aside the claim of the Scottilh Queen, would have
exposed Elizabeth to much and deserved cenfur,
and have raised up against her many and dangerous
enemies. These, however carefully concealed or art-
fully disguised, were, in all probability, the real
motives which determined the one Queen to solicit,
and the other to refuse the ratification of the treaty
in its original form; while neither had recourse to that
explication of it, which to a heart unwarped by poli-
tical interest, and sincerely desirous of union and con.
cord, would have appeared so obvious and natural.

But though considerations of interest firR occa.

lioned this rupture between the Brititb Queens,
rivallhip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities by which Ihe equalled or
surpassed such of her sex as have merited the
greatest renown, discovered an admiration of her
own person, to a degree which women of ordinary
underfiandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to drefl, her
solicitude to display her charms, her love of flat-
tery, were all excefive, Nor were these weaknefcie

o o K confined to that period of life when they are more
111. pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the wifft
5ósL. woman of that. or pe haps of any other age, wore

the gb. and affected the manners of a girl ".
Thongh Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary
in beauty and gracefulness of,perfon, as the excelled
her in political abilities and in the art5 of govern.
ment, the was weak enough to compare herself
with the Scottith Queen "; and as it was impoli
ble the could be altogether ignorant how much
Mary gained by the comparison, he envied and
hated her as a rival bv whom he was eclipsed. In
judging of the conduct of Princes, we are apt to
ascribe too much to political motives, and too little
to the palfions which they feel in common with
the reR of mankind. n order to account for
Elizabeth's present, as well as her subsequent con.
dud towards Mary, we must not always confide
her as a Queen, we must Sometimes regard ha
merely as a woman.

Elizabeth, though no franger to Mary's difficul

ties with refpe to the treaty, continued to urg
her, by repeated applications, to ratify it". Mary
under various pretences, fill contrived to gait
time, and to elude the request. But while the on
Queen solicited with persevering importunity, an
the other evaded with artful delay, they bot
itudied an extreme politenacs of behaviour, an

" Johnston Hi. Rer. Britan. 16, 147. Carte, vol.iii. 69!
Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors. Article ETx.

" Aliil, 98. " .eirh, i7. 160, &Gic

loaded each other with profeflions of sisterly love, n o o
wih rrciprocal declarations of unchangeable eteem III.
and amity. 15I.

It was not long before Slary was convinced, liabeth re.
that, among Princes, these expref4ions of friendllip f ar..n
are commonly far distant from the heart. In failng
from France to Scotland, the course lies along the
Englifl) coaf. In order to be Life from the insults
of the Englilh fleet, or, in cafe of tempctluous wea.
ther, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that
kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand of
Elizabeth a fafe-conduct during her voyage. bhis
request, which decency alone obliged one Prince
to grant to another, Elizabeth rejected, in such a
manner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a
design, either to obftrud the passage, or to inter-
cept the person of the Scottilh Queen ".

Mary, in a long conference with ' hrokmorton,
the Fnglifl Ambassador in France, explained her
sentiments concerning this ungenerous behaviour
of his Mifrefs, in a rain of dignified expoftula-
tion, which conveys an idea of her abilities, address,
and spirit, as advantageous ts any tranfadion in
her reign. Mary was, a that time, only in her
eighteenth year; and as Throkmorton's account of
what passed in his interview with her, is addressed
direlly to Elizabeth ", that dexterous Courtier,
we may be well aflured, did not embellish the
discourse of the Scottilh Queen with any coloring
too favorable

" Keith, 17t. Camden. See Appendix, N*. VI.
Cabbala, p. 74. Keith, e70, &c.

B O K Whatever resentment Mary might feel, it did

.il not retard her departure from France. She was

Iss. accompanied to Calais, the place where the e.
~ru~lr~ ei barked, in a manner suitable to her dignity, as the

Queen of two powerful kingdoms. Six Princes of
Lorrain her uncles, with many of the moR eminent
among the French nobles, were in her retinue.
Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure,
graced it with every circumstance of magnificence
and refped After bidding adieu to her mourning
attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in
tears, Mary left that kingdom, the Ihort but
only scene of her life in which fortune smiled upon
her. While the French coast continued in fight,
the intently gazed upon it, and muting, in a
thoughtful posture, on that height of fortune
whence (he had fallen, and presaging, perhaps, the
diafters and calamities which embittered the re
mainder of her days, the sighed often, and cried
out, a Farewel France! Farewel beloved country,
C which I Iball never more behold!" Even when
the darknef of the night had hid the land from
her view, fie would neither retire to the cabin,
nor taste food, but commanding a couch to be
placed on the deck, he there waited the return of
day with the utmost impatience. Fortune soothed
her on this occasion, the gallies made little way
during the night. In the morning, the coast of
France was till within fight, and the continued
to feed her melancholy with the profped; and a
long s her eyes could diRinguih it, to utter tit

fame tender expressions of regret". At laRt a brilk B o o i-
gale arose, by the favor of which for some days, lit.
and afterwards under the cover of a thick fog, 1s61.
Mary escaped the Englilh fleet, which lay in wait
to intercept her ; and on the nineteenth of August, Irrvn
after an absence of near thirteen years, landed safely sc~oa
at Leith in her native kingdom.

Mary was received by her fubjeds with ihouts
and acclamations of joy, and with every dgmonfira.
tion of welcome and regard. But as her arrval
was unexpeced, and no suitable preparation bad
been made for it, they could not, with all their
fforts, hide from her the poverty of the country,
and were obliged to conduct her to the palace of
Holyrood- house with little pomp. The (Qeen,
accufRomed from her infancy to splendor and magni.

" Brantome, 48;. He himfclf was in the fame galley
rith the Queen.

" Goodal, vol. i. 7. Camden insinuates. rather than
Iffirms, that it was the objed of the English fleet to intercept
Mary. This, however, seems to be doubtful. Elizabeth positively
aierts, that at the request of the King of Spain she had fitted
ot a few hips of fender force, in order to clear the narrow
ftas of pirates, which infested them; and she appeals for the
truth of this to Mary's own bliniters. App. N'. VI. p. 128.
Cecil, in a letter to Throkmorton Aug. 6, ia 6, informs
lim, that " the Queen's hips, which were upon the seas to
leanfe them of pirates, saw her ki. e. Mary) and saluted her
tpllies, and flaying her Ihips, examined them of pirates, and
difailed them gently. One Scottish Ihip they detained as vehe.
mently fufpeded of piracy." Hard. State Papers, i. 76.
aftelnau, who accompanied Mary in this voyage, confirms
tc circumlRance of her gallies being in fight of the Eaglifl
tet. Mim. ap. bb. xi 4.

0o o cence, and fond of them, as was natural at khe
Il. age, could not help observing the change in hu
Irt.. fiuaton, and seemed to be deeply afftedd with it".
tm sr the Never did any Prince ascend the throne at a
,'-T*U juncure which called for more wisdom in council

or more courage and steadiness in aion. The
rage of religious controversy was fill unabated.
The memory of past oppression exasperated the
Protelants; the mart of recent injuries rendered
tbe.Papifts dperate; both were zealous, fierce,
and irreconcilable. The ablence of their Sover
eign had accustomed the nobles to independ.
ence; and during the hte commotions, they had
acquired uch an increase of wealth, by the spoils
ps the church, as threw great weight into the
scale of the aristocracy, which flood not in need
of any acceflion of power. The kingdom bad
long been under the governmentof Regents,
who exercised a delegated jurifdidion, attended
with little authority, and which inspired no re.
verence. A state of pure anarchy had prevailed
for the two last years, without a Regent, without
a supreme council, without the power, or even
the form of a regular government ". A licen
tious spirit, unacquainted with subordination,
and disdaining the retraints of law and justice,
had spread among all ranks of men. The ioflu
ence of France, the ancient ally of the king
dom, was withdrawn or despised. The Engih
of enemies become confederates, had grown int

L*
Br 4 4. * Ith, Appedi 9.

confidence

confidence with the nation, and had gained an as B o K
cendant over all its councils. The Sc' ttilb Mon- li.
archs did not derive more splendor or power from smir.
the friendship of the former. than they had reason
to dread injury and diminution from the inter-
position of the latter. Every consideration, whe.
ther of interest or of self prefetvation, obliged b liza.
beth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and
tocreate the Prince perpetual difficulties, by foment-
ing the spirit of diffltifadion among the people.

In this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when
the adminiltration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age. unac(li.inted
with the mannts and laws of her country, a
ltranger to her fubjedts, without experience, with.
out allies, and almost without a friend.

On the other hand, in Mary's firuation we find
some circumstances, which, though they did not
bal;nce these disadvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them; and, with ftilful management,
might have produced great effects Her Lbjeds,
utnaccultomed so long to the residence of their
Prince, were not only dazzled by the novelry and
fpiendot of the royal pretence, but inspired with
awe and reverence. Besides the places of power
and profit bestowed by the fLVor of a Prince, his
protection, his familiarity, and even his finiles,
confer honor and win the hearts of mren. From
all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded
to testify their duty and affelion to their fove.
rign, and fludied by every art, to wipe out the
memory of pals mifcondud, and to lay in a tock

VOL. 1. T

o o of future merit. The amusements and gaiety of her
111. court, which was filled with the mot accompliled
»s4. of the French nobility, who had attended her, be.

gan to soften and to polish the rude manners ofthe
nation. Mary herself possessed many of those qua.
lifications which raise affedion and procure esteem.
The beauty and gracefulness of her person drew
universal admiration, the elegance and politnet
of her manners commanded general refped. To
all the charms of her own sex, hIe added many of
the accomplishments of the other. The progress Ie
had made in all the Arts and Sciences, which were
then deemed necessary or ornamental, was far be.
,yond what is commonly attained by Princes; and all
her other qualities were rendered more agreeable by
a courteous affability, which, without lessening the
dignity of a Prince, teals on the hearts of sub
jeds with a bewitching insinuation.

From these circumstances, notwithstanding te

threatening aspea of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwitbftanding the clouds which ga
thered on every hand, a political observer woulk
have predifed a very different issue of her reign
and whatever sudden gulfs of faction he migh
have expected, he would never have dreaded hb
deftrudive violence of that form which followed

While all parties were contending who Ihout

discover the molt dutiful attachment to the Queer
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age brok
out in a remarkable instance. On the Sunda
after her arrival, the Queen commanded mafr I
be celebrated in the chapel of her palace. Tl

fit rumor of this occasioned a secret murmur. B o x
ing among the Protestants who attended the III.
court; complaints and threatenings soon fol- s<6.
lowed; the servants belonging to the chapel were
insulted and abused and, if the Prior of St. An.
drcw's had not seasonably interposed, the rioters
might have proceeded to the utmost excesses '.

t is impoflible, at this distance of time, and
tnder circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal against Popery, which
then polfefled the nation. Every instance of con.
descension to the Papists was deemed an a of
apofacy, and the tolMation of a ingle mas pro.
nounced to be more formidable to the nation than
he ivafion of ten thousand armed men ". Un.
der the influence of these opinions; many Pro.
[tants would have ventured to go dangerous
tngths; and, without attempting to convince
eir Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her
by indulgence, would have abruptly denied her
ie liberty of worlhipping God in that manner
hich alone she thought acceptable to him. But
he Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of

party, not only restrained this impetuous fpi.
i; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
d the exclamations of the preachers, obtained
rthe Queen and her domestics the undisturbed
ercife of the Catholic religion. Near a hun.
ed years after this period, when the violence of
rigious animofities had begun to subside, when

and the progress of learning had enlarged
Knox,284. HayneS,372. ?' Inot, 287.

T

B 0 0
O the viewc of the human mind, an Englill House of

IIn. Commons refused to indulge the wife of.their Sover.
$*5L eign in the private use of the mast. The Proterlant

leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praise both
of wlfdom and of moderation for condud so differ.
nt. But, at the fame time, whoever refled upon
the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery in
that age, will be far from treating the fears and cau.
tion of the more zealous Reformers as altogether
imaginary and destitute of any real foundation.

The leaders of the Protestants, however, by

this prudent compliance with the prejudices of
their Sovereign, obtained from her a proclama.
tion highly favorable to their religion , which
t. as. was issued fix days after her arrival in Scotland.

The Reformed doctrine, though etablifled ove
all the kingdom by the Parliament, which met in
consequence of the treaty of pacification, had
never received the countenance or fandion of
royal authority. In order to quiet the minds
those who had embraced that doctrine, and to
remove any dread of molestation which they
might entertain, Mary declared, " that until ti
should take final orders concerning religion, with
advice of Parliament, any attempt to alter
subvert the religion which she found uiverflly
pradifed in the realm , hould be deemed a ca
pital crime ". " Next year, a second proclamato
to the fame effect was publied ".

Shem- The Queen, conformable to the plan which b
p,^*° been concerted in France, committed the admini
j th ad. '" Kith, 4 IbidL sto.
tieo.

traton of affairs entirely to Protestants. Her B o o K.
council was filled with the moll eminent persons sll.
of that party; not a single Papist was admitted "s6.*
into any degree of confidence ". The Prior of
St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lethington seemed
to hold the firlt place in the Queen's afedtion,
and pofleffed all the power and reputation of fa.
vorite MiniRers. Her choice could not have
fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people;
and, by their prudent advice, Mary conduced
herself with so much moderation, and deference
to the sentiments of the nation, as could not fail
of gaining the affetion of her fubjedcs ", the
firmet foundation of a Prince's power, and the
only genuine source of his happiness and glory.

A Cordial reconcilement with Elizabeth was At' iptsto
another object of great importance to Mary; and gsbt, "f
though she seems to have had it much atheart, in or.
the beginning of her adminifration, to accomplish
such a desirable conjontion , yet many events
occurred to widen, rather than to close the
breach. The formal offices of friendship, how-
ever, are seldom neglected among Princes, and
Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to obh
ftrud the Queen's voyage into Scotland, did
not fail, a few days after her arrival, to com-
mand Randolph to congratulate her safe return.
Mary, that he might be on equal terms with
her, ent Maitland to the Englllh court, with
many ceremonious expressions of regard for Eli.
zabeth ". Both the Ambassadors were received
: Knox, s. Lefy, S. '" Keith, 18X. &C.

T3

a o o x with the utmost civility; and, on each fide, thepro

Au. sessions of kindness, as they were made with little
Iass, sincerity, were listened to with proportional credit

Both were intrufded, however, with something

more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with frelh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
condud of his Mistress with regard to that point
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival
in Scotland , the importance of the question in
dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
whom bTe was obliged in decency to consult, were
the pretences offered in excuse for her condut;
the real causes of it were those which have
already been mentioned. But, in order to extri.
cate herfilf out of these difficulties, into which
the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary was
brought to yield a point, which formerly lhe
seemed determined never to give up. She in.
ftruded Maitland to signify her willingness to dif.
cda.m any right to the crown of England, during
the life of Elizabeth. and the lives of her pose.
rity; if, in failure of these, he were declared
text heir by ad of Parliament ".

Reasonable as this proposal might appear to Ma

ry, who thereby precluded herself from dilfurb.
ing Elizabeth's polfeffion of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeths in.
terest, or more contraditory to a paflion, which
predominated in the charader of..that Frinc4

" C~ad, 317. Buc, ,9,

Notwithflanding all the great qualities which o O K
threw fich lustre on her reign, we may observe, i1l.
that he was tinctured with a jealousy of her right 561
to the Crown; which often betrayed her into mean
and ungenerous ations. The peculiarity of her
situation heightened, no doubt, and increased,
but did not infuse this palion. It descended to
her from Henry VII. her grandfather, whom, in
several features of his character, he nearly re-
fembled. Like him , fle suffered the title by
which he held the Crown to remain ambiguous
and controverted, rather than submit it to parlia-
mentary discussion, or derive any addition to her
right from such authority. Like him, he ob-
served every pretender to the fucceflion, not only
with that attention which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires.
The present uncertainty with regard to the right
of fuccellion, operated for Elizabeth's advantage,
both on her fubjecs and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded
her life as the great security of the national tran-
quillity; and chose rather to acknowledge a title
which was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was
decided, were held in dependence, and obliged
to court her. The manner in which fle received
this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was
no other than might have been expeced. She
rejeced it in a peremptory tone , with many ex-
prellions of a resolution never to permit a point
of so much delicacy to be touched.

T4

0 o About this time, the Queen made her public

. entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
s*r. was negleted, which could express the duty and

affedion of the citizens towards their Sovereign.
But amidst these demonstrations of regard, the
genius and sentiments of the nation discovercd
themselves, in a circumftane , which, though
inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As
it was the mode of the times to exhibit many pa.
geants at every public solemnity, most of there,
on this occasion, were contrived to be reprefenta.
tionc of the vengeance which the Almighty had
infliaed upon idolaters ". Even while they fludied
to amuse and to flatter the Queen, her fbhjes
could not refrain from teflifying their abhorrenc
of that religion which she profcffed.

To restore the regular adminifiration of jutice,

'he c"" and to reform the internal policy of the country,
^-"=. became the next objedt of the Queen's car. The

laws enaced for preservation of public order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland as in every other civilized
country. But the nature of the Scottiih confli.
tution , the feebleness of regal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of
faaion, and the fierce manners of the people, ren.
dered the execution of these laws feeble, irregular,
and partial In the counties which border on
England, this defed was mos apparent; and the
consequences of it molt sensibly felt. The inha-
bitants, firangers to indullry, averfc from Lbor,

n Keith, 89.

and unacquainted with the arts of peace, sub. BOOK
sied chiefly by spoil and pillage, and, being nl.
confederated in septs or clans, committed these sia.
excesses not only with impunity, but even with
honor. During the unsettled fate of the kingdom
from the death of James V. this dangerous licence
had grown to an unusual height; and the inroads
and rapine of those freebooters were become no
less intolerable to their own countrymen than to
the Englifl. To restrain and punifi these outrages,
was an acion equally popular in both kingdoms.
The Prior of St. Andrew's was the person chosen
for this important service, and extraordinary powers,
together with the title of the Queen's Lieutenant,
were velfed in him for this purpose.

Nothing can be more surprising to men ac-
customed to regular government, than the prepa-
rations made on this occasion. They were such
as might be expected in the rudest and most im.
perfet state of society. The freeholders of eleven
several counties, with all their followers com-
pletely armed, were summoned to afift the Lieu-
tenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
resembled a military expedition, rather than the
progress of a court of justice ". The Prior exe-
cuted his commillion with such vigor and pru-
dence, as acquired him a great increase of repu-
tation and popularity among his countrymen.
Numbers of the banditti suffered the punishment
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and
" Keith, 19.

O 0O K rigorous administration of justice, order and t.
1II. quillity were restored to that part of the kingdom.
Tast. During the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's,

Tk raps the leaders of the Popilh fadtion seem to have
atempt.
ain , to taken ome steps towards insinuating themselves
into Gayw into the Queen's favor and confidence ". But the

Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable
person in the party for abilities and political addres,
was received with little favor at court; and what.
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who profefled the fame religion with herself,

eie discovered no inclination, at that time, to

take the administration of affairs out of the hands
to which Ibe bad already committed it.

The cold reception of the Archbilhop of St

Andrew's was owing to his connexion with the
house of Hamilton; from which the Queen was
much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car.
dinal could never forgive the zeal with which the
Duke of Catelherault, and his son the Earl of
Arran, had espoused the cause of the Congrega-
tion. Princes seldom view their successors without
jealousy and distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
perhaps, dreaded the Duke as a rival in power.
All tbefe causes concurred in infusing into the
Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The
Duke indulging his love of retirement, lived at a
ditance from court, without taking pains to in
sinuate bimfelf into favor; and though the Earl
of Arran openly aspired to marry the Queen, he,

' Keith, 203.

by a most unpardonable a of imprudence, was o o
the only nobleman of diftinaion who opposed ill.
Alary's enjoying the exercise of her religion; and 1561.
by rashly entering a public proteRation against it,
entirely forfeited her favor ". At the fame time,
the fordid parfimoily of his father obliged him
either to hide himself in some retirement, or to
appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as
firlt Prince of the blood, or his high pretensions
as suitor to the Queen ". His love, inflamed by
disappointment, and his impatience exasperated by
neglect, preyed gradually on his reason; and, after
many extravagancies, broke out at lat in ungovern.
able frenzy.

Towards the end of the year, a Convention of Dec. o
ElRates was held; chiefly on account of ecclesias.
tical affairs. The assembly of the church, which
fat at the fame time, presented a petition, contain.
ing many demands with refped to the fupprefling
of Popery, the encouraging the Protestant religion,
and the providing for the maintenance of the clergy ".
The las was a matter of great importance, and the
Reps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

Though the number of Protefant preachers was 'A nn re.
now considerably increased, many more were fill gulati"n

concerning

wanted, in every corner of the kingdom. No therrev.
legal provision having been made for them, they nues ofrt
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fubfif- chrt.
ence from the benevolence of their people. To
susser the Ministers of an eflablifled church to con-

Keith, 201. 204 .

Knox, 86. Keith, 96.
Keith, a20.

Boox tinue in this state of indigence and dependance;

liI. war an indecency equ.lly repugnant to the prin.
rs5ó ciple- of r-ligion. and to the maxims of found po.

licy; and woaid have jufitied all the imputations of
avarice with which the Reformation was then loaded
by its enemies The revenues of the Popilh church
were the only fund which could be employed for
their relief; but during the three las years, the
state of these was greatly altered. A great majority
of Abbots, Priors, and other beads of religious
houses, had, either from a sense of duty, or from
views of interest, renounced the errors of Popery;
and, notwithstanding this change in their sentiments,
they retained their ancient revenues. Almof the
whole order of Bilbops, and several of the other
dignitaries, till adhered to the Romih superstition:
And though debarred from every spiritual fundion,
continued to enjoy the temporalities of their bene.
sices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
adtive in promoting the Reformation , had, undet
various pretences, and amidst the licence of civil
wars, got into their hands poffeflions which be.
longed to the church. Thus, before any part of
the ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be ap.
plied towards the maintenance of the Protestant
ministers, many different interests were to be ad.
justed; many claims to be examined; and the
prejudices and passions of the two contending
parties required the application of a delicate
hand. After much contention, the following
plan was approved by a majority of voices, and
acquieced in even by the Popib clergy themielVc.

An exad account of the value of ecclefiatical be- B oOK g
nt:iccs throughout the kingdomn was appointed to Ill.
be a.':1' The present incumbents , o whtever iis6.
party ey adhered, were allowed to keep poffclfion:
Two tllrds of their whole revenue were ref.-ved
for their own ife, the remainder was annexed to
the Crown; and out of that, the Queen under-
took to aflign a sufficient maintenance for the Pro.
teltant clergy "

A. most of the Bilhops and several of the other

dignitaries were ill rirmly attached to the Pop'lh
reillion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an act of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been xpcdted from the zeal of the prea hers,
ard from the spirit which had hitherto animated
the nation. But, on this occasion, other principles
obftruded the operations of such as were purely
religious. Zeal for liberty, and he love of wealth,
two p.rflions extremely opposite, concurred in de-
termining the Proteflant leaders to fall in with this
plan, which deviated.fo manifestly from the maxims
by which thev had hitherto regulated their conduct.

If the Reformers had been allowed to ad with-

out controul, and to level all diltindions in the
church, the immenfe.revenues annexed to eccle-
fiaftical dignities could not, with any color of
jullice, have been retained by those in whose hands
they now were; but mull either have been ds-
tributed amongst the Protestant clergy, who per-
formed. all religious offices, or mull have fallen to

' Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 94.

*

soo the Queen, from the bounty of whose ancestors

il. the greater part of them was originally derived.
»w. The former scheme, however suitable to the reli.

gious pirit of many among the people, was at.
tended with manifold danger. The Popish eccle.
fiaRics had acquired a hare in the national pro
perty, which far exceeded the proportion that was
consistent with the happiness of the kingdom; and
the nobles were determined to guard against this
evil, by preventing the return of those vast pof.
fefions into the hands of the church. Nor was
the latter, which exposed the constitution to more
imminent hazard, to be avoided with less care.
Even that circumscribed prerogative, which the
Scottilh Kings pofleffed, was the objec ofjealoufy
to the nobles. If they had allowed the Crown to
seize the spoils of the church, such an increase of
power must have followed that acceflion of pro.
perty, as would have raised the royal authority
above controul, and have rendered the mot li-
mited Prince in Europe the most absolute and in.
dependent. The reign of Henry VIII. presented a
recent and alarming example of this nature. The
wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from
the fuppreflion of the monasteries, not only changed
the maxims of his government, but the temper of
his mind; and he who had formerly'fubmitted to
his Parliaments, and courted his people, dictated,
from that time, to the former with intolerable in.
folence, and tyrannized over the latter with unpre.
cedented severity: And if his policy had not been
extremely hort-fighted, if he had not squandered

.

vwhat he aquired, with a profusion equal to his B O K
rapaciousness, ad which defeated his ambition, he ilI.
might have eftablilhed despotism in England, on a 561'
basis so broad and .frong, as all the efforts of the
fubjeds would never have been able to Ihake. In
Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore as
great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom,
the acquisition of church-lands would have been of
no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal
to the aristocracy. The nobles, for this reason
guarded against such an increase of the royal power,
and thereby secured their own independence.

Avarice mingled itself with their concern for the
interest of their order. The re-uniting the possessions
of the church to the Crown, or the bestowing them
on the Protestant clergy, would have been a fatal
blow, both to those nobles who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of these revenues, and to
those Abbots and Priors who had totally renounced
their ecclefialfical character. But as the plan, which
was proposed, gave ome fanaion to their ufurpa-
tions, they promoted it with their utmost influence.
The Popish ecclesiastics, though the lopping of a
third of their revenues was by no means agreeable to
them, contented, under their present circumstances,
to sacrifice a part of their poffeflions; in order to pur-
chafe the secure enjoyment of the remainder; and
after deeming the whole irrecoverably loft, they
confidered whatever they could retrieve as so much
gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were men
of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained
hopes of restoring the Popiil religion, they wilcd

z 0 o K their own relations, rather than the Crown or the

III. Protestant clergy, to be enriched with the spoils
*sr. of the church. They connived, for this reason,

at the encroachments of the nobles; they even aided
their avarice and violence; they dealt out the pa,
trimony of the church among their own relations,
and by granting feu and perpetual leafes of lands
and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their power1
some color of legal pofeffion, to what was formerly
mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such alienations
still remain ". The nobles, with the concurrence
ofthe incumbents, daily extended their encroach
ments, and gradually tripped the ecclesiastics of
their richet and most valuable poffeflions. Eve
that third part, which was given up in order to
silence the clamors of the Protestant clergy, and to
be ome equivalent to the Crown for its claims,
amounted to no considerable fum. The thirds due
by the more powerful nobles, especially by such as
had embraced the Reformation,were almotuniver.
sally remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent ren.
tas; by estimating the corn, and other payments in
kind, at an undervalue; and by the connivanceol
colledtors, greatly diminilhed the charge againf
themselves ": And the nobles had much reason to Ib
satisfied with a device which, at so small expene,
lecured to them such vast pofeflions.
TP.teI Nor were the Protestant clergy confiderabli

'ant ey gainers by this new regulation; they found it t(
y . be a more afy matter to kindle zeal, than tc

"Keith, (o7. Spotfw. S75.
" Keith, Appn 18. Spotfw. 1t8.

e\tlngllih

extinguifli avarice. Those very men, whom formerly B o o K
they had swayed with absolute authority, were now iln.
deaf to all their remonstrances. The Prior of St. An. 16g.
drew's, the Earl of Argyll, the Earl of Morton, and
l\aitland, all the molt zealous leaders of the Con.
gregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was
called, to modify their stipends. A hundred merks
Scottifi was the allowance which their liberality
afforded to the generality of Ministers To a fev
three hundred merks were granted ". About
twenty-four thousand pounds Scottihi appears to
have been the whole um allotted for the mainte-
nance of a national church eltablifled by law, and
esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church
of God ". Even this fum was paid with little
exatnefs, and the Ministers were kept in the fame
poverty and dependance as formerly.

The gentleness of the Queen's adminiltration, ta;

and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, i biirefloin
some degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac- a,: *.
customed them to greater mildness and humanity;
while, at the fame time, her pretence and author-
ity were a check to their fatious and tumultuary
spirit. But, as a fRate of order and tranquillity
was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became
remarkable for the molt violent eruptions of in.
teftine discord and animosity.

Among the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could pollefs little authority,

I Knox, or. * Keith, Append. i88.
VoL. 1. V

*

BO 01 and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdi0on.

Ill. The interfering of interest, the unsettled state of
ist6. property, the frequency of public commotions,

and the fierceness of their own manners, sowed,
among the great families, the feeds of many
quarrels and contentions. These, as we have
already observed, were frequently decided not by
law, but by violence. I he offended Baron, without
having recourse to the Monarch, or acknow.
ledging his superior authoiity, assembled his own
followers, and invaded the lands of his rival in
an hostile manner. Together with his etate and
honors, every nobleman transmitted some here.
ditary feud to his posterity, who were bound in
honor to adopt and to prosecute it with the fame
inveterate rancor.

Such a dissension had fubriftld between the

house of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and
was heightened by mutual injuries during the late
commotions ". The Earl of Arran and Bothwell
happening to attend the court at the fame time,
their followers quarrelled frequently in the street!
erdnu. of Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in thai

city. At last, the mediation of their friends, parti
cularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement
but an unfortunate one to both these noblemen "

A few days after, Arran came to Knox, and

with the utmost terror and confusion, confeflt
first to him, and then to the I'rior of St. Andrew's
that. in order to obtain the sole direcion of afairs

" Keith, $. " Knox, 305.

hothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had confpir- BOO g
ed to murder the Prior, Maitl.ind,and the other favor. tIt.
ites of the Queen. The Duk e of Chatelherault re- u':h
garded the Prior as a rival, who had supplanted him
in tile (Queen's favor, and who filled that place at the
hlim, which he imagined to be due to himself, as
sirs Prince of the blood. Bothwell, on account of
the personal injuries which he had received from
the Prior durilg the late commotions, was no less
exasperated againti him. But whether he and the
Hamiltons had dgreed to cement their new alliance
with the blood of their common enemy, or whe-
ther the confpira'y exifed only in the frantic and
disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is
impoflible amidst the contradiction of historians and
the defeCivenefs of records, positively to determine.
Among men inflamed with resentment, and impa-
tient for revenge, rafli exprelfions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed;
and on that foundation, Arran's distempered fancy
might rear the whole fuperflrudure of a conspiracy.
All the persons accused , denied their guilt with the
uamoft confidence. But the known characers of the
men, and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly
to the probability of the accusation, and abundantly
juoiify the conduct of the Queen's ministers, who
coniined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-
leaders, in separate pifons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the fhRong caflle of Dumbarton, which
le hd.i held ever since the time of his resigning
the oiice of Regent ".

"lnox, 307, 3og.

V 9

3BO The designs of the Earl of Huntly against the

1i. Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and produced
«i(. more memorable and more tragical events George
eE rlaro Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one of the
Juady's nobles who conspired against James IlI. and who
tQue,,'s raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed

a great ihare in the confidence of that generous
Prince *. By his bounty, great accefllons of wealth
and power were added to a family already opulent
and powerful. On the death of that Monarch,
Alexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend for offices at court;
and retiring to the north, where his estate and
influence lay, resided there in a kind of princely
independence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent
his encroachments. Some of his rivals- he secretly
undermined, others he subdued by open force
His estate far exceeded that of any other subjed,
and his fuperiorities and jurifdi&ions extended over
many of the northern counties. With power and pot.
felfious so immense, under two long and feeble mino.
rities, and amidst the hock of civil commotions,
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the moll
elevated hopes. But happily fdr the Crown, an ac.
tive and enterprising spirit was not the charateriftic
of that family, and whatever objec their ambition
might have in view, they chose rather to acquire ii
by political address, than to seize it openly, and b
force of arms.

'* Cr.wf. Officers of State, 54.

The condua of George the present Earl, during B o o R
the late commotions, had been perfectly suitable to iii.
the caraL1cr of the family, in that age, dubious, 161s.
variable, and crafty. While the fccefs of the
Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he aflifted
the O)ueei Regent in her attempts to crufll them.
I\hcn their affitirs put on a better asped, he pretended
to oin them, but never heartily favored their cause.
I v was courted and feared by each of the contend-
ing parties; both cqnnived at his encroachments
in the north; and, by artifice and force, which he
wcll knew how to employ alternately, and in their
proper places, he added every day to the exorbitant
power and wealth which he poffiffed.

He observed the growing reputation and author-
ity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the greatela
jealousy and concern, and confidered him as a
rival who had engrofTed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish
jelioion seemed to give him a preferable title.
Personal injuries soon 'increased the mifunder-
standing occasioned by rivalflip in power. The
Queen having determined to reward the services
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an
EalI, flie made choice of Mar, as the place whence
lie flould take his title; and, that he might be
better ,ible to support his new honor, beltowed
upon him, at the fame time, the lands of that Fteb.
name. There were part of the royal demesnes",
but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for
" Crawf. Peer, 297.

V3

0 o0 several years, to keep poffeflion of them '. On
111.- this occasion, the Earl not only complained, with
xsi, some reason, of the loss which he sustained, but

had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a
formidable neighbour into the heart of his territo.
ries, who might be able to rival his power, and
excite his oppressed vaflals to shake off his yoke.
taeS7. An incident, which happened soon after, in.

creased and confirmed Huntly's ffpicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie,
had a dispute about the property of an eate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened, unfortunately, to meet in the fireets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvic
was dangerously wounded by Sir John. The la.
giftrates seized both the offenders, and the Queen
commanded them to be firidly confined. Under
any regular governmcnt, such a breach of public
peace and order would expose the person offend.
ing to certain punishm:ent. At this time, some
severity was necefary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from an insult, the rmoR heinous
which had been offered to it since her return io11
Scotland. But, in an age accuftnmed to licence
and anarchy, even this moderate exercise of hat
power, in ordering them to be kept in custody,
was deemed an at of intolerable rigor; and the
friends of each party began to convene their v.:s
fals and dependants, in order to overawe, or ii

't BuIc. 4.

frulrate the decisions of julfice ". Meanwhile, BOO 1
Gordon made his escape out of prison, and flying II.
into Aberdeenflire, complained loudly of the in. n6a.
dignity with which he had been treated; and as
all the Queen's actions were , at this juncture,
imputed to the Earl of Mar, this added not a
little to the resentment which Huntly had con-
ceived against that nobleman.

At the very time when these pafions fermented, Autuft.

with the utmolt violence, in the mind of the
Eail of Huntly and his family , the Queen hap-
pened to set out on a progref into the northern
parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the
Earls of Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other
leaders of that party. The presence of the Queen,
in a country where no name greater than the Earl
of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power
superior to his had been exercised, for many
years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the
2ueen was entirely under the direction of Mar,
all her actionó were more apt to be misrepresented,
and construed into injuries; and a thousand circum-
iances could not but occur to awaken Huntly's
jealoify, to offend his pride, and to inflame his
resentment. Amidst the agitations of so many violent
palflons, some eruption was unavoidable.

On Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly em-

ployed his wife, a woman capable of executing
the commission with abundance of dexterity, to

Keith, 223.

V4

B 0 O0 sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon te

IlL their son. But the Queen peremptorily required
i6;e. that he fhoulA again deliver himself into the hands

of justice, and rely on her clemency. Gordnn was
persuaded to do so ; and being enjoined by the
Queen to enter himself prisoner in the castle of
Stirling. he promised likewise to obey that command.
Lord Erkine, Mar's uncle, was, at that time,
Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity, and
the place in which she appointed Gordon to be
confined, were interpreted to be new marks of
Mar's rancor, and augmented the hatred of the
Gordons againfi him.
;*t i. Mean time, Sir John Gordon set out towards

Stirling; but instead of performing his promise
to the Queen, made his escape from his guards,
and returned to take the command of his so.
lowers, who were rising in arms all over the north.
These were destined to second and improve the
blow, by which his father proposed, secretly, and
at once , to cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland,
bis principal adversaries. The time and place
for perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently
appointed; but the executing of it was wonder.
fully prevented, by some of those unforeseen ac.
cidents, which so often occur to disconcert the
fcbemes, and to intimidate the hearts of afaffins".
Huntly's own house at Strathbogie was the las
and moRs convenient scene appointed for corn
initting the intended violence. But, on her jour
pey thither, the Queen beard of young Gordon'

* Keith, 3o.

flight and rebrllion, and refuting. in the first tranf. B o 0 i
ports of her indignation, to enter under the father's iii.
root, by that fortunate expreflion of her resentment, S6.
fved her linilers from unavoidable deftrudtion ".

' he ll furcels of these efforts of private revenge Tike rmt
precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the .u",.he
()ueel was enitrt ly under the diredtion of his rivals,
it was impollible to compaf, their ruin, without
violating the allegiance which he owed his Sover.
eign. On her arrival at Invernef,, the commanding
officer in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the
gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the
town which was open and defenceless, but this
too was quickly surrounded by a multitude of the
Earl's followers". The utmost conflernation seized
the Queen. who was attended by a very fiender
train. She every moment expected the approach
ol the rebels, and some Ihips were already ordered
into the river to secure her escape. The loyalty
of the lonroes, Frazers, Mackintolhes, and some
neighbouring clans, who took arms in her defence,
fared her from this danger. By their assistance, he
even forced the castle to surrender, and inflicted
on the Governor the punihmnent which his info.
lence deserved.

This open at of disobedience was the occasion
of a measure more galling to Huntly than any the
Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erikine, having
pretended a right to the Earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned it in his favor; and at the fame time

" Knox, tg. " Crawf. Ossicle ofStatc, ,
87 8

OOK Mary conferred upon him the title of Earl of

IaI. Mlurray, with the estate annexed to that dignity,
316. which had been in the possession of the Earl of

Huntly since the year 154s". rom this encroach.
m.nt upon his domains he concluded that his
family was devoted to deRrudion; and dreading
to be Rripped, gradually, of those poffelfions, which,
in reward of their services, the gratitude of the
Crown had bellowed on himself, or his ancestors,
he no longer disguised his intentions, but, in
defiance of the Queen's proclamation, openly took
arms. Inflead of yielding those places of strength,
which Mary required him to.fnrrender, his follow.
ers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which fie
dispatched to take poffcflion of them"'; and he
himself advancing with a considerable body of men
towards Aberdeen, to which place the Queen was
now returned, filled her small court with conflcr
nation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom
be could confide "'. In order to form the appear
annce of an army, he was obliged to call in the
affilance of the neighbouring barons; but as mofi
of these either favored Huntly's designs, or stood
in awe of his power, from them no cordial or
effectual frvice could be expected.
Oaob. a. Witd these troopc, however, Murray, who couk

gain nothing by delay, marched briskly toward
the enemy. lie found them at Corrichie, poltl
to great advantage; he commanded his nolthcn
associates instantly to begin the attack; but on th

"Crawf. Peer. 9. '" nox, 319. '" Keith, 2

sirs motion of the enemy, they treacherously turned B o O x
their backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing ill.
aside their spears, and breaking their ranks, drew tsa.
their swords, and rulfed forward to the pursuit.
It was then, that Murray gave proof, both of feady He is deeat.
courage, and of prudent condut. He flood im. 'Iby huayr
moveable on a riling ground, with the small but
trufly body of his adherents, who presenting their
spears to the enemy, received them with a deter-
mined resolution, which they little expeced. 'I he
Highland broad sword is not a weapon fit to
encounter the Scottih spear. In every civil com-
motion, the superiority of the latter has been
evident, and has always decided the contest. On
this occasion the irregular attack of Huntly's troops
was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion.
Before they recovered from the confusion occa-
sioned by this unforeseen resistance, those who had
begun the flight, willing to regain their credit
with the victorious party, fell upon them, and
completed the rout. Huntly himself, who was
extremely corpulent, was trodden to death in the
pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken,
and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with
his prisoners.

lThe trial of men taken in aual rebellion against
their Sovereign was extremely Ihort. Three days
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at
Aberdeen His brother Adam was pardoned on
account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had
been privy to his father's designs, was seized in
the outh, and upon trial found guilty of treason;

O 00K but, through the Queen's clemency, the punili.
III. ment was remitted. The firR Parliament proceeded
»6. againfi this great family, with the utmoRf rigor of

law, and reduced their power and fortune to the
lower ebb '".

'" This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the moll

intricate and mysterious passages in the Scottish history. As it
was a tranfacion purely domestic, and in which the Englih
were little interested, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Collection, the great Itorehoufe ofevidence
and information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about

this time of destroying Murray, and of employing the power
of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But his account of this
whole tranfation appears to be so void of truth, and even of
probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time,
Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination to
commit any a of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to

explain this matter; but they appear to be equally removed
from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to

the north was a fchbme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin
the Earl ofHuntly. . Huntly had resided it court almost ever
since the Queen's return. Keith, r98. Append. I's, &c.
This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To
attack him in Aberdeenfhire, the feat of his power, and in
the midst of his vassals, was a project equally absurd and
hazardous. 2. The Queen was not accompanied with a body
of troops, capable of attempting any thing against Huntlv by
violence; her train was not more numerous than was uaal
in times of greatest tranquillity. Keith, ;o. . There remain
two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one from
Randolph the Englihf Resident, and another from Maitland,
both direted to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's mealures as
notoriously treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated at
tempts to aflfllnate lurray, &c. No hint is given of n

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the rnolt B o

important event of this year, it would have been il.
improper to interrupt the narrative by taking notice
of lesser tranfadions, which may now be related
with equal propriety.

In the beginning of summer, Mary, who was An inteniew
defrous of entering into a more intimate correspond- bemt,. El
ence and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed Mary proi.t
Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, ''

previous rerolution, formed by Mary's Miniflers, to min.
Huntly and his family. Had any such design ever existed,
it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would
Mlaidtand have labored to conceal it from the Englilh secretary.
Keith, 229. 212.

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan

for seizing the Queen and her Ministers, seems to be no lefa
improbable. . On the Queen's arrival in the north, he labored,
in good earnest, to gain her favor, and to obtain a pardon for
his on. Knox, 18. 2. He met the Queen, firR at Aberdeen,
and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured
to come, had he harboured any such treasonable resolution.
Knox,; ig. . His condua was irresolute and wavering, like
that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like
one executing a concerted plan. 4. The molt considerable per-
sons of his clan submitted to the Queen, and found surety to
obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previously
determined to rife in arms against the Queen, or to seize her
Minifiers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his princi-
pal followers, nor would they have deserted him in this manner.

For there reasons, we have. on the one hand, vindicated the

Earl of Murray from any deliberate intention of ruining the
family of Gordon; and on the other hand, we have imputed
the violent conduct of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden tart
of refentmenr, without charginghim with any premeditatd
purpose of rebellion.

b 0K somewhere in the north of England. As this pro.
Ili. pofal could not be rejeced with decency, the time,
ism. the place, and the circumRances of the meeting were

inftatly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival, who
outbone herself, so far, in beauty, and gracefulnec
of person; and who excelled, so eminently, in all the
arts of insinuation and addrcfs. Under pretence of
being confined to London, by the'attention which
{he was obliged to give to the civil wars in France,
The put offthe interview for that season "', and pre.
vented her fubjeds from feeing the Scottiib Queen,
the charms of whose appearance and behaviour Ihe
envied, and had some reason to dread.
s., . During this year, the Assembly of the church met

k . twice. In both these meetings were exhibited many

complaints of the poverty and dependance of the
church; and many murmurs against the negligence
or avarice of those who had been appointed to col.
led, and to diflribute the small fund, appropriated
for the maintenance of preachers '". A petition,
craving redress of their grievances, was presented
to the Queen; but without any effect. There was
no reason to exped that Mary would discover any
iorwardnef, to grant the requests of such supplicants.
As her Ministers, though all mopt zealous Protest.
ants, were themselves growing rich on the nhefit.
ance of the church, they were equally regardlels of
the indigence and demands of their brethren.

Mary had now continued above two years in
' Keith, a26i '' Knox, 411. 323.

a fate of widowhood. Her gentle administration B o o K
hall secured the hearts of her fubjcds, who were I11.
impatient for her marriage, and wilhed the Crown rq63.
to descend in the right line from their ancient Negociatioun

with Tegaid

lonarchs. She herself was the most amiable woman totheQueen's
of the age, and he fame of her accomplishments, maiage.
together with the favorable circumstance of her
having one kingdom already in her possession, and
the profped of mounting the throne of another,
prompted many different Princes to solicit an alli.
an.e so illuftriou;. Scotland, by its ituation, threw
so much weight and power into whatever scale it
f(ll, that all Europe waited with solicitude for

rlary' dleteimination; and no event in that age

excited stronger political fears and jealoufles; none
interlfted more deeply the paflions of several
Pnrnces, or gave rife to more contradicory in.
trigues, than the marriage of the Scottilh Queen.

lhe Princes of the House of Austria remem. She is rolicit
bered what vaRi projeds the French had founded ,ed by de.

eat krincet.

on their former alliance with the Queen of Scots;
and though the unexpeded death, firfl of Henr
and then of Francis, had hindered these from
taking effed. yet if Mary Ihould again make
choice of a husband among the French Princes,
the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted
with better success.
In order to prevent this, the Emperor entered By the Archl

duke Charle.

into a negociation with the Cardinal of .orrain,
who had proposed to marry the Scottilh Queen to
the Archduke Charles, Ferdinand s third son The
matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil,

BO K who at that time attended the Eletor Palatine,

lit. was commanded to inquire into the charader and
r"?-. situation of the Archduke '.

TU D C. C Philip IL though no less apprehensive of
L rfSdL Mary's falling once more into the hands of

France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the acquii.
tion of so important a prize; and as his own
inatiable ambition grasped at all the kingdoms of
Europe, he employed his ambassador at the French
court, to solicit the Princes of Lorrain.in behalf
of his son Don Carlos, at that time the heir of
all the extensive dominions which belonged to
the Spanilh monarchy ".
tfr ehce, Catherine of Medicis, on the other hand,

dreaded the marriage of the Scottiih Queen with
any of the Austrian Princes, which would have
added so much to the power and pretensions of
that ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes
of Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an
alliance, which, by securing to them the protec.
tion of the Emperor or King of Spain, would

ive new boldnef, to their enterprising pirit, and
enable them to set the power of the Crown, which
they already rivalled, at open defiance: And a
The was afraid that there splendid proposals of the
Aultrian family would dazzle the young Queen
Tfe instantly dispatched Caflelnau into Scotland
to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou

'' Melv. 6. 6 . Ktith, 29. See Append. N'.VIL

Caftelm 461. Addir. a Labour. l01. sol.

the

the brother of her former husband, who soon after B o o K
mounted the throne of France "'. ll.

Mary attentively weighed the pretensions of so 'as3.
many rivals. The Archduke had little to recom- l,berations
mend him, but his high birth. The example of concrning
Henry VI1L was a warning against contraCting a
marriage with the brother of her former hulband;
nor could flie bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which she had
formerly held in that kingdom. She listened, there-
fore, with partiality to the Spanish propositions, and
the profpec of such vast power and dominions flat-
tered the ambition of a young and aspiring Princess.

Three several circumstances, however,. con-
curred to divert Mary from any thoughts of a
foreign alliance.

The first of these was the murder of her uncle
the Duke of Guise. The violence and ambition
of that nobleman had involved his country in a
civil war; which w.as conducted with furious ani
mo!ity, and various success. At last the Duke
laid siege to Orleans, the bulwark of the Pro.
teftant cause; and he had reduced that city to
the las extremity, when he was assassinated by
the frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved
fatal to the Queen of Scots. The young Duke
was a minor; and the Cardinal of Lorrain, though
lubtle and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and
c.iterpriling courage, which rendered the ambi.
tion of his brother lo formidable. Catherine, in.
Rtead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering

.Caltclnau, 461.
VOL. 1. X

R o o the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took pla.

III. sure in mortifying the one, and in disappointing
1*13. the other. In this situation, and without such a

protedor, it became necessary for Mary to con.
trad her views, and to proceed with caution; and
whatever profped of advantage might allure her,
The could venture upon no dangerous or doubt.
ful measure.

1i,,senw The second circumstance which weighed with
f Eiza. Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England.
bck'. The marriage of the Scottish Queen ioterefted

Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and he observed all her deliberations concerning
it with the molt anxious attention. She herself

ems early to have formed a resolution of living

unmarried, and he discovered no small inclina.
tion to impose the fame law on the Queen of
Scots. She had already experienced what uft
might be made of Mary's power and pretensions,
to invade her dominions, and to disturb her poP
session of the Crown. The death of Francis II.
had happily delivered her from this danger, which
the determined to guard against for the future,
with the utmost care. As the restless ambition
of the Austrian Princes, the avowed and bigotted
patrons of the Catholic fuperflition, made her, in
a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood,
she inftruded Randolph to remonstrate, in the
strongest terms, against any alliance with them,
and to acquaint Mary, that as he herself would
corfider such a match to be a breach of the per.
fonal friendflip, in which they were so happily

united; so the Englilh nation would regard it as B o o K
the dissolution of that' confederacy which now 111.
fubfilted between the two kingdoms: That, in 1s63.
order to preserve their own religion and liberties,
they would, in all probability, take some flep
prLjildicial to her right of fuccelion, which, as
fle well knew, they neither wanted power nor
pietences to invalidate and set aside. This threat-
ening was accompanied with a promise, but ex-
piesed in very ambiguous terms, that if Mlarv's
choice of a hulband fIhould prove agreeable to the
Englili nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper
pei fns to examine her title to the fucceflion, and,
if well founded, command it to be publicly re-
cognised. She observed, however, a mysterious
filnce concerning the person on whom she
wilced the choice of the Scottilh Queen to fall.
The revealing of this secret was reserved for
some future negociation. Mean while ile threw
out some obscure hints, that a native of Britain,
or one not of princely rank, would be her
Lflft and molt inoffensive choice '. An advice
offered wi'h such an air of superiority and corn.
mandl, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the
Scottifl Queen. But, under her present circum.
stances, ile was obliged to bear this indignity.
DcIlilute of all foreign afiftance, and intent upon
the English flcceffion, the great objeAt of her
winL:es and ambition, it became necessary to court
a rival, whom, without manifest imprudence, fie
could not venture to offend.
'" Keith , 42. 245.

Xa

B 0 The inclination of her own fubjeds was an.

ill. other, and not the leat considerable circunftance,
,';. which called for Mary's attention at this con.

Tbh tFei juncure. They bad been taught, by the fatal
on ,,k- experiment of her former marriage, to dread an
i:is. union with any great Prince, whose power might

be employed to oppress their religion and li.
berties. They trembled at the thoughts of a
match with a foreigner; and if the Crown hould
be flrengthened by new dominions or alliances,
they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be stretched beyond its ancient and legal
limits. Their eagerness to prevent this could
hardly fail of throwing them once more into the
arms of England. Elizabeth would be ready to
afford them her aid, towards obftruding a mea.
sure so disagreeable to herfcl. It was easy for
them to seize the person of the Sovereign. By
the afliftance of the Englilh fleet, they could
render it difficult for any foreign Prince to land
in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an in-
considerable party in the kingdom, and dispirited
by the loss of the Earl of Huntly, could give no
obftruion to their designs. To what violent
extremes the national abhorrence of a foreign
yoke might have been carried, is manifest from
what Ihe had already seen and experienced.

For these reasons, Alary laid aside, at that

time, all thoughts of foreign alliance, and
seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition, n
order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and
to quiet the fears of her own fubjeds.

The Parliament met this year, for the firRt o o K

time finc, the Queen's return into Scotland. 1l.
lXiry's administration had hitherto been extremely s 6;.
popular. Her Minilters pofelfed the confidence ,i^pl'l
of the nation; and, by confcquence, the proceed. May :6.
ings of that assembly were conducted with per-
feet unanimity. 'Ihe grant of the earldom of
Ilurray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was con-.
firned: The Earl of Huntly, and several of his
valffls and dependants, were attainted: The at-
tainder against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of
hi accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Bea-
toun, was reversed "': The act of oblivion, men-
tioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the
royal fancion. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify that treaty, took care that this
fantion Ihould not be deemed any acknowledge-
ment of its validity; fTe granted her consent
merely in condescension to the Lords in Parlia-
ment, who, on their knees, besought her to allay
the jealousies and apprehensions of her fubjecs,
by such a gracious law ".

No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to Icotr,, de
procure the Queen's assent to the laws eftablilhing t,""',
the Protestant religion. Her Ministers, though '"'"!"""
ze.lous Protestants themselves, were aware that
this could not be urged without manifelt danger
and imprudence. She had consented, through
their influence, to tolerate and proted the re.
formed doctrine. They had even prevailed on
her to imprison and prosecute the Archbilhop of
'" ;nox, 3io . 9"'ar. 9. Q. Mary, c. 67. Spotfw. 188.

X 3

B o 0K St. Andrew's, and Prior of Whithorn, for cel.

111. brating mss contrary to her proclamation '"
uss3. \lary, however, was flill pafionately devoted to

the omifh church; and though, from political
motives, lhe had granted a temporary protedion
of opinions which lhe disapproved, there were
no grounds to hope that he would agree to
fItablilh them for perpetuity. The moderation
of those who proteffed it, was the bes method for
reconciling the Oueen to the Protestant religion.
Time might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at last she might
yield to the withes of her people, what their im.
portunity or their violence could never have ex-
torted. Many laws of importance were to be
proposed in Parliament; and to defeat all these;
by such a fruiilefs and ill-timed application to
the Queen, would have been equally injurious to
individuals, and detrimental to the public.

Mch ofr. T'he zeal of the Proteflant clergy was deaf to
f.di the all these considerations of policy. Fager and im-
uln;j patient, it brooked no delay: Severe and in.

flexible, it would condcfcend to no compliances.
The leading men of that order insisted, that this
opportunity of efabliffling relig;on by law, was
not to be reglected. They pronounced the mo-
deratinn of the courtier;, apoftacy; and their en-
deavours to gain the Queen, they reckoned cri-
minal and frvile. Knox solemnly renounced the
friendftlp of the Earl of Murray, as a man de
voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for hei

" iKith, ;Z9.

service, as to become regardless of those objeds B o O K
which he had hitherto esteemed mos sacred. This 11.
rupture, which is a ftr6ng proof of Murray's s6i.
sincere attachment to the Queen at that period,
continued above a year and a half'".

The preachers being disappointed by the men

in whom they placed the greatest confidence,
gave vent to their indignation in their pulpits
'Ihefe echoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations againfl idolatry; with dismal presages
concerning the Queen's marriage with a foreigner;
and with bitter reproaches against those who,
from interefed motives, had deserted that cause
which they once reckoned it their honor to sup-
port. The people, inflamed by such vehenent andoccarions
declamations, which were didcated by a zeal more among tie
sincere than prudent, proceeded to rash and un- people.
justifiable ats of violence. During the Queen's
absence, on a progress into the weft, mass conti-
nued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holyrood-
house. The multitude of those -who openly re- Augua.
forted thither, gave great offence to the citizens of
Edinburgh, who, being free from the restraint
which the royal presence imposed, assembled in a
riotous manner, interrupted the service, and filled
such as were present with the utmost consternation.
Two of the ringleaders in this tumult were seized,
and a day appointed for their trial ".

Knox, who deemed the zeal of these persons Rnox tried
laudable, and their condud meritorious, con. on ntt 'a

acquitted.
"' Knox, 331. "' Ibid. ;3. Octobr l

X4

o o t fidered them as sufferers in a good cause; and in
HI order to screen them from danger, he issued cir.
asis. cular letters, requiring all who professed the true

religion, or were concerned for the preservation
of it, to assemble at l.dinburgh on the clay of trial,
that, by their presence, they might comfort and
aflif their distressed brethren "'. One of theft letters
fell into the (tueen's hands. o alTemble the sub.
jeds without the authority of the Sovereign, was
confirued to be treason and a resolution was taken
to prosecute Knox for that crime, before the Privy
Diw-as. Council Happily for him, his judges were not

only zealous Protestants, but the very men who,
during the late commotions, had openly refilled
and set at detiance the Queen's authority. It was
under precedents, drawn from their own condud
that Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Noi
would it have been an easy matter for these Coun
fellors to have found out a diftindion, by whicl
they could censure him, without condemnin
themselves. After a long hearing, to the aftonilb
ment of Lethington znd the other courtiers"'
he was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair Bihop a
Foss, and President of the Court of Seflion,
zealous Papist, heartily concurred with the otlh
Counf-l!or; in th.s decision "; a remarkable fad
which shows the unsettled state of government i
that age; the low condition to which regal ai
thorty was then funk; and the impunity wit

" Knox, 316. "'Caldrew. MSS. His. I. 812.

Knox, 343.

which fubieds might invade those rights of the B o o K
Crown whi.h are now hld facrel. 11I.
'Ihe mi.,lrlagc of the Scoitifl Queen continued ,s64.

Dregoci&-

fiill to be the blcet of atention and intrigue. tionswith
Though Elizabeth, even while fle wilhed to dired regard to
I1.i'Vy, treated her with difeuftful reserve; t^e Que^'
though l[h kept her, without neccllity, in a Itate
of fufpenlfi; and hinted often at the person whom
fie deflined to be her hulbnd, without direcly
mentioning his name; yet Mary famed all her
aCions to express such a prudent rfped for the
Fuglhlh Queen, that foreign Princes began to ima-
gine he had given herself up implicitly to her
direCtion '. '1 he prospect of this union alarmed
Catherine of Medicis. Though Catherine had
taken pleasure, all along, in doing ill offices to
the Queen of Scots; though, soon after the Duke
of Guise's death, ihe had put upon her a molt
mortifying indignity, by flopping the payment of
her dowry, by depriving her fubje'6 the Duke of
Chatelherault of his pension, and by beflowing,
the command of the Scottish Guards on a French-
man"'; he resolved, however, to prevent this
dangerous conjuncion of' the Britilh Queens.
For this purpose, fle now employed all her art to
appease Mary "', to whom she had given ro many
causes of offence. The arrears of the dowry
were instantly paid ; more pundual remittances
were promised for the future; and offers made,
not only to restore, but to extend the privileges

'" Keith, 248. "' Id. 244. "'See Appendix, NVIII.

3 0 O x of the Scottilh nation in France. It was easy for

.L Mlary to penetrate into the motives of this sudden
3s64. change; (he well knew the character of her mo.

ther-in-law, and laid little firess upon profefions
of friendship which came from a Princess of such
a false and unfeeling heart.

The negociation with England, relative to the

marriage, suffered no interruption from this ap.
plication of the French Queen. As Mary, in
compliance with the wilhes of her fubjets, and
pressed by the frongeft motives of interest, de-
termined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was obliged
to break that unaccountable silence, which Ibe

Mnch. had hitherto affected. The secret was disclosed,
rEc:midbt and her favorite Lord Robert Dudley, 'afterwards
licnRe to Earl of Leicester, was declared to be the happy
he for man whom the had chosen to be the husband of a

Queen courted by so many Princes ".

Elizabeth's wisdom and penetration were re.

markable in the choice of her Ministers; in dif
tinguilhing her favorites, those great qualities
were lets conspicuous. She was influenced in
two cafes so opposite, by merit of very different
kinds. Their capacity for business, their know.
ledge, their prudence, were the talents to which
alone ibe attended, in chufing her Ministers;
whereas beauty and gracefulness of person, po
lifhed manners, and courtly address, were the
accompliflhments on which fie bestowed her f&
vor. She ated in the one cafe with the wisdom

"'Keth, ass.

of a Queen, in the other fie discovered the weak- B o o i
ness of a woman. To this Leicester owed his gran- ll.
deur. Though remarkable neither for eminence in. is4.
virtue, nor superiority of abilities, the Queen's par.
tidlity dillinguifhed him on every occasion. She
railed him to the highest honors, she bellowed on
him the most important employments, and mani-
felted an affection so disproportionate to his merit,
that, in the opinion of that age, it could be accounted
for only by the power of planetary influence "'.

The high spirit of the Scottilh Queen could Mar of.

fended at

not well bear the first overture of a match with a td a
subjet. Her own rank, the splendor of her
former marriage, and the solicitations, at this
time, of so many powerful Princes, crowded into
her thoughts, and made her sensibly feel how
humbling and difrefpeAful Elizabeth's proposal
was. She dissembled, however, with theEngliflh
Resident; and though he declared, in strong
terms, what a degradation she would deem this
alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage that could jufRify such neglect of her own
dignity, he mentioned the Earl of Leicester,
notwithstanding , in terms full of refpet "'.

Elizabeth, we may presume, did not wilh Elizabeth's

that the proposal hould be received in any other v'," ."'
manner. After the extraordinary marks she had ing him.
given of her own attachment to Leicelter, and
while he was fill in the very height of favor,
it is not probable fle could think seriously of

"Camlen, j49. "' Keith, 252

· O 0 K bellowing him upon another. It was not her aim

ll. to persuade, but only to amuse Mary "'. AlmoR
zs5. three years were elapsed since her return into

Scotland; and though solicited by her subjes,
and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe,
ihe bad hitherto been prevented from marrying,
chiefly by the artifices of Elizabeth. If, at this
time, the Englilb Queen could have engaged
Mary to liften to her proposal in favor of Li.
cefter, her power over this creature of her own
would have enabled her to protrac the nego.
ciation at pleasure; and by keeping her rival in-
married, he would have rendered the profpe oi
her fuccellion less acceptable to the Englith.

Leicester's own situation was extremely delicate

and embarrafling. To gain pofleffion of the mors
amiable woman of the age, to carry away this prize
from so many contending Princes, to mount the
throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered
the ambition of a subjet much more considerable
than him. He law all there advantages, no doubt;
and, in secret, they made their full impreflion on
him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he duril
not venture on the most distant discovery of his
sentiments, or take any ftep towards facilitating
his acquisition of objects so worthy of desire.

On the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality to.

wards him, which he was at no pains to conceal "',
might inspire him with hopes of attaining the fu.
preme rank in a kingdom more iUultrious than

"'MclT. 104, ot. .'.Ibid 9, 94.

Scotland. Elizabeth had often declared, that B 0 it
nothing but her resolution to lead a single life, m.
and his being born her own subject, would have zss.
hindered her from chufing the Earl of LeiceRer
for a hulband. Such considerations of prudence
are, however, often surmounted by love; and
Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence
of her affection would at length triumph both
over the maxims of policy and the cruples of
pride. These hopes induced him, now and then,
to conclude the proposal of his marriage with the
Scottilh (ueen to be a project for his defiruc.
tion; and he imputed it to the malice of Cecil,
who, under the specious pretence of doing him
honor, intended to ruin him in the good opinion
both of Elizabeth and Mary '".

A treaty of marriage, proposed by one Queen,
who dreaded its success; lifened to by another,
who was fecredy determined against it; and scarce
desired by the man himself, whose interest and
reputation it was calculated, in appearance to pro.
mote; could not, under so many unfavorable cir.
cumftances, be brought to a fortunate issue. Both
Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to ad
with equal difimulation. The former, notwith-
standing her fears of losing LeiceRer, solicited
warmly in his behalf. The latter, though he
began about this time to cast her eyes upon another
subjec of England, did not at once, venture finally
to rejea Elizabeth's favorite.

I' Melv. og.

X o o K The person towards whom Mary began to turn

ll her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,
Is% eldest son of the Earl of Lenox. That nobleman,
~ a- having been driven out of Scotland under the
te~aius t.u ofd regency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived

a~rl in baniihment for twenty years. His wife, Lady
3Lt. Margaret Douglas, was Mary's mos dangerous

rival in her claim upon the Englifl fucccflion.
She was the daughter of Margaret, the eldest lifter
of Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
Queen married after the death of her hulband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of fuc.
cession was not fettled with the fame accuracy as
at present. Time, and the decision, of almost every
.cafe that can pofibly happen, have at last introduced
certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is fubje&
to all the variety arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies.
The Countess of Lenox, though born of a second
-marriage, was one degree nearer the royal blood
of England than Mary. She was the daughter,
-Mary only the grand-daughter of Margaret
This was not the only advantage over Mary
which the Countess of Lenox enjoyed. She
was born in England, and by a maxim of law ia
that country, with regard to private inheritances,
a whoever is not born in England, or at least o
parents who, at the time of his birth, were inthe
obedience of the King of England, cannot enjoy
any inheritance in the kingdom"'." This maxim,

"' Carte, Hilt. of Eng. vol. iii. 42s.

Hales, an Englifl lawyer, produced in a treatise, B o O K
which he publilhed at this time, and endeavoured Il.
to apply it to the right of succession to the Crown. 164,
I a private cause, these pretexts might have
given rife to a long and doubtful litigation,
where a Crown was at Rake, such nice disputes
and fubtilties were to be avoided with the ut.
most care. If Darnly should happen to contrac
an alliance with any of the powerful families in
England, or hould publicly profess the Pro-
teltant religion, these plausible and popular topics
might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the pre.
tensions of a foreigner and of a Papist.

I\ary was aware of all this; and, in order to
prevent any danger from that quarter, had early
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correspondence
with the family o Lenox. In the year one
thousand five hundred and fixty.two"', both the
Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into cuf.
tody by Elizabeth's orders on account of their hold.
ino l secret correspondence with the Scottifi Queen.

From the time that Mary became sensible of Elizabeth

the difficulties which would attend her marrying plardwith
a foreign Prince, he entered into a ill closer thi.
connexion with the Earl of Lenox "', and in.
vited him to return into Scotland. This he en-
dcavoured to conceal from Elizabeth; but a tranf.
action of so much importance did not escape the
notice of that discerning Princess. She observed,
but did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in

"' Cambd. 389. " Ibid. 96.

00lK more perfedly with her views concerning Scot.
sll. tilh affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of
3s4. the Scottilb Queen f(oop, at last, to the thoughts

of taking a subjed to her bed. Darnly was in
no situation to excite her jealousy, or her fears.
His father's efate lay in England, and by means
of this pledge fTe hoped to keep the negociation
entirely in her own hands, to play the fame game
bs artifice and delay, which he had planned out,
if her recommendation of Leicester bad beet
more favorably received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no

subjed of one kingdom could pass into the other
without the permission of both Sovereigns; no
sooner did Lenox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, ap.
ply to Elizabeth for her licence to go intoScot-
land, than he obtained it. Together with it, (he
gave him letters, warmly recommending his person
and cause to Mary's fnendlhip and protection"'.
But at the fame rime, as it was her manner to
involve all her transactions with regard to Scotland
in some degree of perplexity and contradidion;
ihe warned Mary, that this indulgence of Lenox
might prove fatal to herself, as his return could
not fail of reviving the ancient animosity between
him and the house of Hamilton.

This admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,
for some time, a total interruption of all corr

!' Keith, as$. 368s

fpondence

fpondence between the two Queens '. Mary was B O oK
not a little alarmed at this; lhe both dreaded the Im.
effecs of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly 1s6r.
the disadvantage of being excluded from a free
intercourse with England, where her Ambassadors
had all along carried on, with some success secret
negociations, which increased the number of her
partisans, and paved her way towards the throne.
In order to remove the causes of the ptefent dif.
ficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of Eng.
land. He found it no difficult matter to bring about
a reconcilement; and soon re-eftablilled the appear.
ance, but not the confidence of friendflip, which
was all that had fubfifled, for some time, between
the two Queens.

During this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions
of love to Mary and Melvil's replies in name.s his
Milrefs,were made in the language of the warmest
and moll cordial friendflip. But what Melvil truly
observes, with respect to Elizabeth, may be ex-
tended, without injustice, to both Queens. "There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great dissimulation, envy, and fear '"."

Lenox, however, in conlequence of the li. tLe it
cence which he had obtained, set out for Scot- riv,
'

Scodand.

land, and was received by the Queen, not only
with the refped due to a nobleman so nearly al-
lied to the royal family, but treated with a dif.
tinguilhed familiarity which could not fail of

Keith, 2. Melv. 83.
hlelv. 104.
VOL. 1. Y

Q o inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The rumor
il. of his son's marriage to the Queen began to spread

over the kingdom; and the eyes of all Sotland
were turned upon him as the father of their future
Master. 1 he Duke of Chatelherault was the fir
to take the alarm. He confidered Ltnox as the
ancient and hereditary enemy of the house of Ha-
milton; and, in his grandeur, saw the ruin of
Limfelf and his friends. But the Queen interposed
her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and
employed all her influence to bring about an ac.
commodation of the differences "'.

The powerful family of Douglas no lesI dreaded

Lenox's return, from an apprehension that he
'would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan.
gero it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lenox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop'".
mturt. After these preliminary steps, Mary ventured

to call a meeting of Parliament. The a of for.
feiture, pafled against Lenox in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-five, was repealed,
and be was publicly restored to the honors and
cfate of his ancestors ".

j~ as. The ecclesiastical tranfacions of this year were
hct" a. not considerable. In the afemnblies of the church,

the fame complaints of the increase of idolatruy

"'' eith, 29.
"' Ibid. 268. Note b)
"' See Appendix, No.

the fame representations concerning the poverty Boo
of the clergy, were renewed. The reply which the lII.
Queen made to these, and her promises of redress, "'**
were more satisfying to the Protestants than any they frfcot.
had hitherto obtained '". But, notwithstanding her of ith
declarations in their favor, they could not help forPo'ery
harbouri.ig many suspicions concerning Mary's de.
signs against their religion. She had never once
consented to hear any preacher of the reformed
docrine. She had abated nothing of her bigotted
attachment to the Romilh faith. The genius of that
fupcrftition, averse, at all times, from toleration,
was, in that age , fierce and unrelenting. Mary
had given her friends on the continent repeated
allurances of her resolution to re.establish the Ca.
tholic church ". She had induftrioufy avoided
every opportunity of ratifying the adts of Parlia.
ment of one thousand five hundred and sixty, in favor
of the Reformation. Even the protection, which,
ever since her return, he had afforded the Protestant
religion, was merely temporary, and declared, by
her own proclamation, to be of force only " till
she Ihould take some final order in the matter of
religion "'" The vigilant zeal of the preachers was
inattentive to none of these circumstances. The
coldnef£ of their principal leaders, who were, at
this time, entirely devoted to the court, added to
their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to the
people, in language which they deemed suitable
to the neceflity of the times , and which the Queen
'" Keith, St. g9. 'I Carte, vol. iii. 415.

Keith, o04. 510.

Yz

· oO reckoned difrefpedful and insolent In a meeting of

in. the General Assembly, Maitland publicly accuscd
Is4. Knox of teaching seditious dotrine, concerning

the right of ubjets to resist those Sovereigns who
trespass againrf the duty which they owe to the
people. Knox was not backward to justify what
he had taught; and upon this general dodrine of
refifance, so julf in its own nature, but so delicate
in its application to particular cafes, there ensued
a debate, which admirably displays the talents and
charader of both the disputants; the acutenes of
the former, embellilhed with learning, but prone
to subtlety; the vigorous underflanding of the latter,
delighting in bold sentiments, and superior to all
fear ".

T*t. Two years had already been consumed in fruit
isht !M; less negociations concerning the marriage of the
2abtk and Scottil Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor.
Marn. 't, tunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eli.
rtard toher
mni. zabeth's proceedings with refped to that affair.

But, in order to set the real intentions of the
Englihl Queen in a clear light, and to bring her
to some explicit declaration of her sentiments,
Mary, at lap, intimated to Randolph, that, on
condition her right of fuccefion to the Crown of
England were publicly acknowledged, he was
ready to yield to the solicitations of his Miftrei
in behalf of Leicester '. Nothing could be far.
ther than this from the mind and intention ol
Elizabeth. The right of fuccellion was a myftcry,

"' Knox, 169.
'' Keith, 269.

which, during her whole reign, her jealousy 0o0 o
preserved untouched and unexplained. She had ill.
promised, however, when she firRf began to in- "s65.
teret herfelfin the marriage of the Scottilh Queen,
all that was now demanded. How to retreat with
decency, how to elude her former offer, was, on
that account, not a little perplexing.

The facility with which Lord Darrily obtained
permillion to visit the court of Scotland, was
owing, in all probability, to that embarraffmcnt.
From the time of Melvil's embassy, the Countess
of Lenox had warmly foicited this liberty for
her son. Elizabeth was no firanger to the ambi-
tious hopes with which that young nobleman
flattered himself. She had received repeated ad-
vices from her Vlinifters of the sentiments which
Mary began to entertain in his favor ". It was
entirely in her power to prevent his stirring out of
London. In the present conjuncture, however,
nothing could be of more advantage to her than
Darnly's journey into Scotland. She had already
brought one aor upon the age, who, under
her management, had, for a long time, amused
the Scottish Queen She hoped, no less absolutely,
to direct the motions of Darnly, who was likewise
her subjed; and again to involve Mary in all the
tedious intricacies of negociation. These motives
determined Elizabeth and her Ministers to yield
to the solicitations of the Countess of Lenox.

But this deepJaid scheme was in a moment
" Keith, 2z9. 261. 266.

Y

0 o ' disconcerted. Such unexpected events, as the fancy
111. of poetsafcribes to love, are, at some times,really
ISs4. produced by that pafion. An affair, which had
D.m-livte, been the object of so many political intrigues, and

had moved and interested so many Princes, wasat
last decided by the sudden liking of two young
persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the
first bloom and vigor of youth. In beauty and
gracefulnels of person be furpalTed all his contem.
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such artsas
add ease and elegance to external form, and which

cm st enable it not oly to dazzle, but to please. Mary
Que' was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full

power of these accomplishments. The impreflion
which Lord Darnly made upon her was vilible
1. . from the time of their first interview. The whole

bufinds of the court was to amuse and entertain
this illutrious guest "'; and in all those scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge
ther superficial and Ihowy, appeared to great ad.
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart became
complete; and inclination now prompted her to
conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which had
been suggested by considerations merely political

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not with.

out design, to increase the violence of this passion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, (be, in
return to that meflage, whereby Mary had fig
nified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave
an answer, in such terms as plainly unravlled

"' Knox, 36q.

her original intention in that intrigue "'. She pro. B o o
mifed, If the Scottish Queen's marriage with IIll
LeicetRer flould take place, to advance him to iset.
great honors; but with regard to Mary's. title to
the Englifi fuccefion, Ihe would neither, susser
ally legal inquiry to be made concerning it,inor
permit it to be publicly recognised, until lhe
hcrfelf Ihould declare her resolution never to. marry.
Notwitlitanding Elizabeth's former promises, Mary
had reason to, expect every thing contained in this
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear,
with patience, such a cruel discovery of the con-
tempt, the artifice, and mockery with which,
under the veil of friendship, she had been so long
abused. She burf into tears of indignation, and
expressed, with the utmost bitterness, her sense of
that defingenuous craft which had been employed
to deceive her "'

The natural effet of this indignation was to
add to the impetuosity with which he pursued her
own scheme. Blinded by refeatment, as well as
by love, (he observed no defes in the man whom
the had chosen; and began to take the necessary
fieps towards accomplilhing her design, with all
the impatience natural to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen,
the canon law made it necessary to obtain the
Pope's dispensation before the celebration of the
marriage. For this purpose, she early set on foot
a negociation with the court of Rome ".

'"Keith, 270. Appind. sig "' Keith, Append. s 5
"Cand. 396.

.4

I. O She was busy, at the fame time, in procuring

1Il. the conent of the French King and his mother.
Sr s, Having communicated her design, and the motives

Cm'taove which determined her choice, to Caftelnau the
·f e much FrenchAmbaflador, she employed him, as the

most proper person, to bring his court to fall in
with her views. Among other arguments to this
purpose, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he repreented to be so violent
and deeprooted, that it was no longer in her own
power to break off the match ',. Nor were the
French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's
pafion. Her pride would never stoop to an al.
iaoce. with a subjet of France. By this choice,
they were delivered from the apprehension of a
match with any of the Austrian Princes, as well as
the danger of too close an union with Elizabeth;
and as Darnly professed the Roman Catholic reli.
gioan,.this suited the bigotted schemes which that
ourt had adopted.

Dd - .While Mary was..endeavouring to reconcile
kuferil foreign courts to a measure which Ihe had so much
of "toe U at heart; Darnly, and his father, by their beha.

viour, were raising up enemies at home to obltrud
it. Lenox had, during.the former part of his life,
discovered. no great compass of abilities or political
wildom; and appears to. have been a man of a
weak understanding, and violentpafllions. Darn-
ly .was not superior to his father in under.
sanding, 'and all his pafions were Rill more im
petuous '". To these, be added that infolenc,

"' Caftdn .
64. Keith, 27J, 271.

\q

which the advantage of external form, when B o
accompanied with no quality more valuable, is ill.
apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the Queen's favor, «s6s
he began already to assume the haughtiness of a
King, and to put on that imperious air, which
majety itself can scarce render tolerable.

It Was by the advice, or at least with the particularly

consent of Murray and his party, that Lenox had Mu"r'-
been invited into Scotland '; and yet no sooner
did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom,
than he began to enter into secret cabals with
those noblemen who were known to be avowed
enemies to Murray, and, with regard to religion,
to be either neutrals, or favorers of Popery "'
Darnly, ill more imprudent, allowed some rash
expreflions concerning those favors which the
Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to
escape him "'.

But, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio, contributed
to increase the suspicion and disgust of the nobles.

The low birth and indigent condition of this The rte of

man, placed him in a station in which he ought
naturally to have remained unknown to polterity.
But what fortune called him to act and to susser
in Scotland, obliges history to descend from is
dignity, and to record his adventures. He was
the son of a musician in Turin, and having
accompanied the Piedmontcie Ambassador into

'"Knox, 367. I(eith, 274. "'Keith, 272. "'Ibid. 274.

3 o o Scotland, gained admiflion into the Queen's family

Il. by his ckill in music. As his dependant condition

bad taught him suppleness of spirit, and ininuat.
ing manners, he quickly crept into the Queen's
favor, and her French Secretary happening to
return at that time into his own country, was
preferred by her to that office. He now began to
make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of consequence. The whole train of suitors and
expectants, who have an extreme sagacity in
discovering the paths which lead most direcly to
fuccef;, applied to him. Hisrecommendations were
observed to have great influence over the Queen,
and be grew to be confidered not only as a
favorite, but as a Minister. Nor was Rizio care
ful to abate that envy which always attends such
an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
studied, on the contrary, to display the whole
extent of his favor. He affeded to talk often,
and familiarly, with the Queen in public. He
equalled the greatet and mos opulent subjes,
in richness of dress, and in the number of his
attendants. He discovered, in all his bebaviour,
that assuming insolence, with which unmerited
prolperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with
the utmost indignation that the nobles beheld the
power; it was with the utmost difficulty that
they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Queen's presence they could
not forbear treating him with marks of contempt
Nor was it his exorbitant power alone, which
exafpetd the Scots. They confidered him, aad

not without rcafon, as a dangerous enemy to the B O o 1
Protestant religion, and fufpedted that he held, for ilI.
this purpose, a fccret correspondence with the lss-.
court of Rome "'.

It was Darnlv's misfortune to fall under the Darnly's

management of this man, who, by flattery and with him..
assiduity, easily gained on his vanity and inexpe-
rience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was
employed in his behalf, and contributed, without
doubt, towards eablilhing him more firmly in
her affecions '". But whatever benefit Darnly
might reap from his patronage, it did not coun-
terbalance the contempt, and even infamy, to
which he was exposed, on account of his fami-
liarity with such an upstart.

Though Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affetions, he conduced herself, how-
ever, with such prudent reserve, as to impose on
Randolph the Englilh Resident, a man otherwise
shrewd and penetrating. It appears from his letters
at this period, that he entertained not the Ieaft
suspicion of the intrigue which was carrying on;
and gave his court repeated affuranccs, that the
Scottish Queen had no design of marrying Darnly "'.
In the midst of this security, Mary dispatched
Maitland to signify her intention to Elizabeth,
and to solicit her content to the marriage with
Darnly. This emba(fy was the first thing which
opened the eyes of Randolph.

r Buchan. ;4o. Mely. o07. Md. al.
"' Keith, 273. and Append. g.

oo 0 Elizabeth asseted the greatest surprise at tis
Ill. sudden resolution of the Scottilh Queen, but
"4c. without reason. The train was laid by herself, and

E^s, fthe had no cause to wonder when it took effet.
dcelm She expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation
01 .tll of the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended
m-Uiage to foresee manydangers and inconveniences arising
witDU.. from it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was

mere affed&ation. Mary had often and plainly
declared her resolution to marry. It was impossible
hbe could make any choice more inoffensive. The
danger of introducing a foreign interest into Bri.
tain, which Elizabeth had so jultly dreaded, was
entirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both
Crowns, and pofeffed of lands in both kingdoms,
could be formidable to neither. It is evident from
all these circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehen.
sions .of danger could not pofibly be serious;
and that, in all her violent declarations against
Darnly, there was much more of grimace than of
realty "'.

There were not wanting, however, political

motives of such weight, to induce that wife Prin.
cess to put on the appearance of great displeasure.

"' Even the historians of that age acknowledge, that the

marriage of the Scottish Queen with a subjee was fafrom
being diiagreeabletoElizabeth. Knox, ;69. T. uBchan. 19.
Cftelnau, who at that time was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the Britilh courts, aflerts, upon grounds of gre
probability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work:
Caftln. 462. and that she rejoiced at the aecomplibhnintct
it, appears from the letters of her own Ambafadon. e.
slo. aSS.

Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay o o
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrud 1n.
with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her Mss6.
mind and the elevation of her charader. Besides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great
objed of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her
diffatisfadion with Mary's conduct, he hoped to
alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached
to the Englith interest, and to encourage such of
the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly
to oppose it. The feeds of discord would, by this
means, be scattered through that kingdom. Intestine
commotions might arise. Amidst these Mary could
form none of those dangerous schemes, to which
the union of her people might have prompted her.
Elizabeth would become the umpire between the
Scottilh Queen and her contending subjes; and
England might look on, with security, while a
Rorm, which he had raised, wafted the only king.
dom which could possibly disturb its peace.

In prosecution of this scheme, she laid before May i.
her Privy Council the message from the Scottish
Queen, and consulted them with regard to the
answer she should return. Their determination,
it is easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable
to her fccret views. They drew up a rernonftrance

,aaint the intended match, full of the imaginary

dangers with which that event threatened the
kingdom'". Nor did hie think it enough, to n4d.thro--
signify her difapptobation of the measure, ither ,; t, i'
'" Keith, 274. See Append. N X.

· o o x by Maitland, Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph,

111. her own Resident in Scotland; in order to add
«". more dignity to the farce which she chose ta at,

the appointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Am.
balfador Extraordinary. She commanded him to
declare, in the strongest terms, her diffatisfadion
with the ftep which Mary proposed to take; and,
at the fame time, to produce the determination
of the Privy Council, as an evidence that the
sentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, Qfe confined the Counted
of Lenox as a prisoner, 'fir in her own house,
and then ent her to the Tower "'

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland, before

the arrival of the Englith Ambassador. In the first
transports of her indignation, Mary resolved, no
longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth; and
sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throg.
morton, to return instantly to the English court
and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth, that aftct
having been amused so long to so little purpose;
after having been fooled, and imposed on so grossly
by her artifices; Ihe was now resolved to gratify
her own inclination, and to ak no other content,
but that of her own fubjeds, in the choice of a
buband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw
all the cffets of such a rash and angry meflage, and
ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his
Miftref;, by disobeying her commands, than to
be made the instrument of tearing asunder, so

" Keith, Appenad. 16.

violently, the few remaining ties, which Rill linked B 00 I
together the two Queens "'. 111.

Mary herself soon became sensible of her error. 'lss
She received the Englith Ambaflador with refped;
justified her own conduc with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, he affeied a wonder.
ful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;
and even pretended, out of complaisance towards
her, to put off the consummation of the marriage
for some months "'. It is probable, however, that
the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the pro-
fpet of gaining the consent of her own fbjeds,
were the real motives of this delay.

This consent Mary labored with the utmost Mnumy'

industry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the .,.o' *
person in the kingdom, whose concurrence was of
the greatest importance; but he had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme
difficulty. rom the time of Lenox's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's
affedions began gradually to be efranged from
him. Darnly, Athol. Rizio, all the court favorites,
combined against him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which
his former services had so litle merited. He retired
into the country, and gave way to rivals, with
whom he was unable to contend "'. The return
of the Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who
had been accused of a design upon his life, and
who had resided for ome time in foreign countries,

' Keith, Appe,.l 160. ' Keith, 27S.
Ibid. 27a. 274. Append. Ig9.

0ooX obliged him to attend to his own eafety. No
Li. intreaty of the Queen could persuade him to a
in;. reconcilement with that nobleman. He insisted on

having him brought to a public trial, and prevailed,
by his importunity, to have a day fixed for it
Bothwell durst not .appear in opposition to a
man, who came to the place of trial, attended by
five thousand of his followers on horseback. He
was once more constrained to leave the kingdom;
but, by the Queen's command, the sentence of
outlawry, which is incurred by non-appearance,
was not pronounced against him "'.
mj - Mary, sensible, at the fame time, of bow much

importance it was, to gain a subjed so powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited
him back to court, and received him with many
demonstrations of refped and confidence. At i
lhe desired him to set an example to her other
fubjeds by subscribing a paper, containing a
formal approbation of her marriage with Danly.
Murray had many reasons to hesitate, and even
to withhold his assent. Darnly had not only
undermined his credit with the Queen,,but disco.
vered, on every occasion, a rooted aversion to
his person. By consenting to his elevation to the
throne, he would give him such an acceflion of
dignity and power, as no man willingly beflows
on an enemy. The unhappy consequences which
might follow upon a breach with England were,
Jikewife, of considerable weight with Murray.

'" Keith, ibid. 60.

He

He had always openly preferred a confederacy o oK
with England, before the ancient alliance with II.
France. By his means chiefly, this change in the .1si.
system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been efta-
blithed; and he could not think of sacrificing, to
a rash and youthful passion, an alliance of so much
utility to the kingdom'; and which he and the
other nobles were bound, by every obligation, to
maintain '". Nor was the interest of religion for.
gotten on this occasion. Mary, though surrounded
by Protestant Counsellors, had found means to
hold a dangerous correspondence with foreign Ca-
tholics. She had even courted the Pope's protec.
tion, who bad sent her a subsidy of eight thou-
sand crowns "'. Though Murray had hitherto
endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the reformed
clergy, and to let the Queen's conduct in the mot
favorable light, yet her obflinate adherence to her
own religion could not fail of alarming him, and
by her resolution to marry a papist, the hope of
reclaiming her, by an union with a Protestant,
was for ever cut off "'. Each of these confidera-
tions had its influence on Murray, and all of them
determined him to decline complying, at that time,
with the Queen's request.

The Convention of nobles, which was asem- may .
bled a few days after, discovered a greater difpofitioo A oen.
to gratify the Queen. Many of them, without he. Nobles ar.
fitation, expressed their approbation of the intended Prove' o

the mar-

ith 69Keith, 169. Melr. 114. riags.

Keith, Append. 6o.
VoL. I.

ioO match; but as others were startled at the fame dla

In. gers which had alarmed Murray, or wereinfluenctd
554%. by his example torefufe their consent, anotherGo.

vention was appointed at Perth , in order to deli.
berate more fully concerning this matter"'.

Mean while, Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
tides of honor peculiar to the royal family. The
opposition Ihe had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and difap
point her inclination, produced their usual deed
on her heart, they confirmed her paflion, and in.
creased its violence. The simplicity of that age in.
puted an affecion so excefive, to the infuence of
witchcraft ". It was owing, however, to no other
charm, than the irrefitible power of youth and
beauty over a young and tender heart Darnly grew
giddy with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of
a Queen, and the applause of many among her ub.
jeds, his natural baughtinefs and insolence became
insupportable, and he could no longer bear advice,
far less contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening
to be the first person who informed him that Mary,
in order to sooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some
time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a
frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to
fab him "'. It required all Mary's attention, to
prevent his falling under that contempt to wbich
such behaviour deservedly exposed him.

l Keith, t. Knox, 73. " t

Keith, 1s1.
"' Keith, Append~. ie.

In no scene of her life was ever Mary's own B o o K
address more remarkably displayed. Love harp. ii.
ened her invention, and made her ltudy every me- tsc.
thod of gaining her fubjets. Many of the nobles dreaf, in
The won by her addres, and more by her promises. gainig hbt
Onfomehe bestowed lands, to others he gave new rubjiet
titles of honor "'. She even condescended to court
the Protestant clergy; and having invited three
of their fuperintendants to Stirling, he declared,
in Rrong terms, her refolotion to protect their reli-
gion, expressed her willingness to be present at a con.
ference upon the points in dotrine which were dif.
puted between the ProtefRants and Papists, and went
so far as to how some desire to hear fich of their
preachers as were molt remarkable for modera.
tion"'. By thcfe arts,-the Queen gained wonderfully
upon the people, who, unless their jealousy be raised
by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the
adtions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

On the other hand, Murray and his afTociates were
plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in
so high a frain of her displeasure at the intended
match; he treated Lady Lenox with so much
rigor; he wrote to the Scottish Queen in such
strong terms; he recalled the Earl of Lenox and
his son in such a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciations of her vengeance if they
hlould presume to disobey"'; that all thefe'expret.
sinns of aversion fully persuaded them of her sincerity.
This belief fortified their scruples with refpecl to the
match,and encouraged them to oppose it.They began
"'Keith, 28;. "'Knox, 37J. '"Keith, 28, 286.

Z2

.BooK with forming among themselves bonds of confe.

1r-. deracy and mutual defence; they entered into a
*ss. secret correspondence with the Englith Resident,

in order to secure Elizabeth's afiftance when it
houid become needful "'; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger,
as might counterbalance the influence of those ams
which the Queen bad employed.

sbemes or Besides these intrigues, there were secretly car.
AIrr. au ried on, by both parties, dark designs of a more
gi.at uac criminal nature, and more suited to the spirit of the
«ihb. age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition, which

he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any
rate to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a
plot to affafinate him, during the meeting of the
Convention at Perth. Murray, on his part, depair.
ing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault; and
the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

If either of these conspiracies had taken effet,

this convention might have been attended with
consequences extremely tragical; but both were ren.
dered abortive by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, being
warned of his danger by some retainers to the court,
who still favored his interest, avoided the blow by
not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intelligence 1o
Murray's enterprise, retired with the utmost expedi
tion, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth
Con(cious, on both fides, of guilt, andiflamedwid

"' Keith, 289. 292. 298.

resentment, it was impossible they could either forget B a a

O

the violence, which themselves had meditated, or Ill.
forgive the injuries intended gainft them. From it6.s
that moment, all hope of reconcilement was at an
end, and their mutual enmity burst out with every
symptom of implacable hatred "'.

r

A

"' The reality of there two oppofitc confpiri has given

occasion to many disputes and much contradiction Some
deny that any design was formed againt 'the life of Murray;
others call in question the truth of the conspiracy against
Darnly. There seem, however, to be plausible reasons for
believing that there is fume foundation for what has been as-
ferted with regard to both; though the zeal and credulity of
part)-writers have added to each many exaggerated circum-
stances. The following arguments render it probable, that
some violence was intended against Murray.

I. This is positively aerted by Buchanan, 14t. . The

Englilh Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly
informed that a design was formed of murdering him at
Ierth, and mentions various circumstances concerning the
manner in which the crime was to be committed. If the
whole had been a ficion of his own, or of Murray, it is
impossible that he could have written in this firain to such
a discerning Minister. Keith, 287. . Murray himself con-
ftantly and publicly persised in affirming that such a design
was formed against his life. Keith, App. og. He was re-
quired by the Queen to transmit in writing an account of
the conspiracy which he pretended had been formed against
his life. This he did accordingly; but " when it was brought
to her Majefly by her servants ent for that purpose, it appears
be her Highness and her Council, that his purgation in chat
behalf was not so sufficient as the matter required." Keith,
App. 109. He was therefore summoned to appear within
three days before the Queen in Holyrood-houfe; and in order
to encourage him to do so, a fafe.condut was offered to him.
Ibid. Though he had once conrented to appear, he after-

Z 3

B o x On Mary's return to Edinburgh, he summoned

111. her vassals by proclamation, and tolicited them by
"c. her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro.
m^, rt tedion of her perton against her foreign and

wiffal t

il&e"* wards declined to do so. But whoever oaniders Murras
rral. fitmation, and the charater of those who direded Mry'r

councils at that time, will hardly deem it a decifve proof
of his guilt, that he did not chufe to rif his person on such
security. 4. The furious passions of Darnly, the fiercenefi of
his resentment, which scrupled at no violence, and the
manner of the age, render the imputation of such a crime
let improbable.

II. That Murray and his afociates had reflved to feie

Danly in his return from Perth, appears with still grete
certainty; . From the exprcel tefimony of Melil, 112.;
although Buchan , p. -. andKnox,p. ;77. at, wihou
reason, to represent this as an idle rumor. 2. The quefioa
was put to Randolph, Whether the Governor of Berwick
would receive Lenox and his son, if they were delivered
at that place ? His answer was," that they would not reast
their own, i e. their own ubjedts, in whatsoever fort they
came unto us, i. e. whether they returned to England so.
luntarily, as they had been required, or were brought thit~b
by force." This plainly shows, that some such design w in
hand, and Randolph did nt difcour:ge it by the anfre
which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation wit
which the Queen retired, and the reason lhe gave for thi
sudden flight, are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291
4. A great part of the Scottilli nobles, and among thef th
Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves priV t
the design, alert the reality of the confpirac. Good
vol. ii. 1i8.

All these circunftances render the truth of both con

fpiracies probable. But we may observe how far ths pro
though drawn from public records, falls {hort., on bthlid

domestic enemies "'. She was obeyed with all B 00 K
the promptness and alacrity with which fubjeat ill.
run to defend a mild and popular administration. ss6.
This popularity, however, The owed in a great
measure to Murray, who had directed her admi-
aiftration with great prudence. But the crime

of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in
their accounts of the conspiracy against lurray, differ widely
in almost every circumltance. The accounts of te attempt
upon Darnly are not more confifenti. Melvil alledges, that
the design of the conspirators was to carry Damrl a prisoner
into England; the proporal made to Randolph agrees with
this. Randolph fays, that they intended. to carry tho Queen
to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Catle Campbell. The
Lords, in their declaration affirm the delign of the confpi.
lators to have been to murder Darnly and his father, to
confine the Queen in Lochleven during life, and to usurp the
government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find' in
an ancient paper, is a folly to-which, in every age, Anti.
quaries are extremely prone, Ancientpapers, however, often
contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and
the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred
to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and'written in the
very heat of faction. Many things allerred in it, are evi-
dently falre or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confede-
rates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they must have
had bome pretences , and plausible ones too., before they could
venture to imprison their Sovereign for life ,. and to seize the
reins of government; but , at that time , the Queen's conduc
had afforded no colorable excuse for proceeding to such ex-
tremities. It is likewise remarkable, that in all the procla-
mations against Murray, of which so many are published in
Keith, Appendix og, &c. neither the violent attempt pon
Darnly, nor that which he is alledged to have formed agtill
the Queen herself, are ever once mentioned

Keith, g29g.

Z 4

0 0 of opposing her marriage obliterated the memor
IIl. of his former services; and Mary, impatient of
nst. contraddion, and apt to confider those who di.

puted her will, as enemies to her person, deter.
mined to let him feel the whole weight of her
vengeance. For this purpole lhe summoned him
to appear before her upon a ibort warning, to
anfwcr to such things as fbould be laid to hi
charge ". At this very time, Murray, and the
Lords who adhered to him, were assembled at
Stirling, to deliberate what course they should
hold in such a difficult conjundure. But the cur-
rent of popular favor ran so strongly againt
them, and, notwithfanding some fears and jea
loufies, there prevailed in the nation such a ge
neral disposition to gratify the Queen in a matter
which so nearly concerned her, thbt, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore
the Queen of England's protetion, they put an
end to their ineffedual consultations, and returned
every man to his own house.

Together with this discovery of the weaknoef

of her enemies, the confluence of her fubjefd
from all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary
an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous situation, (be
determined to bring to a period an affair, which
had so long engrossed her heart, and occupied her

c.iranm attention. On. the twenty-ninth of July, b(h
1I" ,"' married Lord Darnly. The ceremony WtS
riace with

"' Keith, Append. lo9.

performed in the Queen's Chapel, according to the B o o K
rites of the Romilb church; the Pope's bull difpenf. 111.
ing with their marriage having been previously aits.
obtained"'. She issued, at the fame time, proclama.
tions, conferring the title of King of Scots upon
her husband, and commanding that henceforth all
writs at law hould run in the joint names of King
and Queen ". Nothing can be a fironger proof of
the violence of Mary's love, or the weakness of her
councils, than this last fep. Whether fle had any
right to chufe a huband without consent of Parlia-
ment, was, in that age, a matter of some dispute ';
that he had no right to confer upon him, by her
private authority, the title and dignity of King' or,
by a simple proclamation, to raise her husband to
be the mailer of her people, seems to be beyond
all doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title.
It was not, however, the gift of the Queen, but
of the nation; and the consent of Parliament was
obtained, before he ventured to assume it. Darnly's
condition, as a subjet, rendered it still more
necessary to. have the concurrence of the supreme
Council in his favor. Such a violent and unprece-
dented Rtretch of prerogative, as the substituting a
proclamation in place of an ad of parliament,
might have justly alarmed the nation. But, at that
time, the Queen possessed so entirely the consid.
ence of her fubjeds, that, notwithstanding all
the clamors of the malecontents, no fymptolns
of general discontent appeared on that account.

'" Keith, o07. "' Anderron, I. . See Append. N.XI.

Buchan. 341.

0 Even amidfl that fcenc f jpy which ahrys
Ili. accompanies fuecefsful love, Mary did not su&s
"s*. the course of her vengeance agaift the malecoo.

tent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the. marriage, Murray was again mmoncd' to
court, under the severest penalties, and upon his
non-appearance, the rigor of justice took place,
and he was declared an out. law "'. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon,
who, ever since his father's inffrredion in the
year one thousand five hundred and fixty-two,
had been detained a prisoner; she recalled the
Earl of Sutherlaud, who, on account of his con.
cern in that conspiracy, had fed into Slanders;
and he permitted Bothwell to return again into
Scotland. The firlt and last of thele were among
the molt powerful fubjeds in the kingdom, and
all of them animated with implacable hatred to
Murray, whom they deemed the enemy of their
families, and the author of their own fifferings.
This common hatred became the foundation of
the ftri&eft union with the Queen, and gained
them an afccndant over alt her councib. Muay
himself confidered this confederacy with his avowed
enemies, as a more certain indication than any
mealure Ihe had yet taken, of her ioexonble
resentment

Mrts The malecontents had not yet openly taken
M* up arms '". But the Queen having ordered he
and his

" "* Keithei, f1l, to

"' After their fiuidesi confultaio in Stirihng, thde L

fubjets to march against them,' they were driven a o o i
to the last extremity. They found themselves II.
unable to make head againlf the numerous forces 'ts.
which Mary had assembled; and fled into Argyle-
lhire, in expetation of aid from Elizabeth, to
whom they had secretly dispatched a messenger, in
order to implore her immediate affifance"'.

Mean while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embar- Elizabeth
rafs Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her t'rpi
condut. She blamed both her choice of Lord
Darnly, and the precipitation with which he had
concluded the marriage. She required Lenox
and Darnly, whom The fill called her fubjedts, to
return into England; and, at the fame time, Ihe
warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour he represented to be not only inno-
cent, but laudable. This message, so mortifying to
the pride of the Queen, and so full of contempt
for her husband, was rendered Rill more infup.
portable by the petulant and saucy demeanour of
Tamworth, the person who delivered it "'. Mary
vindicated her own conduct with warmth, but

retired to their own houses. Keith, o 04., Murray was still
at St. Andrew's on July 22. Keith, o06. By the places of
rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different
counties, August 4, it appears that the Queen's intention
was to march into Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes,
Kirkaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents resided.
Keith, 3 o. Their flight into the weft, Keith, 12. prevented
this expedition, and the former rendezvous was altered.
Keith, ;o.

' Keith, I2. Knox, ;8o.
Camd. 398.

BOOK with great strength of reason; and rejeed.the

III. intercelifon in behalf of Murray, not without
lit. signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pretending to

intermeddle in the internal government of her
kingdom ".

She did not, on that account, intermit in the

lear the ardor with which she pursued Murray
and his adherents '. They now appeared openly
in arms; and having received a fall supply in
money from Elizabeth "', were endeavouring to
raise their followers in'the western counties. But
Mary's vigilance hindered them from assembling
in any considerable body. All her military opera.
tions, at that time, were concerted with wildom,
executed'with vigor, and attended with success.
In order to encourage her troops, he herself
marched along with them , rode with loaded
pistols "', and endured all the fatigues of war
with admirable fortitudc. Her alacrity inspired her
forces with an invincible resolution, which, toge.
ther with their superiority in number, deterred the
malecontents from facing them in the field; but
having artfully passed the Queen's army, they
marched with great rapidity to Edinburgh, and

" Keith, Append. 99.
"' The most coniderable persons who joined Murray, ere

the Duke of Chatelheraul, the Earls of Argyll, Glencaim,
Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie , Lawre, Bar,
Dreghorn, Pittarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur,
Knox, l82.

'' Knox, 380. "' Keith, Append. 164.

endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of that city BOOK
to arms. The Queen did not susser them to remain Ill.
long unmolested; and, on her approach, they ""*.
were forced to abandon that place, and retire in Ausul 3'.
confusion towards the western borders "'.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what route Thy ,e
they had taken, Mary employed that interval in oblid to
providing for the security of the counties in the England.
heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged
the considerable Barons in those hires which he
most fufpeded , to join in associations for her
defence "'. Having thus left all the country
behind her in tranquillity, The, with an army
eighteen thousand strong, marched towards Dum-
fries, where the rebels then were. During their
retreat, they had sent letters to the Queen, from
almost every place where they halted, full of
fubmiflion, and containing various overtures
towards an accommodation. But Mary, who
determined not to let flip such a favorable oppor-
tunity of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
jeds, rejeced them with disdain. As The advanced,
the malecontents retired. And, having received no
ciffedal aid from Elizabeth "', they despaired of
any other means of safety, fled into England, 0. .
and put themselves under the proteAion of the
Earl of Bedford, Warden of the marches.

" IKcith, Append :15.

Id. i11.
'"ce Append. N. XII. XIII.

ooK Nothing, which Bedford's personal friendiip
i. for Murray could supply, was wanting to render
1sw. their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself

3',A treated them with extreme negle&. She had fully
twed i1 gained her end, and, by their means, bad excited

;"m,, such discord and jealousies among the Scots, as

would, in all probability, long diftrat and weaken
Mary's councils. Her business now was to &ave
appearances, and to justify herself to the Minister
of France and Spain, who acculed her of foment.
ing the troubles in Scotland by her intrigues.
The expedient he contrived for her vindication
firongly displays her own character, and the
wretched condition of exiles, who are obliged to
depend on a foreign prince. Murray and Hamil
ton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by
the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, instead
of meeting with that welcome reception which
was due to men, who, out of confidence in her
promises, and in order to forward her designs, had
hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even
obtain the favor of an audience, until they had
meanly consented to acknowledge, in the presence
of the French and Spanilh Ambassadors, that
Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to
take arms. No sooner did they make this declara
tion, than he aonihied them with this reply:
Q You have declared the truth; I am far from
setting an example of rebellion to my own fob.
jeds, by countenancing those who rebel againlt
their lawful Prince. The treason, of which you
have been guilty, is deteRable; and as traitors I

tbanih you from my presence "'. Notwithtanding 0 o o
this scene of farce and of fallhood, so dishonor. in.
able to all the persons who aed a part in it, 116.
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to
reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly
with money, andrenewed her intercefion with the
Scottish Queen in their favor "'.

The advantage The had gained over them did
not satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the blow,
and to prevent a party, which Ihe dreaded, from
ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, bhe called a meeting of Parliament;
and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might be
legally pronounced against the banihed Lords,
ie summoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it "'.

'he Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble DeIb. .

application, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as the King violently opposed
it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king.
dom, and to reside for some time in France "'.

The numerous forces which Mary brought into
the field, the vigor with which the aded, and the
length of time Ihe kept them in arms, resemble
the efforts of a Prince with' revenues much more
considerable than those which he polfeffed. But
armies were then levied and maintained by Princes
at small charge. The vassal followed his superior,
and the superior attended the Monarch, at his

;1elv. 1,2. '" Knox, 389. '" Keith,

:sm.
'" Inox, 389.

90 K own expense. Six hundred horsemen, however,
II. and three companies of foot, besides her guards,
mtas. received regular pay from the Queen. This extra.

ordinary charge, together with the deburfements
occasioned by her marriage, exhausted a treasury,
which was far from being rich. In this exigency,
many devices were fallen upon for raising money,
Fines were levied on the towns of St. Andrew's,
Perth, and Dundee, which were fufpeted of favor.
ing the malecontents. An unusual tax was imposed
on the boroughs throughout the kingdom; and a
reat fum was demanded of the citizens of Edin.
burgh , by way of loan. This unprecedented
exadion alarmed the citizens. They had recourse
to delays, and fiarted difficulties in order to evade
it. These Mary construed to be ads of avowed
disobedience, and instantly committed several of
them to prison. But this severity did not subdue
the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed
among the inhabitants. The Queen was obliged
to mortgage to the city the fupriority of the town
of Leitb, by which (he obtained a considerable fum
of money"'. The thirds of ecclesiastical benefices
proved another source whence the Queen derived
some supply. About this time, we find the Protest
ant clergy complaining more bitterly than ever of
their poverty. The army, it is probable, exhausted
a great part of that fund which was appropriated
for their maintenance "'.

Knox, S;g. 386. '" MaitL HiR. of Edinburgh, 27.

The

The assemblies of the church were not uncon- B o Q K
cerned fpedators of the commotions of this turbu. l'l.
ent year. In the meeting held the twenty-fourth c1jw.
of June, previous to the Queen's marriage, several alfairs.
of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem
to have had great influence on its decisions. The
high itrain in which the assembly addressed the

ueen, can be imputed only to thole fears and
jcaioufie with regard- to religion, which they
endeavoured to infuse into the nation. The assem-
bly complained, with some bitterness, of the flop
which had been put to the progress of the Refor.
mation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland; they
required not only the total suppression of the
Popifl worlhip throughout the kingdom, but even
in the Queen's own chapel; and besides the legal
eflablilhment of the Protestant religion, they de-
manded that Mary herself should publicly embrace
it. The Queen, after some deliberation, replied,
that neither her conscience, nor her interest,
would permit her to take such a ftep. The former
would for ever reproach her for a change, which
proceeded from no inward convition;' the latter
would susser by the offence, which her apoftacy
maut give to the King of France, and her other
al'ics on the continent "'

It is remarkable, that the prosperous situation
of the §(uecn's affairs during this year, began
to wok some change in favor of her rcligion.
"' i\;x, 374. 36.

Vor. I. aA

3r00K Time EU4 tno, A5~tboI, ud;C lm~~tlb 4

J4L~ Ujten&b~anu; Ile hrfeif asorded ,tec
30G. more avwd protecaiobhatT~rs ,b

&lac pec~isLon, fonse of the lWó

toi pztac publidy w te pecjib'"

Wn OF TE ISt *VOLIMA4

R

3 1A
ICY
