THE
HI S ST 0 'R. Y

OF
S C 0 T L A N D

a?.

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

T I' L
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of tle SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROB ERTSON, D. D,

Minifler of LA D YE S T R 's, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.
THE FOURTH EDITION.

L O N D ON:
Printed for A. M L L A R, in the Strand.

M DCC LXI.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

# BOOK VI.

THE
T EW E
H I S T 0 R Y

o F
SC O T L A N Dh

B OOK VI.

HE unexpeed blow, by which the Regent B K
was cut off, struck the King's party with VI.
the utrnoft conflernation. Elizabeth be- -v
wailed his death as the rmoft'fatal difafl-er, which 1570.

Disorders
could have befallen her kingdom; and was incon- occafoned

solable to a that d by the R.

folable to a degree that little uited her dignity. gYnt's
Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her reffora- death.
tion were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who
expressed such indecent joy at the corfimiffionof it.
And as the assassin made his escape on a horse, which
belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled directly
to'Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
was concluded that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice
to the resentment of the Queen's party, rather than

VOL, II. B to

B o o K to the revenge of a private man. On the day after

V. the murderS Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ser-
*"'~' niherfI, both zealous abettors of the Queen's cause,

5 entered England in an hostile manner, and plun-

dered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which expeced no such outrage. If the Regent
had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on
such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have
happened so oon after his death, unless they had
been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-
cafion. During such general confusion, men hoped
for universal impunity, and broke out into excesses
of every kind. As it was impossible to restrain
these, without a fettlel form of government, a

Steps taken Convention of the nobles was held, in order to de-
towards
elctir.gan- liberate concerning the election of a Regent. The
other Re- Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meet-
FPb. I2. ing, and protested aainfl its proceedings. The

King's own party was irrefolutc, and divided in
opinion. Mailand, whom Kirkaldy had set at li-
bert, and ho obtained from the nobles then as-
femb!ed a declaration acquitting him of the crime
which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by pro-
posing to admit the Queen to the joint adminiftra-
tion of government with her fn. Elizabeth ad-
hering to her ancient fylfem with regard to Scottish
affars, laboured, notwithrfanding the follicitations
of MILry's friends *, to multiply, and to perpetuate

+ See ApSend. No. I;

the

the factions, which tore in pieces 3ti kingdom. B o o
Randolph, whom Ihe dispatched intoe'otland on VI.
the first news of the Regent's death, and who was her ' '
usual agent for such services, found all parties so 57 '
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irre-
concilable rancour, that it cost him little trouble to
inflame their animosity. The Convention broke up
without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited,
was appointed on the first of May *.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A coalition

continued to acknowledge the King's authority, ftpartee
were at the utmofl pains to restore ome degree of in vain.
harmony among their countrymen. They procured
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
leaders of the two factions. But while the one de-
manded the restoration of the Queen, as the only
thing which could re-eftablifl the public tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the King's authority to be
so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called
in question or impaired ; and neither of them would
recede in the least point from their opinions, they
feparaced without any profpec of concord. Both
were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by
the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from
France with promires of powerful uccour to the
Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in that
kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating
in peace, it was expected that Charles would soon
be at liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the
other hand, the Earl of SuiTcx was assembling a

' Crawf. Mcm. 13. Calderw. . 157.

B 2 power-

Bo K powerful army on the borders, and its operations

VI. could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the

*-- 1

i King's party .

I570.
Queen's THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the

-,in orfacions proved ineffectual, it contributed somewhat
Edinburgh. to moderate, or suspend their rage; but they oon

began to act with their usual violence. Morton,
the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide,
follicired Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the safety of a party, so devoted to her interest,
and which flood so much in need of her assistance.
The Chiefs of the Queen's faction, assembling at
April s. Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and

Kirkaldy, who was both Governor of the castle,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with ome difficulty, to admit them within
the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded almost openly to
their party ; and the Duke, and Lord Herreis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
refured the places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition
of persons, o illustrious by their birth, or so emi-
nent for their abilities, they published a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to support the Queen's
authority, and seered resolved not to leave the city
b.efore the m:eing of the approaching Convention,
in which, by their numbers and influence, they did
not doubt of fcuring a majority of voices on their
fide -.

*Cr: £f:.->. r.. Ibi. 137. CIM2e3w. 2. 176.

7 AT

AT the fame time, they had formed a design of B o o K

kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if VI.
they could engage them in hostilities, and revive '
their ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped, Endea7our
not only to dissolve a confederacy o great advan- to involve

the nation

rage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their coun- in a war
trymen to the Queen, *Elizabeth's natural and mol 'aL"ng
dangerous rival. With this view, they had, imme-
diately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had
since instigated them to continue and extend their
depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one
hand, the dangerous consequences of renderi;g this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not
to susser such an insult on her government to pass
with impunity; fie issued a proclamation, declaring
that she imputed tle outrages which had been com-
mitted, not to the Scottish nation, bt to a few def-
perate and ill-defigning perfuns; that, with the for-
mer, she was resolved to maintain an inviolable
friendship, whereas the duty, which she owed to
her own fubjets, obliged her to chaflife the licen-
tioufnefs of the latter*. Suficx and Scroop, accord-
ingly, entered Scotland, the one on the eatt, the
other on the wefl borders, and laid waste the adja-
cent countries with fire nd sword t. Fame mag-
nified the number and progrcfs of their armies, and
Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe in
Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill-affeced
to their cause, retired to Linlithgo)w. Therei by a April -.
publick proclamation they afierted the Qucen's au-
thority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but

* Cald. . i$i. - Cabala, 174.

B ; tz:

B o K the'Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,

VI. whonm she had conflimrted her Litutenants in the

L"- I kingdom.
1570.

Kinz'spir- THE nobles who continued faithful to the King,
ry enrc- E- °)
_.-brh. though confid-rably weakened by the defection of

'*
y s so many of their fri-ends, assembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro-
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies o their country; and charging
them with the murder both of t.e late King, and
of the Regent. They could nor, however, pre-
fume so much on their own strength as to venture
either to elect a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the aiftance, which they
received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
Ey her order, Sir W\iliiam Drury marched into
Scotland, w-ih a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse ; the King's adherents joined him with a con-
fiderable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, rhere the adverse party had already be-
gun hofli'iries by attacking the castle, they forced
the o rtir, theh

o c e n-ighbourilng country,

xh:ch belonged to the IHmiltns, and, after feiz-
in, some of thiir castles, and razing others, return-
ed to Edinburgh.

:..ri. .f UDER Dr:ry's protection, the Earl of Lennnx
E'2 ..e. returned in:o ScoIl:nd. It was natural to commit

-. rdj the government of the kingdom to him, during
M '!;'] the minortv of his rn dfon. I-is' i'lufrious birth,

.d ai, ia.ce v.-i t:; royal fam !y of England, as
\;-- as or Sc ,:and, ren.cre.i h ni worthy of that

E~~~~r oi0ho-

honour; and his resentment against Mary being B o o K
implacable, and his eflate lying in England, and VI.
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him '
as a man, who, both from inclination, and from 5
interest, would at in concert with her, and ardently
wished that he might succeed Murray in the office
of Regent. But, on many accounts, fihe did not
think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or
to favour his pretensions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had ben excited by a pre-
tended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce-
ness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be
on the point of coming to an issue; and after flled-
ding the best blood, and wafting the richest pro-
vinces in the kingdom, both paities desired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negotiations,
which were carrying on for that purpose. Charles
IX. was known to be a pafionate admirer of
Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser
a Queen of France, and the most ancient ally of
his crown, to languifn in her present cruel situation,
without attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monftrating, by his ambassadors, against the indig-
nity, with which she had been treated. But if he
were once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefore became neccifary for her to
act with some reserve, and not to appear, avowed-
ly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. Thejealoufy and pre-
judices of the Scots required no less management.

B 4 Had

B o o Had ffie openly supported Lennox's claim; had he'

VI. recommended him to the Convention, as the can-
'" - d'date, whom she approved ; this might have rouz-
5 70' ed the independant spirit of the nobles, and by too

plain a discovery of her intention, she might have
defeated its success. For there reasons; she hesitated
long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
messages, which she received from the King's party.:
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was
at las obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature femrs to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius V. having issued a bull, whereby he excom-
municated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,
and absolved her fubjefs from their oath of allegi-
ance, Felton, an Englishman, had the boldness to
fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's pa-
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fa-
tal sentence againfr the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now
less regarded, its proceedings were more cautious;
and, it was only when they were rouzed by some
powerful fi'ince, that the thunders of the church
were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed
this ftep, which the Pope had taken, to a combi-
nation of the Roman Catholic Princes against her,
and fufpecled that ome plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottish Queen. In that event, she knew
that the lafety of her own kingdom depended on
preserving her influence in Scotland ; and in order
to strengthen this, she renewed her promises of pro-
teding the K's .dhcrents, encouraged them to

pro-

proceed to the eleaion of a Regent, and even ven- B o o
tured to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the per- VI.
son who had the belt title. That honour was ac-
cordingly conferred upon. him, in a Convention of 570
the whole party, held on the 2th of July *.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the'meet- Lennox

ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party*eleedRe'
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having
effected that, he marched against the Earl of Hunt-
ly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garribon, which he had placed in Brechin, to fur-
render at discretion. Soon after, he made himself
master of ome other castles. Emboldened by this
successful beginning of his administration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of secretary, and
proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other
leaders of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies
of their country-[-.

I N this desperate situation of their affairs, the Mary's ad-
Q2een's adherents had recourse to the King of herents ne-

gotiatewith

Spain ~, with whom Mary had held a close corref- Spain.
pondence ever since her confinement in England.
They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers -to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coafis, and harbours; and. obtained
from him a small upply of money and arms, which

* SPotfw. 240. Cald. . 86. See Appcndix, No. IT.

t Crawf. Mcm. il9. Call. . 1.
1 See Appendix, No. Ill.

were

B o o K were ent to the Earl of Huntly *. But this aid,

VI. so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have
',- availed them little. They were indebted for their
lizabth safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
proposes a under colour of restoring the captive Queen to her
rrea:y of
accommo- throne. The first fieps in this negotiation had been
daion be taken in the month of May ; but hitherto little pro-
ry and her grefs was made in it. The peace concluded between
nbje'& the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and

her apprehensions that Charles would interpose with
vigour in behalf of his sifter in law, quickened Eli-
zabeth's motions. She affected to treat her prisoner
with more indulgence, she lifkened more graciously
to the sol!icitations offoreign ambassadors in her fa-
vour, and seemed fully determined to replace heron
the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her fin-
cerity, she laboured to procure a ceflation of arms
between the two contending factions in Scotland.
Lennox, elated with the good fortune, which had
hitherto attended his administration, and flattering
himfeif with an easy triumph over enemies, whole
estates were wafted, and their forces diipirited, re-
fused, for fame time, to come into this measure.
It was not fate for him, however, to dispute the
will of his p;roeci-refs. A cessation of hoflilities dur-
ing two months, to commence on the third of Sep-
ternber, was agreed upon; and being renewed from
time to time, it continued till the firt of April next
year --.

SOON as:er, Elizabeth cdifparchrd Cecil and Sir
Walter Midm;?a t te Qu!een of cots. The dig-

e ^*-" .' '1- .~. s.em ,. Sp-,l i. 21.t

3 :

. ... F. r-.
: m . >,,j Sp',fA. 243.

nity

nlty of there ambassadors, the former her prime Mi- B o o K
nifer, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, and VI.
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties "
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour5
of Mary's liberty was now approaching. The pro-
positions, which they made to her, were advan-
tageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in
Mary's situation, had reason to expect. The rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the English Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the ad-
hering to the alliance between the two kingdoms;
the pardoning her subjects, who had taken arms
against her; and her promising to hold no corref-
pondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that
might diflurb Elizabeth's government; were among
the chief articles. By way of security for the ac-
complifhment of these, they demanded that some
persons of rank hould be given as hostages, that
the Prince her son Ifould reside in England, and
that a few castles on the border flould be put into
Elizabeth's hands. To ome of there propositions
Mary consented; some the endeavoured to miti-
gate; and others she attempted to evade. In the
mean time, she tranmiitted copies of them to the
Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and to
the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interposition in her be-
half, fle would be obliged to accept of these hard
conditions, and to purchase liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-
tirely exhausted. Charles had already begun to me-

ditate

B o K ditate that conspiracy againit the Hugonots, which

VI. marks his reign with such infamy; and it required
'v'-" much leiure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that

execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed
in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Chrifrian arms, by the victory over the
infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened
an insurrection; and his fubjets in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppression, and many.indignities,
were breaking out into open rebellion. All of them,
for these different reasons, advised Mary, without de.
pending on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the
best terms the could procure *

Ei:zbc;h's IIARY, accordingly, consented to many of Eli-
hrt'ccsiR zabeth's demands, and discovered a facility of dif-
theccnduca
of it. position, which promised fill frther concessions,

But no concession she could have made, would have
satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
professions of sincerity to foreign ambafladors, and
notwi:hfianding the solemnity with which The car-
ried n the tratv, had no other.obje& in it, than
to atufe Mary's allies, and to gain time t. After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for
refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now dfmifs her with safety. Under all;the difad-
vantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, which
were extremely formidable. What defperate'effets
of her just r::c.r.tment might be expected, if she were
set- a; liberty, and recovered her former power ?

/r-er 2.
ol. '. :., i 20. Diggc-, Compl. Amb. 78.

What

What engagements could bind her, not to revenge B1 o o
the wrongs she had suffered, nor to take advantage VI.
of the favourable conjuntures, that mighlt present '-'
themselves ? Was it possible for her to give such I 570
security for her behaviour, in times to come, as
might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was
there not good cause to conclude, that no future be-
nefits could ever obliterate the memory of past inju-
ries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though she
continued to a as if her views had been entirely
different. She appointed seven of her privy coun-
fellors to be commissioners for fettling the articles
of the treaty; and as Mary had -already named the
Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Leving-
fton, for her ambassadors, the required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the
King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcarn abbot of Dun-
fermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons
chosen by the Regent. They prepared for their
journey, as slowly as Elizabeit herself could have
wished. At length they arrived at London, and
met the commifioners of the two Queens. Mary's Feb. ,
ambafadors discovered the ftrongelt inclination to
comply with every thing, that would remove the
obstacles, which stood in the way of their mistress's'
liberty. But when Morton and his associates were
called upon to vindicate their conduct, and to ex-
plain the sentiments of their party, they began, in
justification of their treatment of the Queen, to ad-
vance such maxims concerning the limited powers
of Princes, and the natural right oF subjects to refit
and to controul them, as were extremely flocking
to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative

were

B o o K were very exalted. With regard to the authority

VI. which the King now poffefled, they declared that
''y^ they neither had, nor could possibly receive inftruc-

15i'. tions, to content to any treaty, that tended to sub-

vert, or even to impair it, in the least degree *.
Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commifioners of the King of
Scots, to the Queen of England. His party de-
pended abfulutely on her protection, her hand had
feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease,
she could have brought them to talk in a very dif-
ferent manner; and whatever conditions she might
have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had
no other choice but to submit. This declaration,
however, she affected to confider as an insuperable
It proves difficulty. And finding that there was no reason to

is dread any danger from the French King, who had

not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary,
which was expected ; the reply made by Morton
firnifhed her with a pretence for putting a stop to
March =4. the negociation, till the Regent flioufd fend ambaf-

fadors with more ample powers. Thus after being
amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under stricter
custody than ever, and without any prospect of
escaping from it; while those subjects, who still ad-
hered to her, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in
this negociation rendered fill more incflent -.

Cald. 2. 234. Digges, 1. Haynes, 52, 3z4.

t And. 3. 91, c.

ON

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which B o o K

had been observed with little exacanefs on either fide, VI.
Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gallant and en-
terprifing officer, performed a service of great im- Dunbarton
portance to the Regent, by surprising the castle ofcaflrle du-
Dunbarton. This was the only fortified place in theRegent.
the kingdom, of which the Queen had kept posses-
sion, ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rites in the middle of a plain,
rendered it extremely frong, and in the opinion of
that age impregnable; as it commanded the river
Clyde, it was of great consequence, and esteemed
the most proper place in the kingdom for landing
any foreign troops, that might come to Mary's aid.
The strength of the place rendered Lord Fleming,
the governor, more secure than he ought to have
been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who
had served in the garrison, and had been disgusted
by ome ill usage, proposed the scheme to the Re-
gent, endeavoured to demonstrate that it was prac-
ticable, and offered himfclf to go the foremost man
on the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque
any danger, for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders,
and whatever else was necessary, were prepared with
the utmost secrecy and dispatch. All the avenues
to the catle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design might reach the governor. Towards evening,
Crawford marched from Glasgow, with a small but
determined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock

was

B o o K was highest, that the alailants made their attempt,

VI. because, in that place there were few sentinels, and
^-v J rthey hoped to find them least alert. The first lad.
157I' der was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness

of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the aailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawrord scrambled up the rock, and
fattened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which grew
in a cleft. This place they all reached with the ut-
most ditculty, but were frill at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made
fast a second time; but in the middle of the ascent,
they me with an unforeseen difficulty. One of their
companions was seized with some sudden fit, and
clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All
were at a itand. It was impossible to pass him.
To tumble himr headlong was cruel; and might oc-
cafion a discovery. But Crawford's presence of mind
did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound salt to the ladder, that he might not fall when
the fit was over: and turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there still remained
a high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many
greater difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A
sentry observed the first man, who appeared on the
parapet, and had just time to give the alarm, before
he was knocked on the head. .The officers and fol
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and
more solicitous about their own safety, than capable
of making resistance. The assailants rushed for-
wards, with repeated shouts, and with the utmost

fury

fury; took pofiefion of the magazine; seized the B o o K
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. VI.
Lord Fleming got into a fnall boat, and fled all " '
alone, into Argylfhire. Crawfurd, in reward of 1571
his valour and good condu&, remained master of
the cable; and as he did not lose a ingle man in
the enterprize, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the pri!bners of greatert distinction .

VERAC'S charaEer proteted him from the usage, Archbiihop

which he merited by his activity in stirring up ene- o St. An-
mies against the King. The Regent treated the to dePhby
lady with great politeness, and humanity. But a im.
very different fate awaited the archbishop; he was
carried under a strong guard to Stirling; and as he
had formerly been attainted by at of Parliament,
he was, without any formal trial, condemned to be
hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken,
the entence was executed. An attempt was made
to convit him of being accessary to the murther
both of the King and Regent, but thee accusations
were supported by no proof. Our historians ob-
serve that he was the first bishop in Scotland who
died by the hands of the executioner. The high
offices he had enjoyed, both in church and fiate,
ought to have exempted him from a punishment,
infiited only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal
for the Queen, his abilities, and his profession, ren-
dered him odious and formidable to the King's ad-
]erents. Lennox hated him as the perion, by whose

| iUch. C counfls
-O. II. C counfcls

B o o K counsels the reputation and power of the house of

VI. Hamilton were supported. And party rage, and
1571' personal enmity, dictated that indecent sentence, for

which some colour was fought, by imputing to him
such odious crimes .

K:'dy THE loss of Dunbarton, and the evere treatment

denditheof the Archbishop, perplexed and enraged the
cat-le of
Edinburgh Queen's party; and hostilities were renewed with
Q e 's all the fiercene's, which disappointment and indig.
nrnie. nation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the truce,

had taken care to increase the number of his garri.
son, and to provide every thing necessary for his de-
fence, issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's au-
thority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded
all who favoured his cause to leave the town within
fix hours; seized the arms, belonging to the citi-
zens ; planted a battery on the steeple of St. Giles,
repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affections of the inhabitants leaned
a different way, held out the metropolis against the
Regent. The Duke, Huntly, Home, Herreis, and
other chiefs of that fation, repaired to Edinburgh
with their followers; and having received a small
fum of money, and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls. On
the other fide, Morton seized Leith, and fortified
it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable
body of men. While the armies lay so near each
other, daily skirmishes happened, and with various
success. The Queen's party was not strong enough
to take the field againtl the Regent, nor was his

*Spotfw,. zz2.

fuperioric)

superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the B o o K
cable, or of the town . VI.

I571.

SOUE time before Edinburgh fell into the hands Both par
of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- ties hold

parlia-

liament to meet in that place. In order to prevent ments.
any objection against the lawfulness of the meeting, May I44
the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as
poflible; and assembled in a house at the head of
the Canongate, which, though without the walls,
lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meet-
ing; but they were so strongly guarded, that all his
efforts were vain. They passed an a attainting
Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourned to
the 28th of August t.

THE other party, in order that their proceedings

Iight be countenanced by the fame shew of legal
uthority, held a meeting of parliament son after.
here was produced in this assembly, adeclaration
y the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, where-
y she had resigned the crown, and consented to the
oronation of her son. Conformable to this decla-
ation, an at was pafR, pronouncing the resignation
o have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
nd in all its consequences; and enjoining all good
ubje&s to acknowledge the Queen alone to be their
awful sovereign, and to support those who a&ed in
er name. The present etlablifhment of the pro-
:elant religion was confirmed by another fatute;
* Ca'd 2. 233, &c. - Crawf. Mem. 177.

C 2 and,

B o o K and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new meet-

VI. ing was appointed on the 26th of August *

I57I.
Mferable MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war defo-
condition lated the kingdom. Fellow citizens, friends, bro-
of the king-
dorn. thers, took different fides, and ranged themselves

under the standards of the contending factions. In
every county, and almost in every town and village,
Ki'Rg's-en and 9 een's-men were names of diftinc-
tion. Political ha:red dissolved all natural ties, and
extinguished the reciprocal good will and confidence,
which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itlelf with thee civil diftinEtions, and
contributed not a little to heighten, and to inflame
them.

Sta-C of THE factions which divided the kingdom were,
tac:cs. in appearance, only two. But in both these, ther

were persons, with views, and principles, so diffe.
rent from each other, that they ought to be diftin
guifhed. With ome, considerations of religiio
were predominant, and they either adhered to th
Queen, becauf: they hoped, by her means, to re
etaolifh Popery, or they defended the King's autho
rity, as tl;e Lbet support of the Protefiant faith
Among thee tle opposition was violent and irre
concileable. Others were influenced by politics
motives only, or allured by views of interest ; tl
Regent am ad at uniting there, and did not defpai
cf ganiig, b gentle arts, many of Mary's adht
re:;s to ac.-novledge the King's authority. Mail

' Cra.s '.,'cm 1 7I--.

Ian

]and and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a B o o K
coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might VI.
be restored to some share in the government, and w w
the kingdom shake off its dependance on England. '57
Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
iroft powerful man of the King's party, held a par-
ticular course ; and moving only as he was prompt-
ed by the court of England, thwarted every mea-
sure, that tended towards a reconcilement of the
iactions; and as he served Elizabeth with much si-
del, li ty, p an it or he

derived bot po and credit fom
avowed protection.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the

meeting of their parliaments, now approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in
that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were,
they paflid an at for attainting upwardls of 200 of
the adverie action. The meeting at Stirling was
numerous and splendid. The Regent had prevail-
ed on tle Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Cafiils, and
Lord Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority.

lThe three Earls were among the o'lt powerful

noblemen in the Kingdom, and had hiihwrto been
zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord , oyd had been
one of Mary's commiioners at Yrck and Weflmin-
iter, and, iince that time, had blen admitted into
ail her mofi lfecret councils. But, dulring that tur-
bulent period, the conduct of individuals, as well is
the principles of factions, varied to often, that the
:ene of honour, the chief prfrcrvative of conftlence
in character, was entirely loft, and without any re-

C 3 gard

B o o K gard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one par.

VI. ty, and adopted all the violent passions of the other
,t'V The defe&ion, however, of so many perlbns of dif

57I.* tintion, not only weakened the Queen's party, but

added reputation to her adversaries.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin
party fur- burgh, that at Stirling began with framing as a.
s'ring. gainft the opposite action. But in the midst of al
bzirlin. garist the opposite ja i

the security, which confidence in their own num
bers, or distance from danger could inspire, the)
were awakened, early one morning, by the shout!
of the enemy in the heart of the town. In a mo.
ment, the houses of every person of distinction wer
surrounded, and before they knew what to think oi
so firange an event, the Regent, the Earls of Ar-
gyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Mon
trofe, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogil.
vie, were all made p;ifoners, and mounted behinc
troopers, who were ready to carry them to Edin.
burgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en.
terprize; and if he had not been induced, by the
ill-timed solicitude of his friends about his safety,
not to hazard his own person in conduaing it, that
day might have trminated the contest between the
two factions, and have reflored peace to his coun.
try. By his diretion, four hundred men, under
the command of Hunt!ey, Lord Claud Hamilton,
and Scott of Bucclkugh, set out from Edinburgh,
and the better to conceal their design, marched to.
wards the south. But they oon wheeled to the
right, and horses having been provided for the in
fanry,, rode ftreight to Stirling. By four in the

morning,

nor;ning, they arrived there; not one sentry was B o o K
polled on the walls, not a single man was awake VI.
about the place. They met with no refiflance from ^
any person they had seized, except Morton. He
defending his house with obstinate valour, they were
obliged to set it on fire, and he did not furrendcr
till orced out of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was confurned; and the private
men, unaccustomed to regular discipline, left their
colours, and began to rifle the houses and flops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town
reached the castle. The Earl of Mar rallied out
with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy,
of whom almost none but the officers kept together
in a body. The townsmen took arms to aflift their
governor; a sudden panic firuck the assailants; ome
fled, some surrendered themselves to their own pri-
foners; and had not the borderers, who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the
horses within the place, not a man would have e-
fcaped. If the Regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. Think on
the Archbijhop of St. Andrews, was the word among
the Queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to The P.e-
his memory. The officer, to whom he surrendered, ent k:llcd.
endeavouring to protect him, loft his own life in
his defence. He was slain, according to the gene-
ral opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamil-
ton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concerting this plan
with great secrecy, and prudence; but Morton's
fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline a-
mong his own troops, deprived him of success, the

C 4 only

B o o K only thing wanting to render this equal to the most

Vl. applauJed military enterprizes of the kind *

'57'. airchofen As so many of the nobles were assembled, they
Regent, proceeded, without delay, to the election of a Re-
SePt. 6.

gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates
for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of
voices. Amidcf all the fierce dissentions, which had
prevailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished
himself by his moderation, his humanity, and his
disinterestedness. And as his power was far inferior
to Argyil's, and his abilities not so great as Mor-
ton's, he was, for these reasons, less formidable to
the other nobles. His merit, too, in having so
lately rescued the Leaders of the party from im-
minent destruction, contributed not a little to his
preferment.

pr;ocee- . WHILE these things were carrying on in Scot-
EnI.nd a- land, the transactions in England were no less inte-
g in, refting to Mhary, and still more fatal to her cause.

The parliament of that kingdom, which met in
April, passed an a, by which, it was declared to
be high treason, to claim any right to the Crown
during the life of the Queen; to affirm that the title
of any other perion was better than hers ; or to main-
tain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and
to limit the order of fuccceiicn. This remarkable
flatute was intended not only for the security of their
own sovereign, but to curb the restless and in-
triguing spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her adhe-
rents -.

* Moe. ::. Cr.wf. 'mn. z.x.. t Camd, ;6.

AT

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between E- B o K
izabeth and the Duke of njou, the French VI.
in 's brother, was well advanced. Both courts " '-
-ceed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave Marriag
tr, with the utmost confidence, that it could not negociated

between

ii of taking place. Neither of them, how-Elizabeth
ver, wised its success ; and they encouraged it for Dnd thE
o other end, but because it served to cover or to Anjou.
promote dheir particular designs. The whole policy
f Cathcrine of Medicis was bent towards the ac-
omplifh!rent of her detePable proje6t for the de-
ruction f the Hugonot chiefs ; and by carrying
n a negociation for the marriage of her son with a
rincels, who was justly esteemed the protecrefs of
hat party, by yielding some things in point of re-
igion, and by discovering an indiffe:ence with re-
ard to others, he hoped to amule all the Protestants
n Europe, and to lull sleep the jealousy even of
he-ugronots themselves. Elizabeth flattered herself
;ith re.:;ping advantages of another kird. During
!he dependence of the negociation, the French could
not with decency give any cpen aiilfance to the
Scottifi Quecn; if they conceived any hopes of fuc-
ces in tle treaty of marriage, they would, of course,
inereft thenmelves but coldly in her concerns; Mary
herself must be dejeaed at lo;in: an av, whom he
lad hitherto reckoned her most powerful proteaor;
land by interrupting her corrfpondence with France,
one source, a lear, of th- cabals and intrigues
wvhich disturbed the kingdom, vould e ftopt. Both
Queens succeeded in their fchcmes. Catherine's ar-
tilces inpofed on Elizabeth, and blmnded the Hu-
gonots. The French dilcovered the utmost indiffe-
rence about the in:creft of the Scor ifh Q:cen ; and

Mlary,

B o K Mary, confidering that court as already united with

VI. her rival, turned herfeif, for protection, towards the

King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and thought-

Norclk's ful mind, delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had
conspiracy held a secret correspondence with Mary, for some
in favour
of.:ar. time, by means of the Bishop of Ross, and had

supplied both herself, and her adherents in Scotland,
with small umss of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the cha-
racter of a banker, and who ated privately as an
agent for the Pope, was the person whom the Bi-
shop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to
the Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately
refRored to liberty, upon his solemn promise to have
no further intercourse with the Queen of Scots;
which, however, he regarded o little, that she took
no ftep in any matter of moment, without his ad-
vice. She complained in a long letter, which she
wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, with which
the French court had abandoned her interest ; flie
declared her intention of imploring the afliEance of
the Spanish Monarch, which was now her only re-
source; and recommended Ridolphi to his confi.
dence, as a perlbn, capable both of explaining and
advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to
burn this letter; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolved at that time to be-
tray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the
order, and hid the letter, together with other trea-
fonable papers, under the Duke's own bed.

D/i.s-e, :;4, 3iS. Carnd. 434.

RIDOLPHI,

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omit- B o o K

ted none of those arguments, and spared none of VI.
those promises, which are the usual incentives to
rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great5
iumn in readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The
Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand
men, not far from London. The Catholics to a
man would ife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half
the nation had turned their eyes towards him, and
called onhim to revengethe unmerited injuries, which
he himsnelf had suffered; and to rescue an unfortunate
Queen, who offered him her person, and her crown,
as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of the
design, and though he refused to give Ridolphi any
letter of credit, allowed him to use his name, in nego-
ciating with the Pope, and Alva . The Bishop of
Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and
impatience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt
to run into rash and desperate designs, advised the
Duke to assemble secretly a few of his followers, and
at once to seize Elizabeth's prfon. But this the
Duke rejected as a scheme equally wild and hazard-
ous. Mean while, the English court had received Dircovered
tome imperfe information of the plot, by inter-bthliza-
cepting one of Ridolphi's agents ; and an accident Auguf.
happened, which brought to light all the circum-
fances of it. The Duke had employed Hickford
to transmit to Lord Herreis, ome money, which
was to be distributed among Mary's friends in Scot-
land. A person not in the secret was intrusted with

Anders 3. 161.

conveying

B o o K conveying it to the borders; and he, fufpeting it

VI. from the weight to be gold, whereas he had been

told that it was silver, carried it directly to the pri-
5' vy council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who

were privy, or could be fufpeted of being privy to
Sept. -. the design, were taken into custody. Never did the

accomplices in a conspiracy discover less firmness;
or servants betray an indulgent maser, with greater
baseness. Every one confessed the whole of what
he knew. Hickford gave directions how to find
the papers, which he had hidden. The Duke him.
self, relying at firil on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been de-
firoyed, confidently asserted his own innocence; but
when their depositions, and the papers themielves
were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's
mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too often
repeated, to obtain prdon and Elizabeth thought
it necessary to deter her subjects, by his punifliment,
from holding correlpondence with the Queen of
Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by his Peers,
he vwas fond guilty of high treason, and, after fe-
veral delays, iufrrerd death for the crime .

THE discovery of this conrpiracy produced many

efifcls, extremely detrimental to Mary's interefr.
The Bifnop of Rots, who appeared by the consef-
sion of all concerned, to be the pri.me mover in
every cabal aganft Elizabeth, was taken into cuf-
todv, his papers fe.rched, himfklf committed to the

* Ander. 3. 149. State Trial-, i. P;.

tower,

tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened B o o K
,itch capital punishment, and after a long confine- VI.
ment, set at liberty, on condition that he flould r
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived 7
of a ervant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied, from that time, the privi-
lege of having an ambassador at the English court.
rThe Spanish ambassador, whom, the power and
dignity of the prince he represented, exempted from
such insults as Ross had suffered, was commanded
to leave England . Mary herself was kept under
a ftricer guard than formerly, the number of her
domestics abridged, and no person permitted to fee
her, but in presence of her keepers t.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the form Elizabeth
which was gathering, on the continent, against her declares

openly a-

kingdom, began to wish that tranquillity were re- gainft the
flered in Scotland ; and irritated by Mary's late at- party.
tempt against her government, she determined to
ac, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the
King's party. 1 his resolution the intimated to the
claders of both facions. Mary, she told them, oa. ,.
had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracics both against her crown and life, that
the would henceforth confider her as unworthy of
protecion, and would never content to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She
exhorted them, therefore, to unite in acknowledging
the King's authority. She promiled to procure by

* rhi2r('r, I6. - SrrYve, Ann. 2

A
o.

];r

BoOK her mediation equitable terms for those, who had
VI. hitherto opposed it. But if they flill continued re-

fraory, she threatened to employ her utmost power
to compel them to submit *. Though this decla-
ration did not produce an immediate effect; though
hofilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gor-
don, by his bravery, and good conduct, had routed
the King's adherents in the North, in many encoun-
ters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's
sentiments contributed not a little to animate one
part)-, and to depress the spirit and hopes of the
other -.

^72. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for-
olitiae ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy frill held out the
carried on
be,,,, town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce a day pafied
th m. without a skirmish. And while both avoided any

decisive action, they harraffed each other by attack-
ing small parties, beating up quarters, and inter-
cepting convoys. These operations, though little
memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury, which
rendered themselves regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the priobners they took, of whatever
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial.
Great numbers suffered in this shocking manner;

See Append. No. IV.
- Cald. 2. 29, 2z4. StryFe, z. 6.

the
I

the unhappy victims were led, by fifties at a time, B o o K
to execution ; and it was not till both fides had VI.
imarted severely, that they discontinued this barba-
rous pra&ice, so reproachful to the character of the
nation *. Mean while, those in the town and castle,
though they had received a supply of money from
the Duke of Alva , began to susser for want of
provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
small garrisons in all the houses of strength around
it, scarcity daily encreafed. At last all the miseries
of famine were felt, and they mufr have been soon
reduced to such extremities, as would have forced
them to capitulate, if the English and French am-
baffaeors had not procured a suspension of hostilities,
between the two parties :.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between League be-
Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been fruit- teenEng-

nj wland and

less, both Charles and she were desirous of conclud- France.
ing a dfenfive alliance between the two crowns.
li e confidered such a treaty, not only as the best
device for blinding the Protestants, against whom
the conspiracy was now almorf ripe for execution;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious mea-
sure might expose him. Elizabeth, who had hi-
therto reigned without a ingle ally, now saw her
kingdom so threatned with intestine commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that she was ex-

* Crawf. Mem. 21S, 22o. t Cald, 2. 345.
t Id. 346.

tremely

B o K tKreme."- luici:ous to secure the afiflance of so pow-

VI. erful a r eigihbour. The difirculties arising fi-om
VJ thie frruarion or the cortifh Queen, were the chief
572' occasions oi: any delay. Charles demanded some

terms of advantage for Mary, and her party. Eli-
zabeth refuied to liltcn to any proposition of that
kind. Her obftincy overcame the faint eorts of
the French Monarch. Mary's narne was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard
to Scottish affairs, a ihort article was inferred, in ge-
,p~n ,:. nzral and a.mbiguous terms, to this purpose, " That

the parties contracting shall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor ilcfFr any firanger to enter, and to
foment the faetions there ; but it hall he lawful for
the Queen of England to chaflife, by force of arms,
those Scots who fha!l continue to harbour the Eng-
lifh rebels now in Scotland *." In consequence of
this treaty, France and England affec'ed to ac in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and
Sir William Drury, appeared there, in name of their
refpecive sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce,
for t.o Yont.s, .-as agreed upon, and during that
time, conwerer.ces were to be held between the lead-
ers of the cppcfite factions, in order to accommo-
date their differences, and restore peace to the king-
dom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquiity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest.
Sir Adam Gordon had fill maintained his reputa-
tion and fuperioriry there. Several parties, under
different o cers, were sent againfl him. Some of
them .: - ...:icked in the field; against others he

'.:.~" , -- . :' C.c.. . mploed

employed

mplloyed stratagem; and as his courage and con- B o o k
lutL were equal, none of his enterprizes failed of VI.
iccefq. H1e made war, too, with the humanity,
vhich became so gallant a man, and gained ground 1572.
)y that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations, he would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to submit entire-
ly to the Queen's authority *.

| NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- Proceed-
cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not only ingsin

England a-
in her own kingdom, but among the English. No- gainft

kingdom, Fnolishn

thing could be more offensive to that nation, jea- Mary.
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profpeEt of
the Spanish yoke, than her negociations with the
Duke of Alva. The parliament, which met in
May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn confe-
fence between the Lords and Commons, both houses
Agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of
igh trealbn, and to deprive her of all right of fuc-
ceftion to the crown. This great cause, as it was
then called, occupied them during the whole feflion,

a1nd was carried on with much unanimity. Eliza-
ieth, though she applauded their zeal, and approv-
ed greatly of the course they were taking, was fa-
tisfied wilh ihewing Mary what she might expect
from the resentment of the nation; but as he 'did
not et think it time to proceed to the most violent
extremity against her, she prorogued the parlia-
ment -.

Cravwf Mem. e. D'Ewes Journ. 26, &c.
VOL. II. D THESE

B o o K THESE severe proceedings of the Engliff parli.

VI. ment were not more mortifying to Mary, than th
L't"* ' coldness and neglect of her allies the French. Th;

TbFrench Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over t
neglea her ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew of in
inerett.

tereftino- himself in favour of the Scottish Quee,
but instead of folliciting for her liberty, or her re
fRoration to her throne, all that he demanded was|
flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprifonmern
And even this lmhall request, he urged with so litrt
warmth or importunity, that no regard was paid
it% 1

The ra.Ta- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabel
:eoParis. much fatisfation, and she expected from it a grep

increase of security. She now turned her whole a.
tenrion towards Scotland, where the animofities
the two factions were still so high, and lo many
tersering interests to be adjufled, that a general p,
cification eemed to be at a great distance. Bi
while she laboured to bring them to some agre
ment, an event happened which filled a great p
of Europe with ailonifhment, and with horr'
This was the massacre of Paris; an attempt,
which there is no parallel in the hiflory of mankin
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or
the cruelty and barbarity, with which it was pt
in execution. By the moftfolemn promises of safe
and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants wel
drawn to court; and though doomed to deftruciol
they were received with caresses, loaded with

Jebb z. 5:2.

noun

ours, and treated, for seven months, with every B1 o o
ipible mark of familiarity, and of confidence. In VI.
he midst of their security, the warrant for their de- .-'7-

5I~72

rudion was issued by their Sovereign, on whose August 24
ord they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their
ountrynmen, their fellow citizens, and companions,
mbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thousand
roteflants, without diftintion of age, or ex, or
ondition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
ame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of
he kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
eed, which no Popilh writer, in the prefent,.age,
entions without deteflation, was, at that tirme, ap-
lauded in in Spain;and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings
ere offered to God, for its success. But among
he Protefants it excit-d incredible horror; a ftrik-
g picure of which is drawn by the French am-
affador at the court of England, in his account of
is firfi audience after the mafacre. " A gloomy
rrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
e dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
ere ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
g, and as I passed through them, not one beflow-
on me a civil look, or made the least return to
y salutes *."

BUT horror was not the only pafflon, with which Detrimen-
his event inspired the Proteflants; it filled them ' to

} - Mary's in-

vith fear. They confidered it as the prelude totereft.
pme greater blow,.and believed, not without much

* Carte, 3. 522.

D z pro-

B o o K probability, that all the Popish Princes had confpi

VI. ed the defiruction of their sect. This opinion di

no fimall disservice to Mary's affairs in Scotlan(
1572. Many of her adherents were Protestants; an(

though they wished her relloration, were not wi
ling, on that account, to sacrifice the faith whi(
they profefied. They dreaded her attachment
a religion, which allowed its votaries tb violate t!
mot solemn engagements, and prompted them
perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A gene
confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them, t
only thing that could uphold the Reformation agaii
the league, which was formed to overturn it.
could the present establishment of religion be loI
maintained in Britain, but by a strict union .
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both natioi
in espousing the defence of it, as a common cause

TheReWent THE Regent took hold of this favourable c(
cn.deacurs ]unaure for negociating a general peace. And
boct n'pr- he laboured for this purpose, with the utmof zc

and the adverse faction placed entire confidence
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have fai
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy ca
so near to an agreement with him, that scarce
thing remained, except the formality of signing
treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the dii
pointment he met with in his pretensions to the]
gency; his abilities, his wealth, and the patron
of the court of England, gave him greater f
with the party, than even the Regent himself;
he took pleasure in thwarting every measure

* Digges, 24:, 267.

,)ed by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and B o o c
is affciates recovered any share in the adminifira- VI.
on, his own influence would be considerably dimi- -'
filed; and the Regent, by their means, would re- 1572.
ain that acendant, which belonged to his flation.
Vith him, concurred all those, who were in posies-
on of the lands, which belonged to any of the
lueen's party. And his ambition, and their ava-
ce, f-utrated the Regent's pious intentions, and
etarded a blessing so necessary to the kingdom, as
e eftabliflment of peace .

SUCH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, His deth.
hich reigned among his party, made a deep im-
reflon on the Regent, wholoved his country, and
iffled for peace with much ardor. This inward
rief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of
hich he died on the 29th of Otober. He was,
erhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who
uld have enjoyed the office of Regent, without
vy, and have left it, without loss of reputation.
otwithftanding their mutual animofities, both sac-
ons acknowledged his views to be honourable, and
is integrity to be uncorrupted t.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. Morton
he Queen of England powerfully supported his cllofl Re-
lairn, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Ncvem.4..
ind the jealousy of the nobles, he was elected Re-
ent; the fourth, who in the space of five years,
ad held that dangerous office.

e Mclv, z23 Crawf. Mcm. 237. t Id. 241.

D 3 As

B o o K As the truce had been prolonged to the firt of

VI. January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-

- ing the negociations with the opposite party, which
/57'. had been set on foot by his predecessor. They pro.

duced no efecs, however, till the beginning of the
next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, ome events, hither.
to untouched, deserve our notice.

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been

kept prisoner in Lochlcven, ever since his Bight in.
to Scotland in the year 569, was given up to Lord
Hunfdon Governor of Btrwick; and being carried
to York, suffered there the punilhment of his rebel.
lion. The King's party were so sensible of their de.
pendence on Elizabeth's protection, that it wa:
scarce pofible for them to refuse putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms againit her,
Bur as a fum of money was paid, on that account;
and shared between Morton and Douglas of Loch-
leven, the ormer of whom, during his exile in
Eniand, had been much indebted to Northumber-
land's fiiendfhip, the abandoning this unhappy
nobleman, in such a manner, to certain defirution,
w.-as deemed an ungrateful and mercenary action*.

A-'s r.; Tnis year was remarkable for a considerable in-
tI: c-.h. novat:ion in the government of the Church. Soor

after the -:eformation, the Popish Bishops had been
confirmed by law in poffefion of part of their be
nefices ; but the spiritual jurisdiction, which belong.

* Cra:,vf. MeI. 5;;, 2z2. Card. 445

ed

to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, B o o K
'ough wvith more moderate authority. On the VI.
ath of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Morton ^"~-"
tained from the Crown a grant of the tempora- 57
ics o that fee. But as it was thought indecent
r a avman to hold a benefice, to which the cure
fouls was annexed, lie procured Douglas, rector
the university of St. Andrews, to be chosen arch-
lhop; and allotting him a small pension out of the
evenues of the fce, retained the remainder in his

|gwn hands. The nobles, lwho saw the advantages

ey might reap from such a pracice, supported
im in the execution of his plan. It gave great

ience, however, to the Clergy, who, instead of

:rpetuating an order, whose name and power was
ious to them, wified that the revenues which had
:longed to it, might be employed in supplying fuclh
arifhes, as were still unprqvided with fettled ipaflors.
ut on the one hand, it would have been rash in
e Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen,
whom the very exiflence of the Proteitant Church
cotland depended ; and Morton, on the other,
nducted his scheme with such dexterity, and ma-
aged them with fo.much art, that it was, at last,
greed, in a Convention composed of the leading
aen among the Clergy, together with a committee
f privy council, " that the name and oce of
rchbifhop, and bi!hop, flhould be continued during

ie King's minoiity, and these dignities be confcr-
:d upon the belt qualified among the Protefaint
inifters; but that wvith regard to their fpiriual :-
iftdiaions, they s1hold be subje&t to the general al'.
cmbly of the Church." 'I he rules to be o!!'; v!,d

D 4 in

B o o K in their election; and the persons who were to flpply

VI. the place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged

to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were
1572. likewise particularly specified *. And the whole be-

ing laid before the General Assembly, after fomn
exceptions to the name of ArchiJ7op, Deae, Chap-
ter, &c. and a protestation that it should be con-
fidercd only as a temporary constitution, till one
more perfect could be introduced, it obtained the
approbation of that court +. Even Knox, who
was prevented from attending the Assembly by the
ill slate of his health, though he declaimed loudly
against the Simcniacal padtion, to which Douglas
owed his preferment, and blamed the nomination of
a person, worn out with ge and infirmities, to an
office, which required unimpaired vigour both of
body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the
Assembly, approved of ome of their regulations
with refpec' to the election of ifhops, as worthy
of being carefully observed . In consequence of
the Aembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in
the Convention, Douglas was inftailed in his office,
and at the fame time, an archbifnop of Glasgow,
and a bishop of Dunkeld were chosen from among
the Protestant Clergy. They were all admitted to
the place in parliament, which elonged to the ec-
clefiaftical order. But in imitation of the example
fte by Morton, such bargains were made with them
by different noblemen, as gave them possession only

a Cad. 2. J?. r Id. 3,4. t Sce ppendi, N.V

of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to Bo o K
their fes *. VI.

1572.

SOON after the dissolution of this afiembly, Knox, Novem.27.

the prime instrument of spreading and eflablilhing Death and
the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life, Knox,
in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
intererrednefs, were virtues which he possessed, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with the
learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled in
that species of eloquence, which is calculated to
rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too evere, and the impetuosity of his
temper excessive. Rigid and uncomplying himself,
he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardless of the diRinctions of rank and character,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and ve-
hemence, more apt to irritate, than to reclaim.
This often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expressions, with respect to the Queen's person and
conduEt. 1 hose very qualities, however, which
now render his chara&er le's amiable, fitted him to
be the instrument of Providence for advancing -the
Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled him
to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from
which, a person of a more gentle spirit would have
been apt to flhrink back. By an unwearied appli-
cation to study, and to business, as well as by the
frequency and fervor of his public discourses, he
had worn out aconftitution, naturally strong. Dur-
ing a lingering illness, he discovered the utmost for-
titude; and met the approaches of death, with a

* Spots z6I.

magna-

B oo K magnanimity inseparable from his character. He

V VI. was constantly employed in ats of devotion, and
'OV_ comforted himself with those profpe&s of immorta-

7 ity, which not only preserve good men from def-

ponding, but fill them with exultation in their last
moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present
at his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few
words, the more honourable for Knox, as they
came from one whom he had often censured with
peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never fear.
ed the face of man *."

THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such

Th5 Re- generous motives as the former Regent, he laboured,
gen Utrats however, in good earnest, to establish it. The pub-
with the
qens lic confusions and calamities, to which he owed his
Fartyo power and importance when he was only the second

person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that he was raised to be the first. While
so many of the nobles continued in arms againfi
him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of
extinguishing the flame, which she had kindled, and
kept so long alive in Scotland t. She had disco-
vered the alliance with France, from which she had
expected such advantages, to be no foundation of
security. And though appearances of friendship
fiill fubfifled between her and that court, and Charles
daily renewed his protestations of inviolable adhe-
rence to the treaty, he was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little she ought to rely on the pro-
miles or oaths of that perfidious Monarch. Her

SDotfw. 6. Ca'd. 2. 2t. -- Eigges, 29.

am-

ambassador warned her that the French held a secret B-oo K
correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, VI.
and encouraged them in their obstinacy *. The "'
Duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that king- I573.
dom, with lels disguise. She was persuaded that
they would embrace the first serene interval, which
the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent their
getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any assistance there, by unit-
ing the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the His oe-
Regent to carry on his negociations with them to ures re

i ~

~~~~~~~~~t o ,11jeeed by
great advantage. They were now divided into two Maitland

and Kirk.

factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- aldy.
rault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former considerable. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to their per-
tonal abilities, and to the strength of the caffle of
Edinburgh, which was in their possession. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the
fame treaty ; but as he dreaded that the Queen's
party, if it remained entire, would be able to thwart
and embarrass his administration, he resolved to di-
vide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. He
made the firfl overture to Kirkaldy, and his affo-
ciates, and endeavoured to renew the negociation

*Figges, 296, 31z.

with

- B o K with them, which, during the life of his predecef-

VI. for, had been broken off by his own artifices. Bt
t-'W" Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go.
373 vernment, to be very different from those of the

former Regent. Maitland confidered him, as a
perional and implacable enemy. They received re-
peated assurances of protection from France. And
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French
arms at that time, the fame hopes, which had so
often deceived the party, frill amused them, and
they expeted that the obstinacy of the Hugonots
would oon be subdued, and that Charles would
then be at liberty to a with vigour in Scotland.
Mean while, a supply of money was ent, and if
the catle could be held out till Whitfunday, effec-
tual aid was promised *. Maitland's genius delight.
ed in forming schemes, that were dangerous; and
Kirkaldy possessed the intrepidity, necessary for put-
ing them in execution. The cafle, they knew,
was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's
power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate
the treaty with France, by fending forces to his as-
firance; and if the French should be able to land
any considerable body of men, it might be possible
ro deliver the Queen from captivity, or at least to
ballance the influence of France and England in
uch a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the dif-
honourable dependanceon the latter, under which it
had fallen. This splendid, but chimerical project,
they preferred to the friendship of Morton. They
encouraged the negociaion, however, because it
frved to gain time; they proposed, for the fame

Bges:f: 314.

pur-

purpose, that the whole of the Queen's party should B o o K
be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy should VI.
retain the command of the castle, fix months after r'73a
the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to rejeEt the former ; his penetration disco-
vered the danger of complying with the latter; and
all hopes of accommodation vanished *.

As oon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty
with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of
arms still continued with them.

THEY were lets scrupulous than the other party, Accepted

and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke byChatel-
was naturally unsteady, and the approach of old Huntly.
age increased his irresolution, and aversion to action.
The mireries of civil discord had afflicted Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration oF any former contest. The war, instead
of doing service, had been detrimental to the Queen;
and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour; both had suffered great losses;
and had exhausted their own estates, in wafting
those of their adversaries. The commons were in
the utmoll misery, and longed ardently for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless, but deftruc-
tive quarrel.

* Mclv. 35, &c.

A GREAT

B o o K A GREAT ftep was taken towards this defirabli

VI. event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, betweci
.-,-- the Regent on one hand, and Chatelheraul anc
Artic7s of Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil.
th reaty. legrew, Eizabeth's ambassador *. The chief arti
eb. z=.

cles in it were these; that all the parties compre.
hended in the treaty hould declare their approbation
of the Reformed religion, now established in the
kingdom; that they hould submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re.
gent; that they should acknowledge every thing
done in opposition to the King, since his coronation,
to be illegal; that on both fides, the prisoners who
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the
lands restored to their proper owners that the at
of attainder pasTed against the Queen's adherents
should be repealed, and indemnity granted for all
the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the
5sth of-June 1567; and that the treaty should be
ratified, by the common content of both parties, in
parliament.

Si-geofthe KIRCALDY, though abandoned by his associates,
cafle of who neither discovered follicitude nor made proviion
Edinburgh.

for his safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain
any thoughts of accommodation 4. And though

all

' See Appcnd. N°. VI. f Crawf. Mem. 251.
:~ Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert ktas one of those who
joired uithtIrkaldy in the defence of the cafile, and who was
. bnfelf lfongly attached to their party, asserts that Kirkaldy
offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offers were rejEted by the Regent. Meiv. 240. But
as Lizabeth va;, at that time, extremely desirous of reltoring

peace

all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he still B o o K
efolved to defend the caRtle, in the Queen's name; VI.
and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. c
The Regent was in want of every thing necessary
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de-
termined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could find
leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
fuficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 15oo foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his April 25,
forces; and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, against the catle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the los of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the mloft corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
despair. Three and thirty days he resifted all the
efforrs of the Scots and English, who pufled on
their attacks, with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
were battered down, and one of the wells in the
cablle dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish.
Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he deter-

peace in Scotland, and her ambaflador Killegrew, as well as the
Earl of Rothes, used their utmost endeavours to persuade Kir-
kaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more credible
to impute the continuance of hostilities to Kirkaldy's obffinacy,
his difiuft of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any
other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive tef-

timony of Spotfw. 269, 27, Camd.'448. ohnft. Hill. 3, 4.
Digges, 334. Craaford'.i acccunt agecs, in the main, with
dheil, MeCm. 263.

8 mined

B o o K mined rather to fall gloriously behind the last in.

VI. trenchment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies,
.---- Bot his garrison was not animated with the fame he.
1573. roic or desperate resolution, and rising in a mutiny,
ay :q. forced him to capitulate. He surrendered himself

to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mif-
trefs, that he should be favourably treated. Toge.
ther with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citizens
of Edinburgh, and about 60 soldiers were made
prisoners ".

SPVER -L of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and enter.
ing into the service of the States, added, by their
gaallnt behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the characteristic of
the Scotifh Nation.

p.eview of THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt-
tt. car~c-

of bot'h ly, and the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in
p~ies-. Scotland were brought to a period. When we re-

view the slate of the nation, and compare the
strength of the two factions, Mary's partizans
among the nobles appear, maniferfly, to have been
superior both in numbers, and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterballanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents, which
times of ation form, or call forth, appeared chiefy
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boafl

Cald 2. 40. Me!v. 240. Crawf. Mem 265.

4 0

of any an, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur- B o o K
ray, tempered with wifdomn; the profound sagacity VI.
of Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating ad-
drets of Maitland; or the ficcelsful valour of Kir- 1573'
kaldy; all which were, at firfi, employed in lay-
ing the foundations of the King's authority. On
the one fide, mneafures were concerted with prudence,
and executed with vigour; on the other, their re-
iflutions were ralh, and their conduct feeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompt-
cd by indignation against the Queen, warmly sup-
porctd the ing's cause. The Clergy threw the
vhole weight of their popularity into the fame scale.
By means of these, as well as by the powerful in-
terpofition of England, the King's government was
nally e!tablifled. Mary loft even that shadow of
Sovereignty, which, amidfi all her sufferings, he
had hitherto retained among part of her own fubjefts.
|And as fie was no longer permitted to have an am-

Ibaador at the court of England, the only mark of

Fignity which The had, for ome time, enjoyed there,

h ue mrfi henceforth be confidered as an exile strip-
Iped of all the ensigns of royalty guarded with
anxietv in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or
'orgotten in the other.

KIRKAL.D and his aociates remained in Drury's Kikaliy
:itlody, and w re treated by him with great huma- putto

death.

tity, till the Qeen of 1,ngland, whose prisoners
liy were, should determine their fate. Morton
nfifIed that they hould susser the punilhment due
to tl;eir rebellion and obtfinacy; and declared that
o long ;a they were allowed to.live. he did not rec-

oL. II. E kon

B o o K kon his own person or authority secure; and Eli.

VI zabeth without regarding Drury's honour, or his

'r'" promises in her name, gave them up to the Regent's
153'* disposal. He first confined them to separate pri-

sons; and, loon after, with Elizabeth's consent,
condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hang-
Augufit . ed at the cross of -'dinburgh. Maitland, who did

not expect to be treated more favourably, prevent-
ed the ignominy of a public execution, by a vo-
luntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman fashion *."

VWHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. .X;
the fame time her health began to be much impair-
ed by confinement, and want of exercise. At the
intreatv of the French ambassador, Lord Shiewf-
bury her keeper was permitted to carry her to Bux-
ton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her
imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been created
Baron of Burleigh, and Lord High Treasurer oi
England, happened to be there at the fame time.
And though no minitler ever entered more warmlly
in:o the views of a sovereign, or gave stronger
proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than this
great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust of every
p.rfon, who approached the Queen of Scots, that
her suspicions extenc.ed even to him; and while
Marv ' jufiy reck-oned him her moli dangerous ene.
my, he found Id:ni disicury in persuading his own

M* ilC- :. Z.' 2.Ini

mil

miftrels, that he was not partial to that unhappy B o o K

leen * VI.

THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from 1573.

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppressive administration rouzed a fpi-
it, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaust-
ed its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glo-
ry. Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a
ailder temper, and of a less enterprizing genius.

his event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual
tifquietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with
lhe Scottih Queen, and his zeal for her interest.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro- 574
ound peace, many o the evils, which accompany The Re-
ivil war, were fill felt. The restraints of law, gen" ad-

minialra-

vhich, in times of public confusion, are little re- ion be-
aard;ed even by civilized nations, were totally de- reS od'-
pifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to the re-
ular adminitration of justice. The disorders in
wvcry corner of the kingdom were become intoler-

ble; and under the protection of the one, or the
tlher facTon, crimes of every kind were commit-
:d, with impunity. The Regent let himself to
edrefs these, and, by his industry and vigour, order
nd t:curity were re-e!tablifhed in the kingdom.
ut he loft the reputation, due to this important ser-
ice, by the avarice, which he dilcovered, in per-
ormin it ; and his own exa&tions became more
pernicious to the ntion, than ail the irregularities,

hich he restrained--. Spies and informers were

'T',pe, . .,8, ?-.-q t Sec Anpend. N'V;I.

2 every

B o o K every where employed; the remembrance of o

VI. offences were revived; imaginary crimes were ir

~ -,r .

vented ; petty trespass swere aravated ; and de

I ~j
s4. inquents were forced to compound for their live

by the payment of exorbitant fine!. At the farr
time, te current coin was clrbai d ; licences we
fold for carrying on prohibited branches of con
nmerce, unufR, l taxes were impoed on commodities
and all the refinements in opprefTion, from whic
nations so imperfe ly poliffhd .s t-ec Scots are ufi
al,' exempted, were put in practice. None of the
were complained of more loudly, or with great
reibn, than his injultice towards the ( hurch. TI

:'..c-s of benefices, out of which the Clergy

ceaved their fubiftance, had always been slowly ar
irregularly paid to colleiors, appointed by the G
ne-ral Afiembly and during the civil wars, no pa
ment cou'd be obtained in leveral parts of the kin
domn. Under colour of retretfing this grievanc
and upon a promile of a ".ing evcry Minister
'L.pend within ,s own par:il, the Regent extorte
from te Church t thirds to vlici they !-vd rig
by law. But the Clergy, iead of reapinc a
advanta- from this atraion, found tat pa:

......

,

V.-.

:.. ci c:':: ..i :.:,

co.:: l'c ;, v0 .

. . '. ::. .-'.' , ':: r.

:_-.cr o:i ..e.; t'c '-.: .:. ;"- i-.;::e; r,:i'er.-l i];!e ;arerati,:

\'_~ - -

r

i;: '

1.'

-'---;,:- :-.'' ........... .e] b. ::
. ~ : -

ments became more irregular and dilatory than B o o
3ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with VI.

the cre of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was
allotred him, and the iRegent's insatiable avarice 574
iftized on the reft of the fund *.

TlIE dc(all of Charles IX. which happened this

yca., wxas a new misfortune to the Scottish Queen.
-itlry III. who succeeded him, had not the fame
ttachient to her person, and his jealousy of the
lou o Guile, and obsequiousness to the Queen
lother, greatly alienated him from hler interelt.

TH-E death of the Duke of Chatldherault must 1575.
ik;c:wie be confidered as some loss to Mary. As the J1"n. -2.
p:r';iancnt had frequently declared him next heir to
the Crow.n, this entitled him to great refped among
lis countrymen, and enabled him, more than any
other person in the kingdom, to countcrballance the
{egent's power.

ScON after, at one of the ufutal interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottish and Englini
nar-ches, a cuffe happened, in which the English
vwere worilc ; a ew killed on the spot; and Sir
Jalmcs Forreft:r, the warden, with several gentle-
n-cn who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
liizaleth and the Regent were too sensible of the
a'va.rage, whlich resulted from the good under-
iianmKing that fibfilled between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Cra\f. Min, 2-2. SFotiv. 273. Cald. 2. 42, 427.

E 3 THE

B Oo K THE domefic tranquillity of the kingdom was

VI. in ome danger of being disturbed by another cause,

'^s^" Though the persons, raised to the dignity of hi.
Attep5ts shops, poffiffed very fmali revenues, and a very
of the moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom
Clergy a-
gains the the Regent and all his measures were become ex-
Episcopal tremely odious, began to be jealous of that order,
order.

Knowing that corruptions ftcal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon de-
cent pretences, they were afraid that, from fucb
imall beginnings, the hierarchy might grow, in
time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever,
The chi-f author of these suspicions was Mr. An.
drew IMclvil, a man, distinguished by his uncomn
mon erudition, by the everity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life; and being more attentive to
the ends which he pursued, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and
imprudence with which he carried them on. A
queflion was moved by him in the assembly, "' whe-
ther the ofice of bishop, as now exercilied in the
kingo em, wee areeeabe to the word of God?"
In the ecclesiastical judicatories, continual com-
plaints were made of the bilhops, for neglcc of
duy, many of which, their known remifiiefs too well
jul.iied. The bishop of Dunkeld, b.ing accused
of diiapidating his benefice, was found guilty bv
the afimrbly. And the Regent, instead of check
ing, connived at theie diifpues abou: Ecclefiaficai
government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy

tron:

rom attending to his daily encroachments on the B o o
patrimony of the Church *. VI.

I: 76.

THE weight of the Regent's oppressive admini- He irritates

flration had, hitherto, allen chiefly on those in the fore of
lower, and middle rank ; but he began now to take e
such teps, as convinced the no',le, that their dig-
nity would not long exempt them fiom feeling the
efrets of his power. An accident, which was a
frequent cause of dissention among the Scottish no-
bles, occasioned a difterence between the arls of
Argyll and Athole. A vassal of the former had
made ome depredations on the lands of the latter.
Athole took arms to punish the offender; Argyll,
to protect him; and this ignoble quarrel they were
ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by
interposing his authority, obliged them to disband
their forces. Both of them had been guilty of ir-
regularities, which, though common, were con-
trary to the letter of the law. Of these the Regent
took advantage, and resolved to found on them a
charge of treason. This design was revealed to the
two Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The com-
mon danger, to which they were exposed, compel-
led them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a
clole confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their
juncion rendered them formidable; they dcfpifed
the summons which the Regent gave them to ap-
pear before a court of justice; and he was obliged
to desist from any further prosecution. But the in-
jury he intended made a deep impression on their
minds, and drew on him evere vengeance-l-.

' Cald. Aflemblies, 1574, &c. Johnft. Hilt. 1;.
-f Crawf. Mem. 285.

E NoP,

B o o NR was he more ilccei fiul in an attempt,

VI. which he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton
"'"- with the uiil of having iormed a conspiracy againit

his life. Thoghl those, :who were fuppoed to be
his accomnlices, were iLiztd, and tortured, no evi-
Leance of any tiing criminal appeared ; but, on the
contrary n-.-anv circu::si;ances cdifovered his inno-
cence, a s

ll as l. Regent's Iecret views, in im-

puting to him 'i'ch an od:ous dfign *

-!..- THz- Scotlifh Noblts, who ere ilmoft equal to

:;-"~ * their \lonrihs in pr)\er, and treated by them with
:' ;-.-. much di:itr:!hc;, cb:erved theie a.bitrary proceed-

in-s of a rie.cn, , ith the utmost indi-nation.
The poi'le. o :under a form of government ex-
Ter-.elv i:-,T .l, hi-d bien little accuflomed to the
u den. cf txes, compilained loudly of the Regent's
;.-nc;?. . And ail began to turn their eves towards
te c. ' - ,: ng, fro:: ho m they expected the re-
tdre:s of all their g-ievances, and the return of a
more gentle, and mnor equal administration.

JA:.,'rS was now in re t]wefth year of his age,
c.--. ; The Quee n. ioon after h is birth, had committed

i m

' 1i to the ca-e of the Earl of Mar, and during the
civil wars, he had rided securely in the castle of

..rlin. Alexander Erf;ine, that nobleman's bro-
.her, hal the chief direction of his education. Un-
der him, the famous Buchanan acd as preceptor,
together with three other maters, the most eminent,
ihe nation afforded, for skill in thole sciences,
v- ich were deemed neccfiary for a prince. The

Ci. .yor. :g*

young

ung King fihewed an uncommon passion for learn- B o o K
and, a made great progress in it. And the Scots VI.

ir.,d t1hat they already discovered in him, all those "r"'

LiJ.[, w!hich the fondness or credulity of fubjets 577
j.:ilyv ¥scribe to princes, during their minority.

; '.!,s lames was still far from that age, at which
i law T:eritted him to aiume the reins of go-

lrnnment, the Regent did not fuficiently attend to
e i-cn;inents ol the people, nor reflect, how na-
irlly these prejudices in his favour might encou-

:ge the King to anricipate that period. I-e not
?i]V neglected to secure the fiiendflip of those

i.o vc:-e about the King's person, and who pof-
'si l':s ear, but had even exasperated some of
iim, ty personal injuries. Their refcntment con-
orl' d w;iti the anbition of others, in infusing into piious ,f

Ki-,g early ]ufl;icions of Morton's power, and tile t'R
signs. A King, they toid him, had often reafbn iuwcr
ii:a-, leldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
bi;ion, and by interest, he would endeavour to
llp tie pirince in perpetual infancy, at a diftancc

ln hs fibjSects, and unacquainted with business.
_iiall degree of vigour, however, was sufficient
i brcal the yoke. SubjeCts naturally reverence
ir Sovereign, and become impatient of the tem-
prary and delcgated jurildiction of a Regent.
c!;onI hadw governed with a rigour, unknown to

re arnciet Monarchs of Scotland. The nation

go'rled uinder his oppreffons; and would welcome
e filri profpeC of a milder adminiflration. At
eken, the King's name was scarce mentioned in
ictland, his friends were without influence, and
s flvorites without honour. But one effort would

discover

B o o K discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it wa

VI. arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himsel
t..~ in poffieffion of his just authority, and rescue the

?577. nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re

gard his own rights as a King, let him liften,
least, to the cries of his people *.

A plot THESE suggestions made a deep imprefflon on t
formed a- young King, who was trained up in an opinion thy
gainit the
Regtnr. he was born to command. His approbation of th

design, however, was of small consequence, with.
out the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls
Argyll and Athole, two of the molf powerful ;
that body, were animated with implacable refen
ment aainft the Regent. To them the Cabal i
Stirling castle communicated the plot, which
on foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alex
ander Erskine, who, since the death of his brothe,
and during the minority of his nephew, had tt
command of that fort, and the custody of t!
King's person, admitted them secretly into the King'
pretence. They gave him the ame account of th'
misery of his fubje.ts, under the Regent's arbitrary
adminiftraion; they complained loudly of thein
justice, with which themselves had been treated
and besought the King, as the only means forre
dressing the grievances of the nation, to call a coun[
cil of all the nobles. James consented, and letter
were issued, in his name, for that purpoe; but t
two Earls took care that they should be ent onir
to such as were known to bear no good will t
Morton t.

* MIlv. 29. t SpotfwV. 7' I

I

TrE number of these was, however, o inconfider- B o o
le, that on the day appointed, far the greater part VI.
th" nobles assembled at Stirling; and so hihly -'~8
re they incensed against Morton, that although, March 4.
receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's
terview with the King, he had made a feint as if
would resign the Regency, they advised the King,
ithout regaiding this offer, to deprive him of his
ce, and to take the administration of-govern.
ent into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chan-
l'ol, and Herreis, were appointed to signify this
foblution to Morton, who was, at that time, in
alkeith, his usual place of residence. Nothing He resigns

his office

mild equal the joy, with which this unexpe&ed re- and retires.
lution filled the nation, but the furprize occasion-
by the teeming alacrity, with which the Regent
efcended fiom io high a station. He neither want-
d igacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor
clination to keep pofiefflon of an office, for the
piration of which, the law had fixed so distant a
irm. But all the sources, whence the faftion of
hich he was head, derived their firength, had ei-
ler failed, or now supplied his adversaries with
he means of humbling him. The Commons, the
ity of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were all totally
lienated from him, by his multiplied opprefions.
lizabeth, having lately bound herself by treaty,
lend a considerable body of troops to the assist-
nce of the inhabitants of the Netherlands, who
ere struggling for liberty, had litt!e leisure to at-
end to the aftairs of Scotland; and as he had no-
Ihing to dread from France, in whose councils the
rinces of Lorrain had not, at that time, much in-
I fluence,

B o K fluence, nhe was not difi:leafed, perhaps, at thi

VI. birth of new factions in the kingdom. Even thol

x', nob!es, who had long been joined with Morton i
157 ' faction, or w hom he had attached to his perfonbj

belefits, Glamis, Lindfav, Ruthven, Pitcarn th
fccretary, Murray of illibarden Comptroller, a
deferred hIs falling fortunes, and appeared in tr
co;ncil at Stir;ing. So many concurring circus
fiances convinced Morton of his own weakness, aQ
determined him to give way to a torrent, whic
.-1r. w-. was too impetuous to be resifted. He attended t'

chancellor and Herreis to Edinburgh; was prel
w-hen the King's acceptance of the government ;
proclaimed ; and, in the presence of the peop
lurrendered to the king, all the authority to whil
he had any clxim in virtue of his office. This
r-monv was accolp^nied v.fith such excefive j
and accamatins of the multitude, as added,
doubt, to the anguish, which an ambitious fpr
mult el, when compelled to renounce fupre
power; and co:winced Morton how entirely he hl
loft the aic ions of his countrymen. 1-e obta,
ed, however, from the King an a, containing |
! ;probation of every hing done by him in
exercise of his oce, and a pardon, in the o
ample form, that his fear or caution could devi
of all pat offences, crimes, and treasons. T
nobles, who adhered to the King, bound thefels
undr a great penalty, to procure the ratificationt
this acr, in the firfi parliament .

* Cp.:f-. v .
:?. Cr -., ',`. . . Cald. . 5z.

A cor :

A COUNCIL of twlve lecers was appointed toB o o K
iT tile King, in the adminifcration of affairs. \I.
*;d Morton, deserted by his own parry, and un- 8
Ie to frulggle with the faction, which governed Continues
folutcly at court, retiedl to one of his feats, and to watch

the motions

emcd to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occupied of the ad-
sly in the amusements, of a country life. His" erfe"'y
in d, lhowever, was deeply disquieted with all the
tafy rec 'tions, which accompany disappoint d
inbition; and intent on fchlr'es for recovering his
rr.er grandeur. Even in this retrear, which the
.eople calied the L)sn's-dc;l, his wealth and abili-
ies rendered him formidable. And the new Coun-
Cllors were so imprudent as to rouze him, by the
reciFitancy with which they hailened to strip him

all remains of power. They required him to
rrender the caffle of Edinburgh, which was frill
his pofefiion. He refused at first to do so, and

'egan to prepare for its defence ; but the citizens of
ilinburgh having taken arms, and repulsed a pare

i tle garrison, which was ent out to guard a con-
ovy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that
raportant fortress, without resistance. This en-
Iuraged i'is adversaries to call a parliament to meet
t Edrinburgh, and to multipv their demands upon
im, in filch a manner, as convinced him that no-
ing lcs than his utter ruin vould satisfy their in-
eit'eate h!atred.

TEI;IR power and popularity, however, began
Iready to decline. The Chancellor, the ablest and
riufc moderate man in the party, having been killed
t 'Silin, in an accidental rencounter between his

6 fol-

B o o K followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford;

VI. Athole, who was appointed his successor in tha
-'-v, high ofce, the Earls of Eglinton, Cathnefs, and

D57' Lord Ogilvie, ail the prime favourites at court,

were either avowed papills, or suspected of leaning
to the opinions of that set. In an age, when th:
return of popery was, o much, and so jufily,
dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Mor.
ton had aiways treated the papiits with rigour, thii
unseasonable indulgence made all zealous Proteflant
remember that circumstance in his administration,
with great praise *

Resumes MORTON, to whom none of these particulai
his farmer were unknown, thought this the proper junture f;

setting to work the intiruments, hich he had been
preparing. Having gained the confidence of the
Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother,
insinuated to them that Alexander Erskine had forr,-{
ed a plot to deprive his nephew of the governmen
of Stiring-catle, and the culody of the King'
person; and eafiiy induced an ambitious woman,r
and a ouith cf twenty, to employ force to preven:]
this fuppo:L' injury. The Earl repairing, filddcn-
ly, to Stiriing, and being admitted, as usual, into
the castle with his attendants, seized the gates eariv
in the morning, and turned out his uncle, wiho
Ap;.1 6. dreaded no danger from his. hands. The foldieri

of the garriibn submitted to him as their governr,.
and, witi itle; danger, and no effusion of blood.
he became master both of the King's perfun, an
the fortress -

po t-rw. za3. t Cal.. ,;.
I

AN event o unexpected occasioned great confter- B o o K
tion. And though Morton's hand did not ap- VI.
Ir in the execution, he was universally believed ' '
be the author of the attempt. The new Coun- 57
]lors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety,
change their measures, and instead of pursuing
n with such implacable resentment, to enter into
ms of accommodation with an adversary, still so
pable o creating them trouble. Four were named,

each ide, to adjust their differences. They met

Hot far from Dalkeith. And when they had brought
atters near a conclusion, Morton, who was too
gacious not to improve the advantage, which their
icurity and their attention to the treaty afforded
m, set out in the night-time for Stirlin, and

May 24,

ving gained Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle,
as admitted by him into the caffle; and manag-

matters there with his usual dexterity, he oon
dmore entirely the command of the fort, than
e arl himself. He was likewise admitted to a
t in the privy council, and acquired the fame as-
dant in it.

As the time appointed for the meeting of par-
ment at dinburgh now approached, this gave

tome anxiety. He was asiaid of carrying the

ung King to a city, whose inhabitants were so
uch at the devotion of the adverse faction. He
s no less unwilling to leave James behind at Stir-
ipg. In oJer to avoid this dilemma, he issued a
oclam3.icn, in the King's name, changing the
ace of Lc;ring riom Edinburgh to Stirling castle.

Cald. 2. -. h

TI This

B o o K This Athole and his party represented as a ftep a

VI. together unconstitutional. The King, said they,
~"-'- Morton's prisoner; the pretended Counsellors ai

1
/ his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles ms

repair without fear, and where they may deliberai
with freedom, is abfulutely necefTary for fettling ti
nation, aiter dilbrders of such long continuanc
But in an assembly, called contrary to all sorn
held within the walls of a garrison, and over-awe
by armed men, what safety could members expec
what liberty could prevail in debate ? or what b:
nefit result to the public ? The parliament me
Jul -3. however, on the dy appointed, and notwithfanc

ing the protestation of the Earl of Montrose an
Lord Lindsay, in name of their party, proceedt
to business. The King's acceptance of the goven
ment was confirmed; the at granted to Mortoi
for his ecurity, ratified; Iome regulations, wit
regard to the numbers and authority of the priv
council, were agreed upon; and a pension for lii
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been
intrumenal in bringing about the late revolt
tion "

A:, :! ,.- MlE_:ANii.LE, Argvyll, Atho!e, and their follo
A:.il t-::ers, tCook arms, upon the fsLecious pretence of re
,-. ... cuir. g te King from captivity, and the kingdor

from op7ref5ion. James himfclF, imnatient of ti
'ervit a- i,- which he was hel , by a man whom
had 'onS been taught to hate, -crctly encourag
their en r'rr:ze; i,:o :.,, at the rfimc time, he .
obliPgd rno oCnl to cifav- them :. ublic, b

* C.. z :-. ..;, 'l . lTl. V .

o levy forces against them, and even to declare, by B o o K
roclamation, that he was perfectly free from any VI.
, onllraint, either upon his person, or his will. Both 'T

des quickly took the field. Argyll and Athole
ere at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus,
i'orton's nephew, met them with an army 5000 Augul xia
rong; neither party, however, was eager to en-
sage. Morton diltrufted the fidelity of his own
oops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle
Hicory, however corpleat, would not be decisive ;
~ncl as they were in no condition to undertake the
cege of Stirling-caftle, where the King was kept,

Ieir strength would soon be exhaufled, while Mor-
n's own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen
England, might furnish him with endless re-
'- rces. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eli-

beth had ent into Scotland to negociate an ac-
mmodation between ihe two factions, a treaty li ah

e

as conclucded, in consequence of which, Argyil negociaea
d Athole were admitted into the King's prefcnce; aoi '
me of their party were added to the privy council; bet--en
and a Convention of nob'es called, in order to bring
~l remaining differences to an amicable issue *.

So soon as James assumed the government into
sown hands, he diSpatched the abbot of Dun-
rmling to inform Elizabeth of that event ; to of-
r to renew the alliance between the two kingdoms;
ld to demand oilTef.on of the eftarc, which had
tely, i:l'en to him, by the dcath of his grandmo-
er, the Couintels ot Lenrox. That Lady's e-
l son had left one aughter, Arabella Stewart,

* Crawiv M. 307.
VOL. II. F who

B o o who was born in England. And as the chief ob.

\ i. jecon againfr the pretensions of the Scottish line to

. '
1 t-. ee crown of England, was that maxim of Engliff

/57' law, which excludes aliens from any right of ip.

her;tance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by grant.
i:g this demand, would have eftablifled a prece.
dent in James's favour, that might have been esteem.
ed ceciiive, with regard to a point, which it had been
her conflant care to keep undecided. Without sus.
fcring th's delicate question to be tried, or allowing
any new light to be thrown on that, which she con.
fidered as the great myflery of her reign, she corn
manded the rents of the estate to be sequestered by
Lord Burleigh, master of the wards; ad by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottil King early
warning how necessary it would be to court her fa.
vour, if ever he hoped for success in claims of greater
importance, but equally liable to be controverted .

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,

t'e contending n6bles were at last brought to fornm
agreement. But it was followed by a tragical event
pgril 24. Morton, in token of reconcilement having inviteG

the leaders of the opposite party to a great enter
tainment, Athole the chancellor was, soon after,
taken ill, and died within a few days. The fyrmp
toms and violence of the disease gave rife to llrong
suspicions of his being poisoned; and though the
physicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion
as to the cause of the difemper, the Chancellor's re.
lations publickly accused Morton of that odious
crime. The advantage wiich visibly accrued to him,

Camd. 46 .

Sy the removal of a man of great abilities, and B o o
v-erse fiom all his meallres, was sufficient proof of VI.
is guiik to the people, who are ever fond of im- '"~
ting the death of eminent persons to extraordinary 59
atf reS

Tn E oce of Chancellor was betlowed upon Morton's
rgyll, vhlom this preferment reconciled, in a great ceeinrgs
sea!ul, to Morton's adminifiration. -ie had now agsn the

family of

covered all the authority he pofiefied during his Hamilton.
egency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the

,er arnd cabals of his enemies. None of the great
milies remained to be the objects of his jealousy,
to obllru&t his designs, but that of Hamilton.
he arl of Arran, the eldest brother, had nver
orecvered the fiock, which he received from the
filuccels of his paflion for the Queen, and had
nv/ alrcgethcr loft his reason. I ord John, the fe-

d brother, was in pofefeion of the family estate.
i-cr Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of

m young men, ambitious, and enterprising.
irton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
urtiers hoped to share their spoils among them;

as all princes naturally view their successors with

Slouy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these pas-
is into the mind of the young King. A pre-
: ce as at hand tojuftify the molt violent proceed-
gs. T lhe pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth,
id nt extend to those, who were accessary to the
r rdcr of theRegents MurrayorLennox. 1 ordJohn

h s brother were suspected of being the authois of
h l(fe crimes, and had been included in a general
jj @ "' Spot ; '

B o o K aft of attainder on that account. Without fum.

IV. moning them to trial, or examining a single witnel'
L-,-.. to prove the charge, this attainder was now thought

9' sufficient to subject them to all the penalties, which

they would have incurred by being formally cn.
victed. The Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton,
together with the Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Cath
cart, received a comniiTicn to seize their perfor!
and estates. On a few hours warning, a confider.
able body of troops was ready, and marched to.
wa-ds Hamilton, in hostile array. Happily, t!
two brothers made their escape, though with grez
dificulty, But their lands were confiscated; t
castles of Hamilton and Draffan besieged; tho
who defended them punished. The Earl of Arran
though incapable, from his situation, of commi
ting any crime, was involved, by a fha.eful abui
of law, in the common ruin of his family; andz
if he, too, could have been guilty of rebellion, co:
fined a clcfe prisoner. These proceedings, so coa
trary to the fundamental principles of justice, we
all ratfied in the subsequent parliament ".

AEo.-T this time Mary sent, by Naue her feco

tary, a letter to her son, together with some jeW
of value, and a vest embroidered with her ow
hands. But as fne gave him only the title of Prir
of Sc' tand, the mefienger was dismissed, withat
being admitted into his presence t.

* C:'.vf. Mer. 31 . Snto:fi. c5.
- C a:. . '.Ic. 314.

THorC

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti- B o o K

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Popish 'Prn- VI.
ces, in Mary's favour, fle 'fill continued to guard

1579-

her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition Negocia-
of Pottigal, on the one hand, and the defence of ions.for a

i~

° ~ th .marriage
the Netherlands, on the other, slily employed the between

Elizabth

councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces aid te
by intelline commotions, and under a weak and ca. Duke of
priiiuus prince, defpiled and difrrufted by his own
jiubjccs, was in no condition to diturb its neigh-
bours. Eliza':eth had long amuled that court by
carrying on a trlaty of mr.aiiiae withl the Duke of
Alenoni, tle King's brother. But whether, at the
age of forty five, fie realiy intrndd to marry a
iPrince of twenty ? whether the )leasure of being
flattered and courted, made her liflen to the addrel-
Itcs of so young a lover, whom Ihe allowed to ifit
her at two difierent times, and treated with the most
distinguishing rfpet ? or whether considerations of
itereil, predominated in this, as well as in every
other trailastion of her reign, are problems in his-
tory vwhich we are not co!ncrned to rebolve ? Dur-
ing the progress of this nrgociation, w!,ich was
drawn cut to an extrao:'diar-y length, Mary could
expect no afifitance from the French court, and
seems to have held little correlpondnce wvith ic.
And there was no eriod in her reign, wherein Eli-
zabeth enjoy)ed more perfctt security.

MOR TON; eems, at this ime, to have been equl- Two fa-

ly secure ; but his security was lnoit i wiel fouindd. vouri
He had weathered out one florin, had cruLted his ccndan
adversarics, and was again in pofilefion of tie sole ov,James.

F 3 direCtion

B o o direclion cf affairs. But as the King was now of

VI. an age, when the characer and difpoftions of te
^'' mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become vi-

' fible, the falleft attention to these might have con-

vinced him, that there was reason to expect new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James
early dilcovered that excessive attachment to fa-
vourites, which accompanied him through his whole
life. This paf.on, hich naturally arises from in-
experience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be
expecred that the choice of the obects, on whom he
placed his aelions, should be made with great
skill. The most considerable of them, was Eflme
Stewart, a native of France, and ion of a fccond
bruthnr of the Earl of Lennox. He was diftin-
guifhed b; the title of Lord D'Aubigne, an estate
in France, which descended to him from his ancef-
rors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour, and services to the French crown. He
s:::-. s. arrived in Scotland, about this time, on purpose to

demrnd the eltite and title of Lennox, to which he
pretended a legal right. He was received, at firlt,
by the King, with the respect due to so near a rela-
tion. The gracefuines of his person, the elegance
of his d!efs, and his courtly behaviour, macid a great
impreFion on James, who, even in his more mature
years, was lirtlc able to resist thele frivolous charms;
and his aficJtion flowed with its ufiial rapidity, and
profusion. Within a few days after Stewart's ap-
Fe.arance at court, he was created Lord Aberbro-
thock, oon after Earl, and then Duke of Lennox,
Governor of Dumbarton cafile, Captain of the guard,

firfl

sirs Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord High B o o K
Chamberlain. At the fame time, and without any VI.
of the envy, or emulation which is usual among
candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, the I579.
second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great con -
fidence. But notwithftandisg this union, Lennox'
and Captain Stewart were pcrfons of very opposite
characters. The former was naturally gentle, hu-
mane, candid ; but unacquainted with the irate of
the country, and milled, or misinformed by those,
whom he trusted; not unworthy to be the compa-
nion of the young King, in his amusements, but
utterly disqualified for acting as a Minister, in di-
rec'ting his affairs. The latter was remarkable for
all the vices, which render a man formidable to his
country, and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince;
nor did he possess any one virtue, to counterbalance
these vices, unless dexterity in conducting his own
designs, and an enterprizing courage, superior to
the enfe of danger, may pass by that name. Un-
restrained by religion, regardiefs of decency, and un-
dismayed by opposition, he aimed at objes, seem-
ingly unattainable ; but under a Prince, void of ex-
perience, and blind to all the defects of those, who
had gained his favour, his audacity was successful
and honours, wealth, and power, were the reward
of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their They ia-
whole address, to undermine Morton's credit, which bourto "-

dermine

alone obftru&ed their full possession of power. And Morton's
as James had been bred up with an aversion for that 2"ut'ho:ty

F 4 noble-

B oo : nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the

V I. authority of a Tutor, than to at with the obfequi-

- oufnefs of a Minister, they found it no difficult mat-
5' '. ter to accomplish their design. Morton, who could

no longer keep the King Bhut up within the walls of
-a t7,. Stirling-caftle, having called a parliament to meet

at Edinb'urgh, brought him thither. James made
his entry into the capital, with great olemnity; th:
citizens received hm with the loudest acclamations
of jov, and with many expensive pageants, accord.
ing to the mode of that age. After a long period
of thirty seven years, during which, Scotland had
been lubjccred to th.: delegated power of Regents,
or to the febe government of a woman, nd had
fffered al the mifri-s of civil war, and ;elt the in.
iboence of forcign arnics, the nation rejoiced tofee
the ceptre once more in the hands of a King. Fond
even of that firC ow of aut'-ority, wich a Princeoi
fifteen could posie!s, the Scots sla:tered themselves,
that union, orter, and tranquillity would now bl
restored to the kingdcm. James opened the parlia-
ment with extraordinary pomp, but nothing re-
mark-able passed n it.

THESE demonstrations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their overcign, encouraged
the favourites to continue their infinuatios against
MIcrton; and as the King now resided in the palace
of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his subjects had ac-
cess, the cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger,
and the intrigue, which ccafioned his fall, ripened
gradualiy.

MORTON

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and B o o
deavoured to put a stop to the career of Lennox's VI.
referment, by representing him as a formidable 8"

1580.

emy to the Reformed Religion, a secret agent in Morton
vour of Popery, and a known emissary of the endeavours
ouf of Guile. The clergy, apt to believe every them.t
mour cf this kind, spread the alarm among the

_eople. But Lennox, either out of'complaifance

his maiclr, or convinced by the arguments of
B-me learned Divines, whom the King appointed to

fl-ruAc him in the principles of the Protestant Re-
|gion, publicly renounced the errors of Popery, in

e Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a
ermber of tie lhurch of Scotland, by signing her
gonfefir.n cf Faith. This, though it did not re-
ove all iL.fpicons, nor silence some zealous prcacl-
s, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-

fation .

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mor-
vn was prcparing to seize the King's person, and to
.rry him into England. W\5hether despair of main-

ning iis power, by any oher means, had driven
m to malke any overture of that kind to the Eng-
! o.

court, or whether it was a calumny, invented
Hi his averfaries to render him odious, cannot now

cl determined with certainty. As he declared at his

|ath, that such a design had never entered into his
oughts, the latter eems to be most probable. It
orded a pretence, however, for reiving the office

Lord Chamberlain, which had been, for some
ne, disused. That honour was conferred on Len-

* Crawf. Mem. 319. Spotf.v. 30S.

nox.

B o oK nox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enes

VI. was his deputy; they had under them a band
s,"x~ Gentlemen, who were appointed confantly toatte
I3 ' the King, and to guard his person *.

:izabtth MOR TON was not ignorant of what his enemi
ineoPbeS intended to insinuate, by such unuiual precautio
in h:s be-
hal. for the King's safety ; and as his last resource, a;

plied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often so:
him in stead, in his greaterf diffculties. In cor
quence of this application, Bowes her envoy ac
ed Lennox of pra&tices against the peace of thetr
kingdoms, and insisted, in her name, that he fhou
instantly be removed from the privy council. Sc
an unprecedented demand was confidered by
Counsellors, as an affront to the King, and an
croechment on the independence of the kingdo
They aeted to call in queflion the Envoy's powv
and upon that pretence, refused him fartheraui
ence; and he retiring in c:'guft, and wvithout takii
lave, ir Alexander Home was efnt to expoftuli
with Elizabeth on the fAibijc. After the treatmi
which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thoui
it below her dignity to admit Home into her p!
ience. Burleigh, to whom he was commandedI
impart his commfion, reproached him withi
Ma;er's ingra.itude towards abenefactrefs, wholi
placed the crown on his head, and required him:
advise the King to beware of sacrificing the frie.
ihip of so necessary an ally, to the giddy humoc
of a young man, without experience, and firon!

· Cra., f. Mm. 3:o.

lfpecedl of principles, and attachments, incompa- B o OK

le with the happincfs of the Scottish nation. VI.

THIS accusation of Lennox hatlened, in all pro- Moron ac-
jibility, Morton's fall. The a& of indemnity, cured of the

murder f

ich he had obtained when he resigned tile Re- the lte
!ncy, as worded with such scrupulous exa&nefs, K"i5.

lalmoft screened him fiom any legal prosecution.

e murder of the late King was the only crime,
ich could not, with decency, be inserted in a par-
n, granted by his son. Here Morton still lay
en to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stew-

vho flunned no action, however desperate, if
dto power, or to favour, entered the council-
tmber, while the King and nobles were assembled,
falling on his knees, acculed Morton of being Decem. 3o
efarv, or according to the language of the Scot-
law, art anldpart, in the conspiracy against the
of his Majefry's father, and offered, under the
al penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
,ce. Morton, who was present, heard this ac-
tion with firmness ; and replied with a disdain-
smile, proceeding either from contempt of the
nous charater of his accuser, or from confci-
ness of his own innocence, " that his kno.wn
, in punishing those who were suspected of that
etPable crime, might well exempt himself from

ufpicion of being accelary to it, nevertheless,
\ould cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that
ce, or in any other court; and doubted not but
own innocence, and the malice of his enemies,
Iuld then appear in the clearest light." Stewart,
was fill on his knees, began to enquire how

he

B oOK he would reconcile his bestowing so many hono

VI. on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew
80. be one of the murtherers, with his pretended

againt that crime. Morton was ready to anfy
But the King commanded both of them to be

r 58. moved. The Earl was confined, firfi of all, to
January. own house, and then committed to the caitle

Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erskine was(
vernor; and as if it had not been a sufficient ind
nity to subje&t him to the power of one of his
mies, he was, oon after, carried to Dumbartoa
anuarylS. which Lennox had the command. A warranty

likewise, issued for apprehending Archibald D
glas; but he, having received timely ir.telligene
the approaching danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these vio

proceedings not to hatred against Morton alone,
to the ancient enmity between the houses of Stt
and of Douglas, and who believed that a confpi
was now formed for the destruction of the v
name, was ready to take arms in order refcu
kinsman. But Morton aboblutely sorbad any
attempt, and declared that he would rather i
ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputatia
his own characer by seeming to decline a trial

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH did not fail to interpose, with war:
meafuresiinn behalf of a man, who had contributed son
order to
save him. to preserve her influence over Scotland. The

transactions in that kingdom had given her!
uneasiness. The power which Lennox had aa

*Crawf. Mem. 33. t Johns. 64. Spotfw. 311

independant of her was dangerous; the treatment B o o K
ambassadors had met with, differed greatly from VL
respect, with which the Scots were in use to re-
ve her ministers; and the attack now made on
orton fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tion to sow the feeds of discord between the two
tions, and to seduce James into a new alliance
th France, or into a marriage with some Popish
incefs. Full of these apprehensions, she ordered
onfiderable body of troops to be assembled on
borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
her ambassador into that kingdom. He addref-
himself not only to James, and to his council,
t to a Convention ofeftates met at that time. He
gan with enumerating the extraordinary benefits
ich Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottish na-
n: That without demanding a ingle foot of
d for herself, without encroaching on the liber-
s of the kingdom in the finalleft article, fie had,
the expence of the blood of her subjeCts, and the
easures of her Crown, rescued the Scots from the
minion of France, eftablifed among them true

eligion, and put them in pofflefon of their an-

ent rights: That from the beginning she had pro-
|ted those, who espoused the King's cause, and

her aliftance alone, the Crown had been pre-
ved on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
rfe faction baffled: That an union, unknown to
eir ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
Ims, had fubfited for a long period of years, and
ough so many Popish Princes had combined' to
ifturb this happy slate of things, her care, and
heir constancy, had hitherto defeated all these es-

8 forts:

B o o K forts: That she had observed, of late, an unufu

VI. coldness, distrust, and etrangement in the cc
,---. tifh Council, which ihe could impute to no

but to Lennox, a subject of France, a retain
to the ouse of Guise, bred up in the erro
or Popery, and ftiil suspected of favouring thatft
perltition. Not satisfied with having mounted i
fast to such an uncommon height of power, whic
he exercised ith all the rashness of youth, and a
the ignorance of a firanger; nor thinking it enoug
to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the authe
riv, due to his abilities, and experience, he ha
con!pired the ru:n of that nobleman, who hadofe,
exposed his life in the King's cause, who had cor
tributed more than any other fubjecs to place hii
on the throne, to resist the encroachments of Pop
ry, and to preserve the union between the two king
doms. If an, zeal for religion remained amor
the noblts in Scotland, if they wished for the con
nuance of amity with England, if they valued th
privileges oi thlir own order, he called upon thee
in the name of his mistress, to remove such a per
nicious counicllor as Lennox from the pretence o
the young King, to rescue Morton out of the han:
of his avowed enemy, and secure to him the benel
of a fair and impartial trial: And if force were
cefTary towards accomplishing a design so falutar
to the King and kingdom, he promised them th
protection of his iftrefs in the enterprize, ane
whatever aefritance they fnould demand either of me
or monev *.

Cald. . 6. Srypf, 2. 6:i.

BL:

ied with such an unusual appeal from the King VI.
is fbjets, were not the only means employed ""
Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against 5
nox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
plimenting James on account of the valour,
ch many of his fubjests had displayed in the ser-
eos the States, to enter into a long detail of the
less erterprizes of the Popish Princes againit the

teant Religion; to beseech him to adhere in-

ably to the alliance with England, the only bar-

which secured his kingdom against their dange-
cabas; and above all things, to difiruft the

nuations of those, who endeavoured to weaken

o dissolve that union between the British nations,
ch all the Protestants in Europe beheld with so
ch plealure *.
AMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the de- James de-

tion of their enemy to linten to thee remon-terines to

nces. The officious interposition of the Prince gainft him.

Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's mef-
, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjeas to
I againfi their Sovereign, were confidered as un-
mpled insults on the Majesty and independance
crowned head. A general and evasive answer
given to Randolph. James prepared to assert
own diignity with spirit. All those fufpeted of
ouring Morton were turned out of office, some
them were required to surrender themselves pri-
i rs; the fencible men throughout the kingdom

* Cald. 3. 9.

were

B o o K were c'jmmlandcd to take arms; and troops ,el

VI. levied, and ported, on the borders. The Englil
C/VL ambassador, finding that neither the public mari
158I' fefto which he had delivered to the Convention, nc

his private cabals with the nobles could excite the,
to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland
where libels against him had been daily publilc
and even attempts made upon his life. In boL
kingdoms every thing wore an hostile ape. r
Elizabeth, though The wished to have intimidate
the Scottish King by her preparations, had no inc'
nation to enter into a war with him, and the trooi
on the borders, which had given such unbra
were oon difperfad *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered i

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his eneml
drive on their schemes for his deftruftion. Capta
Stewart his accuser was first appointed Tutor to ri
Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title
estate of his unhappy ward, to which he advancj
some frivolous claim, were conferred upon hi:
The new-ma2.e Peer was commanded to condi
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh; and,
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what f
he might cxpect, but had the cruel mortificationl
feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with honou:
in reward of the malice with which he had conti
buted to his ruin.

-e is tied THE records of the court of 7vJficiary at this i
and con- riod are loft. The account which our hiftoria.

d.Camf.nc. 3. S , . A
133d.

d C.a.vf. Mcm. 32z. Strype, 2. App. 13g,

ve of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac B o o
ry, The whole proceedings seem to have been VI.
Holent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order ' 8,

extort evidence, tortured several of the Earl's do-
eftics with unusual cruelty. During the trial,
1eat bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe,
nt parts of the city. The jury was composed of
eEarl's known enemies; and though he challeng-
several of them, his objetions wee over-ruled,
ter a hort consultation, his peers found him
ilty of concealing, and of being art and part ir

conspiracy against the life of the late King.
e first part of the verdict did not furprize him;
, but he twice repeated the words art and part
h ome vehemence, and added, " God knows
is not so." The doom, which the law decrees
in a Traitor, was pronounced. The Kings
wever, remitted the cruel and ignominious part of
sentence, and appointed that he should susser
th next day, by being beheaded *.

URING that awful interval, Morton possesed Hi, death,
utmost composure of mind. He fupped chear-
y;, lept a part of the night in. his usual manner,
employed the reft of his time in religious con-
nces, and in as of devotion, with -some Mini-
s of the city. The Clergymen who attended

dealt freely with his conscience, and prefled
rimes home upon him. What he confefled
regard to the crime for which he suffered is re-
able, and supplies, in ome measure, the im-

Spotfw. 3i4. Johhft. 6i. Crawf.Mem. 332. CaId. 3.4.
!OL. Alp G per.

B o o K perfetion of our records. He acknowledged, t:

VI. on his return from England after the death of R

S'' i zio, Bothwell had informed him of the confpirac
158' against the King, which the Queen, as he told bin

knew of and approved ; that he foliicited him i
concur in the execution of it, which, at that tim
he abfolutelv declined; that, oon after, Bothm
hifcltf, and Archibald Douglas, in his name,
newing their follicitations to the fame purpose, hehl
required a warrant, under the Queen's hand,' autb
rising the attempt, and as that.had never beei':pr
duced, he had refused to be any farther conern
in the matter. " But, continued he, as I! neit
" consented to this treasonable a, nor affimed
4' the comrritting of it, so it was impofribe forr
2Z to reveal, or to prevent it. To whorf coul
" a make the discovery ? The Queen was the autt
" of the enterprize. Darnly was fiuch a changeli
" that no secret could be safely communicated

him. Hun!y and Bo:hwell, who bore the d
i" \va in the !kingdom, were themfclves the I

" petrators of t'e crim." These circumftam
it mftnt be confesed, go some length towardsai
nating MorIon's gutilt; and tlieugh his apde
ifr the favo43r he had lhen' to Archibald Dout
v.hom h knew to be onof th corifpiator, be
ess fatist7tor, nro uneafyTreectroni ' e lm tob
i;uikted-his own mind on that account ;. X
1his leeper'stol him that tle:eguardsivere attein
rinI all rhiigs in readi-cfi, - lplTi my G(,

e, -1 3ni redN'' ikewsvife.'1 Aran' coinar
t.fe gurdas; and even in tQie moments, »

' C- liem. xp. *.

_.t
. _i .* ',

most implacable hatred is apt to relent, the ma- B o o K
e of his enemies could not forbear this insult. VI.
n the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his coun-
ance and voice unaltered; and after some time
nt in devotion, he suffered death with the intre-
ity, which became the name of Douglas. His
d was placed on the public jail of Edinburgh;
his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold,
ered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by con-
n porters to the usual burial-place of criminals.
ne of his friends durst accompany it to the grave,
ifcover their gratitude and refpe& by any fymp-
s of sorrow .

RRAN, no lets profligate in private life, than odi;us
acious in his public conduct, oon after drew the condua of

Arran,

ntion of his countrymen, by his infamous mar-
e with the Countess of March. Before he grew
favour at court, he had been often entertained
er husband's house, and without regarding the
of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on a cri-
a intrigue with the wife of his benefactor, a
an young and beautiful, but according to the
iption of a cotemporary Historian, " intoler-
in all the imperfefions, incident to her lix."
atient of any restraint upon their mutual desires,

with equal ardor, wished to avow their union
ickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the
ringof their unlawful pasSion. The Countess pe-
ed to be divorced from her husband, for a reason,
h noinodeft woman will ever plead. The judges,

Crawf Mem. 3,4. Spotfi. ;4.
|~G - over-

B o K over-awed by Arran, passed sentence without dela

VI. And this infamous scene was concluded by a ma
8rw r riage, solemnized with great pomp, and beheld I

158 I' all ranks of men with the utmost horror *.
July 5.
o: er:4. A Parliament was held this year, at the openii

of which some disputes arose between Arran andt
Earl now created Duke of Lennox. Arran, haug
ry by nature, and pushed on by his wife's ambitic
began to affeft an equaliry with the Duke, un
whose proteion he had hitherto been contented
place himself. After various attempts to fora
parry in the council against Lennox, he foundE
fxed so firmly in the King's affections, that it
impofTible to shake him, and rather than lose all
terest at court, from which he was banished,
made the most humble submissions to the favou
and again recovered his former credit. This n
ture contributed, however, to render the Dukei
more odious to the nation. During the cone
ance of it, Arran aeSted to court the Clergy, [
tended an extraordinary zeal for the Proteftantl
ligion, and laboured to confirm the suspicions, wt
were entertained of his rival, as an emissary of
houf2 of Guiie, and a favourer of Popery. As
was fippofed to be acquainted with the Duke's
secret designs, his calumnies were lillened to
more credit, than was due to his character.
the fame cause, vwe muffl a;cribe several as of
liament uncommonly favourable to the Church,
ticil.arlv one, which abolifled the praftice, ii

vced by Morton, of appointing but one minister B o o K

fcveral pariihes. VI.

No notice hath been taken for some years of Ec- Eccifii-
fiaftical affairs. While the civil government un- Cal aff.is
rwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the
urch was not free from convulsions. Two ob.
s, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy.
e one was the forming a system of discipline, or
clefiaftical polity. After long labour, and many
fculties, this was at last brought to some degree
perfeion. The Assembly solemnly approved
it, and appointed it to be laid before the privy
! uncil, in order to obtain the ratification of it in

rliament. But Morton, dring his adminiftra-
n, and those who, after his fall, governed the
ng, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into
cution; and by starting difficulties, and throw-
in objections, prevented it from receiving a le-
fancion. The other point in view was tlhe abo-
on of the Episcopal order. The bifflops were
devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
omotion, that the funcion itself was by fonme
_koned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed

eat in parliament, and diftinguiffied by titles of
nour, there not only occasioned many avocations
m their spiritual employments, but oon render-
their character and manners extremely different
m those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles
wed their power with jealousy ; the populace con-
ered their lives as profane; and both wifled their
.wnfal with equal ardour. The personal emula-
n between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learn-

( 3 ing,

B o o K ing, and eminent for his popular eloquence, wha

VI. was promoted, on the death of Douglas, to be
8.o archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

passions on each fide, and heightened them. At.
tacks were made, in every aflmbly, on the orde
of bishops; their privileges were gradually circum
fcribed ; and at last an at was passed, declaring th
office of bishop, as it was then exercised within th,
realm. to have neither foundation nor warrant
the word of God; and requiring, under pain
excommunication. all who now possessed that
nice. instantly to resign it, and to abstain fron
preaching or adminiffring the sacraments, till the
should receive permifion from the assembly. Th
court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacanq
happening, oon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Mont.
goeryr Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickleq
prefumpruous, and more apt, by the blemishes i,
his cr.araEer, to have alienated the people from ai
order already beloved, than to reconcile thems
one which was the object of their hatred, ftrucku
an n amnus argain with Lennox, and on his r-
commendation was chcfen Archbishop. The Pref
bytery of Stirling of which he was a member, tk
presbytery of Glasgow whither he was to be tranf.
lated, the General AfIfmbly, vied with each othe
I^:2. in profecting him on that account. In order t

fcrzen Montgomery, James made trial both ofgenf
tie and of rigor.us measures, and both were eallI
ineffetuial. The General Assembly was just readj
to pronounce against him the entence of excornl
milnication. wnen an ilerald entered and conm
manded them, in the King's name, and under pain

rebellion, to stop further proceedings. Even B o o K
is injuntion they defpiled. And though Mont- VI.
oi:icry, by his tears, and seeming penitence, pro - -..'.
red a short respite, the sentence was at last issued

their appointment, and published in all the
urchcs throughout the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a colleclive body,
as not greater than the boldness of ome indivi-
uals, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
hey inveighed daily against the corruptions in the

ministration, and, with the freedom of speech
mitted into the pulpit in that age, named Len-
x and Arran as the chief authors of the grie-
ances, under which the church and kingdom
roaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained

the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
e Clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
scoures, James issued a proclamation, command-
g Dury one of the most popular Minitlers, not
ny to leave the town, but to abstain fiom preach-
g in any other place. Dury complained, to the
dicatories of the Church, of this encroachment
on the immunities of his office. They approved
the doctrine which he had delivered; and he

etermined to disregard the royal proclamation.
ut the magistrates being determined to compel him
leave the city, according to the King's orders,
v was obliged to abandon his charge, after pro-
flting publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against
e vioence, which was put upon him. The people
ccompanied him to the gates, with tears and la-
':'ntaions and the Clergy denounced the vcnge-

G 4 ance

B o ance of heaven against the authors of this ot.

VI. rage *.
1582.

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the

authority of its judicatories called in question, and
the liberty of the pulpit restrained, when a sudden
revolution in the civil government procured then
unexpected relief.

His favour- THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the
hies cngage King, ps fffed uncontrouled power in the king.
unpopular dom, and exercised it with the utmost wantonness.

c s. James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the

feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended
by such company, and employed in such amuse-
ments, as did not suit his dignity. The fervicesof
those, who had contributed most to place the Crown
on his head, were but little remembered. Many
who had opposed him with the greatest virulence,
enjoyed the rewards and honours, to which the
others were entitled. Exalted notions of regal pre-
rogative, utterly inconfiflent with the conftirution
of Scotland, being infiiled by his favourites into
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep impression there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent
errors in the government of both kingdomst.
Courts of justice were held in almost every county,
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the slightest neglec of any of the nume-
rous forms, which are peculiar to feudal holdings,

* Cad. Afiemb ;,---1582. SpotfwV. 277, &c,
t Cald. 5j ij .

they

hey were fined with unusual and intolerable rigour. B o o K
The Lord Chamberlain revived the obsolete jurif- VI.

&iton of his office over the Burroughs, and they 2,
'ere fubjeced to exations no less grievous. A de-
ign seemed, likewise, to have been formed to ex-
fperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance
sith her, which all good Protestants eteemed the
fief security of their religion in Scotland. A close

rrefpondence was set on foot between the King
d his mother, and considerable progress made to-
ards uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a
aty of association, as Maitland had projected;
hich could not fail of endangering or diminishing
is authority, and mufft have proved fatal to those,.
ho had ated against her with greatelt vigour *.

ALL there circumstances irritated the impatient Thenoble
irit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole- "'spire a-

gainfl

te no longer the insolence of the two minions, or them.
sand by, while their presumption and inexperi-
ce ruined both the King and kingdom. Eliza-
th, who, during the administration of the four
:egents, had the entire direction of the affairs of
otland, felt herself deprived of all influence in
hat kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
as ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the
ing out of the hands of favourites, who were
ading him into measures, so repugnant to all her
tiews. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord
Rurhven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the
Wafter of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen-

* Cald, 3. 57.

,^~~ ~ tlepen

B o o Ktlemen of diftinaion, entered into a combinatio

VI. for that purpose; and as changes in administration,

weT ' which among polished nations, are brought abou
x58z2' lowly and filendy, by artifice and intrigue, wen

in that rude age effected suddenly and by violence,
the King's situation, and the security of the favour.
ices, encouraged the conspirators to have immediat
recourse to force.

Scze the JAMES, after having resided for some time it
Kng's per- Athole, where he enjoyed his favourite amufeme
f.-n aRuch-
yen. of hunting, was now returning towards Edinburg

with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpead
no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther fpo
The multitude of itrangers whom he found the
gave him some uneasiness; and as those who we
in the secret arrived every moment from diffe
parts, the appearance of so many new faces i
creased his fears. He concealed his uneafine
however, with the utmost care; and next morni
prepared for the field, expecting to find there so
opportunity of making his escape. But just as
was ready to depart, the Nobles entered his b
chamber in a body, and presented a memorial agai
the illegal and oppressive adtions of his two favot
ites, whom they represented as most dangerous e
mies to the religion and liberties of the natin
James, though he received this remonstrance wi
the complaisance which was necessary in his pref
situation, was extremely impatient to be gone;
as he approached the door of the apartment,
Tutor of GCamis rudely rfopped him. The Kir

Co

plained, expoffulated, threatned, and findingB o o K-
these without effe&, burst into tears, " No mat- VI.
r, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep than \Vt
carded men." These words made a deep impref- 582
on on the King's mind, and were never forgotten.
he conspirators, without regarding his tears or
Idignation, difiniffed such of his followers as they

speed; allowed none but their own party to
ve access to him; and though they treated him
ith great refpe&, guarded his person with the ut-
oft care. This enterprize is usually called, by our
ftorians, The raid of Ruthven *.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last Commit
gree at an event so unexpected, and so fatal to rr;ant
eir power. The former endeavoured, but with-

t success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from
ptivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
ounted on horseback the moment he heard what
d befallen the King, and with a few followers,
de towards Ruthvcn-caftle; and as a considerable
dy of the conspirators, under the command of
e Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
m, he separated himself from his companions,
d with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
fle. At the fight of a man so odious to his
ntry, the indignation of the conspirators rose,
d infant death must have been the punishment of
srafhnefs, if the friendship of Gowrie, or ome
her cause not explained by our historians, had not
ed a life, so pernicious to the kingdom. He

Cald. 3; 134. Spots. 320. Melv. 357.

was

B o o K was confined, however, to .the castle of Stirlini

V I. without being admitted into the King's presence.

Co-rmand THE King, though really the prisoner of h
Lennox to own subjects, with whole conduc he could nl
leave the
kingdom. help discovering many symptoms of disgust, w;

obliged to pubiifh a proclamation, signifying h
approbation of their enterprize, declaring that
himself was at full liberty, without any reftraintc
violence offered to his person ; and forbidding an
attempt against those concerned in the Ra d of Ruti
''in, under pretence of rescuing him out of thei
hands. At the fame time, he commanded Lenna

ALs9 :s. to leave Scotland before the 20th of September.

The Con- SooN after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arriv
fpirators ed as ambafTadors from Elizabeth. The preta
counte-
nanced by of their embassy was to inquire after the King'

zabeth. safety ; to encourage and countenance the confpi

rators was the real motive of it. By their int.
cefion, the Earl of Angus, who ever since ti
death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, o
rained leave to return. And the accession of a n0
bleman so powerful and so popular flrengthenedti
faction

LE N NO, vwiofr amiable and gentle qualitieshl

procured him man, friends, and who received p
vate assurances that the King's favour towards h'
vwas in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at fit
to pay no rgard to a command, extorted by vi
knee, and no iefs diaiigrcable to James, than itW

C C . . ;.; - :. -':" Cald. :. -x 2.ig

gorous with regard to himself. But the power of B o o
ienemies, who were masters of the King's per- VI.
, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and
enly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from 582
n enterprize, the success of which was dubious,
d the danger certain both to himself, and to his
overeign. He put off the time of his departure,
owever, by various artifices, in expetation either
at James might make his escape from the confpi-
tors, or that fortune might present some more fa.
ourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex- Theircon-
remely solicitous not only to secure the approbation dua ap-

proved by

ftheir countrymen, but to obtain some legal fanc- an Assem-
ion of their enterprize. For this purpose, they bly and a

Conventiom

ublilhed a long declaration, containing the motives, of estates.
hich had induced them to venture on such an ir-
egular ftep, and endeavoured to heighten the pub-
ic indignation against the favourites, by represent-
ng in the strongest colours, their inexperience and
nfolence, their contempt of the nobles, their vio-
tion of the privileges of the Church, and their
ppreffion of the people. They obliged the King,
ho could not with safety refue any of their de-
ands, to grant them a remiifon in the most am-
e form; and not satisfied with that, they applied
o the AiTembly of the Church, and easily procur- oa. i-.
dan act, declaring, " that they had done good
nd acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign,
and to their native country ;" and requiring all fin
cere Protestants to concur with them in carrying
forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add

1 ~~~~~~7 the

B o o : the greater weight to this aEt, every Miniiter wa

VI. enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to infliOj
8- ~~ the censures of the Church on those who set them

5 selves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven.

don of efiare, aflembled a few days after, passe
an alr to the fame efTcl, and granted full indemnit
to t;e conspirators for every thing they had done',

Lennox's JAMES was conducted by them, first to Stiling
departure and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houf£
from Scot.
land. and though he was received every where with i

external marks of refpet due to his dignity, hi
motions were carefully obfcrved, and he was undet
a refiraint no less ftri&, than at the first mone
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lenno,
after eluding many commands to depart out of t
kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journe
He lingered, however, for some time in the neig
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had fill intendd
to make one effort towards reoring the. irg
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his ow
disposition, aver'e to blood-Ihed and lhe diforde
of civil war, or from some other calue, lHkow
to us, he abandoned the design, aiid set op so
Dc. 30. France, b the way of Engilad. Thie Kingi

the order for his departure, with no lets felian
than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned!
feparaion, which neither of them had power t
prevent- Soon after his arrival in France, the fa
tigue of the journey, or the anguift of his Enind
threw him into a fever. In his last moments, bh
discovered such a firm adherence to the Protefi

Cala. i., i -, zo. otr'. o 22. faith

faith

th, as fully vindicates his memory from the im- B o o K
tation of an attachment to Popery, with which VI.
had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland *. As
e was the earliest, and best beloved, he was, per- 15
ps, the mofi deserving, though not the mioft able
fall James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ess of his Matler's affection for him was not
ated by death itself. By many ads of kindness
d generosity towards his posterity, the King not
niy did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
ut et his own charader in one of the most favour-
le points of view.

THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived Mary'?
ames of liberty, made great noise over all Europe; "'IeY
d at last reached the ears of Mary in the prison son.
which fie was confined. As her own experience
ad taught her what injuries a captive prince is ex-
fed to lilfTer; and as many of those, who were
w concerned in the enterprize against hel son,
ere the fame persons whom she confidered as the
ief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
I for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that
e ame calamities were ready to fall on his head;
d fulch a profped did not fail of adding to the
iftrefs and horror of her own situation. In the
nguih of her heart, he wrote to Elizabeth, com-
ilining n the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
gour, with which she herself had been treated,
nd beseeching her not to abandon her on to the
nerc- of his rebellious fubjecs; nor permit him to
involved in the fame misfortunes, under which

' Spotfw. 324.

B o o K she had o long groaned. The peculiar vigour an

VI. acrimony of fiile, for which this letter is remark
' g~' able, discover both the high spirit of the Scottif

82' Queen, unfubdued by her sufferings, and the vio

lence of her indignatiori at Elizabeth's artifices ani
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain theendA
had in view, and accc:dingly it neither procure
any mitigation of the rigour of her own confine.
ment, nor any interposition in favour of the King'

5S HENRY III. who, thoughl he feared and hate

Ambaffa- the Princes of Guise, was often obliged to coun
fro''" their favour, interposed with warmth, in order i
Fraoce and extricate James out of the hands of a party so ea.

sad. 'tirrly devoted to the Englif interest. He con'

manded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambaffadora
the court of England, to repair to Edinburgh, a
to contribute his utmost endeavours towards placin
James in a fituaion, more suitable to his digniy
As Elizabeth could not, with decency, refue hit
liberty to execute this commission, she appointd
Davison to attend him into Scotland as her Envoy
under colour of concurring with him in the nego
ciation, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motion
and to obftru his success. James, whose title
the Crown had not hitherto been recognized by
of the princes on the Continent, was extremely so
of such an lhonourable embassy from the Frend
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for !
fake of the errand on which he came, received F
Jn. 7. nelon with great refpe&. The nobles, in wh

power the King was, did not relish this interpofiti

* Camd. So.

f the French court, which had long loft its anci- B o o K
nt influence over the affairs of Scotland. The VI.
lergy were alarmed at the danger to which reli- ".--
ion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise I583'
ould recover any ascendant over the public coun-
is. And though the King tried every method for
braining them within the bounds of decency, they
claimed against the court of France, against the
rinecs of Guise, against the ambassador, against
tering into any alliance with such notorious per-
tutors of the Church of God, with a vehemence,
hich no regular government would now tolerate,
t which was then extremely common. The am-
idnor, watched by Davison, diftrufled by the
bles, and exposed to the insults of the Clergy,
d of the people, returned into England without
oculing any change in the King's situation, or re-
iving any nfwer to a proposal which he made, that
e government should be carried on in the joint
.es cf James, and the QQueen his mother .

MrMENWHILE, James, though he dissembled with James es-
eat art, became every day more uneasy under his cap:,ti o
nfinement; his uneasiness rendered him continu- hands of

th.,conspi-

y attentive to find out a proper opportunity for rators.
aking his escape; ad to this attention, he at last
ed his liberty, which the King of France was
t ale, nor the Queen of England willing to pro-
re for him. As the conspirators had forced
nnox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
rance from court, they grew secure; and ima-
ning that time had reconciled the King to them,

' Cald, . S207. $potv. 324 Sec Appendix, N° VII.
VOL. II. H and

B o o and to.his situation, they watched him with lit;,

VI. care. Some occasions of discord had arisen amo
'- themfrlves; and the French ambassador, by foment

3 ing these, during the time of his residence in Scot

land, had weakened the union, in which aloneth
fafery confifed *. Colonel William Stewart,
commander of the band of gentlemen, who gua
ed the King's person, being gained by James,
the principal merit in the scheme for reftoringY
Jure -. master to liberty. Under pretence of payinga vi

to the Earl of March his grand uncle, James w
permitted to go from Falkland to St, Andrew'
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodg
at sirs, in an open defenceless house in the tow
but pretending a curiosity to fee the caRfle, no soo
was he entered with some of his attendants wh
he could trufi, than Colonel Stewart comman
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft
his train. Next morning the Earls of Argy
Hunldy, Cra>ford, Mon.rofe, Rothcs, with oth
to whonm the secret had bren communicated, ente
the town with their followers, and though M
with fver.dl of the leaders of the faction, appea
in arms, they found thcmfclves so far out-num
ed, that it was in vain to think of recovering
leffion or the King's perfo -, which had been in t
power somewhat longer than ten months. Ja
was naturall; of so soft and ductile a temper,
those who .'ere near his person, commonly nad:
deep impression on his heart, which was formed
be under the sway of favourites. As he remai
implacab!e and unreconciled to the confpirat

*Camd. c.

*d

ring so long a time, and at a period of life when B o o K
enrments are rather violent than lasting, they VI.
R either have improved the opportunities of in- '~ .
'ating themselves into favour with little dexterity,
the indignation, with which this first insult to his
son and authority filled him, mulf have been.
y great.

IHs joy at his escape was youthful and excefive. tefolvec,
resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James thowrevaer
lvil, and his wisest counsellors, to act with the them with
oft moderation. Having called, into his pre- ion."
e, the leaders of both fations, the neighbour-
gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
IMinifers, and the heads of colleges, lie de-
ed, that although he had been held under re-
int for ome time by violence, he would not im-
ethat as a crime to any man, but without re-
bering the irregularities, which had been so
uent during his minority, would pals a general
of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeas with un-
ngifhing and equal affection. And as an evi-
e of his sincerity, he visited the Farl of Gow-
t Ruthven-caftle, and granted him a full par-
of any guilt he had contra&ed, by the crime
mnitted in that very place .

UT James did not adhere long to this prudent But Aran
moderate plan. His former favourite, the 'egains is

ascendant

of Arran, had been permitted for ome time over Ilm.
fide at Kinnil, one of his country feats. As
as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for

I Mdlv. 2-2.

-I 2 i

B o o K him began to revive, and he expressed a strong defir

VI. to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed the re.

'-'turn of a minion, whose insolent and overbearin
I 83' temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefle

his crimes. James, however, continued his im.
portunity, and promising that he should continuewii
him no longer than one day, they were obliged to
yield. This interview rekindled ancient affetion;
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his
cendant over him; and within a few days refumd
the exercise of power, with all the arrogance of
undeferving favourite, and all the rashness peculii
to himself *.

And the THE firrft effSe of his influence was a proclaim
Kng pur- tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid
rues ano-
t:er pln. Rut!ve.i. They were required to acknowle

their crime in the humblest manner; and the K
promied to grant them a full pardon, provi
their future conduct were such, as did not ob
him to remember past miscarriages. The tenor
this proclamation was extremely different from
act of oblivion, which the conspirators had I
encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them rec
it safe to rely on a promise, clogged with such
equivocal condition, and granted by a young Pri
under the dominion of a Minister, void offa
regardless of decency, and transported, by the
fire of revenge, even beyond the usual ferocit
his temper. Many of the leaders, who had at
appeared openly at court, retired to their own hou
and foreseeing the dangerous storm which was

* Ielv, 274.

then|

ering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign B o o K
ountries *. VI.

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected the Elizabeth's
onfpirators, was extremely difgufled with measures 'libtlatinOf
'hich tended so visibly to their destruction, andthe conpi-
rote to the King a harfli and haughty letter,rAug .R
eproaching him in a flile, very uncommon among
rinces, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to
urt, and with imprudence in proceeding ib rigor-
ufy againfl his best and molf faithful subjects.
ames, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
ifes extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
|ut of fear, were no longer binding, when thelie

ere removed that it belonged to him alone to

hufe what Ministers he would employ in his ser-
ice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
irators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it
as necessary, for the support of his authority, that
ch an inlult on his person flould not pass altoge-
er uncenlured t.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quckly followed by W\al- Sept. T.
ngham her secretary, whom fe appointed her am- hv's en-
affidor to James, and who appeared in the Scot- bafy into
fh court, with a fplcndor and magnifcence, well sc'land.
alculated to please and dazzle a young Prince.
'ialfingham was admitted to evcral conferences
ith James himfclf, in wvhch he infifred on the
me topics contained in the letter, andl the King
epeated his former answers.
{ Melv.,28. Spo:fw. 3-6. C. ,.o. ,' Meiv.29.

..._~
_

B o o K AFTER suffering several indignities, from the;

VI. rogance of Arran, and his creatures, he return

'v" to England, without concluding any new tre
- I5S with the King. WValfingham was, next to B

leigh, the Minifier on whom the chief weight
the Eng]i .i administration refled; and when ap
son of his rank, fiept so far out of the ordina
road of buifnef, as to undertake a long journey,
his old age, and under a declining state of haiL
some aair of conlequence was supposed to bet.
cause, or ome important event was expeEted toi
the effect of this measure. But as nothing conip
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embafi
i. is probable that Elizabeth had no other inteniid
in emp!oying this sagacious Miniser, than to i
cover, with exactness, the capacity and difpofil
of the Ccottifn King, who was now arrived a
time of life, when, with rome degree of certain
co eciures minght be formed concerning his char
ter, and future conduct. As James poffefied
lents of that kind, which make a better fiure
conver:a:ion, than in action, he gained a great
by th; inicrview with the Engliih fccretary,
notw.-nilandin-g tie cold reception lie met i
g-ave luch an aldvantageous repreflntarion of his a
liti.s, as determined Eiizabeih to treat him, hn,
ferw;ardv,-.i:h more dcency andi re-Le&t *.

ELIZ AE -T;'S eagerness to protect the confpirac

rener J. , ames more violent in his proceedi:
ag:.:n; tcm. As they had all restsed to accepti
pardon, upon the terms wich he had offered, ti

'; : . Caid
. . 3. Jebb. 2. s35.

ere required, by a new proclamation, to surrender B o o K
hemlflves prisoners. The Earl of A ngus alone VI.
omplied; the reft either fled into England, or (.b- "'-
ained the King's licence to reire into foreign parts.

Convention of estates was held, the members of Dec. 1.
hich, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
eclared those concerned in the Arci of RZvt-en to
ave been guilty of high treason; appointed the
.t passed lalt year approving of their conduc to
e expunged out of the records; and engaged to
ipport the King in polecuting the fugitives with
e utmott rigour of law.

TiHE conspirators, though far from having done
ny thi ththat was uncommon in a barbarous age,
mong nutinous nobles, and under an uniettled
ate of (overnment, muf: be acknowledged to have
xcn tuilty of an at of treason agai;it their fove-
ig ; and James, who confidered thleir conduct in
is light, had good reason to boast of his clemency,
hen Ie ofered to pardon them, upon their consef-
n their crime. But, on the other hand, it must
e aiiovcd that, after the King's voluntary promise
a general oblivion, they had ome reason to
noplain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
: t ile most unpardonable imprudence, have put
leir lives in Arran's power.

THE interest of the Church was confidcrably as- 84.
ted by these contrary Revolutions. While the Tlleclsgy

favour the

nipirators kept pofiTefion of power, tle Clergy conflpira
ot only recovered, but extended their privileges. tots, and

Is [hey had formerly declared the hierarchy to be King. t

H 4 un-
a

I

B o o K unlawful, they took some bold measures towards

VI. exterminating the Episcopal order out of the Churchj
.-,- and it was owing more to Adamson's dexterity in

-5S4. perplexing and lengthening out the process for thai

purpose, than to their own want of zeal, that the1
did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all thk
Bishops in Scotland. When the King recovered
his liberty, things put on a very different apet,
The favour bestowed upon Arran, the enemy of ever
thing decent and sacred, and the rigorous profcu.
tion of those nobles, who had been the mot zel
ous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin
the Church. The Clergy could not conceal the
apprehensions, nor view this impending danger in
silence. Drury, who had been refrored to hisof
fice as one of the Miniiters of Edinburoh, openi
applauded the Ra. cf R,!!tLben in the pulpir, a
which the King was so enraged, that, notwithftand
ing lome f''mptoms of his fubmifion, he command
ed him to resign his charge in te city. Mr. An
drew Me1vil, being ummoned before the priry
council to anfter for the doctrine he had uttered i
a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused of compar
i-g the present grievances of the nation with thof
under Jam.s III. and of intimating obliquely tha
t'ev ought to be redressed in the fame manner,
thoulght it incumlbent on him to behave with grearer

rrmnnefs. He declined the jurifdioion of a Civil
co;rr, in a cause which he maintained to be purelt
Ecclefiaflical; the Presbytery of which he was 3
member had, as he contended, the sole right to cal
him ro account for vords spoken in the pulpit; ar

ne-

tler the King not council could judge, iti the first B d o K
ance, of the dotrine delivered by Preachers, VI.
thout violating the immunrities of the Church. '"

........ . j 584.

is exemption from civil jurifdiEtion was a privi-
e, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable

oes of whatever contributed to increase the lultre

power of their body, had long struggled for, and

at last obtained. If thd fame plea had now
n admitted, the Protefant Clergy would have

nome independant on the civil magistrate;
an order of men extremely useful to society
ile they inculcate those duties which tend to pr6-

ite is happiness and tranquility, might have be-

j no less pernicious by teaching, without fear or
|troul, the most dangerous principles, or by ex-
ilng their hearers to the most desperate and lawless
|o-,s. The King jealous to excess of his preroga-
|n, was alarmed at this daring encroachment on
| and as Mclvil, by his learning and zeal, had

l uird the reputation and authority of head of
iapary, he resolved to punish him with the ri-

r, which that pre-eminence rendered necessary,
to d.fcourage, by a timely teverity, the revival
such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
ided hi s rage, by flying into England; and the
ics resounded with complaints that the King
extin-guished the light of learning in the king-
, and deprived the Church of the ablest and
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline a.

HES violent declamations of the Clergy, againfl
imeafLures of the court, were extremely accept-

* Spots. 3c. Cald 3. 34.

able
8 i~~~~~~~~~~8

B o o K able to the people. The conspirators, though d

VI. yen out of the kingdom, still possessed great ins
,x " ence there; and as they had every thing to fc
15 4 from the resentment of a young prince, irritatedl

the furious counsels of Arran, they never ce,!
folliciting their adherents to take arms in theirs
fence. Gowrie, the only person among them
had submitted to the King, and accepted of ap
don, oon repented of a ftep, which loft him
esteem of one party, without gaining the confidea
of the other; and, after suffering many mortif
tions from the King's neglect, and the haughti4
of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave S
land, and to reside in France. While he waited
Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
formed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a scheme for
prifing the catle of Stirling. In his situation,
tie persuasion was necessary to draw him to eng'
in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his v
age, and lay ready to take arms on the day fix
by the conspirators, for the execution of their
terprize. His lingering so long at Dundee,
out any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion
the court, proved fatal to himself, and difappoin
the success of the confpirac-. Colonel Willi,
Stewart furrnundd the house where lie lodged '
a body f fcldiers, and in spite of his refifl
took him prisoner. Two days after, Angus,
and Gi-mis, seized the caRtle of Stirling, and ere
ing their standard there, published a manifesto
claring that they took arms for no other reafan,
to remove from the King's presence, a minioni

I

ad acquired power by the most unworthy aions, B o o K
nd who exercised it with the most intolerable info- VI.
nce. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment ,r',
rack a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it 584.
treachery on his part, and suspected that as he
d formerly dererted, he had now betrayed them.
t the fame time, a fum of money, with which
lizabeth had promised to supply them, not being
ly paid, and their fiiends and vassals coming in
wly, they appeared irresolute and difleartned;
d as the King, who acted with great vigour, ad-
nceil towards them at the head of 20,000 men,
e fled precipitately towards England, and with
fficuly made their escape *. This rash and fee-
eattempt produced such effets, as usually follow
fappoinced conspiracies. It not only hurt the
uie, for which it was undertaken, but added
.ength and reputation to the King ; confirmed Ar-
ns power; and enabled them to pursue their
afiures with more boldness, and greater success.
ow.rie was the fiirf vitimn of their resentment.
ct.r a very informal trial, a jury of peers found

guiir! of treason, and he was publickly be-

aded at Stiriing.

To humble the Church was the King's next ftep. May :=.
t as it became necefiary, for this purpose, to call A parlia-
the aid of the Irgifative authority, a parliament nt d

haflily summoned ; and while so many of the
bies were banished out of the kingdom, or for-
iden to appear in the King's presence; while Ar-
ls haughcinefs kept tome a a distance, and inti-
Ilomcn's Hit. of IHoue f Dougl. 375. SpotC 330.

midared

B o o K midated others; the meeting consisted onlyI

VI. those, who were absolutely at the devotion of tb
"'" "court. In order to conceal the laws which m
58.

Severe laws framing from the knowledge of the Clergy, tn
2gainh the Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy; a:

when some of the Ministers, who either fufpeae
or were informed of the danger, deputed one
their number to declare their apprehensions to
King, he was seized at the palace-gate, and carn
to a distant prison. Others, attempting to ent
the parliament house, were refused admittance
and such laws were pasfd, as totally overturned
confsitution and discipline of the Church. The
fusing to acknowledge the jurifdiion of the pr
council; the pretending an exemption from
authority of the civil courts; the attempting to
minifh the rights and privileges of any of the th
eRtates in parliament, were declared to be high tr
on. The holding Assemblies, whether Civil,
Ecclefiallical, without the King's permission or
pointment ; the uttering, either privately, or p
lickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any
and scandalous reports against the King, his an'
tors, or ministers, were pronounced capital crime

WHEN there laws were publifled at the crof

Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom,
Robert Pont, Minister of St. Cuthbcrts, and
of the Lords of fefion, solemnly proteted agai:
them, in the name of his brethren, because
had been passed without the knowledge or con!
of the Church. Ever since the Reformation,

Caid. 3. 6g. t Pal. 8. jac. VI.

1'

pits and ecclesiastical judicatories had both been B o o K
enemd sacred. In the former, the Clergy had VI.
n accustomed to censure, and admonish, with " '
bounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised an '584'
controuled and independant jurifdition. The
ow was now aimed at both there privileges. These
w statutes were calculated to render churchmen as
onfiderable as they were indigent; and as the
rice of the nobles had stripped them of the
alth, the King's ambition was about to deprive
m of the power which once belonged to their

Ier. No wonder the alarm was universal, and the
plaints loud. All the Ministers of Edinburgh
ook their charge, and fled into England. The
)f eminent Clergymen, throughout the kingdom,
itated their example. Desolation and astonish-
ent appeared in every part of the Scottish Church;
people bewailed the loss of Pastors, whom they
eemed; and full of consternation, at an event so
xpeted, openly expressed their rage against Ar-
, and began to fufpet the King himself to be an
my to the Reformed Religion :.

* Spotfv. 333.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VII.

T H E
THE
H I S T O R Y

F
C T LA N D.

BOOK VII.

T H I L E Scotland was torn by intestine sac- B o o K

tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- VII.

ur of a projec in agitation for setting Mary at
ierty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheshire gentle- Thrognmr
n, was fufpeted of being deeply concerned inon's con-

'S .'' '

*, , r r *

* '

i . fpiracy a-

edefign, and on that suspicion he was taken into gainEli-
ftody. Among his papers were found two lifts, zabeth.
eos the principal harbours in the kingdom, with
account of their situation, and of the depth of
ter in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman
tholics in England. This circumstance confirm-
the suspicion against him, and some dark and
fperate conspiracy was supposed just ready to break
t. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and

declared

B o o K declared that the two papers were forged by ta
VII. Queen's Ministers, in order to intimidate or infna,

8- N him; and he even endured the rack with the utnmo
I584' fortitude. But being brought a second time tot5

place of torture, his resolution failed him, and t
not only acknowledged that he had held a fecre
correspondence with the Queen of Scots, but di.
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng.
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook t
furnih troops, and to conduc the enterprize. Ti
Pope and King of Spain were to supply the mon
necessary for carrying it on ; all the English exile
were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics
home would be ready to join them, at their landing
Mendoza, the Spanish ambafador, who was the
of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting tl
spirit of disaffection among the English, or in has
tening the preparations on the Continent; and
his command, he had made the two lifts, thecopi
whereof had been found in his poeffeion. This co
fefion he retracted at his trial; returned to it agai
after sentence was pafled upon him; and retrace
it once more at the place of execution *

T.o us in the present age, whoare aftfied infor:

ing our opinion of this matter, by the light whic
time and hiflory have thrown upon ite .degniS a
characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum
stances in Throgmorton's confefion appear to
extremely remote from truth, or even fromproba
bility. The Duke of Guise was, at that junaurt,
far from being in a situation to undertake forei

Holingffhed, I37o.

CG

onquefts. Without either power or office at court; B o o K
ated by the King; and persecuted by the favour- VII.
tes, he had no leisure for any thoughts of disturb- 1 8
g the quiet of neighbouring flates, and his vast
nd ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying
he foundation of that famous league, which shook
e throne of France. But about the time Eliza-
eth deteced this conspiracy, the close union be-
ween the house of Guise and Philip II. was remark-
ble to all Europe, and as their great enterprize a-
rains Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
avoured to conceal that under their threatnings to
vade England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared
be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew

.ow ardently all the parties mentioned by him wish-
P her downfal, thought that she could not guard

er kingdom with too much care. The indiscreet Denns of
Xeal of the English exiles increased her fears. NTot My's ad-

isfied with incessant outcries against her severity gailt Eli-
wards the Scottish Queen, and her cruel perfecu- Zabt,.
on of her Catholic fubjefts, nor thinking it enough
at one Pope had threatned her with the sentence of
communication, and another had actually pro-
unced it, they now began to disperse books and
ritings, in which they endeavoured to persuade
eir disciples, that it would be a meritorious aion
take away her life; they openly exhorted the
aids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holo-
nes, and by such an illustrious deed, to render
ir own names honourable and sacred in the Church,
roughout all future ages *. For all these reasons,'
liz.'bch not only infiiced the punishment of a

* CanrJ. 4'.,.

| (L. II. I traitor
t

B c traitor on T'hrcgrncrton, but comnanded the Spa

VII. r.iif ambass;ador initantly to leave Egland; an
.'U. that n-' might be in no danger of being attacke
'~S" .vir.lhin the ifnlan, fle determined to use her utmol

en"rts, in order to recover that influence over th
Scottii councils, which ihe had for ome time en
. rely loll.
.:- '. THrzE z were three different methods, by whic

' :.- :..:- i'Bh mnight hope to accomplish this; eitherb
'-'';- .rr. ";ir uc eeitual aid to the banished noble
-: \, a, --o-.id enable t;-em to resume the chief direclio
' : ~- c5 asairs; or bv enterinc into such a treaty wit

N',r as mig't intimidate hr son, who being no0
..cctco U Cm to gc-ern, would be apt to agree to ar
rc-r-:, r.:er than2 resign t'.e iceptre, or admit a
a.'ici-ac in the throne; or by gaining the Earl
Arran, to I:cure the direction of the King his ma
tcr. T-:e Ia'! :.'as not onlyr.! the eafif, and fpeediei
but moai liv o b- fuccersfiul. This Elizabei
rel-'l' d to pturlue ; buc v.ithout laying the oth
Evo - ro:?thcr :'i- .' \\-i th is view, the fentD
;:'., c.- f her pr'ncipal fcrctarics, a man
a'' .'... ..'_ =.'=L, into Scotland. A Miniser

.-e:-' :s \ i, .::d by his o.-n coultrw-'nen,
l.. :. ;..

',;- ,o-.;' b'.- the moil precarious of aili

-.-., . ' _-,- c.f a young Prince, acceped E

::.-_'::h'. t:- S '.i h.:.
" a h ii atiu)nr and eleccnedt

:..,:':aun or '.-: Fro:u'con to be the molR so:

. -

. ;_ .:-. _,:ion cf J t,'.,n gratt.s, oonr after,

.

-. .

.-

:

:. -r i, -e:'v

:'eit Jt ord 1liunfdon

(,-c: - ; cf ,.r·:`.::.. an b 1-i o, noJinour:- with I
-ir-:-_,-, ':. :..f L' . L tcn'.tt CiC.ar'l tfor the lK'

appeared at the place appointed, with a splendid B o o K
rin, In Hunfdon's presence, he renewed his pro- VII.
ifes of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the
nglifh interest, and assured him that James should 5
nter into no negociation, which might tend to in-
rupt the peace between the two kingdoms; and
s Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and
aloufies concerning the King's marriage, which
d formerly disquieted her with regard to his mo-
er's, he undertook to prevent James from liften-
g to any overture of that kind, till he had previ-
fly obtained the Queen of England's content *

THE baniffed lotds and their adherents soon felt Severepro-
.e etas of Arran's friendship with England. As ceedings a-

' ' -,

cr ' - gainft the

lizabth had permitted them to take refuge in her banished
minions, and several of her Miniflers were of opi- Lords.
on that flhe ought to employ her arms in defence
their cause, the fear of this was the only thing,
ich restrained James and his favourite, from pro-
ding to such extremities againfl them, as might
e excited the pity or indignation of the English,
have prompted them to exert themselves with
our in their behalf. But every apprhienfion ofAtr: 2-
kind being now removed, they ventured to call
arliament, in which an a was paffl, atraint-
Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of
followers. Their estates devolved to the Crown,
according to the prac.ice of the Scottish Mo-
is, who were obliged to reward the faction
ch adhered to them, by dividing with it the

~ ' .

:c' .

i.
. Mc;. . See Append. N°IX.

jI I 2 spoils

EB o ; fpois of the vanquished, James dealt out the grea,

VII. er -air of there to Arran, and his associates *.
A-.n :':. NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo

rous. All Ministers, readers, and professors !
Colleges were injoined to subscribe, within sorn
days, a paper testifying their approbation of
laws concerning the Church enacted in last par
ment. Many, overawed, or corrupted by
Court, yielded obedience; others stood out. T
flipends of the latter were sequestered, some of
more active committed to prison, and numbers c
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who compli
fell under the fulpicion of acting from mercen
or ambitious motives. Those who suffered, acq
ed high reputation, by giving such convincing
derce of their firmness and sincerity. The judi
tories of the Church were almost entirely fuppref
In some places, scarce as many Ministers rernai
as to perform the duties of religious worship; t
soon ,fuk in reputation among the people, and
ir5 r'ohibited not only from (lifcourfing of pub[
r-':, br-i cbiged, by thejealoufy of the adminiu
t;:n. tLo Ii-anme tvery sentiment and exprefion.ini
a -.a.'tr, as to give the court no offince, thtir
r.:-.s v. ere deened languid, insipid, and conte
tib:.e a;nd it became the general opinion, thatt
tr.cr .- ith the morr virtuous of the nobles, and
!:'-oi: faithful of the Clergy, the po' er and vi
cf ' i.icn ere now b niflied out of the b

!.! .'
! -, . . . I..J. 3 5 9.'

TMEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one ofB o o K
hose fruitless negociations with the Quecn of Scots, VII.
which it had become almost matter of form to re- 158

I584

few every year. They served not only to amuse
hat unhappy princess with rome prospect of liber-
y; but furnished an apology for eluding the folli-
itations of foreign powers in her behalf; and were
)f use to overawe James, by flewing him that he
ould, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to dif-
ute his authority. These treaties the suffered to
ioceed to what length he pleased, and never want-
d a pretence for breaking them off, when they be-
ame no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot
as not, perhaps, more sincere than many which
receded it; the reasons, however, which rendered
inefflcual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders on-
wards Scotland, the ship on board of which he ,liracy
as a passenger happened to be chased by pirates, z:beclt.
ho in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
richton, in great confusion, tore in pieces ome
pers in his cuflody, and threw them away; but
a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
em back into the ship, and they were immediate-
taken up by fonme of the passengers, who carried
em to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He,
ith great industry and patience, joined th-m toge-
er, and they were found to contain the account of
plot, said to have been formed by the King of
pain, and Duke of Guise, for invading England.
he people were not yet recovered'from the fear
'd anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy, in which

1 3 Throg-
1~~~~~~~

B o o Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his disco.

VII. veries Dpptared nw to be confirmed by additional
t-- - evidence. nor only all their former apprehensions re.

4. cured, but the confernation became general and

excessive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatned for some years. flowed either
immediatciy from Mary herself. or from those, who
made uife of her name to justify their infurretions
and co:fliiicie~. this grauially diminished the corn
pafcn due ro her situation, and the English, instead
of pit., ncg, bean to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
brtn, u.-er whole wife and pacific reign the Fng.
lifh enjoyed tranquilliry, and had opened sources of
wealt unknown o their ancestors, was extremely
bel]ved by all her people; and regard to her safe.
tv. nor ]is than to their own interest, animated

Occafo.s them against thie Scottish Queen. In order to dif.
2n- i-a courage her adherents, it was thought necessary
pLotin to convince them, by some public deed, of the
ary-. aitachment of the English to their own Sove-

reign, and that any attempt against her life would
oboerg9. prove fatal ro her rival. With this view, an A..

ciatin was framed, the subscribers of which bound
themselves by the mofl solemn oaths, " to defend
' the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and
c domefric; and if violence should be offered to
" her life, in order to favour the title of any pre.
" tender o the Crown, they not only engaged ne

ver to allow or acknowledge the person, or per
f" ons, by whom, or for whom, such adeteflable al

" fhoulJ be committed, but vowed, in the prefenct
" of the :ternal God, to prosecute such person, 01
" persons, to the death, and to pursue them, 'st:

', the

their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow B o o K
and extirpation *." Persons of all ranks fubfcrib- VII.
this combination, with the greatest eagerneis and "

H 1~~ C?*~~~~~ 1584.

rnanimrity -.

MARY: confidered this combination, not only as Which
n avowed design to exclude her from all right of g'ly, ,
uccefTion, but as the certain and immediate fore-
tinner of her deftruaion. In order to avert this,
he made fich feeble efforts as were iill in her pow-
r, and lent Nau, her secretary to court, with offers
fr;ore entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,
every point, which had been the occasion of their
ng enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto had
een able to extort t. But whether Mary adhered
flexibly to her privileges, as an independanE Sove-
ign, or yielding to the neceffiry of her situation,
ndeavoured, by conceflons, to ooth her rival, ne
as equally unficcefsful. Her firmness was im-
uted to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign
iiftance; her conceflions were either believed to be
sincere, or to flow from the fear of Ibme imminent
anger. Her present willingness, hdwevcr, to com-
ly with any terms was so great, that Waalfingham
armly ursed his mifrefs to come to a iinal agree-
,cnt with her. But Elizabeth was perliuaded, tl;:t
was the ipirit raised by the association, which had
ndered her so palfive and compliant. She always
agined that there was something mynierious and
eceififl in all Mary's actions,' aind fillpeted her of
arrying on a dangerous correlpondence with the
l.nglilh Cathulics, both within and without the king-

I 'tdte'l'.Js, . 122. . Cnad.

). ibid.
I :I 4 doni.

B o o K dorn. Nor were her fufpikions altogether void o

VII. foundation. Mary had, about this time, writtena

S'L^" letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to haRten
3J 4' the execution of what fe calls the Great plot orDe.

figni:enit, without hesitating on account ot any dan.
ger in which it might involve her life, which e
would moit willingly part with, if, by that sacrifice,
she could procure relief for so great a number of the

She is trea- oppressed children of the Church *. Intlead, there.

ea' -,ri- fore, of hearkening to the overtures which the Scot.
gcsr. tifh Queen made, or granting any mitigation ofth:

h.rdhips of which she complained, Elizabeth re,
solved to take her out of the hands of the Earl o
Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, an
Sir Drue Drury, to be her keepers. Shrewfbu
had discharged his trust with great fidelity, during
fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treat.
ed Mary with gentleness and refpe.t, and had al
ways fwerened harsh commands, by the humani,
wth which he put them in execution. The fars
polirenefs was not to be expected from men of an
inferior rank, whole evere vigilance, perhaps, vwa
their chief recommendation to that employment, an
the only merit, by which they could pretend to gain
favour or preferment -.

CGay, a As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive
:, fa. the banished nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he ap,
the cng's. pointed the Mafler of Gray his ambal'ador to the

court of England, and entrusted him with the con.
duet of a negociation for that prpofe. An.honour
for which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy

S:rype, 3. z46. t Camd. 50o.

the Earl of Arran. Gray pofeffed all the talents B o o K
a Courtier; a graceful person, an insinuating ad- VII.
;, boundlcfs ambition, and a restless and in- 'k(5"
guing spirit. During his residence in France, he I584
d been admitted into the most intimate familiarity
th the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his
vour, had renounced the Protefiant Religion, and
feecid the utmost zeal for the captive Queen,
io carried on a ecret correspondence with him,
m which he expected great advantages. On
e return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
raorinary aduity, and his accomplishments did
fail to make their usual impression on the King's

||rt. Arran, who had introduced him, began
ickly to dread his growing favour; and flattering

self, that absence would efface any sentiments of
dernefs from the mind of a young prince, pointed

out, by his malicious praises, as the most pro-
peiion in the kingdom, for an embafly of such
ortance: and contributed t6 raise him to that high
ity, in order to haften his fall. Elizabeth, who
an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper
ruments for carrying on her designs, endeavour-
by caresses, and by presents, to ecure Gray to
interest. The former flattered his vanity, which
great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which
dill greater. He abandoned himielf without
ye to Elizabeth's diredtions, and not only un-
ook to retain the King under the influence of
land, but acted as a spy upon the Scottilh
en, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that

he

B o o K he could draw from her by his high pretensions

VII. zeal in her service *

i...ti GRAY'S credit with the English court was
-;:h t'.e tremely galling to the banished nobles. Elizah
c'Lr: cis
in:ar. no longer thought of employing her power to reld

them; she found it easier to govern Scotland,
corrupting the King's favourites; and in conm
ance with Gray's follicitations, she commanded
exiles to leave the north of England, and to renm
cem.;. irto the heart of the kingdom. This rendered

difficult for them to hold any correspondence
their partizans in Scotland, and alnmoft impoff
to return thither without her permission. Gray,
gaining a point which James had so much at he
rivetted himself more firmly than ever in his favo
and by acquiring greater reputation, became ca
ble of serving Elizabeth with greater success t.

I ;S. ARRAN had now pofffftd, for some time,
A--<'5 the power, the riches, and the honours, that
corruption,

rc .n;o- immoderate ambition could desire, or the fond
'"' of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality

wards his favourites, could bestow. The office
Lord Chancellor, the liigheft and most important
the kingdom, was conferred upon him, even
'ng the life of the Earl of Argyll, who fucce
Athole in that dignity ; and the public bel
with afonifhment and indignation, a man edu
ed as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and
contcmner of justice, appointed to preside in pd

' :-.~re. 36. -Cald '.t.

P.4

it, in the privy council, in the court of feflion, B o o ic
intruded with the fpreme disposal of the pro- VII.
of his fellow-fubjeeds. He was, at the fame ~i '~8

e, governor of the cafties of Stirling and Etlin-
hl, the two principal forts in Scotland; Pro-
of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all
e accumulated dignities his merit were not sus-
ently recompenced, he had been created Lieute-
tGeneral over the whole kingdom. No person
;admitted into the King's presence without his
lition; no favour could be obtained but by his
iation. James, occupied with youthful amuse-'
Its, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-

Such unmerited elevation increalcd his natu-
rr(gance, and rendered it intolerable. He was
onger content with the condition of a subject,
pretended to derive his pedigree from Mturdo
e of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
to the Crown was preferable to that of the King
self. But, together with these thoughts of roy-
,he retained the meanness, suitable to his pri-
ve indigence. His venality as a judge was scan-
us, and was exceeded only by that of his wife,
,in defiance of decency, made herself a party
inoft every question which came to be decided,
loved her influence to corrupt, or to overawe
udges, and almost openly diltated their deci-
s5. His rapaciousness as a Minister was infa-
le. Not faiisfied with the revenues of So many
es; with the estate, and honours which belong-
o the family of Hamilton; or with the greater
of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his

a
C .ai . . Sco.tarvet's Staggering State, 7

share i

B o o K share; he grasped at the poffeflions of several of

VJI. nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to excha
8'"-- part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinn

and because he was unwilling to quit an ancient i
heritance for a poffefflon so precarious, he stirred
against him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of Jo.
lion, and involved that corner of the kingdom
a civil war. He committed to prison the Earl
Athole, Lord Home, and the Master of Cali!
the first, because he would not divorce his wl
a daughter of the Farl of Gowrie, and entail
elfate on him; the second, because he was unwill
to part with some lands, adjacent to one of
eflates; and the third, for refuting to lend him
ney. His spies and informers filled the wholeco
try, and intruded themselves into every comp
The nearest neighbours distrusted and feared
other. All familiar society was at an end. E
the common intercourses of humanity wereinu
rupted, no man knowing in whom to confide,
where to utter his complaints. IThere is not
haps in hiltory, an example of a minister so univ
rally detestable to a nation, or who more justly
served its detefation *.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the

timents, and depifing the murmurs of the po
gave a loose to his natural temper, and proce
to acs ftiil more violent. David Home of Arg
and Patrick his brother, having received letters fro
one of the banished Lords, about private bufir
were condemned and put to death, for holding

* Spots. 337, 38.

rclF

pondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum- B o o K
iafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of VII.
notr and reputation, were accused of having con- 8

1585.

red, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's
rfon. A ingle witness only appeared; the evi-
nce they produced of their innocence was unan-
erable; their accuser himself not long after acknow-
dged that he had been suborned by Arran; and
men believed the charge against them to be
oundlefs: they were found guilty, notwithftand- Fb. 9,

and suffEred the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time, that there gentlemen were Parry's
nified for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's cgrfpiracy

againrft

ewas indangered by a real one. Parry, a Doc- Elizabeth,
r of laws, and a Member of the House of Com-
ons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute
iri, had lately been reconciled to the Church of
ome; and fraught with the zeal of a new con-
rt, he offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his
tachment to the religion which he had embraced,
killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had publifl-
a book, to prove the murder of an excommu-
ated Prince to be not only lawful, but a merito-
ous aion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the
luits both there and at Paris, the English exiles,
approved of the design. The Pope himself ex-
rted him to perevere; and granted him, for his
couragement, a plenary indulgence, and remiflion
his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter
the fame purpose. But though he often got ac-
fs to the QUicen, fear, or some remaining sense of

* pih.fiw 338. Cald. 3. 79+.

duty,

B o o duty, restrained him from perpetrating the ci

VII. Happily, his intention was at last discovered
,,-,8 Nevil, the only person in England, to whom

had communicated it; and he himself having
''_rch . luntarily confessed his guilt, he suffered the puni

ment which it deserved .

A severe THESE repeated conspiracies agaiint their So
rtazure, hi' reign awakened the indignation of the Englift p
provedfatl liament, and produced a very extraordinary ftat
to Mar).

which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen
Scots. By this law the association in defence
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was fur
enaced ; " that if any rebellion shall be excited
" the kingdom, or any thing attempted to
" hurt of her Majesty's person, Iy or for any
' son Fretending a title to the Crown, the Qa
" shall empower twenty four persons, by a co
" miifion under the Great Seal, to examine in
"and pass sentence upon such offences; and as
"judgment given, a proclamation shall be iffu
". declaring the persons whom they find guilty,

c luded from any right to the Crown; and

': Majefy's fLbjects may lawfully pursue every o
' of them to the death, with all their aiders and at
" tors: And if any design again rt the life of the Qu
" rake effet, the persons, by r for whom, such
" detestable act is executed, and t-rir isis, bein
"any wile afinting or privy to the fame, shall
"disabled for ever from pretending to the Crow
' and be pursued to death in the I:ke manner"

' ,- T,:=:-, \Vc-. 1. , t S::e Tr:als, Vol. I.i:

TIr.

s a.t was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots; B o o K
whether we confider it as a voluntary expression VII.
the zeal and concern of the nation for Eliza- xa
t's safety, or whether we impute it to the influ-
c, which that artful Princess preserved over her
liaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile ir with
general principles ofjuftice, or humanity. Mary
thereby rendered accountable not only for her
ations, but for those of others; in consequence
which, ihe might forfeit her right of succession,
I even her life itfeif.

ARY justly confidered this at, as a warning to The rigour
pare for tihe worst extremities. Elizabeth's mi- with which

file was

ers, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, treated, i-
take away her life; and fufftrcd books to becr'"car
sliled, in order to persuade the nation, that this
el and unprecedented measure was not only ne-
r>y, butjuft *. Even that short period of her
s which remained, they rendereduncomfortable,
every hardfiip, and indignity, which it was in
r power to infii&. Almost all her servants were
,nifed; he was treated no longer with the re-

due to a QLeen; and though the rigour of
nrteen years imprisonment had broken her con-
Jtion, flie was confined to two ruinous chambers,
cc habitable, even in the middle of summer, by
on of cold. Notwitlhftanding the scantiness of
revenue, she had been accustomed to distribute
ully fllme alms among the poor in the village
oin gt to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her

3,;' .299.

lberty

B ooK liberty to perform this pious and humane os

VII. which had afforded her great consoLation, amn
*bV ^ her own sufferings. The castle, in which fie
1585' ided, was converted into a common prison; and

young man, fufpe&ted of Popery, was confi
there, and treated under her eye, with such rigo
that he died of the ill usage. She often complaiR
to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and
postulated as became a woman, and a Queen;
as no political reason now obliged that Princess
amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes, farfe
granting her any redress, she did not even deign
give her any answer. The King of France, clof
allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for
fiftance, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause,
any warmth; and all his billicitations in her be
were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Cal
nau, the French ambassador, whose compaflion
zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the defets
his inftrutions, remonstrated with such vigour
gainft the indignities, to which she was expos
that, by his importunity, he prevailed at length
have her removed to Tuthbury; though he
confined, the greater part of another winter, in.
present wretched habitation *.

A beah NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the
betwen glet of her friends, made such an impression
iar. and
r Ton. Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James

hitherto treated his mother with filial refpeat,
had even entered into negotiations with her, w
gave umb:;age to Elizabeth. But as it was not

* Jcib, v. z. 5,6-598.

inte

ereft that this good correspondence should conti- B o o
, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, found VII
filacvur with the King greatly increased by the fuc- "
of his embafy, perfaded him to write a harsh
utnduiitill leter to his mother, in which he ex-
fy refuit-d to acknowledge her to be Queen of
tiand, or to confider his affairs as connected, in
wifl, with hers. This cruel requital of her
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-

and dfpair. " Was it for th's, said ihe, in a March 4.
etter to the French ambassador, that I have in-
ured so much, in order to preserve for him the
|nheitance, to which I have a jus right ? I am

r fiom envying his authority in Scotland. I
efire no power there; nor wilh to set my foot
n hat kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
f once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
ved witlh too tender affection. Whatever he
ither enjoys, or expecs, he derived it from me.
rorm hrim, I never rceived alliance, supply, or

tenfit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him

ny longer as a king ; he holds that dignity by
y conlont; and if a 1pecdy repentance does not
ppeafe my jut resentment, I will load him with
parent's curfi, and surrender my Crown, with'
Il my prctenfions, to one, who will receive them
ith gratitude, and defcnd them vith vigour "."
love which Jams borc to ilis mother, whom
ad never known, nay whom he ]ad been early
ht to confider as the moS ...bsinoneLi person of
:x, cannot be fiuppofed ever to have been ardent;

* Jb, 2. . Sece Appe:nd. N X.

OL. Tl, K and
Uo. I

o o K and he did not now take any pains to regain }
VII. favor. But whether her indignation at his undi

tiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachml
' to Popery, prompted Mary at any time to think!

rioufly o' difinheriring her fn; or whether t-
threatrings were uttered in a dden rally of di
pointed aecion, it is now no easy matter to de
mine. Some papers which a:e ftiil extant seem
render the ortner not improbable

Dar.-rcus CAR.ES of anoother kind, and no less difquieti
l-;'._:. occupied 1 lizabeth's thoughts. The calm, w

fl-.e hai long cnoved, ieemed now to be at ant
and fch fitcrm.s .e:e gaheling in every qua.
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbou
nitiCcns had undergone revolutions, extremely
her diidv:.nrTge. The great qualities, whichH
ry III. had dilplayed in his youth, and which r
t:-e expc: tionls of his fuljc's so high, vanished
his ac-enli::-g r:e throne; and his acquiring fupi
;v.::;r eems no: only to have corrupted his h
but to h-r.e in-aired his unerftanding. He
loft the etei:' a^.d a eton of the nation;
life divided tbetween the auitcrities of a fuperfti
devotion, and the extravatgncies of the rmoft
Icf.:e db.juch.ry, rendered him as contemptib
he was odious on account of his rapacioulntds,
profu son, and the o b.cdnis with which hedi
on many unw-orthy nminions. Cn the death o0
only brothcr, thole tintimne.s of the people
out with violence. i-enry had ro children,
though but thirty rto ye'ars of a-e, the fiicc:

the Crown was already confidered as open. The B o o K
ng of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal VII.
l.ilv, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was '
eaious Proteflant. The profpecl of an event, so from tle
l to their Religion, as his arcending the throne P°ogre"f of

Hn tn

,

°

, ,, , ,- i r * -r te league,

France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,
d the Du!k of Guif., countenanced by the Pope,

aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
nder of the Ro;mih faith, and the asserter of
|Cariinal of Bourbon's rilght to the Crown. In
er to unite the p.irty, a bond of conlederacy
fc lrmcl, diiringuifhcd 1:y the name of the loly
a:!ac. .l11 ranks of men joinc7 in i w.ir emu.
n. The spirit spread wviih the irrc'il'ibie rapi-
, which was natural to religious pafons, in
age. ' The dcltrucion of the Reformation not
in France, but all over urope, seemed to be
obje and wish of the iwhole party ; and the
e of Guil,, th-e head of this ni.ighry and zea-
boly, acquired authority in tlie ingdom, far
iort to that, which the King himself poficTfed

II. by the conquef of Portugal, had great- fiom tle
creaf.d the naval power of Spain, and had at pi;'p
educcd under his dominion all that portion of
Continent, which lies beyond the yrenean
ntains, and which nature seems to have dellin-
fonn one great monarchy. William Prince
range, who firfl encouraged the inhabitants of
\theriands to afTert their lierties, and hose
in and vilour formed and protesed tle rising
nonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an as-

T he iuperior genius of t'he Piince of Parma,
iven an entire turn to the fate of dite ;war in

K 2 the

B o K and he did not now take any pains to regain hl
VII. favo;r. But whether her indignation at his und.

tiful behavour, added to her bigotted attachmQ;
3 S to Popery, prompted Mary at any time to thiink.

rioufy o; disinheriting her fn ; or whether th
threatrings were uttered in a iudden rally ofdif
pointed afction, it is now no easy matter to de,
mine. Some papers which a:e ftiil extant feei
render the ormner not improbable .
DarnErcus CARpES of another kind, and no lets difquiei

O'Tz1 occupied Ilizabeth's tho ghts. The calm, w
she hai long cnjoyed, eemed now to be at ana
and fc ftcrn.s v,-ee gahern in every qua
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbour
nticrns had undergone revolutions, extremely
her diia:dv.nt ge. The great qualities, which H
ry III. had dilp'ayed in his youth, and which r
the expectltions of his il-jecs so high, vanifhd
his a'ce .: ; rh e throne ; and his acquiring sup
p..er seems no: only to have corrupted his
but to have i-..i'red his undetrfanding. He
loLf the ciF:e- a ard rcation of the nation a
life divided btvween the aui.rities of a fuperftiE
devoticon, and the exrravag:ncics of the rmofi
sol:e d -bucher, rendtred h:m as contemptibk
he was odious on account of his rapaciouneis,
proufion, and the obncn.fs with which hec
on many unworthy minions. Cn the death i
only brothrr, thc'e lenrimnr.ts of the people
out wSth violence. Henry had o children,
thcugh but thirty two years of age, the Iticc:

See Alpc!liX, \.° .I.

the Crown was already confidered as open. The B o o K
ing of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal VII.
iilv, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was
eaious Proeftrant. Tlhe prospect of an event, so from the
t1 to their Religion, as his acending the throne p'grefs of

m ,T i ] - i rcsthe league

Frrance, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,
d the Dr.ke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,

aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
cnder of the Romllii faith, and the aerter of
Carinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
er to unite the party, a bond of conlcdcracy
f trmed, diitingislifllcd by the name of the Iioly
:!e. l1l ranks of nlcin joinc in it irh emu-
n. The- Ipirit fprread with the irei:!'ible rapi-
, Twhich was natural to religious pamfons, in
arge. The eftlrucion of the Reformation nor
in France, but all over Europe, ecmed to be
obje& and wish of the whole party ; and the
e of Guile, te head of this nighty and zea-
body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
riorto that, vwhich the King imfcllf pofiTffed.
ip II. by the conqLuer of Portugal, had great- froin t;
.creascd tle naval power of Spain, and had at O:"'"f; "
educed under his dominion all that portion of
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean
inains, and which nature eems to have dcllin-
nform one great monarchy. William Prince
range, who first encouraged the inhabitants of

cthleriands to aflert their liberties, and whole
MI and valr a

valor forme nd proreed the ring

onwealrh, had fallen by the hands of an as-

T. he superior genius of the Prince of Parmna,
Den an entire turn to the fate of tie war in

K 2 twhe

B o o K the Low Countries; all his enterprizes, concertd

VII. with consummate skill, and executed with equi
,'.,- bravery, had been attended with success; and t
1555'

Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on
point of falling under the dominion of their anci.
mafrer.

;r vfe NoX E Of tho'e circumstances, to which Elizabi

rr3-' had hitherto owed her security, existed any long
duc, She could derive no avantage from thejealo

which had ubfifted between France and Sp
Philip, by means of his confederacy with theD
of Gui, had an equal sway in the councils of
krlngdoms. The Hlugonots were unable to con
with the pow.er of the league; and little could
expeced f:om any diversion they might cr
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands c
clng ernploy the arms, or divide the firengt
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Euro
became necessary for Elizabeth to form a new
of condutr ; and her ifdom in forming i,
not greater than the vigour with which fheca
it on. The meaiures, most suitable to her n
temper, and which he had hitherto pursued,
cautious a:'d fat ; those he now adopted wer
terprizr.ng and hazardous. She preferred peachi
was not afraid of war; and was capable, wlen
pelled by r.ecelfity, not only of defending h
.ith ipirir, but of at:acking her enemies with a
n.ss, v.hich averted danger from her own d
r.ions. She immediately furniil-ed the Hug
with a conf.tderabe supply in money. She
en a p;iv-ate negociation with Henry 11l.

tO

iough compelled to join the league, hated the lead- B o o K
sos it, and wished for their deftruEtion. She VII.
enly undertook the protecion of the Dutch cor- ' "'
on\wealth, and ent a powerful army to its affif:- I585.
ce. She endeavoured to form a general confe-
-crcy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to the
opifh league. She determined to proceed with Rrl,,esto
e utilloft rigour against the Queen of Scots, whose punifil ,a-

0

. ry. and to

iJferings and rights afforded her enemies a specious gin the
etcnce for invading her dominions. She resolved King'
redouble her endeavours in order to effect a c!oser
ion with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
r influence over the councils of that nation.

SHE found it no diffcult matter to induce most
tihe Scottish courtiers, to promote all her defions.
ray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
the office of Secretary, which his brother for-
Ierly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Jufiice Clerk,
o had ucceeded Gray as the King's resident at
gondon, were the persons in whom fie chiefly con- May 29.
ed. In order to direCt and quicken their mo-
ns, file diipatched Sir Edward Wotton along
th Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
ll-bred, and entertaining ; he excelled in all the
ercies, for which James had a passion; and a-
uied the young King by relating the adventures
ha: met with, and the obiervations he had made,
ing a long residence in foreign countries; but
er the veil of these superficial qualities, he con-
ale a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soo,n
ew into high favour with James, and while he
s feerningly attentive only to pleasure and diver-

K 3 fluns,

Bo o fK ions, he acqu red influence over the public cou

- cils, to a degrte x1hich was indecent for a ftran

_C . to pofifs

Prc-rsa- NOTHINC, however, could be more acceptb1
-::"-- . to thle nation, than the proposal he made of afri

alliance becween the two kingdoms, in defence
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarrnmi
progress of thle pcpifh league seemed to call on
ProtelLant Princes, to unite for the prefervaion
1-! 29. their comm;on aith. James embraced the over

wvith v'armth, and a Convention of estates impowI
ed him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged
ra::i;. it in prliant-en-t The alacrity with whi
Jaimes ccncurred in this measure, must not bewli
1v as r;lbed ciiher to h:s own zeal, or to Wort
ad rss ; it \vas owing in part to lizabeth's libe
li:y. As a nma!k of her motherly affection fort
young King, {e fcttlod on him an annual pe-ni
of 50 o pounds; the fame fi.in wiich her fit
had allotted her, before lhee ascended the tliro
!This circumflance, which he took care to menio
rendered a ;m, w.-l.ich in that ae was far from
ing incor.nlier abe, a very acceptable prelFnt to
1i g, w'io.f revenues, during a long minority,
been alm:,ci totally difipated t.
tr---- BUT the chi:f oaect of Wotton's intrigues,

r- "' r to ruin Arran. \Vhile a minion tb odious to t

nr rtcn co.tinued to govern the King, his affiilan
ceui:i be cf lhtt'e advantage to Elizabeth. .A
t'o;,;gh Arran, ever fii,ce his interview with Ht

'-. 317. 1 t 5potfw. 33-. 1 Cald. . 50.

.50','~ ~~~~d.

ne, had appeared extremely for her interest, she B o o K
uld place no great confidence in a man, whose VII.
rJu&t was so capricious and irregular, and who, '"'-
vi:lr a.i;ding his proteff'ltions th te cntrary, 58
i cor,:iad a set ret correfprcndence both with
i·-v, and v'ith the Duke of Gu.s*. The banifl-
Lci-;s v;-cr attc-iche to Engl and fio l ac'tion,
w;l, as rinci; !e, arnd were the on'y Ferrons a-
§ng thc £cuts xwhnin, in any dange:o us exigency,
e c.u d tiloouihly truf'. refore i3cllndtn left
l cn,: they had been fLCliumloned thithr, under co-
or o vin.hicatri tlte::Ic.-cs frcl l hS accutaitios,
r, iln cal;:.', to concc:t w it him the i;'o;l' proper

|;l::1;r.s !or rc2ori:'r t'c'm to tltijr coi ntI ,

V. \'t-
§ li>. ld t' I'1 aI , a ind ('ndatVo 'rcd to r pc n it

c-:;ution ; and it was gre.tlv :cilt,:.tc'd by an
e:,t, nitlr uincoilmmo-n nr cniderabl.'. Sir
h'n F rtlcr, a d ecr of Fcri'htril, ,the L ,ng!iil
d ctt fih wa: ens or the middle march ., hay-

!-.:et, accordi: , to te cu.lom of t!e borders,
. :it -;l'uriin iner, a 'Jra; ri', a .i Lord Iuftiel,

;e ;'l of 'cdii:'d's etldeit in, tlacpened to be

i1 ]. This fc.uFre w,.s p}ire'ly accid.ant .l,

:ut Eli-

lbth ci;e to con!iderl it as a i n rormed by
r, alt itn inii:ation ot Arrall, to iivc;!ve the two

i' n; s i:l w;.r. .he infiic-d i ,.at bo;t or' thr n
:i!l be dlivered up to l-r ; and though James

I .i t'l.it dl:ma;di, Ie was obiiedi to onine -

r-

r in St. ;' ndre.'s, and Ker in b. -rdcei. t1Ar- AfflTs ilh
g ;!;si ab!cc f-rom co-urt, Vottorn :;i. his alo- baniiled

I *

i . . . ~ nobles.

.S c drri.e! on tlheir in-l-rlgcs v. ithout interruiption.
t'i.ir a.Vi'c, the ba.iihed nobles endeavoured to
cmnmi3 od.ic tihcir di;- i-i nccs v i;h Lord Johi,', and

K 4 Lord
I~~~~"

B o o Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two ons,
VII. whom Morton's violence had driven out of the
~'~ ' kingdom. Their common sufferings, and com.
ca 6D. mon interest, induced both parties to bury in obli.

vion the ancient discord, which had subSisted between
the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By ElizR.
beth's permission, they returned in a body to thI
borders of Scot'and. Arran, who had again reco
vered favour, infilled on putting the kingdom in:
posture of def-nce. But Gray, Bellenden, an
Mailand, secretly thwarted all his measures. Soia
r.ecefilrv orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffctual, by the manner o
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, at
with reluc ance *.

-WOTTOXN' fertile brain was, at the fame time

big wsith another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to fe'ze the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was happily
discovered ; and in order to avoid the punifhmenthi!
treachery merited, he departed without taking leave`.

IMEAN- -:' LE the banishcd Lords hafsened theexe

u-r10 La Ocution -of their enterprize; and as their friends and

1,

"' ev rafials were now ready to join them, they entere
,;:r 1.-: o Scotland. \'herever they came, they were wel

corned as the delivers of their country, and the
most fervent prayers were addressed to Heaven so
the success of their arms. They a vanced, with
out lofin a moment, towards Stirling at the
head of o,coo men. The King, though
had aiTembled an army superior in number, could

, preo:., 3.' t IcI:'. 353j.

t venture to meet them in the field, with troops, B o oK
ho0elovaltv was extremely dubious, and who, at VII.
es, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor 8
,as eit^cr the town or cafrie provided for a iege. 5
'he gates, however, of both were mhut, and the

ebles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night Nov
cv furprized the town, or more probably it was
traedl into their hands ; and Arran, who had un-
ertken to defend it, was obliged to ave himself
a precipitate flight. Next morning they invefced
e cifie, in which there were not provisions for
.,r;v-four hou rs; and James was neceflitated im-
c.:ite'y to hearken to terms of accommodation.
hcy were not so elated with success, as to urge ex.,
avagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to
a!e every rcafonahle concession. They obtained
par.on in the most ample form, of all the of-
aces they had committed; the principal forts in

ie kinrdom were, by way of security, put into
eir ands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel
ewrt were removed from the King's pretence;
d a parliament was called, to establish tranquillity
the nation .

THOCGH a great majority in this parliament con- A Parlia-
ed of the confederate nobles, and their adherents, "r'
ey were far from discovering a vindictive spirit.
tisied with procuring an a, restoring them to
er ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the
rdon granted by the King, they seemed willing
forget all past errors in the administration, and
aced James the mortification of feeing his Minis-

Cald. 3. 795.

ters

B o 0 K ters branded with any public note of infamy. Ai

VII. ran, alone, deprived of all his honours, firipped(
L'vy his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to i

J3 3 country by public proclamation, funk backin:

obscurity, and muff, henceforth, be mentioned!
his primitive title of Captain James Stewart. A
he had been, during his unmerited prosperity,
object of the hatred and indignation of his coun
men, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did2
his sufferings mitigate their resentment in the
degree.

Church as- THE Clergy were the only boly of men,
firs,

obtained no redress of their grievances by this
volution. The confederate nobles had, all alK
affected to be confidered as guardians of the p
leges and discipline of the Church. In all t
manifefos they had declared their resolution tor
store these. and by that popular pretence, had g
ed many friends. It was now natural to exp
some fruit of these promises, and ome returrs
gratitude towards many of the most eminent pre
ers who had fuff-red in their cause, and who
manded the repeal of the laws pafied the prece
year. The King, however, was resolute to r
tain there laws in full authority ; and as the nob
were extremely foilicitous not to di-guf him,
infiting on any disagreeable request, the claims
the Church in this, as well as in many for
infiances, were sacrificed to the interest of the la
The Ministers gave vent to their indign tion'in
pulpit, and their impatience under the difapp

rrE(

,,t broke out in some expressions, extremely dif- B o o K
fttill even towards the King himself* VII.

- 1586.

T!E Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the
l-'- of their anger. The Provincial Synod of

I;bmmoned him to appear, and to answer for
colntempt of the decrees of former Affcmblies,
,rel-luming to exercise the function of a Bishop.
d tough he refused to acknowledge thejurif-
ri.n o the court, and appealed from it to the
;,, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
e:;r and irregular, was pronounced against him. April 13.
amfron, with no less indecency, thundered his
iiepif'opal excommunication against Melvil, and
e oticr of his opponents.

ooN afrer, a General AfTembiy was held, in
ch the King, with some difficulty, obtained an
permitting the name and office of a iifhop fill
ontinue in the Church. The power of the or-
lhowever, was considerably retrenched. The
cileof difcipiine, and the infpeflion of the life
dodrine of the Clergy, were committed to Pref-
nes, in which Bishops should be allowed no
r pre-eminence, but that of presiding as perpe-
moderators. They themselves were declared
e subjec, in the fame manner as other pastors,
liejurifdicion of the General Assembly. And
he diicuf5ion of the Archbifliop's appeal might
e kindled unusual heats in the assembly, that as-
was terminated by a compromise. Fie renounc-
'* claim of supremacy over the Church, and

Spotfw. 343.

pro-

B o o K promised to demean himself suitably to the chars

VII. ter of a Biffop, as described by St. Paul. TheA
158.' fembly, without examining the foundations oft

1 sentence of excommunication, declared that it fhoul

be held of no effect, and reftired him to all
privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pronouncz
Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness f.e
for the honour of the fynod, and the delicacy ,
refpet, with which its jurifdition was treated,
veral members were so zealous as to protest agai
this decision *.

A league THE court of Scotland was now filled with
with Eng- ons, so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that
land con-
cluded. league between the two kingdoms, which had

proposed last year, met with no interruption,
from D'Efneval the French Envoy. James
jaly . felr firfr offered to renew the negociation. Eli

beth did not susser such a favourable opportunit
flip, and instantly dispatched Randolph to condc
a treaty, which fie lo much desired. The dai
to which the Protestant religion was exposed,
the late combination of the Popish powers for
destruction, and the necefty of a strict confeden
among those, who had embraced the Reforma
in order to obftrut their pernicious designs,
mentioned as the foundation of the league.
chief articles in it were, that both parties ho
bind themselves to defend the Evangelic Relig0
that the league should be offensive and defent
against all, who shall endeavour to disturb the
ercife of religion in either kingdom; that if one

*Cald. . 94. Spotfv, 5.6.

two parties be invaded, the other, notwithfland- B o o
g any former alliance, should not, dire&ly or in- VII.
re:ly, afTift the invader; that if England be in- '
ded in any part remote from Scotland, James
ould aiift the Queen with 2000 horse, and 5000
ot; that if the enemy landed or approached within
xty miles of Scotland, the King should take the
ei with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as
e would do in deience of his own kingdom. Eli-
beth, in return, undertook to at in defence of
cotland, if it should be invaded. At the fame
me, flie assured the King that no ftep should be
ken, which might derogate in any degree from
is pretensions to the English Crown *. Elizabeth
pressel great satisfaCtion with a treaty, which ren-
ered Scoland an uleful ally, instead of a dange-
us neighbour, and afforded her a degree of fecu-
ty on that fide, which all her ancestors had aimed
t. but none of them had been able to obtain.
eal for religion, together with the blessings of
eace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a
onrfierable period, had so far abated the violence
f national antipathy, that the King's conduct was
niverfally acceptable to his own people t.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time,
xpofed James to much and deserved censure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against
te life of the King his father. Both Morton and
inny one of his own servants, who suffered for
that crime, had accused him of being present at the

* Sotfw. 3,1. tm
Camd. 51,.

mur-

B o o murder *. He had escaped punifhient by flyi

VII. into England, and James had often required E
vó zabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her p

tection. He now obtained a licence, from the Ki
himself, to return into Scotland; and after und
going a mock trial, calculated to conceal ra
than to deret his guilt, he was not only takenin
favour by the King, but ent back to the court
England, with the honourable character of hisa
baifador. James was now of such an age, that
youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in exc
for this indecent tranfation. It must be impu
to the excessive facititv of his temper, which oft
led him to gratify his courtiers at the expence
his own dignity and reputation t.

Rife of Ba- NOT long after, the inconsiderate affecition
bonfpiray the Engiifh Catholics towards Mary, and thi
aanfEli- implacable resentment against Elizabeth, gave r
zabst.h, 0

to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the one Queen
left an indelible stain on the reputation of the othe'
and presented a spectacle to Europe, of whi
there had hitherto been no example in the history
mankind.

DOCTOR Girrord, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodg

son, prierts educated in the seminary at Rheim
lhad adopted an extravagant and enthusiastic notion,
that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dic
tated immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wil
opinion they instilled into Savage, an officer in th

See Append. No. X t Spotfv. 348. Cald. 3. 9gl

Sp.

a courage; and persuaded him that no service VII.
uld be o acceptable to Heaven, as to take away "

i586.

jife of an excommunicated Heretic. Savage, April 6.
erto obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound
Iclf, by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
rto Paris, and follicited Mendoza the Spanish
bafador there, to procure an invasion of Eng-
nd, while the affairs of the league were so profpe-
us, and the kingdom left naked by fending so
any of the Queen's best troops into the Nether-
nds Paget and the English exiles demonPtrated
efruitleffiiefs of such an attempt, unless Eliza-
th were first cut off, or the invaders secured of a
verful concurrence on their landing. If it could
hoped that either of these events would happen,
fclual aid was promised ; and in the mean time
llard was ent back to renew his intrigues. May 15.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-
ngton, a young gentleman in Derbyflire, of a
ntiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
vingcontracted, during his residence in France,
amii:arity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had
n recommended by him to the Queen of Scots.
econcurred with Paget in confidering the death
Elizabeth as a necefliry preliminary to any inva-
I1. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would
on be put to her days, and imparted to him Sa-
ge's vow, who was now in London waiting for
opportunity to itrike the blow. But Babington
hought the attempt of too much importance, to

rely

8

B o o , rely on a ingle hand for the execution of it, a
VII. proposed that five resolute gentlemen should bejoi
~""~ed with Savage in an enterprize, the success

' which was the foundation of all their hopes.
offered to find out persons willing to undertake t
service, hcfe honour, secrecy, and courage, ti
might safely trust. He accordingly opened
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salifou
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, RobertGa
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnoc
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly,
of them, except Polly, whose buffling forward
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of g
families united together in the bonds of priv
friendship, fircngthened by the more powerful
June. of religious zeal. Many consultations were held

their plan of operations was at last fettled; and t
different parts assigned. Babington himself

The fchemeappointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Salifbur
fpirators" with ome others, undertook to excite several co

ties to take arms ; the murder of the Queen,
mofe dangerous and important service of all, fell
Tichbourne and Savage, with four affciates. A
so totally had their b'gotted prejudices extinguil
the principles of honour, and the sentiments of h
inanity suitable to their rank, that without fcru
or compunction, they undertook an action, wh
is viewed with horror, even when committed
the meanest and most profligate of mankind. T
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no
honourable than it was desperate, and in order
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a pietu
drawn containing the portraits of the fix aalTi

Vit

th that of Babington in the middle, and a motto B o o K
imating that they were jointly embarked in some VI.
zardous design. 15S6

i586.

1'HE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and Discovered
prudent inflance of vanity, seem to have thought by Wal-

lfngham.

ifcovery carce possible, and neither diftrufled the
elity of their companions, nor doubted the fuc-
of their undertaking. But while they believed
at their machinations were carried on with the
oft profound and impenetrable secrecy, every flep
ey took was fully known to WValfngham. Polly
as one of his spies, and had entered into the con-
iracy with no other design than to betray his as-
iates. Gilbert Gifford, too, having been ent
er to England to quicken the motions of the con-
rators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
ve him sure intelligence of all their projects. That
gilant minister immediately imparted the difcove-
s which he had made to Elizabeth; and without
municating the matter to any other of the Coun-
ors, they agreed, in order to underfand the plot
ore prfectly, to wait till ii was ripened into ome
mn, and brought near the point of execution.

AT las, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and cri- They are
nal to expole her own life, and to tempt Provi. Rp'zined
tc, any farther. Ballard, the prime mover in August4.
whoe conspiracy, was arrested. His associates,
oncerted and struck with aftoniflment, endea-
red to save themselves by flight. But, within a
days, all of them, except Windsor, were seized
diinerent places of the kingdom, and committed
VOL. II. L to

B o to the Tower. Though they had undertaker t

VII. part, they wanted the firm and determined fpirito
'-'' afhfins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dif.
1"' covered all they knew. The indignation of t,

people, and their impatience to revenge fatch an ex
ecrable combination against the life of their Sove
reign, !-atened their trial, and all of them susser

S:ct. :-. the death of traitors *
,3-iy j..- TH-S far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronoun

- of ed both prudent and laudable, nor can she be

.c- .:i;e cufed of violating any law of humanity, or oft
in !'' ing any precau ti byond what . ere necessary

her ov.wn fafey. But a tragical scene followed, wi
regard to which, poflerity will pass a very diffc
judgmrent.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men

counts fiL:ciently for all the wild and wicked
signs which they had formed. But this was not
iiht, in v.hich Elizabeth and her Ministers c
to p> ce t-.e conf'-)racy. They represented Babi
1tn .r:n his abciatcs to be nftruments emplo
bv the Quecn (f Scos, the real though secret
t'o.ir cl lb many attempts aainit the lire of Eli
be'h, andi the pa-e of her kingdoms. They
c':ccd l-t::ers, -wlich they a!cribcd to her, in f
por: of this charge. There , as they ave out,
come- into t!.eir hands, by the following. fin'
a.-' rv erios mt'nod of conveyance. Gif
cn his return into Englard, had ben itrul'ed
:ome of te cxi:cs vwih letters to Mary; but in

C rad. ,: ;. St;te T:i1s, Vol. i.
1 io.

er to make a trial of his fidelity or address, they B o o K
ere only blank papers made up in that form, These VII.
ing safely delivered by him, he was afterwards '-r-
ployed without farther scruple. Walsingham
aving found means to gain this man, he, by his
ermifiion, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a
aderfan in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whi-
er Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the
tters in a hole in the wall of the castle, covered
ith a loose stone. Thence they were taken by the
ueen, and in the fame manner, her answers re-
rned. All these were carried to Walsingham,
ened by him, decyphered, fealed again so dexte-
uly that the fraud could not be perceived, and
en transmitted to the persons to whom they were
reted. Two letters to Babington, with several
Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the Englilh
itives, were procured by this artifice. It was
en out that in these letters Mary approved of the
fpiracy, and even of the assassination; that he
e:td them to proceed with the utmost circum-
con, and not to take arms till foreign auxilia-
were ready to join them; that he recommended
Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young
l of Northumberland, as proper persons to con-
t and to add reputation to their enterprize; that
ad:'iftd them, if possible, to excite at the fame
e ome commotion in Ireland ; and above all, be-
iglt them to concert with care the means of her
pe, flggefting to them several expedients for

: 'rl'oe.AL

L 2 ALL

B o o K ALL there circumstances were opened at the tri

VII. of the conspirators. And while the nation wasur
-, - der the influence of those terrors which the affo
1586.
The indli- tion had raised, and the late danger had augment
na-ion of they were believed without hesitation or enquin
the English
against r and pread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for
en thata- religion was well known; and in that age, exa

ples of the violent and fangt:nary spirit which
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals agai
the peace of the kingdom for many years had
carried on in her name; and it now appears
dently, said the English, th!a the afety of the
Queen is incompatible vith that of the other. \
then, added they, fliould the tranquillity cf
land be sacrifice for the fake of a stranger? \i
is a life so dear to the nation expcfed to the re
el auts of an exasperated rival ? The cafe
p3sed in the aflociation, has now happened, the
cred person of our Sovereign has been threate
and why should not an injured people execute
jiuf revenge which they had vowed ?
r-.-:rh No sentiments co-lld be more agreeable than

..:'.d to to Elizabeth and her Miniters. They themnfe

t r *-,ce tO
ti - u.-,c; had at frtit propagated them among the people,
'-.rxe.'* they now servcd both a, an apology, and a mo

for their proceeding to such extremities againfi
Scottih Queen, as they had long meditated.
rore injuries Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the
she feared and hated that unhappy Queen,
ca e at lash to be perfiaded that there could
other iecurity for her own life, but the death o0
rival. Burleigh and Walfngham had promo

zealouny all her measures with regard to ScottiflB o o K
asirs; and had aed, with so little reserve, in op- VI.
ofition to Mary, that they had realon to dread the 'V
oft violent effes of her resentment, if ever she
oulc mount the throne of England ; and there-
ore tey endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to
hemfelves, by confirming their Miflrefs's fear nd
tre'd *f the Scottifl Queen.
IMANWHILE. Mary was guarded with unufualHer do-

meftics, pa-

iiuance, and great care was taken to keep her ig- pers, &c.
orant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sir seized.
I honas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
uaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
;ich lhe was loaded as acceifary to that crime;

li: e iurprized her with the account, just as he

ad ot on orieback to ride out along with her
eepers. Shle was struck with aftonifliment, and
ould have returned to her apartment, but heqwas
ot permitted ; and in her absence, her private clo-
et Ss broke open, her cabinet and papers were
izd, fealed, and sent up to court. Her principal
melics, too, were arrefled, and committed to
ifrrelnt keepers. Naue and Curie, her two fecre-
ries, the one a native of France, the other of
cotand, were carried prisoners to London. All
he money in her custody, amounting to little more
an 2coo pounds, was secured. And after lead-
g her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
ouse to another, she was conveyed to Fotheringay,
!ircng caftil in Norrhamptonfhire

Cam. 5 1-
I . 3 No

B o o K N farther evidence could now be expeced a.

TII. gains Mary, and nothing remained but to decide
8C^~ what should be her fate. With regard to this, Eli.
1586.
Delirte zabeth and those Minifiers in whom she chiefly
cc-:. cT.ing confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
the met lied
of proce there was frill great variety of sentiments among
lr'' her other Counsellors. Some thought it sufficient

to di'miFs all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
snder such clole restraint, as would cut off all po.
fibility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her confritution, broken by long
ccnfinement, and her spirit dejected with o many
cares, could not long support fulch an additional
lo d, the Queen and nation would oon be deliver.
ed rom all their fears. But though it might be
ealy to secure Mary's own person, it was impoffiblt
to dim;nifh the reverence which the Roman Catho.
lics had for her name, or to extinguish the corn.
passion with which they viewed her sufferings ; whil
these continued, insurrections and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effed
of any new rigour would be to render them more
frequent and dangerous. For this reason the expe.
dient was rejected.

Determires A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the moftun.
p°bcl'-d exampied, was judged the most unexceptionable

method of proceeding; and it had at the fame time,
a semblance of justice, accompanied with an airoi
dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient re
cords, for any atute or precedent, to juflify such
an uncommon Ifep, as the trial of a foreign Prince,
who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but

ha3

ad fled thither for refuge. The proceedings againif B o o K
er vere founded on the at of aft Parliament, and VII.

applying it in this manner, the intention of
ae who had framed that evere statute became 58
re apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumstance of
mp or solemnity should be wanting, which could
nder this tranfation such as became the dignity
the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
mmiffon under the great feal, forty persons, the
oft illustrious in the kingdom, by their birth or
ffces, together with five of the judges, to hear and
cide this great cause. Many difficulties were started
the lawyers, about the name and title by which
ary should be arraigned ; and while the efTcntials
justice were so grofly violated, the empty forms
it were the objects of their care. They at length
reed that Pne should be ftiled, " Mary, daughlter
and heir of James V. late King of Scots, com-
monly called Queen of Scots, and Dowager of
France t."

AFTER the many indignities which ie had lately
sered, Mary could no longer doubt but that her
hrudtion was determined. She expected, every
oment, to end her days by poison, or by some of
ofe secret means, usually employed against cap-
ve Princes. And left the malice of her enemies,
the fame time that it deprived her of life, fnould
Ileavour likewise to blast her reputation, she
rote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated her-

Canad. 9. Johns. Hit r. Sy

3 .
- y, . 362.

L 4 self,

B oo oK felt, in the strongest terms, from the imputation(

VII. encouraging or of being accessory to the confpirac

S"5'' for affaflinatng Elizabeth *. In the solitude of h
I36' prifo.:, the frrange resolution of bringing her to,

public trial had not reached her ears, nor did th
idea of any thing so unprecedented, and so repug.
nant to regal Mlajefty, once enter into her thoughu

T.,-::-alat Ox the eleventh of Catober, the commifflone;
F.th.-. - appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringa

Next morning they delivered a letter from her
Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches
acculations, fie informed her, that regard to
own safety had, at last, rendered it necessary tomi
a public enqtry into her conduet, and thereforero
quired her, :as hne had lived so long under the ps
tetion of the laws of England, to submit now
the tril, ,which they ordained to be taken of

,-., - crimes. Mlary, though furprized at this meffa
i'-- 2: was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmind

of her own dignity. She protested, in the mosts
lemn manner, that she was innocent of the crim
laid to her charge, and had never countenanceda
attempt against the life of the Queen of England
but, at the fame time, refused to acknowlege
jurifdicion of her commifioners. " I came int

the kingdom," said she, " an independentS
' vereign, to implore the Queen's afifiance, n

to fubiect myfeif to hzr authority. Nor is

"spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or foi
" timidated by present dangers, as to stoop toa
-* thing unbecoming the Majesty of a crowned he

Jcbb, z. z23.

G

or that will disgrace the ancestors from whom I am B o K
descended, and the son to whom I shall leave my VII.
throne. If I muff be tried, Princes alone can 18ó.
be my Peers. The Queen of England's fubjeas, 5
however noble their birth may be, are of a rank
inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this
kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its
laws never afforded me any protection. Let
them not now be perverted, in order to take away
my life."

THE commissioners employed arguments and in-
aties to overcome Mary's resolution. Theyeven
reatened to proceed according to the forms of law,
d to pats sentence against her on account of her
ntumacy in refusing to plead ; he persisted, how-
er, for two days to decline their jurisdiction. An
gument urged by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain,
last prevailed. He told her, that by avoiding a
a, Ihe injured her own reputation, and deprived
rfelf of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
nce in a clear light; and that nothing would be
ore agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
ueen their Miflrefs, than to be convinced, by un-
ubted evidence, that she had been unjustly loaded
ith foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible ifould impose on Consents
e unwary Queen, or that he, unassisted, at that howeverto
me, by any friend or counsellor, hould not be o.
Il to detect and elude all the artifices of Eliza-
th's ablest Ministers. In a fiuation equally me-
ncholy, and under circumflances nearly similar,

her

B o o K her-Grandfon, Charles I. refused, with the utm,

VII. firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurifdiEion
- the High Court of Justice; and poflerity has
5' proved his condu&, as suitable to the dignity of

King. If Mary was less eonftant in her refolutio
it must be imputed solely to her anxious desire
vindicating her own honour.
o° 4. AT her appearance before the Judges, who

feated in the great hall of the cattle, where theyr
ceived her with much ceremony, she took care
protest, that by condefcendipg to hear and to g
an answer to the accusations, which should be
sered against her, he neither acknowledged thej
rifdiction of the court, nor admitted of the vali
and justice of those acts, by which they preteni
to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation,

deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court

The arcn- THEN the Queen's Attorney and Sollicitor o
art her. ed the charge against her, with all the circumla

of the late conspiracy. Copies of her letters
Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget
produced. Babington's conferffon, those of Ball
Savage, and the other conspirators, together
the declarations of Naue and Curie her fecreta
were read, and the whole ranged in the most
cious order, which the art of the lawyers cld
vise, and heightened by every colour, their eloqu
could add.

MA

ARY listened to their harangues attentively, B oo .
wihout emotion. But at the mention of the VII.
of Arundel's name, who was then confined .,'o
Tower, on suspicion of being accessory to 158

confpiiacy, fle broke out into this tender and
ous exclamation: " Alas! how much has
e noble house of Howard suffered for my

HEN the Queen's council had finiihed, Mary Her d..
up, and with great magnanimity, and equal fe
nce of mind, began her defence. She bewail-
e unhappiness of her own situation, that, as-
captivity of nineteen years, during which he
ffered treatment.no less cruel than unmerited,
as at last loaded with an accusation, which
d iot only to rob her of her right of fuccef-
and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranf-
her name with infamy to future ages: That,
ut regarding the sacred rights of sovereignty,
as novw Iuhjected to laws framed againit pri-
persons; though an anointed Queen, com-
ed to appear before the tribunal of fubjets;
lii;e a common criminal, her honour exposed
epetlant tongues of lawyers, capable of wrest-
er words, and of misrepresenting her actions:
, even in this dishonourable fituarion, Ihe was
d the privileges usually granted to criminals,
ijoliged to undertake her own defence, without
refence of any friend with whom to advise
cut the aid of council, and without the use of
wn papers.

SHE

3

B o o K SHE then proceeded to the particular articles

VII. the accusation. She absolutely denied any co,
;86" pFondence with Babington: The name of Ba

was notfo much as known to her: Copies onlyof
pretended letters to them were produced: Th
nothing lcts than her hand-writing or fubfcrij
was sufficient to convict her of such an od
crime: No proof could be brought that the
were delivered into her hands, or that any an
was returned by her direion: The confeffiora
wretches condemned and executed for such ade
able ation, were of little weight; fear or
might extort from them many things inconif
with truth, nor ought the honour of a Queenw
lained by such vile testimony. The declaratio
her secretaries was not more conclusive : pro
and threats might easily overcome the refolutio0
two strangers ; in order to screen themselves.
might throw the blame on her; but they could
cover nothing to her prejudice, without viola
in the first place, their oath of fidelity; and
perjury, in one instance. rendered them unw
of credit in another: The letters to the Spanilh
bafiador were either nothing more than copia,
contained only what was perfectly innocent:'
"have often," continued fle, " made fuche
"for the recovery of my liberty, as are natr
"a human creature. And convinced, by the
"experience of so many years, that it was vat
"expect it from the jullice or generosity oi
" Queen of England, I have fiequently foii

foreign Princes, and called on all my friend
' employ their whole interest for my relie;

have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the B o o K
English Catholics some mitigation of the rigour VII.
with which they are now treated; and if I could "4
hope, by my death, to deliver them from op- I586.
prelion, I am willing to die for their fake. I
wifli, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
not of Judith, and would rather make intercef-
sion for my people, than shed the blood of the
meanest creature, in order to save them. I have
often checked the intemperate zeal of my adhe-
rents, when either the severity of their own per-
fecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of inju-
ries which I have endured, were apt to precipi-
tate them into violent councils. I have even
warned the Queen of dangers to which there
harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn
out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the
1,rofpect of a Crown is not so inviting, that I
fliould ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am
no firanger to the feelings of humanity, nor un-
acquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
the detestable crime of aaffaination, as equally
repugnant to both. And, if ever I have given
content by my words, or even by my thoughts,
to any attempt against the life of the Queen of
England, far from declining the judgment of
men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of
God *."

Two different days did Mary appear before the
dges, and in every part of her behaviour main-

* Camd. 520, &c.

tained

Bo o Ktained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered v

VII. the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

1586.
Sentence a- THE commiffloners, by Elizabeth's exprefsc
gainft her. mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any enten

to the Star-Chamber in Weftminfrer. When;
fembled in that place, Nau' and Curie were broui
into court, and confirmed their former declara
upon oath. And after reviewing their whole p
ceedings, the commissioners unanimously deckl
Mary ' To be accessory to Babington's confpirT
" and to have imagined diverse matters, tending
" the hurt, death, and deftrufion of Elizah
" contrary to the express words of the statute,
" for the security of the Queen's life "."
Irreslnari IT is no easy matter to determine whether the

°risl the jutice in appointing this trial, or the irregulariq

conducting it, were greatest and most flagrant.
what right did Elizabeth claim authority over
independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to con
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How
the fubjets of another Prince become her judge
Or if such an insult oh royalty were allowed, ou
not the common forms of justice to have beeno
served ? If the testimony of Babington and his a
ciates was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth fp
them for a few weeks, and by confronting the
with Mary, overwhelm her with the full convidc
of her crimes ? Naue and Curie were both ali
wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and
what rea'cn were they produced in the Sar-Chac

e Camd. 2;.

where Mary was not present to hear what they B o o x
fed? Was this suspicious evidence enough to VII.
emn a Queen ? Ought the meanest criminal to
ebeen found guilty, upon such feeble and in-5
clufive proofs ?

T was not, however, on the evidence produced
er trial, that the sentence against Mary was
nded. That served as a pretence to justify, but
not the cause of the violent steps taken by Eli-
eth and her Ministers towards her deftrution;
was employed to give ome appearance of jus-
to what was the offspring ofjealoufy and fear.
the nation, blinded with resentment against
r, and solicitous to secure the life of its own
ereign from every danger, observed no irregu-
ies in the proceedings, and attended to no
cts in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and
abilities, as if they had been irrefragable de-
ftrations.

E parliament met a few days after sentence Theparl,-
pronounced against Mary. In that illustrious ment con-

w 1. ,n firm the

mbly more temper and discernment, than are to fenencc.
ound among the people, might have been ex-
ed. Both Lords and Commons, however,
e equally under the dominion of popular preju-
s and paflions, and the fame exceires of zeal or
ear, which prevailed in the nation, are apparent
'l their proceedings. They entered with impa-
ce upon an enquiry into the conGpiracy, and the
?ers which threatned the Queen's life, and the

of the kingdom. Al! the papers, which had

been

Bo oK been produced at Fotheringay, were laid bes&

VII. them. And after many violent invectives agai
'156 the Queen of Scots, both houfts, unanimously,

tified the proceedings of the commifioners by wh
she had been tried, and deciared the sentence agai
her to be iust and well founded. Not fatisfiedwi

and de- this, they presented a joint address to the Qut
,.xenrth beseeching her, as she regarded her own safety,
of' - preservation of the Protestant religion, the weli

and wishes of her people, to publish the fente
and without farther delay to inflict on a rival,
les irreclaimable than dangerous, the punifi
which she had merited by so many crimcs.
requefl, diEtated by fears unworthy of that
Afembly, was enforced by reasons frill more
worthy. They were drawn not from justice,
from conveniency. The most rigorous confinei
it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intrig
spirit; her address was found, by long experic
to be an overmatch for the vigilance and jealou
all her keepers: The severest penal laws could
restrain her adherents, who, while they beli
her person to be sacred, would delpife any da
to which themfilves alone were exposed: S
foreign Princes were ready to econd their attem
and waite:i only a proper opportunity for inv
the kingdom, and aferting the Scottilh Qu
title to the Crown. Her life. for these rea
was incompatible with Ll;zabeth's safety; ai
she were parec out of a flfe clemency, the Qu
peron, the religion and liberties of the king,
could not be one moment f-cure. Neceflityre
ed that hfe fhonud be facridced in order to pre

6

e; and to prove this sacrifice to be no less just B o o
n necefflary, several examples in history were pro- V.
ce, and many texts of cripture quoted, but both ~'
one and the other were misapplied, and distort-
from their true meaning.

OTHtNO, however, could be more acceptable Elizabeth's
lizabeth than an address in this firain. It ex- ditmirnua-

tion.

atcd her out of a situation, extremely embarraf-
; and without depriving her of the power of
ing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less
earance of blame. If fle choe the former, the
le honour would redound to her own clemency.
e determined on the latter, whatever was rigo-
s might now seem to be extorted by the folici-
ons of her people, rather than to sow from her
inclination. Her answer, however, was in a
which fle often used, ambiguous and evasive
er the appearance of openness and candor; full
uch professions of regard for her people, as ferv-
to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of
ry's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite
t ndignation; and of such insinuations that her
life was in danger, as could not fail to keep
their fears. In the end, she besought them
ve her the infamy and the pain of delivering
a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punish-
t; and to confider whether it might not fiill be
ble to provide for the public security, without
ng her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

HE true meaning of this reply was easily under-
, The Lords and Commons renewed their
OL. II. M former

B o o K former requefr, with additional importunity, hi
Vii. was tar from being either unexpectd, or offenfn

6 Eliizabeth did not return any answer more explici

and having obtained iuch a public fantion of
proceeciii-n, t.ere was no longer any reason for p
traatinS this tibenc of diilimulation ; there wasei
iome danger that her feigned difficulties might atl;
b. treaxed as real ones; fh: therefore adjournedt
pariiament, and reserved in her own hands thefc
dill-ofal of her rival's fate *.
F--- i,- .A-LL the Princes in Europe ooberved the proce

'. ; ings 2aainft Mary with aftc;ndiment and horre
't and even Henry III. notv.-ii,Ctfanding his kno.

aversion to the houf, of Guiie, was obliged toi
rerpoe in her behalf, and to appear in defence!
rhe common rights of royalty. Aubefpine hisl
dent ambassador, and Bellievere who was sent
an extraordinary commi sion to the fame purp
intercedci for Mary with great appearance

:,. w
, varmth. They employed all the arguments wr

the catie naturally fuggefed ; they pleaded
justice, from generofiry, and humr,anity; they in
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all t
El:zabzth continued dear and inexorable; and
mg received Icn-e intimation of Henry's real
concern about the fate of the Scottifr Queen,
knowing his antipathy to all the race of G«fe,
trufitd, that thtfe loud renont.rances would be'
lowed by no violent reientment-.

Car.d. 526. D'Ewes 375. - Camd. 531.

HE paid no greater regard to the follicitations of B o o
Scottish King, which, as they were urged with VII.
re sincerity, merited more attention. 1 hough "'-

1586.

commissioners had been extremely careful toJams.en.
h James, by publishing a declaration that their deavoursto

t:'

n~i r i save his

ence against Mary did, in no degree, derogate moher's
nhis honour, or invalidate any title which he life
nerly possessed he beheld the indignities to
ch his Mother had been exposed with filial con-
, and with the sentiments which became a King.
pride of the Scottish nation was rouzed, by
inult offered to the blood of their Monrchs,
called upon him to employ the most vigorous
, in order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's

h.

T first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth
Id venture upon an action so unprecedented,
i tended so visibly to render the persons of
ces less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
h degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other
, ile was so remarkably jealous. But as soon
e extraordinary (leps which she took discovered
inertion, he dispatched Sir William Keith to
don; v.;ho, together with Douglas his ambaf-
in ordinary, remonflrated, in the strongei:
s, against the injury done to an independent
1n, 'n fubje&ing her to be tried like a private
n, and by laws to which she owed no obecli-

and besought Elizabeth not to add to this
, by fi!fering a fciitence unjust in itself, as
s (ifhonour-able to the King of Scots, to be
i1 c,'; uti on .A
St*.'^ip"iix, N' XIIT.

iMT 2 ELIZA-

B o o K ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remn
VII. ftrances of his ambassador, James wrote to herwi

6
'" his own hand, complaining in the bitterest ten
I536' of her conduc, not without threats that bothl

duty and his honour would oblige him to renoun
her friendship, and to a as became a son wi
called to revene his mother's \erongs *. Ate
fame time he affemibed the nobles, who ponmi
to ftRnd by him in so good a cause. He appoint
ambamadors to France, Spain, and Denmark,
order to implore the aid of these courts; andto
other steps towards executing is threats with
gour. The high firain of his lemt-r enraged Eli
beth to Sfch a degree, that the was ready to di
his ambassadors without any reply. But his p
rations alarmed and embarrassed her Ministers,
at their intreaty he returned a soft and evasive
fwer, promising to liften to any overture from
King, that tended to his mother's safety; an
suspend the execution of the sentence, till the
val of new ambassadors from Scotland t.

Decemnb. 6. MEANWHILE, ihe commanded thefentence a
The fen- Mary to be published, and forgot not to inform
gairli Mary people, that this was extorted from her by tk
pU:ir.e. peated intreaties of both houses of parliament.

the fame time, she dispatched Lord Buckbiurt
Beale to acquaint Mary with the fentence,and
importunately the nation demanded the execun
it; and, though she had not hitherto yielded to
follicitations, she advised her to prepare for ane
which might become necessary for securing the

* Birch. Mern i. . t Spotfw; zS1. Cald.,

It

ant religion, as well as quieting the minds ofB o o .
people. Mary received the message not only VII.
ihout symptoms of fear, but with expressions of '-
umph. '" No wonder, aid she, the Englifl
liould now thirst for the blood of a foreign
Prince, they have often offered violence to their
own Monarchs. But after so many sufferings,
death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I
am proud to think that my life is esteemed of
importance to the Catholic religion, and as a
martyr for it I am now willing to die *."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was She is
ipped of every remaining mark of royalty. The ca tthetd
py of state in her apartment was pulled down; Pau- utmost ri-
entered her chamber, and approached her person gu'
thout any ceremony; and even appeared covered
her presence. Shocked with these indignities,
doffended at this gross familiarity, to which Ihe
d never been accullomed, Mary once more com-
ned to Elizabeth; and at the fame time, as her Decem. 9.
requef:, intreared that she would permit her ser-
ts to carry her dead body into France, to be laid
ong her ancestors, in hallowed ground that
e of her domestics might be present at her death,
bear witness of her innocence, and firm adhe-
ce to the Catholic faith; that all her servants
igt be suffered to leave the kingdom, and to en-
thole small legacies, which flhe should beflow
them, as testimonies of her affection; and that,
the mean time, her almoner, or ome other Ca-

Camd j52. Jcbb, zQr.

M tholic

B o o K tholic Priess, might be allowed to attend her, a

VII. to afl her in p-eparing for an eternal world. Si
'.--'- befi;ught her in the name of Jesus, by the foul a
i586.

memory of Henry VII. their common progenito
by the&r near consanguinity, and the'royal digni
with which they were both invested, to gratifyi,
in these particulars, and to indulge.her so far asi
signify her compliance by a letter under heroa
hand. W\hether Mary's letter was ever deliveredl
Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returnc
and no regard paid to her requefis. She was offered
Proteaant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Th
¢he rected, and without any clergyman to dir
her devotions, he prepared, in great tranquilli
for the approach of death, which she now belien
to be at no great di{ance .

1,5C- JAMzs, without losing a moment, sent new
Jar.- - baffadors to London. These were the matteri
,'.:. Gray, and Sir Robert Mclv.l In order to rerri
c-.s in h Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Ma.
J-:-r'v . wuuld become bound that no conspiracy thouldi

undertaken against her person, or the peace of 6
kingdom, with Mary's content and for the faii
ful performance of this, would deliver ome of
most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hoi
ges. If this were not thought sufficient, they p
polfe that M.ary should resign all her rights and :
te-.-:ns to her son, from whom nothing injuria
to te 'i-o-teftant religion, or inconsistent with E
zabeh's safety, cculd be feared. The former p
pofal, Elizabcth rejected as insecure; the latter,i

*; C d. 5:S. Jubb, z. 295.

- t~~~~~~~i

(erous. The amrbaffadors were then inrrueted B o o K
tall in an ligher tone ; and Melvil executed the VII.
ni,,ion wilh fidelity and with zcal. But Gray, 187.
ir his usual perhdy, deceived his Mafler who
(ied him with a negcciation of so much impor-
ce, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
ved to save. lie encouraged and urged Eliza-
il, to execute the sentence against her rival. He
en repeated the old proverbial sentence, The
ad cannot bite." And whatever should happen,
undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at leaLt
prevent any violent es sics of his relentmcnt *

ELIZAnETH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp Eliznbhehs
ms of the noft violent agitation and ilquitudc ""'"lxity"ld
mind. She shunned society, lhe was often found tion.
a melancholy and musing posture, and repeating,
th much emphasis, thele ientences which he bor-
wed from Ibme of the devices then in vogue; Aut
ra!t feri; ie fcriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of
is apparent uneasiness muq be imputed to dislmu-
tin; it was impoflble, however, that a Princess,
tu;al]y so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture
an action, which might expole her memory to
famy, and her life and kingdom to danger, with-
it rieflting deeply, and hesitating long. The
ople waited her determination in fulpence and an-
ety; and left their fear or their zeal fiould sub-
de, rumours of danger were artfully invented, and
ropagated with the utmost industry; Aubefpine,
e French ambassador, was accused of having sub-
So:s\ 352. MSur.in, 56S. See Append. N XIV.

M 4 orned

B o o x orned an assassin to murder the Queen. The S

VII. nifh fleet was said by some to be already arriv
'"g !Milford-haven. Others affirmed that the Duke

38 ' Guise had landed with a firong army, in Sul

Now, it was reported that the Northern Coun
were up in arms; next day, that the Scots had
tered England with all their forces; and a con
racy, it was whispercd, was on foot for seizing
Queen, and burning the city. The panic
every day more violent; and the people, aftoni
and enraged, called for the execution of the fente
againit Mary, as the only thing which could ref
tranquiiry to the kingdom .

warrant \WHILE these sentiments prevailed among
xnJio' r subje:s, Flizabeth thought he might fafrly ven
end-. to firike tlh blow, w)ich she had b long medi
~:r lred. She commaned Davison, one of the sec

ries of (late, to bring to her the fatal warrant;
her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly hewed
it is not to human;ty, that we must ascribe herfI
bearance hitherro. At the very moment she
fbrfcribing the writ which gave up a woman,
fQeen, and her own nearef' relation, into tl-e ha
of the executioner, sic was cap-able ofjefting. '
fays he to l)avifon, and tell Walfinghan wha
iave now done, though I am afraid he will die
grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety
h'.w to secure the advantages which would arifefr
'Mary's dGarh, without appearing to have given
con!nt to a deed so infamous. She often hinted
Pl.uet and Drury, as well as to fume other co

tamd. ;53, 34.

,',a

rs, that now was the time to discover the B o o K
cerity of their concern for her safety, and that VII.
expeled their zeal would extricate her out` "`
her present perplexity. But they were wife 1587'
iugh to seem not to underhand her meaning.
yen after the warrant was signed, he command-
a letter to be written to Paulet, in less ambigu-
s terms; complaining of his remniffnefs in sparing
long the life of her capital enemy, and begging
m to rmember at last what was incumbent oh
m as an affectionate subjet, and to deliver his So-
reign from continual fear and danger, by shorten-
gthe days of his prisoner. Paulet, though ri-
rous and harf, and often brutal in the discharge
what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
a nevertheless a man of honour and integrity.
i rejeted the proposal with disdain ; and lament-
that he should ever have been deemed capable
assing the part f an assassin, he declared that
Qe ueen might dispose of his life at her pleasure,
t he would never stain his own honour, nor leave
everlasting mark of infamy on his posterity, by
nding his hld to perpetrate so foul a crime. On
e receipt of this an!wer, Elizabeth became ex-
.mely peevish; and calling him a dainty and pre-
fellCw, who would promise much, but perform
thing, she proposed to employ one Wingfield,
o had both courage and inclination to strike the
OW *. But Davison remonitrating again'st this
e'tod, as no less dangerous than dithonourable,
e again declared her intention that the sentence
nounced by the commifflioners mhould be execut-

* Eiogr. Britn. Article Davfn.

ed

B o o K ed according to law; and as fle had already figr
VII. the warrant, he begged that no farther applicati!

-7. might be made to her on that head. By this d

' privy counfeilors thought themselves ufficientlya

thorized to proceed; and prompted, as they p
tended, by zeal for the Queen's safety, or infti
ed, as is more probable, by the apprehension of!
danger to which they would thcmflves be exposs
if the life of the Queen of Scots were spared, .
afiembled in the Council Chamber, and by a e
under all their hands, empowered the Earls
Shrewsbury and Kent, together with the HighS
riff of the County, to fee the sentence put in e
cution *.

Mary's be- ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two
biiour at arrived at Fo.heringay, and demanding access
Lr dcab. .

the Queen, read in her pretence the warrant for
ecution, and required her to prepare to die
morning. Mary heard them to the end with
emotion, and cromnng herself in the name of
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Gh
" That foul, aid he, is not worthy of the joys;
Heaven, whic repines because the body mufl
dure the stroke of the executioner; and thougi
did not expec that the Queen of England Wo
set the firit example of violating the sacred pra
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to i
which providence has decreed to be my lot." A
lavi.g her hand on a bible, which happened to
near her, she solemnly protested that he was in
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had car

* Camd. 5 4. Strvpe, 3. 31, 3óji.

against Elizabeth's life . She then mentioned B o o
requets contained in her letter to Elizabeth, VII.
tobtained no fatisfadory answer. She entreated -V\`
h particular earnefinefs, that now in her last I587,
rents, her Almoner might he suffered to attend
, and that she might enjoy the consolation of
fl pious institutions prescribed by her religion.
en this favour, which is usually granted to the
ft criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were
thd in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
ce of the two Earls, with difficulty suppressed
ir anguiflh; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
ry withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and
rft out into the most pafionate expressions of ten-
ness and sorrow. Mary, however, not onlyre-
ned perfec composure of mind, but endeavoured
moderate their excessive grief. And falling on
knees, with all her domefics round her, she
Lnked Heaven that her fufieings were now so
ran end, and prayed that she might be enabled
endure what fiill remained with decency, and with
titude. The greater part of the evening she em-
yed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote
Testament with her own hand. Her money,
jewels, and her cloaths, fle distributed among
servants, according to their rank or merit. She
ote a short letter to the King of France, and an-
er to the Duke of Guise, full of tender but mag-
1I]ous entiments, and recommended her foul to
eir prayers, and her affli&ed servants to their pro-

Jcbb, . 3l.

te.ion.

B o tefion. At supper, she eat temperately, as ut
VII. and convered not only with ease, but with ch

v""s fulness; she drank to every one of her servants,
57 asked their forgiveness, if ever fie i-d failed in

part of her duty towards them. At her won
time fe went to bed, and slept calmly a few .c
Early in the morning he retired into her closet,
employed a considerable time in devotion. Atei
o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers enti
her chamber, and found her ill kneeling at the;
tar. She immediately flarted up, and with at
jeftic mien, and a countenance undismayed,
even chearful, advanced-towards the place of
cution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants.
was dressed in a mourning habit, but with an
gance ad splendor, which she had long' lid
except on a few festival days. An Agnus Dei
by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at
girdle; and in her hand she carried a crucii
ivory. Ar the bottom of the flairs the two F2
attended by several gentlemen from the neigh
ing Counties, received her; and there Sir And
Melvil, the maNser of her houlhold, who had
iecluded, for some weeks, from her presence,
permitted to take his last farewel. At the fight
Mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a fituatio
melted into tears; and as he was bewailing her
dition, and complaining of his own hard fate in
ing appointed to carry the account of such a nm0
ful event into Scotland, Mary replied, "'
r..t, good Melvil, there is at present greaterc
for rejoicing. Thou shalt this day fee Mary
art delivered from all her cares, and such an

A,1

to her tedious sufferings, as she has long expe- B o
Bear witness that I die constant in my religion , Vi,
in my fidelity towards Scotland; and tin- I8;-

anged in'my affeCtion to France. Commend me
my son. Tell him I have done nothing injuri-
to his kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights;
dGod forgive all those who have rhirfled, wih-
tcaufe, for my blood."

WITH much difficulty, and after many intreaties,
prevailed on the two Earls to allow Melvil,
gether with three of her men servants, and two
her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It was
eed in the fame hall where fle had been tried,
ifed a little above the foor, and covered, as well
a chair, the cushion, and block, with black
th. Mary mounted the steps with alacrity, be-
Id all this apparatus of death with an unaltered
untenance, and signing herself with the cross,
e fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant
rexecution with a loud voice, to which the lif-
ned with a careless air, and like one occupied in
her thoughts. Then the dean of Peterborough
egan a devout discourse, suitable to her present
ndition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her
half; but she declared that the could not in con-
ience hearken to the one, nor join with the other;
d falling on her knees repeated a Latin prayer.
hen the Dean had finished his devotions, she with
n audible voice, and in the English tongue, re-
ommended unto God the afflited state of the
hurch, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and
ra long life, and peaceable reign to Elizabeth.

She

B o O K She declared that she hoped for mercy only throt
VII. the death of Christ, at the foot of whose im;

8Pa Ihe now willingly hed her blood; and lifting
I587.

and kissing the Crucifix, she thus addrefed it,
thy arms, O Jesus, were extended on the Cro
so with the outstretched arms of thy mercy, rec
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by akingi

her veil, and upper garments; and one of thee,
cutioners rudely endeavouring to aflift, she gea
checked him, and said, with a smile, that hehi
not been accusomed to undress before so mi
fpecators, nor to be served by such valets. wVi
calm but undaunted fortitude, The laid her necke
the block ; and while one executioner held her hand
the other at the sccnd froke, cut off her h!
which falling our of iks attire, discovered her h
already grown quite gras, v;;h cares and foorro
The execut:oner held it up Itill fireaming ta
blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perish
Queen E!izae;ih's enemies," the Earl of Kent al
answered Amen. The rcfl o-' the speCtators co
nued silent, and drowned in tars; being incapab
at that moment, of any other sentiments, but th
of pity, or admiration '.

Sentiments SUCH was the tragical dcat.l of Mary Queen
of hifto- Scots, after a life of forty four years and t;
ans con-
ernirg months, airloft ninerccn years of wh:ch she p.ass
her. in c2ptiviw,. The poii:icai parties which were son

ed in the ki ngdom, d.: ng her reign, have fubfi

*Camd. 54. Spctf. 35. Jeb, z. 3co. Strype7, .j3

a

unier various denominations, ever since that B o o g

The rancour, with which they were at first VII.
ated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and .

1587.

prejudices, as well as their rage, have been
etuated, and even augmented. Among His-
ns, who were under the dominion of all these
ons, and who have either acribed to her every
ons and amiable quality, or have imputed to
all the vices, of which the human heart is sus-
ible, we search in vain for Mary's real charac-
She neither merited the exag cirated praises of
one, nor the undiftinguifhing cenefle of the
r.

o all the charms of beauty, and the utmos{t ercIlarac-
nce of external form, she added those accom-t
imrnts, which render their imprefilon irrefifti-

Polite, affable, insinuating, prightly, and
b!k of speaking and of writing with equal ease
dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
attachmenrs; bcaufe her heart was warm and
ficious. Impatient of contradiction; because
had been accufiomed from her infancy to be
ed as a Qeen. No flranger, on ome occa-
, to dilimularion; which in that perfidious
rt where fne received her education, was reckon-
mong the nectcijry arts of government. Not
nfible of Pattery, or unconscious of that plea-
,with 'which almost every woman beholds the
i'.e of her on beauty. Formed' with the
ii.i which xve: love, not with the talents that

,.i; :,:as an agreeable woman rather' than
iilu.tricos (iecn. The vivacity of her spirit, :

+,I2~~ ~ not

B o o K not sufficiently tempered with found judgment ;

VII. the warmth of her heart, which was not, at:
.,I- times, under the restraint of discretion, bet!a

her both into errors, and into crimes. To fa
The was always unfortunate, will not aect
that long and almost uninterrupted fucceflion,
lamities which besel her; we must likewise
she was often imprudent. Her passion for Dar
was rash, youthful, and excefflive. And tl
the sudden transition to the oppbfite extreme is
natural effet of her ill-requited love, and: f
ingratitude, insolence and brutality; yet nl
these, nor Bothwell's artful address, and imp
services, canjuftify her attachment to thatn
man. Even the manners of the age, liceqti
they were, are no apology for this unhappy si
nor can they induce us to look on that tragic
infamous scene which followed upon it, witl
abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over
part of her characer which it cannot approye
may, perhaps, prompt ome to impute her a
to her situation, more than to her difpoGtioas;'
to lament the unhappiness of the former, i
than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Ma
sufferings exceed, both in degree and in du
those tragical distresses, which fancy has feirj.
excite sorrow and cornm iferation and whiet
survey them, we are apt altogether to fFg
frailties, we think of her faults with Iefs india
and approve of our tears, as if they were .
a person who had attained much nearer to.
virtue.

.

ITrI regard to the Queen's erfon, a circun- B o o K
ce not to be omitted in :riting the hillory of a VII.
alc rein, all cotenporary aurhors agree in al- "',
iag to Mary, the urmof beauty of counenance, '
elegance of fliape, of which the human form
ipable. 1-Icr hair was black, though, accord-
to the fashion of that age, file freqlucntly wore
ro.ed locks, and o diielreint colours. I-Ier
s were a dark grey ; her comi.lexion was exqui-
y fine; and her hands and arms remarkably de-
tc, both as to shape, and colour. I-Her stature
of an height that roue to the majeflic. She
ccd, sec walked, and rode with equal grace.
tae for nufic was juif, and flhe both l-ng and
yed upon the lute, with iuncommon skill. To-
ds the end of her life, fle began to grow fat;
her long confinement and the coldness of the
iles in which she had been imprisoned, brought
a rheumatif, which dprived her of the use of
limbs. No man, Iays Brantome, ever behel-d her
fnn without admiration and love, or will read her
ry without sorrow.

O.VE of her women were fueI:red to come near
dcad body, which was carried into a roomz ad-
ing the place of execution, where it lay, for
e days, covered with a coarf. cl.oth torn fron a
iard-table, The bl ck, te caffold, the aprons
the executioners, and every thin. ifilecl .with
blood, were reduced to alhes.. 2'o: iong afcr,
zabthi appointed her body to be hubti'd in :ih
tledral of !"cterborou.,h, wvrh royal ima:nifi-
ce. But this vulgilr n rcirice nwas cnnloyed in
\OL, II. N vain;

B o o R vain ; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did

V1i. eiffac the memory of those injuries, which

"< a.-ry in her grave. James, oon after his accefi

'to the Englilh throne, ordered her body to be
move-' to \Veft.inifer-abbey, and to be depo
among ithe Monarchs of England.

t ;'--' ELIZABETH affcted to receive the account:
i',::;..s-l Mary's death, with the most violent emotions
y 5 del- fiurprize, and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamer

tion and mourning, were all employed to dif[
the reality and greanefs of her sorrow. Evid
marks of disimularin and artifice may betrn
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedi
again.t the liie of the Scottish Queen. Theco
miiTilon so;: bringing Mir7 to a public trial wasfe
ingly extorted from her, by the intreaties of
privy counficlors. She delayed publishing the!
tence against ler, till ie was twice ollicited bya
houf's of Parian.c.nt. Nor did fne fignthew
rant for ex:cution without the utmost apparenl
luctance. One fcer.e more of the boldest andn
folemnn deceit remained to be exhibited. She uid
took to mak l the worl believe that Mary hads
put to de:ah w-ithout her knowledge, and a
her will. And Davifion, who neither ffpe&i.e
in:ention, nor his own danger, was her inkirum
in carrying on this artifice, and fll a vidirn to(

IT was his dty as frcretary of state to lay

her the warrant for execution, in order to be si,
and by her comma.nd, he carried it to theG
Seal. She pretended, however, that she hadc

ihim not to communicate what ihe had done to B o o K
arperfon, nor to susser the warrant to go out of VII.
ishands, without her express permission; that, in '""
ontempt of this order, he had not only revealed 58
e matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in
oncert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors,
v whom, without her content or knowledge, the
arrant was iued, and the Earls of Shrewsbury
ad Kent impowered to put it in execution. Tho'
avifon denied all this, and with circumstances
lhich bear the strongest marks of truth and credi-
ility; though it can scarce be conceived that her
ivy-council, composed of the persons in whom
most confided, of her Ministers and favourites,
ould aemble within the walls of her palace, and
enure to tranfa a matter of so much importance,
ithout her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
e so far did he carry her diflimulation, that, with
I the signs of displeasure and of rage, the banifn-
mort of her Counsellors out of her pretence;
d treated Burleigh, in particular, so harfily, and
ith fach marks of disgust, that he gave up him-
f for losl, and in the depeft afflition wrote to
cQueen begging leave to resign all his places,
at he might retire to his own estate. Davison lihe
!antly deprived of his office, and committed him
close prilbner to the Tower. He was oon after

March.

ought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber;
ndemned to pay a fine of o,ooo pounds, and to
imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
nguifhed, several years, in confinement, and ne-
rrecovered any degree of favour or of power.
hs r ealoufy and fear had bereaved the Queen of

N 2 Scots

B o o K; Sco:s cf life, in order to palliate this part of ir

VII. conduct, Elizabeth made no fcrupe o facrifici
' *~ 'ite reputation and hap;ie, cf oee of the moRfy.

tuous and able men in her kingdom .

;:':: Ti: s foeimn farce, fur it deserves no better n

et.'@:,u:; futrnlied Llizabcth, however, with an apolo0'
]j-.., the King of Scts. \As the p Ir'fp.: of hlis moth

danger had excited t',e K::g's filial care and c
cern, the acco'nt of her death filled him with
anA reIcntmcen. His ii ubes relt the dilho:
done to him, and to ;he n.tion. In order to
both, E:lizabcth in,'tankiv diftatchzd Robert C
o:ne of Lord I Iunldne' s ions, with a letter exp
ing her c xtre:-. 2i.:'io oiln account cf that
able acci;i: t, v.;iih, as nse prctended, had hat
edc fr co,tr-arv to her apointment, or intens
Jan-e3 wv.cuid nec permit her messenger to
Scotland; :and i

l lo;bmne dificulry, received a

n;orial e ient iron e -rwci. It contained t!
concerning Dai :.'on, dreTid up with all theci:
:anees, v h:ch tended to exculpate Elizabeth,
to thrxw the .whole blame on his rafhners ortr
ery. Such a defctnce gave little fatisraftio^,
was confin. red as mockery added to insult;
manv: of the nobles, as well as the King, br
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extrerel
i'ic-os to fpacify themr, and neither wantedi
mrr.ns, nor reafois to gain her end. Leicester
to the King. and WXaiingham to secretary
land. They reprefrnted the certain deftrudi
v-hich James would expose himself, if

,; of Scotland alone, he fould venture to at- B o o K
,ckai ingdom, so fr superior in power; that the VII.
ioiry ot past ages, as well as his Mother's fad ex-
srncce, minght convince him that nothing could be
ore dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on
rein aid ; that the King of rance woll never
: to ee the Britfh ki ngdoms unitl under one
n^.;acl, nor contribute to invest a Prince so
: rlv allied to the house of (;uile, with ftch for-
idablc power; that i'hilip mitlic b a more ac-
c :ally, but would certainly prove a nmore danger-
oice, and under pretence of afiiing-him, would
!r his ovn right to the l:,lilh C'rown, which
:lready cegan openly to cl.:im ; that the fame
tci, on which the sentence of death against his
ctilhr had Lbeen fundcd, would justify the ex-
.:i,, hini irom the fucjefEion to the Crown ; that
:.n iilh, naturally averse f-om the dominion of
argers, would not fail, if exaperated by his hof-
:cs, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth
sd i'olbed to repair the wrongs which the niother
dfillired, by her ten.derncs and afrc&tion towards
1ijn; and that by engaging i a Iruitlefs war, he
,;ideprive himself of a noble i.;hcritance, whicli,
c. ivaning her friendifip, he mutt infallibly ob-

h. Thcfe reprefentationl, added to the confci-

'I:ls of lhis own weakness, to the fniallnefs of his
enues, to the muti3ou.s ipirit of fne of the no-
s, to the dubious idelity of others, and to the
uicnce of that fation, which xas eltirely atEli-
bnl's devotion, convinced James that a war with
Ilgh'l, however just, would in the prelent junc-
r be altogether impolitical. All these confide-

N 3 rations

B o o K rations induced him to stifle his resentment; to ap.

\-1. pear lacisfied wih the punifhmnent inflicted on Da.

. v-iion i and to prcerve all the femb'ances of friend.
/' ih;ip with the English court . In'this manner id

the cloud v.hich threatned such a torm pass aw,
Ilary's death, like that of a common criminal, r,
malncd unavcnged by- any Prince; and whatev;
in;anay !izaberh might incur, she was exposed,
no nev can.-er on that account.

D:.-: M.AR'S de.sth, however, proved fatal to
o' c. Ialcr of Gray, and loft him the King's favr'

which he had for ome time poffcfled. He was
come as oious t the nation, as favourites, w'
acquire power without merit, and exercise it withi
di;cretion, uiually arc. The treacherous part, whic
he had ated during his late embafTy, was no scc
and filled James, who at length came to the kno
ledge of it, wirhT aftonihment. The courtiers o
served the svmptoms of dilgult arising in the Kir
mind, h.s enemies seized the opportunity, and
\\iiliam Steward, in revenge of the perfidy 'vi
which Gray had betrayed h:s brother Captain Jame
7.ay 10. pubiick'l a, cu.ue him before a Convention of

bles, nt only o- avi-g contributed, by his adrv
a-d Ifu eRions, to tke away the life of the Qu
but of iolding corre:p;ndence with opifh ri¢c
in order to f-:bvcrt the religion established in
k.gndo.. Gray, untfuported by the King,
ftrrei Iy all. and cncious of his own guilt,
a teebi.. cdenrce. le was condemned to perpe
bani!l;mrLn.t, a puniinment very unequal to hisi cn;

'r.ot.-. S: e, 3. ;-.

E:

X tie King was unwilling to abandon one, whom B o o K
;.j once favoured so highly, to the rigour of VII.
ice; and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and "
other robles who had lately returned from exile,5 7
aratitude for the zeal with which he had served
:l, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAV,XG thus accomplinfled the defrufion of one
iis enemies, Captain James thought the juncture
ourablaJ for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
iingled our secretary Maitland, the moor emi-
t both for abilities and enmity to him; and of-
cd to prove that he was no less accessary than
av to the Queen's death, and had even sorned

;sign of delivering up the King himfclf into the
mis of the Englifl. But time and absence had,
areat measure, extinguifned the King's affelion
a minion, who so little deserved i. All the
tiers combined againf: him as a common cne-

And instead of gaining his pint, he had the

ir'ircation to fee the offce of Chancellor conrer-
upo1 Maitland, who, together with that dignity,
reed all the power and infuence of a prime Mi-
icr.

I the Assembly of the Church, which met this
ir, the fame hatred to the order of Bishops, and
fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
ared. But as the King was now of full age,
]a parliament was summoned on that occasion,
Clergy remained satisfied with appointing tome
their number to represent their grievances to that
rt, from which great things were expected.

N4 PnE-

B o o K PaREVIos to this meeting of parliament, Jan

vii. atzmpted a work worthy of a King. The deac
< c seis v.-hich fiubiithd beteen many of the greatr
,'. nmi is, and w'hih were trarlmitted from one oe

r- on to another, weakened the frength of
r..-.;. kr;.n -'mn; con:ribu;d , more than any other i

cur:.i 'n.cC, to p;refirve a fierce and oarbarous fp
amongr the nobles; and proved the occasion
rnany diiAiers to themfeives, and to their co,.
try. -\tfr m.aiv preparatory negotiations, hei
rvitc t..e cuntcn:.ing !i: ties to a royal entea
r7:.::t .:n t;l p:ilae of Holy-rood-houfe ; and pr

-v ;.s ai u'or;ty, partly by his intr-aties, obtia
i..-;;: pro:;vi to bry tLi difintions in perpe
C-; ; 'n. From thence he co-AduIced them, iai
i.-.; t. ic;c ;on, thrloti:gi thle Itreccs of Edinbr
mnirc:i-'. by pairs, each hand in hand with hiset
M:'. A co :.::on or '.vine and fveet-meats was[a
pa.:, , .r; .e

. Lbic Crcf, and there they dracr

cch c.:ecr, .:h all :he signs of reciprocal forgi
r.-., a:d o- ;. ture friendship. The people,
v.ce p-dc-.: a: a ,p ..acle Ib unulual, concei
t;7e n:oi: lainguine hopes of feeing concord andt
ciq:iliir-- cillhi d in every part of the kinga
an: tc,'in d tleir iarisac^tion by repeated acca
tocns. Unpr il,'

the etcls of this reconcili

eere not corrdlon ent irher to the pious endear
cf the King, or the fond wishes of the people.

THs sirs2 c.re of the parliament was the feci

or ti; Prortcanr re.' ion. All the laws pii
is I.n:.o;:, since the Reformation, were rg
and a necv and fvcrc one was enacted against1

rv P-iefts and Jefulirs, hoc restless indufiry in B o o K

ing proselytes brought many of them into Scot- VII.
:n abouc this tiec. ITwo ads of this parliament ^t'
I rve more particular notice, oil account of the 5 87
I iq;:cnces with which they were followed.

TIE one relpctCed the lands of the Church. As General
. public revenues were nor fuficient for defray-of Church.

li
th KIing's ordinary charges; as the adminiftra- lands.
0; ot government became more complicated and
ore expensive ; as James was naturally profuse,

1
a llranger to ceconomy; it was necefTfry, on
I! del accounts, to provide ome fund proportion-
to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
:.'d be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
! tih benefit of an extensive commerce. The
bles were unacculPomed to bear the burden of
avy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
-e tce only source whence a proper supply could
edraw.v. Notwithfrnding all the depredations of
laity fnce the Refoirmation, and the various
vic s whiich they had employed to seize the Church-
nds, fbme conliderable portion of them remained
ill unaiienated, and were held either by the Bishops
ho posseT ed the benefices, or were granted to lay-
en during peaiure. All these lands were, in this
riiament, annexed, by one general law *, to the

aown, and the King was impowered to apply the

ats of them to his own use. The tithes alone
ere referred for the maintenance of the persons
ho served the cure, and the principal mansion-

":ie, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,

Parl. . ac. VI. c. 29.

allot-

B o o K allotted for his reficence. By this great accesion

VII. of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King
1^87 muff have acquired a vast increase of power, ad
187. the influence of the nobles have suffered a propo.

tional diminution. The very reverse of this feeny
however, to have been the cafe. Almost allgrana
of Church-lands, prior to this ac:, were therebi
confirmed ; and titles, which were formerly reckon
ed precarious, derived from thence the fanEcion
parliamentary authority. James was likewile a.
thorized, during a limited time, to make new ali
nations; and such was the facility of his temp
ever ready to yield to the follicitatio;s of his li.
vants, and to gratify their most extravagant
mands, that not only during the time limited, b
throughout his whole reign, he was continua!lyei
ployed in bestowing, and his parliament in ratifyi
grants of this kind to his nobles; hence little
vantage accrued to the Crown from that vhi
might have been so valuable an addition to its
venues. The Bishops, however, were great liffa
by the law. But at this juncture neither the K'
nor his Ministers were solicitous about the interi
of an order of men, odious to the people, and
fecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoi
the law with the utmost zeal. The profped
sharing in their spoils induced all parties to con
to it; and after a itep so fatal to the wealth
power of the dignified Clergy, it was no diffi
matter to introduce that change in the governnfl
of the Church which oon after took place *,

* Spo:fw. 6.

TH cange, which the other statute produced Bo o K
the civil constitution, was no less remarkable. VII.
:er the Feudal system, every Freeholder, or vas- `''

1587.

of tle Crown, had a right to be prelent in par- Lcofer na-
ent. These Freeholders were, originally, few rons d-

T1'-" ' '" mitted in-
number, but pofllffed of great and extensive pro- to parlia-

!tv V derees, these vast poffefions were di- theirt

ed by the proprietors thefnlelves, or parcelled prefenta-
by thce Prince, or split by other accidents. The
ber of Freeholders became greater, and their
dition more unequal; besides the ancient Barons,
o peferved their estates and their power unim-
red, there arose another order, whose rights were
fame, though their wealth and influence were
interior. But, in those rude ages, when the'
of government was extremely imperfect, when
liamelts were fldom assembled, and deliberated
matters little interesting to a martial people, few
tle Leser Bercns ook their feats, and the whole
iiunentary jurifdicion was exercised by the
C!:.'; Br;cs, together with the Ecclesiastical or-

. mnes I. fond of imitating the forms of the

gih constitution, to which he had been long
toined, and desirous of providing a counter-
eto the powver of the great nobles, procured an
in the year 1427, dispensing with the personal
ndance of the lesser Barons, and impowering
e in each county, to chufe two commissioners
represent them in parliament. This law, like
y other regulations of that wife Prince, pro-
ed littie effet. All the King's vafalls continued,
formerly, pofeied of a right to be present in
;amnent, and, unless in some extraordinary con-

junctures,
I

i~~~~~~~~~~~~

B o o Kjunctures, none but the greater Barons attendd
VII. But by means of the Reformation, the confitut;

SI,' had undergone a great change. The ariftocratc
i5S7.

power of the nobles had been much encreafed,
the influence of the Ecclefiafical order, which
Crown usually employed to check their ufurpatia.
and to bailance their authority, had diminishld
proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors
been erected into temporal peerages; and the
teftant Bishops, an indigent race of men, andodi
to the nation, were far from poffefling the wi
and credit, which their prcdeceffors drived i
the exorbitant wealth, and the fuperfitious re
rence of the people. In this ftuation, the Ki
had recourse to the expedient employed by ames
and obtained a law reviving the statute of i4-
and from that time the Commons of Scotland h
sent their reprefenratives to parliament. An
which tended so visibly to abidge their author
did not pass without opposition from many of
nobles. But as the King had a right to fum
the lesser Barons to attend in prfon, others
apprehensive of feeiog the house filled with a m
tude of his dependants, and consented the more
lingly to a law, which laid them under the reil
tion of appearing only by their repreientatives.

, S . THE year 5 88 began with an universal exx
Tt. ap- tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be
proach of a 1
tr spDaiih tinguifhed by wonderful events and revoluti
A:mado. Several aifrologers, according to the accouns

cotemporary historians, had predic7Led this; andi
situation of affairs in the two principal kingdom

Er"'

rope was such, that a sagacious observer, with- B o o K
any flpernatural intelligence, might have ha- VII.
rda thL prediction, and have foreseen the ap- 88
ach of onme grand crisis. In France, it was evi-
n from the alnnifiing progress of the league,
nduced by a leader whose ambition was relfrain-
by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
iolunted all difficulties; as well as from the
id, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry III.
aeither that Monarch must submit to abandon
e throne, of which he was unworthy; or by rome
dden and daring blow, cut offhis formidable rival.
ccordingly, in the beginning of the year, the
uke of Gire drove his Master out of his capital
tv, and forced him to conclude a peace, which
ft !;im only the fladow of royalty; and before the
ar expired, he himself fell a victim to Henry's
ars, and to his own security. In Spain, te ope-
tions were such as promic-d fomcthing till more
ncommon. During three years, Philip had em-
loved all the power of his European dominions,
nd exlauftcd the treasures of the Indies, in vast
reparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had
eri appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from
ifbon, and a numerous land army was assembled
embark on board of it. Its destination was still
ninown, though many circumstances made it pro-
able that the blow was aimed, in the first place,
gainft England. Elizabeth had long given secret
id to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
nd now openly afforded them her protection. A
umerous body of her troops was in their service;
the Earl of Leiccfler commanded their armies; he

5 had

B o o K had great sway in the civil government of the rep

VII. lic; and some of its most considerable townsw
'* ' in her poffefion. Her fleets had insulted the
1588 of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from they

Indies, and threatened the colonies there. R
by so many injuries, allured by views of ambi
and animated by a superstitious zeal for propa
the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only
invade, but to conquer England, to which his
scent from the house of Lancaster, and the donat
of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opinion
double title.

Coa,,i of ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and
jrfnsn pared to encounter it v:ith the utmost intrepi
iha; occa-
nroo. The measures for the defence of her kingdom

concerted, and carried on, with the wisdom,
vigour, wh:ch distinguished her reign. Her
care was to secure the friendship of the King
Scots. She had treated the Queen his Mother
a rigour unknowvn aimong Princes; fle had
used himself harfhiy, and with contempt;
though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his
kntment of thele injuries, she did not believei
be altogether extinguished, and was afraid h
her present situation, it might burit out with a
violence. Philip, enfible how much an alli
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, c
ed James with the utmost assiduity. He ex
him to revenge his Mother's wrongs; he flat
him with the hopes of sharing his conquests;
offered him in marriage his dalughter the In
Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland swarmed

pn

ePls his emissaries, who educed some of the no- B o o
es to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes VII.

promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were ' -Or

e heads of a faAion, which openly espoused the 5.
ereft of Spain. Lord Maxwel, arriving from
at court, began to assemble his followers, and to
;e arms, that he might be ready to join the Spa-
ards. In order to counter-balance all these, Eli-
beth made the warmest professions of friendhip
the King; and Afhby, her ambassador, enter-
ned im with magnificent hopes and promises.
e alurled him that his right of fucceflion to the
own should be publickly acknowledged in Eng-
nd; that he should be created a Duke in that
ngdom; that he should be admitted to some share
the government; and receive a considerable pen-
n annually. James, it is probable, was too well
ouainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on
efe promises. But he underflood his own in-
et in the prefcnt juncture, and pursued it with
uch fleadinefs. He rejected an alliance with
am, as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
efnce an ambafiidor from the Pope. He seized
olonel Scnmp!e, an agent of the Prince of Parma.
c drove many of the traffiquing Priests out of the
ngdbm. He marched suddenly to Dumfries, dif-
rsed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
a convention of the nobles he declared his refo-
ion to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng-
an:; and, without litening to the suggestions of

venge, determined to at in concert with Eliza-
tii, aainft the common enemy of the Protestant
ith i-e put the kingdom in a posture of defence,

and

B o o K and levied troops to obf.ruc the landing of the S
VII. niards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeti
58'N affilance, and told her ambassador that he exped

no other favour from the King of Spain, btt'
which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, rh
when he had devoured all his companions, hewou
make him his last morsel .

A natioral THE zeal of the people, on this occasion,
covenantin

fnce of not inferior to that of the King; and the extraor
Rlsigion. nary danger, with which they were threatened, a

gested to them an extraordinary expedient for ti
lecurity. A bond was framed for the maintenaR
of true Religion, and the defence of the King's M
son and government, in opposition to all eneni
foreign and domestic. This contained a confe
of the Protestant fai:h, a particular renunciation
the errors of Popery, and the most solemn promif
in the nan-e, and through the strength of God,r
adhering to each oher in Iurporting the former,ra
contending against the latter, to the utmot ofil
power t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy,
the people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Sra
or uncommon as such a combination may now
pear, many circumstances contributed, at thatti
to recommend it, and to render the idea familiar
the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordi
event, or alarmed by any public danger, thepi
of israel were accustomed to bind themlves, b
solemn Covenant, to adhere to that Religion, vi
the Almighty had eftabliled among them; this

Camr. 54-. Johnr.. i39 Spo:fw. 369.
t Dunlop's Coilec cf Co..ff . ol. cS.

S

cots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it be- B o o K.
ame them to imitate. In that age, no confider- VII.
bieenterprize was undertaken in Scotland, with- l"
eta bond of mutual defence, which all concerned
eckoned neceflary for their security. The form of
his religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
ofe political ones, of which so many inflances have
ccurred; the articles, tfipulations, and peculiar
odes of exprefion, are exactly the fame in both.
Inmost all the considerable Popish Princes were
en joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
religion, and nothing could be more natural, or
leed more efficacious, than to enter into a coun-
r-affociation, in order to oppose the progress of
at formidable conspiracy. To these causes, did
e Coenat, which is become so famous in history,
e its origin. It was renewed at different times
ring the reign of James *. It was revived with
reat solemnity, though with considerable altera-
ns, in the year 1638. It was adopted by the
nglifi, in the year 643, and enforced by the civil
d ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms. The
,itical purposes to which it was then made subser-
et, and the violent and unconstitutional measures
ich it was then employed to promote, it is not
rprovince to explain. But at the juncture, in
ich it was first introduced, we may pronounce it
have been a prudent and laudable device for the
fnce of the religion and liberties of the nation;
r were the terms in which it was conceived, other
'n might have been expected from men alarmed

* Cald. 4 t Zi.
Po.. I. O with

B o o K with the impending danger of Popery, and threA

V11. ned with an invasion by the most bigotted, and ro
'"'S powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England dida

inspire him either with the vigour or dispatch ne
fary to ensure the success of so mighty an enterpria
His fleet, which ought to have failed in April, d
not enter the English channel till the middle of Jh
It hovered many days on the coast, in expe&ai
of being joined by the Prince of Parma, who
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by aDu[!

Th- Arn-- squadron. Continual dilafters pursued the Spaniad
deecate. dcuring that time; fucceflive storms and batti

which are well known, conspired with their own
conduct, to disappoint their enrerprize. And
the bleling of Providence, which watched withn
markable care over the Proteltant Religion, and
liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered
deftroved the Armado on which they had arrogu
ly bestowed the name of Invincible. After bi
driven out of the English eas, they were forced
fleer their course towards Spain, round Scotland
Ireland. Many of them suffered shipwreck ont
dangerous and unknown coasts. Though Ja
kept his subjects under arms to watch the mofi
of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
hoffile manner, he received with great human
700 who were forced ashore by a tempest, andd
supplying them wi:h necessaries, permitted them
return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth ent B o o K
n ambassador to congratulate with James, and to VII.
ompliment him on the firmness and generosity, he 88'
addifcovered during a conjuncture so dangerous. 5
ut none of Affby's promises were any longer re-
embered; that Minister was even accused of hav-
g exceeded his powers, by these too liberal offers;
d conscious of his own falsehood, or ashamed of
ing disowned by his court, he withdrew secretly
Ut of Scotland *

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own I589.
afhnefs in attempting the conquest of England, by Philip's ii.

p n C IsTn trigues iri

naval armament, equipped at so great a distance, Scotland.
nd subjected in all its operations, to the delays,
nd dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas
d winds, resolved to make his attack in another
ir, and to adopt the plan which the Princes of
orrain had long meditated, of invading England
rough Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagin-
,might be easily wafted over from the Low Coun-
is to that kingdom, and if they could once ob-
infooting, or procure assistance there, the fron-

of England was open and defenceless, and the
rthern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
uld receive them with open arms. Mean while,
descent might be threatened on the southern coalt
ich would divide the English army, diftrat their
uncils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible
nvulfions. In order to prepare the way for the
ecution of this design, he remitted a confiderabl

* Johnfl. ?34. Camd. 548.

0 a fi.mr

B o o K fum of money to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scot

VII. land, and employed him, together with Hay
<18 Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, to gain ove
T so.
Pcpith no- as many persons of distinction as possible to his in,
lers con- terest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful infinuatioR
th Ki.g. of these emissaries, induced several of the nobltsi

favour a measure, which tended so manifeCly toti
defirucTion of their country. Huntly, though i
King had lately married him to the daughter of h
favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warni
attached to the Romish Church. Crawford as
Errol v-ere animated with the zeal of new conver
They all engaged in a correspondence with
Prince of Parma, and in their letters to him,
sered their service to the King of Spain, and
cerrcok with the aid of 6ooo men, to rendert
maier of Scotland, and to bring so many of t
VafT-ls into the field, that he should be able toe
tcr England, with a numerous army. Fran
Stew.art, grandion of James V. whom the King
created Earl of Borhwell, though influenced by
motive of religion, for he still adhered to theP
reftani faith, was prompted merely by caprice,
the retliefsnefs of his nature, to join this treason
correipondence.
F-.- ,. iALL there tters were i;-tercepted in Engly

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threa
her own kingdom, f-nt them immediately to
King, and reproaching him with his formerlen
toward the Popish party, called upon him to ch
this formidablo conspiracy, by a proper fevei,
But James, though firmly attached to the Prl

ant religion, though profoundly versed in the theo- B o o K
aical controversies between the Reformers'and the VII.
lurch of Rome, though he had employed himself, SV9
that early period of life, in writing a Commen- TheKig's
ry on the Revelations, in which he proved themaxims

with regard

ope to be Antichritf, had nevertheless adopted, to Popery.
ready, those maxims concerning the treatment of
he Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through
c reef of his life. The Roman Catholics were at
at time a powerful and ative party in England;
cy were far from being an inconsiderable faction
his own kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain
ere ready to take part in all their machinations,
d to second every effort of their bigotry. The
ppofition of such a body to his succession to the
e Crown of England, added to the averfcnefs of
e Englifl from the government of strangers,
izht create him many difficulties. In order to a-
id these, he thought it necessary to ooth, rather
an to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to recon-
le them to his succession, by the hopes of gentler
eatment, and ome mitigation of the rigour of
ofe laws, which were now in force against them.
his attempt to gain one party by promises of in-
ulgence and as of clemency, while he adhered
ith all the obstinacy of a difputanr, to the doc-
ines and tenets of the other, has given an air of
yltery, and even of contradicion, to this part of
e King's character. The Papiffs, with the credu-
ty of a fee firuggling to obtain power, believed
is heart to be wholly theirs; and the Protestants,
.itl the jeaioufy inleparable from those who are al-
eady in possession, viewed every act of lenity, as a

0 3 mark

B o o R mark of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy,

VII. And in order to please both, James often aimed at
LI/V t an excessive refinement, mingled with diflimulation,

589' in which he imagined the perfection of government

and of king-craft, to consist.

;Hi excef- His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to
five tnity there general maxims. Notwithfianding the folli.
to the con-
fpirators. citations of the Queen of England, enforced by the

zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a fhon
imprisonment was the only punishment he inflited
on Huntly and his associates. But he soon had rea.
son to repent an at of clemency, so inconfifent
with the dignity of government. The first use which
the conspirators made of their liberty, was to as.
femble their followers, and under pretence of remov.
ing Chancellor Nlaitland, an able Minister, but
warmly devoted to the English interest, from tt
King's councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their
own ill conduc, they were forced to retire to the
North, where they openly erected the standard o
Rebellion. But as the King's government was no
generally unpopular, or his ministers odious, theit
own vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no
zeal in the cause. And the King, in person, ad
vancing against them with such forces as he could
suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on the
fidelity of their troops, which though superior i
number, followed them with reluctance, as toha-
zAr a b:ttle ; but suffering them to disperse, they
frrendered to the king, and threw themselves on

his

s mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both- B o o K
e were all brought to a public trial. Repeated VII.
of treason were easily proved against them. The
ng, however, did not permit any sentence to be Ap58i-1
nounced; and after keeping them a few months
confinement, he took occasion, amidst the pub-
ffftivity and rejoicings, at the approach of his
arriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient The king's
onarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; as all marriage
pes of uniting the crowns of the two kingdoms of Den-
uld have expired with him; as the Earl of Ar- marl:
n, the presumptive heir to the throne, was luna-
; the king's marriage was, on all theSe accounts,
event which the nation wished for with the ut-
iof ardour. He himself 'vas no less desirous of
complifhing it; and had made overtures, for that
rpofe, to the eldest daughter of Frederick II.
g of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every
ng, that would render the accession of the house
Stewart more acceptable to the English, endea-
ured to perplex James, in the fame manner she
done Mary, and employed as many artifices to
feat or to retard his marriage. His Ministers,
lined by bribes and promises, seconded her inten-
ns; and though several different ambassadors
ere sent from Scotland to Denmark, they produ-

powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so
ravagant, that Frederick could not believe the
ng to be in earnest; and fufpeting that there was

I 'Spofd\. 373. Cald. 4. 103.

0 4 ftome

B o o Kfome design to deceive, or amuse him, gave
V.I. daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunfw;cl

G' oc discouraged by this difappointmenr, whichi

imputed entirely to the conduct of his own min
fters, James made addresses to the princess AnR
Frederick's fccond -daughter. And though Elia
beth endeavoured to divert him from this, by !
commending Catherine the King of N'avarre's site
as a more advantageous march; though fhen
vailed on the privy council of Scotland to dcl
aainlt the a wliance wth Denmark, he perfiftcdi
-;s choice. And dfpairing of overcoming theoi
ftin-cy of his own miniflers, in any other mnn,
he fecrely cnncuraced the citizens of Edinbuirgh
tiake arms. They threatened to tar in pieces
Chanceilor, sv'hcm thev accused as the person, w,
arrinces had hithtrto disappointed the wishes ofi
King, and the expecations of his people. Inc
sequence of this, the Earl Marflal was senti
Denmark, at rhe head of a splendid embassy.
received ample owers and inftrucions, drawn
the king's own hnd. The marriage article
quickly agreed upon, and the young queen set
towards Scotland. James made great preparati
for her reception, and waied her landing with
the impatience of a 'lover; when the unwelco
account arrived, that a violent tempest had ari
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a corn
tion o hatered, that there was lirtie hope oft
putting again to fa before the spring. This
expected difappointn-ent he felt with the utrr
sensibility. He inPrantly fitted out some ships,
without cmmunicaring his inention to any ofi

cots

nci, failed in person, attended by the Chancel- B o o c
tiveral noblemen, and a train of oo'perfons, VII.
Itu of h:is bride. He arrived safely in a finall 89
bour near Upflo, where the Queen then resided. oai',.
re the marriage was solemnized. And as it Nov. 4d.
!d have been rash to trust those boisterous eas,
t:e winter season, James accepted the invitation
te court of Denmark, and repairing to Copen-
en. pased several months there, amidst conti-
'.alting, and amusements, in which, both the
cen and himself had great delight *.

o event in the King's life appears to be a wider
iaion from his general charater, than this fud-
filly. tis son Charles I. was capable of that
lilve admiration of the other lex, which arises
i great sensibility of heart, heightened by ele-
e of tfte; and the romantic air of his jour-
to S-pain suited such a disposition. But James
not iil'ieptible of any refined gallantry, and al-
s xprefed that contempt for the female cha-
er, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted
h politeness, is apt to inspire. He was fretted,
'er, at the many obstacles which had been laid
is way. He was anxious to secure the political
ar.taes, which he expelted from marriage; and
ig that a delay might afflord Elizabeth, and his
ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by
intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of
vcnting them, by a voyage from which he ex-
tId to return in a few weeks. The nation seem-
to applaud his conduct, and to be pleaed with

Melv. 352. Spotrfw. 377.

this

B o o K appearance of amorous ardour, in a young Prin
VII. Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond

8- 'time

he expeced, the nobles, the clergy, and the p
589' pie, vied with one another in loyalty and obedien

and no period in the King's reign was more remi
able for tranquility, or more free from anye
tion of those facions, which so often difturbedi
kingdom.

TB

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

THE
T H E
I S T 0 R Y

F
CT L A D.

BOOK VIII.

N the first of May the King and Queen ar- B o o K
rived at Leith, and were received by their VII.
s, with every poflible expression of joy. The '-'"
ity of the Queen's coronation was conduced Th19 i
reat magnificence ; but so low had the orderand Queen

arrive in

hops fallen, in the opinion of the public,Scotland.
one of them were present on that occasion,
r. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Minister of
reputation, set the Crown on her head, admi-
the sacred untion, and performed the other
ary ceremonies.

THE

B o o K THE zeal and success, with which many of

VIII. clergy had contributed towards preserving peace
*-^ order in the kingdom, during his absence, re,
1590. ciled James, in a great degree, to their peri

and even to the Presbyterian form of governm
Au .us. . In pretence of an aembly, which met this year,

made high encomiums on the discipline, as wer
the doctrine of the church, promied to adhere
violably to both, and permitted the aftembll
frame such as, as gradually abjlifned all the
mains of episcopal jurifdiEtion, and paved thei
for a full and legal eftabliflhment of the Pred
rian model *.
-9I. AN event happened oon after, which ao

the Clergy no small triumph. Archbishop A
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under
King's di!pleafure, having been deprived ofi
revenues of his fee in conlequence of the act i
nexation, and being oppressed with age, witi;
verry, and diseases, made the meanest fubmifia
the clergy, and delivered to the assembly a for
recantation of all his opinions concerning Cho
government, which had been matter of offer
the Presbyterians. Such a confcfFion, from;
most learned person of the order, was confideri
a testimony, which the force of truth had exta
from an adverlary -.

D forersin MEANWHILr, the king's exceive clemennc
rthe kt:- wards offenders mulriplied crimes of all kinds,i

encouraged such ats of violence, as brought

Ca-,'J. _. 23. 1 Sr ti~v. 3^. Cald. 4. 2!4-

ernment under contempt, and proved fatal toB Q K
v of his fubjecQs. The history of several years, VIII.
ut this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly 'v'.
rrels between the great families, and of murders 1591.
assassinations perpetrated in the most audacious
ner, and with circumstances of the utmost bar-
t!. All the defe&s in the feudal aristocracy were
felt more sensibly, than at any other period in the
ry of Scotland, and universal licence and anar-
prevailed to a degree, scarce confifent with the
cr'ation of society. While the king, too gentle

inih, or too feeble to a with vigour, suffered

there enormities to pass with impunity.

UT though James connived at real crimes, witch- An attempt
, which is commonly an imaginary one, en-os Both-

well's a-

fled his attention, and those suspected of it, felt gainft the
whole weight of his authority. Many persons King.
therextremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which
eifi;ally held to be certain indications of this
e, but masers of families, and matrons of a
eat rank, and in the middle age of life, were
edandt tortured ; and though their confessions
iaeid the most absurd and incredible circum-
ce, the King's prejudices, those of the clergy,
or' the peop!e, conspired in believing their ex-
'a.acies without hesitation, and in punishing
i ptrfons without mercy. Some of these un-

i:y' fufiere accused Bothwell of having consult-
ti:em, in order to know the time of the King's
a:, and having employed their art, to raise the
rns, which had endangered the Queen's life, and
Ic-taeled James so long in Denmark. Upon

this

B o o K this evidence, that nobleman was committed to
VIII. son. His turbulent and haughty spirit couldi
'^~^' ther submit to the restraint, nor brook such al
591' dignity. Having gained his keepers, he madi

escape, and imputing the accusation to the ar
of his enemy, the Chancellor, assembled his so
ers, under pretence of driving him from the
councils. Being favoured by some of the K
attendants, he was admitted, by a secret p
under cloud of night, into the court of the
of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced diretly tow
the royal apartment, but happily, before he en
the alarm was taken and the doors shut.
Dec. ;. he attempted to burff open some of them, ad

set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh
time to run to their arms, and he ecaped wit
utmost difficulty; owing his safety to the da
of the night, and the precipitancy with whi
fled*.
1592. HE retired towards the North, and the King

ing unadvisedly given a commifflon to the E
Huntly, to pursue him, and his followers, wit
and sword; he, under colour of executing
commifflon, gratified his private revenge, ad
rounded the house of the Earl of Murray, bul
teb. 8. to the ground, and flew Murray himself. The

der of a young nobleman of such promising vi
and the heir of the regent Murray, the darling
the people, excited universal indignation. TO
tizens of Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous ma
and though they were restrained, by the care Oi

' Mlv. S3. Spotfw. j35.

Uin,

lotrates, from any at of violence, they threw B o o K
eall refpet for the King and his miniflers, and VIII.
nly insulted and threatened both. While this ' '
inlus spirit continued, James thought it pru- 1592
to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
ce for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly
ndered himself to justice; and, notwithftand-
the atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours
the people, the power of the chancellor, with
m he was now closely confederated, and the
g's regard for the memory of the Duke of Len-
whose daughter he had married, not only pro-
d him from the sentence which such an odious
on merited, but exempted him even from the
ality of a public trial .

STEP of much importance was taken, oon as- Presbyteri-
with regard to the government of the church. an churct

govern-

e Clergy had long complained of the encroach- mnent efa-
nts made upon their privileges and jurifdition, bled by

law.

the ads of the parliament I584, and though
felaws had now loft much of their force, they
Ived to petition the parliament, which was ap-
aching, to repeal them in form. ThejunEure
pusing such a measure was well chosen. The

had loft mu:h of the public favour, by his
ty towards the Popish faction, and still more by
remissness in pursuing the murderers of the Earl
Murray. The chancellor had not only a power-
rparty of the courtiers combined againit him, but
s become odious to the people, who imputed to
n every false ftep in the King's condut. Both-

Spotfv. 3,7.

wel

B o o K well fill lurked in the kingdom, and being ft
VIII. supported by all the enemies of Maitland's adi
... irration was ready, every moment, to renew
I C. 2.

audacious enterprizes. James, for all these ra
was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy inl
request, and not only consented to a law, wl
the acRs S8 were rescinded or explained, bt
carried his complaisance still further, and perir
the parliament to ea'blifn the Prcfbyterian goR
n.e:rt, its General Aemblies, Provincial
Prefovtries and Kirk effions, with all the di
branches of their discipline and jurisdiction, i'
mofl ample manner. All the zeal and author
the Clergy, even under the adminiftrationof
gents, from whom they might have expedfi
most partial fivour, could not obtain the farl
of law, in cofirmation of their mode of Ec
aftical overnment. No Prince was ever !efi
poifd than James to approve a system, whAl
publican genius inspired a paflion for liberty, I'
p'ug.nat to h;s exalted notions of royal prero
Nor could any aversion be more inveterate thai
to the austere and uncomplying character do
Pre!.,'erian Clergy in that age; who, mori'
ner: ir zeal, than for policy, often contrad
his cpinions, and censured his conduct, with a
domr equall offensive to his dogmatism as a
logi n, and to his pride as a King His firu
however obliged him, frequently to conceal,
dif-embil his sentiments; and as he often difg
his fubj;i:s, by indulging tl e Popish faction
th n tiiev aproved, lie endeavoured to atte:
this, bv cnccolons to the Prcbyter!ian C

re liberal than he himself would otherwie have B o o K
ofen to grant . VIII.

, this parliament, Bothwell and all his adhe- 3592'
tswere attainted. But he soon made a new at-
pt to seize the King at Falkland ; and James,
trayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly de-
ded by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as
Chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to
fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and
e irresolution of Bothwell' s aflbciates t.

cARCELY was this danger over, when the nation A n
alarmed with the discovery of a new and more conrfpiacy
idable conspiracy. George Ker, the Lord pith Lords.
bottle's brother, being seized as he was ready
erail for Spain, many suspicious papers were
d in his custody, and among these, several
ks signed by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
. By this extraordinary precaution, they
d to escape any danger of diicovery. But Ker's
ution flirinking when torture was threatened, he
cfed that he was employed by these noblemen,
rr) o a negociation with the King of Spain;
the blanks subscribed with their names were to
led up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were
uded to offer the faithful service of the three
to that Monarch; and to follicit him to land
dy of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the
th of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
if place, to establish the Roman Catholic Re-
in Scotland, and then to invade England,
:'ld. 4. 28, 25Z. pots. 88. t Melv. 402.
O. I. P with

B o o K with the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
\III. Graham of Sintr,d, and Barclay ofL.adyland, whom
._.- -,he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, w:1

9' tztaken inro ctody, an:. confir-mnd all the circum.

fances o his cor,feion"

1i -9. THE nation having been kept for some timei
z7cai C; ,T! continual terror and agitation by o many fucceiJ
F Cr* conipiracies, the diicovery of this new danger co

pleated the panic. All ranks of men, as ii
enemy, hd already been at their gates, tio
hiemlivcs called upon to and forth in defence
their country. The Minif.ers of Edinburgh,
out waiting for any warra.t from the King, R
happened at that time to be ablent from the capi
and vwithc.t hlaving received ay legal commifE
ai:embled a considerable number of Peers and
rons, in order to provide an inilant remedy agi
the imenin d(anger. They seized the Farl
Angus, and commllritrtd him to the caflle; thrt
minid KRer; and prepared a rem-onstrance to be
before tht KIi'ng, concerning; the iate of the ni
ar.d tihe neefi:y of proficuting the conspirators
b.-. c:. becol'g v.gour. James, though jealousof c'

-':-',: t: oc'n- nt on his preroaaive, and oiffndcdi
a-:-'.; lin,eci, v.:1o iniead of pst ionng, :cemed to

r toO,,5

k- tri to him, iou-nd it nce.!ry-, during the
encz of ihl fcrr-innr, not o :ly to adopt their
but ev l to drc cre thrt no conideiration liould
ind'ce hinm to pardon tl;c.e, vho had been
of lo diouls a treason. Te ftmmuned tile
of
0 lun:y arnd iLriol to lfrre.ider themifelsv

ri:e, Graham of Fintry, whom his peers pro- B o o K

,cced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to VIII.
piub ckly beheaded; and marching into the North -
'the head of an army, the two Earls, together 593.
th Angus, who had escaped out of prison, retir-
e0 the mountains. He placed garifons in the
ilcs which belonged to them ; compelled their
sics, and the Barons in the adjacent counties, to
[cribe a bond containing profcffions of their Ioy-
rv towars him, and of their firm adherence to'
ProtJAant sith ; and, thie better to secure the
nulil'liry of that part of the kingdom, constituted
Lars o Athol, and Marflial, his Licutenancs

§H;VING finilhed this expedition, James returned Mlrchl TS.
lii;bu.rgh, where he found Lord Borrounh, an l'zabeth
|rxj('inary ambaffalor from the court of ELng- 1to tlc

.Elizabedi, alarmed at the discovery of a :";,''it
lfiracy, which she confidered as no lels formi-
.totl her own kingdom, than to Scotland, re-
a'.i James with his former renifhefs, and urg-
i.r,, as he regarded the prelervation of the Pro-
nrorcig;ion, or the dignity of his own Crown,
'-li this repeated trealon w\th rigour; and if
coul! noi apprehend the pcrfons, at leafl to con-
K the estates of such audacious rebels. She
'.ere, liowever, the force of tlefe requests, by
rcedi,,n!, at the stime time, in bhalf of Both-

w!lom. according to her ulfual policy in nou-
ing a -,tiaus spirit among the Scottish nobles,
I;ht tlken um.er her prote&ion. james ao-

' :.. ,!. Cald. 4. 291.

1A ' '
P 2 lutely

B o o K lutely refused to liflen to any intercefflon in favoc
VIII. of one, who had so often, and with so much our

rage, insulted both his government and his perfoi
1593' With regard to the popish conspirators, he dtclai

his resolution to profucute them with vigour; b
that he might be the better able to do so, he&.
manded a small fum of money from Elizabg
which she, ditruftful, perhaps of the manner
which he might apply it, shewed no inclination
grant. The zal, however, and importunity of
own fubjeAs obliged him to call a parliamen;,i
order to pals an a& of attainder against theth
Ears. But before it met, Ker made his escape
of prison, and cn pretence, that legal evidenc,
their guilt could not be produced, nothing wast
eluded aginft them. The King himself was
verfally fufpeted of having contrived this arii
on purpose to elude the requests of the Quee
England, and to disappoint the wifles of his
people. And therefore, in order to sooth the Cle
who exclaimed loudly against his conduct, he
way to the pasing of an a, which ordained
who obfrinately contemned the censures of
Church, to be declared outltws *.

Bo:hw.ll VWHILE the terror excited by the Popish cu
rurprizes racy possessed the nation, the court had ben di:
t"e ': by two rival factions, which contended for thee

direction of affairs. At the head of one, was
Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire
fidence. For that very reason, perhaps, he had
len early under the Queen's displeasure. Thel

Cald. 4. 33. Spotfw. 393. Parl. 13. Jac. VI. c.i

Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree,B o K
al the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, VIII.
,,idened the breach. And James, fond no less '"v
domeliCc tranquillity, than of pu:lic peace, ad- 93
d his favo-ire to retire, for iome time, in hopes
t the Que,:n's reientment would subside. But
he frood in i.eed, in the present juncture, of the
ince of fb able a Minister, he had recalled him
court. In order to prevent him from recover-
his fornmer power, the Stewarts had recourse to
xpdient no lers illegal than desperate. Hav-
combi;:ed with lioihw ell, who was of the fame
name, they brought him back secretly into Scot-
; and !eizilg the gates of the palace, introduced
into the royal apartment with a numerous train
ared foilowers. James, though deferred by all
courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered
:e in(iignation than fear, and reproaching them
tihir treachery, called on the Earl to finish his
sons, by p'ercing his Sovereign to the heart.

otrhwell fell on his klnees, and implored par-
.The king was not in a condition to rfufe his
ands. And a few days after he fgned a capitu-
o0.1 ui this fcccsfui trairor, to whom he was
l a prisoner, whereby lie bound himself to grant
a remiiion for all past ofiences, and to procuie
rat:ficafion of it in parliament; and in the mean
, to dif..ifs the chancellor, the master of Gla-
Lord Home, and S:r George Home, from
councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part,
sented to remove from court, though he left
e as many of his aflbciates, as he thought sus-
ent to prevent the return of the adverse faction.

P 3 BUT

B o o K BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the Ki
VIII. under the fame kind of bondage, to which he hl

been often lfuhjec d(uring his minority. He difnt
h '.,'. vered so much impatience to siakle off his fetter,

' '

: that thole. viho impofled, durst not continue, th.e:

S. :. -
strain;. Ti'-cy permitted him to call a Conver,i

of t-e no'les at Stirling, and to repair thitherh'.
seif. All othwell's enemies, and all who e
desirous of gaining the king's favour by appar
to be so, cbryed the summons. They pronou,.
the infiiir ocered to the Kin-'s erfan and autho
to be high treaon, and declared him absolved f
any oblig:io; to ob!erve conditions, extorted,
force, and wvh'ch violated lo enfentially his royalp
roga:ive. Janmes, ho:.ever, ill proffered hi
pardon, provided he would iue for it as an ai
mercv, and promise to retire out of the king
Th:fe conditions Borh.elil rejecred with di
and b-zi-r.ng himielf once more to arms, attemn
to furprize the Kin, but finding him on his gi

toL [o the borders :
s.1.- T'iHE King's ardour again Bothwell, conip

.- ih his flow anj e\vaive proceeings agai~!

.:: P

-- :--. Popi Lore-s, ccc .
on., d a g ner:! difgufl ai

his iubDe is; and vas n.;pu.e citlher to an exce
attachment to the perfo.s of those conspirators,
to a secret pa:'r;aiity tow\ari:s tleir opinions;
wn.ch gave r.fe to no un:-'cafonable farts.
Clrg;, as the imrr.ediate -uacrdians of the F
tefran- Reiig: on, touuh t mouh ,

tecives bound,
iuch a juncture, to take ex:racrdi;ary fleps for

* C: -; .. po:. 95;'

refrvation. And the provincial fynod of Fife B o o K
ppceing to meet at that time, a motion was made VIII.
excommunicate all concerned in the late confpi- '¥"

I597.

,, as obflinate and irreclaimable Papists. And Sept. 25
0!gh none of the conspirators resided within the
,:;3 of the fynod, or were fub:ct to its jurifdic-
n, fcllh was the zeal of the members, that, over-
kin this irregula-ity, they pronounced againfl
em, the sentence of cxconmunication, to wich
a;c of lall parliament added new terrors. And
this flould be imputed to a few men, and ac-
uiecl the ac of a fiall part of the Church, de-
i:!s V're appointc-d to attend the adjacent synods,
d to fire their apprubation and concurrence.
As event happened., a fv weeks after, which H4islen;ty

towards

trealed the people's iufpicions of the King. As tnim.

w.as marchiing on an expedition against the bor- o' .

'

rrs, the three E'.ar;s coming suddenly into his
nce, off-red to ubmnir thenimfeves to a -gal

nil; .an James, wsithout committing them to cuf-

y, appointed a ,iv for that purpole. The con-
ii;:ors prep.red to appear with a formidable train
teir i-ieinds and vais. But, i the mean time,
C;crgy, togetier witi many eers and Barons,
eiib;ga. at Edinburgh, remonfr-ated againlci the
ing's ex-cme indulgence with great bodnefs, and
:man'cd of him, according to the regular courie
;iuiice, to commnit to flre cuiody persons charg-
;':ih the hiighell as of treason, who could not
brought to a legal trial, until they were abfolvel
in e cenftres o the hurch and to call a
:!c.rion of eflates, to deliber.itc concerning the

i'4 nie-

B o o method of proceeding against them. At the fai
VIII. time they offered to accompany him in arms tot
t'"'" place of trial, left such audacious and powerful
1593. minals should overawe jutice, and dictate to

judges to whom they pretended to submit. Jam
though extremely offended both with the irregu
rity of their proceedings, and the presumption
their demands, found it expedient to put off
day of trial, and to call a Convention of eftates,i
order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the
pie. By being humoured in this point, their
picions began gradual!y to abate, and the Chan
lor managed the Convention so artfully, that
himflrF, together with a few other members,
impowered to pronounce a final sentence upon
'ov. z6. con:pirators. After much deliberation, they

dained that the three Earls, and their affociaI
should be exempted from all further inquiry or
fecution, on account of their correspondence
Spain; that, before the first day of February,
ihould either submit to the Church, and public
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove ouct
the Kingdom; that, before the first of Janua
they should declare which of these alternatives t
would embrace that they should find surety
their peaceable demeanour, for the future; and
if they failed to signify their choice in due time,
should lore the benefit of this act of abolition,
remain exposed to all the pains of law *.

By this lenity towards the conspirators, Ja
incurred much reproach, and gained no advant

* Cald. 4. 330. Spots. 397.

1 1~~~~~~~~~L

evoted to the Popish superstition, fubmiffve toB o o K
the diAates of their priests, and buoyed up with VIII.
pes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls -
iifed to accept of the conditions, and continued 594
ir treasonable correspondence with the court of
in. A Convention of etates pronounced them Jan. 8g.
have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
re offered; and the King required them, by
lamation, to surrender themselves to justice.
e pretence of the English ambaftador contributed,
laps, to the vigour of there proceedings. Eli-
eth, ever attentive to James's motions, and im-
ing his reluctance to punish the Popish Lords to
cret approbation of their designs, had sent to
rd Zouche to represent, once more, the danger
which he exposed himself, by this false modera-
; and to require him to exercise that rigour,
ch their crimes, as well as the posture of affairs
dred necessary. And though the steps now ta-
by the King silenced all complaints on that head,
Zouche, forgetful of his character as an ambaf-
r, entered into private negociations with such
the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's
asurs, and held almost an open correspondence
Bothwell, who, according to the usual art fice
alecontents, pretended much follicitude for re-
ing the disorders of the commonwealth; and
red his own ambition with the specious veil of
Itaainft thoe Counsellors, who restrained the
gfrom pursuing the avowed enemies of the Pro-
nt faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the name
his litress, to take arms against his Sovereign.

MEAN.

B o o MK EAXWHILE, the King and the Clergy we
VIII. filled with mutual distrust of each other. T1
154v were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his affiectio
A new a- leaned too much towards the Popish facion;
teD cf suspected them, without good reason, of prom
wtr.s. ing Bothwell to rebellion, and even of suppl[

him with money for that purpose. Little infi
tion indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turb
spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprize.
appeared suddenly within a mile of Edinburgh,
the head of 4oo horse. The pretences, by wh
he endeavoured to jufLifv this insurrection, were
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to
pery, concern for the King's honour, and or tl
berties of the nation. James was totally unpro
for his own defence ; he had no infantry, and
accompanied only with a few horsemen of
Htome's train. In this extremity, he irplord
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in orda
encourage them to at with zeal, he proil
proceed against the Popish Lords with the utl
rigour of law. Animated by their Ministers,
ran chnarlful - to their arms, and advanced witi
King at their head against Bothwell; but he, a
withfranding his fnccels in putting to flighi i
Home, -who had rashly charged him with a far

rior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith s

out daring to a ttac; the r;ngo His followers ai
dLc.ned him oon after, and dilcouraged by so i
licceflive dilappointments, could never afrerwi
be brought to venture into the field. Hebe
himself to his usual lurking places, in the NIrd
Ingland ; but Elizabeth, in compliance \w;t.

'ngs remonstrances, obliged him to quit that re- B o o K

VIII.

594

No sooner was theKing delivered from one danger, remh
n he was called to attend to another. The Popish daOgers

r

opnn

. . from the
rds, in consequence of their negotiations with Spain, popiih

Lords.
ceed, in the spring, a supply of money from Phi- April ,.

h. 'hat bold designs this might inspire, it was

ealy matter to conjeEture. From men under the
minion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could
reclaim, the most desperate ations were to be
eded. The assembly of the Church immediately
k the alarm; remonstrated againfi them with
ce bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified
fntence of excommunication, pronounced by
vnode of Fife. James himself, provoked by
ir obinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his
forbearance would not only be generally dif-
sing to his own fubje'ts, but give ri'e to unfa-
rable suspicions among the English, exerted
nfdlf vi:h unusual vigour. Hle called a parlia- June 8.
n; li.dd before it all the circumflances, a;nd ag-
ia:ions of te conrpiracy; and though there
blit few members present, and several of these
nedced with the conspirators by blood or fiiend-
, he pevailed on them by his infilence, and
?ra;nicy, to pronounce the moll rigorous fen-
:c the lav, canr inflict. They were declaredl to be
ry o high treason, and their efates and honours

ie. t the fame time, tIatutes, more fcvcre
ever, were enacted againfi the profeijlrs of tile
p',i:h Religion.

* S-ot 4103. CaJ. 4 3-9.

1 low

B o o K How to put this sentence in execution, was a mi
VIII. ter of greater diricuiry. Three powerful Baror
A s"/' cantoned in a part of the country almost inaccefibi
Battle9' turrounded with numerous vassals, and fuppoit
Glenlivat. by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than;

overmatch for a Scottish Monarch. No intre
could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the moq
neccfsary for defraying the expences of an expi
tion againit them. To attack them in person, wi
his own forces alone, might expose him bothl
diforace and to danger. He had recourse to t
only expedient which remained in such a fituati:
for aiding the impotence of Sovereign authority;1
delegated i.is authority to the Earl of Argyll, as
Lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmit
with the conspirators; and gave them a commiist
to invade their lands, and to seize the cales wh
belonged to tcm. Bothwell, notwithftandingl
his high prerenfions of zeal for the ProteftantRl
ligion, having now entered into a close confederr
with them, the danger became every day moreui
ing. Argyll, follicited by the King, and rouzedb
the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7o
men. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlira
with an army far inferior in number, but compot
chiefly of gentlrmen of the low countries, mount
on horseback, and who brought along with the
oa. ;. a train of field-pieces. They encountered eat

other with all the fury, which hereditary enmil
and ancient rivalfhlp add to undisciplined courag
But the HighlandLrs, disconcerted by the sirs di
charge of the cannon, to which they were littlesa
customed, and unable to resist the imprefiioni

0

alry, were oon put to flight. And Argyll, aB o o K
Iat young man of eighteen, was carried by his VIII.
ids out of the field, weeping with indignation '"
their diSgrace, and calling on them to stand, and 594
vindicate the honour of their name*.

N the first intelligence of this defeat, James,
uoh obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
ney t assembled a small body of troops, and
rched towards the North. He was joined by
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other
s at enmity with Huntly and Errol, who hav-
loft several of their principal followers at Glen-
t, and others refuting to bear arms againfi the
ng in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
s. James wafted their lands; put garrisons in
eos their castles burnt others; and left the
ke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that part of
kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re-
in them from gathering to any head there, or
minfefting the low country. Reduced at last
extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and
desertion of their followers, they obtained the
ngs permission to go beyond eas, and gave fe-
rity that they should neither return without his Popih

~~~. . . . Lords dri-

ence, nor engage in any new intrigues againit en out of
eProteftant Religion, or the peace of the king- "he king-

dom.

B1 their exile, tranquillity was re-established in
e North of Scotland; and the firmners and vi-

Cald. 4. 4 '8. + Birch, Mem. . 86. t Spotfw.
4 ald. 73Laid , &-c.

gour,

B o o gour, which James had displayed in his last procee
VIII. ings against them, regained him, in a great degre
'~ the confidence of his Protestant fubjets. But, h
59Ro-' funk, in the ame proportion, and for the farerm

man ca son, in the elseem of the Roman Catholics. Th
tholics in-
cenfed a. had asserted his mother's right to the Crown
gail j~T'. England wkih so much warmth, that they couldw

with any decencv, reject his. And the indulgen
with which he affected to treat the profcffors oftd
religion, inspired them with such hopes, that
viewed his accefion to the throne as no undefira
event. But the rigour with which the Kingp
sued the conspirators, and the severe ilatutes agai
Popery to which he had given his content, co
vinced them that there hopes were vifiona
and they began to look about in quest of some}
succesSor, whose rights they might oppose to
The English Papilis turned their eyes towards
Earl of EIiex, whose generous mind, though fir'
eflablifhed in the Protefiant faith, abhorred the
verities infiicted in that age, on account of religi
op;nions. Those of the fame fest, who were
in exile, formed a older scheme, and one mi
suitable to their situation. They advanced thecia
of the Infanta of Spain; and Parsons the Jef
publishrd a book, in which, by false quotati
from hiory, by fabulous genealogies, and abf
arguments, intermingled with bitter invecdi
against the King or Scots, he endeavoured to pro
the Infant.'s tide to the English Crown to be p
ferabe to hs. And Philip, though involved
ready in a var both with France and England,
scarce able to deltnd the remains of the Burg

n Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, B oo K
Vls rasped at this airy project. The dread of VIII.
s;aiilh Pretender to the Crown, and the oppo-
on .hich the Papills began to form against the 595
ng's iuccefion, contributed not a little to remove
p-prejudices of the Proteflants, and to prepare
way for that event.

BOTiHWELL, whose name has been so often men- Botl=veul
,n as the diflu-ber of the King's tranquillity, forced of
dof the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
etched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of
rland, on account of his confederacy xwith the
piih Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
;;ne reason ; and deterted, in his diflrefs, by
o,'n folovwers; he was obliged to fly for safety
fIr.nce, and thence to Spain and Italy, where,
er ienouncing the rotcfl-ant faith, he led, many
rs, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable on-
for a low and infamous debauchery. lie King,
ghi extremely reaey to sacrifice the firongeft re-
"ment to the slightest acknowledgments, col;d
ter be foitened by his fubmilTions, nor be in-
,d to lilcn to any intri-ccfion in his behalf .

T;:is year the King loft Chancellor Maildand, an
i;iiniilc-r, o;: whem he had long devolved the
et wighit of pubjic afiairs. As James loved
, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
-¥, a copy of verles, ·'hilc, when conpared
th the: compositions of that age, are far fiom be-

' i.:: ,.v' , m. I. YSot'f . not . .t I.. 41T,

Soo.

Bo o K Soow after his death, a considerable change M

VIII. made in the administration. At that time, thea
L-W~có nual charges of government far exceeded the Kin

I$96.
A chang revenues. The Queen was fond of expenfivel
in the ad- mufements. James himself was a firanger to
minifirao
ton. nomy. It became necefiary, for all these reafons,i

levy the public revenues with greater order andi
gour, and to husband them with more care. T
important trust was committed to eight gentler
of the law *, who, from their number, wered
led Oavians. The powers vested in them e
ample, and almcft unlimited. The King bos
himself neither to add to their number, nor tofi
ply any vacancy that might happen, without tl
consent: and knowing the facility of his own te.
per, agreed that no alienation of his revenue,L
grant of a pension, or order on the treasury, flih
be held valid, unless it were ratified by the fubfcy
tion of five of the commissioners; all their atsa
decisions were declared to be of equal force withi
sentences ofjudges in civil courts; and in confeque
of them, and without any other warrant, anypeit
might be arrefled, or their goods seized. Sucha
tenfivejurifdiEion, together with the abfolutei
pofal of the public money, drew the whole exea
tive part of the government into their hands. Eni
ed among themselves, they gradually undermii
the reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on ea
lucrative or honourable office. The ancient fervn

* Alexander Seaton President of the Seflion, Walter Stest

Commendator of Blantyre Lord Privy Seal, David Carnei
John Lindfav, James Elphingflon, Thomas Hamilton, Ji
Skene Clerk Regiiter, and Peter Young Elemofynar.

0.~~~~~~~~~~~s

jie Crown repinllcl, at being obliged to quit their B o o K
ns to new men. IThe favourires, and young VIII.
r;ls, unurmured at feeing the I'ieg's liberality
ted by their preScriptions. And the Clergy ex- I9
med against some of them as known apoRates
opery, and fufpeted others of secretly favour-
it. They retained their power, however, not-
,:,,ntnin.: this general combination against them;
they owed it intirely to the order and ceconomy
h [!ey introduied into the adminifl ration of the
nces, by which the nececary cxp.nces of govern-

et ere more easily defra ed, than in any other

Gol o:r :e King's reign '

*: rutlour of vast preparations which Philip Violenceof
!:il to be carrying on at this time, filled both ', 1'atio,
rad a(d 'cotland with the dread of a new in- P<'pnl
. TJaes took proper measures for the de-
of iiis ingdom. But thel- did nt satisfy the
o. thle Clergy, whose fpl)icions of the King's
r.tyv leg:n to revive; and a he had permit-
t,.c wives of the bani!ed -'eers to levy t!-e
of t:eir elates, and to live in their houles,
ci;2rgedi him with rendering the a of forfei-
inefeCitual, by supporting the avowed enemies
Proteilant faith. The afiembly of the Church March 24
under consideration the state of the kingdom,
aving appointed a day of public fafling, they
niy renwed the Covenant, by which the na-
v'; bound to adhere to the ProteRant faith,
todefend it againt all aggressors. A commit-

* pot£ 413, 435'
o II. Q_ tee,

B o o K tee, confiLing of the most eminent Clergymen,
VIII. of many Barons, and gentlemen of diftincion, w

- ed on the King, and laid before him a plan forr
1 95' security of the kingdom, and the prefervationl

religicn. They urged him to appropriate theeb
of the banished Lords, as a fund for the maia
nance of soldiers; to take the ftriteft precaut
for preventing the return of such turbulent fu!
into the country ; and to purlue all who were
peced of being their adherents, with the utmoR
gour.

ThKie -^ NOTHicNG could be more repugnant totheKi
ren::Tr.efs schemes, or more diihgreeable to his inclin2
t,,o -h.. than these propositions. Averse through his w

life, to any course, where he expeaed oppofitiw
danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with,
char.icer of moderation, and by the arts of pol
he observcd with concern the prejudices againfi
which were growing among the Roman Catho
and resolvcd to make ome artonement for that
of his condur, vhich had drawn on him their
digna:ion. E'izabeth was now well advanced
years; her life had lately been in danger; if
Popish competitor should arise to dispute his
of fuccemon, a faction, so powerful as that of
banished Lords, might be extremely forrnidb'
and any division among his own fubjets i
prove fatal, at a junc ure, which would require
united and most vigorous efforts. Inflead, rh:
tore, of the additional severities which the a'
p-roposed, JamLs had thoughts of mitigaring
i:nifn.ent, wvhich they already suffered.

t'ey were surrounded, during their residence in so- B o o R
n parts, by Philip's emilaries; as resentment VIII.
t dif)olfe tliem to liflen more favourably than 5
, to their filggsefions; as despair might drive 596
m to fill more atrocious aions; he resolved to
a1 them, under certain conditions, into their na-
country. I-ncouraged by these sentiments of
King in their favour, of which they did not
t intelligence, and wearied already of the de-
dant and anxious lie of exiles, they ventured to
rn fccretly into Scotland. Soon after, they pre-
ted a petition to the King, begging his prmif-
to reside at their own houses, and offering to
e fccurity for their peaceable and dutiful beha-
ur. James called a Convention of estates to de-
rate cn a matter of such importance, and by
ir advice he granted the pet tion.

o soon as they were informed of this, the mem- The rnh
of a committee, appointed by the las aembly, proceedilt

` ofthe Clor-

at Edinburgh, and with all the precipitancy ofgy and
, ard of zeal, took such reflut.ons as they pcople
uglt ncefiary for the safety of the kingdom.
y v:ote circular kttcrs to all the Prebyteries in
land; they warncd them of the approacling
ger; thy exhorted them to stir up their people
.e dernce of their just rigls; t',y com !manded
to publifl, in all their pulpits, the act of ex-

ptmunicating the Popish Lords; and enjoined
m to lay ;ill tiofe iwho were fufl eted of favour-
'op'ry ndler the f.nme cenfunc, by a fummiary
:enc, arin without obfcrvin te tufual formali-
, .:ial. A nd 25 te cang-r fi'etned too prefing

) to

B o o K to wa:i for the stated mecting.s of the judicatoriescj

VIII. tha Church, thne made coice of the most eminent
i56' cl:rgy;men in dircrent corners of the kingcl m, ap

9ó- ~h ar Einbu', h, a

pointed them to refil- confla.tl at Edinbu:ghan,
to meet tevrr day with t;e i;-:;ifirs of that cis,
under the name of the StlnL:-ig C zir:,'l Cf tLe Chur,
and vested in this b.)dv t!° fiupreme authority, l!
c ^oining it, in imita tion of the ancient Ro!r
form, to take care thal the Chturch fniuld ree
no detriment.

THEsr proceediing, no Ic-fs uncontlitutionalti
:.preccd cnted. werc maniiecf encroachments onl
roya! prerogative, and bold filp; towards open
bl iion. The King's condu:t. however, j.oih'id
iobe dc:e su:ch exceffts. i-Tis lenity towardsi
Papilfts, i; replgnanr tothe princi .les ofthatag;
pardonil, the ccnfp.irators, notwvi.;ftanding rep
cd promines to the contrary ; the refet he paid
Ladv I .:ni:1v, who was attaclicd to the Ro;nish
iirion, r.o 1.s than her huffland ; lhis coT,m:
tie care i;r his daughter, the ';i;ncefs lizabc;i;
Lady Levinglon, who wias infited t ithi the
liure. rI'.cn ; the contcn.pt xill \\hich ht talked,
all occa;Cn'.5, bclh of the charar r of Mini
and cf ;h-';r fun'fiion ; re ci:cLii.rnces wsI
mi'';l have filled minds, nor prole b, n:u
-ua'. ir., xlth flome fulpicions ; and rmig1ht have
ci:p;tatcC i,:to rain councils, t.or, who were far
mn-ved ifom intemperate zeal. Eut, however
erfuti th motives mi:iht be \hiiu!ch irnfuenced
Clercy, or however laudable the end they hid
vicw, they conduced their n;caiii.cs with no add

,ven witl little prudince. James discovered a B o o K

r;( inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, III.
djealous as he was of his prerogative, would wil- "96
r!v have mane many concessions for the fhke of
ae. By his command, ome of the Privy Coun-
ors had an interview with the more moderate a-
n!g the Chr:'r, and enqulired whether Huntly
!his :i is n ight not, upon making proper
nhlk'd !rmncts, be again received into the bosom
ri'e Chirtch, and be ex, mpted from any further
ri;e;,:, on accounti of teir past aporacy and
fns, Th-ey replied, that though the gare of
ercy il'.od alwavs opcen! or those who repented and
Iturnled, et a thele noblemen had been guilty of
n'::r;, a c!inme dc5rving diath both by the law of
cd, and of man, t;e civil magistrate could not le-
i!': rant them a pardon ; and even though the
Ic;rh fbcloul! ahfolve them, it was his duty to in-
f pr!ni:m/, nt upron them. This inflexibiliy in
oe, w:o wev re re!;cned the mo't compliant of
cr'er, filled the Kirg with indignation, which
ir.r:!cence and co:binacy of a private Clrr-gy-
n .':igtencd into rage.

MIR. l'avid lack:, Minifler at St. Andrew's, dif- Seditious
lur"ing in Coe of is lernlons, according to ctuf- '1,ib,,y
m, c: ner ..r. - tile Lare of the nation, a'irmncd '.

th:- rng hir ad permitted the opifli Lords to re-
rinto Scotland, and y that adtion, had disco-
ret the trc;nery of his own heart; that all Kings
ret rhi Devi!':, chi'dren; that Satan had now the
:iance of tl;e ccirt; that the Quten of England

0 was

B o o K was an athei ; that the judges were milcrearns ar
VIII. b!-itbrs; the nobility gcdleis and degenerate; d

- P:-ivy- Counfe'iors cormorants and men of norei

gion; and in his prayer for the Queen, he udtiL
words, We n-.uft pray for her for :afhion fake, t

No we have :,o cause, she will never do us oud. Ja=

''he C-ry ,
fr. i;': com man ed him to be summoned beiore the F,,
d;c;e. Council, o antwver for such feiitious exprefiioa

and the Clergy, infiead of abandoning him to
-purnihment, h.ch such a petulant and criminalh
tack on his superiors deserved, were so imprutenti
to eibouie lis caule, as if it had been the comrs
one of the v.icel order. The conrrovc(rfy conceq
ing the in-murnities of the pulpit, and the rights
the Clergy to tefiify against vices of every ki!
uhich had been agitated in 84, was now revirv
It was pretended, that with regard to their rfa
function, NMinifters were fuhjeEt to the Chulch
lone; that it belonged only to their ecclefiai?
s-uperiors to judge of the truth o:- falihood of d
trines, delivercd in the ppit ; that if, upon
pretence what.ver, the King ulurpcd this jurifd
rion, the church would, from that moment, fc
under iseriit. to :he civ.il nitrate; that ina
of r Dro'viig vice. ;iri tihat lineft i-oldnels, hi
had o/ren been cf advanta.ge to individuals, andi
:.:tarv to the kin d um, the Clergy would ica.t

.- r the pariuns ot the Prince, and to connlvt

the vces of cthers; that the King's eagc;rne,
rii.,ih thie i;i'cretion of a !'retlant Ivrii
u i;!e h-; wav i ready to parcion the cr-imes oiiP
pi!h coi.,ilateors, cl n

d on them to ft
irtlrid, arid t..t: ov V.ow as the time to contenI

t.;

,ir privileges, and to prevent any encroachment B o o K
rhofe rights, of which the church had been in VIII.
efion ever since the Reformation. Influenced
yrhefe considerations, the council of the Chulch l59G
joined Black to decline the jurifdilion of the Pri-
Council. And he, proud of liuch an opportu-
ty to diplay his zeal, presented a paper to that
rpofe, and with the utmost firmnels refused to
cad, or to answer the questions which were put to
,i, In order to add greater weight to there pro-
eings, the council of the Church transmitted the
cinarure to all the Prefbyteries throughout the
ingdom, and commanded every Minister to sub-
ibe it, in testimony of his approbation.

JANMES defended his rights with no less vigour
:n they were attacked. Sensible of the contempt
P.der which his authority must fall, if the clergy
ould be permitted, publickly, and with impunity,
calumniate his ministers, and even to censure
ln-,fIf; and knowing, by former examples, what
nccal reparation for such offences he might ex-
itfrom the judicatories of the church, he urged
the inquiry into Black's condu&, and issued a
clrodmation, commanding the members of the
uncil of the church to leave Edinburgh, and to
turn to their own parishes. Black, inflead of sub-
ting, renewed his declinature; and the council,
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as
y met by the authority of the church, obedience
ia was a duty still more sacred, than that which
ey owed to the King himself. The Privy coun-
', notwithstanding Black's refuting to plead, pro-

Q 4 ceeded

B o K ceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquin
VIII. pronounced him guilty of the crimes of which j
C^'- had been acculed ; but referred it to the King.

9' appoint what punifment he should susser.

MEA-N -while, many endeavours were ufcdi

bring matters to accommnodation. A most eve
day produced i me new flhemine of reconcilemee
hue th:ojgh the King's ficklenes, the obflinacvi
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, ti
al' proved inese'ctual. Eoth parties appealed tof
p:opie, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accui
fitions, enieavo:red to render each othl-er oi
In;'len:e, feition, treaiLn, were the cr;mes ov
v.hich Jair.es cha:-geu tie C!=r'y ; \\ii tllhy n:
the pu:p'r rfs;und ih conii ints of his excet
lenicy ov. ards Papists, and or the no less excEs
rigour, .irnh v.h:ch he opprefil'd the elfablii
Church. Exafcraced by the'r bold invedcives,
ai laL, Kine:Nced ii'ick to retire beyond the ri
Spr, and to re,;de there during his pleafure;a
cnce rmor ccmmanin te members of the ffii
ini; -cjur: il to d- ,;art trom Ldi,buirih, he requin
ai2 the Min.ifers in t'h king. om to fubfcr.be a a
o:;oingi thenricivcs to iubmic, i the fame marn
as othimr lubj:ctS t t rhe juriloiciion of the ci
courts, in mat;crs of a civil nature.

. r. --*-l, Tn :s dcci iie measure excited all the violent p
i ...-: = ion, w hiic poi-f:f- d:!appoointed fa'tions; andde

no less violent immrd:ately ;fllowed. 'Ihefc t
be imputed in part to the artifices of some cot
tiurs, vh!o expi-.ced to reap advantage from the'

l :n

tsls of their country, or who hoped to lessen the B o o K
iority of the OAavians, by ingaging them in VIII.
ilitics wih the church. On one hald, they in- V '"
md the King thit the citizens of Edinburgh
e under arms every night, and had planted a
,onr ouard round the hoeiPs of their ministers.
.es, in order to put a flop to this imaginary
ul on his overnment, ied a proclamation,

nirarding twenty four of the principal citizens
e'.ve ;te town, within fix hours. On the other
nd, they wrote to the Minifccrs, adv sing them to
k to their own safety, as -i untly had been secret-
ad!nrtted to an interview with the King, and had
en the author of the severe proclamation against
ecij:zens oF Edinburgh ,. They doubted no
re cf the truth of this intellignce, than the
i h1n.i done of that which he received, and fell
blindly into the snare. The letter came to their
nds, juit as one of their number was going to
otir the pulpit. They resolved tha: he should Deem. 7.
taint the people of tlheir dnger; and he paint-
it, with all the strong culours, which men natu-
! employ, in describing any dreadful and instant
lni.';, Whln the fernon was over, he desired
enol bs and entlemen to aflemble in the Little

h:'-h nzt'cirs vcre ndc'il ioufy aggravated by persons,
ii.i . .'l1 part.' to pui I 'u violen measure: ; neither of

c

:l' it; ticrr ceiii ute cf oundatirn. As their

:i'.; :. .':rc .r!';:c:OK to be in dlangeir, some of the more zea-
ctr.:.rn- h.d dlrtcrn!led to defend them, by force of arms.
.h M-rn. z. -;o. Hunt!-i ' ::d been privately in Edinburgh,
c¢,,' ;,i :. interviciv, ii' no: with the King, at lealt with
f ..:
! .i. er-s. Jrciih. bi. 23o0.

Church.

B o o : Church. The whole multitude, terrified at i
VIII. they had heard, crowded thither; they promi
>'~v" a and vowed :o stand by the Church; they drewi

a petition to the King, craving the redre;s cf;
grievances, of which the Clergy complained,
beseeching hi. to deliver them from all futurei
prehensions of danger, by removing such of'
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies ofi
Proteflant religion. Two Peers, two Gntdene
two Burgesses, and two Miniflers, were appoirn

The King to present it. The King happened to be in i
can5er. great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of

sion was fitting. 'I he manner in which the petit.
was delivered, as well as its contents, offendedi
He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners inie
with warmth; and a promiscuous multitude prer
into the room, James retired abruptly into roa
apartment, and commanded the gates to be fliuth
hind him. The deputies returned to the mukiiu
wmo were still afrembled, and to whom a minil
had been reading, in their ablence, the froryo Hs
man. \;hen they reported that the King hads
rufed to liflen to their petitions, the Church!
filled in a moment with noifc, t'rearning, exal
tions, and al the outrage and confi;fion of a ps
tumult. Some called for thei- arms, some tob:
out the wicked Hlaman; ethers cried, the fwcd
the Lord and of Gideon; and rufiing out with,
rmoft firious impetuosity, surrounded theTolbol.
threatening the King himself, and demanding fonti
his Counsellors whom they named, that they mrni
tear them in pieces. The magifitrates of the city, p
]v by authority, parly by force, endeavouredtoq't

!

tuimult; theKing attempted to sooth the malecon- B o o K
, by promising to receive their petitions, when VIII.
*clcd in a regular manner; the Ministers, fen- "ó
of their own rafllnefs in kindling such a flame, 596
0.ded boih; and the rage of the populace, Ifb-
in as ifuddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed,
tile King returned to the palace; happy in hav-
cl'caped from an infurreEtion, which, though the
.antaneous and unconcerted effet of popular fury,

xd xpolcid his life to imminent danger, and was

rfi.cred by him as an unpardonable affront to
a auzhority *.

As Coon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon-
ts ahmbled, in order to prepare their petition.
e punifllhent of the Popilh Lords; the removal
thoe Counsellors, who were fufpeaed of favour-
ti;-ir persons or opinions ; the repeal of all the
dts of council, subversive of the authority of
Church ; together with an a approving the
occecings of the flanding council were the chief
t;eir cdmands. But the King's indignation was
i i hgh, tlhat the d,-puties, chosen for that pur-

di', di nut venture, that night, to present re-

!fts \vi.ch could not fail of kindling his rage a-
. Boie next morning, James, with all his

,!2ants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session, He leaves

other courts of justice, were required to leave a Edinburgh,

\i . r- -i .1 *i i and pro-

y, where it was no longer confilient either with their eeds with
%r, or their dignity to remain; and the noblemen fevei'y a-

gainft the

ibarons were commanded to return to their own citizens,
r" o; 17, &c. Cald. . 54, &c. Birch. Merm. z. 23 .

I Ihoufes,

B o o K houres, and not to reafifmble without the Ki,
VIII. permission. The vigour, with which the kingr

"6 ed, struck a damp upon the spirits of his ave.
1596.

ries. The citizens, sensible how much they wa
susser by his abfince, and the removal of the cc=
ofjuftice, repented already of their condcut.
Mini'ers alone resolved to maintain the cr
They endeavoured to pr-event the nobles fron,
perfing; they in'lamed the people by violent i;r
tives against the King; they laboured to prm
subscriptions to an association for their mutal
fence; and conicious what luiire and powtr
juncticn of crnme of the greater nobles would ad
their cause, the osini:ltrs of Edinburgh wrot
Lord Hamilton, that the peoFle, moved by
word cf Gcd, and provoked by the injuries co
to the Chu:ch, had taken arms; that many of
nobles had determined to protect the Proteftanil
ligicn. whic'n owed its ert;lol.rnment to the
and valour of their alncc o; .

; they wantd

lv a leader to unite them; ;.nd to iirile themi
vis'our; thAt his zll tor ithe ood caule, noi
than his nol1e br'.':, cn;ittcd him to that hona
Ti;ey conjured liim therefore not to d ifappoint
hopes and witrhe, .or to r,.:;,^ e fth fs ring CL
that aid, wE:I f.: c n. h ieeded. Lord
milton, in;,,ead o con,,pling ith their desire,
r:eI tl letterC dic:-c'.ly ro the King, whom thisr
inrl:k irri:ated to f:ch a egree, that he commarl
th miria-e c. - diib ,ourh infansy to feizeb
Mini'.iter, as mani:eft incendiaries, and encoura
o: rebeiion. 'i'h mai'tratcs, in order to re,
the i,ng s f--:. .;'r; \t.e. presaring to obey; i

4

,i;iif!uers, who saw no other hope of safety, fled B o o K
,rs England . VIII.

I597.

-lSi unfLuccefsful infurreclion, in fead of overturn- The King
efablifhed the King's authority. Those con- humblesthe

-

power of

ed in it were confounded and dispersed. And the Church.
relt of his subjects, in order to avoid suspicion, Jan. ;
togain his favour, contended who should be most
ard to execute his vengeance. A Convention
ieates being called, pronounced the late infur-
ion to be high treason; ordained every Minifler
iiblcribe a declaration of his fubmifion to the
:g'sjurifd!iion, in all matters civil and crimi-
; imowered magistrates to commit, instantly,
iicn an.y Minifrer, vho in hi; frn-rons, hould
er ny indcccnt reflections on tie King's conduct;
)hibircd any Ecclefiaflical judicatory to meet,

hcit the King's licence; commanded that no

:cn f;;ull be -:lc -c a magilhlare of Edinburgh,
;hc f~:'ire, withlout the King's ajpp)obation ; and

,i the mtan timie, the prclit magistrates
id l(i;' r di!cover, and inilict condign punish-
ntC a the authors of the l;':e tumult, or the city
Its li(,id be fubjled to all the penalties of that
abnaole ation -.

ARMED w ith the authority of thefc decrees, James Abridges
dVed to crush entirely the nmutinous spirit of his the privi-

Icges of the

,ats. As the Clergy had, hitherto, derived citizens of
irchief crecit and strength from the favour andEdinburh'
tef the citizens of Edinburgh, his fri care was
Srtrf. ;li. Cald. 5. t. Cal;]. 5 147.

to

B o o K to humble them. Though the magistrates subi.
VIII. ted to him in the most abjec terms; thoughth
tv- vindicated themselves, and their fellow citize
1597. from the most distant intention of violating his

al person or authority; though, after the ftri&d
scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix onth
the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had beend
covered; though many of the nobles, and such
the clergy as still retained any degree of favour,
terceded in t.ir behalf; neither acknowledgmec
nor intercessions. were of the least avail*. T
King coninued inexorable, the city was declared
have so; feited its privileges as a corporation, and
be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capl
of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, defe
by its ministers, abandoned by the courts of jus
and proscribed by the king, remained in defola
and despair. The courtiers even threatened to r
the city to the foundation, and to ereft a pil
where it food, as an everlasting monument of
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitas
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who ia
posed in their favour, and moved by the contirk
,.:-.z:. follicitations of the nobles, James absolved the

tizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fa
time, he flrpped them of their most importantP
vilees ; they were neither allowed to ele th
own magistrates, nor their own Ministers; man
new burdens were impof-d on them and a gre
itmr of money was exacted by way of peace of0
ingt.

B Cal7 . 5. 1.^9. ARow 3, 4 4.

J.:e.S was, mean while, equally aiduous, and B o o K

'l:s fuccefsfil, in circumscribing the jurifdicEion VIII.

the Church. Experience had discovered that to"-
tempt this, by acts of parliament, and sentences Newr97-
priy council, was both ineffctual, and odious. lationwih

regard to

had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful,e church.
d better calculated for obtaining his end. The
clefiaflical judicatories were composed of many
embers; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
ir,.'igent, and unprovided of legal stipends; the
Inllers in the neighboui hod of Edinburgh, not-
!thftanding the parity established by the Prefbyte-
a government, had assumed a leading in the
urch, which filled their brethren with envy;
ery numerous body of men is susceptible of fud-
nand frong imprefons, and liable to be influ-
ced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these
nfideraions, James thought it possible to gain the
ergy, whom he had in vain attempted to subdue.
cper agents were set to work all over the king-

;nm; promiles, flattery, and threats were employ-
; the usurpations of the brethren near the capital

c aggravated ; the jealousy of their power, which
srowing in the iftant provinces, was augment-
; an( two different General A Tembiies were held,
both whvlich, notvithftanding the zeal and bold-
s, whrrewith a few leading Clergmen defended
privileges of the Church, a majority declared in
cur of thole measures, which were agreeable to
Klig. iny prac.iccs, which had continued
cte Re cformation, were condemned; many
int of ifcpline, which had hitherto been reckon-

ed

B o o Ked sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; t',

VIII. licence, with which nminiiter dil:ourfcd of politi:l
,..-- matters, was restrained; the freedom, with vica;

D7
9 they inveighed againf pa ticularperfons,cenfurcd; ea.

tences of nummary excolm:nnicatin declared unlaw.
ful; the co:;vo'.i;,g a Gcn-ral Aiftimbly, without h
King's perim ion, prohbited ; and the right ofno.
rminating miniiiers, to the princ:pal towns, vefedi
rhe Cro;wn. Thus, the Cirgy themlcves lurrenderi
privileges, v.':ih it :ould have been dangerous 0
invade, and voluntailv iubmitted to a yoke, rnos
inrtlerable than any- ames would have ventured l
imnoif by fb-c; v.hi!e thnoe who continued too
po: his n.eafl-es, in'eaod of their former pon-
topic of te K: i:gs violent encroa:chments or aj.
rifni-:ion v,'i-c;h i not belong to him, werecb
lis-ed to turn their outcries againit the corrup;io0
of their owv.n order .

BY the a;;thority of thfe alFTmbl'es, the Pop'
J-cs pI` Earls were a.'.ued to make a public recantation f

their errors ; w-vere aolved from the sentence oex
comn;unic-- 'on; and recived into the bofomofti:
Church. B:, not many years after, they relhp
into tr-. former errors, were again reconciledt
the church o Rome, and by their apoftacy jufti.Sd
in some degree, the fears and Fcrupes of the Cleg
with regard to their absolution.

THn Minihiers of Fdinburgh owed to th. init
cefon of these afiTcmbi-s, the liberty of returnip

Spo:fi'. 433. Cal. . 1 29, 233.

their charges in the city. But this liberty was B o o K
logedl in such a manner as greatly abridged their VIII.
Wver, The city was divided into distinct parishes ;
he number of Ministers doubled ; persons on whose
delity the King could rely were fixed in the new
rifhes; and there circumstances, added to the au-
ority of the late decrees of the Church, contri-
ted to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefi-
tical affairs, which James possessed during the re-
inder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the
hurch, that the other tranfaUtions of this period
rcedeferve to be remembered. The Octavians,
ied by the other courtiers, and splitting into sac-
ns among themselves, reEgned their commifflon;
dthe administration of the revenue returning into
former channel, both the King and the nation
redeprived of the benefit of their regular and
gal cconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was Dec. 19.
d in order to restore Huntly, and his afociates,
their eflates and honours, by repealing the aft of
einre passed against them. The authority of
supreme court was likewise imployed to intro-
cea farther innovation into the Church ; but con-
mable to the sysem which the king had now
oped, the motion for this urpofe took its rife relclrfed t
pm the Clergy themselves. As the ac of general a fear in
exation, and that eftabliffing the Presbyterian parliamen.
'ernment had reduced the few Bishops, who still
rvived, to poverty and contempt; as those who

R pof-

B o o . pofle7ed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere lay
VIII. men, and many of them temporal Peers, fewo

none of the Ecclefiaf.ical order remained to votei
parliament, and by means of that, the influenceo
the Crown was corfiderably diminished there, a:
a proper balance to the power and number oft
nobles was wanting. But the prejudices, the nata
had conceived again2f the name and character
Bilhops, were so violent, that James was oblige
with the utmo2i care, o avoid the appearance ofl
design to revive that order. He prevailed therefor
on te commifilon appointed by lar Assembly
complain to the parliament, that the Churchr
the only body in the kingdom destitute of its re
lentatives in that lupreme court, where it o nearj
concerned every order to have some, who were bou
to defend its rights; and to crave that a compe
nurmb.r of the Clergy should be admitted, acco
inS to ancient culorn, to a feat there. In coap
ance with their requet, an act was paiTed, by wri
those Miniflers, on whom the King should ca
the vacant Bilhopricks and Abbeys, were in:i
to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy oi
conceive no jealousy of any encroachment on th
privileges, it was remitted to the General Affemb
to determine vwhat spiritual ju-ifditlion or autho
in the government of the Church these perio
f:ould posses*.

THE King, how'ever, found it no easy matr

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesiastical juii
tories, in which the act of parliament met iwi

fo:fIv. 4;-. .Parl. I;th Jac, VI. c. 23;.

erce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived B o o K
r much lustre this new privilege would reflec VIII.
pon their order ; though they were not insensible /
f the great acceflon of personal power and dig- 59
;y, which many of them would acquire, by be-

admnitted into the supreme council of the nation,
dci abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and
that, they sacrificed every consideration of inter-
or ambition. All the King's profefons of re-
ird for the present conrfitution of the Church did
tconvince them of his fincerty; all the devices
i could be invented for relraining and circum-
ribing the jurisdiction of tofe, who were to be
:iC(d to this new honour, did not diminish their
)ao!fy and fear. Their own experience had taught
en, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy
anccs, and tholgh tadmitted at first with mode-
te autority, and under specious pretences, .how
idly it extends its dominion. Varnish over
is clicme, said one of the leadings Clergymen,
th what colours you please; deck the intruder
ibthe utriit f art; under all this disguise, I fee

o:nps of his mitre." The fame sentiments pre-
lei: among many of his bethren, and induced
n to rcject power, and honours, vith as much
, as ever those of their order courted them.
ny, however, were allured by the hopes of pre-
rciit; th:e King himself and his Ministers em-
ied the lime rrts, which they had tried so fc-
fiii!y lI!fl ear; and after long debates, and 'Mc 7-
Ci ouppofition, the General Afiembly declared
1 it was lawful for Miniie:'s to accept of a feat
lr;i meir l; that it woiul be highly beneficial to

R .2 the

B o o K the Church, to have its representatives in that f.
VIII. preme court; and that fifty one persons, a nurn
1.v nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, whow
59' anciently called to parliament, should be chol

from among the Clergy for that purpose. Th
manner of their eleetion, together with the powsv
to be vetied in them, were left undecided for
prefinr, and furnilhed matter of future delibem
tion .

As the prospect of succeeding to the Crown

i QQ.
arne' en. Engilnd drew nearer, James multiplied precauti
deavours in order to render it certain. As he was allied
with fuc-
cess to DEin many of the Princes of Germany by his marria
anrjd'." he font ambassadors extraordinary to their feve

courts, in order to explain the justness of histi
to the English throne, and to desire their aflifan
if any competitor should arise to dispute his
doubted rights. These Princes readily ackn
lodged the equity of his claim; but the aid
could afford him was distant and feeble. At
fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of Kinlofs,
ambafiador at the English court, follicired Eli
zabeth, with the utmost warmth, to recognize
title by ome public deed, and to deliver her
subjects from the calamities, which are occafi
by an uncertain or disputed succession. But
had strengthened all the passions, which had,
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this greatq.
tion obscure, and undecided; and a general
evasive answer was all that James could obtain.
no imprefnon could be made on the Queen, the

Spots. o40. Cald, 5. 278.

bai

afador was commanded to found the dpofition B o o K
t her fubjets, and to try what progress he could VIII.
ake in gaining them. Bruce possessed all the ta-
nts of secrecy, judgment, and address, requiite 1599
rconduting a negociation, no less delicate, than
mportant. A Minister of this character was inti-
ed to the confidence of the Englifl. Many of
hehigheft rank unboforned themselves to him with-
t refervc, and gave him repeated assurances of
eir resolution to assert his master's right, in oppo-
tion to every pretender *. And as several pamph-
tswere dispersed, at this time in England, con-
ining objetions to his title, James employed some
rned men in his kingdom to answer these cavil-
rs, and to explain the advantages which would
fult to both kingdoms, by the union of the
rowns. These books were eagerly read, and con-
ibuted not a little to reconcile the English to that
ent. A book published this year, by the King
rmfcif, produced an effet still more favourable.
was intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained pre-
pa concerning the art of government, addrefed
Prince Henry his son. Notwithstanding the
eat alterations and refinements in national tate
cethat time, we must allow this to be no con-
ptible performance, and not to be inferior to the
rksof molt cotemporary writers, either in pu-
yof style or justness of composition. Even the
in parade of erudition with which it abounds,
d which now disgusts us, railed the admiration of
atage; and as it was filled with rhofe general
es, which speculative authors deliver for render-

t Johnflt, 4z.

R 3 ing

B o o K ing a nation happy, and of which James could dif.

VIII. course with great plaufibilitv, though often incapa.
bc~~ ble of putting them in ptaetice; the English con.

"9.' 9ceived an high opinion of his abilities, and exped.i

an increase of national honour and prosperity, under
a Prince so profoundly ikiilcd in politics, and wh
gave such a fecimen both of his wisdom, and o
his love to his people .

THE Queen of England's sentiments concern

James, were very different from there of her b
ects. His exceflive indulgence towards the PopiQ
Lords; the facility with which he pardoned tht
repeated trea!bns; his restoring Beaton, the Popil
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of cot
land at the time of the Reformation, to the poffd
flon of the temporalities of that enefice; thea
pointing him his AmbaliTdor at the court of Franct
the applause he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doro
on thoe v.:ho adhered to the Queen his moth
Elizabeth confidered as so many indications oi
mind alienatel from the proteflant religion; 2
fufpciled, that he would feon revolt from the pr
A--::'r feion of it. These fuipicions eemed to be fu

::,-,si confirmel, by a dilcoverv swhich came from t

:: Mlafier of Gray, who reflded at that time in Itai

and who, rather than ;i-ffer his intriguing fpirir
be idle, demeaned himfrre so far as to at asa
for the Englil court. He conveyed to ElizaO
the copy of a letter, written by James to PopeC!
ment VIII. in which t;e King, after many expE
sions of regard for that pontiff, and of gratit

t Card. Sctf. 7.

or his favours, declared his firm rerolution to treat B o o K
heRoman Catholics with indulgence; and, in or- VIII.
rto render the intercourse between the court of ~'
ome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he 1599.
;licited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop
ifVaizon, a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardi-
nal . Elizabeth, who had received, by another
ihnnel -, some imperfect intelligence of this cor-
fon.ence, was filled vwith just furprize, and i-
editely despatched Bo:v.es into Scotland, to in-
ire more fully into the truth of the matter, and
reproach James for an ation so unbecoming a
rotetant prince. -1e was no less astonished at the
ufation, and vwith a confidence, which nothing.
t the confciouliefs of innocence cnld inspire, as
med the vh'lole to be a mere calumny, and the
tter itlerl to be forged by his enemies, on purpofs
bring his sincerity in Religion to be iufpeted.
lphingfon the Secretary of flare denied the mat-
with equal solemnity. It came to be known b'
very singular accident, which happened ionm
arsafter, that the information which Flizabth
d receied was well founded, tlough at tle time
nethe King's declarations of his own innocence
re perfeetly confillent wirh truth. Cardinal Bel-
mine, in a reply which he published to a contro-
nial treatile, of which the king was the author,

:udi him of having abandoned the favourable
tiients which he had once entertained of the
man Catholic religion, and as a proof of this
moed his letter to Clement VII. It was impolfi-

any longer-, to believe this to be a fiftion ; and
(.1 ^3. tf Win.'. Mem. vol. . , 52.

R 4 it

B o o K it was a matter too delicate to be passcd over with.
VIII. out strict inquiry. James immediately examine
~-'"v" Elphingfton, and his confeflion unravelled the whol
1.99- mystery. He acknowledged that he had fhuledin

this letter among other papers, which he laid before
the King to be signed, who, fufpeting no fuchde.
ceit, ubfcribed it together with the reft, and with.
out knowing what it contained; that he had no
other motive, however, to this ac&ion, but zealfa
his majesty's ervice; and, by flattering the Roman
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's
government, he imagined that he was paving ts
way for his more easy accession to the English thron
The Privy Council of England entertained very di
ferent sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. I
their opinion, not only the King's reputation hl
been exposed to reproach, but his life to dange
by this rash impoflure ; they even imputed the gu
powder treafbn to the rage and difappointmentd
the Papifis, upon finding that the hopes which thi
letter inspired were fiuftrated. The Secretary 'l
sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried for higl
treason. His peers found him guilty; but, byti
Qucen's interceflion, he obtained a pardon .

ACCORDING to the account of other hiforiar

James himself was no stranger to this correspond
ence with the Pope ; and, if we believe them, El
phingfton being intimidated by the threats of t
English council, and deceived by the artifices
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed ome circumftanc
in his narrative of this tranfa6tion, and falfin

4 Spot. 456, 507. Johnfl448. oth

orhe: i

es; and, at the expence of his own fame, and B o o K
h the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a V1Ii.
lover this part of his master's conduct *. ."
BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter James at

, ,-

- i_ g

-rT. « reat pains

the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's gto ain the
rmand, it is certain, that, about this time, James Roman
at the utmost pains to gain the friendship of
Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precau-
n towards facilitating his accession to the English
one. Lord Home, who was himself a Papist,
sentrufted with a secret commiiflon to the Pope t;
Archbishop of Glalgow was an ative inftru-
nt with those of his own religion :. The Pope
preTed such favourable sentiments both of the
ng, and of his right to the Crown of England,
t James thought himself bound, ome years as-
,to acknowlcdge the obligation in a public man-
r§. Sir James Lindsay made great progress in
ning the Englilh Papists to acknowledge his Ma-
's title. Of all there intrigues Elizabeth re-
ved obscure hints, from different quarters. The
re imperfctly she knew, the more violently she
peced the King's designs; and the natural jea-
fy of her temper increaring with age, he obferv-
his conduEt with greater solicitude than ever.
THE questions with regard to the election and i6oo.

March 2g.

er of the representatives of the church, were His regula-
ally decided this year, by the General Assembly, OnSiZI
ich met at Montrose. That place was chofn, thechurch.

Cald. vol. v. 322. Vi. 147. t Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57.
'ald. vol. vi. 147, § Ibid. vol. v. 604.

as

B o o Kas most convenient for the ministers of the nort
VIII. among whom the King's influence chiefly lay. A

although great numbers retorted from the north
i6oo.

provinces, and the King emptoyed his whole in
reft, and the authority of his own presence, to
a majority, the following regulations were with
ficulty agreed on. That the General Afirembly
recommend fix persons to every vacant benet
which gave a title to a feat in Parliament, out
whom the King hall nominate one; that the
son so elected, after obtaining his feat in parliarne
hall neither propose, nor content to any thingthe
that may affect the interest of the church, wit
special instruction3 to that purpose ; that he
be answerable for his conduEt to every GeneralA
i4mbly and ibmit to its cenfurc, without ap
upon pain of infamy and excommunication;
he shall discharge the duties of a Paflor, in apa
cular congregation; that he shall not ulirp any
clefiaftical jurif.iricn, superior to that of his ot
brethren; that if the church inflic on him ther
sure of deprivation, he shall, thcreby, forfeit hiss
in Parliament; that he shall annually resign
commiiion to the General Afiernby,which mayhb
fiored to him,or not,as the Afembly, with theKi
approbarion, hall judge most expedient for
good of the Church'. Nothing could be na
repugnant to the idea of 'pifcopal governme
than these regulations. It was not in confeque
of rights derived from their office, but of pow
conferred by a commifion, that ecclesiastical
sons were to be admitted to a feat in Parliarien

Sptfi. 45-, 4;7. Cald. vol. v. 36S.

were the representatives, not the superiors of B o o K
clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, VIII.
their civil jurifdicion was temporary. James, 6oo.
ever, flattered himself that they would soon be
to hake off thee fetters, and gradually ac-
re all the privileges which belonged to the epif-

order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing.
he contended for, and they opposed the nomi-
on of these commissioners, not so much on ac-
nt of the powers then velted in them, as of those,
hich it was believed they would soon attain '.

, RIxG this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an Cowvry's
fual tranquillity. The clergy, after many firug- coiracy.
nere brought under great fubjetion; the Popish
s wtre refored to their estates and honours, by
authority of Parliament, and with the conent
the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace
ong themselves, and obedient to the royal au-
it,'; when, in the midfr of this fecuriiv, the
's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by
r:fpiracy altogether unexpe'led, and almnoft in-
lcable. The authors of it were John Ruthven
rl cf Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
:. Nature had adorned both these young men,
!cally the elder brother, with many accomplish-
rs, to which education had added its most cle-
t improvements. More learned, than is usual
ong perbns of tleir rank ; more religious, than
crOmon at their age of life; generous, brave,
!pular; their countrymen, far from thinking them

Spotfw. 4 5

capa-

B o capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the n,
VIII. sanguine hopes of their early virtues Notwit
' ' ftianding all thee noble qualities, some unknoi
I6oo.

motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if~
adhere to the account commonly received, mu
be transmitted to polterity, as one of the mo
wicked, as well as one of the worst concerted,
which hirrory makes any mention.

Os the fifth of August, as the King, who rc

fided during the hunting leafon in his Palace
Falkland, was going out to his sport early ini
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ru4
ven, who with an air of great importance, told
King, that the evening before he had met ant
known man, of a furpicious aspect, walking ala
in a by path, near his brother's house at Perth; a
on searching him, had found, under his cloak,
pot filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold;
he had immediately seized both him and hism
sure, and without communicating the matter toa
perlon, had kept him confined and bound in a f
tary house; and that he thought it his duty to
part such a singular event, first of all to his
iefty. James immediately fufpeEted this unkn
person to be a trafficking priest, supplied with
reign coin, in order to excite new commotions
the kingdom ; and resolved to impower the Ma
ftrates of Perth to call the person before them, a
inquire into all the circumstances of the story. Ru
ven violently opposed this resolution, and with ma
arguments urged the King to ride direAly to Per
and to examine the matter with his own eyes. M

Wfl

he the chace began; and James, notwithftand-B o o K
ghis passion for that amusement, could not help VIII.
ininatng on the strangeness of the tale, and on ó.
rthven's importunity. At lafr, he called him,
promised when the sport was over, to let out
rPerth. The chace, however, continued long;
d Ruthven, who all the while kept close by the

, was frill calling on him to make haste. At
death of the Buck, he would not allow James
flay till a fresh horse was brought him; and ob-
rving the Duke of Lennox and the Earl of Mar
paring to accompany the King, he entreated him
countermand them. This James refused; and
iugh Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well
the apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour,
id ome Lifpicions in his mind; yet his own cu-
fity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
m to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
etown, Ruthven rode forward to inform his bro-
rof the King's arrival, though he had already
patched two mefengers for that purpose. At a
e distance from the town, the Earl attended by
rvel of the citizens, met the King, who had
ltlyrenty persons in his train. No preparations
eremade for the King's entertainment; the Earl
peared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no
ins to attone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for
bad fare with which he treated his guests. When
King's repast was over, his attendants were led
irle in another room, and he being left almost
one, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
= to go to the chamber where the unknown
rlo was kept. James commanded him to bring

Sir

B o o K Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, inke
VIII. of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow: ai
',, conducting the King up a stair-case, and tne

through several apartments, the doors of which
locked behind him, led him at last into a
fiudy, in which there flood a man clad in armou
and with a sword and dagger by his fide.
King, who expected to have found one difar
and bound, started at the fight, and enquired if
was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagn
from the girdle of the man in armour, and holdin
it to the King's breast, " Remember, said he, h
" unjuly my father suffered by your command
"you are now my prisoner; submit to my difpo
" without refitfance, or outcry; or this dai

shall initantly avenge his blood." James exs

tulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered
The man, whom he found in the study, stood,
the while, trembling, anJ dismayed, without ecu
rage either to aid the King, or to econd hisa
grefior. Ruthven protested that if the King ri
no outcry, his life should be lae ; and moved
some unknown reason, retired in order to call
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care
the King, vhom he bound by oath, not to m
any noi!e during his absence.

WHi LE the King was in this dangerous fituatio

h;.s attendants growing impatient to know whit
he had retired, one of Gowry's attendants enter
the room hastily, and told them that the Kingh
iuft rode away towards Falkland. All of the
ruited out into the street; and the Earl, in the

Io

hoi hury, called for their horses. But, by this B o o
e, his brother had returned to the King, and VIII.
erin"g th:.t now there was no relledy he be- r6o.
ecl to die ofiCred to bind his hands. Unarmed
Jamecs was, he scorned to lubmit to that indig-
; ard closing with the affaliin, a fierce ftrug.
eenlued. 1 he man in armour ltood as formerly,
azed and motionless ; and the KingdraggingRuth-
[on;o.ards awindow, which duringhis abfencehehad
irl'ded the perbn with whom he was left, to open,
ied, wit a wild and afi-righted voice, ' T'reason
realbon! -]ep! I am murdered !" His atendants
rard,and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a
n.i which grasped the lKing's neck with violence.
he vfiewwith precipitation to his alliifance. Lennox
i:ar, with the greater number, ran up the pri-n-
p! rIair cale, where they found all the doors shut,
lich hey b.ittered with the utmofl- fury, endea-
ri.g to burst them open. But Sir John Ramsey,
liei i by a back-fRair, which led to the apartment
i the King was, found the door open; and

o.o, n

upon lRutChven, who was ftll ftrulggling with

'i'r, struck him twice with his dagger, and
rit him towards the flair-cale, where Sir Thomas
rli;i; and ir Hugh Herreis met, and killed him;
c .in with his lafI breath, " Alas! I am not to
- . for this action " During this cufLie, the man,
(i0iad been concealed in the study, escapcd un-
Ii'C!e. Togetiher with Ramsey, Erikine, and
Frris, one Wilton a footman entered the room
Cr te King was, and before they had time to
t't.e door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword
^lah hand, followed by leven of his attendants

v.^l

B o o K well armed, and with a loud voice threatened t~
VIII. all with instant death. They immediately thr
6"'"'the King into the little study, and shutting thedo
16oo.

upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwithftandit
the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramfeypiera
Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down de
without uttering a word; his followers having
ceived several wounds, immediately fled. Three
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the
fict. A dreadful noise continued still at theoppo
door, where many persons laboured in vain to si
a passage; and the King being assured that theyt
Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it wasope
on the inside. They ran to the King, whom
unexpetedly found fare, with transports of con
tulation; and he, falling on his knees, with all
attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, ho
ever, was not yet over. The inhabitants of
town, whose Provost Gowrie was, and by whom
was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded
house, threatening revenge, with many insolent
opprobrious speeches against the King. James
deavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
ing to them from the window; he admitted
magistrates into the house; related to them
whole circumstances of the fa& ; and their fury
iding by degrees, they dispersed. On fearc
the Earl's pockets for papers, that might disco
his designs and accomplices, nothing was found
a small parchment bag, full of magical charaS
and words of enchantment; and if we may bel

5

le account of tle conspiracy publiflhed by the King, B o o
while these were about him, the wound of which ViII.
he died, bled not; but as soon as they were ta- x'iQ
ken away, the blood gushed out in great abun-
dance." After all the dangerous adventures of
is bury day, the King returned in the evening to
alkand, having committed the dead bodies of the
obrothers to the cufRody of the Magistrates of

NOTWITrHSTANDING the minute detail which the Thlemciv:
ig gave of all the circumfitances of this confpi- f t" c'G '
y againit his life, the motives which induced the not eai;iy
obrothers to attempt an action so detestable, the ex
d they had in view, and the accomplices, on
ofeaid they depended, were altogether unknown.

words of Ruthven to the King gave ome
nds to think, that the desire of revenging their
her's death had instigated them to this attempt.
t, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it
gce probable that they could impute them to
King, whose youth and fbje&ion, at that
e, to the violence of a fadtion, exempted him
being the object of resentment, on account of
ons which were not done by his command.
es had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs
h the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil-
; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour,
owledged it with the warmest exprefflons of
ude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
ited of alfifting him in this assault on the king's
nts, were executed at Perth; but they could
n) light into the motives, which had prompt-
o0. II. S ed

B o o ed their mater to an aion so repugnant to tis
VIII. acknowledgments. Diligent search was made

the person concealed in the study, and from hi
great discoveries were expected. But Andrew Hen
derfon the Earl's steward, who upon a promise
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, wasl
much a stranger to his master's design as there
and tho' placed in the study by Gowrie's comma
he did not even know for what end that station
been affirned him. The whole tranfacion rem
ed as impenetrably dark as ever; and the twobr
thers, it was concluded, had concerted theirfc'
without either confident or accomplice, with U
ampled secrecy as well as wickedness.
<;-.,.,T AN accident, no less strange than the other

eIr:Cf-ov\r- cumftances of the story, and which happened
i:. i years ater, discovered that this opinion, how

plausible, was ill founded; and that the two
thers had not carried on their machinations all a
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among
veral persons that he knew ome secrets rel2tn
Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered
to be seized. His confession was partly v0luC
and partly forced from him by torture. Aco
to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentlenm
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals,
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accom
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, hadfre
interviews with him, in order to concert thep
their operations; the Earl had corresponded
him to the fame purpose; and one Bour, Le

oniicienr, was trusted with the secret, and carried B o o K
e lerters between them. Both Logan and Bour VIII.
,ere now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had "ó"
ead letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, on
.t occasion; and in confirmation of his telimo-
, fcral of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fa-
I to himsel had prompted Sprot to fieal from
n;ong Bour's papers, were produced *' These
erc compared, by the privy council, with pa-
rs or Logan's hand writing, and the refem-
lnce was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit,
nd well qualified to judge of the matter, examined
t.mn, and wore to their authenticity. Death itself
i! not exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones
rei dug up, and tried for High Treason, and by

e, equally odious and il'egal -, h s lards

ere

'Logar.' letters were five in number. One to our, another
Gosrie, aiid three of them without any dire-tion; nor could
: C:i!'rce:' the name of the perlon to whom they wvere writ-
L.uiii gives him the appcllation of Rih oIu:wab'e.
,.: ;;(;rl is, iowevclr, and front oher w.ords in the let-
, :,.,. 9j. that there vcre Ievcral persons privy to the con-
:' The ditc of the sirs letter is July isth. Mr. Ruth-
.i,.comn;uicaited the matter to Logan only five days be-
e. ]id. It appears fiom the originaljummoas of Frau/ture
::.J l.oan' lIirs, that Bour, though he had letters ad-
d ;3 i.;.; with regard to a ccnfpiracy equally dangerous
nmepaortal, a\i; so illiterate that he could not read. " Ja-
obus Bour, literarurm prorfus ignarus, di&i Gcorgii opera in
elcna!s omniibus fcriutis ad eum miriis, vel pertinentibu-,
:.Lal." 'I'iiis i7 a together itrange and nothing but the
Ii h ,ilarter oi Logan can account for his chufing such

i t!. Romar. aviw, persons guilty of the crime of High-
t'-:. i;ht he ried even after death. Tli pracice was

S adopt-

B o o were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamoto

VIII. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for mifpriion
YNL . of trealon. He adhered to his confeifon to thelal
1600.

and having promised, on the scaffold, to give tht
Speaators a sign in confirmation of the truth

adopte b the Scots, without any limitation, Parl. 1;4c.
But tl,e unlimited exercise of this power was oon conceireda
be dangerous; and the ro n was laid under proper reftriica
by an act A D. ;54z. wxhich has never been printed. T
words of it ar-, " -And because the aid Lords (i. e. the Lor
of article,) think that the fai a (viz. in 154o) too ogner
and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore si
and ordains that the said at shall have no place in time COmi2
blt againlt the heirs of them that notoriously commits orh
commit lefe m-:efly againlt the King's person, against ther
fcr averting te fame, ard againfl them that shall happen to
tray the ing's ar-ny lienarly, and being notourly known ind
t!;ne; and the heirs of these persons to be called and jue
x\.thin si e years after the decease of the said persons commi
of the fil crin:.s; ar.d the said time being bypast, the
heirs ne: er to be purfied for the fame " The fentenceag
Logan violated thi, iarute in two particulars. He was not
tourl;.: knowin curing his life to be an accomplice in the
for w.ich he was tried ; and his heirs was cal'ed in qi
more than hve years after his death. It is remarkable, thai
ilature eens not to a'..e been attended to in the pariiz
which frifeirted Logan. Anclther singular circum iance defen
notice. As i: is a maxim of ju;ice that no person can be
An absence; and as lawyers ale :i.ways tenacious of theirfa
and often abfiurd in their devicts for preierving them, they
trived tha: in any proces nga'nst a dead person, his corp
Bones fiall be o.efl:ted at th - b-r. Examples of thisoccur
qaendy in the Scottish hiilto: After te battle of Coin
the dead body of the Earl _t' IHunt!y was peented in p
ment, before sentence ofy;s/a:/;,. ' was pronounced a
him. For the fame reafcn the bodies of Gowrie and his
ther were preserved, in order that they might be producd
parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with the fane
were dug up. Mackenz. Crim. Law. Book i. Tit. 6 ji

6

\lut he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, B o o K
fr he was thrown off the ladder by the execu- VIII.
oner -6o

1 60c.

It appears that Archbishop Spotfwood was prerent at the

rCCLtioI of Sprot. Cram. 15: and yet he seems to have given
creditto his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
im is remarkable, " Whether or not I hould mention the ar-
raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at
Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confefion, though volun-
tarvand conflant, carrying small probability. The man de-
po0ed, &c. It eemed to be a very fition, and a mere in-
vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he ihew the
letter, nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went
about the treason so secretly, would have communicated the
matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 508.
pstfiwod could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which
gan had been tried, and cf the proof brought of the authen-
cy of his letters. He himself was probably present in par-
asent at the trial. The ear! of Dunbar, of whom he always
aks ivith the highelf refpea, was the petfon who directed
pr:oefs against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against
truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithfanding all these circum-
r.es, is firprifing. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's advo-
e at thac time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington. repre-
tst he proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convinc-
g;and in an original letter of his to the King 21ft of June
6:9. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the manner in
ihcii te trial had been condu&ed, he thus goes on.

" hen the probation of the summons was referred to the
ds of Article's vcts, they found uniformly, all in one voice,
said summons to be so clearly proved, that they seemed to
itend who should be able most zealously to express the satis-
ion of his heart, not only by the most pithy words, but by
sofjoy; diverse of the belt rank confefiing, that that where-
they doubted at their entry into the house was now so ma-
fef, that they behoved to esteem them traitors, who ihould

longer refuse to declare their assured resolution of the truth
that treason."

S3 BUT

B o o r BuT though it be thus unexpectedly difcovere
v'Iii. tha: Gowrie did noi at without associates, little ad.
t'l dirional light is thrown, by this discovery, on th

6o.

n:o:ives and intention of his conduct. It apF e
aLmof incredible that two young men of such c:;
tinguisned virtue, should revolt all at once, irom
their duty, and attempt a crime so atrocious, as te
mrurder of their Sovereign. It appears fiil mni
imnrobable, that they fhnuld have concerted ti
undetaking w'ith so little foresight and prudnce,
Ir they intended that the deed should have remaln
ed concealed, they could not have chosen a o,
imrc'per scene for executing it than their own hoe
If they intended that Henderson fnDuld have fAi
the blow, they could not have pitched on am
-.ore def'itute cf the courage, that must diret
hand of an affain ; nor coull they expet thatb
uni acited, and unacquainced with their purpo
would venture on such a defierate action. If KiU
ypn rmeant to flab the king with his own hand, wI
'idl he n-it. '.v the dao-er after it was pointit
h s brci ' i-low could he leave the King, after i
a; lain declaration of his inten:ion ? Was it not p
-'o:erous to commi him to the keeping of ficn
timid and faife aociate, as Henderson ? For i
purpose did he wafRe time, in binding the hands of
unarmed mran, whnom he might easily have difpatcb
'w'hn !;is i-.vorc? Had Providence permitted tbh
t enmbrue their hands in the blood of their Sot
-ign2, v;'at advantage could have accrued to the
ty his death ? and what claims or pretenfi
cculd ;riey have opposed to the rights of his ci

5 dres

ie " ' Inevitable and instant vengeance, together B o o K
Ni[i perpetual infamy, were the only consequences VII.
ey could expe't to follow such a crime. 1'-

1600o

ON the other hand, it is impoflible to believe that
he King had formed any design againit the life of
e two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
ignation, by any crime; and were, in no degree,
he obljcts of his jealousy or hatred t ;nor was he of

a

It has been afterted, that, in consequence of the King's
fth, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
nlngland, as the tbn of Dorothca Stcwart daughter of .ord

idtr.ien by Margaret of England, who after her divorce from
'e Erl of Angus, tool: that nobleman for her third husband.
rre Hii. of his own timecs. But this assertion is ill founded.
t:p-ears, from undoubted evidence that Lord Methven had
! oni. chlild by Queen Margaret, vwhich died in its infancy,
rdirliothea Lady Ruthen was not the daughter of Qeen
:':.r't, bat of Janet Stewart Lord Mthven's second wife, a
i:h;:cr cfJohil Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though
G..> h;l.i rea!ly been descended from the blood royal of Eng-
l'. I'ie ing had at that time a on and a daughter; and be-
i.:.: :, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of
-L'.rx had a referable title to the Crown of England.

Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, im-

UptIs the death of the two brothers to a cause not mentioned by
! our Hl-iltorians, " Out of Scotland we hear that there
ir.o gand agreement, but rather an open diffidence betwixt the
r. ;..d his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery
onme affedion between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brotheri
j(hli was killed with him) was the truest cause and motive of
ta:tragedy." Winw. Meri. vol. . 274. Whether the follow-
ri ca:lages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that
s1:cion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22,
J60:, he mentions the return of Gowrie's tvo younger brothers
i Seotland, and adds, " The coming in of these two, and

S 4 the

B o o K a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for raih and de,

VIII. perate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
t,a in their own house, where they were furroundd
i6o0.

with many domestics, he only with a flenderand
unarmed train ; where they could call to their ait.
ance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotionoi
their family, while he was at a distance from all aid;
and leafi of all would he have chosen for hisafl
ciates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, ao
the Duke of Lcnnox, the former connected in cloi
friendship with the house of Gowrie, and thelat
married to one of the Earl's sifters.

A :Het- '¥rHJICIHSOEER of there opposite systems we em,
":' "r brace ; whether we impute the intention of murd
:--n'icnof ,o Gowrie, or to the King insuperable dificulti[

if- c'?i arise, and we are involved in darkness, myflery, an

contradictions. Perhaps the source of the wh
corfpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and
ceriving it from a more remote cause, we may dilc
ver it to be lefb criminal.

the Queen of Scots dealing ith them, and fending away a
furri.'hing rs. Beatrix [their filler] v.ith such information
Sir Thomas Er'.ine has given, hath bred great suspicion in
King of Scots that they come not in but upon omne danger
plot." In another letter, January , 1603. " T'he day
;rting my laa, Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by theL
Paifiv, and Mrs. rf.Angus, as one of their gentlewomen in
'the court in the evening, and flowed in a chamber prepared
her by the Queen's direction, hcrc the Queen had much tid
and conference with her. Of this the King got notice,
Ihe.;ed his dif.;ie thereof to the Queeo, gently reproving
for it, and examining quiet'y of the Queen's servants oftl
fame, and cf o:her matters thereunto belonging with such
cretion and feecrecy as recuires such a matter.

To keep the King of Scots in continual depen-B o o

, was one great objet of Elizabeth's policy. VIII.
order to this, he sometimes soothed him; and " ~
riemes bribed his Ministers and favourites; 6o
when she failed of attaining her end by these
ns, she encouraged the Clergy to render any ad-
nitration she distrusted unpopular, by decrying
or Itirred up some fation of the nobles to op-
e, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with
arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigues,
recourse to the ruder practice of rendering
mfelves matters of the King's person, that they
ht thereby obtain the diretions of his councils.
ofe nobles, who fcized the King at the Raid of
tven, were inftigared, and supported by her.
hwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her pro-
ion, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
necions which James had been forming of late
hthe Roman Catholic Princes, his secret nego-
tens in England with her fubjeAs, and the max-
by which he governed his own kingdom, all
trbuted to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
gnreat Revolution in Scotland to be approach-
and it was her interest to prevent it. The
of Gowrie was one of the most powerful of the
ttih nobles, and descended from ancestors warm-
ttached to the English interest. He had adopt-
tle fame yftem, and believed the welfare of his
atry to be inseparably connected with the fubfif-
c of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
ing his residence at Paris, he had contracted an
imate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the
ten's ambaflador there, and was recommended

by

B o o K by him to his Court, as a person of whomgr
VIII. uie might be made . Elizabeth received him,
' ' he palsed through England, with di(iingui

marks of refpeót and favour. From all thele
cumftances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan
the coa.iiracy against the King was formed at
time, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevs
ed in that age, and from the letters of Nichol:
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears no to
delficute of foundation. An English ship w;s
lerved hovering, for some time, in the mouth ofi
firth of Forth. The Earl's two younger broiL
fled into England, after the ill success of the coi
racy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And J
himself, though he prudently concealed ii,
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, howe
cf Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended tol
the King's person, but only to circumscribe hii
thority, and to thwart his schemes. His ifei
tie filreft safe-guard of her own, and refirained
'o-iifi pretenders to her Crown, and theirab;a
iro- d era:e attempts, to which thcir impa:i
anti bigotry might, otherwile, have urged the,
To ha.e encouraged Gowrie to murder his So
reign, would, on her part, have been an ac oi
utmnoft imprudence. Nor does this seem to have
the intention cr the two brothers. Mr. Ru:t
.-i: of .11, endeavoured to decoy the King to P
v.'ihout any ait-ndiants. When these proved
:;e. ous than was expected, the Earl employ
tra;;tn in order to leparate them from the

',.i:- . I I
.

cetendin; that he had rode away towards Falk- B o o K
Jr and by calling hastily for their horles, that VIII.
: might- fellow him. But fliutring ames up
oen while, in a distant corner of the house, and by 60o.
iepting to bind his hands, their design seems to
'e been rather to seize, than to aalffi nate him,
rd2 though Gowrie had not collected his followver,
as to ave been able to detain him long a prifo-
r,in tiat part of the kingdom, by open force,
r:ight soon have been conveyed aboard the Eng
i!ip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
':mg't [have been landed at F'alt-Caie, a house

Lecan's, in which, according to many obscure
; in his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi
or; wavs to e held. Amidit the furprize and ter-

, ino v;hich the King must have been thrown by
X vo:e.nc offered to him, it was extremely natu-
fir hlim to conclude that his life was fought. It

ete incerelt of all his followers to confirm him

.tis belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
ndo to the importance rnd merit of their own
vi s, And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-
' t;;e c-edulity and wonder, which the con-

oi'..:n of any great and tragical event, when

:!;' understood, is apt to inspire, augmented
'ncie transaction. On the other hand, the ex-
:agnce and improbability of the circumfPances
ich v.ere added, detra'ted from the credit of
:, which rally happened; and even furnilhecd
?^ras for calling in question the truth of the

1T HE

B o o by him to his Court, as a person of whom g
AVIII. ule might be made . Elizabeth received im,
~-v-~-l he paired through England, with difiingui'

marks of refpe&t and favour. From all theie
cumfrances, a suspicion may arise, that the plaa,
the co(,iracy against the King was formed at t
time, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prev
ed in that age, and from the letters of Nichol
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to
defitlute of foundation. An English ship wa.;
Ierved hovering, for ome time, in tile mouth o;,
firth of Forth. The Earl's two younger boi
fled into England, after the ill success of the coi
racy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And a
himself, though he prudently concealed it,
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, hower
c Elizabeth's intri;gues in Scotland tended to h
the King's person, but only to circumscribe his
thorit, and to thwart his schemes. His lie
t-ie iu.ieft safe-guard of her own, and restrained
I'o.ifi pretc-nders to her Crown, and theirabr;:
from dclCera. e attempts, to which their impa:ia
ar.d bigoiry might, orherwile, haveurgedtheai
To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his o
reign, would, on her part, have been an act of
urmo imprudence. Nor does this seem to have&
ti. in:ention of the two brothers. Mr. Ri.:

-r'i of al1, endeavoured to decoy the King to P
w.'ihout any attendants. When theie proved
::u.;ercus than was expected, the Earl employ
itra;.-z:n in order to ieparate them from the

.'i; ,.. I , >. ,

,c;tenring that lie had rode away towards Falk- B o o K
J, and by calling haffily for their horses, that VIII.

a migh t-fllow him. But fhutring James up,

ean while, in a diffant corner of the house, and by 00

perirn to bind his hands, their design seems to
'e!een rather to seize, than to affilinate him.
. :hough Gowrie had not collected his followers,
as to have been able to detain him long a prifo-
r, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
i:ght soon have been conveyed aboard the Eng-
;nip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
rS t ave been landed at l-a!ft-Calile, a house
Lcn's, in which, according to many obscure
n; in his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi
; wrs to e held. Amidst the firprize and ter-
r, ir:o which the King must have been thrown by
e vo:ence offered to him, it was extremely natu-
'ir lim to conclude that his life was fought. It
.se intcreRt of all his followers to confirm him
t.-is belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
ad: to the importance 'nd merit of their own

AI-s. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-

te c-edulity and wonder, which the con-

on of any great and tragical event, when
!:;i,' undertood, is apt to inspire, augmented
n oie n-tanfac'tion. On the other hand, the cx-
an^ce and improbability of the ciroumfances,
O: vc-re added, detrac'ed from the credit of

, '-ih.rh ralliy hnppened ; and even furnilc
-Cs for calling in question the truth of the
. cc nf'ir'cy.

I HE

B o O K THE account of what had happened at Pern
VIII. reached Edinburgh next morning. The pri
-"*' council commanded the Ministers of that city i

·..y e- ftantly to assemble their people; and after relatiin
b'::;:'- to them the circumtances of the conspiracy for

L'..-.d against the King's life, to return public thanks
" :=' God, for the protection which he had o vifiblv

forded him. But as the first accounts tranfmii
to Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and the circu
fiances of the confiracy were but imperfel
kno--n, and the paflions which it excited ftron
felt, were indiflinEt, exaggerated, and contradi
ry, the Ministers laid hold of this; and though tb
offered to give public thanks to God for the Ki
safety, they refused to enter into any detail of
ticulars, or to utter from the chair of truth,
appeared to be still dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to E

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people
the public cross, in which he recited all the circu
stances of the conspiracy ; though James hirnfelf,
their hearing, confirmed his account; though'
commanded a narrative of the whole tranfation
be published; the Ministers of that city, as well
many of their brethren, still continued incredulo
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gow
theirjealoury of every part of the King's condul
added to some false and many improbable circu
frances in the narrative, not only led them to
pect the whole, but gave their suspicions an air
credibiirut. But a: length, the King, partly

A,

mnents, partly by threats, prevailed on all of B o o K
Lm, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they VIII.
e convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He 60oo.
dld be brought no further than to declare, that
reverenced the King's account of the tranfa&ion,
tcotuldl not fay that he himself was persuaded of
etruth of it. The scruples cr obstinacy of a
le man would have been little regarded, but as
iefame firit of incredulity began to spread among
people, the example of one, in so high reputa-
n for integrity and abilities, was extremely dan-
ros. The King was at the utmost pains to con-
nce and to gain Bruce, but finding it impossible to
move his doubts, he deprived him of his bene-
e, and after repeated delays, and many attempts
ards a reconcilement, banished him the king-

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded Proceed-
any tcruples of this fort. The dead bodies of liament' a
two brothers were produced there, according to gaint the

confp:ra-

w; an indictment for High Treason was preferred tor.
aiift them; witneflIs wvere examined; and, by
unanimous sentence, their estates and honours
ere fofeited; the punifin-ent due to Traitors
as infiited on their dead bodies; and as if the pu-
ilment hitherto in use did not express sufficient de-
lation of their crimes, the parliament enacRed that
lurname of Ruthven should be abolished; and
order to preserve tle memory of the King's mi-
actlous escape, and to declare the sense which the

* Spotfw 61, &c. Caid. 5 389, &c;

nation

B o o K nation had of the divine goodness, to all future

VIII. appointed the fifrh of August to be observed, ani

ó"" aily, as a day of public thanksgiving *.
I 00. ' T

* A few ;: ee' .a.':r the dc.-h of the tw;o brothers, thei

¥F, D\ed a i:'..,,',: ,'> ; ' s?t o

s,:. ,r
L';i'a! ~,ric r.,:z

I:

. n'

-. 1 te ve.-r -i3. George Earl o Cromerti pi

ed an
r H '!or:ia l acon!-t of the co!:s piracy bvthe sil

Cowrie, a:.d i' :bert L.:-n of Re:lal.ig againt King

' i

\ ." ie :.tc:i; r.ct to have LC('n the accou;:;

:he i- r. hir'-.fr .h:-di .ri'en f ta- m.atter, an, borrosi'
.:i.c'c ..:.':'c:i F.. frortm S.cf:i.oo ', and other auhor;i
lhe h.s c ..tra. .n:n. ti:z t;:b!ic records the depositions of
:r:ne!cs prodi-ce bv the k;ing's Council, in orderto

po-d' :; -: .:'-' a2ai.t i the ts.o broti.r and Logan dieir

C.ite. tr.''C

i.' ;.O t,; c'ij our klnoiledge of ail t.e

r:i ci:rc::':n:.i~sj of t!i'. ccscir'Laca' i, derived. The e.:
.i,: :'.c. c:.::i;:, c wie .:-c'. expe to be authentic a2
c::.:e. .n ,. co?-lt c a fcr, fiill recent, publlshed by
au:a:'iC::', ..:.: t;e cr.:,a'ie: .c: ;oions or persons examimr!
prc.-nce cr ;de ihail,:li cour in the nation, ought to corg
cerz ce. c.:_ e ci'c-. a;inr.cd in li..orical relations, ar
e'cluce all remain :'in dob: r.an uncertainty. FP ' as evern
v.:h .-zr.d :o tni, r t-an:i;cn is dark and problematira','i
-i~'s .c.account and hrc depolitions of the witnesses not o.-.'.
b-: co.:r.i.a e-c'n c:.- hr in b mnany circumrPances, that a
rc-oa is :.:l IC: tr hef.ation, and hiltorical scepticism.
tei: mr-nv o, Keracr.:. is .he fullet and mo'i important, bt
le-;ra! j-r^-'u'_r the ;ing's a-ccount and his are contradl':
I. :a..:.g :o :he ijin s acccunt, hile Mr. RuthrPen
]iol-iig ;:e dcgg:r at ii: breat, " the fel!o:v in the ftoud''
; " - a.d t:-e.bl!ing." D:ic. .

7. But Henderson fa!t
.; ;.-r.,;- :,c':!e :':.; -ger out of Mr. Ruthsen's hand. i

. . '

,_ --; H:i.e-;!c oTxcd to his wvie t;

h ;-: 1..
::e ':-cc' t:'c Kini from being stabbed. D

- r. ::.- I. I. i- a
K:: a trts that Henderson oi

'

.: . :.^:

; . :-:: .-On, .;ce. Dien z3. en
: :- : *- . .' ::- t:" to open it ,'en

: ,.r

TroucGH Gowrie's conspiracy occafloned a sudden B o o K
d a great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.
:,nces ofimportance; and having been concerted '- -'

x 6or.
rth two brothers, either without any associates, Efix'scon.

or fpiracy a-

gainc Eli-

:i'c, lcturr.ed, and that during the firuggle between thezabe
.nga , him, he opened it. Disc. ;, 5,4. Crom. 51, 52.
!. Ifcwe 1ay believe the King, the fellow in the fiudy tood,
;r:.;ic llruggle, behind the King's back iinafive and tremb-
.! the tne. Disc 27. But Henderson affirms that he
.:;hd away the garter with which Mr. Ruthvcen attempted to
i:-. King ; that he pulled back Ruthvcn's hand while he
a: e.,eav uring to flop the King's mouth, and that he opened
ie ::,-. Diic. 54. Crom. 5z. JV. By the King's account,
:. kc::en let him in the fiudy, and went away in order to

e: . his brother, and the Earl came up the flairs for the

'?'L:'ose Disc. 23. Henderson deposes that when Mr.
i:'': ithe King, " he believes that he did not pass fiomn
i:,o." Crom. 5i. It is apparent both from the ituation of
:ho-l, and from other circumiflances, that there could nor
F:h have been any interview btween the brothers at this
; Di:c. 23.

!i''c!fon was twice examined, first at Falkland before the

0ci. lncil in Augul, and next at dinburg2h before the Par-
:en in November. Not to mention ome letfcl variations
el:;. tielfe depositions, we shall point out two which are re-

a;blc. In his first dcpofition Mr. Henderson relates the moil
L-':;ai c.icumslance of the whole in these words. " Mr. Ruth-
'cr, puiled out the deponent's dagger and held the fame to
hi Mjtfiy's breait, faying, renmember you f nefather'sJ u*t-
,'t; J: fia;ll

a low diefor it, and minting to his Highncfs's

.tiar, v.i;h the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of
'tlr. lRuhven's hands, and swore that as God flall judge his
rce!, tiat if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in hi
lard, the space a man may go fix iteps, he would have ftric-
kt the King to the hilts with it." Dife. 5z. But at his fe-
" -i: emitrion he varied from this in two material circum-

stances.

B o o or with such as were unknown, and chore to rem'
VIII. so, the danger was over, as soon as dicovered. B

-6ol. not long after, a conspiracy broke out in Engla

fiances. Firfi the words which he at that time put in Mr. R
ven's mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breai
' Sir jsu .? Ie niy pij.rer ; rc.r7;n.:er o, my father's ,4
Secondly, hen he threatened him with dceath, it was only to
rer him :iron making any noifr, " Held yiCoir tcjute ;. 6yj
" -cii 2jb'.l e. 2. In his trf deFofiuon, the words of
Ruthevn whe;i he re.r-nei to the chanlber where he hadleft
Kino, are," '-c .. :o -.,

' ; Gsd you s:/i di'e." But

his seco-.d dceirtior, "' B God there is no remedy, and
" fesed o bind his MJaijti's hand." Crom. . The m
rial worcs.a nm;? ijc a:e onitted. The first deposition

!-:rv to :!ni;mate ths. i: ; ai Ruthv:en's intention to murder
-i:;S. .The r.-cond oul;: cad us o conclude that he had
c'r dS.-g; ;: then to d't.i. :.ni as a prifor.

Terc r kewi' :c.- fomc rcmar!:abe contradiaions in te

t. .niiso c :he otier wi:n-iffs. i. In the discourse publi
b; a;ihori:t i: ir.fnuated that the tumult of the inhabi>
\,.a raie:d gz^ i.s the Ki:g, and that it required ibmeat
racifv them ic.. ifc. 3 he Duke of Lennox confirms tii
hi deFpcfi;icn. Crom. 4. An a of privy council si:
:ng the Ai.'.i:ratcs of Pcrth to anfger for that riot is fill es
A.Ld et Andrewv. R.o, one of the Eaillics of the town, ds
that he himfelf:-i.ed ; people, and that they took ar.si
order to afi! the -ing. Croin. 66. 7. Henderson deposes
he gave an ev:i:ve anfsv.cr to Mr. Johl M\oncrief, who
quired wcvhere he had been that morning, because the Earl
commanded him cot to let any man know that he had teen
Falkland. Disc. 54. Monciief deposes to the fame pr
Crom. 6:. And yet Gcorge Hay, aterwards Lord Kinns
and Chancel'or of Scotl.nd, and Peter Hay, depose tha;t
Earl, in their pretence, assed Henderson, " Whom he set
with the King at Falkland :" Crom. 7o, 71. Which quef
seems to prove tha; hle did not aim at keeping that journey a
c.et.

2ai'

gain, Elizabeth, which, though the firfl- danger B o o K
s inftanrly dispelled, produced tragical effects, VIII.
t rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal o
l unhappy. As James was deeply interefed in
iatevent, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided
tween two powerful fafiions, which contended
the supreme direction of affairs. The leader of
one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex; Sir
obert Cecil, the on of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
as at the head of the other. The former was the
of accomplished, and the most popular of all the
nglifh nobles ; brave, generous, affable ; though
petuous, yet willing to liften to the councils of
hoe whom he loved; an avowed, but not an im-
lacable enemy; a friend no lels constant, than
arm; incapable of disguising his own sentiments,
of inifreprefenting thole of others; better fitted
ra acamp, than for a court; and of a genius that
alified him for the first place in the administration,
i.'n a spirit which scorned the second, as below his
erit. He was oon distinguished by thc QCueen,
ho, with a proflfion uncommon to er, conferred
him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho-
our3, Nor did this diminifl the esteem and as-
eion of his countrymen ; but, by a rare felicity,
was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and
e darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
nd, educated in a Court, and trained under a fa-
her, deeply skilled in all its ars, was crafty, infi-
iating, industrious; and though poffefifd of ta-
1;s, which ftted him for the highe.st ofices, he
OL. I. T' did

B o o K did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
VIII. but availed himirlf of every advantage, which his

;' own addre!s, or the mistakes of others afforded him

Two such men were formed to be rivals, and ene.
rmies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil, as low and
base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared
to be pr:fumption and folly. All the military men,
except Ralrigh, favoured Efiex. Most of thecour.
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more near!
resembled their own.

is ,o=efr As Elizabcth advanced in years, the ftrugglebe
pcr.^-rc twecn these factions became more violent. Effex,i
withl the
Sco.; ih orler to strengthen hmelf, had early courted tb

friendihip of the King of Scots, for whose right
fuccefon he was a zealous advocate, and held
cloe crrcfpocnd-nce both with him, and withlis
principal Miniifhrs. Cecil, devoted to the Que
alone, ro.e daily to new honours, by the assiduity
his erv ices, and the patience, with which heexped
cd ;he reward of them. While the Earl's high sip
rir and impetuoity iometimes exposed him to check
i-om a Miirref, -who, though partial in her afie
tion townrds him, could not easily bear contradic
rti:n, and conferred fvours often unwillingly, an
ai;. -as slowly. Isis own follicitations, however, I
cnded maicio'fly by his enemies, who wifliedt
re.mo'e hiin at a distance from couit, advanced hi
to te command of the army employed in Irelani
again2it Tyronne,' and to the office of Lord Lieute
nant of that kingdom, with a commission almo
uni:.;ted. }-is success, in that expedition, did n
equal either his own promises, or the expecatio

li

Elizabeth. The Queen, peevifl from her difap- B o o K
intment, and exasperated against Effex by the ar- VIII.
jces of his enemies, wrote him a harlh letter, full ' ""
accusations and reproaches. These, his impa- i6.
nt spirit could not bear, and, in the first transports
his reentment, he proposed to carry over a part
his army into England, and by driving his ene-
es from the Queen's presence, to reinitate him-
fin favour, and in power. But, upon more ma-
rethoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and
ting fail with a few officers, devoted to his per-
, landed in England, and poRed directly to court.
izabeth received him, without any symptom either
affecion or of displeasure. By proper complian-
and acknowledgments, he might have regained
former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought
mfelftoo deeply injured to fibmit to there. Eli-
beth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
s haughty temper; and though her severity drew
m him the most humble letters, she confined him
the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commis-
ntrs to try him, both for his condut during his
rernment of Ireland, and for leaving that king-
nwithout her permission. By their sentence, he
suspended from all his offices, except that of
ater of the horse, and continued a prifbner dur-
the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having
tfied his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not sus-
the sentence to be recorded, and soon after al-
ed him to retire to his own house. During these
rfactions, which occupied several months, Effex
c':ted between the allegiance he owed to his So-
'in, asd the desire of revenge, and omnetimes

T 2 ls

B o o K leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other, I
VIII. one of the intervals when the latter prevailed,
ó/V lent a messenger into Scotland to encourage the Kin

to assert his own right to the succession by forceo
arms, and to promise that, besides the affiftanceo
the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord Mlount
ioy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would
him with 50oo men, from that kingdom, D

;,a. .- James did not chufe to hazard the losing a kingdol
-2'..,CUj which was just ready to fall into his hands, by

premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too,
dined the enterprize, and Effex adopted more d
ful schemes; all thoughts of ambition appearing
be totally effaced out of his mind.

T- . :' THIS moderation, which was merely theeffei
..'S of difguff and disappointment, was not of longcon

nuance. And the Queen, having not only ref
to renew a lucrative grant, which fle had form
bestowed, but to amit him into her preence,
new injury drove a temper, naturally impatient,
now much fretted, to absolute despair. Hisfri.
instead of soothing his rage, or restraining his in
tuofity, added to both, by their imprudent and
terested zeal. After many anxious consultation..
determined to attempt to redress his wrongs byi
lence. A nd conscious how unpopular such an en
prize would be, if it appeared to proceed from
tives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured
give it the semblance of public utility, by min'
t-e King of Scotland's intercll with his own.
wrote to James, that the faction which now preo:
nated in ihe I nglifh court, hd rcfolvce to
J uport

retenflons of the infanta of Spain to the crown; B o o K
ta. the places of the greatest importance in the VIII.
incdom were put into the hands of his avowed ene- i6"?
ies; anc that unless he ent ambassadors, without
elav, to insist on the immediate declaration of his
iht of uccefflon, their measures were so well con-
e.red, that all his hopes would be desperate. James,
ho knew how disagreeable such a proposal would
e r, the Queen of England, was not willing rash-
to cxFo;c l;infelf to her displeasure. But Effex,
Iindd by resentment, and impatient for revenge,
baconed hinf-elf to these paflions, and ated like
man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or
hree hundred followers, incompleatly armed, he at-
empted to afault a throne, the best eablifhed in
urope. Sallying at their head, out of his own
ouse, he called on the citizens of London, if they
irher valued his life, or wished to preserve the king-
om from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take
ms, and to follow his standard. He advanced
,wards the palace, with an intention to drive Cecil
nd his faftion out of the Queen's pretence, and to
bain a declaration of the Scottilh King's right of
ucceffon *. But, though almost adored by the ci-
izens, not a man would join him in this wild enter-
rize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted by
me of his own attendants, and almost surrounded
y the troops, which marched under different lead-
r into the city, he retreated to his own house; and
wthout any bold effort, suitable to his present con-

* Birch. Mem. 2. 477.

T 3 dition,

B o o dirion, or worthy of his former reputation for cou.
VUII. rage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Essex's ill fucces, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kin.
loss, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of these was the person, by
whose means Effex had carried on his correfpon.
dence with the King. He was a passionate admit.
er of the Earl's charater, and disposed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendihip with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was th:
purpose of the embassy less friendly to Effex, thai
the choice of the ambassadors ; they were command.
ed to folclit, in the warmest manner, for the Eari's
life, and if they found that the King, by avowing
his friends, could either promote their designs, i
contribute to their safety, they were impowered to
lay as

a all disguise and to promise that he would

put hin;f-i at their head, and claim what was de
to i.;r, by force of arms *. But before the ambae
faciors could reach London, Effex had suffered the
H;s e;h. punihm.ent he n.crited by his treason. Perhaps the

fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his par
don, hafiened his death. Elizabeth continued, for
foine time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could
not bring herself to consign into the hands of the
executioner, a man, who had once poifefled herfa
vour o intirely, without a painful struggle between
her refentmcnt against his late misconduct, and he;
ancient affcction towards him. 1 he difrefs to

* Jehrr.f 289. Birch. Mem. 2. 50o.

JhICE

which he was now reduced tended naturally to sos- B o o x
ten the former, while it revived the latter with new VIII.
trndernefs; and the interceftion of one faithful friend, '~-"J
wlo had'intereft with the Queen, might perhaps
have saved his life, and have procured him a remif-
ion, which, of herself, he was ahamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no

fch friend. And Elizabeth, iollicited incessantly
by her Ministers, and offended with the haughtiness
of Effex, who, as she imagined, scorned to sue for
pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be put
n execution. No sooner was the blow struck, than
e repented of her own rashness, and bewailed his
eath with the deepest sorrow. James always con-
dered him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his
erice, and after his acceflion to the English throne,
Ieored his son to his honours, as well as all his as-
ciates in the conspiracy, and distinguished them
ith his favour *.

THE Scottish ambassadors, finding that they had James con-
irrved too late to execute the chief business corn- inu"e his

.H~ ~ ~~~ ~

* ill intrigues in

itd to their charge, not on/y concealed that part England.
f their instructions, with the utmost care; but con-
ratulated the Queen, in their Master's name, on
er happy escape from such an audacious confpira-
y. Elizabeth, though no flranger to the King's
orrefpondence with Effex, or to that nobleman's in-
rntion of afierting James's right to the Crown, was
not willing that these should be known to the peo-
p!:, and, for that reason, received the congratula-

Camd. Spots. 464.

T 4 tions

B o o K tions of the Scottish ambassadors with all po0ible

VIII. marks of credit, and good will; and in order
"--' sooth James, and to preserve the appearances
óSO1. union between the two courts, increased the fubfi

which he paid him annually. The ambaffadorsre.
ided for some time in England, and were employ.
ed, with great success, in renewing and extend
the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered in.
to with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanc
in years, the English turned their eyes more
rmore towards Scotland, and were eager to preve
each other in courting the favour of their futur
Monarch. Assurances of attachment, profefions
of regard, and promises of support, were offered
James from every corner of the kingdom. Ced
himfclf, perceiving what hopes Effex had foundd
on the friendhip of the Scottish King, and what
a;'vantages he might have derived from it, thought
i prudent to stand no longer at a distance froma
Prince, who might so soon become his Matrer. Bu
being fnfib!e, at the fame tine, how dangerous
ich lla: intercourse might prove, under a Mifrei
naturally jealous, aAd whose jealousy grew fronge
wtn old age ; though he entered into a correspond
ence with him, lie carried it on with all the fecrer
and cautiln necessary in his situation, and peculir
to his character. And Tames, having gained the
iman whol eppofition and influence he had hithero
';i.ely dreaded, waited, in perfect security, till that
even; fhoIld happen, which would open his way to
the tchro.e of England. it was, with ome diffi
cu'.y, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his

:dee:s i that kngdom, who labouring to di

ftinguilc

uilh themselves by that officious zeal, with B o o K
ich a Prince, who has a near profpe& of mount- VIII.
the throne, is always served, urged him to al-;''~
a motion to be made in parliament for declar- io.
his right of succession to the Crown. James
denty discouraged that design ; but it was with
rfmall satisfaction that he observed the ascendant
was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had
n, so long, obliged to obey ; and which had ei-
prescribed or thwarted every rsep he had taken
ring the whole course of his reign *

NoTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the 1602.
itical factions which divided the court, and the Attempts
uent revolutions which had happened there, the Hi'gl
cthe King firlt took the reins of government into landers.
own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tran-
ility, being undisturbed by any foreign enemy,
free from any intestine commotion of long con-
ance, During this period, James endeavoured
civilize the Highlands and the Ifes, a part of his
inions almost totally negleted by former Mo-
hs, though the reformation of it was an object
hy worthy of their care. The long peace with
gand had afforded an opportunity of subduing
licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restrain-
their depredations, often no less ruinous to their
trymen, than to their enemies. The inhabi-
sos the Low Country began, gradually, to for-
the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
iof peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
ural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured

Spots. 47, 471. Birch. Mem. 2. 514.

to

B o o K to rapine, infested their more industrious neighbour

VIII. by their continual incursions. James being fboi
1602. tous not only to repress their inroads, but to rend

them useful fubjeds *, had at different times enade
many wife laws ex-emely conducive to thele end
All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were enjoinedt
permit no persons to reside in their estates, w
could not find sufficient surety for their good be
viour; they were required to make a lift of all
picious persons under their jurifdition, to bi
themselves to deliver them up to justice, and to
demnify those, who should susser by their robberi
and, in order to ascertain the faithful performan
of there articles, the chiefs themselves were obli
to give hostages to the King, or to put pledges
his hands. Three towns, which might serve as
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for
and commerce, were appointed to be built in di
rent parts of the Highlands; one in Cantyre, an
ther in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewi
and, in order to draw the inhabitants thither,
the privileges of Royal Boroughs were to be c
ferred upon them. Finding it, however, to be
easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of thole co
tries with the love of induitry, a resolution
taken to plant among them, colonies of people
the more industrious countries. The first ex
ment was made in the Ie of Lewis; and as it
advantageously situated for the fishing trade, a ou
from which Scotland ought naturally to derive g
wealth, the colony transported thither was dra
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were

' Bafi. Dor. i;9. s!

illd in that branch of commerce. But before B o o K
eyhad remained there long enough to manifest VIII
egoodeffects of this infitution, the islanders, en- 602.
d at feeing their country occupied by those in-
ers, took arms, and furprizing them in the
bh-time, murdered ome of them, and compel-
the reft to abandon the settlement. The King's
ention being oon after turned to other objeAs,
hear no more of this salutary project. Though
mes did not pursue the design, with that iteady
plication and perseverance, without which it is
Pofflble to change the manners of a whole peo-
, e had the glory, however, not only of hav-
firR conceived the thought, but of having first
nted out the proper method of introducing the
il arts of life into that part of the Island *.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, Elizabeth's
effeft of a found constitution, and the reward of a iner

and death.

ommon regularity and temperance, Elizabeth
an this winter to feel her vigour decrease, and to
denible of the infirmities of old age. Having
owed on a very stormy day from Westminster to
chnond, whither she was impatient to retire, her
plaints increased. She had no formed fever;
p!ulfewas good ; but he eat little, and could i603:
seep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from January 31.
ep melancholy, which appeared both in her
ntenance and behaviour. She delighted in soli-
de, lhe fat constantly in the dark; and was of-
drowned in tears.
'Pa'. 1587, 1594, 1597. Spotfw, 468.

No

B o o K No sooner was the Queen's indisposition knoai

VIII. than persons of all ranks, and of all different fd
t.---' and parties, redoubled their applications to the Kii

o3' of Scots, and vied with each other, in profefii

of attachment to his person, and in promires
;tbmiffion to his government. Even some of
own servants, weary of the length of her re
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid'of the bu
of gratitude for past benefits, and expecing to
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to de
her. And crowds of people hurried towardsS
land, eager to pre-occupy the favour of the
ceffor, or afraid of being too late in paying hon
to him.

MEANWHILE, the Queen's disease increased,

her melancholy appeared to be fettled and incur
Various conjecures were formed concerning
causes of a disorder, from which she seemed to
exempted by the natural cheerfulr ess of her ten
Some imputed it to her being forced, contra
her inclination, to pardon the Earl of Tyro
whole rebellion had for many years created he
so much trouble. Others imagined that it
from observing the ingratitude of her courtiers,
the levity of her people, who beheld her healtd
dining with most indecent indifference, and lt
zorward to the accession of the Scottish King,
-. impatience which thLy could not conceal
:-.o: common opinion, at that time, and pe
-'-. molt probable, was that it flowed from grie

-.e Earl of Eiex. She retained an extraord
:-rcr; bor t:e r.-.emory of that unfortunate n

0.~ .... , I

g; and though fle often complained of his ob- B o o K

inacv seldom mentioned his name without tears *. VI.

n accdent happened soon after her retiring to I6'
ichmond, which revived her affeaion with new
dernefs, and imbittered her sorrows. The
ountefs of Nottingham, being on her death-bed,
Gred to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
in to her, without discovering which, fIe could
tdie in peace. When the Queen came into her
iamber, she told her, that while Effex lay under
ntence of death, he was desirous of imploring
don in the manner which the Queen herfeif had
refcribed, by returning a ring, which during the
eight of his favour she had given him, with a pro-
ife that, if in any future difrefs, he ent that back
he, as a token, it should intitle him to her pro-
:ion; that Lady Scroop was the person he intended
imploy in order to present it; that by a mistake,
was put into her hands instead of Lady Scroop's;
dthat she having communicated the matter to
ehuband, one of Eex's most implacable ene-
isI he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
e Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
tlintefs, having thlus discloscd her secret, begged
e leen's forgiveness ; but Elizabeth, who now
both the malice of [he Earl's enemies, and how
jutly Ihe had fufpect-d him of inflexib!e obfti-
ty, replied, God may forgive you, but I ne-
can;" and left the room in great emotion .

From

Birch. Mem. . 55.

I This anecdote cncer..rig Elizabeth wa.s 1fr;: FptLlii?:cd ;y
-'*':e, .Mc;n. of Eli7. p. z : is confirmed by rre trctirnc,-
e M\au^hcr &, m , . i h the tra.;di:in:i eviJence of

I c ,

B o o K From that moment, her spirit funk entirely;
VIII. could scarce taste food; she refused all the medici
ó" " rprefcribed by her physicians; declaring that

3 wished to die, and would live no longer. No

treaty'could prevail on her to go to bed; she fat
cushions, during ten days and nights, pensive,
silent, holding her finger almost continually in
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the groa
The only thing to which she seemed to give any
tention, were the ats of devotion, performed
her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbu
and in these she joined with great appearance of
vour. Wafled, at last, as well by anguifhofm
as by long abstinence, The expired without a ft
gle, on Thursday the 24th day of March in

Lady Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch. Negoc
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death asone
the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers re
which prove that this was commonly believed at tie time,
Mem. z. 5o6. Efie., however, had been beheaded toy
before her dth, and there ems to have been no other re
but that which we have agned, why her sorrow should re
with so much violence at so great a d;ifance of time. As
death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a
night before the Queen's death, the coincidence of these eve
together with the other evidence menioned, adds so much
bability to the ory related by O'norne, as will entitle it
place in hiflory. The on!- o'bjcfion to the account we
given of Eiizabeth's atachmcnll to Eilex, arises from hergr
age. At the age of S, te .:rrooj , ons

,,o are comM

abundartly cco], and the violence of all the paffons, except0
is much abated. Fut the force of this bojeiion i; entirely
moved by an Author who has ilkL;atd many passages inl
Englih Hiiiory, and adorned r.o.r:. Catalogue of Roy
Nob. Authors. Ar:ic' E.irce:.

7C
3

t year of her age, and in the 45th of her B o o

anx~~~~~~.~ ~VIII.

x6o3.

OEIGNERS often accuse the Englilh of indiffer Her Cla-
and difrefpet towards their Princes. But with- raaer.
reason; no people are more grateful than they
tofe Monarchs, who merit their gratitude. The
esof Edward III. and Henry V. are mention-
b the English of this age, with the fame warmth,
hey were by those, who shared in the blefings
splendor of their reigns. The memory of Eli-
this flill adored in England. And the hiflo-
sos that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
peop!e; her sagacity in discerning their true in-
; her fleadinefs in pursuing it; her wisdom in
ciioice of her Mvinifters; the glory she acquired

trms; the tranquillity she secured to her sub-
; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of
nceice, which were the fruits of all these
rank her among the mofl illuflrious Plrinces.
nthe defecs in her characer, they observe, were
oia kind pernicious to her people. H-er ex-

'e:g.lity was not accompanied with the love
ltaring; and though it prevented some great
rtak:igs, and rendered the fucceis of others
m!<at, it introduced oeconomy into her admi-
rtton, and exempted the nation from many
ten which a Monarch, more profuse, or more
?t!ilng, mIuft have imposed. Her slowness in
ding her servants sometimes discouraged ufefil
i but it prevented the undeferving from ac-
'b:.- i:c;. Mem,. z.o5. Birch, Ncgoc. 26. Strypc,

quiring

B o o K quiring power and wealth, to which they had
VIII. title. Her extreme jealousy of those princes, w

óT"; pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led

3to take such precautions, as tended no lefs-to

public safety, than to her own; and to court
- affections of her people, as the firme ft pport

her throne. Such is the picture the Englilh dr
of this great Queen.

WHOEVER indertakes to write the Hiorf

Scotland finds himself obliged,-frequently, t'i
her- in a very different, and in a less -amiablelg
Hier authority in that kingdom, during the r
part of her reign, was little inferior to that, wl
1he poifcifed in her own. But this authority,
quired at first by a service of great importance
the nation, fle exercised in a manner extremely
nicious to its happiness. By her indufry in for
ing the rage of the two contending fa&ions?,
fipplying the one with partial aid; by feedirig
other with faife hopes; by ballancinrg their p
so artfully, that each of them was able to di
and neither of them to subdue the other; lhe
dered Scotland long the feat of discord, confi
and bloodshed: and her craft and intrigues, e
ng what the valour of her ancefors could rtl
complifh, reduced that kingdom to a state f
pendance on England. The maxims of poli0q
ten little consonant to those of morally,' imay
haps, juflify this conduct. But no apologyc
offered for her behaviour to Queen Marx, at i
of dissimulation without neceflity and of f1e
tbyord example. In almost all her other ail

iizabeth is the obje&t of our highest admiration; B o o K
nthis, we mufc allow that (he not only laid aside the VIII.
agnanimity, which became a Queen, but the feel- 1603
gs, natural to a woman.

THOUCH Elizabeth would neverpermitthequeftion ames pro-
cerning the right of succession to the Crown to claimed

j °

i * r -I I i- EKing of

determined in parliament; nor declare her own England.
tn;menrs concerning a point, which he wished to
ain an impenetrable myfiery; he had, however,
rmed no design of excluding the Scottilh King
m an inheritance, to which his title was undoubt-

A hort time before her death, he broke the

ence, which she had so long preserved on that sub-
,and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That
throne, was the throne of Kings; that she would
e no mean person to ascend it, and that her Cou-
the King of Scots should be her successor.'
is he confirmed on her death-bed. And as oon
fie breathed her last, the Lords of the Privy-
uncil proclaimed James King of England. All
intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
Infanta, all the cabals formed within the king-
n, to support the titles of Lady Arabella, and
Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment;
nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
is with Scotland, and their aversion for the do-
niOn of strangers, teffified their fatisfation with
der acclamacions, than were uual at the accession
their native Princes. Amidst this tumult ofjoy,
otion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
crnbe ome conditions to the successor, and to
L from him the redress of some grievances, be-
O, II. - U fore

B o o fore they called him to the throne, was scarce herd.

VIII. and Cecil, by fifling it, added to his stock of me.
~ ~i r it h his new Master. Sir Charles Percy, bro.

ther of the Earl of Northumberland, and Thoma
Somerset the Earl of Worcester's son, were di
iatched to Scotland, with a letter to the Ki%
fgned by all the Peers and Privy Councellors the
in London; informing him of the Queen's death
of his acce.flon to the throne, of their care to
cognize his tit!e, and of the universal applau
with which the public proclamation of it had bet
attended. They made the utmost haste to deliv
this welcome message ; but were prevented by
zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord Hunfdane's youn
eft son, who setting out a few hours after Elizabet
death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday nigh
9j22 as the King had gone to bed. He was imm
diarely admitted into the royal apartment, and kne
Ing by the King's bed, acquainted him with
4eah of Elizabeth, saluted him King of Englan
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token
Tc;e truth of the intelligence which he brought,
tented him a ring, which his filter Lady Scroop
taken from the Queen's finger after her death. Ja
heard him with a decent composure. But as C
.as only a private meflenger, the information
brought, was' not made public, and the Kingk
his apartment tiil the arrival of Percy and Som
iet. Then his titles were solemnly prolair,
and his own fubjeds expressed no less joy, than
Eng;ilh, at this increase of his dignity. As
pretence was absolutely necessary in England, w
the people were extremely impatient to ee t

i n

rw," Sovereign, he prepared to set out for that king- B o o K
do0s, without delay. He appointed his queen to VIII.
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the L"-
government of Scotland to his Privy Council. He
iatrufted the care of his children to different noble-
men. On the Sunday before his departure, he re-
aired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing
sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the great-
e of the divine goodness in raising him to the
hrne of such a powerful Kingdom without oppo-
tion or bloodshed, and exhorted him to express
is gratitude, by promoting to the utmost, the hap-
inefsand prosperity of his subje&s; the King rose
,and addressing himself to the people, made
any profelfions of unalterable affection towards
he; promised frequently to visit Scotland; as-
ua them that his Scottish fubjets, notwithftand-
ghis absence, should feel that he was their native
ince, no less than when he resided among them;
d might still trust that his ears should be always
en to their petitions, which he would answer with
heahcriry and love of a parent. His words were,
ten, interrupted by the tears of the whole audi-
nce; who, though they exulted at the King's prof-
rtv, were melted into sorrow by there tender de-
arations '.

0.x the fifth of April, he began his journey, Taes pot.
ih a fpienldid, but not a numerous train; and fcfron of

the throne,
at day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came,

menfl multitudes were afiembled to welcome him;
d the principal persons, in the di:ffreit Counties

I I thro.ghi

B o o 3 through which he palled, dilplayed all their wealii

VlI. and magnificence in entertainments prepared f0
.-r' him, at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so lon
7I3' in England, that molt of her fubjets remembere

no other court but her's; and their notions of th
manners and decorum suitable to a prince were form,
ed upon what they had observed there. It was ni
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour a
actions of their new Monarch, and to compareh
at first light, with the Queen, on whose throne
was to be placed. James, whose manners werea
tremely different from her's, suffered by the cor
parilon. He had not that flowing affability,
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her
pie and though easy among a few whom he 1lo
his indolence could not bear the fatigue of ren
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude.
was no less a stranger to that dignity, with wh
Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And in
of that well-judged frugality, with which hec
ferred titles of honour, he bestowed them with
undiftinguifhing profusion, that rendered them
longer marks of diftinEtion, or rewards of me
But there were the refleaions of the few alone;
multitude continued their acclamations; and am
there, James entered London on the 7th of M
and took peaceable poffelion of the throne of E

land. .
=cr,'dnc., THuS were united two kingdoms, ..divided

the earliest accounts of time, but.deftined, by
situation, to form one great monarchy. And
this junsion of its whole native forces Great Bn

ath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe B o o K
hich England and Scotland could never have at- VIII.
ned.

1603.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs view of
next heirs to the English throne, that they had the Revo-
u! leisure to reflect on all the consequences of their 1,tiOn fti
d.g advanced to that dignity. But dazzled with 'uion of

"' u -> -^ ^ Scotland

e glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful nncc tie
nemy, relying on the partiality of their native JL',ffi°vi
rince, and in full expectation of sharing liberally
the wealth and honours he would now be able to
sow, they attended little to the most obvious corrn
uences of that great evenr, and rejoiced at his
cefion to the throne of England, as if it had been
olefs beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
the King. They soon had reason, however, to
opt very different sentiments; and from that pe-
d, we may date a total alteration in the political
nfRitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been flbvert-
din most nations of Europe by the policy of their
inces, or had been indermined by the progress of
mmerce, fill fubrifted with full force in Scotland.
any causes had contributed gradually to augment
epower of the Scottish nobles; and even the Re-
ormation, which in every other country where it
evailed added to the authority of the Monarch,
idincreafed their wealth and influence. A King,
ofeffed of a small revenue, with a prerogative ex-
emely limited, and iinfipported by a flanding
ry, could not exercise mich -authority over fucl

Tf ? potcnt

B o o is through which he palled, displayed all their wealth
VIII. and magnificence in entertainments prepared sot

y him, at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long
1003' in England, that most of her fubjeas remembered

no other court but her's; and their notions of th
manners and decorum suitable to a prince were form
ed upon what they had observed there. It was a
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour a
ations of their new Monarch, and to compareh
at first light, wih the Queen, on whose throne
was to be placed. James, whose manners were
tremely different from her's, suffered by the co
parion. He had not that flowing affability,
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her
pie and though easy among a few whom he o
his indolence could not bear the fatigue of ren
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude,
was no less a stranger to that dignity, with wh
Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And ins
of that well-judged frugality, with which flec
ferred titles of honour, he bestowed them with
undiftinguifhing profusion, that rendered them
longer marks of distinction, or rewards of m
But these were the reflecions of the few alone;
multitude continued their acclamations; and am
these, James entered London on the 7th of M
and took peaceable poeffeion of the throne of E
land.
crl-c:n. TH-s were united two kingdoms, ..divided

the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by
ituation, to form one great monarchy. Ani
this junction of its whole native.force, Great Bi

I

ath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe B o o ;
ich England and Scotland could never have at- VIII.
ned. r_

i 6o.
I603.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs
next heirs to the English throne, that they had te Revo-
11 leisure to reflect on all the consequences of their L° confti
iing advanced to that dignity. But dazzled with tution of
heglory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful since the
nemy, relying on the partiality of their native accemo'o
rince, and in full expectation of sharing liberally
the wealth and honours he would now be able to
tow, they attended little to the most obvious corrn
uences of that great event, and rejoiced at his
celion to the throne of England, as if it had been
less beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
the King. They oon had reason, however, to
opt very different sentiments; and from that pe-
d, we may date a total alteration in the political
nftitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been ubvert-
in most nations of urope by the policy of their
rinces, or had been tndermined by the prorgrefs of

rmerce, still subsisted with full force in Scotland.

ny causes had contributed gradually to augment
power of the Scottilf nobles; and even the Re-
rmation, which in every other country where it
ailed added to the authority of the Monarch,
d increased their wealth and influence. A King,
flelffd of a small revenue, with a prerogative ex-
rnely limited, and ilnflpportcd by a sanding
'rmy, could not exercise much authority over such

T 3 potent

B o o potent fubjecs. He was obliged to govern by ex.
VIII. pedients; and the laws derived their force not from

his power to execute them, but from the voluntary
fubmiflion ofthe nobles. But though this produced
a species of government feeble and irregular beyond
example; though Scotland, under the name, ani
with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, wa
really subjet to an Aristocracy, the people were no
altogether unhappy ; and even in this wild formo
a confticution, there were principles, which tend
ed to their ecurity and advantage. The King
checked and overawved by the nobles, durst ven
ture upon no at of arbitrary power. The nobles
jealous of the King, whose claims and pretension
were many, though his power was small, were afr
of irritating their dependants by unreasonable acM
tions, and tempered the rigour of ariftocraticali
ranny, with a mildness and equality to which it
naturally a stranger. And while the military e
nius of the feudal government, remained in vigou
the vassals both of the Crown and of the Baro
wvere not only free from oppression, but courted
their superiors, whose power and importance we
founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his accefiion to the throne of Englan

James acquired such an immense accession of weal
of power, and of splendor, that the nobles, alto
nifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to ftrugg
for privileges which they were now unable to defen
Nor was it from fear alone that they fbmitted
the yoke; James, partial to his countrymen, an
xwi!ling th tat tey ould partake in his good f0

tus

e, loaded them with riches and honours; and B o o K
hehope of his favour concurred with the dread of VIII.
i power, in taming their fierce and independent 'v
irits. The will of the Prince became the fuprerre
w in Scotland and the nobles strove, with emu-
tion, who hould most implicitly obey comrnmands,
hich they had formerly been accustomed to con-
mn. Satisfied with having subjected the nobles
tie Crown, the King left them in full poieffion
their ancient jurifdiEtion over their own vassals.
he extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief,, be-
ame in their hands dreadful instruments of oppref,
on, and the military ideas on which these rights
re founded, being gradually loft, or disregarded,
cthing remained to correct or to mitigate the ri.
ur with which they were exercised. The nobles,
haufing their fortunes by the expence of frequent
tendance upon the English court, and by attempts
o imitate the manners and luxury of their more
ialthy neighbours, multiplied exacions upon the
ople, who durst scarce utter complaints which
h;y knew would never reach the ear of their Sove-
rgn, nor move him to grant them any redress.
cd from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution
:688, Scotland was placed in a political fitua-
on of all others the molt singular, and the molt
'thappy; subjected at once to the absolute will of
Monarch, and to the oppressive jurisdiction. of an
irilocracy, it suffered all the miseries peculiar to
ch these forms of government. Its Kings were
ipoCtic; its nobles were slaves and tyrants ;. and
i people groaned under the rigorous domination
e: :och,

U 4 DURING

B o o K DURISG this period, the nobles,- it is true, madt
VIII. one effort to shake off the yoke, and to rgain.thi
t'"'9V" ancient independency. After the death ofjam4

the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by
Monarchs with any partial affection. Charlesi
educated among the Englilh, discovered no pecul
attachment to the kingdom of which he, was a a
tive. And the nobles, perceiving the fceptre.to
now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Psi
with whom they had little connection, -and o0
whose councils they had little influence, no lon
submitted with the fame implicit obedience. Pro
voked by some encroachments of the King on th
order, and apprehensive of others, the remains
their ancient spirit began to appear. They cm
plained, and remonstrated. And the people, being,
at the fame time, violently disgusted at the inneva
tions in Religion, the nobles secretly heighten
this disgust; and their artifices, together with ih
ill conduct of the court, railed such a spirit.
the whole nation took arms against their Sovereign
with an union and animosity of which there h
formerly been no example. Charles brought again
them the forces of England, and notwith,,indin
their own union, and the zeal of the people, t
nobles must have funk in the struggle. But, th
diaffection which was growing among his Engli
fubje&ts, prevented the King from acting with v
gour. A civil war broke out in both kingdomn
And after many battles and revolutions which a
well known, the Scottish nobles, who first b
the war, were involved in the fame ruin witht
throne. At the Reteoration, Charles II. regain.

! poffeirion of the r6yal prerogative in Scotland; B o o K
d the nobles, whose estates were wafted; or their VIII.
irit broken by the calamities to which they had '""
enexpofed, were less able and less willing'than
er to refiftl'the power of the Crown. During
is reign, and that of James VII. the dictares of
Monarch were received in Scotland with most
bje& submission. The poverty to which many of
enobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
ves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. -The
eople, always neglected, were now odious, and
aided with every injury, on account of their at-
achment to religious and political principles, ex-
rnely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into
e government of Scotland. To increase the au-
iorit of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of

nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole object
four aws. The rights of the people were scarce
er mentioned, were disregardcd, or unknown.
trention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
ehire of the people. By the cl4iiim f right, their
trries were secured. And the number of their
prentatives being increased, they gradually ac-
ired new weight and consideration in parliament.
they came to enjoy more security, and greater
wer, their minds began to open, and to form
ore extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and:
police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which still
dominated, together with many other accidents,
tarded the improvement and happiness of the
atijon: ...AO-

ANo-

B o o K ANOTHER great event completed what the revo
VIII. lution had begun. The political power of the no
''vJ bles, already broken by the union of the twocrowns

was almost annihilated by the union of the tw
Kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly
of the supreme assembly of the nation, inflead
bearing the most considerable fvay there, the Sct
tih nobles are admitted into the British parliame
by their representatives only, and form but an
considerable part of one of those bodies in whic
the legislative authority is vested. They themfev
are excluded ablblutely fiom the lloufe of Cor
mons, and even their eldest ions are not permitt
to represent their countrymen in that augut assem
by. Nor have their feudal privileges remained,
compenfae for this extinction of their politicala
thority. As commerce advanced in its progri
and government attained nearer to perfetion, te
were insensibly circumicribed, and at last, by la
no less falurary to the public, than fatal to the no
bles, they have been almost totally abolished.
the nobles were deprived of power, the people a
quired liberty. Exempted from burdens to whi
they were formerly fubjc&, freened from oppr
iion, to which they had been long exposed, an
adopted into a conltitution, whose genius andla
were more liberal than their own, they haveexten
ed their commerce, refined their manners, madein
Frovements in the elegancies of life, and cultivat
the arts and sciences.

THls f:r.-ey of the political state of Scotlar
in which even:s and their causes have been men:!0

rather than developed, enables us to point out B o o K
ree ras, from each of which we may date some VIII.
reat alcration, in one or other of the three diffe- < 9`
nt embers of which the supreme legislative as-
mb'y in our constitution is composed. At the,
,es, the Kings of Scotland, once the most li-
ited, became in an instant, the most absolute
r;accs in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
r, which their Parliaments were unable to con-
oul. or their nobles to refilt. At the Union, the
udal aristocracy, which had fubfifled so many ages,
dwith power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and
re-eminences, peculiar to their order, and reduced
emfelses to a condition, which is no longer the
ror and envy of other fubjets. Since the Union,
Commons, anciently negleded by their Kings,
ddefpifed by the nobles, have emerged into dig-
it; and being admitted to a participation of all

privileges, which the English had purchased at
expence of so much b:ood, muff now be esteem-
abody not less considerable in the one kingdom,
,they have long been in the other.

TiE church felt the effects of the absolute pow-
w'hich the King acquired by his accession; and
revolutions too, are worthy of notice. James,
tir the latter years of his administration in Scot-

t', revived the name and office of Bishops. But
e pofleffed no ecclesiastical jurifdiftion or pre-
Inence; their revenues were inconsiderable, and
'Y were scarce diftinguiflied by any thing, but by

their

B o o K their feat in parliament, and by being the objeat
VIII. the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. Th(
^t"~ King, delighted with the Iplendor and authorii

which the English Bishops enjoyed, and eager to
effect an union in ecclesiastical policy, which hehad
in vain, attempted in the civil government, refol
to bring both Churches to an exact conformitywi
each other. Three Scotfinen were consecrated Bi
shops at London. From them, their brethren we
commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unkno
in Scotland were imposed. And though the cler'
less obsequious than the nobles, boldly opposed the
innovations, James, long practised and well skill
in the arts of managing them, obtained at len
their compliance. But Charles I. a fuperfiti
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Sco
imprudent and precipitant in all the meafuresh
pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly
reception of the English liturgy, and indifcret
attempting a resumption of church lands, kind
the flaries of civil war; and the people being I
at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the epifcop
church was overturned, and the Presbyterian
vernment and discipline were re-efrablifled with
vigour. Together with monarchy, Episcopac¥y
resiored in Scotland. A form of government,
odious to the people, required force to uphold i
and though the whole rigour of authority, and
the barbarity of perfecurion were employed in.
support, the aversion of the nation was inlurmnil
able, and it subsisted with difficulty. At the Rev
.ution, the inclinations of the Pe pope ere thlot

0rthy the attention of the legislature, the Prefby- B o o
ran government was again eftablithed, and being VIII.
atifed by the Union, is fill maintained in the'"
ingdom.

NOR did the influence of the Acceffon extend to
civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the
nius of the nation, its taste and fpirir, things of
nature still more delicate, were sensibly affected by
atevent. When learning revived in the fifteenth

sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
ere in a state equally barbarous, devoid of ele-
ance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No
thor thought of writing in languages so ill adapt-
to express and embellish his sentiments, or of
ting a work for immortality, with such rude
d perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
revailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
riginal effort of the human mind, but was excited
yadmiration of the ancients, their compositions
reefteemed not only the flandards of taste, and
f sentiment, but of stile; and even the languages
which they wrote were thought to be peculiar and
imoft consecrated to learning and the muses. Not
nly the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied ; and, extravagant as the at-
tempt may appear to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accustomed to think, and which
hey could not speak, or even pronounce, the fuc-
cefsof it was astonishing. As they formed their
file upon the purest models, as they were uninfect-
edwith those barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of

fami-

B o o K Familia- onverfation, the affecration of courts,

VIII. tercourfe with firangers, and a thousand other cau
t'.- introduce into living languages, many moderns ha

atrtined to a degree of elegance in their Latin coi
pofirions, which the Romans themselves scarce x
fefred beyond t'-e limits of the Augustan as
Vhile this was almost the only species of compo
tbon, and al authors, by using one common la
guage, could be brought to a nearer comparife
the Scottifl writers were not inferior to those ofal
other nation. The happy genius of Buchana
equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, mo
various, more ori-gnal, and more elegant, thanlt
of alnoft any other modern who writes in La
re-sets, i.ith regard to :his particular, the greare
Hiftre on is country.

B-. the labour attending the ifudy of ad

tongue vas irkfobne; the unequal return for. tie
industry which authors met with, who could
read and admired onlv within the narrow circle 4
the learned, was nortifying; and men, inflead
va.-aing half their lives in learning the language
the Romans, began to refine and to polilh the
own. The modern tongues were found to befi
cep-ib'e of beauties and graces, which, if not equ
to those of the antient ones, were at least morea
tain-b!e. And the Italians having first set the e:
ampie, Latin was no longer ued in the wor
of taste; it vas confned to books of science; a
the politer nations have banifihed it even from the
The Scot, we nay presume, would have had

Cat

aufe to regret this change in the public tate, ardd B o o K
0uld still have been able to maintain some equa- VIII.
i with other nations, in their pursuit of literary
0oour. The English and Scottish languages, de-
ved from the fame sources, were, at the end of
efixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, dif-
ring from one another somewhat in orthography,
ough not only the words, but the idioms were
uch the fame. The letters of several Scbttifh
atefnen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
in purity, to thos'e of the English Ministers with
hom they corresponded. James himself was maf-
r of a stile far from contemptible; and by his
ample and encouragement, the Scottish language
ight have kept pace with the Englilh in refine-
ent. Scotland might have had a series of authors
n its own, as well as in the Latin language, to boast
f; and the improvements in taste, in the arts, and
the sciences, which spread over the other polish-
nations of Europe, would not have been un-
nown there.

B7T, at the very time when other nations were
ginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
e, and to make trial of the strength and com-
ossos their own languages, Scotland ceased to be
kingdonm. The transports of joy which the Ac-

tion at first occasioned, were soon over; and the
0ts, being at once deprived of all the objects that
5nc or animate a people, of the presence of their
ince, of the concourse of noblks, of the splendor
a elegance of a court, an universal dejection of

fpiri:

B o o K spirit seems to have seized the nation. The Cou
VIII. being withdrawn, no domestic standard ofpropriel
b-'-' and corrednefs of speech remained; the few corn

positions that Scotland produced were tried by th
Englilh standard, and every word or phrase th;
varied in the least from that, was condemned
barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had coni
nued distinct, each might have retained idioms an
forms of speech peculiar to itself; and there, ren
dered fashionable by the example of a court an
supported by the authority of writers of reputation
would have been confidered in the fame light wit
the varieties occasioned by the different dialects i
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beau
ties, and, in many cafes, used promifcuoufy bytl
authors of both nations. But by the Acceflon
the English naturally became the fole-judges an
lawgivers in language, and rejeed as folecifis
every form of speech to which their ear was notac.
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercouri
between the two nations was inconsiderable , an

* A remarkable proof of the little intercorfe between

Englif and Scots, before the union of the Crowns, is to b
found in two curious papers, one published by Haynes. '
other by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commandedlb
Biibop of London to take a furvcy of al the firangers wiib
the cities of London and Weftminlter. By his report, whidi
very minute, it appears that the whole number of Scots at it
time was ;S. Haynes 45;. A survey of the fame kind wa
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor A. D. 1569. Th
number of Scot had then increased to 88. Strype 4. Supplemlt
N I. On the Acceflion of James a considerable nmbeu(
Scots, efpecia!ly of the higher rank, retorted to England; k
it was not till the union that the intercoarfe be veen the "
kirdom, b:c-mc great.

ancien
4

ncient prejudices were still so violent as to prevent B o o K
tnition, poffels the means of refining their own VIII.
ongue according to the purity of the Englifll stand- '

r. n the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
from ever) different source. The Clergy of Scot-
.:, in that age, were more eminent for piety than
rlearnilng; and though there did not arise many
:hrs among them, yet being in poflelion of the
nvilge of discoursing publickly to the people, and
ir Ilrmons being too long, and perhaps too fre-
ent, such halty produtions could not be elegant,
ndmany floveniy and incorrect modes of expref-
on may be traced back to that original. The
eadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
te, and that profession having tfurnifled more au-
os, and the matters of which they treat mingling
il in common discourse and business, many of
ol vitious forms oi fpeeclh, which are denomi-
edSccttcifns, have been by them int-roduced into
Ianguage. Nor did either the language or pub-
ia:lc receive any inprovemnnt in parliament,
ie a more liberal and more correcr eloquence
igr have been expcf-cd. All bufnefs was trani-
. there by the Lords of Articles, and they were
Irvilely devoted o the court, that few debates
o., and none were conducted with the pirit and
geur natural to a popular afinrbbly.

T,,'s, during the whole seventeenth ccntury, the
nglii were gradually refining their language, and

taste; in Scrland the !former was much de
td, and the latter almost criti!-el, lofl- In th.z
V\L. II. X be.

B o o K Oeinnin of that period, both nations were emerg

VIi. inn, out of barbarity ; but the distance between them
{-R ~
- which was then inconsiderable, became, before th

end of it, immense. Even after science had onq
dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finkin
back into ignorance and obscurity; and active an
intelligent as they naturally are, they continue,
wvhils other nations were eager in the purfuitc
fame and knowledge, in a tate of langucr ar
f1upefaEtion. This, however, muit be impuredt
the unhlappinefs of their political situation, not
any de:ect of genius ; for no ooner was the or
rfmoved in any degree, than the other bgan toii
pl v itfif. Tihe ac abolishing the power or t
Lords of Artic'cs, and other alutary laws pafi

n
tle i evolu:ion, having introduced freedom

dIbate into the Scottih Parliament, eloquence, w
ai the arts that accompany or perfect it, beca
immedia:e objets of attention; and the exaTmp
of FleLci:cr of S..lon alone is fufficicnt to h
that the Scots' were still capable of generous eknt
mcns, and, not.,ithi'anding fmi- p!culiar iii
w:.-c ab':e o exp:'e thenifelves wvth energy, 1
.:h clegance.

-- lingTr-h t!;e nlion h.-.vin incorporated

t;.-o r-tions, and rendered them one pople,
d-:in:t ions w. nch had fubfiftecd for many ages g
(d.la:!y; wear aw.ay; peculiarities difappar;
:in-. m;anners prevail in both parts ot the il.n'
rhe amre authors are read and admired the s
en-,::-aii;rnmer.s are frequented by the elegianc

p lk!

lite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pu- B o o K
tv in language, is etablifhed. And the Scots, VIiI.
er being placed during a whole century, in a
uation no less fatal to the liberty than to the
e and genius of the nation, were at once put
poffiefon of privileges more valuable than those
ich their ancellors had formerly enjoyed; and
cry obstruction that had retarded their pursuit,
prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
aliy removed.

X 2 APPEN-

B 0 K beri.nnin of that period, both nations were eer.

V-Iil. inr out of barbarity ; but the distance between then
^--wihich was then inconsiderable, became, before th

end of it, immense. Even after science had onr
dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finkin
back in:o ignorance and obscurity; and active an
intelligent as they naturally are, they conintu
while other nations were eager in the pursuit
fame and knowledge, in a state of langucr a
iiupefaEtion. This, however, muit be imputedi
the unhppinefs of their political situation, not
any de:'ect of genius; for no sooner was the or
removed in any degrce, than the other bgan totii
plv itfiir. The a abolishing the power oi't
Lorcs of Artic'cs, and other ialutary laws pais
a. the ievolution, having introduced freedom(
d-tbae into the Scottihi Parliament, eloquence, ii
a'i the arts that accompany or perfe'c it, bec:
immediate objects of attention; and the exam
of Fleci' .cr of S.;lon alone is sufficient to (f
that the Scots were still capable of generous lfnt
mcnts , ad, not. ithf!tnding f.ime p!culiar i.iir
vacre ab:e to exp-es then-lfelves with energy,
v,';i:h elc-nce.

:w length tk.?e ntion having ilcorporated

t;-.-o nrtio:;s, a:nd rendered them one pople, t
d:'.st'niions \v.':: ch had fubfifteci for many ages i
d'.a!H!v wear awvay; peculiarities difapprar
rf::t manners prevail in both parts o the iil.'.r
the fame authors are read and admired; the a
e-c::rarinmer.s are frequented by the eleganta

pol:!

ite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pu. B o o K
[ in language, is eablifhed. And the Scots, VIII.
[er being placed during a whole century, in a
[uatio no less fatal to the liberty than to the
fe and genius of the nation, were at once put
poTleflion of privileges more valuable than those
hich their anceltors had formerly enjoyed; and
cry obftrucion that had retarded their pursuit,
prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
aiiy removed.

X 2 APPEN-

# APPENDIX.

P E ND X.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 210.)

3I E M 0 R 1 A L of certain points meet
fr, the refloring the realm of S O T LAN D

s
i' the antient weale.

.ypRiMrs, it is to be noted, that the best worldly feli- 5th AuguR,
city that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a 559 . Cot-

ton. Lib.

perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to Cal. B. Io.
made one monarchy with England, as they both make fol.17.From
ut one illand, divided from the reft of the world. acopyin e-
IF the firfi is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace irlsarande
i;hEngland, then muff it necessarily be provided, that
thnd b not so fubjeft to the appointments of France,
.is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England,
eth always to make Scotland an instrument, to exer-
, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make a
-stool thereof to look over England as they may.
THEREFO R E, when Scotland shall come into the hands
arnere Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope
i!cch accord, but as long as it is at the commandment
ite French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
.x; these two realms.
THEI'EFRE feeing it is at the French King's com-
ndment by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for

rceale of Scotland, that until he have children, and
ring her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to
cro-wn, being the house of the Hamiltons, fhouldhave
grd hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposed
r waftedl; and on the other fide, the nobility and com-
nalty ought to force that the laws and the old cufloms
the realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
P?^eriflied by taxes, empreft, or new imports, after the

X maa-

manner of France ; for provision wherein, both by the aw
of God and man, the French king and his wife mat
moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this pirpole, it v.ere good that the nobiiity

. d comruons joined with the next heir of the crown, to
seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to the
ruin of their country, which mufl be done before the
French grow too firong and insolent.

Si r -r, That it may be provided, by content of t'e

three c.ares of th- land, that the land may be freefromnl
idolatrv like as England is, for justification whereof,
any free general council may be had where the Pope
Rome:.ha' e not the feat or judgment, they may offer
hew their c.uf t, b molt agreeable to Christ's religion.

N-t T, to provide that Scotland might be governed, i

a!! rl-; aJd .cF,.es, bv the antient blood of the realm, i::
o.t either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as alloth
Princes govern their countris, and cfpccially that the fa
mrn ht be in the h..nds of mere Scottish men.

T'HTIrDLY, That they might never be occasione't

enter into wars against England, except England fioid
give tie first cause to Scotland.

FOURTi LY, Tha no noDblman of Scotland fhouldtre

cive pcnion of France, except it were whiifi he did ifc,
in Ftramicc for otherife thereby the French wouldihoi
corrutD manv, .nd betav thcir own country.

IFTHLY, ihat no office, a'bbeyv livin, olr cI.

ih:\. be given to an;v but mere Sco:tifh men, by theate
of the th-re cl-ates o the realm.

S: xTH, That there be a councel in Scotland appoir

in the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and
rthoe cafes not to be directed by the French.

SEVENTHL-, That it be 'l- the said three eftatesa

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm fhallbeed
pended, ho-w much the queen f.all have for her portin
and eitate during her absence, how much liali be liir.i
to the governance and defence of the realm, how
yeaii appointed to be kept in treasure.

Is thele and such like points, if the French king a

f'-e cueen be found unwilling, and will withstand he
prot.iion; for the weale of the land, then hath thethr
c!Lftae of the realm authority, forthwith. to intimate
the fd kin a.u, l ouecn their humble requests; and iith
,,.e_ b. rc: c. : ua.la--ginted, then humbly they c:

' .
;

ormit tl:e governance thereof to the next heir of the
r(An, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an-
lr:r lihts of the realm.
SI ALLY, If the queen flall be unwilling to this, as it is
:i; he ill, in refp)edt of the greedy and tyranous aec-

fn 'o irance, then it is apparent that Almighty God is
'acd to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for

-; S l of it, and this time must be used with great cir-
ir.ction, to avoid the deceipts and tromperies of the

A';D then may the realm of Scotland confider, being
sce edie fre. what means may be devised by God's good-

to. accord the two realms, to endure for time to come

[K ie p!cafuire of Almighty God, in whose hands the
ri;s of all pr;nces be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 220.)
cr of Maitnd of ttinlgton's, thus di-

reced.
To my loving friend James. Be this deli ered

at London.

I '";DL-TA>:D n by tle last letter I rcceived from yow, a- !- Tlrui.
i',.lt :.fourfingr with zour countrymen upon the mat- ry ; S: 60.
:. 'Lu;.nd, and comoditevs may ert ew to that realmn, c1'i,. 'i.
-i;:: - gi z prcfcniry aflit ws with zour forces, ze io, .. tih

':i norl'.lie of the con-rary advifS, douting that we fall "'i i31 il
r: .. ingrh be found trufly frends, nor mean to conty- h1,nd

1.;'il c(onir:lt amctye, albei v,e promifc, but only for
:..i: the prent danger make zw to serve our turne,
''.* a'.:: -:ing jdii:ecred, becrm enemies as of b,-fore. For

;' c;;l:nrcof, they alledge things have past betwixt ws
[<:or:ce, and a few prcfntlptionts tendinr to the fam
', 1l glroundedl upon miniruft; quhlilk;, at the first ichr,

-i;ce n-hewe of apparcnce. gif men wi-'y not the circum-
.'s of the matter ; but gif thev will confer the tyme
' itll ihe present, confidcr t;e nature of this caus,

I*: 2it of or contrey, I doubt no hut jutgement fal be

L-to anilh miltruft. And firlt, I wad inh ze fould

:.',e the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the
;-.:: of '!ngl.and and Scotlind, and quhat moved our

X. 4 anc.tors

anceclours to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhii
by our storeys and regifires off antiquiteys appear to
these. The princes of England, some tyme, alledging
certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyn
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bo
dourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterpr
fed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by son
off armes, that we wer drvven to great extramiteys,
Iaos of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of o
cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that our owne ttreng
was fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of Englani
The Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering wellho
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na n
tion was able fa to annoye England as we being eneme
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by tb
meane to detourne zour armves from the invasion
France, and occupy zow in the defence offzour count
at hame, offering for that effect to beftowe some charg
pon w-s, and for compafling off theyr purpos, choyfed
tyme to propone the matter, quhen the fi-efche memorye
i::ris larelv receaved at zour hands, was fa depely pra
r-d on our harte;, that all our mvndes were occupied hol
to he revenged, .lnd arme ourselfes with the powaroff
tbr:'ne prince ag::inf zour enterprises thereafter

THIs v.-es the beirnrinq offour confederacy with Franr

Ar quhiik trme, our cro: ic!es mrak mention, that fomea
;he wvft forefa v the perril, and finall frute hould i
dound to vws t o

thr c t let rh : it hd affection fa binie

-t:xemernt, ,''at the -dvfCe of i-e . if part owercaell
bel. 'I i- rna .}iit part of alI querells betwixt ws lilD

ha: tvro, a iea.i qlu!hen the provocation came ou0f

iyv., h-s ever f.:ii:n out hy theyr procurement ral.h
-:a rian-, o.e cans oi'olr fclfcs : and quhenfaeverwebrat
t-= pec e, it come pa'ltli by :h'-r intyfements, partll
::hesw rhe cononeti intended b'v that realm. But no

-: (;oodl' provi, nce fa altered the cafe, zea chJnged
u- :he piat contrary, t!:at how hes the FrenIche takenzo
p:?.c, and we, off very j zernent, becum defyrous tot

;jw in the; r rowme. Oui- e.'ca are opened we espy h
un:a-2rea' the;. ha.e been us or wei!e t all rymes, h
they mad=e ' s ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in mrn
dangerous wves for thevr cominodite, and neverthel
wad not lv;ck; ot tvmes, anainl: ile natour of the lil
to co-tr.'; p":ce, lcavin ws in w:ev-. We fee that th

h fuppj

pport, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affe(ion
ie bare to ws, for pytie they had offour eate, for re-
:apenle off the lyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme
aihtleyr alEliftioncs, but for ambition, and infaciable cu-
idite o rcy)gne, and to mak Scotland ane accessory to the
own of France. This was na friendly office, but rner.
nary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of
'r defcrviing; a hale realm for the defence of a part.
,e fee theym manifcitly attempt the thing we fufpeed

wzo0w; we feared ze ment the conquest off Scotland,

adthey are planely fallen to that work; we hated zov
r doubt we had ze ment evil towards ws, and fall we
e theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about
bring ws in maift vile servitude ? Gif by zour fiendly
pport at this tyme, ze fall declare that not only fute ze
ot the ruyne offour country, but will preserve the liber-
thereof from conquelf by frangeares, fall not the oc-
ofin off all inimitie with zow, and ligue with theym,
taken away? The causes being removed, how fall the
si'ces remane ? The fear of conquest made ws to hate
wand love theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee theym
anely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws frendlhip,
1 we not hate theym, and favour zow ? Gif we have
i'lwne ft great confiance, continuing fa mony zeares in
i)h with theym, off quhome we had a: inall commo-
te, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off
InItiones may do ws greatest plefour ?
B'ri ze will fay, this mater may be rcconcvled, and
f.irends as off before. I think weill peace is the end
fii weyr, but off this ze may be asSured, we will never
fr trust that reconciliation, that we wii be content to
rgo the ametyc of England, nor do any thing may bring
i in suspicion with zow. Giff we wold, at any tyme
pileate theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes
tetole off elimnation and discrediting off oifelfes. per-
uaily expone our common weill to a maift manifeit dan-
r. and beciim a pray to theyr tyranny? Quhais aid
ld we miplore, being eflitute of zour fricndlhip, gif
ti offnexw ald attempt theyr formar entelprife ? Qhat

l'n mg}l: help ws gilS they w!ld, or w.ld gif they
tght' and it is kce eneuch, they will not flick hereaf-
to tak theyr t) me off ws, quhen difplcfiur and grudge
's t.r:; depe rute un baith f c-, secing a;ubition has ft
pi; o.;r ther r.eaiion. that beforc we la: ever done

a n ',

any thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary plea
fed thevm by right and vwrang, they did not flick tot
tempte the fubverfien of our hale Ifate. I wald ze hoaul
rot efleeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we canno
forsee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will o
f£:dy by al gode means to entertayne that thing rmav
our fatetc ; quhilk confiiles all in rhe relaying.of zol
frendhips I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, iitt
days of zour princes off maift noble memory king Hen
the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes weropenedol
asmyvtye betwixt baih realms; was not at all tymes ti
difference of religion the onley stay they wer not em
braced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power
thevr adherents fubeert the devises of the betterforti
But now has God off his mercy removed that blockfuri
orn' the way : now is not theyr pracrife lvke to tak plan
any mare, when we ar cornme to a conformity offdofrm
an profes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take t
be the ftrayteft knot o amit'e can be devised. Giffi
mav be alledged, that iome off our countrymen, at o
trme, violated theyr promis ? giff ze liss to way their
cumrfances, ze fall fvnd the promis is rather roughto,
b'y necciire. after a great owerthiaw off our men, i
comnme off fre will, and tendinir ever to our great i
cocnodite and decay cftour haiil frate, at leilt fa iat
Brt in this c.:fe, f.il the preservation off our liberieb
in-ep- l-!y ijincid with the keping ot' promeffe, andth
Yi.'ativn oyfi our fayth cal ws inl maift mierable e.ni
tuie. Sa that iss nytther the feare off God, reverence0
nmn, reliio', othe, promile, nor warldly honeflye ,
iuiifcicnt to bvnd ws, ve-t all the zeale off or iait
conntl-e, the maintcnalnce off our owne state, theffet
rs our w- tsfc and chillirene roin llaverv, compeli sti
kepe pronilre. I am aiTurcd, it is trewly and sintad
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametvent
zow ; it fall be uttred by our proceedings. Giffel
as ,'cy-rons of it as e ar, aurances may be de"yA
quh:..;; al! p:.rtres will be out of doubte. There
,goae mznes to do it, fit iftruments for the purpos, tiv
fer.e-S w.tii, the inhabitants of baith ealms with it, G
hes wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties ao
taine filil areement upon it, never did, at any tymel
mornv rtins concurre at ones to knvt it up. thedill
i.lion off a tfew quhai harts are in Godis hands, nlay
4

t (he hale. I hope he quha hes begun this work, and
;i;yned it quhilc now, by the expectation of man,
j perfyte it.
I ;ry zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confulta-
n. cahethec ze fall support ws or no. ieyng the mater
:;ch for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence
o'nr caus, giffze have any refpe& for zour awne weill.
hei preparatives in France, and levying of men in Ger-
a-: (qihcr-off I am lately advertised) ar not altogyd-

oer dencd for us, ze ar the mark they flhote at; they
o our re.lme, but for ane entrey to zours. GifF they
o:d direct! fchaw hoftilite to zow, they knaw zo wald
:r.di for !lheyme ; therefor they do, by indirect meanes,
liind zo, the thing, they dare not as zit planely at-
:e. They feme to invade us to th' end that having
fiMbld thevr hale forces fa nere zour bordours, they may
i'l) i to attack zow : It is ane offtheyr aid fetches, mak-
?id.:o' to one place, to ]lghton ane other. Remcm-
':!ow covcrtiy zour places about Boulougne were aai-
:, andc carryed away, ze bein: in peace as now. How
e c;.rrpri' of Calais was fnely dissembled, I think ze
:;e rot f sone ;orgotten. Beware of the third, prevent
:iy policy by prudence. Gififze fe not the lyke difpofi-
2: prId'!itiy in thc-ym, ze fe nathing It is a grosse igno-
'eo ; mifl.naw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak
ize z. r.y not hcrenfelr, '" IH:d I wist ;" ane uncomely
tc-.: to procde ofi a wyfe man's mouth. That is on-
:.: c'lanced on to zow, quhill zow commonly wiffed,
:'. c.'untrey mnlght be divorfed fiom the Frenfche,
n: f comnmc to pass as was mailt expedient for
. For giS b your intyfemcnt we had taken the
:; il hadri, ze manght have fufpe&ed we 'would
:e en otruftv frends, and na langer continued
i'.c, thien peirril had appeared. But now, quhen
our self, we have conceyved the hatered, provokel
pi'late injuries, and that thcyr evil dealing with
il:s d(ceccd our inimitye, let no man donbte but
n il f-!yd vws cnnc!nmes in ernest, that fa ungent-
-cs denoe'ned our countrey, and at qnhais hands
c:.n oo, fr

i nathini but all extremitve, -giff ever

'' in. et the upper hand. Let not this occasion,
u tpc!! offrcei, efrcape zow: gifF ze do neglect-
.' t. prci'nt opportulitic, and hoping to Lave ever
* ''.ik conmme ic;iping upon zow, it is to be feared

zour

zoul enemye waxe to great, and fa firang, that asti
wards quhen ze wval!, ze fall mPot be able to put hi
down ; and then, to zour smart, after the tyme,
will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by e
perience, quhat harmc cometh off oversight, and tru
ing to zour encmyes promeffe. We offer zow the c
cation, quheyrby zour former losses may be repayre
Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, suffering ws to be owerra
quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frenfche, th
they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, fickii
their lust to reygne, that they can neyther be conte
with theyr fortune present, nor reit and be fatisf
when they have gode luck, but will still follow on,
ving in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of figr
a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end? Is tb
any of f ffmall jugement, that he doth not forefeeal
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent again
zovw ?

It fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe t

Frenfche be prefenty Thc'r estate is not always
calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly
wes not thevr gicat rcdines for weyr made theym
tak this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a ay
trult in their awne policy, thinking to have found
rciillance, the'ir opinion hes deceaved therm, and ti
makes them no.v amafed. The estates off the emp
(as I heare) has futed refiitution off th' Imperial toi
Metz, Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to si
bef:lnz-; and all thing is not a calme within tb
a.vne countrev, the lis fit they be presently for we
the mare oportune lefreme ye the time for zowv.
thn lyke occasion were u.fcred o the Frenfche againf zo
:vey, how <gladlv wvoul i thyc embrace it. Are ze note
chained ot zour fieuth, to spare theym that hes alre
compalIed zour destruction, gifflheym wer able? Confd
with zour seif qahiik is to be choyfcd ? To weyragal
them out irh zo -r re.ime or within .' Giffquhill ze fle
we fal be overthrownlc, then fall they not fayle tofute2
in zour awne countrev, and ue vs as a fote stole to o'
.loke zow. But ome will fay, perhaps, they meane it'
It is foly to think th-e wald nor giff they wer able, qu
before hand thit flick not to ift zour armes, anduft
the flyle of zour cro-.vn. Then quhat difference there i
camp within zowr awne bounds or without, it is manifn

f t armyes fiould camp in zowr country, but a

th; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit flould
loie be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
ow on our support will draw to, befydes the difho-
LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not

;perticular refpec&s weill affecred to the caus, move zow

ubtract zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap-
irt, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, un-
fible that we may receave conditiones of peace; but I
little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fik as
remove all miflruft, and giff we wald have accepted
hers, the mater had bene lang or now compounded. Let
w not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles, and dif-
es our jufi querell with the name of conspiracy against
foverayne. It is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It
the liberty off hir realme we fludy to preserve, with the

oazrd o our lyvcs. We are not (God knaweth) comme
this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rew!l, or
ling to fchake off the zoke of governement, but ar
awne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of firan-
ares, feaking to defraude ws off lawful government.
if we ihould susser itrangeares to plant themfelffes
aceably in all the frenthes of our realme, fortify the fey-
rte;, and maift important places, as ane cntre to a plain
nqueft, now in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth
the realme, (hould we not be thought oncareful off the
mnon weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill
uets to hir majelle ? Quhat other opinion could fche
ae ofF ws ? Might ihe not jufly hereafter call ws to
ccompt, as negligent ministeres ? Giffftrangeares flould

thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail
evll, alter and pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr ple-
ur; myght not the people eleem our noblemen unwor-

the place of counfalours ? MWe mean na wyfe to fubtrak
ur obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes

her dew reverence, rents and revenues offhir crown.
feke n:tthing but that Scotland may retnane, as of before,
fre realme. reswlit by hir hyenes and hir minifleres borne
men of the fami; and that the succession of the crown may
mane with the lawful blode.
I WALD not ze fould not fa Ivttill efleme the friend-
ipof Scotland, that zejuged it not wvorth-y to be embraced
it fall be na small commodite for zow to be delivered off

the

the auoyance of so neir a ny'.lbour, quhis inimitye a;
rrore rrouble zow, then off any other nation albeit tw}
as pui.irant, n t lyeng dry marche with zow. Befydesti
ze fall not nede to fear- the invasion off any prince lackl
the cummodite to invade zow by land, on our hand. Co
fider cuhat fup.er.uous charges ze beiiowe on the fti
cation and keping of Barwick; quhilk e may reducet
mean owmc, having ws to frendes. The realne oflri
land being of natour a godc and fi'till countrey, b'rea
son off tie continewval:.; -r-.uiicncs and lak of poiicy,;
knaw to be ratier a ..:

l.. unto zow the-n great .a

rage ; and giff it were peaceable may b very ec!nmmeiiou
For pacification quhayroff, it is not on'.no.-ne to *;
quhat service we .ar bill to do. Refure no- the- .;
moditeys, betides mony ma quhen the ar o,.'cl. ' il!
albeit I fiudy not to amplify and dlatt, ed - ;

il

countrey able to offer zow the lyke, ad a. riraeal

ce embraced, for that zour nunccftors, bj' ai :.: ;I:-. nm
crne'-t- futcd our amity, and yet i: \v;s not tl;e-'; hlap
com by it. The mater nes ahnaift canryed me beyoandt
boundcs off a Icttre, qlharfor I will leave to troubleza
aft-r I h..ve ^ven ou this note. I .'ald wiss thatze, a
they that ar lcar.ldi, so 'ld ree the te wa former orati
of Dcmoflth:::. cailed Olynthiace, and confidere qh
counf:.!i t!:at v.-fe oratour gave to the Athenians, his con
tryrn., i a !yke cafe ; quhilk hes fit) ,reat affinite with t
causc f corr, that every word therff myght be applje
to .i'r purpos. There m.iy ze learne of him quhat a
v:- i :.j be folowed, when zour nyght-bours hous is
f- re; Ih;'5 I bid zow hartely fareweill. From Sant A
die-'v, the *cth of Jan:ary, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 228.)
P' rt o a letter s;-on '1 ho. Randolph to Sir W

liam Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29
of April, 1560.
.- o:' - W I L L only, for this time, discharge myself of

promi:e to the erl o Hitly, who so defireth

i. e recorFriided to vou. as one, who with all his he
ft.voureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. H
tr.e words that come out of his mouth were able to p

a-..e n urnxpF-rienced man to peak farther in his

i, than I dare be hold to write. I leave it to your ho-
r to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
will mftIlf always measure my thoughts, as he fhail
lrve to be tpoken of. With much difficulty, and great
rii!in. he hath fiibfcribed with the reft of the lords
i;n with them in this action; whatfomever he can in-

t to the frtherance of this cause, he hath promised to
,wivi folenn p!-otcliation, and many words; he trust-
!olijoil many to this cause; and {aith surely that no

a '

iil lie where he taketh part. IHe hath his day sub-
;d ; blond between England and this nation; he faith,
;, thcie was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. . ('ol. p 242.)
2,do!p!l to Ccil, Ioth August 560o. From

Edinburgh.

IN CE the :qth of July, at what time I wrote lafl An -;ngina
to your honour, I have heard o nothing worth the i:lthePaper
pfting. At this prefnt it may please you to know, that '
enol part of the nobles are here arrivcd, s your ho-
ur fiall receive their names in wriing. The earl of
tly excufctih himlr by an infirmity in his leg. His
ariant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chofcn
akerofthe parliament, or harangue, makcr as these men
rai. The ii-i day of their liiting in parliament will
. Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as have been
'.; f the lords have communed and deviscd of certain
ii then to he propounded, as, who shall be sent into
;;', wh into England. It is much easier to find thecm

,
th otr. It fetemeth almot to be resolved upon
tor Engl ald the Maiter of lMaxw.'ll, and laird of
;gon. For France, Pitarrow and the Juflice Clerk.

: lhey have consulted whom they think meetell to
ctLr the XXIV. of th: hich the XII. counsellors mufi
c "oi;cn. They intend very fortly to fend away Ding-
ita herald into France, with the names of those they
chuic; and also to require the king and queen's con-
at urto this parliament. 'I hey have devised how to

i- t contrat with England confirmed by authority
pa'tiin nt; how also to have the articles of the agree-
" bctwecn them and their king and queen ratified.

Th rsce

These things yet have only been had in communicati(
For the confirmation of the contra& with Engla
I have no doubt; for that I hear many men very i
the fame, as the Earl of Athol, the Earl of Sutherlai
the L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with the L. Jam
The L. James requested me this present day to bringth
contract unto him. I intend also, this day, to fpeaku
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for thatbep
mifd in my hearing to subscribe, and then preset
would have done it, if the contract could have bcen h
For the more assurance againfi all inconvenients, I wol
beides that, that I trult it shall be ratirf'd in parliaint
that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand
f-t his feal, which may always remain as a notable moo
mient, tho' the act of parliament be hereafter difannoul
If it might, therefore, stand with your advice, thatt
lDrds might be written unto, now that they are herep
sent to tht effect, or that I might receive from your Ho
some earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt not bu
would serve to good purpose. If it might be also kno
with whar fubflt.tial and effetious words or charge yo
lire to have.it confirmed, I think no great difficulty woe
be made. Th- Earl Marshal has oft been moved toti
ftribe, he fcith mo delays than men judged he Tvoo
His son told! me yeficrday, that he would speak with
^t leisure. if did als. Drumlanrick; I know nottow
rurpofe: I have caused L. James to be the earnefler
the L. I!-rfhal, for his auftority's fake, when of
it w1 i conu!trion by what m ans it might bewroul
that the amity between these two realms might
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, oe
that he knew of no other, but by making themb
cne, and. tha- in hope of that mo things were do
than would otherwise have ever been granted ; the
of Argyll advifeJ him earnefily to flick unto that, tha
had promised, that it should pass his power and all
craft- knaves of his counfei, (I am bold to use un;ot
H. his own words) to break so g d!y a
pose This talk liked well the afifters, howfomeve
pleased him to whom it was spoken unto. Theba
who in time past have been of the parliament,
yefterdav a convention among themselves in the chu
in very honest and quiet fort; they thought it go'
require to be refiored unto their ancient liberty, to

IL i pal"iamelnt. They presented that d a bill
to th lo! i to that ei'e't, a copy whereof 'fha! be
int as oon as it c:an b- ha.d. It was aiifuered Unto
ently and tak.en i good part. It wvas re-Cired unto tlic
rds of the articles, when they are choaien, to rciliveC
htreupon. - - 'i-c f:lrtrj a ig ^a." ,ap', :'.,:.,_

stbe foutirficotss cf Ia'i..;-, &c. - 'I his picfen[
orning, v'z. the 9th, I underllood, that th lurds
tdcedl to be at the parliament, which c nufed m some-
hattu flay my letter, to fc whvit I could hear or lear;l
rh the reporting unto your Hlo'r. The lords, at ten.
fthe clock, afLnbb!e.l th!imfle-s ;at t pce, whe-re
he duke liclh; fi-oin \, !hnce thyc-) departed towards the
albooth, as they were in dignity. Each one being ft
a his feat, in such order as your H. nihl! receh-e then
this ferull. I he crovwn, the mace, the fw.rd, were
idin the queen's feat itience beiin comianded, the L.
Lidintgon began his oration. sI exct'fed his infufficien-
to occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of
nags past, and c what necessity men were forced unto
r the defence of their country, what remedy and support
plealed God to fend them in the time of their neceli-

o, w much he were bound heartily to acknowledge it
J to requite it. eIc tookl away the perfnaiion that was
many men's minds that lay back, that nifidcemed other
:irgs to be meant than was attempted. si. ad,'ifed a!
Siecsto lay all particulars ap.:;t, aLnd to 1 end thicmfe!lv;
,olly to the ti-Le flrice of Go.l and o' their coultrlv .
.willed thin to rc!emlbe in wh.it :a i it iad beeni
io;ag time for lack f ro'vcrlan;'ct, all c.rcii' of julice.
;eend, he exlurtcd them to n ituai! lt a ni; d hearty
iend'ip, and to live ith one another as members all
so; bod--ile I'C! ;vcld God 'on' to in itain this peace
d.amity \ith ali ;ii:'!t s, et'p iailly bet.tvit the realms or
g!l .U alii Scotiaid, in lhe fear of God, and so ended.

l c'eill o r-cgier imm iately I'r:co up, and ailc.
., \!it atte;- tey would proeecc : t was thoui ht
: ',at the a;-:ices of th' peace 1.ould be confi-med
it' c>!rloinn conlfentit. for t t it xwv; I lhol!tht r cFa-

:-:;- l -.'-' away l'itl { e'. I!!2t, i'Fri.l-e, and to re-

':i: '.'- i..iai-ion Gi tihem as foun :as miglit e. The
:-' l' t, read, were imlnm.'atel agreed tl i;to A dcv
'ia nire.d to have certain of the noble, f;bfcrib. iln-

' ~, and to put to their feals, to be ant away b1 a
Ls. YI,
y herald,

hera'd, who fha!l also bring the ratification aain ;i,
him. The barons, of whom I have above written, re
c;ired an answer to their request, somewhat was said In
to the contrary. The barons alledged for them cuftoc
and authority. It was in the end resolved. that there (houl
be chosen fix to join with the lords of the articles, an
that if they, after good advisement, should find itrighi
and necefTary for the commonwealth, it should be ratifid
at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords precedi
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords oft!l
articles. Tie order is, that the lords spiritual chufe d
temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgfs
their own. T'here were chosen as in this other paper
have written. This being done, the lords departed and
companied the duke, all as far as the Bow, (whichis
gate going out of the high fireet) and many down intot!h
palace where he lieh. The town all in armour, thetr:c
pets founding, and other mufick such as they have. Th
much I report unto your honour of that that I didbot
hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used sar'i
in tiimes lng past the lords have had parliament rob
which are novw -ith them wholly out of use.

T:E names of as many earls and lords fpiritr.!i 2
tero.ral as are afe-mbled at this parliament.

Th- dke of Chatclhcrault.

Eat'-:. Lords. Lords Spirit;i.l.

Arr.n--. Frfl;ine. St. Andrew's.
Ar,, il. Rl uthven. DI)unkell.
Atho'e. I. ndfev. Athens.
C:-awford. Sumervill. The bilhop of thc!ei'
Canf.ils. Cathca:-t. Abbots and rio;;,
M;arshall. Hurne. know not how t,;'
Morton. Livinsiton.
Gincairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Ru.hes. Fleming.
I on:l;-th. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochiltree
Gordon,

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons elected to be

of the Articles.

iens. The Duke. Maxwell.
]ed Argyll. 1" illibardine.
rd James. Miarfhall. Cunninghamhead.
brouth. Athole. Lochenvar.
ebottle. Morton. Pitarrow.
iniors(. Glencailr. Lundy.
opar. Ruthvcn. Ten Provosts of the chief
irirffi, Erskine. towns, which also are
lwinning. Boyd. of the Articles.

Lindsay.

that w-ih the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the
!i;io!i, ad chiefly the affections of theie men. that are
s:is time chosen Lords of the articles. May it atisfy

:rHon'. for this time, to know that, by the common
!5oa of men, there was not a fubflantialler or more sus-
irt nmber of all forts of men chosen in Scotland these
yi years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good
roue. This present morning, viz. the oth, the L.
Ldngton made me privy unto your letter; he intend-
, much as may be, to follow your advice. Some
' l;nts there are. He himself is determined not to
i:!:J rance. He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh

that, that moveth him most, which is the ex-

?i of the las, that went on a more grateful mcllfge
:ne hall carry, and stood on other terms with their
roethau he doth, and yet your honour knoweth swhat

hlboi world judgeth.
i:ioa of the Lefier Barons to the Parliament,

held Aug. 1560.

T lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and Ict!or, ;
1 ohos, we the barons and freeholders of this I1'.d..!.'3
, your brethren in Chrilt, That whereas the cruses of e"'er r CC-

.llI I ql- l

e ion, and common well of this realm, are, in this i5

A s.
!"-: ;aliament, to be treated, ordered, and eftn.1ith-

Y d,

ed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of the comm
weall h; and wve being the greatest number in propor.:i0
wvhere the said caures concern, and has been, and veir
ready to bear the greatest part of the charges thereui:,
as xvcl in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, an
with or go. 's; and ieeing there is no place where s
nay do better f ice now than in general councils a
par iamen'. in
, iig our belt advice, and reason, Vo;

;;o.t co':u!rnIc

ioi: thereof, for the mains

-:-ar; cf sv;rt z, and punishment of vice, as use and culloa

i..d bee: i okd by ancient acts of parliament obhni
.n this real;; an I hertby we underfiand that we
to h' ha:-ad rt rcafcn, and vote in all causes conceriiln
cc-:> ;:,iV.c!il, as w ll in couni-lls as in parliaments;o:
;.ic - v i th;ii that whatfomever ordinances and fi:ut
be ,r-ad concerning us and our estate, we not being
c"lred and fuiLrcd to reason and vote at the making:h
us. t;c. the fl.me (hould not oblige us to tan thet
T. :'.tore it .iil please your lordEfips to take conlid=
ticn Lhe euf, and of the charge born, and to be bon

, s.ince e are willing to serve truly to the common
f t- r-e alm, after our estate, that ye will, in this par
p..i.imen, .and all counfells, where the common wsv|
t- reat:n is to be treated, take our advice, counfedi
cote, so th., ithot thth fame, your lordflfips woulil
tr .'k:;.:' to be pascd and concluded in parliment
c:,:;;;i.i a orefaid , and that all acts of parliament eim
in tirm. past, concerning us for our place and eflate,
in our favour. be at this prlrent parliament, confir;
,r.pr*oved. and ralified, and a of parliament made it
up. n. And your lord,'hips anfver humbly befcechcs.

Oif /. :.' s cfthi, t tion, the f/lowuing a:cost:;F

/ <iAr.is ; L tt. toCecil, 9 Aug. 1560. The ni
conc.ded a:-; pa'i by common content on Saturday
i.: f.:h foIlern for;t as the firtl day that they aembl,
these. FirIt, that the barons, according to an olid
parliament, made in the time of James I. in the
God 142-, f:!ll have free voice in parliament, i:i
palled withuut: any contradicricn,

N(

No. V. (Vol. . p. 252.)

\ !tter of Thonls Randolph, the rrnglifh ref-

denr, to thle light vorfhipful Sir William Cecil,
kii. prIncipal lecrctary to the queen's majefly.

Have received your honour's letters of the firfi of this 9 A"g.
nanutlh, written at Cfy)es in Ecx, and also a letter un- 5'61' co-.
the lord James, from his kiniman St. Come out of ,'': B. Io.
rane, in this they agree both that the quc.ni of Sc;,tiand
s nothing changed of her purpose in home coming. [
Tre vour honour that will be a flout advenlture for a
i eC!.;!:'d woman, that may be doubted as well lhat mnv

upen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily in-T

a5 be received ,whcn i he cometh to land of a grieat numni
r, ho are utterly persuaded that lie intiedeih their
ilr ruin, come when fle will; the preparance is very
rll whenfcver that she arrive, s:Carcely any man can be
.:faL2,, that Ihe hath any such thouoiht in her head I
,;v. loil your honour's letter unto the lhrd James, loi
kioii, lord Ledington, they wish as your honour doth,
.t ihe might be flayed yet for a space, and if it werl
tf r th .i obedience fake, some of them care not tho'
ey ever saw her face. They travel what they can to
rsent the wicked devises of these mischievous purposes
ih.r minitcrs, but I fear that that will always be founl

i:,ii hujuts feculi, they do what they can to sand with
;hJ.iiion, and to maintain amity with their neighbours
:e :;'.e also need to look nto themfees, olr their ha-
'i great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor
::: for themselves, but to rcpofc theinfelves upon the
ilrn s mjefly, our sovereign's faiouls and support.
ieida .broad they have none, nor many in vwhom they

f

rr t home. There are in mind ihortly to try what
: m.; be afitrcd at ot the queen's majcfly, and what
'e m:Iv .lrcl)- prfor:n of that they intend to ofTer for
ierprati. '-This the queen of Scotland above all other
h rolhteth ; this file feeketh by all means to pre-

.'': a.J hatli caused St. Come, in her name, earnely to

rc -

to charge him that no such things be attempted be-
r

re r comiinr home ; for that it is said, that they too

dJ\5 ;arrived here out of England for the purpose, what
rt'bl.int lomcver the noblemen do make, that they arc

Y 3 grievcd

grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far frcor
thir hearts They intend to expostulate with me here
upon. I have my aniwer ready enough for them If he
thru't all Engli;hmen out of this country, I doubt no
but t;ere wi;i be tome o her own that will bear i:s for
kirpdnefs. Of m-e he rhall be quit. so oon as it plcafrh
the queen's majeft' n-:y miitrfs no longer to use my fice
in ihis pce. By such talk, as I have of late had. ith
the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that
th=v are of mind that immediatch of the next convention,
I lhall repair rowards ou nwith their determinations, ad
ref'oluions, in a;' prpoles, wherein your honour's advice
is earne-iv recqiile., and fhortl! looked for. Whatfoa0.
ever I deiile myielf, I know my will ought to be subject
unto the queen my fooereign's pleasure, but to contcnt
m-:ielr, w-c:d Go- I were so happy a:, to serve her maief-
ty in as mcan a iate as ever poor gentleman did. to b
quit or this place ; not that I do in my heart wax ;ryz
or' her mjerfy', service, but because my time and years
require some p'ace of more repose and quietness thanlfini
in this country I doubt also my insufficience when othe
tr,.ucies in this country aife, or ought hall be requi- o
mr.e to the advancement of her majci}y s service, that ei,
ther my will is not able to compass, or my credit if
cimrt to work to tht eff:Ec, as perchance shall be loIi
for a my hands. As your hono..,:- hath een a me.nso
r' co:tinuance in this room, so I trult that I hall fin
tha: continual favo .r at your hands, that so so,'n asit hai
stand with the queen's majeftv's pleasure, I may give thii
place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and in;hi
r-ean fealon, have my course directed by yotr goodad.
.. -e y"-. i r..n :

by mny cont'ivance do some such service, asj

n.::.e3. .-eoe
t to her maj- fits wvill and pieaure.

'i . -i f.wv ord, I am bold to write unto your h0

r-,::: ',f m t-:lf. ior tle rt, where that is itfhed that
t.- io: ;s vi!!i sout:> continue yet for one month, I alferr
yo.:r honour that there is yet nothing omitted of theiroid
and a cutfome d manner of doing, and feeing that the
have brc..ht tt unto th.is point, and hould now prevaili
the',: v.:-e un v.ort.-y of thei liivcs.

i FrI:D Co '.- .at the- are posed so to leave the ma'

rtr I dou'r: -.o:c hei- monyi- , than I de her fair wordis
a:;. yret ca; I : cceive what great things can b
-.;:e:'-u t w:.: f..-: thou-in;d crowns, and treaiure of e

('.v o'"B

.n i;-e I know there is no sure or ready means to get
. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothingT at thlis time
.;rittcni, that he thinketh may be able to f.tisf)e our
ei;re, inl knowledge of the present slate of things here.
,\"r;tfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever bett, that
:come not; but if Ihe do come, to let her know, at
:; firit. what fihe hall find, which is due obedience,
-ja willing service, if lhe embrace Chris, and desire to
i;'e in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you
tsae lt received, your honour somewhat underflandeth
,, \r. Knox himself, and also of others, what is deter-
alnei, he himself to abide theuttermolt, and other never
;,leare him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
g:;ler with what comfort fomever it will please you to
iie him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth not
::dr!s condern hin, or at the least in that point, that he
i t lore charged with by his own queen, that her majefly
:i;! no; allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a
'r;t comfort unto him, and will content many others;
..ii :ils prayer isfor the maintenance of unity with Eng-
:.a, and that God will never susser men to be o ungrate,
;;v an' persuasion to run headlong unto the derfrufrion
r them, that have savcd their lives, and restored their
(0n!tl to iiberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble
Aio::] hnour, dcfiring God to fend such an a amiry between
:i:j to realms. that God ay be glorified to them of
:.;i world.-At Edcnbourgh the 9th of Augufi, 6 I.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 262.)

A letter of Queen Eliz;ab.lt to Quecn Mary.

Tt!:,e right excellent, right high and mighty p-inccfTc,
o!;i r-ight dear and well blo-cd ifier and cousin the
q'Cn of Scotland.

!GIIT excllent, right high, and mighty princesse, i6th of
k oi;r ;riht de:r and right well-beloved fiter and cou- ,u g. c-

Pa/,r Of-

'* " gi'ect you well. The lord of St. Cofme breought fice, fionm;
;-:I yo;r letters, dated the 8th of this present at Ab- Coly.

.;. .l wh'lLer.b ye signify, that although by the answer
.':;,: :' you by Monficur Doyzell, ye might have had
-::.;n to lhave c;;uctd into fomc doubt of our amity, yet

Y 4 after

a'tCr rti?. put'po:i-T pa-edc bctwixt you and our abaf.
£-.:L, you wjiuld afTure us of your good meaning to live
\::;h . i ni arm--', and for your purpoie therein ye require
u-; ro g--e credit to the fid St. Cofme. We have there-
t'!.o thought good to anfwvcr as followeth. The fame
S:. Cc;.ne harh made like declaration unto us on yourpart,j
fur .our excuic in not ratifying the treaty, as vourfelf
mrnade to our am ba. Jor, and ke have bricly answered to
ev ery th la:nc points. as he can shew you: and if he
fna l r.o iu do, et ls in the mean season you might be
i:-C_. d to th'ik that your realons has (aisfied us, fomer-
al' y

v.;- alure you, that to our requells your answer can.

nor be reputed for a tifatisfaion. For we require no be.
re.t of yo, bat that you will perform your promise where.
uno y-u are bound by your feal and your hand, for he
refj i wh-er o . e fee no reason alledged can serve. Nei-
ther co- we- a thing. but that which is in your wa
po.'er as ueen of Scotland, that which yourself in uods
2::i fpeec dco:' con'cfs, that w hich your late hulband'
o:;r god b:;:h-:r's ambassadors and you concluded, th!t
v...ih ". v

:." own nobility and people were made prier ca

Tn' tni t .
.'..l t indced made peace and quietness berwixt u',

L.a thai, x\ i'hc u wh ich, no p rfech' amity can contirt.i

tb:.T.:-:;- us, as ii ir be indilferetlv weiShed, we doó
r.o: but vc x.-'l perceive, allow and accomplish. Never.
thic.cs, rc.--ce.;-.ng b- the report of the bringer, thaty
Irl;!-t. si ;h-\v., i-C:; our coming homc, to follow herei
t: . - i.'

; e of , -1: cou ncil in Scotlan d, we are content

fufipc d o;:' c- ..cipt of ai! unkindncfr, and do afTureo
t.at we b:z " ti. rcdolvcd, upon: this being performed, t
ui;: e a ti.r- .'.ri o amitv. and to live in neighbourhoo
\.-:th i'

- c::'::'. friendly, v.i as aiTuredly in the l

cr iri.nip, a. is -

- .e in the knot of nature and bl

.nrnd h-reni v.-.e b. o eirnefriv dirr.rn:i:,ed, that the wor
': ld 's-- i t'r:- cn trarv il-:'d r.ov, (which God for
id'. the verv oc:.ion to be in onu and not in us; as ti
'orv xin.rl.-th th like of the kinE vour father, our uPl
v. ith .;hon ur rat er fought to have knitt a perpet'
bcon v ir. vti i r o come in this irealm to York, of whid
ma:ter we r;knc there rc;n.in v irh us, and we tli'
vith vou, i..

i ti- .

\- rvitn:Ts or C.os father's earnest goo

meaning, and of the error hrcu;-toJ divers evil coupcil
lrs induced .our rther ; or final. where it feemeth tho
report hath been made unto you, that we had sent

adni:l

ri:'al to the seas with our navy to empeache your pas-
. both your servants do well underfand how false
, is, knowing for a truth that we have not any more
tn wo or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
W:;1" pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost com-
;'.., by the earnest complaint of the amba.Tador of
.r0od brother the king ofSpain, made of certain Scot-
,S;en haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of
trs of marque, of which matter also we earnefHly require
t. a your coming to your realme, to have some good
aleration, and the rather for refpet that ought to be
aitt your realme and the countries of us, of France,
Sp.in, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right
x:ient, right high and mighty princess, we recommend
toyou with most earnest request, not to neglec these
arfrierlly and filterly offers of friendship, which, before
i. we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
x ignet at Henyngham the i6th of Augufi, in the third
a of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 295.)

lItter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir
William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the
queen's majefy.

F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had 5sth of
J nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Be- a', '563.
re.scoring, we had so little to hint upon, that we from the
nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, Original.
!ig, and running at the ring, and such like. He

wght with him such a number of letters, and such abun-

:te of news, that for the space of three days, we gave
3liecs to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
;nag of tales many so truely reported, that they might
compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
.i :);'bs. Among all his tidings, for the most as-
',1 f nIl this unto your honour a an undoubted truth,
*: i, that the cardinal of Lorlr 'e, at his beipn with
t:'psror, moved a marriage b -'cn his younge} son,
'Cus of Auftruche, and this queen ; wherein he hath
tar ivailcd, that it hath already come unto this point,
i; i find it good, the aid duke will out of hand fend

kither-

hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to the confum
mation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; an
to the intent her mind may be the better known, laCro
is sent un:o her with this melnage from the cardinal, wvh
hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again
fore the end of May ; and for this cause la Croch is rea
for his departure, and his letters writing both davan
night. This queen being before advertized of his towar
ncfs, by many means, hath fought far off, to known
lord or lMurray's mind herein, but would never so plan
ucal witil hil, that 'e could learn what her meaning
or how ihe is bent. Sie ueth no man's council, but o
this man's that lait arrived, and auredly until the L.
Liding:on's return, he will do what fle can to
that secret, and because resolution in his absence cannot
taken, fine will, for this time. return la Croch with reque
t.) have longer time to devile; and after, with t.:.
fpced she can, she fully purpofeth to advertize him, 1
her uncle the caidinal, of her mind. Of this nmatter
L. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whe:her
lome intelligence that he had before his departure. orli
his arrival in France, divers letters have passed bete
her grace and him, whereof as much as it importdl
grrcav the kno-wledge of, was communicated to
as much as was written in sypher, is kept unto themsi;
Whether :Jo the L. of l.idington hath had conterre
vith the Spaniih amb-lTador in England of this matt
or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good mea
to get true knowledge thereof. Gueffcs or furnmiIs
so grave nttcrs, I wou!d be loth to write for vi'ili
This aiio your honour may take for truth, th.t the
peror hath offered with his son, for this queen's de
the count, of Tyroll, vhich is said to be worth :,:
franks bv. ear. Of this matter alfi, the rhingran'et:
a letter unto tlis queen, out of France not long!;
This is ail that p-cfentlv I can write unto your hoi'
hereof, as I can come -by arther knowledge, your
nour snail be informed.

I HAVE ecei:.-ed your honour's writings by the S
t-tin man, tha- lalt came in:o these parts, e brought
let:er unto this qu-een from the L. of Lidington, t
date was o:d, and contained onl the news of Fn
I perceive, divers ways, that Newhaven is forre tC
but I am no; fa inora;;t of their nature, but thatl.I

t1 will fay s much as they dare do, I will not fay as
:hproverb .lo.h ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' From

: [ do a :are them, what means foioever they make,

rhaw p:tiF, !fomnver thei- mone be, they are like to re-
ire blt fn:;l comfort, for all their long allie. We
,i1 iaily in .lo; br what fiiendfhip we ihall need our-
f, exccept we pt better order unto our misruled papifs,
:.n -t we do, or know how to bring to pals, that we

v::;- . voi of their comber.

;',inrrow., the th of this instant, the queen de-
1;'. o'i this town, towards lKdenborough. If my hap
x,"u!. you ilall thoroughly hear ome merry tidings

Bp. of St. Andrews; upon WVednefday next he

.: : rrti-ned. and five other pricfis, for their mafling
:i-,itcr lalt. Thus most humbly I take my leave; at
:.A,drevws the i5th of May, 1563-

No. VIII. (Vol . . p. 304.)

!tr of Ra:dolph to the right honourable Sir
\;lliam Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the
C.!e;n's majelty.
IA Y it please your honour, the 7th of this infiant, ot of A-

Rowlet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; her;", 563.

:-:-:h vrcy honefilv of his good ufagc, he brought, erth UoC
:? . miny letters unto the queen that came out of riginal in

l:::. li1l ou lamentation and sorrow. She receivedhll own
~ ;'..' eeni mother two letters, the one contained

::I. ..: a!r o' !-er grid', the other signify the
:'.Jirl-' r e as then it was, in what fort things were
:r-,1. a.-d what farther was intended for the appeasing
::- liTcords there, not mifuirlting but that if rcafon
:! ret e had at the queen of England's hands, but
:':e r;iahn of France should find her ready and will-
U: Iftpport and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
.ad old alliance between the two realms he is

nOw well there words do agree with her doings, your

li can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
:ti, queen, (which I asSure your honour is true) you
! '.edly know, that nothing hall be left undone

9f

of her part, that may move debate or controverfie ,
tween this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much muled at by the queen herself, how th

ncw kindness came about, that at this time he receive
two long letters written all with her own hand, faying, a
the timne since her return he never received half o man
lines, as were in one of the letters, which I can myfi
teflify by the queen's own faying, and other good 2aiu
rance. here hitherto I have not been deceived. I|
alo farther assure your honour, that this queen hath f
that she knoweth now, that the rizcdfhlip of thequea
maiefly my fovereisn may Hand her more in fiead, th
that of her good mother in France, and as he is dei
ous of themr both, so will ihe not lose the one for
other. I may also farther allure your honour, that wh
fomever the occalion is, this queen hath some what in
heart that will burit out in time, which will manifeiit
some unkiudnefs hath pafled between them, that will
be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, (lefd
that the queen mother might have used the matter oth
wife than he hath done, and doth much doubt what
be the success of her great desire to govern alone, in
things to have her will. Seeing then that prefentlyt
fland in iuch terms one with the other, I tho't itiet
to confirm her in that mind, (this queen I mean t
to speak any word that might cause her to conceive
ter of the other. And yet I am alured (he hall ree
as friendly letters, and as many good words from
queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether
queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of
dington of that purpose, flie did write unto thisquJ
of, I know not, but if (he do, I think it hard if your
nour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or Ip
ehance by tome means here. It may, perchance, bevw
ten oly bv that queen, to try what answer this q
v 'iil give, or * nder.and what mind he beareth unto
q. cen's j ai.ity our sovereign. The queen knowethn
ri-t thc earl BLothe'.vdl is itnt for to London. She
fd n1 ger:! enaln o hers to enquire the cause; I anfvc
that i k-. -zw ';one other, but that his takers were in
tro; -fy v. ho took him, and that it should be ja
the-r. I know that he thinketh much that he is not
into Scotlanj. It is vet greatly doubted that if he
here, h- vould be reserved for an evil instrument.

ilrdJ of Lidington have not been plain with your ho-
rffierein, he is in the wrong to those who are his

is here, but most of all to himself. There comes a
iiltue in this realm, if ever that man come again into
aedit.

No. IX. (Vol . I. p.313.)

Te oration made by William Maitland of Le-
thington, younger secretary for the time, in the
parliament holden by our sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the reffitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be
that it has pleased her majefy mos graciously to

:er unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuffici-
:!y conceived the cause of this your present assembly;

having her majefy's commandment to supply my
i.ra Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee de-
cd, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
: large. \
NCTOUR it is, how, in her Highness's minority, a
process of forfaltour was decreed againfi my lord of Len-
ES, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
fp-fied in the dome and cenfement of Parliament gi-
v; thereupon; by reason whereof he has this long time
b-n exiled, and absent forth of his native country, how
grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
ydivers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her Ma-
iy's knowledge, not only containing most humble and
en fubmnifion, but always bearing vitnefs of his good
tro:ion to her Majesty his natural prince's, and earnest
Laction he had to her Highncfs mofl humble service, if
i:hould please her Majesty of her clemency to make him
'ia to enjoy the benefit of a subject ; many respects
right have moved her Highness favourably to incline to
no request, as the anciency of his house, and the fir-
^ane he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her
aefy by affinity, by reason of my Lady Margaret her
ighnefs's aunt, and divers other his good confidera-
i:', as also the effeituous request of her good fifler the

Q.een's

Queen's Maje.Sy of England, whose earnell commendtiOl
was not of least moment, besides that of her own nat
ral, her maiefty has a certain inclination to pity the de
cay of noble houses, and as we heard, by her own report
has a great deal more pleasure to be the inilrument
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antien
blood, than to have matter minillred of the decay
overthrow of any good race. I pon this occasion, n
majesty the more tendcrly Icoked upon his requefi, an
her good fiftcr the Q(cen of England's favourable lette
written for recommenJation of his cause, in confideratio
whereof not only has !he granted unto him her letter
restitution, by way of grace, but also licensed him to pur
sue, by way of redurtion, the remedies provided by th
law for such as think rt m!- ves grieved by any judgmen
unorderly led, and to hvc th!e process reversed; forexa
minarin whereof, it has pleased her majesty prefentyt,
aiTemble you the three ellates of this her realme,
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her majiy'
mind, to proceed for.vard upon his complaints, as t
merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and practiceob
served in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all aou
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, t.n
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the mate
we have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few mor
words, not far different from the fame subjec, where
I woud extend the circu:nllances more largely. ii
teared not to ofFend her highness, whose presence an
rmoua-t na:ure abhors long speaking and adulation, ai
so will compel me to speak such things, as may seem t
tend to any good nd p;-=cet point; and least it lhiou
be comnped to me, as that I we:e oblivious, if! fio,
on-.it to put you in remembrance, in what part we nnay'a
cept this, and the like demonltrations of her gen:ill n
tre; whose gracious behaviour towards all her subje&i
in e....', my firve for a good proot of thatfc ii;
v. may ,-ok or undcr her happy government, so ion

a; it .il:l p!ease God to rant her unto us; for a go
harmor;n to be had in the common weill, the offices b
t.ven the prince and the subje&s must be reciproque
a; by h.r majefbi's prudence ve enjoy this present pea
vi.'ih all toreign n:ations, and quietness among yourfe'
in such f t, that I think justly it may be affirmed Sco
lan. in rno. rr..'s age that presently lives, was in gre"te

I[
at

.iqui;itv; o is it the duty of all us her loving frujec s
tcknowledge the fame as a most high benefit proceed-
ifirom the good government of her majcfty, declaring
'iftlves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma-
l' such due obedience, as a jut prince may look for
rie hands of faithful and obedient fubjecrs. I mean
(i brced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her
f:iare does detet, but such as proceeds fiom the con-

tplariion of her modest kind of regiment, will for love
t duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
re e ll in general had of her majesty's benignity
tfe three years, that he has lived in the government
cr ou, and many of you have largely tatied ofher large
'Iraiitr and frank dealing; on the other part her high-
i.hias had large appearance of your dutiful obedience,
t beccomes you to continue, as we have begun, in con-

ion of the many notable examples of her clemency
;': others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest
]:.sic bruites and rumours, which are the most pestilent
:b :hat can be in any common well, and the owers and
.:nors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have
tic an moll gracious princesse, and lie mor faithful and
i: fiubjets ; ard so both the head and the members.
o.5; cilouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
: poitick bodies, whereof I made mention before, as
.;: .,thercof hall partly appertain to her maieftv,

t.iJ no small praise and unspeakable commodity re-
;:, thercthreg,,h to you all universally her fubjecrs.

No. X. (Vol. 1. p. 324.)

e perils and troubles that may presently enfic',
a.d in time to come follow, to the Queen's ma-
iill' of England, and state of this realm, up-
on the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Lord Darley.

IST, the minds of such as be affTeed to the Queen
.f Scotts, either for herself, or for the opinion ot
p: t::cc to this crown, or for the desire to have
'c:' ithe forme of religion in this realm, or for the
':Eita;io;n they have of the Queen's rrajefty, or her
:':5c:, or of the fuccefflon of any other betide the

Q ecr

Qeen of Scotts, ihall be, by this marriage, erecqi
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how tobriy
their delires to pass; and to make some eimate wi
perions those are, to the intent the quantity of the do
ger may be weighed; the fame may be compassed in tho
forts either within the realm or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the

of Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and
iance ; s firfi all the house of Lorrain and Guise forh
part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difpl
filres by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamilton
The second are lil manner of persons, both in this rea
and other countries, that are devoted to the autho
of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received; a
i:: thtfc two forts are the substance of them comprehend
t:lat ilail take comfort in this marriage.

NEnT therefore to be confidered what perils
troubles thefc kind of men shall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general cope and mark of all their dfi

is, and always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts
have the royal crown of this realm; and thereo
though the devisees may vary amongst themselves for
compafiiung hereof, according to the accidents of the di
and according to the impediments which they fhallfind
mreans of the queen's majelty's actions and governio
vet all their prpofes, drifts, devises, and practices,
wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scots quee
this realm. and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof;
in their proceedings, there are two manners to be consid
cd, whereof the one is far w-orse than the other, the
is intended by them, that ei:her from malicious bi
nets in religion, or for natural affeEtion to the queen
-Scotts, or the lord Darley, do persuade themselves that
said queen of Scotts hath presently more right to thecro
than our sovereign lady the queen, of which fortbe
their kiidred on both fides, and all such as are devote
popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or
w\'2:'c; the other is meant by them, which, with
m;.: se, are persuaded that the queen of Scotts hath
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's mal
and hlr i:Tue, of which fort few are without there
but here within, and yet of them, not so many as 2r
the contrary, and from these two forts ihall the peril

4-~~~~~~~~~~

yties and pratfices proceed, From the firfl, which ima-
gine the queen of Scots to have perpetually right, are to

looked for there perils. First, is it to be doubted the
dgil will infe& some of them to imagine the hurt of the
lie of our dear sovereign lady, by such means as the de-
iilflhait fuggelf to them, although it is to be afluredly
hoped, that almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, gra-
d0ounfl prote& and preserve her from such dangers. Sc-
condly, there will be attempted, by perfuafiins, by brutes,
b rumours, and such like, to alienate the mirds of good
fabiecs from the queen's majelty, and to counciliate them
tothe queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers
ad the north will be much solicited and laboured. Third-
ly, there will be attempted causes of some tumults and
rhbeilions, specially in the north towards Scotland, so as
tstreupon may follow some open enterprize set by vio-
Iacc. Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's coun-
tiland friends, a new league made with France, or Spain,
.hat hall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance
totheir title. And it is also very likely, that they will
kt a foot as many practices as they can, both upon the
frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty
ttancreafe and continue her charge thereby, to retain her
ilm being mighty or potent, and for the attempting of
lthcfe things, many devises will be imagined, from time
time, and no negligence will therein appear.
FROMt the second fort, which mean no other favour to
th queen of Scotts, but that fle flould succeed in title
to the queen's majefly, is not much to be feared, but
that they will content themlelves to fee not only the queen's
majeiy not to marry, and so to impeach it but to hope
tat the queen of Scotts shall have iflue, which they will
tin to be more pleafible to all men, because thereby the
eowns of England and Scotland shall be united in one,
d thereby the occasion of war shall cease; with which
Pfuafion many people may be seduced, and abused to
bcine themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.
THE remedies against these perils.
VCCL, Ir Z A Du.

A Duplicat.

A fmmary of the consultation and advice giver

L "^ by the lords and others of the privy council.
: ' ~ Collected out of the sundry and several speeches

of the aid counsellors.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord 1 rcaftirer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,

Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls o :, E-irord, Cave,

( Leicctier, Peter,

Lord Admiral, Mason,
Lord Chamberlain,

Qinciionr propounded were these two.
T. T I S T. what, peri;s might ensue to the queens 'i

es jelI-.- o iis rcad:n. of the marriage betwixt
nueen of iecos, andl ti-- Lord Darnlv.

:. \a-:
! -.i-ere mret to be done, to avoid or reme

To th- irl.

T.ie :,- r'. : anr v'' many,

avwe-e re.ces
hv i.. e co'::.';.or ia:'T only one.

1. Si '. h-- bt; thi; nrriaoc, the queen of Sco:

*(bh:; rt mrr':i:d' great number in this realm, n;l

t.0e -.'orLt ri: ^esr, r'i t be a.lienated in their mindiro
-r r.-.i. rl dLt .- to h-r ma.sl , to depend upon t
;: -'c- ) rl.'is r'i ''e of Scotland. a n mein to elli

' i :ln O' L ^-h :ie crowns in the ilTue of the

i .-':"' --. r d so f-'. ,ur all d -.ih s and p-aifrices, t

. od

t r. to the alva-ncement of he queen of Scor.

2. Secr.d!\-, trlat confidering the ciet foundation

'

.-. .i -h fiu:. ':ered the marriage of the lord DarIn
. :.:i upn !.te tru!t of si! as were papills, .

r::.-, r.-:.';. errt to refrore the rcli ion o Nonl , i '

piaini' to be ft-en. th!.i both in thii icalm :a':d Sctt!3
th-e pa;ii:s

, .ou; . r. ol ia-vour, maintain, and for ; '
?ri-iage of t.e r.d Drn'ev, and would for fsrth'L-t

..i
i· 1~

ntdcd be within this realm, to dilturb the eflate of the
Scn's majefly, and the peace of the realm, and confe-
ctlv to atchieve their purposes by force, rather than

iy some other, these perils having indeed many

ternchcs, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, in-
,Wro forts, and these were in nature such as they could
it be cafily fevered the one from the other, but cre
i and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the
with the other. The first of these fort of perils was
b:, this marriage with the lord Darnley, there was a

;i intention to further the pretended title of the queen
Scotts, not only to ucceed the Queen's majelty, as in
re bell amity he had profelTed, but that to occupy the
n's eate, as when he was in power, fle did maui-

:srl d&cilare.
T'H fond was, that hereby the Romifl religion
sid be erected, and increased daily in this realm, and
: to were thus knit together, that the furtherance
^,maintenance of the title flaid, in furthering of the re-
ouf Rome ithin this realm; and in like manner the
sance of the fame religion flood by the title, for
::ife the title had no found:tion.
Pr'es of the sirs ) And to prove that the intention to
nice e t itle to disturb the queen's majesty. mull
i' ensue, was confidered that always the intention and
ofi any person is mofi manifefr, when their power is
:n'., and contrary when power is small, then the in-
r. and will of every person is covered and less fen.
I:wiien the queen of Scots powver was greatest, by
r.rriage with the dolphin of France, bing after-
rs Flench king, it manifestly appeared of what mind
and all her friends were, uing then manifefily all
gmeans that could be devised to impeach and dispossess
q.een's majefly, first by writing and publishing her-
i' all countries queen of England ; by granting char-
patents, and commissions with that Pile and with
.n:s of England, both the French and Scotts, which
:.rs remain Ilill undefaced ; and to profccute it with
:. it iknown what preparations of war were made,
'.'it ino Scotland ; and wvhat other forces wcre aem-
t: foreign countries; yea, in what manner a fame-
iice was made by the French with king Philip, to em-
'i the forces of France, to pnirfue all the matters by
;' '!icl by God's prQvidence, and the queen's ma-

2 jefiy

jetRv contrary power, were repelled; and afterwards, bi
her husband's death, her fortune and power beingcha
ged, the intention began to hide itself, and although b
the Scottish queen's commissarys an accord was made a
Edenbrough, to reform all those titles, and claims, an,
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. An
so now, as soon as he hall feel her power, (he witl e
the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such error
as were committed in the first, her friends and allies ii
amend the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpof
By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was great
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a ubje.
of this realm, than with the mightielt prince abroad; f
by this, he being of this realm, and having for thecan
of religion, and other refpeds, made a party here, fhou
encreafe by force with diminution of the power of thera
in that whatsoever power he could make by thefa
tion of the papist, and other discontented perfonshe
lhould be as it were deducted out of the power of
realm; and by the marriage of a ifranger, she could
be afTured of any part here; so as by this marriage
should have a portion of her own power to serve her ta
and a small portion of adversaries at home in ourownbo
els, always seen more dangerous than treble the
abroad ; whereof the examples are in our own foriesm
ny, that foreign powers never prevailed in this real
but with the help of some at home. It was also reme
bered, that feeing now before this attempt of marriage,
is found, and manifestly seen, that in every corner of
realm, the faction that most favoureth the Scottifhti
is grown flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in thiscol
both in hall and chamber, it could not be (but exc
good heed were speedily given to it) by this marrin
and by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame"
tion would hortly encreafe, and grow so great and dang
ous, as the redress thereof would be almost desperate A
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late inp
using of the fublfance of the uftices of the peace, i{
the countrys of the realm, scantly a third was found t
assured to be trusted in the matter of religion,.upon wh
only fIring the queen of Scots title doth hang, and c
doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Lenn
and his had more knowledge hereof than was thoughtl;

..reby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was

rcat in England as the queen's majesty durfl not at-
;tpt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
Efilm of the perils declared, being notwithstanding more
rgely and plainly set out, and made so apparent by ma-
rlure arguments, as no one of the council could deny
e to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

THE question of this consultation was what were meet
be done to avoid these perills, or else to divert the
arce thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there were
great number of particular devises propounded, and
h!ie more part of them was reduced by tome into three

i. TE first thought necessary by all persons, as the
r' thing of the molt moment and efficacy, to remedy
:ihefe perrils, and many others. and such as with
.it. no other remedy could be found sufficient, and
tas to obtain that the queen's majesty would marry,
nt sake therein no long delay.
2. THE second was to advance, eflablifh, and fortify
'ed the profession of religion, both in Scotland, and
England, and to deminifh, weaken, and feeble the con-

. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either
joii'ppoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the
eaf, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful
o this realm, as otherwise it will be.
THE first of these three hath no particular rights in
but an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with all
mblenefs, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
ncl to the queen's majesty, that he would differ no
re time from marriage, whereby the good fubjets of
erealm might tfay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
'i, and the iue of her body, without which no surety
be devised to ascertain any person of continuance of
^r families or pofteries, to enjoy that which otherwise
ild come to them.
SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein
truth and policy were joined together, had these par-

Z

.ilIrs .
Z 3 q~ FIR,

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion ;

the realm have taken occasion to comfort and increaf
their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, with
a rumour and expectation that the religion f{all be short
ly changed in this realm, by means that the bishops, b
the queen's majeflt's commandment, have of late deal
fireight!v with some perlbns of good religion, because thet
had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like thingi
being more of form and accidents, than of any fubftane
for that it is well known that her majesty had no nieanin
to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain an nni
formity as well in things external, as in the fubfiance, nc
yet hath any intention to make any change of the reii
gion, as it is eflabliflied by laws. It was thought b al
men very necelary, for the suppressing of the pride an
arrogancy of the averfaries, indireCtly hereby to notifr
by her special letters to the two archbishops, that e
former commandment was only to retain an uniformity,
and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudgeo
her rajefit, in the change or any part of religion, bttha
she did determine firmly to maintain the form of her rei
gion, as it was eltablifhd, and to punish such as di
therein violate her laws. And in these points, fomeail
w,ihed that it might please her archbishops, that i the
shoL!d fee that te adversaries continued in taking oca
fio: to fortify their faction, that in that cafe theylhoul
uie a moderation therein, until the next parliamen, a
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order migh
be devised, and eabiiihed, for such ceremonies, so
both uniformity and gravity might be retained amoagI
the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondam bitiop

and others, which had refused to acknowledge thequeen
mna i'rr's power over them, according to the law, andw'er
or lte disper'sed in the plague time to sundry place
.b-oad, where it is known they ceae not to advance thi
t.i;ion, mizht be returned to the tower, or some othe
p:;iorl where tney might not have such liberty to feduc
ar.d iveigle the queen's majesty's fubjecs, as they dil
do.

Tqr third menns was, that where the bifhopi J

ccmp-ni n that ti-.y d..re not execute the ecclesiastical l.1
.;', r c;r:hel-nc of riigion, for fear of the pr-emnliri
- . -:'i'u '_ :h - and awvers of the ralmn, being ' t

cr5~~~~~~~~~~~~::t

-I

,il itFct'ed in religion, do threaten them, and in manv
;s Ilett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
j;fi op-ned, some convenient authority might be given
: fn, i-om the queen's majefly, to continue durin her
F iii rc.

'I'HE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-
do;a and unlawful books in English brought from beyond
:ii, nd are boldly received, read, and kept, and efpeci-
' in the north, seducing of great numbers of good sub-
t:, the like boldness whereof was never fuflrcled in any
,ith.r princels's time, that ome fireight o der might be gi-
vrn tavoid the fame, and that it might be conlidered by
iAjsudiges, vhlat manner of crime the fame is, to maintain
fch boi.s, made directly against her majcfty's authorily,
:d i.iaintaiing a foreign power, contrary to the laws oL
1, Iialm.
TH.r fifth was, that where a great number of monks,
f-s, and such lewd pcrfons are fled out of Scotland,
ai o serve in England, epecially in the North, as curates
o chulches, and all such of them as are not found honelt
adconformable, may be banillied out of the realm, fr
;-.t i: appcareth they do sow sedition in the realm, in many
'-;Ce, and now will increase their doings.
THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings,
t. 0:1 the other fide the sea, and fi-om thence maintain
'i:; a in the rcalm ; that livings may be better beflowed,

0;'.:c commodity of the realm, upon good fubiects.
THE fevcnth is, that the judges of the realm, having

aotulil authority in this realm in governance of all pro-

pt'?(f the realm, might be fwvorn to the queen's ma-
i', accoirding to the laws of the realm, and so thereby
':' ol:uld for conscience fake maintain the queen's m-
:'s authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and
:l: thi., mar iage, or to divert the pcrrils.
F:P;RI o break this marriage, confidering nothing
' ;'i do i, but force, or fear of force, it is thought
-i);m that these means following might occasion the
-.:c5 ;- the marriage.

1 T'; ,-r the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.

:- Ti.T the wvorks at Berwick be more advanced.
3. ' TIi' d;e garrison be thcre incrcafed.

Z 4 4. THAT

4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be sent into York.
inire, to be lieutenant general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to bein

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scot.
land.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to some

place, where she may be kept from giving or receivina
of intelligence.

9. THAT the earl of Lennox and his son may be sent

for, and required to be ent home by the queen of Scots,
according to the treaty; and if they shall not come, then
to denounce to the queen of Scotts the breach of the trea
ty, and thereupon to enter with hofiility; by which pro.
ceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in deeds
and not in shews) that the marriage will be avoided, or
at the leafl that it may be qualified from many perils; an
whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed wit
speed, whilst she has a party in Scotland that favouret
not the marriage, and before any league made by th
queen of Scots with France or Spain.

So M E other allows well of all these proceedings, favin

of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the rel,
and also to these particularities following.

to. THAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son'

refusing, should be seizcd and bellowed in gift or cuflody
as hall please her majeit-, upon good fubiects.

I r. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, inth

North, or elsewhere, be inquired for, and that they be
by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT inquiry be made in the North, who haveth

flewardfnip of the queen's majefiy's lands there, and tha
no person, defen-ing mifiruft, be fired to have govet
nance or rule of any of her fubje&ts or lands in the North
bat only to retain their fees, and more trusty person hali
rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. That all frequent pafiages into this realm, to an

from Scoiland, be refirained to all Scottith men, favi
such as have fare conduct, or be efpccially recommende
from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. TArT iome intlcligence be used with such I

$cct

land, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted
om time to time.
tj; THAT the queen's majesty's houfhold, chamber,
i'penfioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and
oely speech used by sundry againfr the tfate of the

i6. THAT the younger son of the Earl of Lenox, Mr.
rles, be removed to some place where he may be
Oh coming.
i; THAT confidering the fa&tion and title of the queen
Scotts, hath now, of long time received great favour,
continued, by the queen's majesty's favour herein to
queen of Scotts and her minilters, and the lady Ca-
;ine, whom the said queen of Scotts accompted as a

tpeor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
n's majesty, by some exterior at, to hew ome re-
onof her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of
aiord, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find some
ge, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
therein.
'. THAT whosoever hall be lieutenant in the North,
Ralph Sadler may accompany him.
19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be

itted to a new governor.
:2. FINALLY, that these advices being confidered by
majelty, it may please her to choose which of them
liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and not
lstilhem over in consultations and speeches.
Yl it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use
means to put their intention in execution. Some by
hice, some by force, when time (hall serve, and no time
'erve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt the pe-
as now at the firtf, before the queen of Scotts pur-
be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 335.)
dolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edin-

burgh the 3ift of July I565.

AY it please your lordship, I have received your Coti. Ii..
lordship's letter by my servant, ffficient telimno- cl. B. 9.
your lordflip's favour towards me, whereof think s^o. 26.

.my no!.

my fclf always so aured, that what other milhap ,
ever befall nmc, I have enough to comfort my self wiit
though I have not at this time received neither accordis
to the need I stand, nor the nccelity of the fernif t t
am imployed in, I will rather pass it, as I may \ith p;, a
ence, than trouble your lordship to be further ft:- so
me, when there is o little hope that any good wi. b
done for me. I doubt not bur your lordliip hath hear
b- such information, as I have given from hence, \m
the present state of this country is, how this queen i
become a married wife, and her husband, the feli fam da
of his marriage, made a king. In their desires, l;ih:to
the have found fb much to their contentment, that f
rell succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think thea
selves much happier, than there is appearance that h
fha!l be, so many discontented minds, so much mi!i:ha
of the subjects to have these matters thus ordered, ,.Ji
this fort to be brought to pass; I never heard of an; car
riage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do t,.!
was never seen, at an, time, when men should must ia
shewed themfclves to r joice, if that consideration ofh
own honour and well of her country had becnhaja:d2
pertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear,
overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie w.:; t
queen's majel)v, and the destruction of as man- of ti'.
biliry as he hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to r',
quarrle unto. To fee all these incon,-eniencys appreac-,
there are a good number that may sooner lamen ;:
themcelves, and complain to their neighbours, il .

ible t find rcmedle to help them, some arempt v'i

-the t.rct thiex have, but are too weak to do d.ny -x
wwhat is required other\w.nv, or whv t means there i 'rc:
tour lord hip knocth ; what will be anwvcarcd, or '
wvill be done, iherin, we are in great doubt, and t'ul
vour intent '- never 10 gord uinto us, yet do we so -
t-ea r or dc.:v, that our ruin fhll prevent your fiFi
when counci ;i: once laken. Nothing so needfuil, a'p-
exccution. Lpon the queen's maieft, we vi i, Ce
pendl, in her n:.iie v's ihands it tandcthl to fivc oui li
or to, i:IT:r us io peiiih; grcr:ter honour he ni.:'":
nor h2e-, t'i:-i in that whichl !I:ve ill Cer majcfi p"' '
do t-i us; the l'ms are not great, the numbcab of ni-. '
not man- that ;- de ire n:..n;. w.:iil da-vly be fotuJ. :':
r-' xvwi be ;inc c;hrge; men grow d.;ly, t!U'

3S

j; time, I think her majesty shall loose but few; her
;rds here being once taken away, where will her majefly
, the like; I speak leafl of that which I think is molt
: lilv intended by this queen, and her husband. when
, im it was lately said, that he cared more for the papists
liiEgland, than he did for the protestants in Scotland ; if
crdore, his hops be so great in the papists of England,

mrat may your lordhip believe that he thinketh of the

rttants there; for his birth, for his nurritour, for the
!,ir h ath to be of kine to the queen my mistress,
i! preferring those that are the queen's majelies wort
,;'ts to thole that are her bel, he declareth what mind
:i.Kareth to the queen's majeflies self, any man may fay it
i. ei.erly rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten; he
ir!d now seem to be indifferent to both the religions, (he
;ouse er mas, and he to come sometimes to the preach-
!; they were married with all the folemnities of the
plh time, aving that he heald not the mass; his speech
. ak argueth his mind, and yet would he fain eem to
.korlJ that he were of ome religion; his words to all
:, agnit whom he conceiveth any displeasure how
it f: loer it be, so proud and fpitfill, that rather he
:.;;h a monarch of the world, than he that, not long
:;., \c hve fecn and known the lord Darnley ; he look-
: iow for reverence of many, that have little will to
r.l; i him; and some there are that do give it, that think
.n lit:e worIth of it. All honor that may be atributed

t.:on; man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully ; all

::; tat may be spoken of him, he lacketh not from
:'.:, all dignitics that she can indue him with, which

I;rady given and granted; no man pleafeth her that

i:.:entcth not him; and what may I fay more, he hath
.:: ovr to him her whole will, to be ruled and guided
."nfclf best liketh ; he can as much prevail with him,

thing that is against his will, as your lordship may

.':. me toc pcrfwade that I hould hang my self; this last
[ ': out of hand to have been proclaimed king, he
;i' ! have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament,

i: itl head ccn himfclff of21 y ears of age, that things done
'; niame might have the better authority. He would,

c,.f have it deferred one day, and either then or ne-

:, v:it'rupon this doubt is risen amongst our men of law
' h::;r fhc being clad with a husband, and her hulband
' :' , oune years, any thing without parliament can be

of

of frrength, that is done between them; upon Saturdayat
afternoon, these matters were long in de'.at in. nd
before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours;a
night, by three heralds, at found of the trumpet, hewnj
proclaimed king. This was the night before the marriaqej
b this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords a

that were in the toun, were present at the procainiino
him again, where no man said so much a amen, óavingh
father that cried cut aloud God save his queen. The man
ner of the marriage is in this fort, upon Sunday in t
morning between five and fix, he was conveyed by dive
of her nobles to the chapell; (he had upon her back h
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mour
ing hood, not ui:like unto that, which (he wore the don
fall day of the buriall of her husband ; he was ledic
the chipell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and the
was she left untill her husband came, who also wasc
veyed by the fame lords, the miniser priests, two
there receive them, the bands are aked the third time. n
an instrument taken by a Notour that no man faidagain
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which we
three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon herfi
ger; they kneel together, and many pravers (aid o
them, ihe tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kis,a
leaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whitherwit
in a space she followeth ; and being required, accordingt
the solemnity, to cafi off her cares and leave aide tho
forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleafa
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe formann
fake than grief of heart, lie fuffereth them that A
by, every man that could approach to take out pi
and o being commired to her ladies, changed her g
rcnts, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world,
it was not lufi that moved them to marry, but only t
necelTity of her country, not, if God will long to leae
ceftitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are gt
of all things to make the worfr, would that it hould
believed, that they knew each other before that theyca
there, I would not your lordship hould so believe it,
likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if it w
poflible to fee such an act done, I would not believe
After the marriage folioweth commonly great cheer a
dancing: :to rt'ir dinner they were conveyed b the who

"I

]Jiii);i the trumpets found; a largess cried; mony
:\v;l about the house in great abundance, to such as

Ir. happy to get any part ; they dine both at one table,
uon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Athole
'er, Morton Carver, Craufoord cup bearer; these serve
; ir like offices, earls Eglington, Caffel, and Glen-
r after dinner they danced a while, and then retired
mfcl'es till the hour of supper; and as they dined so
othey sup, some dancing there was, and so they go to
: or all this I have written to your lordship I am not
alitus telis, to this, but of the verity your lordship
i;not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was
i for to have been at the supper, but like a currilh or
conutly carle I refused to be there; and yet that which
ar lordship may think might move me much, to have
a the fight of my mistress, of whom these eighteen days
ijuf account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by
that fort as a very eil person, which in my heart I
well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can
)t find either honest or good that liketh their doings;
eare at this time further to trouble your lordship, crav-
g pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I
able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night

ha by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of
t which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your
rdlhip, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write
tMr. Secretary, so that I trust that he hall be to this,
five me of a little labour, to write the fame again, molt
,umbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of Ju-

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 339.)

ier of the earl of Bedford to the honourable
Sir William Cecil knt. her majefly's principal
ifcretary, and one of her highncfs's privy
council

F T E R my hearty commendations, this day at noon, 2a of Sept.
captain Brickwell came hither, who brought with '565

·i2 th~ q u e e n s h e

1 .aper Offic

- th queen's majesty's letters containing her full re- sor the
i'.ln, ld pleasure for all things he had in charge to Original.
i' iilornmation of, fiving that for the aid of the lords

2 of

of the congregation, there is nothing determined, or
the least exprefled in the fame letters, and for that pL
pose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by ti
duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, cravia
to be ho:pen with 300 harquebufyers out of this grri
son, for their better defence. And albeit, I know rih
well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's majel
our sovereign's good wil!, and care towards them; 'a
do also underfiand that it were very requisite to have then
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manna
decided, and tha; it now frnndlth upon their utter ov0e
throw and undoin., fin;c rtc queen's part is at the e
5oo3, and they rnor much above 0oo0; besides, that
queen hath hrquc bufers, and they have none, and d
yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle folu!
bring to them, who is no- vet joined with theirs; Ih
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a meanst
learn her mae-il's pleasure in this behalf, what, andhow
I filial anfv'er them, or othcrwife deal in this matte
now at this their extreme nccellity. For, on the o
fide, Iverh thereupon their uiter ruin and overthro
and the miserable fubecrlion of religion there; and,o
the other ide, to adventure fu great and weighty a ma
ter as this is, (aibtit it be but f a few soldiers, for am
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, p
adventure, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and inth
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, ;having in t
whole but So) wiiihourt any grant of new supply for t
fam ; and by that me:ans aso, to leave the mailche; he
the more fubiec't to invasion, while in the mean fe.l
new helps are pr-cp:!;g i to this know not I whatt0o
or how to do. And if much more I marvel thereof,
that having so m:.ny tines written touching this mntte
no resolute determination cometh. And so between
writing, and looking for anfver, the occasion cannot p-
but mull needs proCced a have success. God turnlit
his glor ; hut fur;. al, mens reason hath great caafeti
fear it. Such a pufih it i now cme unto, as this litl
supply would do m'ich good to adv-ance God's honour t
continue her mas:t's great and careful memory of theO
and to prelerve a great many noblemen and gentleena
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your go0
will and aection that way, I do nothing mistrust,
herein shall take such good advice, as by an- means I -

Ir

r:;ived from these lords two papers inclosed, the effcEt

:,ii fh;ll appear unto you. For those matters that
::n hickwell brought, I hall anfwser you by my next,
' Irc\with fend you two letters fiom Mr. Randolph,
: rceivcld this day. By him you ihall hear that the
:eftants are retired from ,denborough further off.

,
I hpc your resolution for their aid shall come in
if it come with speed, for that they will not now
p',''ltly need them; and so with my hearty thanks
,it vou to God. From Berwick, this d of Sept.
[c5,

No. XIII. (Yol. I. p. 339.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

TPON the advertizements lately received from you, x Snt,
with iuch other things as came also from the lord ,'5";

::pe rd Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole mat- "percc'
;e;il cnfidered, we have thus determined. We ill,
s'il the speed that we can, fend to you 30001. to be
;.-:!d. If you hfall certainly underfiand that the earl
.'i'-r.! h;trh such want of money, as the impresting to
c: Ico: 1. might stand him in lead for the help to

him !irelf, you hall presently let him secretly to un-
-'', tilat you will, as of yourself, let hiim have so
.::, .d so we will that you let him have, in the molt
;i: ilr that you can, when the said fium liall come to

: it ou can, by any good means, advance hi:n
:;!t there before hand.
T. otier 2000 1. you fliall cause to be kept wlole,
:. itit be not that you (lall ee necelfary cauf to
:1: lne part thereof to the now numbers of the
:'tmelren, and oo horsemen; or to the calling out of

.ot such workmen, as by sickness, or othervwie
:: t be discharged. And where swe perceive, by
:: ',.l' letters, the earneit requell of the iaid earl of

an'-: hib allciates, that they mnight have, at the
*' U oir soldiers, to aid them. And that you alfb

. t ili, ,' w ould not command you to give them
!r wc: \vwuld but wink at your doing herein, and
: i.liLc i,)u for attempting such things, as you
':' I'-.lp ct others hould bring about, you doubt

3 not

not but things would do well; you shall underflandfa
truth, that we have no intention, for many refpe,
maintain any other princes subje&s, to take arms agi
their sovereign; neither would we willingly do any thi
to give occasion to make warrs betwixt us and thatprin
which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you a
power to let them be aided with any men. But no
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwit
flanding their humble submission, and offer to be orde
and tried by law and justice, which being refused to
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves,
adding thereunto the good intention that presently
French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to
with ome one of ours, and jointly to treat with
queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of
lent and rigorous proceeding against her fubjess,
which purpose, the French ambassador here with us
lately written to that queen, whereof answer is
looked for, to the intent in the mean time the aid l
should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some
to defend them, we are content, and do authorize, if
shall fee it necessary for their defence, to let them (a
your own adventure, and without notifying that you
any direEcion therein from us) to have the numberof
soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to
drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee cause.
to cover the matter the better, you hall fend these
bers to Carlifie, as to be laid there in garrison, to d
that march, now in this time that such powers are on
other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from th
as you hall fee cause to diret of, the fame numbe
any of them may most covertly repair to the said lo
when you hall exprefly advertize, that you fend them
aid only for their defence, and not therewith to make
against the queen, or to do any thing that may offend
person, wherein you hall so precifelv deal with them,
they may perceive your care to be such as if it h
otherwise appear, your danger hould be so great,
the friends you have could not be able to save you to0
us. And so we asSure you our conscience moveth
charge You, so to proceed with them, for otherwise
to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield to gire
aid of money or men And yet we would not that

tf thes were kinown to [-e our a, biu :-athcr to be
;cred with our own dci: e :d attempt.

No. XIV (Vol.

( . p 350.)
,ndolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

56D-6.

tY hmnile duty confidered ; what to write of the ,, O;g

p-efnt fate of the country I am so uncert.in, by I:

;L of the daily aitcratioins of mens minds, that it
:^t:! me much flower than otherwise I wou'I. lWithin
!t !ew' days, there was ome good hope, that this iqueien
Sad hlave fi'we:l fomc favour towards tl'- io:'ds, anl
iR obert. Ml- /!.-n LIould hJveu retul-;e.1 unto th.i. with
e.ufrt, uponl foni conditions. Since th.t ti 'n, there
'c;Jc out of Fr.ince Clernia by land, and Thorneton
ie; the one from the cardinal, thz other fioan tle
:op of Glasgow. Since whose arri;';l riither can there
good word gotten, nor appearance of any good in-
:deJ them, except that they be able to perfwade the
.a's neflty our fovcreign to make her heir apparent
ie croun of England. I write of this nothing less
., know, that flie :; :h spoken. And by all means
: ie thinketh the bedt doth t.--vai'e to bring it to pars.

: beis

a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the

wirer, the king of Sp.in, the duke of Savoy, with di-
s princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufTpeced to
:tiihc fnme confederacy to maintain papifrry through-
iC-rifiiandom ; this band was sent out of France by
'srneton, and is fibfcribed by this queen, the copy
:r's remaininTg withi her, and the principal to be re-
ijd very fhortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen \iillfon, a
aeil tlcr for such a devilifl dvie ; if the coppie here-
[i.' be gotten. that s1mall be sent as I convelierr'iy may.

Clieur Rambollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
e that night to the queen and her husband, but not
; the next day he had long conferences with them
a, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whel c)f
.' intreated. I cannot speak with any that hath any
?e that there will be any good done for the lords by
.though it is said that he hath very good will to do so
.'e uttermnof of his power. He is lodged near to the
t, and liveth upon the queen's charges. lpon Sun-
'3L, II. A a day

day the order is given, whereat means made to many,
bc present that day at the mai. Upon Candlemafs'j
t',ere carri d their candles, with the queen, her hurfon,
!e earle o Lenox, and earle Athol; divers other oir
have been called together and required to be at the iar
that day, some have promised, as CaiTels, Mongomri
Setor., Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fieming, L
ring.lon, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and of thema
Loth.!l is the itoutI3, but orft thought of; it ;
r-.o:'.' in council that mass flould have been in St. Gii
.r.irh, which I believe was rather to tempt men's miad
t -ian in-cnded indeed: She was of late minded again
f-nd Robert Melvin to negotiate w\ith fich as he tiunte
;:: ;.mongtl the queen s mair'lhs lujcc'ts, of whoflego
x;i .s tis way I tril. that the bruit is greater than d
tr.ut, buit in these matters, her mal;efy is too wie n
i ti'.: to be war-, and provide tor the wol-t; some

i -.t eon;r- arr t. ught to be privie unto the bar.'sa

-i.:d';rc of -'.:.': I have written, xIhereof I am

there, is lfoi; t;i :;,, t;o' perchance of all I h.'.e
i=3rd he truth; in th is coi t. divers quarles, conten:o
·an d;bates no'ling so much fought as to maintain
chie anl diiord.r. D.avid -' reta."incth fill his p;a
r.: wni;h.'a t 1'reart gi' to m.':.., thlt fee their fuvtra

U ld chii'Y b fucih a fellow ; the queen hath utte
i''-d to do an, aod to mn lord of Agyll, and itj
id 4h -t ni.! be tirt voyage that fle will mak J
1n1 i; delivered of her being with child ; the bruit i c
m:;:i ti-: 11. is but h.irdly belie;-el of manyi, and of
I can ati're you, t.'l there have of late appeared so
t.;.ilns i) the con ira y.

No. v'-. (Vo1. I. p. 359.)
PI j, o' f a leter :rom thie ear! of B isord and i

Tho. an..oDh to the lords of the council
Pr nlan:i from Barwick, 27r' of March, 1
A';Or ginal in the Cotton Library, Calig-
i. 1il. 72.

_' .. ;;,' p'5 / ;/- ;,'* I :-';;rr,

.- '*.r . . .- i_
9 R I <IG of rto man.'iie matters, as v.e do,

_ ;.ndi ^e icl vIar.tic in the repolrts, e

.~. ?- '

1 :

. . .
ri s-the vci k: which nm::i.-.

1fa

, ;,c and loother to put any thing in wrytinge, to the
tcre we wold not that your honours, and by you the

in's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be advertif-d
ors the veric trothe as we can poflible. To this c-nd
,;;iought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in
.iilibourge at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke
:lru with diverse, and after that with the queen's fell
li her husband conforme to that, which we have learn-
lv others, and know by this reporte, we fend the fame,
,incned by the parties self, that were there present and
lt'les unto these that were executors of the ate.
'THIS swe fynde for certain, that the queen's hulband
c; entered into a vehment suspicion of David, that by
iafonle thynge was committed, which was most agaynlle
;-1e queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte,
:.:;communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who
il?3 his sorrowes so great fought a l the means he
.:.: to put ome remedic to his gricff; and communili-
:ir the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the ing's com-
-:;icnt, no other waye coulde be found then that
:a ihould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he
i i earnefl and daylye prefed the fame, that no refte

be had untyll it was put in execution. To this
:, found good, that the lord Morton and lord Lind-
i::'u:ld be made previe to th' intente that theie might
r: i:eir friends at hande, yf neade required; lwhii.h
' them to assemble so mayny, as thaie thought us-
.:ag.iiln the tyme, that this determination of theirs
c-'.b put in exccutione; which was determined the
.: ;hi inftante 3 daics aore the parliament should
;., at whilch time the :iv dc lordes were aluired, that
;.:s Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and their complyces
. haive been forfeited, tt the ing cou!d not bI pclr-

ti ailroull this means to be their f-iends : who t o:
h: rc h hade that this intent flouldl take effcSt th'

S':I., was content to vielde, without all dilficultie
::'.r, with this condition, that thaie fniould give
:.iicllts, that he might have the crowne mIatrim)-

U;. \was .;, impatient to lce thce hings lie saw,, anl

: '..'c 1broulu h ro his cres, that he dayly preircd
.i o1r il'.iKt in, that there might he no longer de-
.:I .: o the iitcnt that mvghr manifcllc unto lhe

' h.t ie approved the ;a':", .as content to he ar
2 '')' thatl himlflf.

a T p.-

39t A P P E N D I X.

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto v of the cio

the king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, Geor
DtLg!fs, and two others, throwe his owne chamber
the privy sayers up to the queen's chamber going
which there is a cabinet about xiI foot square; in t
fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the whi
thevr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady A
gile, and David with his capp upon his head. Intot
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, wa
v:;ed David to come forth, faying, that was no pi
for him. The queen said, that it was her will. H
howfband anfwerede, that y' was against her hono
The lord Ruthen faide, that he should lerne betterl
deutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm, Da
took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and p
hinmelf behind the queen who wolde gladlee have far
him : But the king having loosed his hand, and ho0
ing her in his arms, David was thrust out of the ca
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pi
fens, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who
tending that night to have reserved hym, and the next
to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore h
evill will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagg
and after hym a great many others, so that he had in
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne,
the kinges own dagger was left flicking in him. Wh
ther he fluck him or not we cannot be here certayn.
was not flavne in the queen's prefens, as was said,
going down the Lavrcs out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE remarvned along tyme with the queen her ho

band and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here,
interceflion, that he shold have no harm. She bla
greadee her howlband that was thee acfor of fio
deed. It is said, that he did answer, that David
more companie of her boddie then he for the fpaceof
months; and therefore for her honour and his own
tenement he gave his consent that he fiould be t
away. " It is not" (faythe (he) the woman's part to
" the husband," and therefore in that the fault wa
own. He said that when he came, she either wol(
or made herself tick. " Well," faythe she, you
' taken your last of me and your farewell." Then
pitv, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is )four majefy's
band and must yield dutie to each other. " Why

1 not," faythe he, " leave him as well as your wife

her husband ?" Other have done the like. The lord
:iIn said that fle was lawfully divorced from her hus-
d, and for no such cause as the king found himself
,e. Befydes this man was mean, basle, enemie to the
biliti, hame to her, and def-ruRion to herself and
utry". " Well, faith fle, that hall be dear blude to
fomeof you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the

ir uten ; for the more your grace Ihowe yourself of-
add, the world will judge the worse.
HER hulband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself con-
ually weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and
ak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This muf do
swith your majesties pardon," and pcirfuadeth her in
befl fort he could, that he would pacify hcrfelfL
iting that could be said, could please her.
is this mean time there rose a nombre in the court;
p.cify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
t lrayt to the eries Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to
iet them, and to assure them for the king that no-
ig was intend against them. These notwithflanding
ting fear, when theic heard that my lord Murray
id be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Hunt-
nd Bothwell both get out of a window and so depart.
toll had leave of the king with Fly[h and Glandores
ro was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to
where they wold, and bring concordie out of the court
the lord of Lidington. Theie went that night to such
as, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.
BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the her-
of the lord Ruthen ihe was contents that he hold lie
ih her that night. We know not how he * himself,
came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends,
t he was so fleepie, that he could not wake in due
aon.
THERE were in this companie two that came in with
king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom
:qeen fayth would have ftroken her with a dagger, and
Patrick Balentine, brother to the juflice clerk, who
her grace fayth, offered a dag against her belly with
:cock down. We have been earnefily in hand with
lord Ruthen to know the varitie ; but he aoureth us
the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber
lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two others.

A a 3 They

The-- at the first offering to make a defence, the lor
Ru.:r-cn drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then
t';. : ;.ere not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we
'\- thi; lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the figi

to Dunbar-Caftle, whither resorted unto the lords Hunt
and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord Ru
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promise
boncis and subscriptions. That he had protested befo
the council, that he was never consenting to the death
Daxid, and that it is fore againit his will: " That
' the great fubflance David had there is much pok
'; ome fay in gold to the value of II m . His appa

w" Wis very good, as it is said; 28 pair of velvet ho

" His chamber well furnished, armour, dagger, pl
" ltts, harqucbufes, 22 swords. Of all this noth
" fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had
'culodv of all the queen's letters, which all wered

vered unlooked upon. WVe hear of a juill, thatheh

" hanging about his neck of some price, that canno!t
" he.rd of. He had upon his back, when he wa.sll
a night gown of damask furred, with a fatten dublet
' 1hofc of ru.fet velvet."

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 368.)
P"rt of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan.

1565-6.
---- ' CANNOT tell what mifliking of late th

I hath been between her grace and her hub

he preffeth earnestly for the matrimonial crown, w
the is loth hastily to grant; but willing to keep some
. ftoe, unil the know how well he is worth to e
such a fvereignty: and therefore it is thounht tha;
parihin.enr for a time shall be dcferred, but hereofI
x. rite no certaintv.

From iMr. Randolph's letter to fcretary Cc

I -', T HE ju : ce-clerk in hard terms, more for lhis
: - '-: ~ ther's caufc tha.n any dcefrt, and as far as I cnl

t .g ot al othei in wor,> fur nrither 1; : be
h

-1 opicion of him for attempting of any thing that
.i,:,.lin!t her will, nor the people that he hath denied
:iict a matter, bing proved to be done by his com-
-:ilmrct, and now himfeif to be the accuser and pur-
o.rof them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
ras executed, and Murray that was yeflerday arreigned,
ere both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
i. by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the queen,
! : the is determined that the house of Lennox shall
:e:a poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continu-
e;: ick, fore troubled in mind; he faith in the abby,
ii;i n h:as been once with him, and he once with the
in!l, since she came to the caflle. The queen hath now
in a.l the covenants and bands that pafred between the
lang ld the lords, and now findeth that his declaration,
::ore her and council, of his innocency of the death of
David, was false; and grievously offended that, by their
racs, he lould seek to come to the crown matrimo-
daj.
P:r: of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber-

wick, 25 April, 1566.
-T H 'F RE is continually very much speech of the

_ discord between the queen and her hubnband,

::. that, that is commonly slid and believed of himself,
ta: Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a
s.irce betw\een them. It is very certain that Malevafier
I.'dnot -poken with him within these three days. He is
nai.r accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman:
i::ded upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or
:c o the guard; at liberty to do, and go whe;e and
ti:; he will, there have no hope yet among themeleves
;: huiicta ess.

DAVID'S brother named Joseph, who came this

':. ith Malcvraifer, unknown to any man here, is be-
::. f'crctary in his brothcr's place.

A 4 No. XVII.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 37.)

The earl of Bdford to Cecil, 3d Augulf, J66
rs H E' queen and her husband agree after the old man

ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom

with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor
loveth anyfuch as love him. He is so far out of her book
as at her going out of the cafile of Edinburgh, tore-
move abroad, e knew nothing thereof. It cannot for mo
defty, nor with the honour of a queen, be report
what (he said of him. One Hickman, an English merchan
there, having a water spaniel which was very good, gave
him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the plea
lsrez which he saw the king have in such kind ofdogs
gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell marvel
lo-fl.n out with Melvil, and called him dissembler an
i-ittrer, and said he could not trust one, who wouldgiv
nj; thing to uch one as he loved not.

The erl of Bedford to Cecil, August S.

T E disagreement between the queen and her hu
_ band continueth, or ratherincrea,-th. RobertMe

iil dra-.ing homewards, within tw.elve miles of Edi
burgh, could nor tell where to find the queen; si
which time fne is come to Edinburgh, and had not twe
horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that
can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman
her company. The king her husband is gone to Du
fermling, and paffeth his time as well as he may; baiY
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hu
band hevy at the heart.

Sir John Forfler to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

T H E queen hath her husband in small eimatio

1 and the earl of Lennox came not in the quee
fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, i th Dec.

HE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the
ambassadors, and all things for the christening

[t his lordlhip's appointment, and the fame is scarce-
well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and
ten is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater fa-

ciarity than he was all the while past.
jdert;fernents out of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford.

HAT the king and the queen agreed well together Auguf
two days, after her coming from - , and after 5si66 Paper

Office, from

lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new the Origi-
rd has happened. The queen hath declared to my nal.
d of Murray that the king bears him evil will, and
said to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
fault that she doth bear him so much company: and
like manner, hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere
It the king, which he did a few nights since in the
een's pretence, and in the hearing of divers. The
gconfeffed, that reports were made to him, that
lord of Murray was not his friend, which made him
kthat thing he repented ; and the queen affirmed,
cthe king had spoken such words unto her, and con-

fe before the whole house, that he could not be con-
atthat either he or any other should be unfriend to my

of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
utl, and used his speech very modestly, in the mean
the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that
queen should use familiarity either with man or wo-
q and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and
re, who keep most company with her. My lord of
rray and Bothwell have been at evil words for the L.
Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir James Bal-
re had new come from Ledington, with his answer up-
fiuch heads or articles as Bothwell and he should agree
PO, which being reported to the said earl in the queen's

nfre, made answer, that ere he parted with such
as was desired, he should part with his life. My

lord

lord of Murray said foutly to him, that twenty as hon
m-;n as he flould lose their lives ere he reafte Ldi,
ton. The queen spake nothing, but heard both; in th
terms tey parted, and since, that I hear of, haver
met. The queen after her hunting came to Edinbur
and carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her. Ti
lalt Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Rut
ven's, who confefled that he was in the cabinet, butn
of council of the fact. The queen hath also opsi
to m lrd of Murray, that money was sent from
pnpe, how much it was, and by whom, and for ahl
purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. 'ol. I.p. )
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 2(

i -69. A copy interlined by Cecil. Itcontlis
.n aoi\evr to a complaining letter of Mary's u
the in;prifoning of te Bishop of Ross.

- 1A F T E R this [i. e. Mary's landing in Sco;an
J _ h"o;v patiently did I bear with many via

lavs in not rati'ying the treaty accorded by your own co
m:-:o.ers, whereby I received no small unkindnef,
tides the manifold cause of suspicion that I migh:
hereater trull to any ritings. Then followed a
mariner of dealing with me, to entice my subjec andn
kini-nn, the lord Darnly, under colour of private
for land, to come into the realm, to proceed intr
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea toc
clude the f.iae without m aiEnt or liking. AnJh
many unkind parts accompany'd ; that fact by receive
my iub et t that were base runnagates and offender
I;ome, and enhanfing then to places of credit againlt
;-iil wi:!h many such like, I will leave, for that the
membraice of the fame cannot but be noyfome to
And vet al! these did I as it were fpprcfs and overc
-i:h m- natural inclination of love towards you;
diJ .f .-:e''ards gladly, as ou know, chrilten oiu.r
t'e ciL d of rr ifid kMifmnan, that had before so Ir,:
1.' c ,;r'i.! :nme, both in marriage of you, and in o:hcr

.1::, :-::--- towsls i me his fuvercig,. How m;t
.. -- - :-. :ne;m.a;-1 ; o r:co:.'e Lhirn, b.ina o:r

, :o you, when others nourished discord betwixt
U, who as it fecmed had more power to work their pur-
s, beincg evil to you both, than I had to do you good,
peCt of the evil I had received. Well I will over-

ii vour hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
cv council. And then in your most extremity, when

-as a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from

or notorlious evil willers, how far from my mind was
ie r:nembrance of any former unkindness you had shew-
me. Nay how void was I of refpecf to the designs
hi.ch the world had seen attempted by you to my crown,

si! ecurity that might have ensued to my state by

:.: rdath, vihen I finding your calamity to be great, that
i:. verc at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
ii, id not only intreat for your life, but so threatned
.e as were irritated against you, that I only may fay it,
n I \as the principal cause to save your life.

No, XIX. (Vol. I. p. 4o0.)

;t:er ofQ:F.lizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus mark-
t1 on the back with Cecii's hand.-Ccpia Liicr-
i:r,,, Re';ie jcnJttis ad Reginam Scotorm.
\ '1[°. iril/s.

if A M E, vous aant trop molefte par M. de PaprOffice,

Crocq, je n'eiill' eu si peu de confideraiion de vous

[flke de ctte lettre, si les liens de charit' vers les ruinez,
:,; Ficres dcs imifrables ne m'y contraignaffnt. Je en-
cns iqic nll edit a ec divulgue de par ous, madame, que
EO chafcun, que venlt justifier que ons eft& les meurtriers
ierotre en malii, et moln feu coulln, viennent a le faire
iexnlme de ce mois. La qlell]e cl'ofc, comme c'eft plus
hr.orable ct neccaiie, qui en tel cas fc pourra faire, ne
yitant cach. quelqne millre ou finifre, ainfi le pere et

ais u mort gentelhomme m'ont humbicment requis,
.ceje vous priafle de prolongue e jour, pource qu'ilz
jooi:i'it quc les iniqucs fe font combins par force de
f.ire c.lic par droift ils ne pourront pas faire partant,
-.R p;;i mis finon pour' l'amour de vous emee, a qui il
tc.]c ] plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de
tj'.: ci:')rtr le leur conccder cette requefle, laquelle, si
t:;-: :';;.'ct noi, voui tOlurie;roit gr.andcent cu oupion,

de

de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez voloa.
tiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de teli]
fincerite & prudence cn ce cas qui vous touche de si pres,
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in.
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez
dignement eibloye hors de rancz de princesses, & non fani
cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable
qu'une vie maculee ; vous voiez madame, queje vous traitd
comme ma fille, et vous promets, que si j en euffe, ne lui
foubaiterois mieulx, que je vous desire, comme le Seigai
cur Dieu me porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon cceu
de vous ifpirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honneur, e
a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordiall
recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plu
de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De WlVe
ce 8 jour de Janvier* en hafle.

No. XX. (Vol. I. . 423.)
A letter from England concerning the murdero

king Henry Darnley.

E. f 'Mr. TTAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark,
roLs

c. j- tho't good to write a few words unto you. I ha

Buiiajl Brc. rec ome writs from you ; and some I have seen latce
No, :. lfent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford

the 6:". of 4May. I have participat the contents thereoft
such as I thought meet, this mekle I can afflre you;
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue,
there was not one papist nor protestant which did notco
sent that juflice should be done, be the queen my fovr'.
and support, against such as had committed that abom
able ill murder in your country ; but to fay truth, the la
& coldness did not rife from such as were called to coul
cil, but from such as lfould give life and executil
thereunto. And further, I alfure you, I never kneWs
matter of estate proponed which had so many favourers
all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto O
no man promoted the marter with greater affection, th

- A mi!lake in the date corrected with Cecil's hand VII

Arihs.
4

tic Spanish ambafador. And sure I am, that no man dare
palv be of any other mind, but to affirm that whoso-
er is guilty of this murder, handfalted with advoutre,
iunworthy to live. I hall not need to tell you, which
be our letts and flayes from all good things here. You
me acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I must con-
f(s, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
tour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and
mely such as before, and after the murder, were deemed
t allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and justice
te puinifiment of those abominable acts, though we lend
ou but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both
onourable and honest, be well known to me, and fun-
ry cthers here, to be justifiable in all their actions and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation
i blemished and infamit by these doings which lately passed
among you. What we shall do 1 know not, neither do I
srite unto you assuredly, for we be subject unto many mu-
ations, and yet I think we (hall either aid you, or conti-
rac in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so as it
;apear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not
to run the fortune of France, which will be your own
idefruftion, if you be unadvised. I know not one, no not
oneof any quality or eflate in this country, which does
illow of the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the
orld were rid of her, so as the fame were done without
frtlher slander, that is to fay by ordinary juflice. This I
tad the 23d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 434.)

Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton
to Cecil, i th of July, 1567, from Berwick.
-IR, Your letter of the 6 of July, I received the AnOriginal.

0' 1oth at Berwick, I am sorry to fee that the queen's PaperOffice.

Rtjefty's disposition altereth not towards the lords, for when
al is done, it is they which must sand her more in tfead,
dIan the queen her cousin, and will be better instruments
to work some benefite and quietness to her majesty and her
realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of good
mA e.-

A Ict-

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil

from Faftcaftle, i2th ofJuly, 1567,
Pi--.Oi-. I R as yvow might perceive by my letter of the lI'

* ... July, I lodged at Fatcaftle that night, accompanTe

with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and Jane
Melvin. where I was intreated very well, according to t
Ifate of the place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners thta
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very fitron
By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledingto
I find the lords his associates and he hath left nothing .i
thought of, which may be either to thir danger, Or or
them iuertv, wherein they do not forget what gooda
harme France rmvy do them, and likewile they conlie
the fame of England; but as farr as I can perceive,
be plain \virh vow, they find more perril to grow nt
them thrug h the queens majefts dealing, than eithcrtht
d.^ 1v tihe French, or hv any contrary faction amng^
them:ci:ve, for they airure themcflves the queen wii lea
them in ti- brvers if they run her frtoun, and thoug
they do acknn.vileige great benefit as well to them, s
the realm of Engln :d by her majefly's doings at Leit
vwhereof thc 1'a- m.2 i';'v her majelry and both the realm
have received -lreat fruit: yct npon other accidentshic
h ,ve chanced, since, they have obe-rved such things in he
ma;rI-: doin ,., as have ended to the danger of us I
i'e ha-: de.''.: wih.l ], to the overhrow or r own deiili
iacnts, 3anld li:' ;c tie fuesrty or any party ; ard upon tle
confid-.rio-; a-i. dih'courfes at lei-trh, tnethineieth fin
. dif ;i:t on in th', that either th! n l'.- to make tc
bargir - witxh France. or elie to deal ri;:e.r with Fr.C
n-; ;v\o', ;:- o

0 twh

r.t they ihall t.:::-. meet for i-'

::.te'r-3nd c'-t, and to use there re:l. d .i occoaion fij
move rtcm: Ineaning neither to ir-itate France nor E
.-d urt;;i ch ime as they have in.lc tihir bargn, .:i
1-,:redi. w-ith oe o vo; for they think it convc!ient
p, -ecd w ith .ow o:th for a whil'e pa:'i p:'.!,', for .!'.
- ns my lord of Le.!i .on's terms. I do p:cel,;:'--
'.:ke e r'.t^r verv unkindly, th.t no better .nwi '
mad to' the i-::. w.-i; thelords d:d iln to hIr m,.;.,'
.d i;:.; ::.'

:v 1.. n.i,- q o v r, hei

sr.rac. on, 1 ... a

..

- - . w^.s .. as I ,. . i
: .:

:|1

;] their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet hap-
ned, and therefore her majefly hath efnt me to the end
,;V inform her throughly of the frate of the matters, and
^i the declaration of their minds and intents to such
rpoWfs as fllall be by me proposed on their majellys be-
: uato them, they shall be reasonably and resolutely an-
ral. At these things the lord of Ledington smiled and
I: his head, and said it were better for us yow would
;
i; alone, than neither to do us nor your selves good, as
:,lr re in the end that will prove; S if their be any
2r in Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ram-
::: i:i coming hither or a man of like quality, and to
:i;-cr t!;em of their queen for ever, who hall lead her life
iF liiC in a abbay reclufcd, the prince at the French
toi0n, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
. o the Scottifl nation, the forts committed to the
:id of filch as hall be chosen amongfl themfelvcs, as
::1 fil no great likelihood that I shall have access to
·,.:o'l, it is objected they may not so displease the French
.:; I1:ilels they were sure to lind the queen of England
, hficilnd; and when they once by my acccfs to the

::i have ofinded the French, then they fay yow will
.i: }our profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the
:.rn ibel y, which was the firll head that I proposed,
: i;i, that thereby they did perceive that thc queen
i-: t'icil undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
., but folly to talk of them the liberty going before;
::l^id illev, if ou will do us no good, do us no harm,
.: 'i x ill provide for our fel-cs. In the end they said,
,.id:!ld refnfe our own commodity, before they con-

i a.';.

vith any other, which I hould hear of at my
hi:'7 to Edin ; by my next I hope to fend yow the

.i cocniuded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that
:.:l. not so mulch to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr,
!. '. which was ent into France; thus having no more
!::: but compell'd to leap on horseback with the lords
! 7" to din-, I humbly take my leave of from Fafc-
.;.. ri; i; 1': o J.uly 1507.

To

To ir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotlan(

By the queen the 4th July 567.

RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, thoug
we think that the causes will often charge upon a

riety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry refpeEts, no
amiss, that as yow (hall deal with the lords having charg
of the young prince for the committing of him intooB
realm, so (hall yow also do well, in treaty with the queen, t
offer her that where her realm appeareth to be subjet
sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it
manifest) her son cannot be free, if he hall be content
that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, withint
our realm, being so near as he knows it is; we (hall n
faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child,
can be devised for any that might be our child born
our own body, and shall be glad to how to her thee
the trew effee of nature; and herein he may be byyo
remembred how much good may ensue to her son to
nourihed and acquainted with our country; andthe
fore, all things confidered, this occation for herchil
were rather to be fought by her and the friends of hi
than offered by us ; and to this end, we mean thatyo
shall so deal with her, both to stay her indeed fromi
dining to the French praftife, which is to us notorious
convey her and the prince into France, and alfotoar
any just offence, that he might hereafter conceive, if
should hear that we should deal with the lords fort
prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabet

i4th July I167, from Edinburgh.

A.Or-::. rl. TT may please your majefly to be advertised, I did si
rp..roac. I fie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the 1n's

12 b of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland,
causes of my flay, my lodging at Faftcafle a place of
lord Humes, where I was met by the said lord and by
lord Lidington. and what had paIfed in conference
twixt us, whilefl I was at the said Faftcaflle. Si
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, a
with 400 horses by their appointment for my better co

' (lU~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

;r, I came to Edn' the 2th of this present. The r3'h
,g Sunday appointed for a folemne communion in this
:, 'ind also a folemne fast being published, I could
!: s!:v conference with the lords which be assembled
ihii iis town as I desired, that is to fay the earls of
,bie, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liling-

Sir James Balfour captain of the cafile, Mr. James
Giilt aid the prelident of the felion.
I.VLRTHELE" I made means by the lord of Liding-
BI.it they would use no protrafte of time in mine au-
!c, iso did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom I
: : chance ; I was answered by them both, that albeit
,; were defiined to sacred exercises, such as were

e; othe council would consult upon any moyen touch-
r.v acccfs unto them and my conlerence with them,
jiai aio that iu the aternroon either they would come
Cr, or 1 fluuld hear fiom them. About 4 of the clocl
t!i. afternoon, the said 13th day, the lord of Liding-
C!me to my lodgings, and declared unto me on the
; o the loids and others, that they required me to
ep.,ience though they had defferred my conference with
c, wiich was grounded principally upon the absence
ice caries of Mar, and Glencairn, the lords Semple,
gi ti and chers of the council, faying also that they
jo{iiic!r the matters which I was on your behalf
;a:; ;'iti; them of, were of great importance, as they
ii :ut fiaisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor
' anfR;er without the advice of the lords, ar.d others
it 'ii;'ats; the lord of Lidington also said unto me,
i.e he r perceived, by his private conference with
i r joulry hitherwards, that I prelfed greatly to
f I lv access to the queen their sovereign, he perciv-
- the lords and others which were here, thatin that

i t;.ce vas great dificulty for many refpebts, but
. ; bc;iule they had refued to the French ambafsa-
- li'.i access, which being granted unto me, might
I'o;inld the French, a matter which they eired
'I:::c;i.d to cfchew ; for they did not find by your ma-
La!iniil; \'wiih them hitherto, that it behoved them to
' 'iie French king, and to lose his favour and good
¼-n'e with him i anfxvered that as to their refusal,

e

'.:J the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville
e"'; Uii$pr.tched forth of rance before there acci-
;:-' i .I.'d, and his fpeciall errand was to ipachl

,l. t, L) rl

the quen.s marringe with the earle of Bothel, (fnr foin
deed since my coming hither I learned his commilno ten
ded to tha end. and to make offer to the queenof a
other marriages and as to monficur de Crocq, hecoal
have no order forth of France concerning these mate
since they happnled; and therefore they might very sw
hold them flfpece j to have conference with the queen, e
thev rmi,!:h treat: o matters in this time without infiru
ons'and o rather do harm then good; but your maje
b.i-a, advertized of all things which had chanced,
fen: r1e hithrir to treat with them, for the well of therea
for the confervarion of their honors and credit, and
their fuertv ; and I might boldly fay unto him, thatv
ma'efty had better deserved than the French had.
said, for his own part, he was much bound unto your
iefrt, and had alwavs found great favour and courte
"England, but to be plain with you, Sir fayed he, th
not manv of this aflembly that have found so great ob!
tiop at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the Fr
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn bethe
persons which took benefit by the queens majeftsai
Leith, the reft of the noblenren were not in the a
and we think, said he, the queens majesty yourfoverc
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world,
as rreat benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotl
or any particular person ; and not to talk with yowa
ambaafidor, but with S" Nicholas Throgmorton, my
MIorton, and such as were in pain for the death of D
found but cold favour at the queens majestys hands,
they were ban;sh'd forth of their own country;
voul!d all our whoe company were as well wvilling
co-npliqf the queeni your sovereign intents and ddi
I am, for mine own part, I am but one, and tha:.
meanest fort, and they be many noblemen and fu
have reat interefi in the matter, mary yow hal! bea
I will iply myflf to imploy my credit, and all
may do, to fatisfie the queen your miflrefs, as much
eth in n.e, and for your own part you have a great
f:-iends in this assembly, with many other good
But for conclfion I muff take this for an answer
unrill the other lords were come, and thereupon 1 th
meet to advertize your majefit what hath passed, an
far forth I have proceeded ; your expectation being
to hear from hence.

4

3

; now to advertize your mijefly of the flatc of all
,il as I have learned in-e: my co::ing hither, it may
' your majefly to under-fr.nd as olloweth.
TiE queen of Scotland rc: l.ineh in good health in th=
lcof Lochleven, guarded by tl; 'L.S rd i:. ay anl Loch-
P the owner of the hou ; or the lord Rutlhven is inm-
led in another conmmilTfion, cc beau he bl to lhow
rfavour to the qtleen ani to give er inreiligence. Shz
w ited on with 5 r hladys, 4 or 5 ;':ntlewo°'ne.., and
hamnbcrcrs, whereof one is a French woman . lhe
r of Buch;an, the earle of Murray's brother, hath allo
ey to come to her at his pleafre ; tlhe lords aorefaid,
ich have her in guard, doe csp her very lraitlv, and
Ir as call pe-rceive, their rigour proceedeth by their

ir fom thele men, becauie that the queti will not by
ainins be induced to lelnd her authority to profecutc
murder, nor will not content by any perfwafion to
:oun the lord Bothell for her hulband, ::.r avo.veth
antiy that lie will live and die with him ; and faith
if it were put to her choice to relinquish her crown
kingdon, or the lord Bothell, f(h would leave her
gom and dignity, to go as a imple damfell with
ad that file will never content that he shall fare worse,
are more harm than herself.
IT. aq far as I can perceive, the principall catnfe of her
ction is, for that these lords do (ee the queen being of
n'eat affteion towards the earle Bothell as ihe is, and
put at, as they should be compelled to be in conti-
inms, and to have occasion of many battles, he be-
rith manifefl evidence notorioully dctecred to be the
pail murderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of
::utinlt him according to his merits.
E lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and
a a marriage not to be suffered for m ny refpccts,
icpiration cannut take place if the queen be at li-
ad have power in her hands.
sY do not also forget their own pcrill, conjoin'd
'e dangcr of the prince, but as far as I can perceave,
ltend not either to touch the qeen in fuerty or in
for they do speak of her with rfpcct and reve-
and do affirm, as I do learn, that the conditions
id accomplished, they will both put her to libert,
lt:01 her to her etate.

B b 2 Tr,sE

t' r - R l-'s i-'Tve fr te guard of their town 40oHir.

.

' -.- I-..;r ber i; i v-ry good order, for the entertain.
i;.._. -r , .' hih c;m; ip:-.s, untill all matters be componded

.' :

' '.. a' '.3 7,'ur m ajeflv, to aid them with such fu

,.,- r.;:-', :; hl.:> e-n nmentioned to Mr. Secretary b th

r : Li. -ihnto''; :riting, amounting as I perceive too
Cr a-w'.;; t-u. ir crouns of the

T Y -e.'F-c ia :ly advertized that the French lKin
ad.rh .--:Ii L ',-.:nl hit'her monsieur de ia Chapell d(ez
i:, .' niht cr he Frnch order, and always Vwelana

:;i;;n.:c to i-h h:; o -Guvfe. and howioever la Foref, i
L:..'o'.', :id dtl C(oc. h.ive ued language in the que:ns
;.,'r .d ro t r ilrds difaldvant.ge there, to vo;r
;it:.': i- Cr cq do:h carry with him such matter asL
be !i:t!- o th qucicn's advaitai ; lo as it is thousht;

,-r a: ki'i, upon his c ito s presence, iil !'a:;

.i:i-r- th. lords, than pleaf'ue thc queen; for the, h
'ir f..t' .; o wvell made, as the French will rathe;'r
he ir pr fit by them, than any other way,

iHE E X.ITHi I fend your majcfly the lafr bond ar

on, an' f'gncd by the Hamiltons, the earl of Arg
Hu.t;l-, a.d f:nt Iv others at Dumbarton.

.;LT- i P.'I.THELL', iince my coming to this town,

li.m-.l:'-,ns hve sent unto me a gentleman of their
ri..z i;-n-ed Robert Hamilton with a letter froa
b.l .'o o'tr. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, tc
wherrcs I inl yo.ur m icftv and mine answer unto th
r.-fer-mi:b, to t-he bearer the declaration of some things
t:l .e d'i.; by :h! '!nto m ,

TI'F. e1::c ,f A.-'gyl hath, in like manner, feniano

unto n;c

- i-h i:t - and credit. I have used him asl

th. c.'.c;-:s. t' w
co7w of born which letters I Irn3

rn.;ir. ai. The lord Harrys hath also sent uro
bu: ni'! 'litten, and I ha-e returned unto him in

.' -' ' ;T the -;i h dayt of th!is month there is ?ag

2:cim',' <.:': I:he ihu-ches, (flires, and boroughs tos
t':is r..:.ni, n.v.-clV of such as be contented to re
t':L'- '..:.il : ' this town, where it is thought the
*.::- : t. n;-:rtr iii be h drd d, and I fear me

t r c s d.'..it at.l danger; unliefs hi

I.'il,.On and s..e th_rs wi aich be eft aifede u
dO p- o i.'- is;o/ ic; ,2', ; fsor perceave the gr-]

r. a:.' '"! ht:.la m r .'i',. ;bii 'chiciiy t-c cornlio- i

.:;' !ia alitied in these doings, do rcatly diilononr

I'ucni, and mind seriously either her deprivatiln, or
;clnllru ion; I uled the bllt means I can 'corfici'in'
: uric of the world herc to proroge th;s afli':nb!i, iso

:?px caleth to me to be the belt remedy: I mn.y not

:' of diliuc,ltion of it, for that may not be abi ln, and
'!U,1 tlhereby bring my self into great hlatrc an l pcrril.
chiCi'ef o thle lords which be here prcfent ai this tinm
r not show so much lenity to the queen as I think they
';: be contented, for fear of'the rage of the people.
sw somcn be molt furious and impudent agii:ist the
.:n, ;aid yet the men be mad enougi ; so a a iraner
, bfic may soon be made a fcrilice amnonge them.
T;i!i.' was a great bruit that the -lami!runs \ith
:ridhcrents' would put their force into the f!el-k a,: iift

i 2h of this month, but I do not find that intein fu
., ;a the common bruit goeth.
T:- ear!e of Argyll is i;i the high Linds, where there
- L.e among his own countrvrrcen.
'; ? earle of ILennox is by thcie or's much detil-red
::. .lnd 1 duo believe 'o:n;a majiefy may ft ult hi:n, and
-.'...him, as he lhall be able to p:-omote your ppofe
;.:.: thele men.
I'ir. earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons andc he be incompa-
.--I do find amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and the
;.i)- two firange and sundry hurmours.
H'.iiL I ONs do make show of the liberty of the qneen,
:! rofecute that with great earneitleis, becanle tlev
.- have there lords destroy her, rather than flie hould
:e;ovcrcd from them by violence; another time they

o dcfire her liberty, and Bothwcl's defirudtiol,

..:: they would corpais a m:ariage betwixt the queen
id Le !ocd of Arbroth.
TriS eal!. of Argyll doth act her liberty, anl , oth-

Icb 'cftiltion, becaunf he xxould niarry the queen to

' 'GtiCIer.

.):i yet nither of them, notwithflandin their opin
:;.ira(rc, (as appeareth by their bond) dnti dlii; ve-r

iiis; to each other, nor mind one end ; Knox is
'.!e, but in the well parts, he and the rcft of the mi-

w::'! ill b e here at

the t afTemby, whos aficrity

'! tie inuecn I fear s h as

h as ny m::n's.

'' tome confirrence which I had w h lrine of this
-! 1il, me thinketh that tlhey have i eJl!igence il;;' tl:tre

B i . ;

i; a i. 'position in the queen of Scotland, to leave this realm,
and ro retire herself either into England, or into France,
b:- most willin!y i-.-o tngland, for such - and mif
i:keings as fh- kno-vcth hath been, and is meant unto heri
France, leavi ig the regiment either to a number of per.i
sons deleagucd and authorized by her or to some one o
r.oe.

AND it please your majelty, I think it not amiss

put vow in rein.e-nbrance, that in cafe the said queencom
inlo England by Your allowance, without the French king!
conicnt, the fhail loose her dowery in France, and hat
little or nothing from hence to entertain her; and in a
she do go into France xith the king's contentment,
mayv be an instrument (it he can recover favour, as tim
will help to cancell her disgrace) either by matching wil
some hulband of good quality, or by ome other devise, t
work new unquictnefs to her own contry, and so coG.:
qjently to your maiefty's.

'-HFREI'RE it mav please your majefly to confider

this matter, and t let me know your pleasure with co
venient speed, how I fhal aer the fame, if it
propounded urnt me. either br the queen, or by thecoun
c'il, as a piece o rc end and compos tion. For lam sure
of late, lhe hath feermed very defrous to have the mat
ter brought to pa's, that she might go into Engan
retaining her efl.te and irifdicrion in herself, though fh
do not exrrcifc it; and likewise I understand that tome
this council whih be leart affcdted to her safety do thin
there is no cthsr way tofave her. Thus Almighty G
preierve your ma:efrv- in health, honor, and all felicity;
-din the i4 Ji.' 1i567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmoron to queen Elil'beth t

iSth of July 1567, from Ldinburgh.

-n-:.;--::. T may please your nmailef. vow might perceave byn
'-:*-- i letters of the 6:.-, how far I had proceded with the;,

lords, and what was their an:fver; since which time
have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, theioir
of Lidington, and Sir James Balfour captain of thiscalli
at whose hands cannot p2rceave that as yet access to th
queen to Lochleven will be granted me, faying themfel("
fli!l by the absence of the lords and others their affociat
which (they favy tey look fr withir two days; and foa

\ha

;: I finl, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
i.C access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have

:nght good not to defer this dispatch untill I have a re-
,:,.! anlwer in that manner.
.'.AY it thereior please your majefly, to underfiand Ro-
C:t Melvin returned from the queen in Lochleven, to this
ron, the 6'h of July, and brought a letter from her writ-
;1 o her own hand to these lords, which doth contain as
in.nert;lnd marter as followeth - A request unto them
,ob'c consideration of her health, and if they will not put
r te liberty, to change the place of retraint to the cattle
stir:ing, to the end fle might have the comfort and cornm
; c her n, and if they will not change her froim Loch-
in', lhe required to have some other gentlewomen about

-r, naming none.
To have her apothecary, to have some modest minifler.
-To have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as
would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
t,,ber.- Touching the government of the realm flhe
A.irh two offers, which are but generally touched in
ir etter, the particularitys be not fpccified, but refered
to Rbert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and
',::v to the earle of Murray; the other is to the lords
olc names ensue, aiitfed with such others, as they Ihall
I unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault,
ca';s of Morton, Murray, Marr, and G(lencairn.
SHE hath written unto them that I might have access
:n her.-- he requireth further, that if they will not
,.: ler and regard her as their queen, yet to use her as

5 king their sovereign's daughter, (whom many of
;Pm ki\: ) and as their prince's mother. -She will by
omz!ns ield to abandon Bothell for her hulband, nor

qii!h him; which matter will do her molt harm of
-.and hardeneth these lords to great severity against her.
S. yicldeth in words o the prosecution of the mur-

IH.iE the means to let her know that your majesty
h sent me hither for her relief.
I .AVE aso perfwaded her to conform herfclf to re-
:t:ce Bothell for her hulband, and to be contented to
Ic a divorce to pass betwixt them; she hath fnt me
rcrd that she will in no ways content unto that, but ra-
'er die; grounding herself upon this reason, taking her-
: to be seven weeks gone with child, by rcnouncing

B b 4 Bothc!!,

Bot.e'.1. (he finould acknowledge herself ro be wvih liil
o a ba!tard, and to have fo-feited her honrur, whilch he
will not do to die for ir ; have perfw ad'ed her to fae
h.cr oiwn iie- a:; her child, to choole the least hardl con.
dition.

m.. Knox arri-ed here in this town the 6th of t!;s

r- "'', with whnom. I have had rome contercnce, and wv:il
M-- Crai' a.lso, the other mi:iie-r of tis ton.

I .iVE e;,'-==d wi:h them to prcaci; and perfwad e-

rn'tv, I 't

n :hem both very- aulfere, in this crnfir-ncc, vxh.j

i cv iv .il d hereanter I know not, thev are furniPiedi
v.:t m .' argu.T.i.nts, ,mrne fcrts of the ic:iptulre, foan:
irth oi hittlrics, iboe groended (as they fa'r. ;)oai;e:
ia'.s oS tii rea.m, iame upon pi acices uicd in this rcal,,
njd some upon the conditions and oth made by their prici
at her coronation.

THE bithep f Ga;lloway u7ncle to the carle of ur. :cL

hI:th ent hither to the'e 1arJs, that his n phew tie-'
and some others of that .ide may, at Linithow or a; Si-
ing, have forme communic.tion with foine appointi ca
this fide, aiurinr t-em tha: there is a good difpo;:ian
in te lords of the other pirty to concurrc woith thfc, ;:
furin ltulther t'.t they will not dilT nt fur tril'es or! 'r.
necelTary thingii, and as I am given to underland) ii';t.l
can be pleased the quecn's recir::iit be con:inu'd, u:ril.
th:e murder be p.rfSed in all peribns, whereby the ie.i
ration or the quen :d -the!!

i imp"cd, the prei-r'

tion of the pri.ce, the f.cuirit' tor :;ll in, and

;i a
Oir'er taken f' :- te ccv.crr.ane o the realn in tranicuil;

CAPTAIr. Cc:-k. wihich hrthi so long i'rved in Del::'i

an;liervd at i

t..;;havecn, did he 16tih .Js this r.cr.et ,2ac
co--r.n\ d ' .': cne o" 'is ;foiie'rs, or rath the -Jr

a-.: h ^" e.: '".* te.l: c esmti. ih ta'i lor coty

.. th,. toe

r i- ;-: ,i; i rdx, ?.. h~ninftv, and wi'l::'air. cisI
r'.i- ;-on; *v :-.- :r-o:e Clerl; i.nth rc~ihe"l lin' ' ;:l

:,rr.! V.-.S . '_t h i wih aoo. Lac....r, .'I..

- ? '. v.--: ri-,-i:r-! '
thcie ijords to o th e north

.:s-.- ', ;iT-'.'ch :}he p ilT.tge or the earie o'hi,

t :.;.. .ent i'hr to i;e i.i-;, or to any other p.:ce; "L
r.e ::i.-eat or th- ma; i rhis entereriz was daihe.

T.:y ''hop or _.:.ow,-'., i; com:e .,: L;bni, .:,,. ,
,

::: C'.:- t': :D.Mi' with t:e l;:'1 od' Li '.ieyo~a a.,

I
.!%1

Ti!E abbot of Killwinning hath sent for Sir James Bal-
r, craptnin of the castle, to have conference with him.
": I v.rote nto your majeft i y
my lft, the Hamiltons

::i n

o matter to dif vcr thecl lords and them afnn-

l ut wvould concurr in all rins (ca in any extremi-
i; the queen) so as that they might be altured the

. c of Scotland were crouned king, and fhoull die
:,t iiTTe, that the earle of Lenox's son living fliould
: i:;rt the croun of this realm, as next heir to his

.. althhough the lords and councelors fpcak reverent-
; ,:i,lv, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot
*. ,'v- their pcech any intention to cruelty or violence,

Io i rinld by intelligence that the queen is in very
.: ;ril of her life, by reaf,; that the people airemblcd
*; convenltion do mind vchemently the deltrunion of

;: - a pnblic speech amonlr?: all the pcople,.and amongfl

. .^t, (.ving of tie coun 'r.or. hat tiheir queen hath
r:: libic-rty nor priMilede to commit murlder nor aul- .
., ii;:n ny other private person, neither by God's laws,

the awvs of the realm.
e!;- carl othwell, and all his aiherents and associates,

: .; ro t'.:e horn by the ord j.ary julicc of this town,

. ''.e lords of the feiTion; and commandment gi,'en
; lr;-i ;. and ail other ofiicers, to apprehelnd lim,

::; .it.:' is foilowers aind reciptors--The earl of
...,
.' tor, and one o his o hcir servitors of his
..:. i-:' app!rhcnded. -.:.- conifLd such sundry

.;:.': :.'::,i: , p
it appca;ireth r;dentdv, that he the said

': ....-o iitf th e p. ii;ipal ec'uItO;s of tile murder, in

" n:
r . on, accoaip:'. u. .-: irli)l'y others, of which

t: cnor: vcs cc.i .i;i, i:,,; n the naImes but of three

'. that is to f.y, two , te Oroiif.on's of Tivot-
.. :' one Hayborn of Boiton; the lords would be
:-i t;l- :-one rs ithe murderers fliould have fnay ravour

; ;'.1 latEn xd, and hereof rheir deire is, that the

* '

...n r 'e er m:ay be warn'ed ; Bothell doth frill

::. -..i .. *.:. ':i:;:i' a.'t;, hit ibhe lord Seato:n an.d Fle-

;. ,i..: i:;xvc b.i therc, have uttery1 abandoned

:- '.i! p n

repair hithhe:'ards.-The intciiigence doth

-J;il betwixt tneife lords, and those whiclh held of;
: '.-;wi;t .inding t'e lo:'rd iave sent an hundred and
' ::-:'.:-;ihcrs ti-o Stinii, to keep the town and pa-

sage

sage from furprize; and o have they done in like man.
ner to St. JohnfRon, which be the two passages from the
north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain 0i
Duibar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do mer
vile the carriages be not impeached otherwise than they
be.

OF ate this queen hath written a letter to the captai

of the said cafle which hath been furprized; and there
by matter is discovered which maketh little to the queen'
advantage.

THUS, having none other matter worthy your maie

fly's nowledge, I beseech God to prosper your maje
with long life, perfect health, and profpcrous felicity. A
Edinburgh the ISth of July, I567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the righ

honourable the earl of Leicester, knt. of theor
der, and one of the lords of her majety's mo
honourable privy Council.

tn ofPJ', B D Y my former dispatches ant to her majelty, and
o.,rii:D ~ Secretary, since the i2th of July, your lordlhi
the Ori'- might have perceived the state of this country, andt

what end these matters be like to come; so as not
trouble yourlordfhip with many words; this queen is li
very fhortlv to be deprived of her royal estate, her son t
be crowned king, and she detained in pris.m within th
realm, and the fame to be governed, in the youn king
name, by a councel, consisting of certain of the nobili
and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to
seen that the power and ability to do any thing toth
commodity of the queen's majety, and the realm of En
land, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in t
hands of these lords, and others their associates, assemble
at Edinburgh. Nowr if the queen's majelty will still
sift in her former opinion towards the queen of Sco
land, (unto whom she shall be able to do no good) the
I do Fpainly fee that these lords and all their accomplice
will become as good French, as the French king can wi
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamilton
the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that faction, they
already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth litt
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then th
is the f'ate of things so come to pass of this country, tba

Franc

:ance has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them,
to all purposes, as ever it was ; and what an instrument,

0oulng prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report
;et) your lordships wisdoms, and therefore confidering
, weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, [
*!t 5your lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis
:h time) how to advise her majesty, to leave nothing un-
iae that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her
ptiron, or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And
:jngle other things, that I can imagine, for the firfl
ie ree, nothing is more meet to bring tis to effect, than
rinlre this company here aembled, to bear her majesty
::r .'vour. Some talk hath passed between the lord of
linington and me, in certain conferences, about this
?cer. By him 1 find, that when her majesty hall have
:nithefe men to her devotion, the principal point that
:,! make them conformable to deliver their prince into
rlnd, will reft upon the queen, and the realms en-
:1: him to the succession of the crown of England,
:iltr of issue of the queen's majefly's body, ome other
:;5gwill also be required,as the charge of the said prince
I his train, to be at the charge of England. I do well
asrce that there men will never be brought to deliver
ir prince into England, without the former condition,
rhe fcceflion of England; for (faith Liddington) that
ag place, the prince hall be as dear to the people of
ii?.nd as to the people of Scotland; and the one will
as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
esi:h, all things conlidered, it will be reported that the
Cilinen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as
e vwhich commit the sheep to be kept by the wolves.
as Rfor concision, your lordships may perceive here
','b e the sLope of this matter. As unto the delivering
'im pon hostages, he fayeth, let no man think, that
condition of the succession not being accomplished,
nobility and the gentry will never consent to leave
cfves destitute of their lovereign, upon any holfages,
er upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to issue
'ina to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
i] that the matter were so handled; for then you should
d'enture all your goods in one hip, which might have
'angerous effect, considering the unwillingness of the
Seen your sovereign to consent to eftablilhing any fuc-
0r to the crown. And then, how unmete were it, that

her

her majesty having in her possession already all such per
sons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crovij
to have our prince also in her culody. For so ther
might follow, without good capitulations, a firange ad
dangerous ifue, tho' the queen your minfrefs do thin
that such imaginations could not proceed but from b';
heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf. Wha
is come to pass since my last diipatch, and how far fort
things are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be inforne|
by my letters lent unto her maje!ty, at this time. :\:
so I pray almighty God, preserve your lordfllip in r:l|
honour and felicity. At Edenburgh this 24th of jil
1567.

it may please your good lordihip to mn.:.e my lorJ S.tv,:
partner of this letter.

The queen to S:r Nicholas Throg mrton.

By the queen.

T:'-;. R LS TY and right well beloved, e grcet .'o
I $67. ~ well, for as much as we do confider that you hai

now a long time rained in those parts, without xpe
dition in the charge committed unto you, we think it no
meet feeing there hath not followed the good accepiatio
and fruit of our well meaning towards that slate, whil
good reason w.ould have required, that you fhou!dconti
nue there any longer, our pleaure, tlerefore, is, that 0
fhail, immedia:Jy upon the receipt hreof, fend youo!
vant Middlceore unto the lords and eftlacs of that re.:
that are aemb.ld together, wi'ing him to declare
them, that it cannot but seem very fi-range unto us, tl,
you having been sent from us, of such good intent, todea
with them, in matters tending so much to thir o
quier, and to the benefit of the whole estate of their

o t

tr-, they have so far forgotten themselves, and lu inigth
ly regarded us and our good meaning, not only ,in s:'.J
ing to hear you, and deferring your access to the uee
their sovereign, blu also, which is irranneil of all, i'
vouchsafing to make a!v ani-Wcr rnto us. And ;ln
thele deaiings be such, indeed, as \xere not to be io':
.:r t their hands, 3t do we rind their allge and

C t '?

jinIs townards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass
h" -eft, in so strange a degree, as we for our part, and
. hlppofe the whole world besides, cannot but think
:..; to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of sub-

, as must needs remain to their perpetual tauche for

And therefore he lhall fay, that we have tho't good,

,o'.it consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you
:aour presence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and
iaf.urt so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we
'l'i that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
itcnicnt speed as you may. Given, &r.

Indorfed 6th Augut, I567.

Tirogmorton to the right honourable Sir William
C.cl. k::ighr, one of her majesty's privy coun-
c:! and principal secretary, give these.
SI R,

II A T I have learned, since the arrival of my rzth Aug.
V lord of Murray, and Mons. de Linnerd, you 1567.

ucdelftand by my letter to her majesty, at this time. PaperOfi
I c Ftrnch do, in their negotiations, as they do il their riginal.

rin, put water to their wine. As I am able to fee into
d;i.:r lings, they take it not greatly to the hcart how

:;;: qeeln il ep, whether she live or die, whether fne be
:;!ibLriy or in prizon. The mark they shoot at, is, to
:;w thtir old league; and can be as well contented to
i .e it of this little king, (howfocver his title be) and the
;i.:: i- the order of these lords, as otherwise. Iyneroil
i.:c bat yeflerday, and me thinketh he will not tarry
, ; on may gucfs how the French will seek to dif-
a..ic.i tlhc lords, when they changed te coming of La
C >pdlie des Ourlins for this man, because they doubt-
i tlat de la Cappclle hould not be grateful to them,
. a .pitl. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than
Il'11 do otherwise, me thinketh the earl of Murray
il ril tile course that those men do, and be par-
itirr of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bit-
iiv a,:infl the tragedy, and the players ltherein, than

s, itli like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an ink-
ti h that Ledington to is go into France, which I do as
r"'l mi(;iie, as any thing, for ourl purpose. I can aftiul-
'a i':: whole protefanit. of France vill live and die i,

t,. -

these mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit among
you, that aid should be fcnt to the adverse party, a'
that Martigues should come hither with fame force; Mio
Baudelot hath alTured me of his honour, that inflead c
Martigues coming againtl them, he will come with as goo
a force to succour them: And if that be ent under mean
er conduct, Robert Stuart hall come with as many to for
tify them. But the conflable hath alured there lords
that the king meaneth no way to offend them. Sir, I pa
you find my revocation convenient, and speed you to fur
ther it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it bet
kindle these lords more againfl us. Thus I do humnb!
take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the 2th of Au
gui, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.

R U S T Y and well-beloved we greet you wll
T We have, within these two days, received thr

sundry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d,
this month, having not before those received any feie
days before; and do find, by these your letters, thatyor
have ery diligently and largely advertised us of allth
hall and peremptory proceedings there; which as w
nothing like, so we trull in time to fee them wax colder
and to receive some reformation. For we cannot per
ceive, that they with whom you have dealt can anfwser th
doubts moved by the Hamiltons, who howsoever they ma
be carried for their private respec'ts, yet those things whic
they rrove, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. Ft
if the; may not, being noblemen of the realm, be fuffere
to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind con
cerning the reports which are made of her, by such a
keep her in captivit y, how hould they believe the reports
or obey them, which do report it i and therefore ou
meaning is, you (hall let the Hamiltons plainly under
lbr.ni, 2th2. we do well al!ow of their proceedings, (as fa
forth as the f.me doth concern the queen their fovereig
for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reason-
able for us therein to do, for the queen our filter, we
.il be ready to perform the fame. And where it is
required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope

ilhu!A

fiti1l deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
tus,. and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith,
ad we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof
ivour letters, and to will him to shew himftlf favourable
t them in their a&cions, that may appear plainly to tend
Btthe relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
v, And as we willed our secretary to write unto you,
it upon your mefnage done to the earl of Murray, you
sight return, so our meaning is you shall. And if these
our letters lhall meet you on the way, yet we will have
:3U advertise both the lord Scrope, and the Hamiltons,
i our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
5:; Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbishop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commendations to your good lord- 13th Aug.

I hips, this shall be to advertize you, that the queen's rS67.
iarily my sovereign having sent me hither her ambafsa- PaprrOffce,

from a copy

:rto the queen her ifter your sovereign, to communi- which Sir
(t:e unto her such matter as she thought meet, confider- Nicholas
gia the good amity and intelligence betwixt them, who set to th

queen.

ting detained in captivity (as your lordships know) con-
trary to the duty of all good subjects, for the enlargement
ofwhofe person, and the retfitution of her to her dignity,
ar najelly gave me in charge to treat with these lords
tembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable con-
ditions and means as might be, for the safeguard of the
tounig prince, the punilhment of the late horrible murder,
:e dilolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the
ia rof Bodwell, and laflly for their own furcties. In the
egri.tion of which matters I have (as your lordships
ll know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being
Ci' to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the queen
.y sovereign's fatisfadion, Of which frange proceed-
as towards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards
:irfovereign, I have advertised the queen's majety ; he
*rJt being minded to bear this indignity) hath given me
i charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in
!ch fort as they may well perceive her majelty doth difal-

low

low of their proceeiiings, an thereupon hath revokedme
Anr further hath given e in charge to communicateh
Lame un:o your lord'its, requiring y.ou to let me know
before my departure h .-c, :(hich -hiall be, God willin
as iCon as have receied antlver from you) what oJ
and -cur confederates will afTuredly do, to set the quee
you r fove-ein at libert, a. :i to restore her to her fore,
dignity b- force, or otherwise; feeing these lords haver

.fed a'l ot-.er mediation, to the end the queen's maiel

my fover.ign may concur rwih your lordflip s in this ho
nourable enterprize.

AN-D in c, through the difperfioa of your afFociae,

vour lord : ,s can neit;cr comuniicarc this matter amona
you, no. rcei' re io of them ail

ob that time,

ma-- pleaic you to fend me the opinions or to many or v0
as rr.:.v c trir togeth-r, xithin two or three day, f0
1 mni- .a.'e ouar an 'wr here i this town' by Moni:o
Tuzfdav n^-: at the farthest, bciiag the Igth of thi.s A'
gu:'; for I in:en; God v:-iiing.) to dcpart toward; e-.
land, uFpon \ edridaiy flowii.g. Thus I molt hut,1
take my le.ve of -our lord;hips at Edenburgh, the i3r;o
Aug. o567

Indorf3 t'e 1t:. c. A-ug. 1567.

Sir Nic olas Throckmorton the lord Herrys,
:- A. -, 7 0\ U R good lordiiip's leter of the I th of Agl

6-.- I have -ice d he the isth o rile fame. For an;e

P-' _-; ·-a.: v.'ercun.:o it mray like your lordship to underfrand, th2
'. ';' ." I-ili signify unto you plainly, hw far forth I am alrea]
N tharo. g;Chl\. infitr.lte o he queeni's majefiy my folveni '

'r · . . .
psa.:;, co ' erna ing7 the detention of the queen your ii

ricl;, and ccnacrning her iclici.

T1 h-,; fir her rmjicfry hath given in charge, to 1u:'
'. ".-- f` periuafion ii her name, to move these iords aliil
o:-d a: EL r.orgh to du ift fomn this violent nd undutia
b. ..-,o;ir, .';i hl h:cy u e to-a rd their fo.ereign. *.1

i =

.;S pri, bldues the flhce of mavny eafons, and il
dry- rea-ui ons of anmicabc treaty with them, her n'¢i

. ; .il:. .c.? P... oi: plain and fevee fpeci a
to t-.::i, ..Ji"f .2 s.i orth, as if they would not b ':-

:r ...;.., .:' rcorr thc. tliri outrage:s pr:C'

.-.._ . -...i-; i:::: o:re iign, that thenl t::cy n.g
1

i alured her majefly neither would nor could indure
ich an indignity to be done to the queen, her good cou-
in and neighbour.
A sD notwithfianding these my proceedings with them,
.tv have made proof to he little moved thereby, for as
t neither will they consent to the enlargement, neither
iF.9r me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me,
i is superfluous to treat any more with them after this
a.nncr. Whereupon I have advertised the queen's ma-
:.y my fovcreign, expecting daily her majesty's further
der; and as I flall be advertised thereof, so will not
i to signify the fame to your good lordhip ; and in the
tan time will advertise her majtfty also, what your lord-
rip hath written unto me. Thus with my due commen-
_ions to your good lordship, I commit the fame to al-
Bhty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and
r,:e that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.
Indorfed 24th of August, 567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 450.)
co;'.it of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Par-

liament held December 15, 1567.

HHE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the PapcrOffi; .
n ame of the duke and himself their friends and ad-
J::., ;the duke himself, the earl of CalElles, and the

osit of Kilwinning being also present) to persuade the

:In of the whole realm in one mind. Wherein he did
.ipare to set forth solemnly the great praise that part
::iri nobility did deserve, which in the beginning took
-res for punishment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing
'quen's inordinat affe&ion to that wicked man, and that
ould not be induced by their persuasion to leave him,
:; i fequeftring her person within Lochlevin, they did the
-: ?o noblemen. That their honourable doings, whi h had
Ip: red to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their
:.couintry from the slanderous reports that were spoken
' nor.g other nations, had well deserved that all their
':'ien hild join with them in so good a cause. That
:' ;-n, ;a whose names he did speak, would willingly,
....i..t, , ..ny compullion, enter themselves in the frme

:'. ! put their lives and lands in the like hazard,
;-:i II. C c for

for mir.t.:ne ; o our c.:;_. And if the queen hErtci
xwer- in Scotland, accomp.ni-d with 2O,=co men, the
:v.':1 be of the fame minJ, an'. fight i: our quarrel. H
hkoed the remainder noblemen of their party, Huntle,
Arguile, and others, vwhich had not as yet acknoledge
the king, ;-ould come to the fame conformity, whereunt
he would :.!so ecrnetlv move them. And if they willr
main obft;inte, and refuse to qualify themselves, then vi
the duke, he, and their fi-iends, join with us to corre
them, that otherwire will not rfrorm themselves. So p!an
lible an oration, and more advantageous for our part
r.no o ofurfelves could have made. He did not force
to term my lord regent, by the name of regent, (thr
was no enr.tion at all of the earl of Murray) and to ca
him gr-ace at eery word, when his speeches were direl
ed o hi-m, accompanying all his words with low court
f:es after his manner.

:-o . XIV. (Vol. I. p. 472.)
Prt: cf a letter from fir Francis Knoll s to Ctc

Sbh Aug. i55S, from Bolton.

A-.^ .- --7 T f r'

- i q een doth seem, outwarJ'. r
?r:.;- ;:C.. j on, . ;'.vour the form, but also the chief

ticrl of t;z rc'igo:i of the gospel, namely, juftifica;ioab
faith on:-: a id fie heareth the faults of ppeiryrevca'e
L-- preacing or othrilwie, with contented ears, and wi
s-enile an weS-ak rep'ys, and fie doth not seem to like
vorle oi religion tirovw me.
P -:' o: a lettcr rom fir Francis Knollys to Ce

21 SpjciT.b , 1 iS, from Bolon.
--- 7T c.n-. o to hi q'-len' s ears of late that she \|

[ blr.i:cl to b'_ _:--l1 turneL to the religion cf

:.pel, t- the g: ..t i.;.';ng of 'the papifls h ca-
V ,;ir .i:: .e h oriel co;.f.c, d ufito me, and re.
cae'.' hi :. :: great chamb when the ajlembl) ^^k

pn-L

in ..-^.i.' pr,:f'ir, ile took occasion to fpCe

r i,;Oi, and the;l op;en : in-- profesScd herfc!f to be :
S.;:i' r-ii-:,, .:-1 t;;o'k upon her to patronize the if

r: c .:-,, t}'..: '.. e had done a great while aorc

,' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the
,. of her speech was only to fllew her zeal ; and after-
rards to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become

lcoafidently backward in religion, why, lsid she, would

ou have me to loose France and Spain, and all my friends
i other places, by seeming to change my religion, and
.::I am not assurcd the queen my good lifter will be
gy afred friend, to the f'tisfaction of my honour and
xperation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 474.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

PIGHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, e PJaerOfF-.
K gre't you wel!. Where we hear fay, that certain From .co;.y
:rts arc made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what- r-oArte by
i;:r should fall out now upon the hearing of the queen c;il.
i 'ar-:r caufc, in any p:-oof to convince or to acquit the
.i.eeii conce;rning the horrible murder of her late hus-
i.: o;r coafin, have determined to reifore her to her
i.lJ!n and government, we do so much millike hereof,
; cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and
::r.),e we have thought good to a.urc you, that the

a:is urtruly devised by the authors to our dilhonour.

:"- e have been aiways certified from ciur said ifter,
:: :b her letters and mcifigcs. that fie is by no means
::- [or participant of ta mi-rder, which w\e swiih to be
:., If. lurely if: ihe riould be found ji'ty to be guilty
:- .:l' hth b'rcr reported of her, cwher ci f- e would
*'.: i;,rrv, thln, i'Jccd, it fihuld beho vc us to con-
:.: ;:lcrweiie o, 1 .r cauie tman to s.issy h;'r dfiire in re-
:::a of he to the gov!nment of tiat kingdom. And
"would lhavc you and all others think, tiat Phonld be
:'. to conceive 'honojrabv of us and cur actins.
I:::c:f-d 71 Snt, s56S.

C c 2 '..-. XXVI.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 481.)
Sir Francis Knoilys to Cecil the 9th of Oftbe

16S, from York.
0. o: _ T Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me

. '

t : i t Bon, to attend upon him here Thurfd

C !il.
SI rn:ad mv repair hither accordingly, maning

l'av here uiil MnunJay next ; as touching the matters
the corrr.iii-,: that his grace and the reft have from
highneiz, his grace hath imparted unto me of all thi
thereunto aFertaini g, and what hath hitherto pa
and al;ho' the matters be too weighty for my weak c
city, to presume to utter any opinion ot mine owa th
of, yet I fee that my lord Herlis for his parte laborre:
rconciiaticn, to be had without the extremity of o1i
accul-i., *n; my lord of Ledington also faith to me,
he could wilfi there matters to be ended in duke ma
so that it mght be done with fafery; of the rcft voi
co- ;ive, b-; the advcrtifcmcnts and writtings, feat u
cij co.nLizHsca.l;rs.
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the qu

of Scots, from York, October i 6S.

' L
"c LE I S your majslty I conferred at length i

ane great part of a night, who aurit me t;

had reasoncd wiih B. this Saturday C. on the tidJ,
determinate to him that it was the D. detcrmi-t
pole not to end your cause at this time, but to hoi
fame in fufp-nce, and did that was in her power, ton
the E. puriue extremity, to the effect F. and ,.s ad
re.nt might. utter all tey couid to your dilro
the efe t to cause you come in disdain with thehaii
iects of this realm, that ye may be the mair usa1
attempt any thing to her disadvantage. And to ti;
is a: . her intention, and when thcv have produc'd j.
can against you, D. will not appoint the matter i;;}
b.t transport you up in the country, and retain .oj
till ,he think time to shew you favour, which is njo:
to be hi.fil;-, becaale of your uncles in France,

r (lie has of yourself to be her unfriend. And there-
; their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
;aing that ye are informit that your fbjerts which has
,wedit vou. - This in effect that your majesty hear-

the efiate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
hormed that her maiefty was informed of you, that you
,uid not gudcly remit your subjes in such fort as they
ight credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the
I ofthis controversy to be ended. And therefore per-
i:ing her D. effectually not to trust any who had made
ch narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her
:ands, as most tender to you of any living, so prayit her
atake n opinion of you, but that ye wald use her coun-
iflin all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to
2iothers, as well uncles as others, and allure her to keep
tat thing ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice.
d if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her
i;hat point be removing within her realm in secret and
qie: manner, where her G. pleased, until the time her
G.were fully satisfied, and all occasion of difcredit're-
n:ed from her. So that in the mean time your realm
wre holden in quietness, and your true fubjeds restored
anmaintained in their own estate, and sic other things
niing to this effet. And affirms that they believe that
tir; nay he occasion to cause her credit you that ye offer
;rir; and it may come that within two or three months
lemav become better-minded to your grace, for now
ie i; not well minded, and will not thew you any plea-
re or the causes foresaid.

.\- R. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the
'!owing key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rede to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
. The queen of Scots commiflioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

C c 3 No. XXVII.

No. XXVII. (Vol. 1. p. 492.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scot.

land, Dec. 21. i56a.
Pi;erC.'.e. TH E beftr .ay for England, but not the easiest, thai

the cueen of Scots might remain deprived of he
crown, and the fiate continue as it is.

THE second .ar for England profitable, and not so hard

-- That the queenr of Scotts might be induced, by fom
perfwafions, to arce that her son might continue kin
because he i crowned, and herself to remain alto queen
and that the government of the realm might be commi
te: to ifch p-or.' as the queen of England should n
f a; for the nomination of them it might be ordeed
that a cor:ve:en- irmber of rnerfor of Scotland houldb
firY nar.ed to the oueen of Eng and. indifferently forth
qt;cea of Scn;rs, a3r: for her for, that i to fay, theon
haif by the queen-ef Scotts, and the ocher by theear
of Lennox and l3ads Lennox, parents to the child; an
out of those, t oueen's r:aiehty of England to m
choice fr all the offices o the reSin, that are, by t
lawsT of Scs':and, diof.ble by the- king or queen of t
!and.

THAT untill t's; nrray be done by the queen's ma

fv. the r-'.mient remain in the hands of the earle
Mii:rr.y as .: .. rr ,:'.l ig he hi!! not dispose of a
off.ces or p?!pei -:s to coninue any longer but to the
cFered of the rrr.i'es.

THA r a p2r imten be fmmoned in Scotland bt

-e.al corn..;- ;cn:r.-:, both of the queen of Scotts an
rhe young kriz.

- TH.- b-cr'.'r'f b: dciivercd .into F.ng! nd on;

voung ki 's be-half, to the nmber of tvelve prfon,
the earle o; . ;rra.'s part, as the queen of Scots
name ; and :: f -s.-i on the cueen's behalf to rhe iikei n
bhr as th= ' -:.: ,.ir;-'-r fna'l nmn c the fnme ror to
an:- t.ot ha'-- bv-. inheti.ance or (c' ce ca.feI to be in
Far a..er.-, to r- main from the b'ginnirg Or tI e finIo
Of that rnr- -. Lunrill three mn r-.s a-r the pani
ment; iohkh '-.-a:r- i.ai! b pledgts, that the tfe.i
c ei-her pi : f-;.. c: r rne p;:c i: a;i' ca' s, til [ '

a.,

fpirlment it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
:-n or England fill. dcvife for the government of the
;:- (being not to the hurt of the croxxn of Scotland,'
r contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheri-
:, as the fame was before the parliament at Edill. the
D*';g 1567) hal be etfablifhed to be kept and obeyed,
'er pain of high treason for the breakers' thereof.
----THr by the fame parliamcnt also bc flablifed
executions and, judgments given againit any person to
t death of the late king.
-- T'Il T by the fame parliament, a remifflon be

s

univcrfally from, the queen of, Scotts to any her

c;arys, and also from, every one fubjct to anoiher,
a, that refitution be made of lands and houses, ad
oiiaer things heritable, that have been, by either fide,
'ie from them which were the owners thereof at the
:m;tiing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.
i Ai'T by the fame parliament it be declared who shall
:Jccis:ors to the crown next after the Q. (,f Scots and

:ri.;:c; or cite, that such right as the D. of Chaittl-,e:
u:;ad, at the marriage of the of Scois with ilhe

lDarnlcy, may be eoncrvl-ed and no, prcjdlized.
AT:. the Q. of Scots may have Ica:e of the quecn's
r;.!' of England, twelve mOnths after the laid parl!a-

.-', a t e mfa!l not depart out f Eng!a'.l, with-

c:;:c;il l.nce of the qu-en s m:jeiy.
TI:AT. the young king llall be oui.ed an bron;!ht
:iii Eanlad, till he be years of ae.
h' is to b- confidered, that in this cauf e he coinp)fi-

:v'e c: e

te queen and hr fubccts may be made with

:::..i a:.ticis, outwardly to be fcn to .the world fC

.!:.cur, as though all the parts flhould come of her,
e: for the surety of contiarys, that certain bct\.i\t
ai r i.,il qucin's majcry are to be concllled.

No. XXViI Vol. . . . 94)

ne queen to Sir Fra.ncis Kncoieys, 22 J.n.
[ greet ou well, we mean not, at this p:int, i.....-e.

i' bn any writing, to renew that vhich it hath

'i: d God to mke grevious to us a;nd frr fiull to ,,w ,
i ItiL.;ar!;g the .!'me. as unmLLec at this p .int, h: iug

c 4, .-

occasion to command yow in our service, and yow f
whiie you are to serve us. We require yow to cot
fid-r of this that followeth with like consideration an
d:ligence, as hitherto yow have accuftumate in ourer
v'I:; a: the time of our last letters written to yowth
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queeno
Scots, we had underflanding out of Scotland of certaii

iritdngs sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongf

the which one is found to contain great and manifest un
truths touching us and others also, as shall and mayplai
3l appear unto yow by the coppy of the fame, whic
Ii kewife we fend vow, and because at the fame time we we
advertiife, that it should be hortly proclaimed in Scotland
though then it was not, we thought good first to remov
the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and thenex
pe': the i.e thereof; and now. this day by lettersfro
our cousin of Hun!don we :e afcerrained, that fincethl
time the fame matters contained in the writing, arep
li!hed in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we
tho-ghtl it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, a
to confound the falsehood contained in that writting,
only to have the fame reproved by open proclamati
upn our ronters, the coppy whereof we do herewi
fend Tow, but aifo in convenient fort to charge that que
therewith, so as she may be moved to declare the auth
thereof, and persuaders of her to write in such flandero
fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, weha
here fiayed her commilrioners, knowing no other who
we may more probably presume to be prties hereunt
than they, untill the queen shall name some other, a
acquit them; who being generally charged, without
p.efsing to them any particularity, do use all manner
speeches to discharge themselves ; wherefore our peaiul
i., rh.t ve fnall. after ye have well perused the copI
o5 thi; writting sent to yow, speedily declare unto he
that we have good understanding given us of diverse
ter and writtings, sent by her into. Scotland, signed
her own hand, amongst which, one such writting ise
w:th her commandment expressly as now it is alrea
Djb!infed, as we are much troubled in mind thatapr
cess as fne is having a cause in our hands so implicat
with difficulties and calamitys, flaould either conceave
hsr own mind, or allow of them that fhould-devife fu
faife, untrue) and improbable matters against us, ando

hon0!|

r, and- fpdcially to have the aveature to have the fame
: known so untrue to be published; and you hall
iiV, because we will not think so ill of her, as that it
sid proceed of her self, but rather she hath been coun-
td thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part
eos to be true, we require her, even as she may look
any favour at our hands, that he will disburden her-
'as much as truly he may herein, and name them
,ich have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
I ob (he hall make as great amends to us as the cafe

e require; after you have thus far proceeded, and had
e answer of her, whether ihe flhall deny the writ-
gabfolutely, or name any that have been the advisers
teof you hall fay unto her that we have flayed her

iioners here, until we may have some answer here-
because we cannot but impute to them some part of
evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may
knovn; and as soon as you can have direCt answers
e her, we pray you to return us the fame ; for as the
ifrandeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with it,
rg our honour so deeply touched contrary to any in-
!on in us, and for any thing we know in our judg-
it, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame
ting void of thought for the matters, to them therein
Iuiol; you may impart to the queen of Scots either
contents of the slanderous letter, or hew her the co-
:olreid it, and you may also impart this matter to the
i Scroop, to join with you there as you hall think
iFrancis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from We-

therby the 28th January, 1568.
~ WILL fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them An Origi-

over with silence, for the present learning of your nal in the

a'- and for this queen's answer to the coppie of her PperOffic'
Died letter sent into Scotland, I must add this unto
b;other's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary yeflernight
; in process oftime, he did not deny but that the
I lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to
kter that she had sent unto Scotland, which touched
o0rd of Murray's promise to deliver her son into your
ay's hands, and to avoid that the fme should not be

done

done without her consent, made her, she faith, to wri
in that behalf; she faith also that she wrote thatth
fould cause a proclamation to be made to stir her peo
to defend my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, ford
livering of her iaid son, and impunge his rebellious gover
ment, as he termed it, but she utterly denyeth to ha
written any of the other slanderous part of the faidlett
touching your majesty; she said also, that he fufpea
that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the a
thor of fose Scotch letters devised in her name, but
would not allow me to write this for any partof h
anmlwer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. . p. 503.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right hono

able the lord of Liddington.

or 0'

T -7 UR letter of the 3d of July, I have receired

F';'-:9e X 15th of the fame. For answer whereunto you
O:: -.n. trnderftand, that fiiends here to my lord regent and

do with such a concurrence in all doings, as in mat
and circumstances there arise no diflention, or at thelea
no more nor other than the difference of countriesdo
necessarily require. WVe here do think convenient that
few delays be fed as may be, for the consummation oft
rutter in hand, which principally to advance, your
lo-.ance, pro;ecution, and speedy promotion in Scotlar
is n-ofl requilite, for you are so wife, and well acquaint
with the fate of the world, and with all our humours,
you know that orme do allow and disallow for reason, so
for refpe of multiade, fre for refpec of person,
,o te cause is to o forward as men do like to set it
wa:-d. You are nt to leek that some will use cautio
!cme neutrality, iome delays, and some will plainlyi
Fzznge it. And yet all and evervof these forts will alterth
dic,irgs, when they- 'hall fee the regent and his favour
accord with the L and greatelr part there, and ag
with the wis.- and ironelt- party here. Tho' the
tcr has taken its bhginnin.g hcre, upon deep and weig
conflieratioas, 'or the wii of both the princes and th
realms, as well prefenti', as in time to come, yet
thought miit expejier, that the regent and realm

odand, by you, should propose the matter to the queen
grovereign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
bedifpofed to leave but a scar, and no wound of the
ats palt. I would be glad that this my letter should
e to your hands before the convention, whereat it
asyour queen's restoration and marriage to the duke of
olk ihall be propounded, either to wynne in them
iallowance or rejetion. To which proceedings, be-
Gie ou pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus,

Lithaketh you use a propofterous order, to demand the
ient of ficih persons, in such matters, as their minds
: a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and.

t! or a factious division amongst you, whereby a blou..
; intelligence must needs come to queen Elizabeth of
intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
:nllcretely and advisedly propounded unto her high-
; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
rajitylv (hall be made inexorable and so bring the
.r to iuch passe, as this which should have wrought

re", queitnefs, and a flay to both queens and their

r, ihll augment your calamity, and throw us your
iriindks into divorfe wirh you, and into unhappy divi-
a amrongPit ourselves; for you may not conjc'tre l that
, :.tier is nowv in deliberation, ut e:;pecfteth good

c:i ro exccuting ; sure I an you do not judge io

:;';y of the managing of this matter, as to think swe
s.c or.t ft the worit, or to enter therein so far wi\tl-
t! ie aiillance of the nobility, te ableff, the

noii t, t ,

ti ie mightiest of this realm except queen Eiizabeth;
:mwhom it hath been concealed until you, as the fit-
: g;!ile, might propound it to her, on the beialf of
rcent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far maller
'.i'ils tfamations do carry tlhen of queen Elizabeth s
'it0ns, and mailrer fecrerar's, to ailt the re(gent and
'?pleis the queen of Scots, I kiow not, nor it is nt
:'i; but 1 do alturedly thin a

tat her majef wvill
':i:r ircty, the tranluillio oi her rein, ant the

o.: n o her pop e, bcfre a; cevice, whichl mniy

I:nni ralsll va:il (dicoturfe, r imperfelitons of paiiins,

.'cni crae

ate aiTccins. And as fr Mr. SeCci .:Iv,

2.':e 1lit to Icain, that as h!e liketl not to ,;) too lait
.te, I he cove-eth nor to t;!'iv too far beilind, and lpe-
:.' 'r.n the riiqucs be oi no reat value or p.;\x'r.

Js

If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, ar
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would faycol
fidently, you may repose as well of him in this mattel
as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel,Pen
broke, Leicefher, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft
the nobility; all which do embrace and protefle the as
complifhment of this cafe. I have, according to vo0
advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with t
fame zeal and care of his well-doing that I owe to hi
whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath affur
unto him the queen of Scotland's favour and good
nion, wherewith he feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. Ifvo
credit be, as I trust, haflen your coming hither, fri
very necefTary that you were here presently. Q Elizabe
both doth write to my lord Regent in such fort, as
may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her majefly's
fe&ion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise benttrh
be conjecureth of him, the effe& of which her manil
letter you shall undcritand, by my lord Leicefter'sle
unto you at this dispatch. At the court, 20th July, S

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 504.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to I..

probably Lord Burleigh.

- E C A U SE I fee that great advantage is ta

q.' i,

t. B. on small occasions, and that the mention of

3-. B. 9. marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
;- 4.; the D. ofNorfok, hath this while palt been very frequ

in both the realms, and then I myself to be fpokenof
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to
nmajefly's ears. I will, for fatisfation of her highn
and the discharge of my duty towards her majefly,
fest unto you my interefl, and medling in that nat
from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prej
cial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
sovereign, this his realm, and me. What conferre
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them

eree with me within the realm of England, I am not
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing
Fafied betwixt him and me, either at that time, or l
And to the end her maiefry mar understand how Il

-' ' -
M~~~~~~~~

Ibe dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
lone circumtances, before there was any mention of her
atriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commission-
( I trund very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and
ahers her highness's commiflioners, in the beginning of
te cause, as in the making of the others to proceed fin-
erelS, and so further. During which time, I entered
itO general ipeech, flicking at ourjuft defence in the mat-
ters that were objected against us, by the said queen's

iomilioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but

lummary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a
ias'l declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
Howsardi, what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that
tiht Lithington returning, and entring in conferrence
with ire upon the slate of our action, I was advised by him
topafs to the duke, and require familiar conferrence, by
the which I might have some feeling to what ilfue our
ml:ers would tend. According to which advice, having
:cn time and place convenient in the gallery of the house
ii.'c the duke was lodged, after renewing of our firli
:,u::intance made at Berwick, the time before the as-
!za of Leith, and ome speeches passed betwixt us; he
iei to ay to me, how he in England had favour and
(r.t.i, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of ma-
r, it was to be tho't there could be none more fit inltru-
:nats, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
l:. realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the
,refcnt ate of both, and how I was entered in that action
tending o far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed bv
him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I1hd received of the queen, and what inconvenicncies her

iina.tion in the matters laid to her charge might breed
to'er poilerity. Her refpec& was not little to the crown
it ngland, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons mv
'.riciids had the next respect, and that I fl(ould flenm
th ili:be of her body would be the more ani-c:tionate to
m: and mine, than any other that could attain to that

;.n And io it hould be meetelt, that (nl affirmed her
1i:ion made in Lochlevin, and we to abil.raF te ict-
:. . ir hhand write, that he fiould not be defamed in

:;i. My reply to that was, how the matter had pas-

' ;i . liament, and the letters seen to many, o that iite
':..shting of the fame could not thei: secure her to aluv

ptatp;:d,

purpfe, and yet should we, in that doing, bring tel,
rominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for]
that way to proceed, lecing the queen's majelly of EI
land was not made privy to the matter as she ought toll
to be in respect we were purposely come in England f
that end, and for the - of the grants of our canfe. T
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle a
ters well enough at the court. After this, on the
sion of certain articles, tha were required to be refol
on, before we entered on the very declaration of the
ground of our action, we came up to the court; wh
some new commilfioners were ajoined to the former, a
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the prl
ment house at Weftminiter, in presence of which co
miffloners of the said queen, and - through the
rebnuking of the queen of England's own commissioners,
uttered the whole of the action, and produced iuch
dences, letters, and probations, as we had, whichig
move the queen's majesty to think well of our cad
Whereupon expecfing her highness declaration, and fee
ro great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given, b
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the
cueen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the means
fn, 1ianding in hazard and danger, we were put to the
termofr point off our wit, to imagine whereunto them
ters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing und
for justification of our causes, yet appeared noend,
continual motions made to come to some accord with t
queen, and refrore her to whole or half reign. Ihad
o;her answer to give them, but that I should neither
gain2 conscience nor honour in that matter. Notwit
standing feeing this my plain answer wrought no end,
difpar-ch to us, and that I -as informed that the dukel
p-'-'y gain to miiike of me, and to speak of me, as that

' reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her

and rmurderer, I was advised to pais to him, and g
himn good words andt ro ul-rge myfelfof the thingso
ijred to me, that I ihould not open the sudden enr
hi; evil grace, nor have him to our enemy- contfid
i .g }:i grea ness. It being therewithal whispered, a
i'h-vc 2J I me, that if I depa ted, he flanding difconten
ari r .- '-i ,rid, I miht pera venture ind such trou.
in r.i V wR, a; mv thro. . 'i'-. be cut before I came

. .. An therefor '.c it might well enough

to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair,
ty good will could not be had therein. So fewdays

1e my departing, I came to the park in Hampton court,
e the duke and I met together, and there I declared
him that it was come to my ears, how some mifre-
t should be made of me to him, as that I should

irreverently and ra-hly of the said queen my fove-
g's mother, such words as before expressed, that he PrcbM1y

.at- - thereby my affection to be so alienate from/ f,;:-.-
as that I could not love her, nor be content of her
rment, howbeit he might persuade himself of the con-
r, for as ihe once was the person in the world that I
r bell, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
ng received such advancement and honour by her, I
r.ot so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wvih her bo-
arn:, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of
(hiovfoever the truth were in the self) and as to the
tirvtion of her fon,now my tovereign, had moved me
enter into this cause, and that her own pressing was Probbly
-occfion of that was uttered to her - whenfover d/-'":'"'
floulld move her heart to repent of her bypast beha-
-: and life, and after her known repentance, that flhe
;:'J be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar--

't!hnt ite was entred in, and then after were joined
' U1i-h a godly and honourable a personage, as were

r'i oned to the true religion, and whom we might t-ur,

;.1d siad in my heart to love her, and to siew her as
: plea' lie, favour, and goodwill, as ever I did in my
; rd in cafe, he hould be that pcrfonage, there was

r: whom I could better like of, the qucen-in-

_?ng!anc! being made privy to the matter, and fie allow-
:r.acof, which being done, I lould labour in all thihn-s

I co.ld, to her honour and pieafire, that were not
iidal to the king my {o\weeign's estate, and pa.cd
not to think oherwife of me, for my affetion wans

b!ri - and hidden vithin me, awaiting until Go:!
li!'cct her to know hcrfelf, than utterly alie^n.te.!
.-·'i:t'fd from her; which he fecmed to acce.t in
7.d part, fa:ing, Earl of MIurray thou thinkl; oi me
':: t.::, Thereunto I will make none in England or Son-
: pFivv, and thou haft Norfolk's wife inl thly In'.':.

:["rltiln'r, I came to my lodging, and by the way,
. ... nioht, I wa.s in co..ii.!ual tlhcUht nh ng:
a 'iai;

i:''- o.' to behave m-vclf in h; w ''Iv .;:,
n

ii.it

firfr, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were a
tempted without the queen's majesty of England's kno
ledge and good will, this realm and I myself in partic
lar having received such favour and comfort at her hig
ness's hands, and this whole ife such peace and quietne
since God poffefled her majesty with her crown. Anj
the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to
protesting, none other were or should be privy to
speech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter
tiing, that might endanger him ; moved to the uttera
with hefe cogitations, and all desire of sleep then rem
ed, I prayed God to fend me fore good relief and o
gate, to my discharge, and fatisfaftion of my troubl
mind, which found indeed; for upon the morn, orwi
in a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation w
my lord o Leicester, in his chamber at the court, wh
he began to find strange with me, that in the mtt
made lo difficult to him, flanding so precisely onconf
rence, and how when I had in my communicationvi
the duke, come so far - and there he made some
Po.r'v course with me, about that which was talk betwixt us

', perceiving that the duke had the matter tomyl

of Leicef'er, and thinking me thereby discharged at
duke's hands, there-ore I repeated the fame commu
cation in every point to my lord of Leicester, who defir
me to (lhew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
fuied to do, \vi:iing him if he tho't it might import
highncfs any thing, that he as one - by her maje
and for many benefits received at her highness's hand;
obliged to \:'h her well, hould make declaration of t
fame to her majefy, as I Jalderflnd by some speech
her highrefs o me, he did. This my declaration to
duke was the only caufc, that taid the violence and tro
prepared for me unexec.:!ed, as I have diver; ways
derltand. The fan.-e claration I was obliged to
new since in wri:ings of-- --ft to mry servant J
Wood. The umn w-hereof, I trust, he hewed thedu
and something alio I wrote to himself, for it was tho't
lhould redeem some time, that the duke should not
denly declare him our enemy, for his greatness was
laid before me, and what frierndip he had of the chief
the nobility in England, o that it might appear to
queen's maje.t- o' England -so cold towards us, anJ' Ji
nothing publi:'2 :ha: -;: fem favourable for us,
3

,,d orme cause to fufpecr that her highness should not be
cortrarious to the marriage when it hould be proposed to
her. The sharp message ent by her majefly with the lord
Bol'd, who had the like commission from the duke tending

tsar to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing

Oe manncr of conditions from both, gave us to think that
!er highness had been foreseen in the dukc's design, and
i.: I'ne milght be induced to allow thereof. But howbe-
itit was dcvifed in England, that the lord of Lethington
atu!l come as from me, and break the matter to her
Highness, as her majetry in a letter declared that she
Io.ke for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of
ne, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife ac- Probably
cord to his fiiding, nor allow of the matter motioned, but d'i"'.
i!tcgether milliked it, as bringing with the fame great in-
nrcnicncies, to the surety and quietness of this whole isle;
br our proceedings have declared our minliing and difal-
arance of the purpose fiom the beginning, and if we had
'ei.fd, he was ready for the journey. And in like wife
: iwas devised to give content, that the between
i f. (id queen and Bothwell, should be suffered to pro-
r; in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd,
b; rafon we could not undeftand what was the queen's

i:!'.s pleasure, and allowance in that behalf-
.!n whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made
pr;-' ot an flch intention, the fault was not in me. The
Irt motion bring declared, as I have swritten, to my lord
Ldiceft-, and by him imparted to her majefly, so far
I cot d perceive by some speech of her highness's to me,
b:i;'e m dcparting. Thus I have plainly declared how I
'- bcc dencilt withal for this marriage, and how just ne-
:. -Tnovcd me not to require directly, that which the
'.e .pjeared so -- unto. And for my threatnings,
,3 ;rnt to the fime, I have expre(fed the manner ; the
?:'ni, !lat laid the matter befo-e me were of my own
^~,'.'y. I[ut the duke lince hath spoken, that it was his
:i'ing wh\ich fi.ied my life at that time. In conclusion I
P'i' you perl'uade her majeily, that Ihe let no speeches nor
:i':,h;er thiul pialil and objected to my prejudice; moYe
':: 'ic'' to alter her fvour- towards me, or any ways

c' ,

'ubr my al's!rd conifancy towards her highness;
! i .n thii-g which may tend to her honour and fuie-
v''.., I D d tyv

ty, I will, while I live, bestow myself, and all that vi!
do for me, notwithstanding my haz:ird or danger, as prj
ial] declare, svhen her majely finds time to eplio
me.

A P PE

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

403

P PEN DIX
To THE SECOND VOLUME,

No. I. (Vol. II p. 9.)

Ism Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Leiceftcr, March 2oth, 1570, from Ledington.

H E great desolation threatned to this whole realm, An0,;: na,
be the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth
press me to frame my letters to your lodfiip, in

Cr fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other
^,t, but only to maintain my private credit; therefore
a driven to furnish them with matter, which I know
to be plausible, whereupon by mifconf-rning my mean-
some there may take occasion of offence, thinking
Irather utter my own paflions, than go about to in-
vour lordship truly of the htate; but 1 trust my plaii
ing hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning;
ake the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordfihip's

he plat of this country; which first is divided into
.-'ions, the one pretending the maintenance of the
i- reign, the other alledging the queen to have been
tyd calt withall, and unjustly deprived of her state;
'nrmer is comnpofed of a good number of nobiliy,
Ilen, and principal burroughs of the realme, whlc
i.e, as Mr. Randolph bcarcth us in hanJ, the quetn s
i vour overeign's allowance and proLtetin ; the
:: h1 in it fomc molt principi!l of the nobility, and
withl, good numbers of the inferior fort, through-
te whole realm, which also lock aiTmledly that al1

oa allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
lhat confcquence this divifievn will draw afrcl it, I
it to your lordship's consideration ; there is fialen ( ut

cr ' ifion, accedentally, by my lord regent's death,
iii^e to change the (ate of the other two fastins,
ire- the one, and diminish the other, wich is

D d2 !uindid

F.: si.2 i upon the regiment of the realm. Some nu
- c: nob'c;-,-en aipire to the government, pretend
i.i;- :;--;:.o byi r-c.fon of the queen's demiffidn of
c:- ,::. .:i.d hzr cominiiion granted at that time for

i.Ai:i' du'i; t! . :ing's minority; another faction do

_..--icr rpi; -e a' lnllt that division, thinking it neitd
.: n .' t'-'lraol-e, thit three or four of the meanefi f
.. no.;.. *::-. c-.: in, .n'! p.efu;e to challenge to themfel'

a -.; uver th r who'e rcalme- the next of the blood, i

:; ; : ;: 1,i..;';, >.;- grc:lt alway both for the antientry
t.;:. !:ou.-'s, dg.'j, and frces, being negleckted; t

o. .: - 5.v ;'.'i :. :-po:ous, that the meaner fort
I'; 1.._ i l pJlli,:; ril tunico!l to command, and the grea

! :' , .:. i . r.i'.'. ; rtlen to obey; beides that, ti
: .:.. th c,-niTli- n had in the beginning been rale
..-, .::.i:i the moit part will not grant) yet canit

,:;c:;.'. a :-'ne pr icnt, for that the condition; tei
:.o . . ,:;.;J3 are c.ueJ, and so the effec't of thevh

-

d, -

,' .:.r Fp:-t of this diifion hath many prct
.-;. r :i-e- the qieen's faction, which is wholy

. .'r .nbr of these that have heretofore

-,i i'- _,c :-.. b ..L...cn, do favour the fame, and

. : . ' .
:.J t:;c 1.;;'-;,:-;'nt of the other, whose prefea

r; _'--- t_- m'ii;;, when the queen's fafcion

.i.: :c..-d, -'i' " part of the king's, and these not
.:.; '..:ic, n ' .ow may judge what is like to in
.-: .'r l'i.;j et li i:e to move men to enter in furt

'::-.: ii g-. ou, t here in Scotland that the que
--.. :,: i' :ing r'orh fom so rces towards the bor

:. :i. '!.:! er.t-r this realm, to countenance these, tha
-rz :U! ':'.,i :-oiC-n: , and fuppreis the contraryhfa
.': ri: ; .:e iprC:..d, that the fame hallbe here o

. :1 t' Ci-C.' -

t'.iink themselves of equal force with

.-. '::.

...o;l a home, or rather an overmatch tol

:- n ^t .- .c to enconater v. ith the forces of another pr
ra.:er- t..-:: .i .i!.l to their i Ceriors, will, I fear, take
;:t of i1L::--,, and evill councillors, and seek als

'i';.-!a:.ce cf -

tom. foreign prince, whereby her mn

.:::.o no iurti zr inconvenient were to be feared) mul
c': -n excenive charg-es, and it would appear

--':i.-.cv, of all the cleinents at one time

uS t:

, ::r-bw t he c.rs, for now when the rumo

v-, t ]-is c,::.- .'.va ds the border is spread a
(.;'n ;:.:: . :':- :::c . ; arrived at Dumbarton, ag

v*5i: a meflenger sent exprefly from the king of France,
j that part of the nobility, that fa.-ours the queen to

'itl the frate of the country, and what support they iacki
(-tlire, either for furthcrance of her asirs, or fr theic
(In ltfety ; assuredly this mefiage will be well received,
;lj lif'ered accordingly, this is the present fate of Scot-
.11 Now if your lordship would also know ny opinin,
',v to choice the best, as the cafe Itandelth; I will in

1; .llo atisfie your lorlfhi p, I am requiled fr m them to

:.i plainly, and your lordlhip shall judge wither I do so
:rot; for I think it plain dealing, when I limply utter
5 jiudgemienr, and go not about to disguise my intents.
imit te queen's majef v h:tth a desire to retain at her
W;otiot the realme of Scotland, which she hlitllh gon
j.it to purchafc, with bei-oi ing great charges, and
i 1s of some of her people; this desire is honourable

her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and
o;oile to be disallowed ; fpccially if it be (as I take it) to
tie the ainity of the whole realm, for it is not a pol tion
f Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-

si.s tor her to suit the fiiendfiip of a ction or Scotland,
aor so doing, in gaining the belt, flie may lose the
:e, and the fame would brine all her acrions with us
i l'fpicion, if ihe liould go about to nourilith fations
i.ngft us, which meaning I am sure never entered into
riajfly's heart; then if it be the fiendlhip of' the

wKe nle doth demand, let her not. for pleaftlre of one
::, go about to overthrow the remnant, which will not
l ,ialale, as some may give her to underlland ; but
rir, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
.sJ:e flite, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all
s'ood means to an uniformity, so lliall ihe give us all oc-
;o'iin to think well of her doings, that fle tcnde:h our
I'Ath, and provoks us univefally to wilh unto her ma-
:' a motl prosperous continuance ; by the contrary, if
':,c plcafure of a few, fie will fend forces to suppress

\iV whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma-

lr. men be not so faint-hearted, but they have courage
0 provide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace

*'r::cans partly offered, but will also procure further, at

;n ind of other princes. This for mine own part, I
l' aibhorr, and protefl I desire never to fee forces of

::i'trs to set foot within this land, yet I know not what
?'-.; aeciFity may drive men into, as if men in the middle

Dd3 of

of t'jC fen were in a ship which fil :!enly should be ft
-r_ the fear of burning would m.lke them to leap into th
lea. and loon after h: fear of the watter would drive the!
to ceive n:ain to the fired ship, so for avoiding prefenteii
men will many times be inforced to have recourse to an
other, o lcfs dargerous. Trull me forces will not brin
forth a-v good f uit to her majesty's behave, it mupb
i'ome ;j. of tre :y (hall serve the turn, wherein b m]
former et 'ecrs our lordihip doth know already whati

r: -: nent; vou fee hw plainly I do write, withoul

conf'idc:'.io in wi lhar part my letters may be taken, yet m,
-;?ne is tr:. such a- ill favourably interpret them, .fh
.r nk h..; I r-.. : a. well to her m.ajief, and thatrealm
as these t w.,

. il atter other langtuae. I wish thecon

ti-u-::ce of the amity b['rXixt the two contrys, vithou
c:her rcipe,, ard will r.ot conceal from her m-jerftva
thir:. to my k nw\-e-dgc, tending to the prejudice theiso

i I fhl p "cexe her m.e-'et taking frank dealings in e
part, I hall r-o.n thnceoi :rth forbear; in the mean seas
I .:" - .:i. .

t trowDi L' vour lordhip, as I hall ha
occ.:,^l . ) v \.'::e, and so I take my leave ofyourlor

No. II. (Vol. IIp.p. 9.)
A 1e::er of qt::en F, ;fibeth to the earle of Sufl.

J t::n 2dC, 1570.

. _. I

ci T ru.ss and well beloved cousin we greet

\\, we'l. this d - wc have received your letters of

.- "

'' - ' ]ait rio.!th. -ith all other letters. sent from
:'-3' jand, n::d men'ioned in vonr letters, whereunto anfcrw

d i to be 'ivcn b -f;re the tenth of this month; w'hi
is a ::~- L'.rf ,-t'i, the weightiness of the mattcr, a
the dii-rne o tle pl.:es confitierei ; neverthelei '
.a'v-e, as th- 1 ho-inef couid susser it. resolved to give !
ani'fer foo',vi'n- whi.h we will, that yow, bywarr
h :ro.-, fr'.l' c": L to 'e iven in our name to the earl
Lr:::-. x ;;-.' !t'; rcr of trie nobiemen convcend with hl

i re it , b' thernm. in their letters, an: writisngJ

If 'd, !-.a for ic:o. onr relolute- answer, concerningt!
eita iinin of t' e re,i;m!,- t of thln realm inder their rvo
R;i:g, gr:,t . icv:-..-eaicnces h: ve happned, and therdj1

a1

,v have deferred now at their alft convention to deter-
5iie of the famine, who flall have the place of gover-
n;r, until the 21 ft this month, before which time they
retre to have our advise, in what perion or persons the
01rernment of that realm hlall be eltablifled, we accept
f thankftll the goodwill and eputation they have of
['in ielding so frankly to require and follow our advise
a inltrc, that toucheth the tate of their king, their
ires, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
c former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
,ken some discomfort, as though that we would not have
eard to their slate and fuerty, so on the other part, they
g ithir wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the
hjoie world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
tgovernment, or a governour by name, for that howfo-

rer we Ihould mean well if we should do so, yet it could
I be without ome jealousy in the heads of the eflate, on
i!in, and community of that realm, that the government
terbof Ihould be by me foecially named, and ordain'd;

oas finding dfficulty on both parts, and yet mifiking most
G;t they Ilould take any discomfort by our forbearing
iohow uur mind therein, we have thought in this fort for
aproceed, confidering with ourfclves how now that realm
a: been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
f!g and by reason of his base age, governed heretofore
a ery careful and honourable pelfon, the earle of Mur-
iv untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil ex-
p!ie) he was murdered, whereby great disorder and con-
nisn or ncccffity had, and will more follow, if determina-
or be not made of ibme other peciall perfun. or per-
S, to take the charge of governour, or ilperior ruler
ci.!l, for adminiflration of law and juflice, we cannot
'erv Twell allow the desire of these lords to have tome
cial governoiur to be chosen; and therefore being well
red, that their own understanding of all others is
i to confider the Ifate of that realm, and to discern
iabilities and qualities of every person meet and ca-
;. for such a charge, we shall better iatisfie ourselves,
;'rm they by their common consent lhall first choose,
'iappoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us afore-
ad uncertainly named, and that becaule they shall per-
';e that we have care of the prfon of their king, who
nearness of blood, and in refpe&t of his so young years,
!ght to be very tender and dear to us, we shall not hide

D d 4 our

our opinion from them, but if they shall all accord to namei
his grandfather, our coulin, the earl of Lennox, to bei
governor alone, or jointly with others, (whom wehear to
be in the mean time by their common content appointed!
Iieutenant-general) reaibn moveth us to think that notne
can be chosen in that whole realm, that shall more desire
the preservation of the king, and be more meet to hare
the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet
hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they (hall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured
that whatsoever reports of devises. are, or fliall be spread
or invented, that we have already yielded our mind to
alter the tate of the king or government of that ralm,
the fame are without jull cause or ground by usiren
for as we have already advertised them, that although wr
have yielded to hear, which in honour we could rotre
fuse, what the queen of Scots or her part shall si an
offer, not only for her own atTurance, bt for the wealth
of that realm, et not knowing what the fame will be
that shall be offered, we mean not to break tile order
law and uftice, by advancing her cause, or prejudging
her contrary, before we (hall delliberately and alTuredij
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, some place nece
farv, and just cause to do; and therefore finding tha
realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by lawso
that realm, and thereof invested by coronation and othej
sole rnities uscd and requiiite and generally so recired b
the whole etates, we mean not, by yielding to hearth
complaints cr informations of the queen againf her son
to do any a& wherebv to make conclafion of goverments
but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to continue
yea not to suSer it to be altered by any means that w
may impefhe, as to our honor it doth belong, as by youl
late ac&ions hath manifestly appeared, untill by some jufice
and clear cause, we (hall be direftly induced otherwise t
declare our opinion; and this we would have them t-
know to be our determination and course that we mea1
to hold, whereon we trufi they for their king may fe
how p'ainl and honourably we mean to proceed, a
ho.. iittle cause they have to doubt of us, whatsoever
the contrary thev have or shall hear; and on the othe
parr, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how unho

nourabsg

.:able, and contrary to all human order it were for us,
;n11 the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require

c-;r her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in
,,ilme, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as
foist herself and her Ion and his party of that realm,
;,ii't which offers no reason could move us to refuse to
-r ear, that we (hould aforehand openly and directly, be-
,- the causes be heard and confidered, as it were, give.a
jiment or sentence either for ourselves or for them,
0oin he maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye hall
Adonifh them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
Igod meaning toward them, or by indirect assertions of
h:iir adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
Fcir own cause, in such fort, that our good meaning to-
urds them hall not take such effect towards them, as they
Kalldesire, or themselves have need of. All this our an-
-er e (hall cause be given them, and let them know, that
sr;!ieflortnefs of time, this being the end of the second
ithis month, we neither could make any longer decla-
-;in or our mind, nor yet write any several letters, as if
in might have served we would have done. 2 July,
';-o.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
T:e bishop of Ross to secretary Lidington from

Chattifworth.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, i'th Tune
ihere at Chattifworth, the loth of January, but on '570

itereccipt thereof I had written to you at length, like as
e queen did with my lord Levinglton, by the which you
i.i be resolved of many points contained in your said
';r. I writ to you that I received your letter and crc-
i;fiom Tho,. Cowy at London, and ent to l.eicester
!'Know the queen of England's mind whether if you
Mould come here or not. He ent me word, that he will
: wahs have you come as one of the commissioners,
ecaufe ihe is yet offended with you ; and therefore it ap-
p-ars good that ye come not hither, but remain where
.U are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best
'rance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
'-t7 depends thereon, in refpecR of the great fid and

enni-

ennimity born againfr you by your Scots people, and th
great heirfnip taken of your father's landis; both Were fur1
demon'r-ations of their malice. Yet I am encourageld
your flout and deliberate mind. Aflure yourself no dili
gence hall be omitted to procure supports forth off al
parts xhere it may be had. We will no. refuse theai
neither or Papilt, Jew, nor Genti!, after my advice; an
to this ed, during this treaty, let all things be vell pre
pared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go in
Flarnders, the queen thinks it very necessary that he sod
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of h
.ing of Spain to give support, and I am ure that ther
h hall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for
abides only on the coming of fore men of countenanc
to procure and receive the fame. He must needs tar
there, on the preparations thereof, during this treat
which wil! be a great furtherance to the fame here. Th
neen has already written to the Duke D'Alva for th
erS^t. advertizing of his coming; there is certain fun
or money coming for support of the Englishmen, as Iwrot
to von before, from the pope. Whereupon I wouldi
hai a general commission to deal for them, and receir
fc umrns as (hall be given. The means fiali befon
t. u

cause you be anfuerit of the furms you writ for, tob

'ifpontr upon the furnishing of the cafile of Edenburgh
f bn^r lrome honetl and true man were sent to Flande
to recei-e it, as said i, which I ould you prepared an
l":. Oriders hall be taken for thr metals as you writoi
\'V> hv;e proponit your avce in entring to treat with th
cueen of Enrlrnd, for retiring of her forces puntyioaill f
iacl. nt a'.. Y'or anifwers to the Englrlimen are tho'
v.:-. -..id. bu:t above ?i keep you weil olt of their hand
o. tat cai, eltGte prudentcs ilcut ierpentes. You ma
ke exo rrien,-e -vth the hard delli;-g with me, how )
'.o:d be u'1.i i' ve :-vere here, and yet I am not foriho
d:ider, _i'Ln in min.; o naiou;l prava;, alway no cars
-.; i; G' ^- g..ice=, aiall make me ninink from her majesty;,

.r.ice. i,.c the que-n of England has refuted that yo

.J:TI- 1' , it ;.pe.-s to me quod nondum eft fedata mra
: *ia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathen
mi.', b. nv m.nars be proculed to come, they were th
.n : :: ' .-,; ::. p;arp js, Rorhes w-ire aibt meet, if he a
- ,cere n.:) ll o one firname; il t;he treaty \vould ge
:- 'e. s :re ir-:hcr i Scotland , r here. Therefore 2i1

G~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~5

fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert
-il come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
n's pleasure; in my last packet, with James Fogo, to
in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the queen's
shand writing to him, which I trust ye reccived. I am
r ve come not for the great relief I hoped to have had
;our presence, for you could well have handlcd the
ten of England, after her humour, as you were wont
do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying
1 to fend you health. From Chattifworth the ijth
, Jnuary.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 30.)

7,e declaration of John Cais to the lords of
Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the 8th
day of Ot. 57t.
THereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's

pleasure, what he will do for appeasing ofthefe

c:r:rovrlies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be
;:aercommandment, touching the common tranquility
ithe whole isle, and the amity of both realms; her plea-
:. is in this behalf, that ye fould leave off the mainte-
:nreof this civil discord, and give your obedience to the

, whom she will maintain to the utmofi of her power.
A\D in this doing, he will deal with the regent and
':; ,ng's party, to receive yon into favour, upon rcaro;-
. conditions for security of life and livings.
.LO mhe fays that the queen of Scotts, for that ihe
: pr'.tifed with the pope and other princes, and also
.i her own fubje&ts in England, great and dangerous
itons arainfl: the state of her own country, and also to
' dellruetion of her own person, that fie hall never
:r uthlority, nor have libelrt while (he lives.
!i ye reftle these gentle offers, now offered unto you,
- will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
:sition, and all necefflry things, to be had againfl:

2.

WSHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with
":ed, without any delay.

No. V,

No. V. (Vol. II. p 4.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general Affemb:y

August 5th, 572.

c s

'. F IRST, desiring a new act to be made ratifyinga

Cs W'-. P things concerning the king and his obedience h

tr,. Vcr :. were enacted of before without any change, and that t
5i6. miniifers who have contraveend the former acts be cor

eted as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace and nb

lity maintaining the king's canfc, that -hatocver procee
e:h in this treay of peace they be mindtul the kirk l
not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they fpeciaih'
the ministers, that have been robbed of their poioi,
within the kirk during the rime of the troubles, oro:'c
wife dung and injured, may be reflored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bi(hoprick

other benefice be given to any perlon, contrary to the
nor of the acts t'nadein the time of the firt regent of g
memory, and they that are given contrar the said as,
to any unqualified person, may be revoked and made
be an act o' fecr-e council, and tlac all biihopricks so
cand may be pref:nted, and qualified persons nomi
thereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof, acco
ino to the order taken in Leith he the commilionsr;
the nobiliv and of the kirk in the mnnnh of January ia
and in special to complain upon the i'.ing of bifhopri.
of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of beneficc, great or s:,i,

given be simple donation of an', lord regent, wi;hnou;
ient of the polfefor of the :ids bcnefice s h.aing
thereto, and the admifion of the superintendent or C0
milToners of the province where this beneice lyeth, or
the bishops lawfully eleced according to the f.id 0
taken at Leith; and desire an at of council to be ¢
thereupon, until the next parhiament, wherein the :i
may be specially inacted, with inhibition to the lords 01
sion to give any letters or decrecc, upon such finmp'eg
of benefices or pentions nor being given in manner bo
rehearsed, and that the kirk prclently afrembled dec.a
all such gifts null so far as !ve'h in their powver.

Ti'

I HAT the firfl form of presentation to benefices, which
.rr in the firIt and second regent's time be not chang'd
. Iov, it is commonly; but that this clause be contained
i tic presentation, that if the persons presented make
,0l relience, or be flandrous or found unworthy either in
if; oer Jofrine be the judgment of the kirk,.(to which al-
i' he lhall be subject) or meet to be transported to an-
o,.r room at the fight of the kirk, the aid presentation
Idall that lhall fall thereupon shall be null and of no
turce nor effect; and this to have place also in the nomi-
ta!ion of the bishops.
THAT an a be made in this afTembly that all things
done in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third,
b;her be papifis or others, by giving of fews, liferents,
rtaks, or any otherwise difponing the said asSumed thirds,
be declared null with a solemn protestation the whole kirk
diilcnteth thereto.

THAr an act be made decerning and ordaining all bi-
4'ps, admitted to the order of the kirk now received,
;g ive account of their whole rents, and intromiflions
i herewith once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for
l ch causes as the krk may easily confider the fame to be
:a;i expedient and necefTar.
AXENT the ju-ifdicEion of the kirk, that the fame be
de:ermined in this aembly, because this article hath been
,on poftpond to make fute to the regent and council for
ameudy against meflengers and excommunicate pelfons.
LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the
i;;, who procure againfl miniflers and minifiry, and sos
:jit;ig of justice of the kirk's aions in the session.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 46.)
Dclaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. i5-2.

E it known to all men, by there presents, that
Helnry Killigrlewe, Efq; amnbaffador for the queen's

aest o England, Forafinuch as, at the earnefd motion
ani fulicitation being made to me, on her highness's be-
L.s, tilc-c is accord and pacification of the publick troubles
and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed and con-

n:
:t. and the fame favourably extended towards the right

honour-

honourableGeorge earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidl
zenoch, and the ord John Hamilton, son to the duke'
Grace of Challellarault. and commendatour of the abbyo
Abirbrothock, for the firety of the lives, livings, honour
and goods of them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, an
partakers, now properly depending on themn; in treaia
or':he which said pacification, the murders of the late ear
,-f Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfathe
late regent to the kling's majefy of Scotland his realm an
ieges. as alho an article touching the discharge for h
ti. .tis or moveable goods, which the said persons ha
rakein r.a perfonis profeiling the king's obedience, or so
rte damiaes done or committed by them, since the Ist
i--y or Junii, i167, and before the penult day of Jul
:::i b ped, b raon of the common cause oranythin
dependig thereupon, bing thought by the king's commi
-s:ies matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king'
present regent could not conveniently, of himself, remi
or dilcharge the iame. Yet in refpec of the neccityo
:he preent pacification, and for the well of the king, ani
common quiencfs of this realm and lieges, it is accorded
i;,: the matters of remiflon of the said murderers, ana
; the ,icharg of the said fructis, moveable goods, aa
other damages, moved by the persons desiring the faidre
niir ns and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habi
tation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her maieli
thal advise and councel touching the said remiflion an
dhicharge, the said lord regent, for the well of theking
.1nd universal quietness of the rcalm of Scotland, al
p rrorm, obervc, and fallfil the fame. And in likewile
:'e said earl Hintly, and cmmendatour of the Abirbro
'ock, being urged to have dclivered pledges and hofi.ge
tor ob:rv.-tion of the conditions of the said accordand
p:ification, hath required me in place thereof, inhe
-ctl;'h-s rame, b virtue of my commifflon, to promise
IrL them ithat they (hall truly and faithfully observe and
keep the said pacification, and all articles and condition;
thereof for their parts, and that it would please her ma
jelty to interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for them
to ta:- eft, to the king's maiefy of Scotland their so
r-. eign and his said regent, which 1 have done, and pro-
r.,;: to do, by virtue of his majesty's commiflion, asb;
-.e hoo'scrable and plain dealing of the said earl and lor.,

thcr

; intention to peace well appears, the fame being most
eeable to the mind of the queen's majefly my fove-
, which so long by her ministers hath travelled for
-said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and
fii:ation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majesty's

te, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that the

ajlemen and others now returning to the king's obedi-
e all have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
urs and goods. Therefore in her majefly's name,
by virtue of my commiflion, I promise to the aforc-
earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that
her rniefty's good means, the said remiflion and dif-
:;ge {hall be purchased and obtained to them, their kin-
.s, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly de-
eding upon them, (the persons specified in the firit ab-
5r.ice always excepted) as also that the said pacification
' be truly observed to them, and that her majeily (hall

f:rpofe. erfelfas confervatrix thereof, and endeavour her-

t o cause the fame to be truily and sincerely kept in all
:ts and articles thereof accordingly. In witrefs wht r.-
I have to this present subscribed with my hand, and
J the fame with mine own feal the th day of Febr/,
aoDomini 1572. An. ilI.is to be pclforimed by me,
cixt the date hereof, and the parliament which (hall be
:pinted for their reflitution, or at the f tielit before the
iof tle said parliament. Sic ubfcribitur.
te bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the qu-en

of Scotl-nd's Dowry.
'HE queen of Scotland, dowaser of France, had for 576.

her dowry, befidcs other pofeffion, the d' kedom of c"tt" i,'
:rere, which was solemnly contrac&ed and given to her c.
!,c king and eflates of parliament; which dkledo;n she
fed peaceably till 576, and then, upon the pacifi-
on betwixt the king and Monfr his rothe'-, to aug-
attwhofe appcnage this dutchy was given, to which the
een of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who
e¢ her near relations, provided the equivalent which
promised her should be faithfully performed. So
t yar, after a great many follicitations in lieu of that
t:chy, he had granted her the county of Vermaudaife
ih the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry; tho'

'tis

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not
equal value with Turene, but was promised to have
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal val
Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confir
ed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, cot
of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others neceffar
upon which she entered into poleflion of that county, l
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commissioners of
chamber of accompts, it was found, that the revenue
that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene
3000 liv'es. But inflead of making up this deficied
according to justice, ome of the privycouncil, viz. M.|
Chevcrnl, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay,
Sr. Bonet, ia the name of the king, notwithftandin
her aforefhid losses, did fell and alienate the lands of S
lis, and te dutchy of Eflaimpes, to Madam de Monp
filr, from whom the king received money; of which
the counc'llors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guar
tee;, which hath hindred the aforesaid queen to
iuflice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfierh
been put in poffefiion of these lands of Senlis, cont
to ll the declaration, protestation, and afurances of
king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that
qcen of Scotland is difpolelred of her dowry, contrar
all qui , vwithout any regard to her quality.

No. I. (Vol. IV . . p. 5I.)
A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the

gent Mortoun.

3-,.-.,-;h T wiii pieaFe your grace. I receive your gracesj
-- E'I arer, and his confidered the fame. The parson
': - ' ' Cailev v.was - ere at me before the receit thereof, dir
r.. . ed t;-a m! lord of Mar, and the mailer anent my
"**'9· wii;tten. iihich was the answer of the writing that

master sent to me, which I fend to your grace, defit
me TO come to Steriing to confer with them. I had gil
n-. rmvr iL

,T ' the receit ot S-our grace's letter, th,,

bc:..:iii-it o bi;d Sain; Anirois, at ane friends tr

v,.;; I nmi':it not omit: I underltand by my said co!$
th.:t 'c -in-is m-..ef is to w lie to divers of the nobiig
......
.re i-,.e, aneni '.c;r !o'dfnip's tliai, and tht',J

! ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a

,l written before his departing to my lord Monthrois.
I understand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effect, which I tho't good to
make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace, for the love of God almighty, to look upon the best,
and not to sleep in security, but to turn you with un-
Signcd heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that
thea the king's majesty was very young, God made him
te instrument to divest his mother from her authority,
rho was natural princess, for offending of his divine ma-
ilay, and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame
r as largely in you, except to that your grace condefcen-
ded not to the destruction of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offend-
dGod, and far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God
erver left unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace
on never have the love of God nor man. I pray your
gace flatter not yourself, for if your grace believes that
s have the good will of them that are the king's good
dilers ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfeEtly that
a0urown particulars are not contented, lat by the reft,
Ld that molt principally for your hard dealing. I pray
!ur grace, beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for cer-
t.ly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very f-
tiion of my heart towards your grace. which has con-
i.ued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, be-
aUfe the matter stands in your grace's handling with the
ag's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth
ithhim now, I fee not how ye hall meet hereafter; pray
four grace to call to God, and look on the bell, and
,J from your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition
. avraritioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sand Androis,
i trust to return on Wednesday at the farthell. If
pur grace will command me in any offices that are ho-
C, that I may dq your grace pleasure in at Sterling, ad-
atife of your grace's mind, and shall do to my power and
~0wledge, and thi with my heartlie, &c. &c.
v'c. Its E e To

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

r~ RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commenda.

o^?: : 1a  tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,
E. of or- and as we take your plainness therein in good part, as pro.
tons Ar- ceedin from a friend and kinsman, in whose goodaf.

B', festion toward us we never doubted, so ye may not think
.c. 31. it firange that we purge ourself so far of your accufationi

as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambitio
surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in ou
private estate we could, and can live as well contented,
any of our degree in Scotland, without further aspirin
The bearing to the charge of the government of thereal
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that shall occupy th
place, not limply to refpet ourself, but his majefty'srown
which we supply, and therein not transcending the boun
of measure, as, we trust, it shall not be found we h
done, it ought not to be attributed to any ambition in
For as soon as ever his majesty shall think himfelfrea
and able for his own government, none shall more willi
ly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think ne
to set my face againit him, whose honour, fafetyand pr
servation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never
lieve to find otherwise at his hand than favour, althou
all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him, top
fuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you,
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar
not thankfully acquit; as we trust yourself confide
but because the ambassadors of England, my lord of
gus, the chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen r
w.ft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily
'lref, yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
find the ir:e!ii -ood of all things, let us be advertized th
f* with your own advice, by Alexr hay, whom we
:ho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus si
5-:rling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you i
:-o;etion of God. At Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of Mai
7 ;77.

FOR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed i

not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to
f-- all criver;, or never qa1
r l any fvereign and n

to

rn prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of
ch, as thinks them judges to their own reward; in ma-
lcfies, I doubt not to find the affitance of my friends,
swhere my aftions hall appear unhoneff, I will not
e their afitance, but let me bear my own bur-

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p 97.)

he coppy of the king of France his direcions
font to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fe-
nelon. Translated out of the French.

IRST, on their majestys most christian part, he Caldenv.
hall make the mnft honourable salutation and visit& M S. His-
to the most serene king of Scotland; their good bro- tory,Vol. 3
and little son, that in him is poffable.
Togive him their letters that are closed, such and such
as they have written to him with their hands, and to
, exprefly the perfet friend(hip and singular assec.
:, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back
ianfwer.
To take heed to the things which touch near the molt
*e king, to the effeft that his person may be in no dan-
but that it may be molt surely preserved.
ID that he be not hindred in the honest liberty that
ght to have, and that no greater, or itraiter guards
i'out him than he had before.
D such like, that he be not impeached.in the autho-
,that God hath given to him of king and prince so-
'gn above his fubjefts. to the effec. he may as freely
n and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of
:n0ntry, with his ordinary council, as he was used to
q before.
^Ar his nobility, barons and commonality of his
may have their free liberty to resort to. his serene
:;, without suspicion of greater guards or morearmed
about his person then the use was, that they be not
ll and hindered to resort; and further that the seg-
rde la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely speak
said serene king and council, requiring the re.etfa-
g of hat that may or hath been changed:or al-

E e a AND

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobil

t-, and other men of good behaviour of the towns at
commonality of the contry conveens, and are content wil
the form of government presently with the said serel
king, to the end that if their be any miscontent he mn
travaile to agree them together, and that he return
without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may underfsand that there be any who hai

not used them so reverently towards the said serene ii
their foveleign lord, as the duty of their obedience
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majesty m
chriftiin the said serene king his good brother, giving
councill wholly to forget the fame, and exorting the
do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in
respeCts with the obedience and true fubjectiontheyou
him.

AND if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the

serene king to be in any manner conflrained of his pe
authority, liberty, and disposition of his effairs, than
used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity,
the sovereignty of a prince does require, thathe use
moyen lawful and honest to place him in the famine,
that he implov as much as the credit of his most chri
majesty may do toward the nobility, and fubjecs of t
contry, and as much as may his name, with the ni
of his crown towards the Scottifi nation, the whichd
loves and confides in as much as they were proper Fred
men.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, anj

estates, of his consent, and to all the nobility and pr
pall personages of the contry, that his most Clriftian
jeflie will continue on his part in the most ancient
ance and confedracy, which he hath had with thefai
rene king his good brother, praying his nobility and
try, with his principail fubieis, to persevere in theif
in all good understanding and friendship with him;
which, on his part, he lhall do, observing the famine
inviolable. I

FURTHER his most christian majesty underfta

that the serene king his good brother was contented
the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignieu
la Motte had charged to pray his serene maieftV tih
might remaine betide him to his contentment, beli
''.ar he Should more wiiiina intertain the points ct

ad confederace, betwixt their majeflys and their contrys,
cause he was a good subjet to them both; and if he
ight not remain, without some alteration of the tranqui-
!n of his estate, that he might retire him to his own
'use in the said contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to
:urn to France that he might furely-and if it pleases
s serene majesty, to cause cease and flay the impeach-
lents, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
et that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
: contry, as they were wont to do of before.
AXD that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor
ofpeech but honourable of the most Chriflian king, in
Btcontry, but such like as is spoken most honourably
f the serene king of Scotland in France.
HE had another head to propone, which he concealed
a little before his departure, to wit, that the queen,
eking's mother, was content to receive her son in affo-
tion of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 115.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis MVTalfingham, the

i4th of August, 1584, from Berwick.

SIR,
CC OR D I N G to my former letters, touching my Caldcrw.

A meeting with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday M' So Hir
,there came hither to me from the earle, the justice p. 374
Ark, and fir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton,
i. of the king's privie council, to treat with me about

order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to ap-
2t the hour, and the number we flhould meet withal;
:as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to
ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be 13 of

ae; and the reft of our troops to stand each of them a

re from the town ; the one on the one fide, the other on
Ctorher fide, so as our troops were two miles afundcr; I
- not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen,
Ihere I had co hot on horse, but they were very near
l horse well appointed: According t'.) winih appoint-
ent, we met yellerday, and after om congratulations,
lesrle fell in the like protestations of his guo i will and
l':incfs to serve the queen's macfty. bc'cic any prince

Ee 7 in

in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto.
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnel
vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her najefty may
dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I en.-
tered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him
and so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that Iha
to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward
her majesty, according to my inftrucions, which withou
any delay he answered presently, as ye hall perceiveby
the said answers, ent herewith ; but I replying unto him
he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but
this effect. Then I dealt with him touching the poin
of her majesty's satisfaction, for the uttering such praffi
as has been lately et on foot for the disquieting of ha
majefy and her estate, who thereaf made sundry discourse
what marriages have been offered to his majefly by fnndri
princes, and by what means the earle has fought to diver
them, and for what causes ; the one, for that be mariag
with Spain or France, he must also alter his religion
which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will h
never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he h
any credit with him; he denys not but the king has bee
dealt withal be practices to deal against her majelly, whic
.he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as the
have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or
knoweth therein there hall be nothing hidden from he
majesty, as her majesty hall know very ihortly; surely i
seems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
thereunto there had been no small company of French i
Scaroand ere now to disquiet her majelly.- This be
ing ended, I dealt with him earnefily for the stay of thi
parliament, which now approacheth; or at the leaftha
there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice o
there noblemen and others now in England, for thefo
faulting of their livings and goods, hereupon he made
long discourse to me, first of the earl of Angus dealing
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwith
flanding of fundrie gracious offers the king had made hin
then of the road of Ruthven, how that prefentlyafter the
had the king's majesty in their hands, they imprisonei
himfclf, dealt with the king for putting of the duke ou
ps the realm, the king refuscd so to do, they told hit
plainly that if he would not he should have the earl
of Arran's head in a dilh ; the king aed what offence th

. ea,

earl had made ? and they answered it mull be so, and
iould be so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran's lir-
the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet A!
ran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life; 1 ailc'.r-
ged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majefly, and
his as in council, that they had done nothing but for
his fervife, and with his good liking and content'ient,
who answered me he durit do no otherwise, nor could ;ot
doany thing but that which pleased then, . if h a num-
ber of other their dealings with the king wi: i: ! .::. -,. . in
their hands as are too long to be written, and too b.:; ii
they were true; I said the king might have let the queen s
majesty's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him; he answered, that
the king was not ignorant that the apprehenfionsin that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's prafice, and thereby
durst not impart so much to him, and yet the king was
content, and did give remission to as many, as would ac-
knowledge their faults, and ak remission, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further
loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's facond
pprehenfion, and the killing of the earle, and others,
and seduced the ministers to their faftion, and yet not
satisfied with these conspiracies and treasonable dealings,
(as he terms them) are entered into a third, being in Eng-
land under her majesty's protection, to dishonour her ma-
eilty as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king
conceive some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taking of the castle of Edinr. and bring-
ing home the earles, to take the charge of the king; all
which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
liable of the castle thereupon fled ; the earl brought Drum-
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay to have
confessed the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing, received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could
bring him no further, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such praftices, in respect of the
queen's majesty, abiding within her realme, and if there
be any such pra&tices, they have proceeded from others,
and they not privie unto them: and that if it be not ap-
parently proved againit them, that it will be thought to

Ee4 be

be ome practice to aggravate the fault, and to make them
the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it
should be proved so sufficiently, that they hould not be
able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is to be
showed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that i
her majesty (hould so press the king for them at this tie
that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty, n
further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, hecou
not, in any reason, eek to do them any good; and beside
he assured me, that if he would, he dare not, this la
matter being fallen out as it is; and fuerly if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the reftcr
ing of the earl of Marr very shortly, if her majety would
have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus,
perceive the king is persuaded that both he, and the re
of the Douglasses, have conceived so mortall an hatre
againfl him and the earl of Arran, about the death of th
earl of Morion, as if they were at home, to morrownext
they wouid not leave to practice and conspire the death
them bo:h, and therefore a hard matter, to do any thin
for him: finally, he concluded and required me toaffur
her majefly from the king, that there shall nothing be hi
from her, nor any thing left undone that may fatisfie
maiefty with re.ifon, and that the king shall never doan
thing, nor consent to have any thing done in her prejudice
so long as he had any credit with him, or authority ua
der him. Having this far proceeded, he defiredto lo
me his commislion, which is under the great feal, to him,
self only, which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of
the privie councel there with him, but not one in comj
milison, nor present, nor near us all this time; having
spent almost five hours in these matters; he presented to
me the malter of Gray, who delivered to me a letter fron
the king in his commendation, whom I perceive thy
king means to fend to her majefly, and therefore requires
a safe conduct for his palFage, which I pray yow procureg
and to fend it so soon as you may. I let him understand ok
the lord Seaan's negociation with the French king. He
swore o me, that Seaton was but a knave and that i
was partly against his will, that he fliould be sent thither
But his commilnon and infirudion being of no great irm
portance, he yielded the sooner ; and if Seaton has gong
beyond his inf'rucions, which Arran drew himself, hi
will mate S:oa inrt for it. Touching William New;

Gats'

and Mark Golgan, he protested he never heard of
such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black
rd, come thither a begging, who said he was an ene-
to Desmond, to whom he gave a croun, but never
rd of him since, and for any Scots man going into
tand, he fays there is no such matter; if there be.
re may be some few rafkels that he knows not of; and
ching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays
is but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and

as would have the world believe the king were ready
revolt in religion, who the world (hall well fee will
tinue as confant therein, as what prince soever pro-
dit molt; and the earle himself dos protcft to me,
,to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
ddid aure me if there was any in Scotland, they
ud not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers
ul do, if they preach such doctrine as they did in
otand, and touching one Ballandcn, of whom I wrote
vow, I heard from Mr. Colvil, the earle avows con-
tly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any such
n,but he would inquire at the justice clerk, and would
orm me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
.w as (hort a discourse as I can of so many matters, so
gdifcourfed upon, but there are the principal points
l our talk, so near as I can remember it, and for this
e I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick, the
hof August, 1584.
The king is very desirous to have
ion Robert Carrie to come to him.
;rt yow know her majesty's pleafurc.

ran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdane, set down in another form.

S to the firait and severe persecution of all such, as
have been noted to have been well affected to the

es majeIty, it cannot appear they were either for
tcaufe punished, or hardly dealt with, since his ma-
of late has been so careful and diligent to choice out
instruments to deal betwixt her majefly and hin,

':i majety has done in elcting of your lordship and
::; betides that in all their accusations, their good will

anrd

and affction born to her majesty was, at no time, ai
to their charge, but capital ations of treason many w:
tried now be the whole three estates, and more than ma
nifeft to the world.

As for 9is majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamatioi

such as were banished, not to repair in England; th
bruits and whiperings that came to his majesty's ears,
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn they
complifhed, so far as in them lay, moved his majesty
inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majef
realm, left they should have attempted these things, whi
ihortiv they did attempt, being farther off, and mored

rant both by sea and land.
As for reception ofjefuits, and others, her maie

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his p
mise, as your lordship propones, his majesty would bem
glad that so it might fall out by your lord(hip's travil
that no fugitive of either realme hould be receivedof
ther, and when so hall be, it hall not fail on his majefC
part, albeit in very deed this time bygone his majesty
been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells
fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since her maje
hath receipt, in effeft, the whole and greatest reb
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had;
tor the agreement with his majefly's mother anent th
aitociation, his majesty has commanded me, in presence
-vur lordship's servant, to asSure her majesty and your lor
flip, in his majefly's name, that it is altogether false,
an untruth, nrr any fich like matter done yet.

His majeitv has aifo commanded me to afflre so0

lordlnip, that it is a!so false and untrue, that his mae
has, by any means diret or indirect, sent any melTigeg
the pope, or recived any from him; or that his naje
has dealt with Spain or any foreigners, to harm her
Ie-y or her realm, which his majesty could have no
nour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I nao
in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majeit

mlr.niers, sent unto his majesty, his majesty ued n
of them so; and if his majetfy had, ufficient causes
given by them, as ome of their own writs do yet telti
as I more paricuiariy hewed your lordship at Fouldenp
cur a-^ rmn^'ing. g

No ,

No. X. (Vol. II. . 29.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q_ Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,
'Affeurant que vous avez eu communication d' une Cor.B Lu.i

V lettre de Gray que voftre homme Semer me livra Fol. 147.
or oubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoifant quasi de Al Origi-
ntamo lesmefmes raisons, quc le dit Gray m'efcrivit en nal'
ifre eilant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant la
lifance & bonne intention du personage je vous prieray
ulement fuivant ce que ii devant je vous ay tant inftan-
ient importune que vous me permettiez defclaircir li-
ement & ouvertement ce point de l'alfociation d' entre
y & mon filz & me deffier les mains pour proceder avec
comme e jugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le
en. Et j'entreprendz quoy que 1'on vous die & puiffe
rapporter de faire mentir ce petit brouillon qui persuade
raucuns de vos miniftres a entrepris cctte separation
atremoy et mon enfant, & pour y comrmencerje vous
pIplie m'o&troyer queje puiflc parler a ce justice clerk
irous a efle nouvellement envoye pour mander par luy
mon filz mon intention furcela, ce que je me promis que
me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer
s fest la bonne intention que vous m'avez afeuree
roira l'accord & entretien de natural devoir entre la mere
al'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes efire empefche pour
lous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez
eax defmentir & faire paroitre voftre bon defir a notre
:ion que me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non
'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos minis-
'ti pretendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais
tliniftres prafiques etre nous. La lettre porte que l'as-
adrion n'est pas passee, auffi ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bicn-
in mon filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions convenu
,fimble, comme 'afte sign6 de fa main, & ces lettres
;nt a may, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce
teme teroignage defabouche propre a plufieurs ambafla-
ers & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne l'oser faire
i'blier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces
Nlr vous resister d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement
':it journellemeat persuade au contraire par vos minis-

tre s

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorc¢
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quanp
mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de s'opiniaftrer er
cette extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne pui
penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretiente le vouliffiez eu cela applaudir ou meinrenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediEtion ains que pluito
introviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & eJ
cores ne luy ouloier je'n ofter, mays donner avec droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout comrniie
vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foj,
pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale deI
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & :
plus grande affiction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir 11
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me manderen ca|
qu'il perfile en cette m'efconnoiffauce de son devoir, que dg
luy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy 0o
royne d'EcofFe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre aveM
moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoyje vou
requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gourerna
enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' affeftion quejc
fens mon cceur oppreffi d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenezvoul,
de la promee que m'avez faites de me prendre envotrE
protection me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce prian
Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemysE
diiiimulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler
deme venger de ceulz qui pourchafTent un tel malheur entrg
la mere & l'enfant. Je cefferay de vous troubler, maisnoa
a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de vous
&a de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder dj
tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Volrre fidelement vouee faeur

& obeiffante coufine,

A !a reyne d'Angleterre MA RI E

madame ma bonne fceur
& cou:ne.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 30.)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Cott. Lib.

Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church history L. 6.
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, p. 4Is
according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fecre-
tary, the reft with the queens own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.

COnfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie
C humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft,
ou doibt afleurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
(cricorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre
tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cette captivite, mefmes a cause des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenud jufques a present;
jayadvise tandis que j'ay la commoditY, ou raison en ju-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
terrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon teflament et ordonnance de
mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S'. Esprit.
Premierement, me recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfaacion par
toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa
bonte. Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Re-
demptcur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame a la be-
coifte ct individue Trinitc, et aux prieres de la glorieufe
Viergc Marie, et de tous les anges faincts and fainates de
pFradis, efperant par leur merites et intercession, eftre aydec
obrenir dc eftre faice participante avec eulx de felicit
e:nclle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net ct
entier, defpouillant des a present tout refTentimcnt des in-
,ures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me
pourroient avoir este faies durant ma vie, par mes subjet.
rebclles et aultres cnnemis; J'en retriet la vengeance a
Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefrme affc:tion,
que je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls
; cc!les que je puis avoir offense de fais ou de parolles.

J=

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand
mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de s'opiniaflrer en
cetre extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis
penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de 1l
Chretiente le vouliffiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenilS
pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction ains que plutost
intraviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop-
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & e.
cores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays donner avec droig
ce quil tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commire
vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foye
pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevaledet
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & l
plus grande affliction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcaroir
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupp!ie de me mandere ca
qu'ii perfifte en cette m'efconnoifTance de son devoir,que d
luy ou de moy i vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy o
royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre ave
moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoyjevou
requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouvern
enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' affetion quejl
fen; mon cceur oppress d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenezvoui
de la promele que m'avez faites de me prendre enrot
protection me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce pria
Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemys
dil2imulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler
deme venger de ceulz qui pourchafTent un tel malheur entrl
a1 mere & l'enfant. Je cefferay de vous troubler, maisnog
a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de vou
& de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder di
tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Voflre fidelement voue6 fceur

& obeiffante coufine,

A la reyne d'Angleterre MARIE Qi

madame ma bonne ser
& coufine.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 30.)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

N, B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. cott Lib.

Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church history L. 6.
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, p. 4Is-
according to him, is written by Nau6, Mary's fecre-
tary, the reft with the queens own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.

^Onfiderant par ma condition prefente 'eflat de vie
C humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft,
cu doibt afleurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fcricorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre
tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cette captivite, mefmes a cause des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenue jufques a present;
i'y advis6 tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en ju-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
terrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de
mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S'. Esprit.
Premierement, me recongnoiflant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, quc de fatisfaeion par
toutcs les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa
bonte. Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Re-
dempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame a la be-
roitfe et individue Trinitc, et aux prieres de la glorieufc
lierge Marie, et de tous les anges faints and fainEtcs de
paiadis, efperant par leur meritesetinterceffion, eftre ayde5
obtcnir de ere faice participante avcc eulx de felicite
e:'rnclle, Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net ct
eatier. defpouiilant des a present tout reflentiment des in-
jures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me
pourroient avoir este faces durant ma vie, par mes flbjet
ribelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la vengeance a
Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de merfmre affcion,
Sac je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tons ceuls
; cc'les que je puis avoir offenf d fais ou de parGlles.

Je

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The twofollowing paragraph!

ccntain d,reiions concerning the place and circumfJance of h,
burial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conferva.

tion de 'Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la
quelle je veuls vivre et mourir, si le prince d'EfcoTfe mo
filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture
qu'il a prise a mon tres grand regret en l'herefie de Calv
entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe feul et unique heritier de mo
royaume d'Efcoffe, de droit que je pretende juflemen
en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays que en dependent,
et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et im
meubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de ce pr
c. teflament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en ladie

-crefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et faite don " de touts c
' chacuns mes droicts, que je pretende et puis pretendre

a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droiCs, lig.
:euries, ou royaulmes en dependantz, au roy catholiqe,

' ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, co
" fentement de fa faintete ; taut pour le voyr aujourdhu
, le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, quepou
'; reconoilTance de gratuites favours que moy, et lesmiea
' recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de uy en m

plus grande necefiite; et refguard aufi an droi& que
" luy mefme peut pretendre a ces dirz royaulmes et pa,

je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, deh
maifon de Lorraine, et si il ce pleut de celle de Guie,

" pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie a
" cote de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
" mon feul enfant, lequel eflant Catholique j'ay tons-

jours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoitde
"l'accepter, ou faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme

fa fille.
" Je layfie mon filz a la protection du roy, de prince,

a et ducs de Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, ax
' queiz je recommende et son eftat en Efcofe, et mo
" droict en Angleterre, ii il eft catholique, et quellele
" prlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Le.

nox tenu par feu son pere, et commande mon filtz, cormme
mon heretier et fuceefeur, d' obeyr en celt en droit a mon
vo-onte.

2J

e veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe
[eront par moys deues, tien mhis cause de doit eftre faits
2 Lohliven" etre promptement payee et acquittes, et

tort et griefs repares per lefdits eecuteurs defquelz
charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. [Follow twa or
paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
d] Fait au rmanoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour
A-Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

After a blank page foloows in the queen's hand:

"Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude
Hamiton lequel fe montrera le plus fidele vers moy, et
plus constant en religion, au jugement de -- Dcs
:e Lorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de cculs
que j'auray donnay la charge de trayter avefque eux
de par moy et ceulx, a condition de fe marrier ou aljier
en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Fellow near two pages of particidar legacys.

"Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droi& quelle pent
pretendre a la conte d'Angous avant l'acort fait par mon
commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et le
comte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu. roy
mon Mary et moy, fur la promeffe de fa fidelle aflil-
ance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et befoing d'ayde,
,ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos en-
nemis rebelles, qu' altemtprient centre fa vie, et pour
et effeft pris les armes, et ont porte les bannieres def-
'ploiees, contre nous, je revoque auffi toute autre don
'quc je luy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promeffes
de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que la dite
Contd foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y par-
tenir, comme fes trahifons tant en lamort de mon feu
'Mary, que en mon baniffement, et pourfuit de la mien
ne 'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de fejamays ser-
vire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes pa-
rents, la quelle je crains ne s'eflende jufques a luy,
connoiltant d tout affeCionne aux ennemis de mon
droite en ce royaume, du quel il eft penconnaire.
"Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon
filz, et luy commande detenir pres de luy et s'enfervir,
et ie luy ayfile le ec du conte de Bduei, son oncle,

" SD,

" en refpec qu'il eft de mon fang, mon filleul, et mae
" laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

" Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abbe de

"Croix na'en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que
"ne fut amays mon intention, commeil apret par lar
" vocation que j'ay fayte depuis, et ete auffi faite d'atal
" la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer fil t

m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx eal
c je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reune a la couronq

" comme une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, etf
, la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Les filles de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, a
" revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleftluydo

ner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'en fie
" ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 142.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the que

of Scotts.

A: hi:. :'. p LE ASE your majesty, I received your letter oft
7- B. . date the 2th of Nov. and in like manner has fe
so. :c. some part of the contents of one other of the famedat

directed to Monfr de Movifir, ambfaador for his mai
the most Christian king, both which are agreeable to yo
princely dignity, as by the one your highness desires
know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto
all favour if I shall be innocent of the heinous sacs co
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory,
by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare un
me, if your husband's murder could be laid jultly agai
me, that you could not follicit in my cause, neither yet
any person that was participant of that execrable fa
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you hou
have any means to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be
nocent of that crime, is moflt favourable, and your
fire to know the truth of the fame is molt equitable; ad
therefore that I hould with all my simplicity, fincerityan
truth answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end th
your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocenc
.hall sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation
if I be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledgeC

,evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility
;!infl your said hulband, and not revealing or it, !which I
;in iiiircd was sufficiently known to himself, and to all that
gi. judgment never so little in that realm; which also I
;iiconltrained to underfland, as he, that was fpccially
ploved betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
your nobility, that they might with all humility inter-
e at your majeRty's hand for his relief, in such matters
are mere specially contained in the declaration tollow-
, which I am constrained for my own juitification, by

i:is lttie to call to your majcfty's remembrance. Not-
E.::..iing that I am assured to my grief, the reading
;ifrcif will not finally offend your princely mind. ir
.y picafe your majesty to remember, that in the year of
cj 166, the said earl of Morton, with divers oher
;itv anld gent. were declared rebels to your majefly,
:i.:nilbecd your realm for insolent murder committed in
';r m.jefly's own chamber, which they alledged was
e hy command of your hulband, who notwihlfiand-
;irilrned that he was compelied by them to fubfci-ibe
:ilrlrant given for that effect, howfouver the truth of
:- miter remains amongst them ; it apcertailns net to me
:;his time to be curious; true it is t-at I was one of that
nmbr, that heavily ofletnded against your majelly, and
::.e i France the time of our banifiment, at the delire
;he rl(t, to humbly pray your brother the Mloit Chrf-
:l.in, to interceed that our ofences millt be par-
:c, .lnd your majefly's clemency extended towards us,

r divers of no small reputation', in that realm, was'
:Ihc opinion, that the said fact merited neither to be re-
:;iso, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the care-
iind of his majelly towards the quietness of that realm,
it the dealing in that cause was committed to Monfl
Movifiri, who was directed at that time to go into Scot-
, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom
ailttv God of his oodnefs may long prefervc in happy
e:Cand perpetual felicity; the careful travel of the ifid
:lovifir vwas so effectual, and your majesty's mind so
;i::. to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I
P: -mitted to repair in Scotland, to dal with ears
'r:', Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Ledingtoi,

i:. n.me and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Re-

L;iriy, and remanent complelis, that t.ey might
'.: o:i l in the names of the said earl, of any mattei that
nt. r! F f might

might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your dcl
m-env to be extended in their favours; at my coming t
th'r., ar;er I had ooened the effect of my message, the
declarcd that the marriage betwixt you and your hufban
h-d bc n the occasion already of great evil in that realr
ani it .lur hu fband fhouid be suffered to follow the al
r;r-ie .and mind of such as was about him, that kind c
dt;:iin- mi 'tr prcedce iwkh time worse effecs; for helF
in- of :c!h in.cov-neni-.ce that might fall out by that kin
c dci'i:-g, th :v had thought it convenient to join then
el:ves in !kag7- and band with some other noblemen, re
s:i.-ed to s

,-v - our mijefty a their natural sovereign, an

h..'.ve not-hi:i t3; do .ith vour hulband's command whatfo
ever, if the iid ear-! would for himself enter into thatban
.d confeder.cy wit h t he, tey could be content
humbly reque u and travel by all means with your maeft
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed
they deflled to know the said earl's mind herein; when1
haid answered, that he nor his friends, at my departur
could not know that any such like matter would be prd
po.ir, and therefore was not instructed what toanifsr
therein, they desired that I hould return fufficientl it
1'ructed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptifim
Your son, whom God might preserve; this message w
f-ithfu'u'v delivered by me at Newcastle in England, whe
t:ie said earl then remained, in presence of his friends a
company, where they all condescended to have no fa
ther dealing with your husband, and to enter into
fail band. 1With this deliberation I returned to Std
ling, where at the request of the Most Christian kinga
the queen's maiefty of England by their ambassadors p
sent, yoir majes'lt's gracious pardon was granted unto thi
all, under condition aiways that they should remain banil
ed forth of the realm, the space of two years, and sarti
during our majesty's p!eafure, which limitation was as
mitigated at the humble request of your own nobilitj,
that immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired
to Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl Bodvellr
secretary Ledington come to him; what speech pa
there amongst them, as God flall be my judge, I kn
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was requl
ed b- te said earl Morton to accompany the earlB
ve;i and fecretarV to Edenburgh, and to return withf
anf'. e as lthey ihould obtain of your majesty, which

gincn to me by the said persons, as God shall be my
-e, ewas no other than these words, '" Schaw to the
jrl AMorron that the queen will hear no speech of that
mnltter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit that the
-er might be made more sensible. secretary Ledington
j, that the earl would sufficiently understand it, albeit
i''or none at that time understand what pafred amongit
:: It is known to all men, als veill be railling let-
3i pl f betwixt the said earl and Lidington when they
ome in divers factions, as also ane buck sett furtht by
en minifltrs wherein they affirm that the earl of Mo--
a has confcnfed to them, before his death, that the earl
rell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling

' of the king your husband, to the which propofi-

a the said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no
ver unto such time he might know your majefly's
n therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
.ble murder, it is known too by the depositions of ma-
p:rfons that were executed to the death for the commit-
thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
the command of such of the nobility, as hd fubfcri.
'and for that effect; by this unpleasant declaration,
most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
ianer may be understood by the aforesaid witnefies that
cxaniined in torture, and that are extant in the cullody
:h. ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency o far as
.concern any fadt does appear fifficiently to your ma-
L And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be o other-
charged therein, but as what would accuse the vfFTel
:rcfcrves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy
eich as immoderately uc the fame. As fr the fpe-
cause of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ed upon ane opinion conceived, that was able to ac-
n:he earl of Morton of so much matter as thefalledge
;.to have confefled before he died, and would not
iiuctd, for lots of reputation, to perform any part
:of If this be the occasion of' my trouble, as I sup-
it is, what punishment I ihould deserve, I remit me
:or majefy's better judgment, who wcll knows how
,l ever ilk gentleman fould be of his fame, reputa-
,and honour, and how far ever ilk man should ab-
'le name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so
t i; lk;i in, notwitlltanding all the iicus I was

F f con-

c.-.ir e t

, to !. t:'.c\-' at his hand all the time of hi,

.verm.c!, a:d 'tui no o-her calce, but'for shewing of,
ticular friend:lio to p:-ficular trierds in the time ot t!
lalt cruel troubles in Sco:;ind. Sorry I be now to accu
him in an'- matter being d.aJ, and more sorry that bin
on lvi-, be such 'ind of dealinig obtained that name
Ingratc Always for my own part I have been bania
my natve country those three years and four months, ii
ing in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, vhi
were not small, inerrittit and difponit upon, and
continually since the time I was relieved out of my
troubles at the deflil of Monfr. de Movifir, attended
know your maelftv's plealure, and to await upon
service it fnould pleale your majesty for to command.
on the Sth of Apri' init. your good friend secretary
~iDghame has declared unto re, that her highaers t
it expedient that I should retire myself where I pleaed
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might pert
that desire. until such time as I thould receive it from
maieftv. Neither knew 1 where it would please your .,i
nef to direct me, untii such time as I should have recei
further iiito;-mation from you. Upon this occafioo,
parrhi bv permifiin, I have taken the hardrefs to \i
this prelent letter, wxhereby your maiefry may unJerf
an- part of my troub'es pafi, and firait present.
my intention future, I will never deny that I am fui
solved to spend the reft of my days in your majesty's
vice, and the king your ion's, wheresoever I shall bedi
ed bv vour m irlt:, and for the better performing tS
of, if so ihall be her majesty's pleasure, to recoml
the trvai of mv innocency, and examination of the
of the precedig narration, to the king your son,
requels t!at I m?.v be pardoned for such offences as
cerned your m.eilty's service, and var common to al
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, exce
me, I should be the bearer thereof myself, and bed
ed in whatsoever service it should please your majef
to conm-amnd. Most humble I beseech your majeflyt
fider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order,
I mav have means to serve your majelty according
fnceri of m my eaning, and so expecting your mal
answer, after the killing your hand with all huill
take leave from Lovndon.

No, i

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 163.)

etter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald
Douglas his ambalatdor in England, Otober
i586.

Eferve up yourself na langer in the carneft dealing Ct.Lih.C.-
for my mother, for yc have done it too long ; and ii?. c. .

ink not that any your travellis can do goodc if hir lyse An Ori';:al
;takin, for then adeu w ith my dealing with thaiine tha thand.
atle special inftrumcntis thairof: And tlheirfore, gif ye
ike for the contincuance of my favour tow Iitis you, fpair
pains nor plainnes in this cace, but reade my lettcr
Tettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie
the contentis thairof, and in this rcqueift let me reap
effruicfis of youre great credit there, ather now or never.
iwcll. Ocober 586.

:tter to fir William Keith, ambassador in Eng-
land, probably from fccretary Maitland. Nov.
27, I586.

Y your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit conceril- A copy in
ing no pleasant subject) his majclty conceives vwel th: C'"c'a.

of fir A.

,our earnestness and fidelity in your negociations, s D. VlA.o
of Mr. Archibald's activity and diligence, whom you A. fol, zi,.
greatly praise and recommend. I w\i!h the iue cor-
,nd to his majefly's opinion, your care and traviel,
his great diligence as you write. His majefly takes
rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in
lrt, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour
iotherwife. His highnefes ations and behaviour utter
inly not only how far nature prevails, but also how he
;rehenlls of the sequel of that process, and of what mo-
it he esteems it. There is an amballtde florrly to be
-'ed, wherein will be employed an earl and tvo coun-
.r,, on whose answer will depend the continuance or
:lution of the amity and good intelligence between
princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther ex-
'ity be used, and his majesty's suit and requel difiain-
his highness will hink hi.felf difhonouicd and -cn-

F f 3 t.nmlcd

temned far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye r:.I
perceive his majefvy's disposition by his letter to you
which you fh-l! impart to Mr. Archibald, and both dea
accordnq thereto. I need not to recommend to you care
concerning f, our malcr's service both in weill and in ho.
nour. .- ou an.d your colleague hall behave yocriel
in this behalf, o r my own part, will I in:erpret yo,
arrcctron to c::r ma'ter. I am glad of that I hear of yor
fc!f ar.d I do f':'. credit that )ou write of Mr. Archi
bald, v.'?:.' f;iens here make great accoint of his pr
fclTcd devo;:cn to the queen, besides the duty he owe
to t.e kind's ma:efy her son. Farther I am confiran
to e-i: to next o.:cafin. having scarce time to fcrib bl
thee i-w lines (which of themselves may bear witness o0
. -; h.ze.) Wi!ing ou a prosperous ilue of your nego
ciarion, I co'miit you, &c. Halyrudloule, Nov:.2;:

HE: pecp.e, a. d all eflates here are so far morjb

the ri orcus procecdlinzs againt the queen, that his m
;e.;'-, and .al .:'at iha-e crcjir are importuned, and a
nrt go abro 'd for exclamations against them, and i
precat;;os against the queen of England.

No. XIV. \Vol. II. p. 167.)
To the kir-'s maeflv, from Mr. Archibald Do

geas.

6 O-. P' LEASE your maiefiv, I received our letter of t
cm'h ... date the 2h of Sep

Ltember, the

2tlh o f OR

Or,1,in-. which as the fame day that I dirctred WVm. Murray,
thn- crie:. warads vour hichnefs ; bv such letters as he carried, a
DfC fir B others Cr ftveral dates, your majefly may perctive tl',
fl-. 4. had on-it:ed nothing so far a2 my travel might reach

to, anent the performing of the two chief points conta
ed the said letter befor the receipt thereof, which by the
presents I must repeat for anifwering of the faidis. As
the £rft, io far as may concern the interceeding for t
queen your maicfr-'s mother her life, I have divers tfin
and in e;'ti audience travelled with this queen in
matter, feeciar.y to know what her full determinati
mulr be in that point, and could never brhin ler t2
further an:.-cr; but that this proceeding againfl her byo

3~~~~d

APPENDIX. 439

.: ofjuftice was no less againfl her mind, than against their
iii that loved her belt: As towards her life he could give
*answer thereunto, untill such time as the law hath de-
,rel whether she was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
:ns her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a
:.nber of the aociants that earneff!y pressed her that the
i\\I' riht procee.l against her, giving reasons that so long
;,,ie was suffered to deal in matters, so long would
:;r this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this
c.;:e in aflrance, and in the end they used this pro(teita-
::n that if she would not in this matter follow their ad-
;e, that they flould remain without all blame wvhatIo-

lir flould fall out whereupon flie had granted them
':ertV to proceed, left such as had made the request,
,:ht hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience
:':' (hould happen.
A:D by mr'fclf I know this her speech to be true, be-
;i: both papist and proteflant has behaved them, as it
i:.' been her pleafutre to dc!a!e, but upon divers re-
i':r, the one to avoid suspicion that other-wif was con-
(:redd against them, the other upon zeal, and care that they
;.'. be known to have for preservation of their fovercign's
;n.:d state in this perrilous time, upon consideration
:.:reof, have been conltraincd to enter into some deal-
i' with both, wherewith I made her majesty acquainted;
proteflants, and such as in other matters will be kncwn

!Jh:r no small favour unto your majcfly's service, hath
f'y!d that they may be excused fiom any dealing in the
anrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
-1 by their speech to their foevreign requefled for, and
,'; before my coming in this country ; if they fnould now
:'erwife do, it would produce no better effect but to
;'.e them subje(c to the accusation of their fovelcign,
!in it hould please her to do it, of their inconfancy,
i giing councell whereby they might incur the danger
fiii cuuncellr. and be consequent worthy of punifliment.
Such of the papists, as I did deal with, went imediate-
!; and told her majesty what I had spoken to them, who
'I:ir she understood the matter of before, sent for me
"*i declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to
;:a', willing me for the weil of my maifler's service to
:itain fiom dealing with such, as were not yet fuffici-
nly mnoved to think of my mafier as ihe did. I craved
ac.e of her majefly, that I might inform them of your

F f 4 ma-

mr.-.cP;-'s Jate behaviour towards her, and the Itatc of ;,!
realm, w.hereunto with some difficulty she gave her con
f:;it. At my late departure from court, which was upo
th-c 5:h of this inflant, and the day after that the lords
this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majeft
go no;rthward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to pr
mise to h:.ve further speech in this matter at the returnin
of the faic lords, and to give full answer according toyo
m.aey-'s contentment to the remainder matters, that
1hA proponit in name of your majesty. As to the 2
par: concerning the association, and desire that the pr
n.if- rn-.e to the maltcr of Gray concerning your majelly
title ma; be fulfiied; it appears by the said letter, th;
the very pAint, whereupon the quc-fion that maybri
vo::r maicC;v's tit'e in doubt hath not been rightly at t
.v itinri o f the fai letter confidcrcd, which I take to ha
Froceeded for lack of reading of the a of parliame
x hrc-ein i- fulfilled all the promiftr made by the queen
th ii raer, and nothing may now cause any doubt

:.-f ;:g.:i:ft xoar said title, except that an opinion Ihou
be c-l -ved bv there lords of this parliament that are
v-h; .-n.t at this time againfl the queen your majefty'si
'e-. th;at your majeivy is, or may be proved hereaft
artir., to her proceedings, and some that love your
je-ay's service were of that opinion that too earnelf req
might move a ground, whereupon suspicions mightgro
i;n imen o1 il affected in that matter, which I tho't mig
be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament
y ur m.-iev" s innocence at this time, and by reason thJ
good n.trire and public honesty would confrrain you to
te"cede for the queen your mother, which would carry wi
i:f:lf, without any further, some suspicion that might m
il! affcce men to doubt. In my former letters I humb
craved of your majeily that some learned men in thela
m:ght be moved to advise with the words of the affoc
tich, and the mitigation contained in the act of parli
mrcn;, and withall to advise what suspicious effects yo
rr,;ie:v's requelit might work in these chole-ick men at th
t me, an.d how their minds might be bet moved to r
ci,e rcafon ; and upon all these considerations they migh
have folmcd the words of a declarator of your majefl
i:nocence to be obtained in this parliament, and faili
t.ereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame
lCct that miht belt serve fl- your maijefis service, a

0iQ

. my betrer information. Albeit this was my finple opi-
:1. I hail be contented to follow any direction it (hall
i-f: yori majesty to give ; I have already opened the sub-
r,:; hereof to the queen of this realm, who seems not to
offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal
trcin with fch of the parliament as may remain in any
o!bt of mind. This being the fum of my proceedings
!ithi matter, besides the remainder, contained in other
;:ers or ieve;-al dates, I am constrained to lay the whole
rI before your majesty, and to humbly pray that full
0rcmation may be ent unto me what further to do here-
;1: this middle time, while I shall receive more ample
;rcio I (all proceed and be doing according to such
.ion as 1 have already received. And so, most gra-
j. :overeign, wishing unto your majelly all happy fuc-
iin your affairs, I humbly take my leave from Lo;idon,
i:t! of Or this 586. Your majesty's most humble
'::t and obed' servant.
memorial for his majesty by the Master of

Gray.

T will please your majesty, I have tho't meeter to set z T.in.
down all things as they occur, and all advertisements 1585. An
they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre. his own
I came to Vare the 24th of Decr. and sent to W'n. haid 1i the
:ith, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertize the queen cAi) o ic r
it, like as they did at their audience. She promised Vol. 'A.
: queen your majefly's mother's life should be spared fl.- Z-
! we were heard. The 27th, they came to Vare to me,
which day Sir Robt. came to Vare, where they flewed
:how far they had already gone in their negociation,
for that the discourse of it is set down in or general
::;, I remit me to it, only this far I will tetfify unto
v,! majefly that Wnm. Keith hath used himfeif right ho-
,liy and jifily till our coming, refpccting all circumlnan-
', and chiefly hió colleague his dealing, which indeed
;not better than your majcfly knows already.
THE 29th day of Dec. we came to London, where
:were no ways friendly received, nor after the honelt
a: it had pleased your majesty use her ambafEiidors, never

( 'cnt to welcome or convey us. The fam;e day we
,i'iituod of Mr, de Bcllicvre Iis leave taking, and for

th.lt

that the curlom permitted not we sent our excuses by i,
George Young.

THE ili day of Jan,'', W . Keith and his collcao

according to the custom sent to crave our audience. 1
received the answer contained in the general letter, a
could not have answer till the 6th day, what was doc
that day your majefly has it in the general, yet we w;
not out of expectation at that time albeit we receive
hard answers.

THE Sth day we speak with the earl of Leicefier, svei

our conterrence was, as is set down in the general. I r
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detairnin
of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that he pr
tended a fucceflion to this crown. Judge then by tii
what is tho't of your majefly as ye fball hear a little
ter.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambaffad

whom we find very plain in making to us a wife difcoar
of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we than
ed him in our majefly's name and opened such things
we had to treat with this queen, save the last point, asmo
largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and lome friends of your majefiyr's

vised me, that Bellievre his negotiation was not efifEeci
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed]
thirnk is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a ta
of this Chal'eauneuf his fcrvants taken with his whol. Pi
pers and pcquets, which he was fending in France,
that the- charge him with a conspiracy of late againll t
qlrcen here her life. It is alledged his servant hai cd
i'lied the matter, but whom I hall trust I know ni
but till I fee proof I shall account him an honest m
for inJecd so he appears, and one (wilhout doubt) w!
haih bcn verv instant in this matter. I nhew him thlt
qcecn and earl of Leicester had defird to speak withi
in private, and craved his opinion ; he gave it freely tt
Le tho't it meeteft, I shew him the reason why I comni
r;lcae that to him, for that I had been fufpefted by so

n w
h mr m.'efty's friends in France to have done evil offi

i- hor ervie, that he fould be my witness that my earn
d.l in, ;i this "h3uld be a fufficisnt tellimony that all'
vh-cs and tha; this knave Naue who now had betrayed
h.d in rhat done evil ofices; he desired me, feeing she
c:, wih other foliks e-?':, that I ould no ways imp

,. her, for the like she had done to himself by Naue his
:.lia;ion. I answered he should be my witness in that.
1':E 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which
got the oth day; at the first, he said a thing long
wked for flhould be welcome when it comes, I would
lw fe your matier's offers. I answered, no man makes
fes but for firme cause ; we would, and like your ma-
i, first know the cause to be extant for which we offer,
j likewise that it be extant till your majesty has heard
. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promise for an
,ur, but you think to flift in that fort. I anlvered we
aiJ not to shift, but to offer from our sovereign all things
It with reason may be; and in special, we offered as is
:down in our general, all was refuted and tho't nothing.
.cilled on the three that were in the house, the earl
L-icetcr, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very
'pitefully repeated all our offers in presence of them all.
p. ned the last part and said. Madam for what respect is
:' ?.r men deal against your person or eflate for her cause ?

, nfwered, because they think he shall succeed to me,

;i-or that she is a papii t; appearingly said I buth the
-.'s may be removed, flhe said she would be glad to un-
::t.nd it. If MaJamr, said I, all that fie has of right
!:c:ession were in the king our ibvereign's person, were
:ll hope of papists removed ? She answered I hope
. Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall
';li:oly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
:hanti no right, for flhe is declared unable. Then I

it he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases al-
:J, so that it is not to be feared that any man attempt
'::cr. The queen answered, but the papists allow not
:declaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's per-
;by her assignation. The earl of Leicester answered,
': i a prisoner, how can fle demit. I answered the de-
.^so is to her son, by the advice of all the friends he
:;.- Furope, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any at-
:rt conttit the queen here away, who fiall party with
'!o prove the demission or assignation to be ineffc&tual
'on being opposite party and having all the princes her
:'!'s for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with
, ajefty of before. The queen made as he could not
'pirehend my meaning, and fir Rob' opened the matter
in, she yet made as tho' she understood not. So the
:! of Lcicefler answered that our meaning was, that

the

the king hiould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, t'i
queen answered, then I put myself in a worse cafe thano
before ; by God's pafnion, that were to cut my own throlt
and for a dutchy, or an earldom to yourself, you or fucl
as you would cause some of your defpcrate knrves kill m
No, by God, he shall never he in that place. I anfwere
he craves nothing of your majesty but only of his mother
The earl of Leicester answered that were to make hi
party to the queen my mistress. I said, he will befa
more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. S
would fIay no longer, but said Ihe would not have aovo
in his mother's place. And said, tell your king whL
good I have done for him in holding the crown on
head since he was born, and that I mind to keep thele au
that now flands between us, and if he break it fhallb
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden un
a farewell ; but we echcuit. And I speak craving of he
that her life may be sparcd for 5 days ; she refused. Si,
Rob'. craved for only eight days, she said not for an hour
and so geid her away-. Your majesty fees we have del
vered all we had for ofie s, but all is for nothing, for
and her councel has laid a determination that they mi
to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her coun
than herself, which I like the worse; for without doub
fir, it nall cut off all fricndfhip ye had here. Altho'
were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, y
remembring themselves, that they have medled withyo
mother's blood, good faith the) cannot hope great good
vourilf, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further vo
majetvy ma.- perceive by this last discourse of that I prt
ponit, if they had meaned well to your majesty, they h
used it otlerwife than they have done, for reason h
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind fonmet-hi
to speak in this matter, because we look fhurly our letten
thall be troucit by the way.

FoR that I fee private credit nor no means can ltt

their determination, aitho' the qu.een again and the earl
Licefter has desired to speak with me in particular;
mind not to speak, nor ihall not; but alTurediy ilall
all men fee that I in particular was no ways tyed to Enl
land, but or the refpCLe of your maielty's service. Sol
belt, at this time, I c.nild not erlecruate that I dird
vet my upright dealin: iit ihail be manifcflre tob

.-rld. We ar, God v.iling, then to crave audiJr

, ' :s

APPENDIX. 445

we we mind to use fllarply our inflructions, which hi-

iierto we have used very calmly, for we can, for your ho-
rous canfe, fay no ]ess for your majesty, than the French
,mi.lTalor has Laid for his mailer.
So I pray your majefly confider my upright dealing in
your fernice, and not the effeCt, for had it been double by
"y I might have here had credit, but being I came only
for that cauf I will not my credit shall ferlve here to any
further purpose. I pray God prefirve your majesty and
fad you a true and inccre friendship. From London
this 12th of Jan. 1586.
I underliand the queen is to fend one of her own to
your majcefy.

To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and fe-
cretary to his majcfty, from the master of Gray.
l Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to iIth Jn.

his majefiy, whereby your lordship fiall understand r6ginan 0-

how matters goes here. And before all things I pray your the collect.
lordlhip move his majesty to refpeft my diligence, and of lir A.
not the effect in this negotiation, for I swear if it had A'Di. I-.
been for the crown of England to myself I could do no
more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for
the world shall fee that I loved England for his majesty's
service only. I look shortly to find your lordship friend as
ye made promise, and by God I shall be to you if I can.
Wf. Keith and I desired, if matters had gone well, to have
run a course that your lordship might have here been in
credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you
2i for myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in
conscience they mean not honeitly to the king our fove-
reign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is
gone or shortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind
offcruple I pray you to advise him the best is not this wa\'.
They fay here, that it has been said by one who heard
itfrom you, that ye desired not the king and England
to agree, because it would rack the noblemen, and gave
an example of it by king James the fourt, I answered in
your name that I was alfured you never had spoken it. Mr.
Archibald is the speaker of it, who I aure your lordlhip
has been a poison in this matter, for they lean very mickle
to his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the

king

king will be fain to deal this way, either by fair means o
necessity, so that when he deals this course he is aured tl
be welcome; to set down all that is past of the like pur.
poses, it would consume more paper than I have here, f(
I defer it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged
against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think
in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford, who i
ambaflador for this queen in France, is touched with it, his
brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in ou
negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's blood, tili
this invention was found forth. I remit all other things
to the incloed. We minded to have ent to his majef
a discourse, which we have set down of all our proceed
ings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized
that the bearer is to be truffant by the way for our pac
cuts, so that we defer it till our own coming; this 1 have
put in a privy part beside the pacquet. We hall I thin1
take leave on Frvday the 3th day, where we mind ex-
ctlv to follow the rigour of our instructions, for it can.
not stand -vwith the king's honour that we fay less then
the French ambafrador, which was, le roy man maitre
ne peult moins fair que fe refentir. So that about thez2th
I think we thell, God willing, be at home, except that fom
fray c me which we look nut for. The queen and the
earl of Leicefler has desired to speak with me. I refued
save in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave
no credit but for that cause. It will please your lordlhip
retire the icofed from his majefiy and keep it. So after
my servcice commended to yourfeli and bedfellow, Icon-I
mit you to God. From London the r2th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majelfy, from fir Robert Melvill.

-it' Ja . ' [ T may plefe our majesty, since the direcion of our
15.. An j former letters, we had audience. and her majefit ap-
O:,._l in peared to take our overtures in good part in pretence of

r.;,in :he her council ; albeit no offence would take place with them,

ceilec. cf having ta.en resolution to proceed with extremity, nottlie
f.c. D 1- less it pil-ed her majesty to desire us to fray for two days
fc'.. ;. ca ta;i::; our leave, until she had advised upon our pro-

pofitiocs

&ions; since which time, her majelty is become more
,d by some letters (as we are informed) has come from
o!ild, making some hope to believe that your majesty
ec not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
egec, and had of before removed the like opinion out
h er majelty's mind, which by sinister information was
jdited, their reports has hindred our commiflon, and
fa!d this queen, fearing in like manner we hall be stay-
1 until anfver come from Scotland by such person as
e have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
augh known to all men how heavily your majesty takes
le proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have
this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to
ajerour negotiation. As also Allynour Stewart is to be
Sted in their party, by our knowledge, who has awan-
mole of his credit, than I believe he may perform,
dv we willed him to defill from this dealing, faying it
i: harm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting
,our majefly's good direction to take order herein as we
-i be answerable to your majesty not to omit any point
e have in charge, as the truth is, the master of Grhave
s behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this
:rge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who
e e of before his fiiends. We have been behaldin to
Ie nenftrals who has born us best company, but has
a been troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethe hath

nothing undone that he had in charge. As for maf-
r Archibald he has promised at all times to do his de-
!r, wherein he hall find true report made to yonr ma-
::;, craving pardon of your majesty that I have been of
iiou;, after I have killed your majcfly's hand 1 hum-
: take my leave. Praying God to grant your majefly
:ny good days and happy, in whose protection I commit
ar majefly at London, the 20th of Jan. 586.

SIR,
ALB E IT Master George has not been in commiion,
is not inferior in his service to any of us, as well by
iagood advice and diligent care he takes for the ad-
accment of your service, wherein we have not been a
::le furthered.

r To

To the king's majesty, from the master of Gr!

and fir Robert Melvill.

2t^ -n.An ILE ASE it your majesty in the las adiencewe,
1;S6. An P since our last advertizement, by WV: . Murray, v
o0' ."'! - find her maieltv at the resuming our oers fimething i
the cole.'
-~ ;rfir gated, and inciined to confider more deeply of them,
Dick. '!. fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of t
A.- "l. 'So. council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Christopher

ton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hiawar- being prese
in the chamber, gave little share of any great contentme
to have her from her former resolution, now cafln inpe
pleitv what she should do, always we left her in th
state, and since have daily pressed conferrence witht
whole council, which to this hour we have not yet obtai
ed. This day we have sent down to crave our lea
The greaeft hinder which our negotiation has found
therto i a priuafion they have here that either your
jefty deals iuperficially in this matter, or that with ti
)e may be moved to digest it, which when with greatdi
cultv we had expugnit, we find anew that certain ett
nritten to them of late from Scotland hs found so
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that reol
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special mefag
they have made choice of fir Alexander Stewart to
your highness's meaning in it, and to persuade your maj
to like of their proceedings, where from no terror wee
fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has giveno
that he has credit with your majesty, and that he dou
not to help this matter at your highness's hand. If
come there that errand, we think our majelly willn
oversee the great disgrace that his attempts shall gire
here, if h be not tane order with before that hebe furth
heard, and if so be thnt any other be directed (aso
intelligence gives us there shall) our humble suit is toyo
mnjefty, that it may please your highness to hear of
what we find here, and at what point we leave this m
tlr with her majesty, beore that they find accidence,
caifts -hereof remi:.ing to our private letters. Weco
mit your majefl tfor the prefrnt to God s eternal prot
tion. From London thii 2 t of Jan. 1586.

No. X

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL

P P E N D IX

I had no opportunity of feing several of the following

papers, till those jheets of the hiflry, to which they re-
late, were printed off For this rfon no trferences
are made to them there; but I have supplied that defel
y marking the particular pafages in the hifory which
they erve to il'unjrate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 49. Line ig.]
ccount of the sentence of divorce between the
earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife.
From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David Fal-
conar, advocate. Fol. 455.

POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the riclt
hon. Mr. Robert Maltland dean of Aberdene, Mr.
Edward Henryson dotor in the laws, two of the

ators of the college of jutice, Mr. Clement Little,
Mr. Alexander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edn ;
peered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for Jean Gour-
e countes of Bothwell, conflitute be her for purfew-
of ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contra
eerle Bothwel her husband for adultry, committed be
with Befile Craufurde, the purfucrs servant for the
and ficklyke, for the said erie, compeared Mr. Ed-
dHay, who efter he had pursued and craved the pur-
sprocurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just caus
purfew the said ation, and obtained it, denyd the li-
and the said Mr. Harrie took the morne, the last day
pryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhi!k day,
~ig produced some witnesses, he took the next day,
g ,e r of May, to do farther diligence. Upon the
ilk of May, he produced some moe witneffes,-and
',:I 'I G g re-

rc-::-"ice ;':r'r prob.tioune. Af'-r quhilk, he desire,
a t<:'m to be ;ained to pronounce sentence. To whion
t:i; :..i co:nii:nars a':ignd Satterday next, the 3 0

i'.-, tO, Frcn'-;.,n . ;.: r.C therein, fecundum alligatae

F-obhta, q-.:;k accordingly was given that day in favou
cf t!e purle-.var.

AT thae a time there was another proces intendit b

t':c erl o Bo:.;;-ell co:nra his lady, for to have their mar
r';.e dciareA n.l, as being contracted against thecanons

\l;'o.!: a difplenf!'ion, and he and his lady being vithir
den:-;- ' -:- l .nd. vizfcrd.is a kin, and that wyfe for ex
pS ing of this proces, there -.'as a commiffioune grati
t.j the .irchbfl aop of. St. Androis to cognoce and determinl
i., and Ru:. bihop of Dunkeid, illiam bishop of Dun
blane. '!r. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow., an
parton oi, Eclih.me. Mr. Alexander Crekhtoun, and Mr

c.r Couk ch-.ii.ic.or of Dunkeld, and to Mr. .iJoi

i'i.'.;: "!.ne char.nln in DLunbar and prebendar of Pe
o'.ime, or ny ane of tem. This comrmifione is di
27 Aprile i ;6, was presented to two of the a id con
ni;iioneri-, iz. Mr. And'. Crawfurd and Mr. John Maan
ceriioune on Satterday May, by 'Ir. Thomas Hepburr.
p;.r-ron cf An!ldhanfc:.: :, procurator for the erie of Eoth
vel, wro acce:-ed th! dc-lcgatioune, and gave out t!hi
cit.::-' by prcce-p, dirc.cd, Decano Chriflianitates d
T,%~l- g ito-, r ec non vic.3no feu curato eccle. parochic
C'reichtouz,, fe, cc'2c; altcri cappellano debite reqt!i:

·i, ser fu.mo:;.nng at the laid erles infance, both oft,
iad? pe;fon.lll; if flc could be had, or otherways at ti
r.ro;che kerk cf Creich tonne the time of service, or at hi
c-,;-.-:: : .:; ' bcfor-e witneiTes, primo, fecundo, tertio
pcrem--..ore, u.co tamen contextu protuplice edift
And like:a..- to be witnesses in the said matter, Ae
i cp- ,of C.-ilo-.a,

: who did marry the said erle and h

!2a.-. n .a--e.
: -hoo.f kirk, in Feb. 565, fir John Ba

-r.^-r c' of c no u!e uflice clerk, Mr. Robert Creic

toun o E'i.; te qucen's advocate, Mr. David Chalme
provol't us Creich.oun and chancellor of Ross, Michael.
abt of e rof, and to compear before the said judg
or -r.v no- of them in St. Geils kirk in Ed'. on Mo0nd
the: - '.-.. ,

r s thalm.elves, or their procurators. Up

the i.id 5 da-v, Mr. John Manderftonn, one of the jul
dilcrat oi.': bci.:t prefcrt compared the fame procui
t.s ror both 't:e p.atcs that z -ee in the form'er prOc

A

!\. Edmond Hay ( articulatlie ) and TIxo ,oris
Ilb.c of the witnces funmmoned produced, and received ill til p1-
0r proving of the ame. The said procurator renounced r'"nhets il-
srer probatioune, and the judge afligned the mornc, the le;L
;, of May, ad publicandum produ'ta, nempe depofi-
.oncs ipforum teflium. The quhilk day, post publicatas
ip:fitiones predictas, Mr. Hen. Kini-ofe, procurator for
;, lady inflanter objecit objecniones juris generaliter,
cntra pro ducte, infuper renunciavit ulteriori defenfio-
i; proinde concluia de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
afa, judex predi&tus ftatuit craflinum diem pro termina,
pronunciandam fuam fententiam definituram, ex de-
`u'tis coram eo, in pirafenti caufa et proceil%. Con-
firm hcreunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said
dge gave out, his sentence in favour of the erie, deciar-
22 the marriage to be, and to have been null from the
iining, in refpe& of their contingence in blood, which
:rdcered their lawful marriage without a dispensation ob-
Eir.d of befoir.
No. XXXII. CVol. I. p. 471.1 Line'25.

Q.,een Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

iMADAM,
Lthough the necefity of my cause (which maketh me c,rt, L.
A to be importune to vou) do make you to jud.e that c'! ' A
im out of the wvay; yet such as have not my paTion, pci'. a,m
^rthe rcfpects whereof you are persuaded, will thin! that t:;,::i:.,
1o as nm cause doth require. Madam, I have not accuf-
i ou, neither in words, nor in thought, to have used
aiifelf evil towards me. And I blieve, that you have
want of good underfianding, to keep you from per-
afion against our natural good inclination. But in the
Hrn timr I can't chufe (having my fences) but perceirv
r evil furtherance in my matters, ince my ccmi:g hi-
'. I thought that I had fuifcic-nrly difcotI ted unto
:a the difcommrodities, which this delay bringeth unto

. And cfpccially that they think in this next month of
t2guf, to hold a parliament against me and ll my fcr-
rs. And in the mean time, I am stayed here, and yet
i!l you, that I flould put myself forther into our coun-
: .:*l;ot .t feig yt,'i) and remov mer fu th;r frc;n;

G g 2 In

mine; and there do me this di(honour,at the request of my
rebels, as to fend commissioners to hear them againftnme
as you woid do to a mere subjec&, and not hear me by
mouth. Now, madam, I have promiscd you to come to
vou, and having there made my moan and complainto
:cie rebe'-, and thev coming thither, not as poffefibor
but as fubit.. to ainwer. I would have besought yo
:o hear my ititicarion of that which they have falfly fe
:urrh afuil ni me, ::nd if I could not purge myself thereof
yoV m:n-gh then discharge your hands of my causes, an

.-.. go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if

..:c ciulpable I would be better advis'd; but beingno
i;, I can't accept tlhs dishonour at their hands, that be
in" i:i po.,iior they w:-i! come and accuse me before you
cummniI!:oner:, whe eos I can't like : And feeing you thin
i: tj be ;aaiftr your honour and confignage to do othe
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy,
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every wa
.And to susser me to go into France, where I have a do
to maintain me; or at the least to go into Scotland, wi
ar-,larce that if there come any strangers thither, Iw
bind mnyivf for their return without any prejudice to o
or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protest that I willn
iIrpute it o falfhood, if I receive firangers in my count
without making you any other discharge for it. Do wi
my body as you will, the honour or blame {hall beyyo
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful ferva
may be succoured (tho' you wou'd not so) by ftrang
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. Th
be many things to move me to fear that I fhallhave
do, in this country, with others, than with you. But
-:'i-h a ',ur.;ing hath followed upon my last moan
;-.;d .- x.;rce, hippen what may happ. I have aslee

I':.: y r itrtune, as to seek it, and not find it. Furt

i: i leca;c vou to give licence to my subje&s to go
come. Th;s hath been refused by my lord Scroop
Mr. Kno!ls as they fay) by your commandment, bea
i -ao:'i not depart hence to your charge, untill I
nfiver of this letter, tho' I shewed them that you requ
my .lf-.v{r; upon the two points, contained in your

TIE one is to let you briefly understand, I am corm
to ou to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
would declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
ad complaint to God, that I am not heard in my just
Qoarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refpet
hereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, firir
f all, when you hall have examined your conscience be-
ore him, and have him for witness. - And the other,
'hich is to come further into your country, and not to
come to your presence, I will eteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
frced. In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to
mc my lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
none of my counfal here, and also to susser me, if it please
you, without further delay, to depart hence whitherfo-
rC;r it be out of this country. I am sure you will not de-
r:me this simple request for your honour's fake, feeing
iioth not please you to use your natural goodness to-
N;rds me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
lam come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
i; God permit my causes to succeed well, I hall be
bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't
blame you. As for my lord Fleeming, feeing that upon
i; credit you have suffercd him to go home to his hoife,
warrant you he (hall pass no further, but shall return
hn, it Mhall please you. In that you trust me, 1 will not
liodie for it) deceive you. But from Dumbarton I an- Pchapsjr.
rer not, when my L Fleeming shall be in the Tower.
Tr they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
sccour, if I don't afiure them of yours; no, tho' you
nould charge me withal, for I have left them in charge,
have more refpec to my servants and to my eflate, than
cmy life. Good fifler be of another mind, win the heart,
ad all all be yours, and at your commandment. I
fought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you.
!.;! do not as the serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing,
irI am no inchanter, but your filter, and natural couiin.
lfCfar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint
an advertiser, he had not so died; why lhould princes
cr be flopped feeing that they are painted so long ? Mean-
g that they should hear all and be well advised, before
'"anfr.f I am not of the nature of the bafilik, and
'I of the chamelion, to turn you to my likencrs, and

G g3 tho'

tho' I fhuld be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, yec
are fi.cl;en;v armed with constancy and with juflic,
vw'-:ch I rquire of God, who give you grace to use it weO
wi-h ';on and happy life. From Carlile, the th of July)
1568.

No. XXX:IiI. (Vol. I. p. 473. Line ult.)
rA let. r rCcTI m7 lord -rries to my lord Scroop

ar:J ..r F. Knolis, Sepzember 3d, 1568.

C-. 1-. ', j'Y lord;, pleafir your honourable lord(hips, Ia
t :c..-n i'~ i;::it by James Borthwick, lately comle fio
h:i .;.. tlhe quloe's m. cft.your rfoerane. that it is fchawin tohe

highnelc, I Ihu!d have ridden in C:awfurdmure, fen m
iatt cu:ming into tns ream, upon the earl of Murray's de
pS dants. -;And that I fu!l have caufi:, or been of counfa1
to Scc-':i ; to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpnlzi
her m e, ' rubjeccs.

,- i.rds, I theught it right needful becaufc your lord

fhi i:, be ''o;ir foverane commanded to attend upon tb
Cueen'c s m.;i-." m miress so having daily access in ti
mra't-rs, toc d:care upun the truth; humbly desiring tha
you; '-r.-idrp will for God's cause, certificate the quee
your fc.sr.ne the ime.

As .,ui :1-o, have neither consented. nor any wis

had no'..'!e e of onv Scottifinan s ryding in England, t
do tfle IlfujecL s thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene th
.fice of ci.:h; and as I underRand it hall be fund tru
that i; em. ic open hurt be done, it is by tile queen m
fov-.rcign's diiobedients, and that I have not ridden no
iur: no Scr:tilhman, nor commanded any hurt to be don
to th:i:l. fn my coiln from the queen s majefly of En
l.n, it S ; vwll kend, for that ncser anc will complain
me.

I . :VE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever th

etrl of M ar'ray has done, and will be loatheft to do the
a..' harm than he will. Except the queen's majelly ou
!;-verein, command sic false rports to be tr it, quere
tils is al:;nidder an inventit leafne, her grace allb
trub.it, a..d tne the hcarts of true men here, quhom
sic Itp- :t s.:i bn made, that bai:! would frve hir, at
mBa, bcter than the-.' unworthv liars.

M,

'jy lords, I understand the queen's majesty your so-
.ria is not contented of this bruit, that there flould

Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
.ttlerault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the
)aifall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainly thCreo,,
I hear by Borthwick's eport from the queen's majefly
r:l' sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is

cu indeed, her gracefelf is all the wyitt, and th counfall
2t wiil never let her take order with my maiflrefs cause.
ar that our fovereigu havand her majefly's promise, be
rting, of luff, fiiendllip, and allinHance gif need had
requi-it, enterit that realm, upon tlec 16 day of May,
that time the queen's majesty has commaneicd me di-
ife times to declare fle would accept her c.ufc, and
ifor her, and to put her in peaceable pofl'i'on of this

e, and when I required of her majcfly, in my mai-

:?s name, that her highnes wold cither do flo her, (as
r special trust was (he wold) according to her frmer

:.is, or otherwise give her counfal wtold not consent,
aI 1mlow her grace I sand divcrfe repugnant) thcn that
wKoiild permit her to pass in France, or to some other
:ce to ieek support, or filing hereof, (quhilk was

ains all rafon) that she would permit her to return in
;rain countrie, in sic fempil manner as ile came out
it, and said to her majefly ane of thir, of her honcur,
.uld not be refufit, fecand that file was corned in her
:<la upon her writings and promises of friendlhip. And
:h;like, I said to her highncfs, gif ny maiftrefs had the

pomife of her nobility and icates, as he had of

a;ls, I should have reprovit them highly, if thay had
icondefcendit to one of thi:- three, and fu I f.y, and
I write, that in the warld it ihall le maiL repr!-liend-
c, gif this promise taketh not other good c'.f t, nor
it does. Notwithftantiing, I get gud :ll\Vi r of thir
:&fces of fiiendlliip made to miy fov',eriga, ;nii t pt

grace in this her awin countiic peaceably, we iiave
1 the contrary working y Mr. Midld-more, (irccli
an her highncfs to flay the army that eLtiif down otlr
fs. And alfua, in the precediing (.f this late p, ten-
pilrii;:ment, promised twenty days bfiore tiic tim to
; i' to have cauied it been tdich crgit.

And yet con-
:: to tis promise, have they made their prctendui; man-

o:r
. tob-i;ulturc of mren of gid rcputatiun, l)iiops,

C g 4 abbotis

abbotis, and barronis, obedient subje&s to our fovereig
only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause ,

taken upon hand be the queen's majesty of that realm,
hundred thonfand pounds Scots worth of her awin t
fubjets geir, under the color of their law, groundit u
on their false, rreafonable, tfowin, authority.

THE murders, the oppressions, the burnings, the

*viihing of women, the deftrution of policy, both ecd
fiaifical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my f
mer writings I said it was lamentable to ony chrifli
man to hear of, except God gif grace, the profefion
the evangile of Jesus Christ profeffit be your prince,con
fall ad realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inami
that has fland betwixt the realms, many of my countrym
will doubt in this article, and their proceedings puttis
self in fan& Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that rel

upon quhais promise and honour my maiftrefs came the
as I have said, will leave all the French writings, a
French phrases of writings, quhilks amongis them iso
meikle on baith the fides unfit, and plainly, according
the aul1 true cultom of Ingland and Scotland, quhc
be a word promift truth was obfcrvcd, promie, in t
name of the eternal God, and upon the high honour
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingl
quhereof she is descend it, and presently wears thed
dem, that fne v ill put my maiftrefs in her awin count
and cause her as queen thereof in her authority
strength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint
certain day svithtn two months, at the farthest, as
underltand this to be our weill, fua will we, or the ma
part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frecnchme
and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefo
and for the true perpetual friendship of that realm,
condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almig
God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as no
and wife men can condescend upon, for the weill of
haiil ifiand. As I have been partlings declaring to
queen your sovereign, quhilk I hew to your lords(
ie'fis both i religion, in the punishment of the earl Bt
wile, cr the queen's ladt hufoand's slaughter, and so
mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us

nr~r

DOUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic
time and friendful working, as may gif us occasion baith
oforgette, Middlemore and this late pretendit parliament,
re will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our
l to reft where she is, under the promise of friendship.
s I have baith said, and will ever affirm, made be your
orreign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming in
t realme, and seek the help and moyen of French, or
panifh, till expulfe this treasonable and false pretendit
thority, quhilk means to reign above us.
MIY lords, Idefire your lordships confider, that it is
e, that maiff desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scot-
ad to continue, and of a poor man best cause has, that
rits this.
Mly brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in
ur lordships communing with him, it appearit to him,
our mind was we shold susser the earl of Murray to
work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain
ereof to the queen's majefly, and her highness wald fee
ireformit. My lords, her majefly will be over meikle
noublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit alreadv.
Dr I am sure, gif reason and justice may have place, our
maifirefs, and we her fubjets, have received express
wrg, far above two hundred thousand pounds iterling,
the time of this unhappy government, feeing the reror-
tion of fa great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie,
d the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle
rais'd, I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor
ur weill, your lordships would fua mean, nor that it is
od to us to follow it. And that ye will give your so-
reign sic advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms
all find in this cause meet. It will be true and friends
i working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
ocrboafting, and finding little other effet, that will cause
s to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written,
ad I desire your lordships plain answer, for in truth and

nnefs langeft continues gud friendlhip, quhilk in this
tIer I pray God may lang continue, and have your lord-
ipsin his keeping. Off Drumfreis, the 3d day of Sep-
taber X568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

H E R R I S,

Q9--

Queen Mary to Q Elizabeth.

- ' * A D A M E ma borne foeur. J'ay refceu de :.
iS6. M ! lettres, d'une mefme date; l'une, ou vous faie
Co:-. L. mention de l'excufe de Monfr. de Murra pour tenirfa

'2i.i':3". pretendu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obte

nir plus de tollerance que je m'cf.ois perfuadee n'avoir p
vofsre prornefe, quant a n'ofer donner commission dee
nir fas un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de nobles
alors, je vou; refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois ou qr
d'aar.taage, qui euffeut auffi bien dit leur opinionho
de pqrlement, qui n'a elte tenu tant pour cette effet, m
pour faire ce qu'cxprefsement nous arions requis efire
pefches, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjccts pour m'ar
eftls fiddelles, ce queje m'aLtarois, jufques a hier, avoire
en promefi de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Sru
e Maifire Knoleis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voir
a les en4l-re refentir toutefois je vois que je l'aym
pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour c que fur votrelet
qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je 1 ay si divulgueme
affurav que pour vengeance que j'en defiraffe, si nonm
tre dif.erence entre leur faux deportemens, et les mic
sinceres. Dans vofre lettre aufi datee du ioT d'Ao
yous metties ces mots. ' I think your adverse party, u
'on my funldr former advices, will hold no parliamen
"at all; and if they do, it shall be only in form of
" affemb',-, to accord whom to fend into this realm, a

in wh.-.t fort; for otherwifc, if they shall proceed in m

" ner of a parliament, with any a of judgement gai
" anv pcrfon, 1 hall not, in an, wife, allow thereof; a
"if they hall be so overseen, then ou may think
"fame to b of no other moment, than the former pr
" cedres : and by fich their ralh manner of proccedin

thcy fh^ 'l moR pFrejudice themnfeses; and be affired
: find me rady to condemn them, in their doings." S
cno, i'a-. contreianJ mes ferviteurs, les faifant retir
'..fr.n lt eon vofire commnr.derent d'etre fauffemc
r,om; .r : t:'-tr-, par ceulx, qui ie font de vray; etc
core d'cre p c-oqus p-a efc;irmons dies, et par prinfe;
r'es g-r;rs e. iz:es, et au cotitrai:e- vou:s ecs inforrt
cue rs-s :'ueic:s o: eh; ]cas rvof)r, Majalnum qui a
r.e raTpp;r: ni'c;} rpas homnl. . biAr , c-r laird S5rfor'e

. i, sfont et ont efles mes rebelles deprts ]c commcnce-
:.; enquires vous, s'ils n'eitoient a Donlris aveques
. jiavois offri refpondre de fa fionliere, ce qui ine fut
:;; ce qui m'endevroit aes delkhargcr, nearnloins,
Iv:oils fairc preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur fallit, s'il
; ne fyte donner le nom des coulpables, et me forti-
*, i coimmalnderay mes fibjeCls ]es por fui -re, ou si

n:voules que e foit les voftres, !es is

mies ler aydc-

-; j ous prie m'en mander votire volontc, au refte
:fiibjzcs fiddles feron: refponfables a tout ce que Itur
i0lis fu les contre vous, ni les voai-rs, ni les rebelles,
;is quie me confeillates les faire rclircr. Qu.nt aux

atoi; j'efcrivis que l'on m'en fit nille pouriuite, car
ois tant en vous, que je n'en auroia befoign,--j ne
ni ;e didc aura en mes lettrcs mais, je vous jure dcvant
, qu je ne fay chose du monde Lc leur venue, que
,c m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de Fr-ance mot
...-nde, et ne le puis croire pour cit occllion, et si ils
:;::, 'elf fans mon fceu ni confentcment, oulrquoy je

;f;pplie ne me condamner fans rmoiinic, car je lui:
lde tnir tout cc que j'ay offert a Meifer Knoleis, et
n;alTffe que vofire amite, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera
Ge avant routes les choses du monde, quant France
rit la pour prelTer leur retour a ceffe condition, que
ies mes affaires en mein, en focur, et bonne ami, comr
ma France cei en vous; mais une chose feule me rende
:fe. j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre oreille, laquelie
p.r;aut avoir par parolle, toutes mes aions vous font
.;;iLcs, et falfement raportecs, par quoi il m'eft impof-

.ie mi'afiLrer de vous, pour les manteris qu'on vous
Li:, pou defiruire volire bonne volontd de moy; par
; je defirerois bien avoir cc bien vous faire entendre ma

e:' ct bonne afficion, laquelle je ne puis si bien dc-

:, que mes enemis a tort ne la decolo . ia bonne

gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir, n'entres en jea-
pour faulx raports de celle qui me deftre que vorre

c race ; je me rcmettray fur Mbleter Knelcis a qi je
fblis librcinent defcouverte, et apres vous avoir bais,.e
r:ins, ie prieray Dicu vous donner en fante, longue
:'-.lctife vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'ef-
:;.;ir, qu'aveques vofire bonne grace, qcuoyque les
i:s mentent. Ce 26 d' Aoult.

No. XV.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. 79. line i8,]
Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb.

1580-I.

S IR,

Co-. Lb. T H A V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy
Ca. C. 6. j your letter of the 25th of the last directed unto

lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with
king and his council, in your second audience, whe
with having made her majesty acquainted, she seem
somewhat to mlike, that you should so long defer i
for the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made answer
your behalf, that I thought you were directed by thea
vice of the said Empedocles friend., in the folliciing
that cause, who knew what time was fitreft for yo
take to deal there in, with molt effcct, and best fucc
with which answer, her majesty did in the end relt
well satisfied, touching that point.

YOL-R putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny might

fily be won at her majesty's devotion, was at firltint
pretcd to have been ironie spoke by you. But since
fecmeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were oth
wife persuaded of the man, or at left kept that opin
to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways fufficie
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and
ception into that government, to overthrow religion, a
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein
inclosed copy, which you may use to good purpose the
shall partly gi've you ome light ; there is no man here
be persuaded that he will change his purpose, for sofa
advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore
ihall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that fitr
as I have already written to you. The prince of
range fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do
good; for besides that these people are in thefel
flow in their resolutions, their own aairs are, at prfe
so great, their state so confused, and the prince's at
riry so small, that he cannot so oon take order in it;
vet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or ca
L is in the ratterai, ng, more than three weeks

t one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
:ing. The letters, you desire should be written thi-
rby the French ministers, I have given order to Mr.
aigrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carefully
orm it, so that, I hope, I hall have them to fend you
the next. And so I commit you to God. At Whitehall
third of February I58o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.

iil ktter ;s an orig;nal, and in some parts of it wrote in
cphers and explained by another hand. By Empcdscles is

.micrJtod Morton, by Villenarius the king cfScots, D'u-
tefv' is marked thus o - o.

3 Feb. 580.

a;dry notes gathered upon good diligence given,
and in time to be better manifested, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the kirg, the nobility, and that state.

I R S T, it hath been informed, by credible means, c...Lib.C.
that D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la li. c. 6.

ae the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, -A::U'' "''*
d of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the
g, to think and esteem it an evil president for princes,
subjects might have power to deprive their lawful so.
reigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
any mean, to defeat him, either of the present govern-
et of that realm, or yet of the poffefion of the crown
d inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to
D: and that for the accomplihiment of that asSurance,
e king should have been advised and drawn to have go-
red, for ome short time, as prince, calling D'Aubig-
to rule as governor of the prince, by commission from
equeen his mother, untill the king's enemies were sup-
.Tfed; after which time,- D'Aubigny hould have power
'en to etnblifh and resign that kingdom to the king,

by

by his mother's vountary consent, whereby all suCh,
hid before been in ac'tion againIt the quteen or her a
thori-v rnmght e bionght to fanid ihi the king's nier
And for tat the' king ightl live ini more fety, D'Aubi
ny Ihou!d be declared both fcoh'd' terfon in fuccedlion
that crown, and a!!l lieutenant-general of Scotlhd, an
that D'Aubiny, before his departure out of France, re
cc;ved commiiiion: friom the King's mother to the effe
iemembcr'J, or near the famd'. That in this behaif
had co:ference with the bishops of Glasgow, and Rc
and with :r Js Baford;, with which persons,
with the duke o Guise, he had and hath frequent
teli'gence, ann! hy fir Jamnes Baford he was advised
confer .-ith tlh lord John Har'ilton' before'iis repair iu
Scot:ar.-, wher nto he agreed, and yet afterward h
fenr one Toh:n HaFilton to the said' lord John toexcu
him i tii r-rt, .Hiedging, tha 'He did forbear to cc
to him, lefr t' i.'iy he fould marr or hinder grearet
iCcrs to b-' cV.cC' e by him in Scotland.

TII T bi-re his coming into that realm, the nob

'i:v and cou-rrv were well quieted and united ingoodc
,ord, with great lore bets-ixt the king and nobility, a
mo^rorn^r the n'cl-cfie, hut he hath both drawn the ki
, ... ',,^-' or te chiefeft of his nobility, that ha

been mr: c '.-, and have expended teir blood and p
i:;ior tco r--'.ervc reiiicn;, and defend the king's pe
i'n, his cv'---r..nt and ell:tc, and also hath given cc
lions of re-t (uitpicions and oence to be engenderedb
rvixt th :ib-'i. an his nobility, and especially with fu
as h-v^ I:ccr.r-. -rion 2gainft the king's mother, andh
.ut!-o:o: '.-;

,

n '> f.\- and means of the said comm

sion .^. clrL.t: re, ftould have been brought ito
danc.-r s conJr.ii"!' and who also itayfind thenife!
in r.c. wia'! rcs-:!, .b-ilc-s he possesses the king's ear, sb
feth I: prLf-'-ce, and holdeth such of the principal e
and p.''- of i l-; 'cal:n, as he presently enjoyvth.

T-;T - * 5k-.l dr'.wn the king, not only to forg
C ,: .:- b.-r.c.-.; d ne to him and his realm, by the qiee
rnaje; u F- rg.-- , b:t also to requite the fame with f
dry i'r.s o' "r:t cnthankfulnefs, and wounding the
with h1e . ono"::- of her maiefty, and thereby hath adA
tur ed , 'o t.k the happy amity long ime continued b
t;Sixt tic.: ; :- .

A;D whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle
ts and good offers, to have pafled, and been done be-
t them: In which' refpe&, the king and council having
lred to write to her ithkjfty, for her highness' better
fation in the late negotiation of Mr. Alexarider Hume
.orthbers/wick, had given order to the king's secretary
frame that letter: He minding to break the bond of

in funder, willed the secretary to be sure tlia no-

i flould be inserted in that letter, whereby the king
ud crave any thing at her hadds, seeking thereby to
offall loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the de-
tion of the said fecrctary may be better learned, and
reupon further approved.
THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubig-
proteffton, Alexander King presumed with that bold-
to make his lewd harangue, and by his means hath
terto escaped chastisement and correction, due for his
ence.
THAT fir James Baford, condemned of the faughter
the King's father, hath been called into the realm by
nox, without the privity of the king. And whereas
esid fir Jmes found in a green velvet desk, late the
1of Bothwell's and saw, and had in his hands the prin-
! band. of tle corifpirators in that murder, and can best
dare and witness who were authors and executors of
elme; he is drawn by Lennox to suppress the truh,
to accuse fch as he himself knoweth to be innocent;
as by order of law, will be so found, if they may
ve due trial, which, contrary to all justice, is by Len-

n means denied.

7b; is t:e charge againJi D'ub;gny, mentioned i the fore-
I letter by Wtatfingham ; but by Baford they mean fir an:rs
jiffur.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. 119. Line 25.)

e Scottifl queen's offers uponI the effect of her
liberty propounded by her secretary Naw, No-
vember 1584.

HE queen my mistress being once well asured of your Citt. .ib.
majeftv's amity, Calg. C. S.

i. ~VILL A cpy.

I. WILL declare openly that he will (as it is fincerel

her meaning) firaitly to join unto your majesty, and to th
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and refpeft, bt
fore all other kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a lincerefo,

getfullnefs of all wrongs which she may pretend to hay
been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in an
fort or manner whatsoever, hew offence for the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in he

own Dartici.r name, as also for her heirs and others de
fcenJing of her for ever, your majefly for jufi, true, an
la.vul queen of England.

4. AN cniequently, will renounce, as well for herfe

as for her aid heirs, all rights and pretences which
may- c!i;.n to the crown of England, during your mai
t-'. ii:e, and other prejudice.

;. SHE vwiil revoke all as and shews, by her heret

f:-c r mde, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudic
ot your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms a
iile of queen of England, by the commandment of ia
Francis her late lord and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much

Bat h>e expounded to turn in her favour, and for her
hoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and i
decl.ire that she will never help and serve herelf wi

7. SEiE will not prosecute, during your majesty's lif

by open force or orherways, any publick declaration
h.er right in the fucceflion of this realm, so as secret affu
--ce be gioen unto her, or at the least publick promit
that no ccic.J:ng thereof hall be made in the prejudi
of her, or of the king her fun, during your majesty's li
nir; after your decease, untill such time as they have be
heard theret!p..n, in publick, free, and general afenb
*.i the par:lame;it of the said realm.

S. SHE wiil not practice, direCtly or indirectly, xvil
-. of your maciefty's subjects, neither within nor oute

.-o;;r realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreg
-..ins. your ma:efly and your eflate, be it under pretel
of reicion, nr tor civil and politick government.

c. SH.E wi:l not mairnain or support any ofyourfun

' .-"--, ,;.-'.: ;r.b s, and co.victed of treason agail

10. S

. SHE will enter into the aflociation, which was

ered her at Wingfield for the surety of your maje-
l?'s life, so as there be mended or right expricated some
suses, which I will hew to your majesty, when I hall
are the copy thereof, as I have before time required.
1 . SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,
forany war or trouble against this slate, and will re-
ounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
ade in her favour for that respect.
12. FURTHERMORF, this realm being aflailed by any
dil or foreign war, she will take part with your maje-
iy, and will assist you in your defence with all her forces
ad means, depending of herself, and with all her friends
? Christendom.
13. AND to that effecc, for the mutual defence and
aintenance of your majesty, and the two realms of this
e, she will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
e, as (hall be more particularly advised, and will per-
ade as much as in her, the king her son to do the like.
The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and
:ecially the antient league between France and Scotland,
that which shall not be against this present.
14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good
lrance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of
-r right in the fucceflion of this crown, and promise,
t happening any breach betwixt France and this real.n,
hich she prayeth God never to happen) the just value
her dowry 1hall be placed for her in lands of the reve-
of the crown.
i,. FOR aurance of her promises and covenants, (he
:a offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain time,
;erhoftage can she not give than her own perfon)which,
a ihe be kept in the liberty here before propounded,
otin cafe to escape secretly out of this country, in
sickly Itate e is in, and with the good order which
r najelly can take therein.
'1 AND in cafe vour majesty do agree to her full anJ
Dle deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this
ia, the said queen of Scots (he will give fuffcient hof-
ftr such time as will be advised.
I7. IF he abide in this realm, he will promise not to
:rt ott of it, without your licence, so as it be pio-
3'unto her that her late, in ifuch liberty as filal be
::'ied nto her, hall not be in any fort alterej, tntill
1 . r t7. H h vteY

after tryail to have attempted against your life, or other
trouble of your etate.

r1. IF Ihe go into Scotland, he will promise to alter

rnothinz there in the religion which is now used there, Ihe
Lis - f-cred to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her ho-ifhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
fir-ther, t pull out every root of new division between
the fubje ts, that none of the fubiecrs of Scotland hall
hb sifted for his conience, nor constraincd to go to the.
service of the contrary religion.

Io. SHiE will grant a general abolition of all offences

cione against her in Scotland, and things shall remain
there as they are at this present, for that refpcct, saving
that which hath been done against her honour, which she
meanrth to have revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fee a sure and general recon.

c'ii-tion between the nobility of the country, and to cale
to be apointed about the king her son, and in his coun-
ci!, such as hall be fit for the entertainment of the peact
and quiet of the country, and the amity of the realm, j

21. SE will do her best to content your majefti, in

favour of the Scots lords banished and refuged hither,
.upon their due fubmifilon to their princes, and your ma-c
ie!v's promise to afift the said queen and king of Scot{
!and agaSinf then, if they happen to fall into their fort
mer faui:s.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her
son, with the advice and good council of your majesty.

,. As he will pass nothing without the king her foun

so doth fie desire that he intervene conjointly with her
in this treaty, for the greater and perfeaer affuranco
thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be eltablil.
ed to be found and continue.

24. TE said Scotch queen trufleth, that the Frenc

king her good brother, according to the good affefio,
which he hath always (hewed her, and hath been afreh
teefied unto me by Monfl. de Mannifliere for this said
treaty, will ve wiwillingly intervene, and will assist her so
the fure.v of her promises. y

^5. A-,D o will the princes of the house of Lorrai;

following the will of the iaid king, will bind themfel
thereunto.

26. FOR other kings and princes of Christendom,
-ili a -Tav to obtain the like of them, if for greater

lemrit

lemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
Receljlry.

27. SHE doth desire a speedy answer, and final con-
c!dlion of the premisses, to the end to meet in time with
ail inconveniencies.

,8 AND in the mean time, the more to frengthen the
,'J treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, {he
diirrh that demonltratin be made of some releafement
o; her captivity.

Objcftions against the Scottirh queen, under fe-

cretary WalGinghamle's hand, November 1584.
r H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ill

affeCted to her majefly, and therefore it cannot be

. .that her liberty should bring peril unto her majesty.
THATr her enlargement will give comfort to papifs,
Hri othcr ill affected fubjets, and greatly advance the
c!nion had of her title as successor.

TH.Tr as long as (he- (hail be continued in her ma
:3's pofTeIlion, he may serve as it were a gage of her
m.njcfty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dan-
.r hie may be thrown into, in cafe any thing should be

ine in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the of-

::;lce of her iajefly.

November What course were fit to be taken
I,4. with the queen of Scots, either to

be enlarged or not.

^HE course to be taken with t!e said queen may C,,tt. Lib,
b e cnfidered of in three degrees; either, Ci. 2.

i. To continue her under custody in that Itate fie now

. To refrain her of the prerent liberty (he now hath.
3. (R to set her at libert upon caution.
i. TOL CuING the first, to continue her under cufody
:'er that slate she now is; it is to be confidered, that the
--:cs that favour that queen, pon the complaint ie
:;eth of hard usage, are greatly moved with commifera-
:-:n owvards her, and promile to do their endeatollr for
:.lierty, for which purpose, her miniiiels follicit thn

JN h 2 ANs

A\n, to move them the more to pity her cafe, she ac-.

o'!ilt::'h t'rn with h-r ofers made to her majesty, which}
:;ppeared to b no less profitable than reasonable for heri
:-.'.i::, fJ as the refufCi and rc ing giveth her friends
:..i fr-o'rers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and'
t'-ereiore may, x-ith the better ground and reason, attempl
c v.n- ha; .; .,r the f t-ttir of her at liberty.

I-r is alo likejl that the fid queen, upon this refusal,

f.:..... i r calf- .i,erat.e, will continue her pracice undee
}*:::j, bh :t ho1e ad a broad, not only for her d!
iivcrv. but to atin to the present possel ion of this crowa'
l'0oni hcr reter ned title, as she hath hitherto done, a

a -'erc:h. and i moor manifert by letters and plots inter

c.'-5:J. .rd chia-e y by that late alteration of Scotland,
v. .ic: h.Pi-' proceeded altogelher by her direction, vwhrel
b-. a g2? is a;d open for the malice of all her majeftr'
cniim:c so as it appeareth that this manner of keepi;
her, with f~ich number of persons as nhe now hath, a
.\ ir ;l;b;r-' to write and receive letters, (being duly coa
idcreid is oenfive to the princes, the said queen's friends
ri; -h chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and sub
,c' to ail iuch practices as may peril her majesty's pe
i-or or state, without any provision for her majeftv's f
t-, an- thc-refore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUC-.H!NG the second, to restrain her in a mr

straighter degree o{ the liberty she hath hitherto erj,
c .i

iT may, at firfi fight, be thought a remedy very aJ

:o fioo the course of the dangerous prac'tices softer
h- rerforo by her : For, true it is, that thi; remedy mrih

ro ve vr proitable. ir the realm of Scotland floodi
that ifoi t devoted to her majesty, as few years pat it di
r.:a ir t.e king of that realm were not likely, as well f
the rele:ie of his mother, as for the advancement ofbo'
their pretended title, to attempt somewhat against ifR
r .lm an d her maiefly, wherein he hould neither 2lack
rein a n.iirance, nor a party here within this realm: B
the ki:' r.n- that realm Itanding affected as they d
this ret-r.::nt. initead of remedying, is likely to bre
;-'e i.-.c:;-;iencies foliowinr:|

FI;sT, It will increase the offence both in him, and
te r ci t!he pi ince her hienJs that milliked of her r

Ic0p

SECONDLY, It will give them jul{ cause to take omer

wray of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it rmay provol:e
[ine desperate ill disposed person, all hope of her liberty
removed, to attempt somewhat againtt her majefly's own
person, (a matter above all others to be xw'ghcd) which
inconveniency being duly conlidered, it will appear mani-
fely,l, that the refh-aint, in a firaighter degree, is likely to
p;ore a remedy subjec' to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the aid
tueen at liberty, minillrcth some cause of doubt, touching
,he manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be
Ferformed, whether to be continued her within the
realm, or to be reflored into her own country.

BUT firfr, this propolition, before the particularities
v weighed, is to be confidered in generality.
FOR it is very hard for a well afTecited fubjct, that tcn-
ireth her majelly's surety, and weigheth either the na-
ure of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition
:d revenge, or her former actions, what practices he
t.h set ol foot most dangerous for her majelly and this
;ln, to allow of her liberty, being not made acquaint-
d with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it
!:; perilous than it hath been, nor with such cautions
:inav, in some fort, be derifed to prevent both her am-
stion and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,
IT is to be contidered, that the danger that was in
them other, is nov grown to be in the foni. He pretend-
: h the fame title she doth : Such as do afiec't her, both at
mene and abroad, do aect him; (and he is the more
at;:rerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
;:;'.nce his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby he
;v enter into ation in his own person) where fie is
reltained, he is at liberty; his own realm is nox alto-
gether at his devotion, and the party afiefted to this crown
;5Std; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her li-
herty nor reft-aint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils to-
ards her majesty, unless by such promises as may be made
5' way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow

:m the king her son be provided for-.

BUT in this behalf it may be objected, that so long
' the mother remains in her majefly's hands, the king
'il attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

H h To

To thti obeticr. it may be answered, firii, That they

hope that her m:aety, bei n a prince of jurice, and in-
ciined to mere-. vill nor puni the mother for the son's
o.'ence, unless ihe lha'l be found, by good proof, cul-
pable. Secondarily, That men -ill not be over-hally,
ccn!id 'ring in what predicament the king flandeth touch.
:". hs expeEtation of this crown, to advise any thing
that in time future may be dangerous to the giver of such 1
council as may reach to his mother's peril.

AND lafily, the taking away of his mother, he bing !

firong in the field through both foreign affifance, and a
party here within the realm, ;iil appear so weak a re-
medy, (which may rher exasperate both him, and her
party, to proceed with more courage and heat to revenge,
if any such ha;cl measure should be offered unto her) saj
thtv v.ill suppose for the reason above specified, that no
such extremity will be used,

IT mray ao be objected, that the feling of her atli-.

berty will greatly encourage the papills borth at home and
abrDod; but herein, if the provision be du!y considered,s
that may be made by parliament both here and there, theyv
shall rather find cause of dicomrt':,l than otherwise. |

THESE two doibts being refoivcd, and the perils that

was in the rc:hcr appearing mot manifestly to be seen
in the ton accvmFanie d with more danger, with due con-
Ifderarion had aifo of sUch remedies as may be provided
for the preventing of the dangers, that her liberty ma.v
miniser iult cause to doubt of; there will be good causes
or hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit
than perils.

Now it rc --ih, in what iort the said liberty (hall bet

pirformed; if it ihal! be thdouht meet flhe h.Ul be con-
linued wvith-i the re.!m with some limita;ion, efpecialiy
in that p!'ce where fte now refdeth, the country round
about bein so in'z-red in re'iion -s it i, it is greatly toj
be dcli'ctd th.:; will very much i:crca'e the corruption,K
an' falling away in that ,c-a!'. Besides ihe should have
commoditv, xit muach more efe, and fpred, to entertain
praices wvithi this reaim, than by being in her own
contnr.

IF ..broad freely without limitation either in Scotland j

or France, then shall her majef.r lose the gages of her|
lare:v, then fh.a lhe be a hand to give advice in further-

anc;

of such prafcices, as have been laid for to flir troubl3

:;his realm, wherein ile hath been a principal party.
IlOR the firfl, it is answered before, that the refpec of
, perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort re-
;rin her son. For the other, if it be confidered what

ai:r her advice wil work unto herself, in respect of the
r'i.ion! of the treaty, and the provision that may be

;:.d in parliament here, it is to be thought, that she will

Ic-; be \cll advild, before he attempt any such mat-

:, which now file may do without perill. Besides such
::laces, as have itcrpofed their faith and promise for her,
:ni; a with honour affifl her, wherein the French King
;i:ot be found very forward, who, in molf fiiendly fort,
:.;!i lately rejected all such requefs, propounded either
:!,her, or her son's ministers, that might any way o-
i:nd her majesty. And so to conclude, feeing the cause
ii hr grief fliall be taken away ; the French king grati-
i:d, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that, by
:ay Spanish pracice, she flould be drawn to violate her
hth; that the reft of the princes shall have no just cause

o;'seiince, but rather to think honourably of her majesty

;::eideling the Scottish queen's carriage towards her,
;,'ich hath deserved no way any such favour; the noble-
s-n of Scotland shall be restored, who will be a good
!;, of such counfeils as may tend to the troubling of this
ein, especially having so good a ground of warrant as
;re parliament to stand unto; the charges and perrills

erich her pratices might have bred to this realm hall be

voided ; and latly, the hope of the papilis fliall be taken
:'.y, by such good pro'ifions, as in both the realms may
ke made, whereby the perils that might fall into her ma-
;:s own person, (a matter of all others to be weighed)
.i:1 be avoided, when by the change that may grow by
n'- such wicked and ungodly practice, they shall fee their
ate no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to inl.ice her majelfy to proceed in the

treaty under Secretary Walingham's hand.

f I A T such plots as have of late years been devised o t. .Lb.

(tending to the raising of trouble within this realm) calig. c s,

zre grown from the Scots queen's miniflers and favour-
s, nut without her allowance and seeking: Or,

H h 4 THAT

THAT the means used by the said miniflers, to induc

princes to give ear to the said plots., is principally grounded
upon some commiseration had of her reitraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the said princes
have, for the most part, been entertained with home ani
domeflick troubles.

TH T it is greatly to be doubted, that now their

realms begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted
in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is a!so to be doubted, that somewhat maybe;

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort
to the perrill of her majefy.

T AT for the preservation thereof, it hall be convey

nient for her majesty to proceed to the finilhingofth|
treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the fai4
queen.

No. XVII. [Vol. II. p. 149. 1. 27.]

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

c-:'-.c. Did forbear. according to your direfcion signified i

c. 9,
3 your letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed

to the execution of the contents of M'r. \Vaades letter
unto you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary ferl
vants, and for the feafng of her money, wherein I
bc!d to write unto you my simple opinion, (although i4
vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th o
this infrt!nt. which I doubt not are with you before thi
tne ; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5th
which c Je not unto my hands until the 8th in the evet
in. b - reaon as did appear by indorfement that the
Es bein rmilaken. and were sent back to Windsor, aft
t:. .' e; 2 entered into the wav towards me, I confider
cd, i'-: bei;:. accomparnied only with r.y own servants,
l 7',t b thought t-at thte would be inrreated to fay as
v,;.j -oirima;.d the.r, and therefore I thought good
for .- brter difch-are in thcfe money matters, to crav'
the at --uine crf r. Richard Bagott, who repairing un
to me the next mcrning, we had acces to this queen
wio:n we bfund in her bed, tro'-bic after the old man

nee

nrr with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide
c. lier neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
1' Ls, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her
.orimer pratifes, doubting left (ie would perfilt therein
tk icorrpting underhand sone bad members of this slate,
;I cxpreny commanded to take her money into my
'in, and to ref- answerable for it, when it shall be re-
ci:d; adviing her to deliver the said money unto me
ith quietness. After many denials, many exclamations,
:.i:! nany bitter words against you, (I fay nothing of her
,iili:lr against myself) with flat affirmation that her majefly
ai'.t have her body, but her heart file Ihould never have,
resiliing to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my ser-
!n:s, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
ron fl(e yielded, and cauing the door to be opened, I
eind there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's re-
r:em!irance, five rolls of canvass, containing five thousand
Fre'ch crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one
;h., in gold, one hundred and four pounds two shillings,
:i the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of fil-

w:: was left with her, affirming that fle had no more mo-

re in this hoife, and that she was indebted to her ser-
;is for their wages. Mr. Waades note maketh men- Cu-le c.n
K::! of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, t:, th,,f.
': was mifireckoned, which is evident as well by the te'ti- mat:cr.
onies and oaths of diverse persons, as also by probable
caietures ; o as in truth we found only two rolls, every
i which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this
ceen's guifte to Cu-le's wife at her marriage. There is
":id in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
r;'aition one hundred pounds, and in money, in one

r ine hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred
urfcore and fix pounds eighteen shillings. All the fore-
i;d parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and fealed
v Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
,"' s money, which I reserve in my hands, for the use
:his houfhold, and may be repayed at London, where
r majesty shall appoint out of the money, received
:'lI by one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I

e-''ed left the people might have dispersed this money in
.l this time, or have hidden the f:me in some secret cor-
nrs, for doubt vihereof, I had caused all this queen's fia-

is. from the highest to the lowest, to be guarded in
1e cveral places where I found them, so as yff had not

found

found te money, with quietness, I had been forced to
have searched first all their lodgings, and then their onv
persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a fingu.
lar bietfng,. that that falleth out so well, fearing left a
contrary success might have moved some hard conceits ia
her majesty.

TGUCHI;NG the dispersing of this queen's servants,

tru!t I i;av done so much, as may suffice to farisfy her mai
jelty for the time, wherein I could not take any abfoluta
courie, until I heard again from you, partly becaufehel
rnaje-y, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to yourconfi|
deration to return such as all be discharged to their feve
ral dweliings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, vyo
have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that
yet, I ha', e received no anfer from you, of your refolutiso
upon ri; v-e,; of the Scottilh fanily sent unto you, wia|
perfous you will appoint to be diimift ; only this I ha'.
done, I have bellowed all such, as are mentioned ia t:i
bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the ifae
mav fuifice to contain them, and that their mcat and drir.:
ihajl be brought unto them by my servants. It may peas
you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what ort
and rir what course, I (hall make their paflports, as alu
i; ti-v h ll fiyv i tthey are unpaid of their wages, what

-:- :;'. I ifhl: do herein. Yt is said that they have beenac
\.---- - i .cl;i;)mned to be paid of their wages at Chriflmas, for th

-:' ~ ; year. He- majely's charge will be somewhat di

. .' : .-r.i-.i:c byv t deprture of this people, and my charg
-.- -:. t.i; occfion, ii! be the more easy. But the persons

ai i'ae 'Sjiii'n are such filly and fimp!e fouls, as ther
vwas o great caufL to -ear their practices, and upon th
ground, I was or opinion, in my former letters, thatal
thiis dimi;id train should have followed their miftre
Ln.; ;he n xt renove, and there to have been discharge
U.: a the sudden, for doubt that the said remove might
dd- 'yed, ;: she di1 fear, or expesf any hard measure.

0 t:I Rs ih?,.i excuse their foolifi pity as they may; b

for m, prart, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, y
in .nv thing that I have said, written, or done, Iha,
r-: any other re-lpet than the furtherance of her maje
13's f_-rvce ; and io I shall mofl earnefitly pray you to aft
firm for me, as ii.ewivie for the not seasing of the monec
by :'ir. IManners, the other commifioners and myself.

rr'- .r. W1Ade harh afwered, i all humble duties, so

tl'

. whole company, that no one of us did o much as
nk that our commifion reaching only to the papers,
niight be bold to touch the money, so as there was
ipeech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know
as no commifi'oner in this search, but had my hands
at 'I yxhall, discreet servants are not hafiily to deal in
at matters, without warrant, and especially where the
fe is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.
you advertisement of that happy remove hath been
?[!y comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in refpeft
mvfelf, because my private interest hath no measure of
mparifon with her majetfy's safety, and with the quiet
ithi; realm. God grant a happy and speedy ylfue to
,?e ('ood and godly counsels; and so I commit you to
i;mrciful protection. From Charrlcy the oth of Sep-
abcr 1586.

No. XV. tVoL . . i74. line 25.1

tpy of a letter from the earls of Shrewlbury
and Kent, &c. touching their proceedings with
regaid to the death of the Scottish queen, to
bhr r cfty's council.

tifed, that, on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Ro-
nBe.tle came to the houoe of me the carl of Kent in the
un)y of- to whom your lordship's letter and nmcffage
sdelivered, and her majcfiy's commilTion hcewn ; where-
an 1 the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flaying of
:h hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring
officers to make tfay of all such persons, as Ihould
in any such warrants without names, as before had
en done, and to bring them to the nextjufrice of peace,
!he intent that upon their examination, the occasion
causes of such editious bruites might be bolted out
a known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of
net ihouid on the Monday following, come to Lylford
M!lr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
:lord of Shrewlbury. Sonday at night, I Robert
ale came to Fotheringay, where after the communicar-
: the commission, &c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir

D:c Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-

14 co;'-cJ

covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewfbur
being then at Orton fix miles of; it was thought goo
that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale liould go unt
him, which we did on - morning; and together wit
the delivery of her majeity's commiflion, and your lord
ship's letter, imparted unto him what both the earl ofKen
and we thought meet to be done in the cause, prayil
his lordfiip hither the day following, to confer with
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordship pro
mifed. And for the better colouring of the matter, I t[
said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a juficeq
peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining,
whom I commnunicated that warrant, which Robert Bea
b!-d under -our lordfnips hands, for the Rlayingof t
huc: and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof l
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto thejuflic
of peace of Hur.tingdon!hire, and to cause the pursue
and bringers of such warrants to beflayed, and brougl
to the next iuftice of peace; and to bring us word to
theringa cftle on Wednesday morning what he had don
and what he fnou!d in the mean tine unceriand of th
authors of such bruites. XVhich like order, I afio
Amias Pawlct had taken on Monday morning in this towi
and other places adjoining. The ame night, the lieni
of the county of Nc;r:hampton upon the receit of o
lordship's letter came to Arundel, and letters were e
to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's i
tention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and ott
letters were ao sent with their lordlhips assents to
Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightlv, Mr. Tho. Br.
deneli, &c. to be here on Wedneiday by eight of t
clock in the morning, at which time it was thoug
meet that the execution lhould be. So upon Tuedaa
we the earls came hither, where the fneriffmet us; a]
upon conference between us it was resolved, that the ca
for the fend:i:g for the surgeons, and other necefia
proviion should be committed unto him against the tin
And we forthwith repaired unto her, and frfi in the pi
fence of herself and her folks, to the in:ent that they rigM
ie and report hereafter that (he was not ohcrwife prb.
cceded wi:h than according to law, and the form of tL
flatute made i the 27ih year of her majelly's reign, it

Cf

thought conveniunt that her majefly's commiion fiould
re.d unto her, and aiterwards tie was bv sundry speech

;,;id to prepare herself against the next morning. She
v-t albo put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
mianer of proceeding with her, and the neceflity that was
ipofed upon her majesty to proceed to execution, for
tat otherwise it was found that they could not both fland
together and however, fithence the lord Buckhurfl's his
bEing here new conspiracys were attempted, and so would
b ltiil; wherefore since she had now a good while since
warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think up-
an and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
Le was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept
.i message in good'part. And to the effect that no chri-
f:ian duty might be said to be omitted, that might be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
nd foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
iit would please her to confer with the bithop and dean
,fPeterborough, file might; which dean, we had, for that
.'rpofe, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
p'ace. Hereto he replied, crossing herself in the name of
ie Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, faying that she
as ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her
.:cfiors had profelfed, from which he would not be re-
=ered. And albeit we used many persuasions to the con-
:rary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
&e demanded the admittance of her priest, we utterly de-
5eJ that unto her. Hereupon, she demanded to und2r-
'and what answer we had touching her former petition to
ier majefly, concerning her papers of accounts, and the
fito wing of her body. To the first we had none other
::ver to make, but that we thought if they were not
er.tbefore, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody,
wahowas now in France, and feeing her papers could not
nywife pleasure her majefly, we doubted not but that the
'me would be delivered unto such as The hould appoint.
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
iajely would not make any profit of her things, and
lterefore (in our opinions) she might set down what she
eould have done, and the fame hould be imparted unto
Lr mnajefty, of whom both he and others might expe&d
'. courtesy. Touching her body. we knew not her ma-
jrl's pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her pe-
ili hould be deny'd, or granted. For the pra&tice of
"bington, (he utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
:; her death was for her religion; whereunto it was eft-

soons

toons by us replied, that for many years she was n
touched for religion, nor should have been now, b
that this proceeding against her was for treason, in th
she was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for deftroyir
her majellv's person; which she again denied, adding fu
ther, that albeit she for herself forgave them that were ti
procurers of her death, yet (he doubted not but thatGc
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged wit
the depofiiions of Naue and Curie to prove it againfi he
she replied, that he accused none, but that hereafter whe
lhe shall be dead, and they remain alive, it hall be fee
how indifferently he had been dealt with, and what me
sure had been used unto her; and aked whether it ha
been heard before this, that servants had been praftife
to accuse their mistress, and hereupon also required wha
was become of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed bythl

commiflion, that the charge of her was in the difpoitido
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Dr.
Drurie to receive, for that night, the charge, which the
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers t
watch that night, and that her folks hould be put un
and take order that only four of them should be at thi
execution, remaining aloof of and guarded with certail
pcrfons, so as the)- hould not come near unto her, whic
-ere Melvil her fieward, the physician, surgeon, and ap
thecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls werer

pared unto the castle, and the heriff had prepared a
things in the hall for the execution, he was commande
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down toth
place where were present, we which have signed this le
ter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt
his on anl heir apparent, and William Montague his brc
ther, fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brudene
AMr. Beuil!, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.S
reft, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbc
rougih, and others.

AT the ftairfold, fl:e pawsed to speak to Melvil in

hearing, which was to this effect, " Meivil, as thou ha
been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continuet
rm son, nd commend me unto him. I have not imrpug"'
his religin, nor the religion of others, but wi(h him wel
And s I forvive all that have offended me in Scotland,

I would

Iouid that he hould also; and beseech God, that he
*uld fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Mel-
s answer was, that he would so do, and at that instant,
would beseech God to aflift him with his spirit. Then
demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied
oher, the rather for that she came with a superstitious
r of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
r women to help her, and upon her earnest requefl,
afaying that when other gentlewomen were executed,
had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
to them, it was permitted that she should have two nam-
by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After
iecame to the scaffold, firfl, in pretence of them all, her
ajeilie's commiflion was openly read; and afterwards
. Dean of Peterborough, according to a direction which
:had received, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd
'ae made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at
e first entry, she utterly refused it, faying that fie was
irould that he should also; and beseech God, that he
-:holique, and that it were a folly to move her, being
brefolutely minded, and that our prayers would little avail
'r. Whereupon, to the intent it might appear that we,
,ad the whole assembly, had a christian desire to have her
e well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr. Dean, was read
Aid pronounced by us all. " That it would please Al-
ihhty God to fend her his holy fpirir and grace, and al-

if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of

l mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlasting
igdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and confound
til her enemies ;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair
l? hortly, can shew your lordships a copy.
T H I done, she pronounced a prayer upon her knees
to this effec, " To beseech God to fend her his holy
ijrit, and that he trusted to receive her salvation in his
blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom,
lbeught God to forgive her enemies, as he forgave
them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
iueen's majeftie, that she might serve him. Likewise to be
merciful to her son, to have compaflion of his church, and
altho' fle was not worthy to be heard, yet he had a con-
fidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
un:o her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning to-
wards her fer-ants) she desired them to pray for her, that

her

her Saviour wxould receive her. Then, upon petition ma;
by the executioners, he pardoned them; and said, he w;
glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Tlit
she mifiiked the whinning and weeping of her women, fa
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refe
lution, an kiifing them, willed them to depart from.th
i'caioid, and farewell. And so resolutely kneel'd dow-n
and having a kcrcheffbanded about her eyes, laid dow]
Lcr neck, where pon the executioner proceeded. He
lervants were incontinently removed, and order taken tha
noneo ihouid approach unto her corps, but that it lhoul
b em-balmed by te urgeon appointed. And furtherhe
crol;e, apare'l, and other things are retained here, ant
not viel!ed unto the executioner for inconveniencies tha
might ftilow, b't he is remitted to be rewarded by uct
as lnt him hither j.

H I S ht h been the manner of our dealings in thi

i:rvicc, ;wher of 'r have thought good to advertifc yo!i
lnrdili.-. - particularly a; we could, for the time, and
t-;-r:: -.a Lve tho,:ght good to signify unto your lordflipl
btd:frs, tat for the avoiding of all finifier and flanderoul
r-o;-r:s that mrinv be railed to the contrary, we have cauie
a rno'e -'.reof to be conceiv'd to the fame effe& in writj
inr, v';: h w-e the aids lords have subscribed, with thi
:-:;:-d or liU;h other there the knights and gentlemen abovd
iiamed that wvere precfnt at the ation. And so beseech
Inr- Al;nighty God long to bless her majefiy with a ot
prosper.ous reign, and to confound all his, and her enemies]
we rake cu.r :v'-:t. From Fotheringay-Calle, the Sth
Feb- -'. - 150, J in hall.

iYour lordships at commandment.

. T. This, .- -ell as several other papers in this Api

p- cn ix i- t.ken from a coliection made by Mr.Craw]
taird of Dr-mls, , historiographer to Q Anne, nos
i-; r - ibr.: v o' the faculty of Advocates. Mr. Craw-
strJ's -L rii-rber has omitted to mention the boc
- thce C :: Lib, where it is to be found.

No. XIX.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 1i80. line 4.]

The objections against Mr. Davison, in the cause
of the late Scottish queen, must concern things
done either, i. efore her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that session. 3. After the fame.

I. DEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can beco:t. i.I,.

`

charged to have had any hand at all in the cause Cl.g. i.

ofthe said queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-
erning the fame directly, or indirectly.
2. DURING that session, he remained at court, where
tle only interest he had therein, was as her majesty's fe-
cretary, to receive the letters from the commiffloners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.
3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commission-
as, it is well known to all her council,

r. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting
whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause
of the said queen, till the fending down of her majefly's
arrant unto the commissioners, by the lords and others
of her council.
2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence,
afied against her.
3. That he never penned either the proclamation pub-
'hig the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any
c:er letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the fame.
,nd,

THAT the only thing, which can be specially and truly
,iuted to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto
er majesty to be signed. She fending a great counsellor
:nto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
l the great eal of England, by her own special direction
t:d commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident.
i. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treav
s::er, was delivered by him unto Mr Davison, with her
t:fty's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when she
~tuld be pleased t call for it.

:. 1 . II. THAT

2. THATbeing in his hands, he retained it at th

least five or fik wees npefented', ror 6oice 'Tffering It
carry it up, till she sent a great counsellor unto him for th(
fare, and was ffarply reproved therefore by a great peelr
in her majefly's ot.n presence.

3. THAT having signed it, fle gave him an exprel

commandment to carry it to the feal, and bein, fealed to
fend it immediately away unto the commihioners, ac
cording to the dircction. Herself appointing the hallo
Fotheringay for the place of execution, milnikmg th|
.court-yard, in divers respects,- and i conhclu'fin .aso
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any f

'f ther, 6ore't h

hear any more hcredof, till it ;as cone. She 'for her pr'
having (as he said), perfomed all that, in law or ealo
could be required of her.

4. Which direcions notwithStanding, he kept th|

warrant seai'd all that night, and the _greatef part of
next day in his hands, brought it back with hiim toh
court, acquainted her majesty withal, and fndigo th
majesty resolved to proceed therein, according to herfo
mner duecetons, and yet desirous to carry the matter h
as fie might throw the burden from herfeff, he absolu'te
resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treafrer

chamber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Ha'tton, n
in his presence 'iefiored the fame into the hands of the fa
lord treaiarer, of whom he had before received it, ¥sh
from thenceforth kept it, till himself and the reft of t
council sent it away.

W-H ICH, in fubflance and truth, is all the part andi

tereit the aid Davilon had in this cause, whatsoever
or may be pretended to the contrary.

TcucHT-r G the fending down thereof unto the comni

fioners, that it was the general at of her majesty's coui
Ki 'a, is etfore mentioned) and hot any private a oi
hi , may appear by

i. THilR own confeflion. 2. Their own lettersfe
oy.vn therewith to the commitioners. 3 i''Te tefTmoi
uo the lord, and others to whom they were diretfed.
alio 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. T
tencr o her majety's first commifion for their calling
the ftar-cha:mber for the fame, and private appearance a,
fuabmrfion afterward inltead thereof, bfore the lord ca,

Ceili

Icllor Broomley. 6. The confeiflon of Mr. Attorney-
general, in open court confirmed. 7. By the sentence it'
i:f upon record. 8. Besides a common at of council,
(ontaining an anfver to be verbally delivered -to the Scor-
ti ambaiTador then remaiaing here, avowing and juflify-
ig the fane.

NHow where ome suppose him to have given ome extra.
srdiuary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evident-
appear by.
. H-s former absolute refusal to sign the band of as-
iation, being earnestly pressed thereunto by her maje-
's self.
2. His excusing of himself from being used as a corn-
Sitioner, in the examination of Babington and his comn
ices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.
3. His being a mean to flay the commiflioners from pro-
uning of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it
they hould return to her majesty's pretence.
4. His .keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks ur-
r&fnLed, without once offering to carry it up, dtill h
ajeRy eat exprefly for the fame to sign.
5. His deferring to fend it away after it was seal'd un -
the commissioners, as he was specially commanded,
ing it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
yin his hands.
6. AD finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of
lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the
e.
WmHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the laid Da-
n.did nothing in this cause whatfoeve:, contrary to
duty of the place he then held in her majelty's.fer-

Cal. C.9.

Tais Teems to be an original. On the back is this title,

TRE innocency of Mr. Davlfon in the aule of thelate
tailh .queen.

I .i . No. XX

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 280. line'27.]
Letter from 0, Sir Kohert Cecil, to His Majefly

King James.

"-

. O S T ;.-o:.h prince, the depending dangers up.

ml on your .iaionates have been such, as hath in.
forced i,'c-nc; in h5:n, who is faithfully devoted to ou
perion, and in d::e time of trial, will undergo all hazards
cf r.rur e, f.r ;'- m.inutcnnce of the just regal ightsj
tat., b: the lw *i'. v :e, of nature, and of nations, is in
veted in your ro;-. person. Si not then, most nobll
.nd renav.cd prince, from him, whose providence hat
;- m:ny dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an inltru!
meit of his glory, and the good of his people. Somn
secrets, I find have been revealed to your prejudic
which mut proceei from some ambitious violent spirtea
pcrion r.ear your maieftv in council and favour; no ma
in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath no foun-
dation from any, wi.h whom, for your service, Ihavehela
corrcfpondence; otherwise, I had, long since, beendi
abled from performance of those duties, that the though
of my heart endeavoureth ; being only known to thiswo
thv nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts
Chrii'endom for his fidelity to your person and state, al
to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal servant, myfirltan
faithful corre'pondent; and unto James Hudfone, whdo
I have found in all things that concern you, most fecn
and assured. It may, therefore, please your majesty,
the humble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to bet
indorfement of your commands unto me, that by foi
token of vour favour, he may underlfiand in whatter
you rgard his fI.'riiitv, fccrecv, and service. My paffli
a:te az'Cio:n to your person, (not as you are a king, i
as vou are a good king, and have just title, after myS
c--ci:n, to be a great king) doth transport me to prefut
ti-n. Con.'amn nor, moit noble prince, the motit
ci c-re and love, aitho' mixed wvith defcts in judgmen

r. I, theref:-e. fErlf bfeeciil vour r.ajeflv, that

t.- nod of i, whom God, by divine Provide
-'h :";ir.::, .o vyour chrge, a;.:- o', l tbe plcife

.i
1-i

v:,re an extraordinary care of all practicers, or practices,
:glnft your person; for it is not to be doubted, but that
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, fnc&ion, or fear,
tere are many that desire to have their sovereign in mino-
rity, whereby the sovereignty and fate might be sw.ayed
:y partiality of subalternate erfons, rather than by true
rjle of power and justice. Prelfrve your person, and
iar not the piatices of man upon the point of your rlinht,
.lihli will be preserved and maintained againfl all aafuls
of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection of
iour person, and royal polterity, to the A!mi!htv God of
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and all youls, in all
iegal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preervation of vo:r person, is the
tonfervation and secret keeping of your coun:ells, !hic,

I have said, are often betrayed an ! dili'ovried, either

out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent r-criun, or
base conception, the which your mnaeil is to regarld ith
il circumipe"tion, as a matter moll dangerous to yonr
prfon and state, and the only means to ruin and dcltrov
il those, that fland faithfully devoted to yoi;r majefsy's
rriece. Some particulars, and peifons of this nature, I
cake no doubt have been discovered by the cndeavours of
:his nobleman, the bearer hereof, of ;-hlom

, your majcfiy

may be further informed.

,. THE 3d point considerable is that yo-:u m.jefiv, by
-l means poflible, secure ou-rself of the ood aftc'tion
o'Fthe French king and States, by the negotiation of tome
rithful secret confident; the French naturally diftafinig:
tie union of the Britilh ilands under one monarch. In
Germany, I doubt not, but you have m:ny allies and
fiends, but by reason of their remote slate, they do not
iamuch iporte this afflir, which must be guided by a
Hick and fuddcn motion.
4. WVHEN G.)l, by whoe PrIovidence, the period of
i persons a.id ti.n-s is dc t,-mine , fi1l cill to his kina-
oan of glory hr mjeft,, (al:hou-' [ do ilfur-d h )ne
tia: there will not be any qetion! in co'npetiti'n, vyt
br thit hold it nt fit in to rive any intilr e i-r'

a c.ufe of so high a na.f

- c), I do huinbil b.ser. h'

m:ellv to design a secret, faithful, and experienc' l- -

ient fcrvant of yours, being of an approved fidelity
i:,:nent, continuaIli y to b h-ce rc ident. w f neg'
I:, it were convenient 'iour mi:je"ly s!hould fortiie, w .

i f -.'

fih. secret trust and powers, as there may nt need 14
days respite, to polt for authority, in a cause, that cannot
endure o hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend
least good to your eflablilhment, will not in publickop-.
puag your title, but out of their cunning ambition, willi
seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of commonl
good to the state, in propounding of good conditions fort
dlfburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws,
heavy impositions, corruptions, oppreflions, &c. which isl
a main point to lead the popular, who are much difgufed
with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convenient, that these motives, out of your majesty's provi.
dence, hould be prevented, by your free offer in theft
points o!low-ing. viz.

r. TH A T your majefry would be pleased to abolifl pur

vaiors and purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offensive t
the common people, and the whole kingdom, and not pr
fitab!e to the prince.

2. THAT our majelty would be pleased to diflolveth

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and an
icnt farmiies of this realm, by base matches, and evi
tduca.tion o their c'.:d.en, by which no revenue of th
crown will be defrayed.

. THE abroga'ing the multiplicity of penal laws, ge

nE:ally repin.1d aainit by the subject, in regard of their
.njce;taiatv, being many times altered from their true
mear r.g by variety o interpretation.

4. '1 HiAT vour majcfty will be pleased to admit fre

ounort of the native commodities of this kingdom, nox
orten restrained by subalternate persons for private profitr

eincg mo;t prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants
and a plain deftrncion to the true industry and manufac1
ture of ai! kingdon;s, and againift the profit of the crowni

THCSE, bcin; by your rrmaiji-'s confidents in the point

cG time propounded, will aured'v confirm unto your ma

i'ie the hc.'r:s and affe&ions of the whole kingdom, ant
l'iolutely preven a;ll ininuations and devices of defigne
patrinro, that, cut of pretext of common good, woul
;ek to patronize t;.mfcl'es in popular opinion and power
rnd thereby tv derc-iatc from your majesty's bounty an
f.-ee r.o;r, Jb princly merit of your moderation, jud

mrn, an4 j.:-.-Yo

You

Y'oUR majefly's favour, thus granted to the subje&t,
.ll no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance
a.r. ' he difproportionable gain of ome chequer offi-
;is, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle un-
:tcciary clerks and attendants, will only susser some de-
rinent; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdom,
rn, which will confirm unto your majefly the universal
're and affeftion of the people, and etablifh your re-
j;vn in the highest esteem to all posterity.
THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you tri-
rphant over all your enemies.
M aY care over his person, whose letters pals in this pac-
iuet, and will die bfore he leave to be yours, hall be
a lets then of mine own life, and in like efleem will I.
i.!d all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will
Widi my self reserved from being known unto any of them,
amy particular devoted affections unto your majesty, on,
; this extraordinary worthy man, whose aTociate I am
i his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will
lra} for you, and if we live you shall find us together.
I ESEECH your majefly burn this letter, and the others;
.r altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may be disco-
¥eied.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

I i 4 A CRITWAr .

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

[I]

A

C R I T I C A L

D S S E R T A T N
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The Murder of King HENRY, and the Ge-

nuinenefs of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the con-
troverfies, to which the murder of King Henry,

or the letters from Mary to Bothwell, have given
rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any par-
ticular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
Feat, and to expose all the ill founded assertions
with regard to thee points, which have flowed from
inattention, from prejudice, from partiality, from
malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no lets
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of
my readers. All I propose, is to assist others in
forming ome judgment concerning the fads in dif-
pute, by ifating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and
with the fame attention and impartiality, which I have
endeavoured to exercise in examining other contro-
verted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two
different fyftems'have been formed. The one sup-

poses

poses Bothwell to have contrived and executed this
crime. The other imputes it to the Earls of Mur-
ray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted sass in his.

:ory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of use.
They stand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, the fabric of the story remains
untouched. But the fa& under dispute in this place
is a fundamental and effencial one, and according
to the opinion which an Historian adopts with re-
gard to it, he must vary and dispose the whole of
his subsequent narration. An historical system may]
be tried in two different ways, whether it be con-
firtent with probability, and whether it be supported
by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon Both-

well argue in the following manner; and though
their realonings have been mentioned already in
different places of the narrative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay
they, was a sudden and youthful passion. They
beauty of his person was his chief merit. His ca-
pricious temper soon raised in the Queen a disgust,
which boke out on different occasions. His en-
gaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted
this disgust into an indignation, which ffle was at n
pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps, in its
own nature, irreparable ; the King certainly wanted|
that a and condescension which alone could ave
repaired it. It widened every day, and a-deep and
fecled hatred effaced all remains of affeftion. Both-
well observed this, and was prompted by abition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme vichl
proved fatal both to the Qeen, and to himsel.
Ne had served Mary at different times with fideliy
and success. He insinuated himself into her favourt
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her|
heart. In order to gratify his love, at least his am-|

4 bition,i

bi;ion, it was necessary to get rid of the King.
Vlary had rejeted the proposal made to her for ob-
taining a divorce. The King was equally hated by
th partizans of the house of Hamilton, a confider-
able party in the kingdom by Murray, one of rhe
o0ot powerful and popular persons in his country,
bN Morton and his associates, whom he had deceiv-
J; and whom Bothwell had bound to his interea
bi a recent favour. Among the people Darnly was
ialben under extreme contempt. He expected, fur
z!l these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pass without any enquiry. And to Mary's love,
ad to his own address and good fortune, he trulted
orthe accomplishment of the reft of his wishes.
What Bothwell expected really came to pass. Mary,
if not privy herself to the design, connived at an
action which rid her of a man whom fle had such
Rood reason to detest. A few months after, he
married the person who was both fultected and ac-
cufed of committing the murder.
Those who charge the guilt upon Murray and his
party reason in this manner. Murray, fay they,
wras a man of boundless ambition. Notwithftand-
ing the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early form-
ed a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's
return into Scotland, he insinuated himself into her
favour, and engrofled the whole power into his own
hands. He fct himself against every pro ofal of
marriage which was made to her, left his own chance
of succeeding to the Crown should be destroyed.
He hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him.
In order to be revenged on him, he entered into a
sudden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and
mortal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate
the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the
Queen. All this was done with a design to throw
upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceffory to the murder, and under that pretext, to

destroy

deltroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, an
to seize the sceptre which he had wreited out of he
hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of pro

bability, is consistent with itself, and solves appear
ances. In the latter, some aflertions are false, fo0m
links are wanting in the chain, and effects appear
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray
on the Queen's return into Scotland, erved her witl
great fidelity, and by his prudent administration ren
dered her so popular, and so powerful, as enabled he
with ease to quash a formidable insurrection railed b
himifef in the year 1565. What motive couldinduc
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, with
out followers, without influence over the nobles
whom the Queen, by her neglect, had reduced t
the lowest state of contempt, and who, after alon|
disgrace, had regained (according to the moot fa
vourable supposition) the precarious poffeflion of he
favour only a few days before his death ? It is di
ficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from th
King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what h
could gain by his death. If we suppose that th
Queen had no previous attachment to Bothwell, no
thing can appear more chimerical than a scheme
persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was ftil
alive, and who was not only fufpeEted, but accused
of murdering her former husband. But that fucl
a scheme should really succeed is still more extral
ordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell t(
commit the crime, or had himself been accefor
to the commiflion of it, what hopes were theretha
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow crimina
all the persecutions which he suffered, without evel
retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the
whole scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadl
feud had subsisted between Murray and Bothwell
the Queen with difficulty had brought them to fom

ternis

trms of agreement. But is it probable that Mur-
ray would chufe an enemy, to whom he had been
f lately reconciled, for his confident in the com-
miion of such an atrocious crime? Or, on the
oher hand, would it ever enter into the imagination
of a wife man, first to raise his rival to supreme
power, in hopes that afterwards he hould find
some opportunity of depriving him of that power ?
The most 'adventrous politician never hazarded such
dangerous experiment. The most credulous folly
never trusted such an uncertain chance.

BUT however ffrong these general reasonings may
be, we must decide according to the particular
evidence produced. This we now proceed to ex-
amine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-
der appears, I. From the-concurring teflimony of
all the cotemporary historians. 2. From the con-
feaion of thore persons who suffered fozafFifting at
the commission of the crime, and who enter into
a minute detail of all its circumstances. Anders. v.
2. 65. 3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's
own commiflioners, who allow Bothwell to have
been one of those who were guilty of this crime.
Good. v. 2. 2 3. ' 4. From the express testimony of
Lefly Bilhop of Ross to the fame effect with the
former.' Def. of Q Mary's Hon. And. 2. 76.
Id. v. 3. p. 3 I 5. Morton, at his death, declared
tsat Bothwell had follicited him, at different times,
to concur in the conspiracy formed against the life
of the King; and that he was informed by Archi-
bald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Men. App.
4. The letter from Dotiglas to the Queen, pub-
liflied in the Appendix to vol. II. No. 12. confirms
Morton's testimony. 6; Lord Herreis prorifes, in
his own nnae, and in the name of the nobles who
adhered to the Queen, that they would concu in

puhnih-

punishing Bothwell as the murderer of the King
Appefd. vol. I. No. 23.

TRE mCfr -direat charge ever brought against
MMurray is in these words of Bihop Lefley, ' Is its

unknown," addrefing himself to the Earl ofr

M ray, what the Lord Hfc-reis said to your faces
' openty, -even at your own table, a few days after
"the murder was committed? Did he not charge
"you with the foreknowledge of the fame murder?

-)id rr.or he, nullsa circtitione uus, flatly andp'lain-
ly burden yu, that ridiig in Fife, and coming

"w with one ofyoor mbft affired and trusty fervuts
" tie ame day whereon you departed from Edin.
" bargh, said to him, ambng' other talk, This
' night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lore hi
"life ?" Defence of Q.Mary, Anders. v. 2. 7
But tri assertion of a man To heated with farion as
Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence,
is of little W'eight. The servant to whom Murray
is said to have spoken these words, is not named;
nor the manner in which this secret conversation Was
brorghtr t ight mentioned. Lord Herreis was'ohe
of -the toft zealous advocates for Mary, an 'itis
remarkabJe hlat in all his negociation at the courft of
England, he :never once repeated this accusation of
Murray. In answering the challenge given him by
Lord Lindsay, Herreis had-a fair opportunityof
mentioning Murray's knowledge of the miu'raer
but though hIe openly accuses of that crime some of
rhofe who adhered to 'him, he induftrioafly avoids
any hnfiruation against Murray himself. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary, herself, in a conversation with
SirPrancis Knotces, accused Morton and Mailana
of beingprivy to the.murder, 'but does not nmen-
tion Murray. And. .4. 55 'When the Bi'hop d
Ross and Lord Herreis themselves appeared before,
'rhe nglifh council, january , 1569, they e-
-clare -hemfeles redy,-in obedience to-the 'Queer's

SSB~i' |

omand, t6o a'ccuse Murray and hi's af&ociate. of
being acceIory to 'the 'u'rtdr, but " they bn

allb reuired, 'wh'ether they or any of them, as
of themselves, would accuse the said Earl ih 'fTe-
i cial, or any of his adherents, or thi'hught them
i guilty therefof ' 'they anf'vered, " that they took
' God to Wri'nefs that hnne of 'thein did 'eVr kniow
" any thing ps the bhnfpiacy of that mu'rde, bt

v were in council and 'foreknowledge thereof; rei-
'ther who'W re devisers, inventors, and execu'tor
i of the fanme, till it 'was peblickly difcovetrel 1long
I thereaftei by fmne f 'the affafllins who suffered
" death bih that account." Good.'v. . 308. Ttief
words are tahe ou't of a sr'egitllr kept by Refs and
lerreis thifeiSelves, -and Tfeei to be a direct cohfu-
ution of the'bihop's a'ssertion. The bishop hin-
self repeats tlie fame thiiig in still 'flonger 'terms.
And. 3. _

. .

The Earrs'f tHu'-itly and Argiyll, in their Pro-
ietation touching the murder of he King of Scots,
after menti6ning the coni6fenc'e at 'Ciairgmillar con-
cerning a divorcie, of hih we -have given 'an ac-
count vol. I. 330. add " So fter 'thee'.psemiffes,

the muraer of the King following, we judge in
"our consciences, and'hlid'for certain 'a'nd' tirth,
" that the Earl of Miirray ahd fectetary Le'tliig-
" ton were'authors, invetors, courifelloes and alU-
" sers of the fame murder, 'ih'what rianner, or b'v
"whatfomever .erfoils -the faie was executed.
Anders. v. 4. 88. Bt, . This is nothing 'mre
t'an the private opinion or perlonal affirnatidn -ot
thee two noblemen. 2. The concluficn which they
make has no connection'with'the premisses on which
they found it. Because Murray proposed to Obtain
for the Queen a divorce from her hfband with hr
own consent, it does not -follow that therefore'he
committed the murder without her knowledge.
3. Huntly and Argyll tvere at that time the eade.rs

of

of that party opposite to Murray, and animate(
with all the rage of faclion. 4. Both of them wen
Murray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account
of the treatment which his family and clan had re.
ceived from that nobleman. Argyll was defiroul
of being divorced from his wife, with whom ha
lived on no good terms. Knox 328. and by whom
he had no children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Mur
ray's filer, and by his interest he had obftruaed tha
design. Keith 55i. These circumstances would
far towards invalidating a positive testimony; the
more than counterbalance an indeterminate fufpi
cion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntl
and Argyll ever subscribed this proteflation. Acop
of such a protestation as the Queen thought woul
be of advantage to her cause, was tranfmittedt
them by her. Anders. v. 4. 186. The proteftatio
itself published by Anderson is taken from an un
subscribed copy with blanks for the date and pla
of fubicribing. On the back of this copy is pasta
a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer of th

Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls o

" Huntly and Argyll." Anders. 194, 195. Bu
it can scarce be esteemed a reply to the above-men
tioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date
London, January 19, 568. The Queen's letter
in which he inciofed the copy of the proreftation
bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5. 1568. Now it
scarce to be supposed that the copy could be fe
into Scotland, be iubfcribed by the two Earls, an
be seen and answered by Murray within so hort
time. Murray's reply seems intended only to pre
vent the irm-prton which the vague and uncertai
zccuftiors of hs enemies might make in his ab
fence. Cecil ha got the original of the Queen'
letter ito Ilis cuody. Anders. vol. 4. i86. Thi
naturally es-' us to conjecure that the letter itsel
together v:ith :ht ir-clol t p;'oteftation, were inte

I cepted

I

.epted before they came to the hands of Huntly
ad Argyll. Nor is this mere conjecture alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
as inclosed, is to be found; Cotr. Lib. Cal. C. i.
,.280, and is an original subscribed by Mary,
hough not written with her own hand, because he
ddom chose to write in the English language. The
rteftation is in the laime Volume, fol. 282, and is
ianietly written by the ame person who wrote the
ueen's letter. This is a clear proof that both
ere intercepted. So that much has been founded
l a paper not subscribed by the two Earls, and
robably never seen by them. Besides, this method
ich the Queen took of fending a copy, to the
To Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
ith regard to a conference held in their own pre-
ice, appears somewhat suspicious. It would have
en more natural, and not so liable to any mifin-
rretation, to have desired them to write the most
it account, which they could recollet of what
d palled in the conversation at Craigmillar.
THE Queen's commiiioners at the (,o;ifcrences in
enland accused Murray and his associates of ha--
2g murdered the King. Good 2. 281. But these
u(ations are nothing more than loose and gene-
affirmations, without descending to fch parti-
lar circu.mifances, as either acertain their truth,
discover their falfehocd. The fame accusation
repeated by the nobles aflrembled at Dumbarton
pt. 1568. Good. 2. 359. And the fame obfer-
:ion may be made concerning it.
ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to
couIn for Murray's murdering of the King, by
Ippofing that it was done -on purpose, that he
,ght have a pretence of disturbing the (ueen's
iminiftration, and thereby rendering inefie5tual her
".eral Revocation of Crown lands, which would
lye deprived h;-n and his aleociates of the bet part
VOe lS, K .1 of

of their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 7
But whoever confiders the limited powers of
Scottish Monarch, will fee that such a revocatio
could not be very formidable to the nobles. Ever
King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the powe
of the nobles rendered it ineffectual. The best vin
dication of Murray and his party from this accufa
tion, is that which they preifnted to the Queen o
England, and which hath never hitherto beer
publilhed.
A.r zirs to the obje-cio;;s and alle.gance of the Queenl
O0c c. c. edging the Earl cf Miurray Lord Regent, tL

Earl cf Alcrton, Aarr, Glc': cirn, Hlume, Ruth.
yen, &c. to ave becn moved to armour, for tbal
they a;;-rcd and might nct alide her revocatioi
of rte alienatin made of her property.
IT is answered, that is alledged but all appear

ance, and it appears God has bereft, the alledgance
of all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons
folio.ing-

Il:PaIMIs, as to my Lord Regent, he neve

had occasion to grudge thereat, in refpet tht
Queen made him privy to the fame, and took refoj
lution with him for the execution thereof, letting
his Lordship know she would alluredly in the faminl
except all things she had given to him, and ratey
them in the next parliament, as ihe did indeed; and
for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind him
MasRer Tohn Wood, to attend upon the ame, tJ
whom he declared, that als well in that as in aU
others her grants it should be provided, yea of fre
will did promise and offer before ever he demandedj
as it came to pals without any let or impedimen
for all was ratified by her command, and hand writ
at the Parliament, but any dificulty.

ITE

IT EM as to my Lord of Morton, he couId not grtldge
thereat quha never had of her property worth tWtclty
dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencain.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of nay Lord Lindsay.
ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thincr
of the property quilk alfua was gladly and libc-rally
confirmed to him, in the said parliament preceil-
ni a year; was never ane had any cause of mifcon-
tent of that revocation, far less to have put their
i'ves and heritage to so open and manifefl ane dan-
r as they did for sic ane fiivole cause.
GVF ever any did make evill countenance, and
how any miscontentment of the said revocation, it
was my. Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha 1iak
lrgely in the time of Parliament theiranents to the
Qeen herself, and did complain of the manifeit
corruption of ane at of Parliament pafn upon her
Mlajcty's return, and fa did lett any revocation at
nhat time ; but the armor for revenge of the King's
id was not till twa months after, att quhat time
:are was no occasion given thereof, nor never a
an had mind thereof.

HIAVING thus examined the evidence which has
ken produced againfl- the Earls of Murray ,nd
iothwell; we shall nxt proceed to enquire whether
he Queen herself was acccffory to the murder of
.r hIufband.
No) sooner was the violent death of Darnly kno-.n,
ian orong suspicions arote, among obme of- h-r iLb-

c's, that Mary had given her consent to the com-
i.on of that crime. And. 2, . c Vea-ein-
sinr,ed, by her own ambaiador in France, the Arch-
ihop of Glasgow, that the sentiments o' orc-;gn-
s, on this head, were no les unfavourablc to her.

rth. Pref i. M any of her nobles loudly accuicd

K k 2 tr

her of tiat crime, and a great part of the nation.
by lupportine thlem, eem to have allowed the ac
cu;a:ioni :o be wvll louCded.

SUM. E crimes, however, are of uch a nature, thai
t'-cy icarce admi: of a ofitive or direCt proof

.c ..s of dar.nc!s can seldom be brought perfetiy

to I hr. \Vhc;' persons are acculed not of beinj
p;riii.~' , but only of being ,iccrfaries to a crime
no c hvirg con.rmited it th-mlelves, but only o
g v.rn cCon;-'nt o tL:e conilmitiion of it by othersi
the proof brcomes 1i`ill more dilt;cult: and unlef
.h;en iJoiTe accomplice betrays the secret, a proo
L circ;.m.tances, or preflumFtive evidence, is al
rhar can be attained. Even in judicial trials, fudh
vd ence is fomein.es held to be sufficient for con!
i;-.r.:n. criminals The degree of conviction wh:ch
';iC;r ev.' en.e carries alonig whi it, is often notin

c:-ic- to ci.at which arifcs from positive teflimonyg

arnd a conrcurring Iicries of circumstances satisfies t'
undcrftaning n ro 1t- than the exprels declaration ,
wit .Qscs.

ETvIDENCE (f both these kinds has been pFr

duced a2ain it .ary. \Ve (hail first confidtr thi
-;'hici is ft.:;dcd upon circumfances alone.

Sc-.i o re liipicicus circunirfances preced

the Kin'irs dra-h ; others were subsequent to i
\\ith regard to rhe former, we may observe
the Qeen's vio'ent ove of Darnly was soon co
verted inro an aversion to him no less violent; a
that his own ill co: ;tc, and xcefics of every kit.
were such, tha if they did not justify, at lealt th
account for th:s fudcen change of her disposition t
wares himi. '1 he rife and progress of this dometl
n.pture, I have traced with great care in the hiftor
and to te prools of it which may be found
papers publiShed by other authors, I have add
tho;e containcd in App N XVI. and XVII. T
larls or MIiurray, Miorton, Bothwell, Argyll, a

Hut

iltntly confidered the Cchee of procuring for the
Ilueen a divorce from her husband, as one of the
motl flattering proposals they could make to her,
and employed it as the molf powerful inducemnt
r0 prevail on her to content to a mealure, which
:icy had much at heart, but from which they knew
,r to be extremely averse And. 4 p.. i. 8.
1)' Croc the French ambanfador, who was an eye
ciuncts of what he describes, not only reprelents her
;'gi;nt at Darnly to be extreme, but declares that
ere could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
;;cm. ' The Queen is in the hands of pliyfIcians, Deccm.
n I do assure you is not at all well; and do be- 2'1566'
lve the principal part of her difeafa to confif in
i:ep grief and iorrow; nor does it seem polTible to
:i'e her forget the fame. Stiil fhn repeats thele
.ocrds, I cud Wij to '

b dead. You know very

.dl that the injury the has received is exceeding
;-cat, and her majesty wi.l never foret it.- To
;,ak my mind freely to you, I do not expect, upon
:veral accouns, any good understanding be-
:;:en them [i.e. the King and Queen] unless
uo: effictually put to his hand - His bad de-e-. 23.
:u;'ntent is incurable, nor can there ever be any
;'.l expected from him for leveral realbns, which
;might tell you was I preent vwih you. I cannot
prtcnd to foretel how all may turn, but I will fay,
int matters cannot subsist long as they are, without
t:;ng accompanied with lundry bd conequences."
dith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural death,
;;a is junc2ure, it nuft have been confidered as a
'ry fortunate event to the Queen, and as a fealbn-
3.e ueliverance from a husband cwho had become
etogether odious to her. Now as Henry was mur-
Ltre a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing had
ippened to render the Queen's aversion to him lels
oent, the opinion of those who confidcr Mary as
i.eauthor of an event, wich was manifefly to

K k 3 ;,rceahle

agreeae: to her. will appear perhaps to some of our
readers to be nither unnatural nor over refined. If
we add to this, what has been observed in the his-
tory, thir in proportion to the increase of Mary's
:.-:;-cd of l; r ,hufand, Botshell made progress in
her a:-our ; an'i tih hr bcame the object not only
of -r co ..dence but of her attachment, that opi-
ni"n z: '::.s r"..v itrer.g-h. It is eay to oblervei

-; '- ta.--, : lhich nmi',t redound to Mary as!

1'1'il a" rc 0o:vcil sio:n the King's death; but

exc--;-,'; them, no pe:in. and no :party in the
!;ing.iom cccucd deriv the icaft benefit from tha
c--e. . Bo:h\ci!, accordingly, murdered the King,
a-- i;: ;as, in that ae, thought no violent impu
t-.:i.n on iary's characer, to suppose that she had
conie, cd to .he ced.

T. ? ca:s vb :ch1 thle Queen took after her hus

band's death a-dd frengrh to thar iUppofition!
i. MIlil ,, -o w.s in Edinburgh, at Lth time of,
ilc Ki.e.c deaih, a:Trts that " every body fufpe&Et
cd CL;:e Ear! o, B,hveil; and thoie who durst speak-
iree) to othe , said Dlinly th t it was He." p

1 . c2.

'ary aving iued a procamation, ord

t : of cbru:.ry, oir:ng a reward to any per
,1, nv-o fhou'dl dilcover tl:oie who had mu!rderei
h.r hufroand; , nd. . 6. a paper in anfwvertoth
wx.-s a-xei to te gates of the Tolbooth, Februar

5, in v-h:h Hotnivell was named as the chief per:
fTn z^ikv of that crime, and the Queen herself wa
aCci.Ld of h in given her consent to it. And. 2^
i 6. 3. Soon a.ser, February 20, the Earl of Lenr
r.ox. ite K:n'rs f :t;er, wrote to Mary, conjurin
her, b.- eve-r mii t e, to prosecute the murderer-

- e ur-:or; r ro::r. He plainly declared hiI

Co..n 'lr:'s!cion , ooth'.e:!, and pointed out a me-
th'.- o pc^-::-g againC him, a^d for discover,

i- ;- o-i: r auhilr of the crime, no lss obviout
r;::.:: c.iab!. H-e adv.Zfd her to seize, andtB

comnm t

:jnl""

conimit to sure custody Bothwell himself, and those
who vere already named as his accomplices; to call
an afiemblv of the nobles; to issue a proclamation,
i:viting Bothwell's accusers to appear ; and if, on
!;at encouragement, no prfon appeared to accife
i'.i, to hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
;::hout farther trial. And. 1. 40. 4. Archbishop
seaoun, her ambafTador in France, in a letter to
\;ar!, March 9th, employs arguments of the ut-
.Tio!l weight to perflade her to prosecute the mur-

w iers with the greatef leverirt. " I can conclude

;rnhirg, (fays he, by quhat zour iVdajelty writes to
me zoLirfelf, that c-n it has plefit God to conlerve
:zo' to take a rigorous vengeance thereof, that ra-
:her tian it be not atually taine, it appears to me
s-'ser in this warld that ze had loft li!e and all. I
s;' your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I
can hir nathing to zour prejudife, but I rman con ,:jl
traindly writ the famin, that all may come to zour
knawlege ; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfill that ze forth shaw now rather
tilhn ever of before, the greite vertue, magnani-
nili, and constance that God has grantit zow, be
quhais grace, I hope ze iall overcome this most
heavie envie and dilplefir of the committing thereof,
andl conserve that reputation in all godliness, ze
irve conquit} of lang, quhich can appear na wayis
nmair clearlie, that that zow do sick justice that the.Oc*
ti:l world may declare zowr innocence, and givel,:-:
riimony forever of thair treason that has com-
.nitted (but fear of God or man) so cruel and un ,,itt,
0odlie a murther, quhairof there is fa meikle ill,,ch
,,;cn, that I am conftrainit to ask zow mercy,
:hit neither can I or will I make the rehearsal therof,
;"icl is or odious. But alas! Madame, all overr:
llurope this day there is na purpole in head fa fre-
quent as of zour Majefrie, and of the present fate of
zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretic

K k _ finiftcrl?."

sinisterly." Keith, Pref ix. 5. Elizabeth, as ap.
pears from Append. Vol. I. N°. XIX. urged the
lame thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances
of the cafe itiel', no less than these olicitations and
remonstrances, called for the utmost vigour in her
proceedings. Her husband had been murderedin
a cruel manner, almost in her own pretence. Her
subjects were illed with the utmost horror at that!
crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favourites,
had been Fublickly accused as the author of it. Re-j
fiections, extremely dishonourable to herself, hadj
been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of'
justice, did not prompt her to pursue the murderers
with ardour, decency, at least, and concern for vin-
dicating her own character, shou'd have induced her
to avoid any appearance of remiinefs or want of
zeal.

BL-T inread of this, Mary continued to discover,

in all her ations, the utmost partiality towards Both-
well. i. On the th of February, five days after
the murder, {he beltowed on him the reversion of
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year 15 o5 she ihad mortgaged to the citizens ofr
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance,
as it ave him not only the command of the prin-
cipl'. port in the kingdom, but a great afcendanr
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely
desirous o keeping Fofieffion of it*. 2. Bothweil

being

-* r- ., -: .: :

: r: -;;'*. :n i! C'.-.'::r-!' e i, .'c' -
: i:': ,'; E.-1:r-

.'.- * -' ;'. ?;'r s. -:' ' *' ,,f *'' r.'*:sn P's t
/ .r,ritv of/ LWil'

_.Tri2 D.i ra3:ia Regina Scotor'.i, ornibu' nrob; - lor.!;:bli

;i_-i ai cuos pr reenie;l lnere DCcrvcrerir, lu;c:-l. Sciatis, ad
rno a incm,.'iam reducen:cs ;n'i;'ex h.:n;m verum e: fdee
isi;in, n,.n tantrm quondam

quon i-m n cha':;m m natri ari

Repgr..C : r .i noi!ri pro temnrn p in n,:lrt. mioritate f turn c:
j;rtme. :.':., xvr':rn e:iarn noL !inc; ':[ '~, t.'!i' ;-r 3 .irl-t' G3l!iT
qUd:m nr.-a oc r. oirum rer.um, ai t.r::::o;.nc inioi honom -

I:Z

eing extremely desirous to obtain the command of
the catle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to pre-
vail on the earl of Mar to surrender the government
ci it, offered to commit the young prince to his cuf-
:ody. Mar conented; and she instantly appointed
Bothwell governor of the castle. And. i. Pref. 64.
Keivh, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder, pre-
rious to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been con-
u&ted with the utmost remifnefs. Buchanan ex-
claims loudly against this. And. 2. 24. Nor was

et aucoritatis in punitione furam, malefaeorum, et tranfgre1b-
mni iiina idem, per nolrum confifum coninguincum et confi-
':r.m Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Halis, Creighton
:tL:ddit'dale, magnum admirallum regni nolri, commifilonem
e: oncrationem ad hunc effedum habentum, per quas ipfe 'uum
c:rpua et vitam in magno periculo poiuit; ac tiam, in perfor-
.ti,:e et extentione nofri diti fervitii, fuam hereditatem, fu-
;r. ilnmmam viginti millium mercarum hjius nofiri regni, alie-
:avit ac lhelt. Et nos cogitantes quod, ex nolt'a principali ho-
:orc et devoria, diftum nollrum confilum confanguineum & con-
.;ir;ium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine rcompenfare et
:r:t:.care incumbit quax nos commode fibi concedere poterimus,
LP.iC ife magis habilis omnibus affuturis terlporibus efe poterit,
it ad ujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis feu eventibus:
.! ecompensationem quorum pramiffirum. ac pro diverfis aiiis
I: i.i rationabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus,
?cimus, &c. diftum Jacobum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos
:.irsdcs mafculos quolcunquc nolthos legittimos, &c. aflignatos

tt ad literas reverfionis facas, &c. per Symonem Prelton de
Adli.m militem, prapofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem
:':. nolitri burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fucceloribus,
,. nobis, noitifque heredibus, fuccefforibts, et aflignatis pro

'i .lptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius villa de Leitl, &c. impig-

Oi.ii per nos ditis prrepofito, &c. sub reverfione alienata
'n'ineietis fummam decem millium mercarum moneta pra-
';.:i.: numerandam et calculancda in parochiali ccclefia de
i-.iburoh, super premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris
, veiuti in' distis reverfionis liieris, &c. de data 8vo Otob.
:,j', &c. (The reft is form, and contains a claue of absolute
*;i..nJice.) IN cujus REI TESTIMO:IUV. prefentibus mag-
i:n iiillum noltrum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, de-
:.i; quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Domini millefimo quin-
;,.ite:ino fexageiimo sexto, et regni noluri vicefimo quinto.

Thc great feal entire.

it

it without reason that he did so, as is evident from
a circumstance in the asdavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house
when his mafier was murdered, and was dug up alive
out of the rubbih. Being examined on the Mon-
day after the King's death, " This deponar fchew
that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queeis fervandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Qubilk
the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair,
here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai
left of, and procedic na farther in the inquisition."
And. 4. p. 2. 67. HIad there been any intention
to farch into the bottom of the matter, a circum-
fiance osso much importance merited the most care.
ful enquiry. 4. Norwithitanding Lennox's repeat-
ed foilicirations, not-ithftanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the neceflity of complying with
them, in order to encourage any accuf r to appear
against Bothwell, she not only refused to commit
him to custody, or even to remove him from her
presence and councils; And I. 42, 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other cir-
cumfances, discovered an increase of attachment to
h'm. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to
a publick trial; but flie permitted him to fit as a
mermber in that meeting of the Privy Council, which
directed his on trial; and the trial itrelf was car-
ried on with f;ch unnecef.ary precipitancy, and with
so many other falpicious circumstances, as render his
acquitta! rath-r an argument of his guiit than a proof
cf his innocence. 'I hefe circumstances have all been
mentioned at length. Vol. I. p. 403, &c. and there-
fore are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days
after the trial, lar- gave a public proof of her re-
gard frr Bochwcll, by appointing him to carry the
sceptre before her at the meeti::g of 1'arlianent.
Keith. 3-S. 7. In that parliament, he granted him|
a ratincation or all the valt Foff-fiions and honours,

whlich

Wh.ich ihe had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumcration of ail the services
he had perorined. And. I. 17 . 8. Though
Melvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Both-
wel! would at length induce her to marry him,
warned her of the infamy and danger which would
attend that ation, he not only disregarded this fa-
kltary admonition, but discovered what had passed
between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. 56. 9. Bothwell fciz-
ed Mary as she returned from Stirling, April 24.
If he had done this without her knowledge and con-
ipnt, such an insult could not have failed to have
filled her with the most violent indignation. But
according to the account of an old M. S. " The
friendly love was so highly contracted between this
great princess, and her enormous subjec&, that there
was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteemed
by all men that either of them loved other carnally)
so that file suffered patiently to be led where the
lover lift, and all the way neither made obstacle,
impediment, clamour or resistance, as in such ac-
cidents u!e to be, or that she might have done by
her princely authority, being accompanied with the
noble Earl of Huntly, and secretary Maitland of
Lcthinton." Keith, 383. Melvil, who was pre-
sent, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that
nothing was done without the Queen's content.
Melv. 58. Jo. On the 12th of May, a few days
b:fore her marriage, Mary declared that lhe was
then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had
offended her by seizing her person, he was so mIuch
fiisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that time,
and lo indebted to him for pafi services, that he
not only forgave that offence, but resolved to pro-
rmote him to higher honours. And. i. 187. Ir.
Even after the confederate nobles had driven Both-

well

well from the Queen's presence, and though she saw
that he was confidered as the murderer of her for.
mer husband by so great a part of her fubjecis, her
affetion did not in the least abate, and fle conti-
nued to express the most unalterable attachment to
him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
thar the rigour with which the Queen is kept, pro-
ceedeth by order from these men, because that tlh
Queen will nor, by any me.ns, be induced to lend
her authoiity to prosecute the murder; nor will not
consent by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Both-
weli for her hu;band, but avoweth conitantly that
me will liv-e and die with him; and faith, that if it
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and
kingdom, or the Lord Bothnc.l, e v.ou!d leave
her kingd :-n and dignity to go a simple damsel with
him, and that flie xill never conent that he shall
fare worse, or have more harm than herself. App.
p. 42. See alib p. 44. l-rom this long enume-
ration of circumstances, we may, without violence,
draw the following conclusion. Had Mary reaily
been acceflary to the murder of her husband; had
Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her consent, or
at her comman ; and had he intended to stifle the
evidence against him, and to prevent the difovery
of his guilt, ihe could scarce have taken any other
fleps than tho'e she took, nor could her conduct
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of pru-
dence and of decency.

TH: positive evidence produced againlf Mary
may be caTced u nd-r two heads.

i. THr- depositions of fom; persons who were

employed in committing the mrrder, particularly
of Nicholas Hubert, who in the writings of that
age i; cailed ii;eichl Parss. This person, who was
Bothwei's servant, an,. much truiledt by him, was
twice examitnd, and the o:rignal o one of his de-
poij.ions, and a copy of the_ other, are ill cxanr.

ir

It is pretended that both these are notorious forge-
ries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
ianivete which it is almost impossible to imitate.; they
abound with a number of minute fa&s and particu-
larities, which the most dextrous forger could not
have easily assembled, and conneated together with
any appearance of probability ; and they are filled
with circumtances, which can scarce be supposed
to have entered the imagination of any man, but
one of Paris's profession and character. But, at
the fame time, it must be acknowledged that his
depositions contain rome improbable circumstances.
He teems to have been a foolish talkative f llow;
the fear of death ; the violence ol totrur: ; and the
defi-e of pleating those in whose power he was,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign tome circumitances,
and to exaggerate others. To fay that ome cir-
cumftances in an affidavit are improbable or false, is
very different from faying that the whole is forged. I
flfpeect the former to be the cafe here; but I fee no
appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some
of the most material fads in Paris's affidavits reft
upon his single tefrimony; and for that reaonri, I
have not in the H-ifory, nor shall I in this place,
lay any stress upon them.

2. IHE letters said to be written by Mary to

Eothweil. Tlc-hle have been fiequently published.
The accident, by which the Queen's enemies got
them into their pofleffion, is related Vol. I. 43
\hen the authenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contested, it may be afccrtained either by
external or internal evidence. Both there have been
produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's

letters,. i Murray and the nobles who adhered to
him affirm, upon their word and honour, that the
letters were written with the Queen's own hand,
v.wirh which they were well acquainted. Good. 2.

A 64,

64, 92. 2. The leersr were publickly produce
in the parliament of Scotland, December 1567
Good. 2. 360; and were to far confidered as ge
nuine, that they are mentioned, in the a againf
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good
2. 66. 3. They were shewn privately to the Duke
of Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and ir Ralpi
Sadler, Elizabeth's commiffloners at York. In the
account which they give of this matter to their mif-
trefs, they eem to confider the letters as genuine,
and express no suspicion of any forgery ; they par-
ticularly obfcrve, " that the matter contained in
them is such that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than htrfelf; for that they dif-
course of some things, which were unknown to any
other than to herferl and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to counterfeit so many, so the matter of them,
and the manner how ti;efe men came by them is
such, as it feemeth that God, in whole fight murder
and bloodshed of the innocent is abominable, would
not permit the fame to be hid or concealed." Good.
2. 142. They seem to have made such an impref-
sion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent
letter to Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has
there words, " If the matter fnall be thought as
detefrable and manifeti to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 54.
4. After the conferences at York and \'eftminfter
were finished, Elizabeth resolved to call together
the Earls who were then at court, and to lay before
them the whole proceedings against the Scottish
Queen, particularly that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the. Regent, as the Queen of Scots let-
ters and writings, should also be shewed, and con-
ference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their
fight, with the letters of the said Queen's being
extant, and heretofore written with her own hand,
and efnt to :he Queen's majesty ; whereby may be

searched

iearched and examined what diffcrence is betwixt
them." Good. 2. 252. 1 hey assembled, accord-
ingly, at Hampton Court, December 14 and 15,
156S ; and " The originals of the letters supposed
to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and
being read, were duly conferred and compared, for
the manner of writing, and fashion of orthogra-
phy, with sundry other letters long since heretofore
written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
Qileen's Majefy.- In collation whereof no dif-
ference was found." Good. 2. 256. 5. Mary
having written an apologetical letter for her condu&
to the Countels of Lennox, July io, 1570 *, fe

,tranf-

* Mary's letter has never been published .n d oght to have a

p'a-e here, where evidence on all fides is fairly produced.
' Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebellis, enemeis
e ll knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trafted of
me by zoure advice, had not Ib far flurred you aganis my inno-
c:cy, (and I muf shy aganis all kyndnels, that zow have not
cnelie as it were condenipnit me wranlfullie, bot so hated me,
a some wordis and opene deideis hes teftifcit to all the warlde,
a nimnyfell miflykinrg in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I wold not
rave omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me
of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping with Godis
grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to zow, as trust
it , already to the mait pairt of all indifferent perfonis, I
ithcht it belt not to trouble zow for a tyme till hat uch a mat-
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting
2zoae littil son, ad my onelic child in this countrey. To the
nchiik albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I have born
i.lm, and God knawis with quhat daunger to him and me boith;
and of zow he is defcendit. So 1 meae not to forzet my dewtie
n zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnel; to zow, how unkyndlie
that ever ze have delt with me, bot will lo:ve zow as my awnt,
2nd rcfpet zow as my moder in law. And gifye plcs to knaw
iarther of my mynd in that and all uther thingis betsixt us, my
amibaador the Bishop of Ross fall be read)y to confer with zow.
Arid so after my hairtlie commcndationis, remitting me to my
iJle ambassador, and zour better conilderatioun, I tommit zow
ti hie proteclioun of Almyghty God, (iuJhom I pr.iy t^ prfeiric

ZO;\

transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland ; and
he returned to the Countess the following answer:
" Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer the
Queen the King's mother's letters sent to you, what
can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ
the best fe can for hirfelf, to seam e to purge hirof
that. quhairof many befyde me are certainly per-
fuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my
awin knawledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffli
onis of men gone to the death, and uther infallibil
experience. It wull be lang tyme that is hable to
put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary
is fa weill knawin. The mail indifferent, I trlft,
doubtis not of the equitie of zoure and my cause,
and of the jus occafioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis inter.
efl, were hir trew confeffioun and unfeyned repent,
ance of that lamentable sac, odious for hir to be
reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God is]
just, and will not in the end be abused; but as hej
has manifested the trewth, so will he puneife the
iniquity." Lenncx's Orig. Regift. of Letters. In
their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be
suspected of advancing what would be most subser.
vient to their cause; not what was agreeable to
truth, or what flowed from their own inward con-
viction. But in a private letter to his own wife,
Lennox had no occasion to dissemble; and it iss
plain, that he not only thought the Queen guilty,
but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

:-,w and m' b-otlier Charles, and cans zov to knaw my pain
btter nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July 157d.

To my Ladic Lennox Youre natural gude Nice

;, niodt:-i law'. and lovynge dochter.

II. HiVT;|

II. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the

genuineness of the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we
may observe, . That whenever a paper is forged
with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to etablifh the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
appearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
use exprefflons the most explicit and full to his pur-
pose. The passages foisted into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles
of the Romifi faints; the fuppolititious deeds in
their own favour produced by monasteries; the
false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. P. 13.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim
fems to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error of proving too little. The point which
the Queen's enemies had to eablifh, was " that
as the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so
was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
fuader, and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. 2. 207. But of this there are only
imperfea hints, obscure intimations, and dark ex-
preflons in the letters, which however convincing
evidence they might furnish if found in real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of
evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All
the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can
irve as a proof of her guilt. Lefley, Blackwqod,
Turner, &c. abound with passages to this purpose;
nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
ciffiernr. " Yet still it might have been expected
ia)ys her ltent defender) that some one or other of
the points or articles of the accusation should be
nude out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that
; to be seen in the prefert cafe. There is nothing

eL. II. L 1 in

in the letters, that co.ld plainly shew the writer to
have been i; the foreknowledge, counsel, or device
of any murder, fir less to have persuaded or com-
manded it and as lit'e is there about maintaining
or jufifyir.g any murderers." Good. . 76. How
ill adviscd were Mary's aiverfaries to contrac so
much guilt, and to p racile so many artifices in or-
der to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for
establishing the conclusion they had in view ? Had
they been i base as to have recourse to forgery, is it
not natural to think that they wiould have produced
forething more explicit and decisive ? 2. Asitis

:hr.ci impoflible to invent a long narration consist-
ing of many circumflances, and to conneEt it in
4uch a manner with real facts, that no mark of fraud
ihall appear; for ts rearon skilful forgers avoid
rany long detail of circumstances, especially of so-
reign ad superfluous ones, well knowsing that the
more these are multiplied, the more are the chances
of dreection increaled. No'.v Mary's letters, epe-
rially th. fir. are fiilel wih a multiplicity of ci.-
c!umfar.ces, extrem!ely n.it.iral in a real correspond.
ence, but altogeti. r for- ; n to the purpose of te
,'tee:i's enemies, and wh.ich it ould have been
-:x:rme f: '. to h.ve in.Lr:ed if they had been alto
eotrher i;--ainarv, and without foundation. 3. The
.tr;: a:.d r-eallit o' several cilcuimtances in the leti
ter-, n the, too, of nor very publick nature

Cre co; -:.-.e by :.d'ub:ucd coll.ltcral evidence:

L ott . . . p. . 'h. e Qcen is said to havi
i-.er on ot L.en:n>x 's n.l en, and to have sori
co.v-ri.ion v.-irh him. Tlomas Crawford, rwh

.-as te p-r.-n, apire. -cd berore colizabeth's com
m-il:o.r--s, and conr., m d, oupon oath, the truth
ti..s circumstance. H h li :wife dec-lared, tha
c;.r:-. ti-e _ Qeen's fa' t Gl:'ov, the Kingr
pa:. -o k him, ever- nrg!t, ;v.hcvcr had paired
:ro-n',' -:- ay, be:v. her 2 iaid:iy and him

an

nnd thar the account given of these conversations in
the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245. Ac-
cording to the ame letter there was much discourse
between the King and Queen concerning Mynto,
Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 8, to, r. Wrhat
this might be, was altogether unknown, till a letter
of Mary's preserved in the Scottish college at Pa-
ris, and published, Keith, Pref, vii. discovered it to
be an affair of so much importance as merited all the
attention she paid to it at that time. It appears by
a letter from the French ambassador, that Mary
wvas subject to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circumstance is mentioned, Lett. . p.
30. in a manner so natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine produion. 4. If we shall still think
it probable to suppose that so many real circum-
!lances were artfully introduced into the letters by
the forcers, in order to give an air of authenticity
to their produEtion; it will carce be possible to hold
the fame opinion concerning the following particu-
far. Before the Queen began her first letter to
Bothwell, ffie, as is ufua! among those who write
Ion letters containing a variety of subjects, made
,::'es or mme,rrancms of the particulars she wified
t, remember; but as she fat up writing during a
grelt part of the night, and after her attendants
were asleep, her paper failed her, and he continued
her letter upon the fame meet, on which she had for-
merlv made her memorandmins. This she herself
ta!es notice of, and makes an apology for it: It
; are ; I dfire never to cease from writing unro you,
v.t now after the Ikilfing of your hands, I will end
nmy letter. Excuse my evl writing, and read it
twice over. Excuie that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had na paper zeterday, quhen I wrair that of the
memorial." Good 2. '8. These m moranjdums
fill appear in the middle of the letter; and vlat

L 1 ve

we have said seems naturally to account for the man-
ner ow they might find their way into a real letter.
It is scarce to be supposed, however, that any forger
would think of placing memorandums in the mid-
dle or a letter, where, at sirss fight, they make so
absurd and io unnatural an appearance. But if any
shall still carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this cir-
cu:nftance, in order to prelerve the appearance of
genuineness, they must at least allow that the
Queen's enemies, who employed these forgers,
coul not be ignorant of the design and meaningof
these fcr notes and memorandums; but we find
them miflaking them so far as to imagine that they
were te cith -t c' thebeareri, i e. points concerning
which the OQeen had given him verbal inftrutions.
Good. 2. 152. This they cannot pofibly be; for
the Queen herfelr writes with so much exadneli
concerning the different points in the memorandums,
that there was no need of giving any cr;idit or in-
fiuntions to the bearer concerning them. The me-
morandums are indeed the co:tents o the letter. 5.
Mary, mentioning her conversations with the King
about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays,
" The morne [i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to
him upon that point ;" and then adds, " As to the
reft of Willie Hiegait's, he confeffit it; but it was
the morne [i. e. the morning] after my cumming
or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This addition, which
could not have been made till after the conversation
happened, eenms either to have been inserted bythe
Queen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps, she
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence
into the text. It we suppose the letter to be a real
one, and wricten at different times, as it plainly
bears, this circumstance appears to be very natural;
but no reason could have induced a forger to have
ventured upon such an anachronism, for which there

was no neceflity. An addition, perfectly similar to
this, made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good.
2. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the
advocates for her innocence have contended that
these letters were forged by her enemies, on pur.pose
to blast her reputation, and tojucfily their own re-
bellion. It is not necessary to take notice o the
arguments which were produced, in her own age,
in upport of this opinion; the observations whiclh
we have already made, contain a full reply to them.
An author, who has enquired into the affairs of
that period with great industry, and who h.is ac-
quired much knowledge of them, has late-ly pub-
lifled (as he affirms) a demonstration of the orgery
of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With re-
gard to the former he observes, that the French copy
of the Queen's letters is plainly a tranfation of Bu-
chanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scottish copy; and by conlic-
quence, the assertion of the Queen's enemies, that
/he wrote them originally in French, is alcogelher
groundless, and the whole letters are grols forgeries.
He accounts for this strange succession of tranfla-
tions, by supposing that when the forgery was pro-
jeed, no perlbn could be found capable of writing
originally in the French language letters which would
pass for the Queen's; for that reason they were sirs-
composed in Scottish; but unluckily the French in-'
terpreter, it would seem, did not understand that
language; and therefore Buchanan translated them
into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered
into French. Good. . 79, 8o.

IT is scarce necessary to observe that no proof

whatever is produced of any of these uppolitions.
The manners of the Scots, in that age, when al-
most every man of rank spent a part of his youth

L 1 3 ir

in France, and the intercourse between the two na.
tions was great, render it altogether improbable that
so many complicated operations hould be necessary,
in order to procure a few letters to be written in the
French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we mayob,

serve that all this author's premises may be granted,
and yet his conclusion will not follow, unless he
likewi:e prove that the French letters, as we now
have them, are a true copy of those which were
produced by Murray and his party in the Scottiflh
parliament, and at York and We'tminiter. But I
this he as nor attempted ; and if we attend to the
history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious,
must have been unsuccessful. The letters were firfc
pubiifhed at the end of Buchanan's deteaion. The
first edition of this treatise was in Latin, in which
language three of the Queen's letters were fubjoind
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 571.
Soon after a Scottish translation of it was publiihed,
and at the end o it were printed, likewise in Scot-
tith, the three letters which had formerly appeared in
Latin, and ive other letters in cottifn, which were
not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French'
trani.ation of the Detection, and of seven of the
letters; this bears to have been printed at Edin-
burgh by Thomas Waltem, 1 72. The name of
the place, as well as of the printer, is allowed by al
parries to be a manifest impolfure. Our author,
from observing the day of the month, on which
the printing is said to have been finished, has as-
ferced that this edition was printed at London ; but
no stress can be laid upon a dare found in a book,
wnere every other circumstance with regard to the
printing is allowed to be falfr. Blackwood, who
(next to Lefley) was the bell informed of all Ma-
ry's advocates in that age, affrms that the French
edition of the Detection was publified in France:
"II [Bucharan] a depuis adjouil. a cefte decla-

rnatio:l

mation un petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc
de Norfolk, et de la facon de son proces, et la tout
envoys aux freres a la Rochelle, lefquels voyants
qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, 'ont traduit en
Franfois, et iceluy fur imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft
a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Waltem, nom
apofte et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jebb. 2.
2 -6." The author of the Innocence de Marie goes
farther, and names the French tranilator of the
l)etection. Et iceluy premierement compost com-
nle il femble) par George Buchanan Efcoffoys, et
depuis traduit en langue Francoiie par tn Hugonot,
Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Ca-nu:, ty iilant
gentilhomme, et un de plus remarouc z feditelx de
PFrance. Jebb. . 425, 443." The concurring tef-
timony of two cotemporary authors, whole residence
in France afforded them ufilicicnt means of infor-
mation, must outweigh a flight conjecqure. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the
original French letters as wricten by the )ueen her-
self; he exprefy declares that he tranfated them
fiom the Latin. Good. . I02. Had our author
attended to all these circumflances, he might have
saved himself the labour of so many criticifins to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is
a translation from the Latin. The French editor
himself acknowledges it, and so far as I know no
person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French tranfator was

so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written these
letters, partly in French, partly in Scottish. Good. I.
1o3. Had this translation been publishcd at London
by Cecil, or had it been made by his direction, so
gross an error would not have been admitted into
it. This error, however, was owing to an odd cir-
cumfance. In the Scottish translation of the De-
teEtion two cr three sentences of the original French
were prefixed to each letter, which breaking off
with an &c. the Scottish tranCation o the whole

L 1 4 followed.

followed. This method of printing translations was
not uncommon in that age. The French editor ob-
serving this, foolishly concluded that the letters
had bten written partly in French, partly in
Scottish.

IF we carefully confider there few French fen-

tences of each letter which still remain, and apply
to them that species o criticism, by which our au.
thor has examined the whole, a clear proof will
arise, that there was a French copy not translated
from the Latin, but which was itself the original
from which both the Latin and Scottish have been
translated. This minute criticism muff neceifarily
be disagreeable to many readers ; but luckily a few
sentences only are to be examined, which will render
it extremely short.

IN the irft letter, the French sentence prefixed to

it ends with thele words, y faijoit bon. It is plain
this exprefflon, veu ce que peuz un corps fan caeur, is
by no means a translation of curn plane perinde eem
atqve corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the
Latin nor Scottish have retained. 7Jujques a la
dine is not a translation of toro prandii tempore; the
Scottish translation, qubile denner-time, exprefles the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
qubi.'e signified until as well as during. e n'ay fas
tenu grand propos is not juilly rendered neque contu-
lerim sermonem cunm ququam; the phrase used in the
French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a more probable account of her behaviour than
the other. Jyueant iin qu'il n5i faifoit bn, is not
a translation of ut qui jdicarcint id non e ex ufu.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with
apprendre. It is evident that both the Latin and
Scottish translations have omitted altogether these
words, et loutefoisje ne p:.s atprendre. The French
fenterce prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with presenter.

7^n~

7'aye veill plus tard la haut is plainly no tranflatlon
of diutius illic morata fim ; the sense of the French
is better expressed by the Scottlfh I have walkit later
there-up. Again, Pour excuser vofire affaire is very
different from ad excufandu m nofira negotia. The
five remaining letters never appeared in Latin; nor
is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lilhed in French. This intirely overturns our au-
thor's hypothesis concerning the necefity of a tranf-
lation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detection the whole

sonnet is printed in French as well as in Scottish. It
is not possible to believe that this Scottish copy could
be the original from which the French was tranf-
lated. The French consists of verses which have
both measure and rhyme, and which, in many
places, are far from being inelegant. The Scottilh
consists of an equal number of lines, but without
measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever think
of a thing so absurd and impracticable, as to require
one to translate a certain given number of lines in
pwfe into an equal number of verses, where both
measure and rhyme were to be observed. The
Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifestly to be
a translation of the French; the phrases, the idioms,
ad many of the words are French, and not Scot-
tifh. Betides, the Scottish translator has, in several
instances, milsaken the sense of the French, and in
many more exprefTes the sense imperfetly. Had
the sonnet been forged, this could not have hap-
pened. The directors of the fraud would have
olnderltood their own work. I fliall satisfy myself
with one example, in which there is a proof of both
my aflertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour

Pour uy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottifn but il

French phrase; the two other lines do not exprels
the fenle of the French, and the lafl is absolute
non!enfe.

TH - eighth letter was never translated into

Frencih. It contains much refined myfiicifm about
LJc.iccs, a folly of that age, of which Mary as
very fond, as appears from several other circum-
fiances, particularly from a letter concerning i»
Presas by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Marr's
adversaries forged her letters, they were certainly
employed very idly when they produced this.

FROM these observations it seems to be evident

that there was a French copy of Mary's letters, of
which the Latin and Scottish were only translations!
Nothing now remains of this copy but those e
sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish tranflaj
rion. The French editor laid hold of these: fr
tences, and tacked his own translation to them
which, o ar as it is his work, is a servile and
very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin.
whereas in those introductory fenrences, we hay}
discovered strong marks of their being originail
and certain proofs that they are not translated froi
the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latii

an' Scottilh tranfirions with thee fnentences, ta
the Scottish rranfiator has more perfectly attainen

tli

the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early
translated into Scottish, Good. 2. 76; it is probable
that uchanan made his translation not from the
French but from this Scotrifh copy. Were it ne-
reil)ry, several critical proofs of this might be pro-
dulced. One that has been already mentioned seems
decisive. Diutius illic mcratafim bears not the least
rcrrnblance to j'ay veille plus tard la art; but if,
iaftead of I walkit [i. e. watched] laiter there-up,
we luppofe that Buchanan read / -aiti, &c. this
mniake, into which he might so easily have fallen,
2ccounts for the error in his translation.

THES' criticisms, however minute, appear to be
well founded. But whatever opinion may be form-
ed concerning them, the other arguments with re-
]ard to the internal evidence remain in full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's
letters, which our author has produced, is extreme-
iy lijecious, but not more solid than that which we
rave already examined. According to Murray's
diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow
January 21, 1567; she arrived there on the 2d;
kit that place on the 27th ; he, together with the
King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th, flayed in
that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh
before the end of the month. But according to
our author, the Queen did not leave Edinburgh till
Friday January 24th; as The stayed a night at Cal-
lendar, she could not reach Glasgow sooner than
the evening of Saturday the 25th, and he return-
ed to Linlithgow on Tuesday the 2th. By confe-
quence, the first letter which supposes the Queen to
have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Sa-
turd:y morning, whereas she did not arrive there till
the evening, mut tie forgeries, That the Queen
did not set out from Edinburgh focner than the

24th

24th of January, is evident (as he contends) from
the public records, which contain a Precept of con.
firmation of a life-rent by James Boyd to Margaret
Chalmers granted by the Queen on the 24th of Ja-
nuary at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the
Queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap-l
pointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son,
That the King and Queen had returned to Linlith.-
gow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palaces
there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. .
IIS.

THIS has been represented to be not only a con-I

vincing, but a legal proof of the forgery of thei
letters laid to be written by Mary; but how far its
falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations.

1. IT is evident from a declaration or confeflion

made by the Bishop of Ross, that before the con-i
ferences at York, which were opened in the begin-s
ning of October 1568, Mary had, by an artificeofi
Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of thofei
letters which her subjects accused her of having}
written to Bothwell. Brown's trial of the Duke o|
Norfolk, 3, 36. It is highly probable that thel
Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote
the defence of Queen Mary's honour, in the yeari

57o. They were published to all the world toge-
ther with Buchanan's Detetion, A. D. 1571. Now:
if they had contained any error so gross, and so ob-
vious, at that time, to discovery, as the supposings
the Queen to have pafied fcveral days at Glalgow,
while he was really at Edinburgh; had they con--
rained a letterdated atGlafgow Saturday morning, tho'i
she did not arrive there till the evening is it poffi-
ble that she herielf, who knew her own motions, or:
the able and zealous advocates who appeared for her
in that age, should not have published and exposed

z thi

this contradiction, and, by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an imposture ? In difquifl-
tions which are naturally abstruse and intricate, the
ingenuity of the latest author may discover many
things, which have escaped the attention, or baffled
the sagacity of those who have formerly confidered
the fame subjet. But when a matter of sac lay
so obvious to view, this circumfiance of its being
unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any of her
adherents, is almost a demonstration that there is
some mistake or fallacy in our author's arguments.
And so far are any either of our historians, or of
Mary's defenders, from calling in question the com-
mon account concerning the rime of the Queen's
setting out to Glasgow and her returning from it,
that there is not the least appearance of any differ-
ence among them with regard to this point. But
farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which
our author refts the proof of his assertions, con-
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the originals
subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tran-
flations of copies of those originals. It is not ne-
ceffary, nor would it be very easy to render this in-
telligible to persons unacquainted with the forms of
law in Scotland; but every Scotfinan conversant in
business will underitand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is
only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was
fealed with the Privy-Seal, on a warrant from the
fignet-office, proceeding on a signature which bore
date at Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that
the deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a
letter, fealed with the Privy eal, proceeding on a
signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some de-
gree of reason, that a proof founded on papers,

which

which are so many removes distant from the origi
nals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued if

the name both of the King and Q(een; by law
the King's subscription was no less requisite to an!
paper than the Queen's ; and therefore unless tht
original signatures be produced in order to ascertain
the particular day when each of them signed, or tc
prove that it was signed only by one of them, the
legal proof arising from there papers would be, that
both the King and Queen signed them at Edinburgh,
on the 24th of January.

4. T-H dates of the warrants or precepts issued

by the fovercign, in that age, seem to have been in
a great measure arbitrary, and affixed- at the plea-
iure of the writer; and of consequence, these dates
were flfdom accurate, are often false, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was found to be so pernicious, that an a of
parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the affixing a
false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE fill remain, in the public records, a

great number of papers, which prove the necessity
or' iis law, as well as the weakness and fallacy of
our author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the diflance of two centuries, to prove
any particular date to be false, yet furprizing in-
fLances of his kind hall be produced. Nothing is
more certain from hiftorv than that the King was
at Gla;gow 24th January 67; and yet the record
of signatures from 1563 to 582, Fol. 6th, con-
tains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmon-
flon laid to have been subscribed by our Sotvereins,
i.. ethe King and Queen at Edinburgh, January
24th 157 ; lb that if we were to trult implicily
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our
author's argument tD be good, it would prove that

noi
j

not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edin-
burgh on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Bishop
of Ross, that on the 25th of Otober 1566, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keith, App. 134; and
yet a deed is to be found in the publick records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that
day. Privy-feal, Lib. 35. fol, 89. Ouchterlony*.

BOTHWELL seized the Queen as she returned from
Stirling, April 24th 1567, and (according to her
own account) carried her to Dunbar with all dili-
gence. And. i. 95. But our author, relying on
the dates of Tome papers which he. found in the re-
cords, supposes that Bothwell allowed her to flop at
Edinburgh, and to tranfaft business there. Nothing
can be more improbable than this supposition. We
may therefore rank the date of the deed to Itright
Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mention-
ed by our author, Vol. . I24. among the in-
I'ances of the false dates of papers which were if-
sued in the ordinary courle of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper
to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 4th, not April
2.4th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's his-
tory, it is, that she remained at Dunbar from the
time that Bothwell carried her thither, till she re-
turned.to Edinburgh along with him in the begin-
ning of May. Our author himself allows that she
rrfided twelve days there, Vol. . 367. Now
though there are deeds in the records which bear
that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar dur-

N. B. In the former editions, another infiance of the fame

Mnture with thoie which go before and follow was mentioned;
bu! that, as has since been difcovcred, was founded on a mistake
o! the perlbn employed to fcarch the records, and is therefore
omitted in this edition. The reasoning, however, in the Dif-
Irtation ifands ftll in full force, notwithtianding this omission.

ing

ing that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh; e. g. there is one
at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy feal, Lib. 36,
fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at
Dunbar on that day. Lib. 3I. Chart. No. 524,
526. b. lib. 32. No. 154, 157. There are some
signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh
April 30th, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at
Dunbar May if. Id. ibid. No. 58. Thefediffe.
rent charters suppose the Queen to have made.fo
many unknown, improbable, and inconfiftentjour.
neys, that they afford the clearest demonstration that
the dates in these records ought not to be depend.
ed on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the

charter said to be signed April 27th, which hap.
pened that year to be a Sunday, which was not,
at that time, a day of business in Scotland, as ap-
pears from the books of federwit, then kept by the
Lords of fefflon.

FRoM this flort review of our author's proof of

the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident
that his arguments are far from amounting to de-
monftration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuinenefsof

these letters is founded on the stile and composition,
which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Queen, and unlike her real productions. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of composition
in most of Mary's letters, and even from her soli-
citude to write them in a fair hand, that he valued
herself on those accomplishments, and was desirous
of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when she
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks ol
inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance of this
may be found in a paper published, Good. 2. 30o
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut.
most hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages ol

a tranf.

h translation, they are not destitute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which she expressec
her love to Bothwell hath been pronounced indecent
and even shocking. But Mary's temper led her td
warm expressions of her regard; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highef rank.
Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series of
letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, co-
pied from the Harleian Library, P. 37. B. 9. ol.
88, in which Mary declares her love to that noble.
man in language, which would now be reckoned
extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Both-
well were written before the murder of her hus-
bnd; ome of them after that event, and before
ler marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fond-
ft expressions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly
ifcover that their familiarity had been extremely
riminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
refflons, which her enemies employed to prove that
he was no stranger to the schemes which were
orming against her husband's life. Of this kind
arethe following passages, " Alace ! I nevir diffa-
it ony body; bot I remit me altogidder to zour
ill. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and
uhatfaever thing come therof, I fall obey zow.
dvife too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
air secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tal
edecine and the bath at Craigmillar." Good. 2. 22.
See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa
eikle praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faithfull
ravellis quhilk I fuftene for to merite hir place.
or obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural,
btrayis tharne that may imperche me. God forgive
.e," &c. ibid 27. " I have walkit laiter tcair-
VrOL. I. MI m ,

up, then I wald halve done, gif it had not been to
draw omething out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zov, quhilk is the fairest commodity that
can be orit to ex-cul zour affairis." Ibid 32.
From the leiiers FOi'erior to the death of her hus-
band, it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's
ifizing Mary by t,.ce, and carrying her along with
him, was contri,-ved in concert with herself, and with
her approbation

HAVING

a Ti AT letter; of ri ;mi'.; ':;n;tarnce as those of Mary's to

BiCt';celi fheuld have L-e:i ;;.ire' lso, appears to many altc·
gethe- una-ccountab!e. After bci r p oduced in England before
hiz.bcrt.' carm:nii ore.--, t'.:r \v.c: c ehiered bach by them to
tie Ear! of v .ay. Gooj. . - He ems to have kep:
rh:m in h pofi ion urin- 1; . After his death, they fci
ir.:o the haids of Lennox hi; wcceTor, who ref-orcd them ;)
the Ear! of Morton. Good. '.

1. 'hough it be not neceTa.

ri:' co-.nechd with any of the quelions which gave occasion to
tyL Dernrtaticn, i: mr-i; Fcrlanp

: a:;il the cuiofity of fioe of m

:a"e-.- ;o irfto.:m them. t.-.,t ,cr a vcrv di-gent fearc-l, which
h-. ;:e'v been nmade, no cu'-.' of NMa;s letters to Bothwell c3:a
ce fr': ir. an'' of the pub.ick librai-i in G(reat Brit.iin. The
c.;- ce;: -i intelligence co3cerit'ili-C It. ince the ti:e, of their
L-:.'r iil'.erd to '.;., ;.., wva. comrrnic;tdc b'y the ::;curate
0r. L.rA..

; i RA CT f tie e:'ers of RobLert wce, Efq; ambafictdor
'.;cm ("een E': .1rdl t.j :i'e iin of -c, .nid, \ritrcl to ir

.. ir.Z: ''. . ;'.r.;. fc-.;-r-. of l'r.ie, fto;: t!e o;-i'ino re-

i:.-r-'.:-';~ of . r.

r \'-' - ieter. ' ,

m i -r' of -:gtuir 52,

;o :-: il:c te:'^l i

r , 'i, i the po!-i'iuo! ot Cih-iilpher Hunter,
i'1. D. of Drh.m.

I ;S, Sth iover.c ber, foi'n dlnburgh.

-' - - - I e bee:'. b o-1e n hand, 'That the cc. r hec-in

. ere '.. rr'.-:.'; of 'etr:-rs bet;veen the Scc- 'ih Q!een and the
'.arl of EGBo.:.e.!, hic bseen delivered to flndry hand;, and

::.?e- '.'as a: pr .e.t v- n ig. and c::ko.a n where it re!led,
.: , c eared cer.:. . i -.- r'-- P - rs l'i iiardvne's mea s,
:::, :o.:; hc ccrer a --i ,lihe :-.'rt. s are cr o", and now rr-
;. . '.'- -e E.-.rl or (C-v. -ie , I per-ive, vwill be liaridy
;:;.-ea-:e.! -o i.ak;e ,ei.-.e-y to her Majeiv acc-rc'ding to her Mr

Ti' 13

HAVING thus flated the proof on both fides;
having examined at so great length the different

fy iems

THIS time palt I have expcnded in searching where the cos-
fr and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
!'."uld have found great dtfFculty; now I will essay Gowrie,
a: d of my fuccels you fhali be floitly advertised.

izth of November 5Sz2, from Edinburgh.

BlCAt SE I had both learned, that the casket and letters men-

tioned in my lall, before these were come to the pofleffion of the
Lard cf Gowric, and also found that no mean might prevail to
.in the iame out of his hands without his own content and pri-
-:t ; in which behalf 1 had employed fitt infiruments, that ne-
rthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted to essay him-
kicf; letting him know that the aid catket and letters should have
-ecn brought to her MIVajcity by the oficr and good means of
Inod friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majefly
iefore they came into his hands and cuRody, and knowing that
he did bear the like affction, and was ready to pleasure her Ma-
. in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far ten-
i'-icd to her Majefly, and which thereby should be well accept-
i, and ith princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his
ceiort and contentment; I moied him that they might be a
r .efent to be sint to her Majefly from him, and that 1 might
c.ui the fame to be cnveyed to her Majefly, adding hereunto
":.;1 hords and arguments as miht Loth llir up a hope of libe-
- ::, ad a!so belt cftetd the p.upoic. At the fill he was loth
:, ..gee that they were in his poffeflion; but I let him plainly
now\ that I was certainly informed, that they were delivered to
.i.! by Sanders Jardin; whereupon lhe prefled to know who did
:' ufo;mn me, enquiring wlhedlh-r the sons of the Earl of Mor-
.;i had done it or no. I did not otherways in plain terms deny

. .n!iver thereunto, but that he might think that he had told
,c, as the prior i ready to avouch, and well pleaiid that 1 fhal
-:ichim to be the author thereof; after he had said [the.ugh]
.ti tcfe letters were in his keeping (which he would neither
':.': nor- deny) yet he might not deliver them to any per.cn
..::out the conients and piivities, as well of the King, that
'.;i iiterelt therein, as alto of the ret of the noblemen enter-
'.;lil-, of the action againlt the King's mother, and that would
. :e them kept as an evidence to warant anId make good that
:ion. Arnd albeit I replied, that their ation in that part touch-

; tie nifignation of the crown to the K ing by his mother, had
.;. 'd luch c:iatblifhment, continrmtion, and l.rength, by act;

M n -.' of

systems with regard to the facts in controvery ; it
may be expected that I should now pronounce fen-

tence,

of parliament and other publick authority and inflruments, as
neither hould that cafe be iffered to come in debate or queflion,
nor such scrolls and papers ought to be hewed for the strength-
ening thereof, so as thefo might well be left and be rendered to
the hands of her Majeliy, to whom they were dellined before
they fe!l in his keeping; yet he would not be removed or satis-
ied ; concludig, after much reasonings, that the Farl of Mor-
ton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durst
at any time make delivery ; and becaufc it was the firll time
that I had moved him therein, and that he would gladly both
anfiver her Iajefi)'s good expectation in him, and also perform
his duty due to his foeereign and aflociates in the acion afore-
said; therefore he would feck out the said cafizet and letters, at
his return to his house. which he thought hould be within a
(hort time ; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and
consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This resolution I have received as to the thing; and for the pre-
sent I could not better, leaving him to give her Majesty such
teftir,ony of hs good will towards her, by hii frank dealing
nerein, as i.e may have came to confirm her highnesses good
opinion conceived already of hm, and be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards him. I fnall tiil labour him both by
mvyflf and also by all other means; but I greatly difirull the
dcfired success helein.

z4th of November x 58, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the lc:ters in the coffer, come to ti

hands of the Earl of Go;rne, 1 have lately moved him carnelty)
therein, letting him know the purpoi. of the Scottifl (Qecn.
both giving cut that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels
;.nd aib iccKing thereon to have them delivered to her or de
faced, and that the means which he will make in this be
has hfijll be b great and e'ectual. as these writings cannot be
l'elyv .Ket in that realm without dangerous offence of him tha
hath te cc!'ody thereof, neither hall he ;hat is once known t(
bave them be lufferei to hold them in his hands. Herewith
have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that action, an
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is no"
openly known to have the pofieSiion of these writings, and
have let;in Lim iee vhnat luret:; it flall bring to the laid cauf
and ail the parties therein, and to himfcif. that thelb writing
may be vith iecrccy and good order committed t- the keepini
ot her 'I aj '. , h \i'. h..c :hem ;ea;iy ;hcnloevcr any eul

ie Ay,.,,woeverri f5

tence. In my opinion, there are only two conclu-
sions, which can be drawn fiom the fadts which have
been enumerated.

ONE,

.hall be for them, and by her Ilighneflis countenance defend
thtm and the parties from such wrongfu!l objections as shall be
laid againit them, offering at length to him, that if he he not fully
satisfied herein, or doubt that the Ielt of the aflbciates (lhall not
like of the deliery of them to her majetty in this giod manner,
and for the interelt rehearsed, that I hall rea.!ily, upon mcetin;
and conference with them, pro-ure their aiint in tllis part; a
matter more easy to offer than to perform) and, lafily, moving
him that (for the secrecy and beni-fit of the cause, ianl that her
Majesty's good opinion to;wards himflf mayl be firmly fettlcd and
confirmed by his acceptable foiwvsardinc herein) he would, with-
out needlcefi lcruple. frankly commit these writings to her Ma-
jeity's good culiody for the good uscs received . \ftel long de-
bate he resolved, and said, that he would unfeignedly lew and
do to her Majeily all the pleaflue that he might w!thout offence
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the afrociates in the
afsion, and therefore he would firfl make fe:-rch and view the
said letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and how
far he might satisfy and content her Majclv ; promising thereon
to give more resolute anifser; and he concluded flatly, that alter
he had found and seen the writings, that he might not make de-
livery of them without the privity of the King. Albeit 1 Ilood
long with him againll his -efolution in this point, to acquaint
the King with this matter before the letters were in the ha:;ds
of her Majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should ad-
mit great danger to the caufec; yet I could not remove him from
it. It may be that he meaneth to put over the matter fiomn him-
self to the King, upon fight whereof I hall travel effctfually to
obtain the King's consent, that the letters may be committed to
her Mlajefv's keeping, thinking it more easy to preval herein
. ith the King, in the present love ad affection that he bcalrc:
to her I-ighncfs, than to win any thing at the hands of tlhe -
fociates in the action, whereof tbme principal of them now come
an:d reinain at te devotion of the King's mother; in this I hall
Itill call n Gowrie to search out t c coser, according to his pro-
misc and as I hall find him minded to do therein, so shall I
do my best and whole endeavour to effect the success to her Ma-
jciiys belt contentment.

2d December 1SS2, from Edinburgh.

Ei CAUSE 1 saw good opportunity offered to renew the mat-
ter to the Earl of Gowric fbr recovery of the letters in the cos-

M m 3 Icr

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver-
sion to her husband, and presuming on her attach.
ment to himself, struck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, instead of
testifying much indignation at the deed, or discover-
ing any resentment against Bothwell, who was ac-
cued of having committed it, continued to load
him witih marks of her regard, conducted his trial in
iuch a manner as rendered it impossible to dilcover
his guilt, and oon after, in opposition to all the
maxims of decency or of pruence, voluntarily
agreed to a marriage wich him, which every confi-
deration mfould have irduced her to detest. By this
verdict, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having
contrived the murder of her hufand, or even of
having previously given her content to his death;
but she is not acquitted of having discovered her
approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and

his adherents laboured to efablifh, " That as James,

fr in his hands, therefore I Fut him in mind thereof; whele.
t on he told me, that the L uke of Lennox had fouqbt carnelt-
!v to h:are had tofe letters, and that the King did now where
;.ev *ere. so as they could not be deliv-e:e to her aijcfty with-
out t-e King's p-ivity and co:lsent, an he pretended to be
:il w\,.li's to p efure her :'ajcfty in the fan:, )f tlr as he
ma.- v.:h his duty To to heKir and to the reft of the afibciates in
tr'at act:cn; but I greatly dilr-Li to efft;c this :o her Majefi"'s
,^f'.-, t.kerein-, nreverthetief, 1 f.ll co my u:termcrt endea-

'- trt . janmes V. iwho pt the Ea-l of Gci:-ic to deah,

.A. D. ir 3, a;nd ieized ali his eiecs, t3ok care to ('liroy ]:i
-:- ter ,e:ters, or u ho e honour he 3.s at that ti'ne extremely

.. .cr. ; -r.;;'.r thev hav-e e. . e b: lhmr n;inkno' n accident;

cr vr.:- t hnry r .:'

n t ::.1 r emin Gni.b.hr;c anmoni the ar-
c':.yes or Ib-e of cr g-)a.: fa.ilies, it is :-no;b'. e :o detcr-

frim*

f;mtyme Erle of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor
of the horribill and unworthy murder, perpetrat in
tle person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
mory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis
lauchfull husband ; fa was he of the foreknowledge,
counfall, devise, perfwadar and commandar of the
:!id murder to be done." Good. 2. 207.

WHICH of these conclusions is most agreeable to
the evidence, that has been produced, I leave my
-::ders to determine.

M m 4 INDEX

# INDEX.

I D E X
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A.
A D DAIMSO N, archbiflop of St. Andrews, is excommu-

nicated by the fynod of Fife, II. 139. He excommunicat-

L X ed his opponents, ibid. is restored by the general assembly

upon conditions, 140. his mean submission to the general all
fembly - 204
,lbany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against hiA

brother K. James III. I. 57. is made prisoner but escapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed V. of England, 58.
procures assistance to invade Scotland on mean conditions, ibid.
returns to Scotland, and is reflored to favour, 59. cabals again
but is forced to fly to France, - - - ibid. o

.-- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James

V. 1. 37, 63. after several unfuccelsful Itruggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France, -63

Aiencon, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him - 11. 69
Allen, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulness of killing

excommunicated Princes - II. I 5

Alva, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q Mary, II. 27, 31, 43.

is recalled from his government of the Netherlands - 51
_Ambaj'adors, their office -- . 87
Andre.wJ St. the archbishop of, remarkably cured of a dangerous

distemper, I. 13 , 136. the motives of his opposition to the Q.
Regent, 58. his great influence on the bench of Bilhops and
weight in Parliament, 1(:3. governed the church with great
moderation, 65. persecutes the reformers, ibid. i66. per-
forms great service to the Congregation against the Feircli, 221.
is imprisoned for celebrating Mals, 30o. ruins Q Mary's as-
fairs by his imprudent condut, 456, 457. is taken prisoner
in Dunbarron cafile, and hanged 11. 17

- the castle of, demolished by the French - I. 110
-- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q. Regent

and the Reformers, I. 178. is provoked to leave the court,
r8o. is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, 195.

some

feme rcccIl:: ari a character cf him, ibid. 19-. artful en-
deavouris used to rndrmine him, 157. presumption of his in-
rocer.ce of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the
conventicn to invi:e the Queen to Scotland, 252. i received
bv her i.h confidence and affection, 253. retrains the turbulent
iirit of the people againlt popery, 266, 2t;. is sent to reltrain
the licentious Draices of the borderers, 272. executes his com-

.::-:. v.i-h vigou:r and prudence, 273. a conspiracy againfl

:I d:..ovcred, 282. is created Earl of Mar, 285. becomes
obrcxic' ts the F-rl of Huntly, ibid. See Mar and Murray.

t_.. E:-' c, ;.as the cnly man who asserted the independency of

..:i cet-::.-, T. :. -.. .!ii'mes tle Regency during the mi-
nor'-' c k.; .. : \. ;-,

_. 5is uble to gain his afCfecion;,

6 . i, a:a..- : ana :ie r

:nto Etand G;

-- O:-i' ; iea_\e t. return into Scotia,:, I,. oz. furrcnders
hi-se'r o K ames \ I. ;c,. he -ith ie.-eral others seize the
c .1 c-f 8tir-ir. to opTofz Arran, ic6. they are forced to fly
i-:s Eir.-and on the aIprcach ot t-e KRng . w;th an army, 0;7.
he is ar!inted nd his ee forfei;d, . is concerned in a
F!e: i- f o-;r of Sain, 2c. ir leized and committed prifoncr
to the ca I cf Einburg. . Ci F. e-s and flies to the moun-
ti'rs. z 1 . oe.rs to t o

r i to trial, 21;. fen:ence is pro-

ro_-n:ed againil him, : 6. he refuses to submit - 2z
/'-:i. Duke; of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eliza-

1-r ? ---- --- II . 2;
'. .- a Prince!s of De .noark,. m-rried o K. lames \ I. 11. 2ec-
:. her a-rival in Sco!and and coronation, 203. heads a par-
I tha:t oc-,fes the chacllor -- 212, z2

. -r.:. ' ?S. D-ci::, and C:f.'fr; revived in Scotland dur-

iio the singS mninor't,, 11. 8, . this gives great offence to
nmn;' of the cerg. 39, . an a of aflembly against these
c'.ces, c. , S. Bishops made subjet to prefbyteries and assem-
b:es, I;5. a gat iroke gien to their authority, i8;, i86.
N'ne of them present at the Queen's coronation 23
-'--' Eari of, i; apcir.ted to carry the crown matrimonial to the

h'aDr!rhin of Fance, I. 15:, i-4. uses his interelf with the re-

r :ers t; mr-ke a trery v.ith the Queen Regent, 178. leaves
. r cc'-t in re :r.renr. of her treachery, ito. refuses to ac-
ce;- to a tr-a: .'.v:th Murray the Regent, 495. is oon after
f-ced to fubm.i, g9. acts as lieutenant to the Queen after
:' ? ernt's murder, 1I. 6. is prevailed cn to join the King's
r_.;-, ;i. quartre.: .'h Athole, 55. confederates with hm

:;1 \.or:--. the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they

r..c:-. -:e g -ir.. h' to tie King. ,S. they raise forces a-
a: :. .

h .a. C' - cia'.es a treaty with him bv the mediation

rs iq

L't:'-:'h . is romted to the office of chancellor,

t-. the Kirr's a.i;-ori delerated to him and Lord Sorbes
a-;irl the :- ?tiih Lotd, _':'. his forces are defeated in an en-

.-. v.irh them - - ibid. 221

-n

.I._ _ ,. !

seo~a u, I. z;5
_:::-,-_:, r:£J2inizm: in <Coda:t, ---- I. 2-5

A nna,

.Irndo Spanifli, preparations for it, II. 88, 1S9. it is defeated

194

E,..,n Earl, is appointed Regent during the minority of Q Mary,

1. 97. his characer, c9. consent to the schemes of England
which dilgulis the public, oo. becomes fpcious of the Earl
ol Lcnox, loz. is forced to renounce the friendihip witil Eng-
land and declare for France, loj. and to persecute the reformers,
104. publickly abjures the doctrine of the reformers, iro. is
contemned by one half and little trutltd by the other part of the
nation, o16. heads the partizans of France and de.caders of
popery, 107. attempts in vain to seize the murderers of cardinal
Leatnun, 113. is forced to make a truce with the confpiratoir,
i1i. his eldell son is conditionaily excluded all right of fuc-
cefion, 17. his mean concefflon to the court of France, iz+,
i;:. gets the title of Chateiheraut, 125. is uinernined by
i'e Q. Dowager, 132, 133. propoials and argunimnts for his
leflignlatiion, 134. he consents to it, 135. retracts by the influence
es the archbilhop of St. Andrews, 136. is at la:t prevaile o0l
:;rd gets advantageous terms, 1 7. Scc CIJ.'wal',:erit.

.;.r,:n, eldell on of the Duke o Chatelhtr:ult, joins in an afio-

ciation with the reformers, I. iq4. I;aironly ecapes i:tended
.uin at the court of France, 195. is fill of resentment againit
the French on that account, ibid. 196. the Congregatinii fol-
licit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, z44. his gieat imprudence withi
regard to Q.Mary, 274. discovers a confpiracv agaiill the Qieen's
favourites, 2zS. lotes his reason, 11. o7, 6e. is inlpriloncd
by Morton 68.
-- late capt. Stewart, gets that title and ellate, II. 80. is

:.ppoincd to conduft Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tortures several of his servants cruelly, 81. his infamous
mariage with the countfi of March, 83, 84. his variance with
Lenox, 4. is fiuirated in an attempt to relcue the King at
Ruthvcn. 91. 1i confined prisoner to the cafile of Stirling, 92.
cgains his liberty and the King's regard, Ioo. reiunics his
power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven confpirat(rs de-
clared guilty of high treaibn, lo0; is deellicd as author of a per-
tecution against the clergy, C9. is gained over to Q.Elizabeth's
n;tercft, 114. gets everal forfeited eltates, 116. his corrup-
ticn and inbolence, i2z. is made chancellor and has unlimited
power, ibid 123. his venality is imitated by his wife, 123.
ilis monfrrous tyranny and opprefflon, ibid. 124. his power un-
dernined by Wotton the English envoy, 134, 13;. is confined
in the castle of St. Andrews but soen rcovels fvour, 135, 136.
his intercRf finks much, 138. is lripped of his honours and
ipoils, and reduced to hs originail iLition ibid.
.' i is Lords of, their origin and buiiliel, I. 8. by whom cho-

icn, 82, 83. the fubi.l-uent viriaicns and political eui made of
i:;is inflitution -- - 3, 84
. a'e! a Earl of, is appon:ed a ccmrmLToner to the conference at
Weiumnlcr - - I. 48S6

,-',,,

,l/b;, ambaff'dor from Q Elizabeth to Scotland, II. 1i. his

great prom;;es to King James. ibid. his promises are loon for-
got, 1.,. he is ailhamed and withdraws privately from Sct.
land ibid.
;ranit:i, the irequency of it in Scotland, how accounted for,
1. 363-36;. feteral inilances of it in France, 30b, 365. a
flop put to it there and in Scotland, 366. several great men ,p.
riovuc cr i., 3. 7. prevailed greatly afterwards, II. :c-
Af.'zl: of tile ch.rch of Scotland, the firlt but feeble and irrc-

gular, I _ I. ano!her assembly, their demands fr m the c n-
vcnei-n, 2-4, -27. to other alTemblies in vain follicit an auc.
mer.ta:ion of their revenues, 2o3, 294. thev addref. Q. Mary in
hih firain; of complaints, 3+z. an assembly proceeds at Glaf.
go.v no-wi h.a:;dirng the King's interdiction, II. , -. t\;o
ale-nmblies ield many of the privileges of the church to the King,
235, 2-o. declare it lawful for Minilers to lit in Parliament, 24j,
2-.. .ce Cer.y.
Sso:ilaiion, formed in defence of Q. Elizabeth against (Q M;.r;

II. ilS
.tb3,E E-:l o, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Ar.

gyl, I . 5. joins ith him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib.
dies loon after an enzert.,inment at tvlorton's, 66. filfpicions of
hi, being poi;ioed -- ibid.
:gr.s-e Lord ce. sic.d or. of the Earl of Lenox, arrives in Scot-
land from Fr-.nce, II -. becomes oon a great favourite of K.
James, ibid. high tles and pons bellowed on him, ibid. 1,
r.o:es .ai-i!t him. appendix, 401. See Lrnox.
A,.-r:an fai;nl, their origin and power, I. 8, SS.

B.

Ai;;l :r n, hnv, fomr.e account of him, I. 143. the rife of

his canfpr;.acv -;.ini t). Elizabeth, 142, 13 the naine-

and fihe-e of oper.ti ns f hii associates, ibid. 1<4. thev are
betrayeJ, Sized ard excuted -1-, 1a
BSccr, Si. cho:as, app;.int.d one of the comn:iffoncrs to t';

conference at \V eimmlnier - I. 4,6

D.,'i ."Jo!, his climr to the crown of Scotland, I. to. is prefer-

red ry Ed .

I. 2. Ion fcrced hy him to resign ibi

c.aad a r..;<i;:.i;g r.rict. !o'iicils an invasion of England fron
Spain, I!. l -i; .ns in a ccr. piracy to murder Q. Elizabeth, ibi.
is d:lcc:cr.; an.d :aken inr.to cuftudy, 146. and executed, ibil.
a'-~.:, their ijri:dictcil erve extensive, 1. 21. the d:fijrence b!-
t.;'en te Creatr and lerfer, whence, 78. three hundred of th!
remon-.rrate agairl tr.e condu&, of the Q: Dowager, 52jz t':
iefer azdr-::red bv their reprefenta:ies int: Parliament, 1I. 1S,.
petition of tre lefler Barons to Parliament, app. ^-;. See A'ob:.
BPa.'icrn D.r-r., a Look pub - .hed by King james VI. tirengthenr

his ir.teref in England -II. 21:

ZDBcts:

p.,!;,n cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the nobl.j,

1. bS, 69 his pletenfions to the Regency on th:- death of that
'riulce, 96. forges a tellanment of the late King, ibid his vievs
how ifappointed, ibid. his chara7c.r, 97. opposs the Earl of
Arran Regent, ico, 1oi. excites moll of tlhe nation against
the Engliih, oz. feizcs the young (Qeen .an hler mother, ibid.
cajols the Ea:l of Lenox, ilid. obliges the Reent to renounce
England and declare or France, 103. and to persecute the
reformers, 104. engrofies the chief direction of la/airs, o16.
his double dealing with the Earl of Lenox relented, ibid. 107.
is murdered, ii . his death fatal to the Catholics. 113. a
vain attempt to revenge it, ibid. 114. scandalous reports con-
cerning him 147
edford Earl of comes as Ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to wit.
ness the baptism of James VI. I. 387. his initrufions, 388,
389, his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix 349, 3, 360
i'dicndan Sir Lewis, justice clerk. K. James's resident at London,
II. 133. joins in promoting QElizabeth's interest in Scotland,
ibid. is ent with her Envoy into that cowutry - ibid.

Elack Mr. David, minilter at St. Andrews his ridiculous and fedi-

tious expreflions in the pulpit, I. zz9, z2o. being supported
by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdilcion, 230. is con-
demned by the privy couhcil, 231. is sentenced by the King to
reside beyond Spey 232

Bl'ackader captain, and three others executed for the murder of

Darnly -. 43;

Dsethius Hector, his hiItory of Scotland, iome account of 1.
folion Cle, Q. Mary confined a prisoner there 1. 47
BPonot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney . I o
Bordercrs, an attempt to reitain their licentious practices, I. 272,

273. Q. Mary visits them, 377. a fcufrle there in which the
English warden, &c. are made prisoners - II. 5,3

Borthvick Lord, affills the Q. Regent in defending Lcith I. 213
Bodh-well Earl of, intercepts a um of money from England to the

Congregation, I. 212 . favours the Qucen Regent, but resides at
his own house, 2 13. his resentment againt the prior of St. An-
drews, 285. is by him when Earl of Murray and Regent fum-
moned to a public trial, 326. prevents it by leaving the king-
dom, 327. a sentence of Outlawry against him prevented by
the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return, 336. escapes with her
after the murder of Rizio. 361. some account of his former
behaviour, 369, 370. commences a favourite of the Queen, 370.
Thc reconciles him to several Lords. with whom he was at va-
riance, ibid. 371. he increases in favour with her, 3;. cir-
cumlances concurring in this, 374. he is wounded in attempt-
ing to seize one of the borderers, 377. the Queen's extraordi-
nary regard for him on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his associates, 39t. propo-
les the rcioration of the popilh ecclesiastical jurifilition, 393
his views in :h;s, ibid. s94. is fufpeced the author ofDarnly's

murder,

r.: .c.

5 -s:. i! ch;arged i th it by Lenox, 40o. but fill fa

' oure ',. ;'s.e (Q:en, 404.. apointed governor of Edinburgh
ta:.e, ibid. his tria i hurr;cd on, 405. remarkable par-
tia!itv i.. his favcur, 4'5. Lenox accuses him openly, 47.
cer-,e to his til. it a cr. retinue, 0o8, 409. is acquitted
b- a jirv, 40 . the trial univerfa!lv ccnfured, ibid. 40., 410.
t .aI;'engt anv that wou'd accuse him, 41o. several aCs or
i'ariiamen:; [-ad in his ib\o ir, ibid. 411. he procures an at in
iv;-ou o- the reforma ion , , 412. prevails on several of the
nobles to recommnr.d inim as a husband to the Queen, 41 3, 41r,
41;,. eiz s the Q c n on a journey from Stirling, and carric,
her to Dunbar, , 1-, . his view in this, 418. obtains a par.
den u..er ;he sgrat , :':. 11 . Frocures a divorce from his
wife, 41. c?.r-ies the (,ueen to the calle of Edinburgh, ibid.
is crea'ed Du':e of Orr.re', A4:. and ma:ried to the Queen,
ibiL. is not ailo-se te title of King, 421. he watches tl;e
Queen very cice;v, ibid. 42. endeavours to get the Prince
in.o hi:- coio- , z, 423. is alarmed with an association of
the r;-'. a-i.-..i her, 'een and him, 424, 425. carries the

ct.se to t'.c c.:.ile e: - ' ::hw;ict, 42',. raises forces against

thr co.ie..c:a;-- i.or.i.. i;. h marchei against them, 427.
pro.rc s a it.ne. :. ;.-:, z 2. thb how prevented, 429. tak:s
his -. i'a-'.-'..i o: tht ''c':, ai-l is forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a ca-::e of le;ter rr :'. ' 'vlarv o ;iim, 435. they are inter-
cen:ed bv the t..al or .'ic'.. ibid his miserable fare, 447,
.- S. r;ec: on- on . con.ic;. 4; copy of his divorce from
Lacv 'ean CGordor, -ir.n.:; -- 93

S :- . .:c'
l.r.:ci_ 3,'a;:. ;, c;:-:ced Ear! ofBothwel;, II. 196.

i im: d cc-i'. v.::ce. 2-5, :S6. etcapcs and

2at.:'; to bre-ak ir:o tie ing's pr. ence, z=6. letires to the
nor:', ibid. he and his -d:erents are attainted, 209. fails in
an a:;'mp: to l; iz e e in", ibid. is taken under protecion of
Q. E!:ae:h. ' 'o I'l. c;, rtor him, 211. seizes the King's per-
ion, 2 13 for.,' him o imni,; the chanceilor and his other fa-
vour:es, ibid. and to rant him a remiiion, ibid. his bold
ar.n i:n!er.t behaviour a-erwnards, 214. is encouraged by the
En:;.ii ambniador, :17. mrakes ar.orher a;tmi!;t to come at
ithe in, 2 1 . is rnu!t ard obliged to iv to the north of
fnr.iand, iotid is ab.n-'::.c bv Q tEli.zabeth, and forced to
fl. io Spain ar.d I':v, z ;. -emain isn indigent obcitv, and
is never after rcocrci ied :o : e King ibid.

Adam, bi.'hop of iOrknev, perf-rr.s the .erer.:onv ofmar-

r;-ce of QM r.:r- :, t'e 1:; of Bouinwcil -- . 4:

Jcr. .c, a'gh. See ' H';cn.
LZ..c, -:f, v.relfed hby te i-:e:lh out of the har. of the English,

I .

i2e. hev cgr.n: to reiore it and its dependencies t the

French 126
S.;;ic_, Envoy from r. )F:;"abel, acue I. enoo ofdiiurbing the
Fpe;e-, Ii. 74. is :c.:cd an audier.n. iiid. is fcrt to cncou-

i 12^ó

tafe ti;e conspirators at Ruthven, 92. to enquire about 1K.

James' cortelpondcnce with the pope - 2. 6, 2- 7
so!d ord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James 111. frul-

trated -- - I36

-- is prevailed on to join the King's party againfi Q Mary, 11.

2 . joins the Rutlven conspirators 89
pri,-'ne Count de, comes an ambassador from France to witnels

the baptism ofK. Ja. Vl, I. 387
marce Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, T. o. his grand-
son aflerts his right and vindicates the honour of his country,
12. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles ,t6

a priell, employed by the King of Spain to educe the Scots

nobles --- ---'
- Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian minister, performs the ceremony of
the-coronation of K. James's Queen - II. 20

Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits himself with address and

reputation as ambassador at the court of Eng!and Ji. 244, 2-,
- r. Robert, a miniiLr, his resolution in refuting to publii
the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, 11. 269. is deprived
and baninfed on that account ibid.
Ti.,;C,an George, his hiflory of Scotland, some account of, [. .

remarks on his dialogue de jure Regiis. 153. alone accuses Q
Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio, 56. approved
of aflhfllnation, 367. his partiality in overlooking an a of Par-
li.ment in favour of the reformation, 4 1. attends the Regent
i.to England when called on to accuse Q. ar) 47;. was one
of the pleceptors of K. Janes V\I. II. 5;. commended for his
4reat genius - -- 30c

e:,,,'c:gh. ee Ceii.
D.?<rr;g/Is, when fil. represented in Parliament - . 21n

C.

the Lords of Grainge and Lethiigton, appendix 411

Caithbncs Earl of, his protell at the trial o Botiwvcll for the murder

of Darnly - J. ,c9
Ctlvin, the patron and rcftorer of prcfb'tcran churc!h govern-

m-nt -. 49
Cimatn,, some millakes of his -- I. 388, 389. 415.
Casioigate na;,r Edinburgh, a Parliament held there - I. 19
Car./an, some account of him, I. 135, 136. his remarkable cur:

of the bilhop of St. Andrews ibid.
C-,:, Sir Gcor:e, fnt amhb.T;alior from Q Elizabeth to encou;age

the confpir.tors at Ruthlven - II. 92
- Robert, ent by Q_ Elizabeth to sooth K. James after the
death of his mother, 11. iSo. is not permitted to enter Scot-
land, ibid. was thie first tha. brcunlht K. James inteligence of
the death of QElizabeth - 20
C',.-c of letters from Q. Mary to Bc.ihwcll fcizej by the Earlof

Mlorton,

Morton, I. 43j. her enemies avail themselves much of them,

ibid. 436

Co5,i's Earl of, joins the King's party I. 21
Ca/elnau, the French ambaftador, is employed to procure the con-

lent of his court to her marriage with Darnly,I. 318, 319. he
endeavours to make up the differences between the Queen and
him, 373. his intercession in behalf of Q.Mary II. 128
Cath,,rine of Medicis, assumes the government after the death of

Frands II. her son, I. 246. her harsh treatment of Q.Mary,
ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 304, 30;.
bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Protcftants, II. 25.
her artful condufc with that view -ibid. z6
Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, I. 232. 256. is employed

to negotiate a peace w.ith France, ibid. over-reaches the French
ambaifador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 256. is appointed a corn-
mrifioner to the conference at Wefrtmintler, 46. is sent by Q.
Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, II. o. has an interview
with her hich excites QElizabeth's jealous, o5. is treated
harsh!' by QElizabeth for conrenting to Q : Mary's death 179,

18o

---- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party agairnt Es-

sex, 11 273. his character, ibid. 274. his great assiduity, ibid.
enters into a private ceorefpondence with K. James, 280. a
letter from him to his Maajeftv, app. -16
Creiba,, of the popifn clergy, a chief engine of their policy I. 44,

173
C rarles V. Emperor. his great power, I. S-. and ui.!nmited an-

bition. SS. 89. is checked by Francis I. - 8

K. of France makes a leagnewi:h Q.Elizabeth 11. 31, 32
Chs.lci-au: Duke of. that title conferred on the arl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, I. 2:. his right of succession to the crown
of Scolar.d maintained, 8. enters a prcteRlition to save his

r ih:, 61. joins the reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, c.i. joins in afociation with them, 194. is
looked on as the head of the Congregation. 9, 196. his p-
fillanimity, 2:0. becomes obnoxious to Q. Mary, 24. his
jealofv, of the prior of St. Andrews, 288. deprived of hi;
French pension, 304. is alarred at the Earl of Lenox's return
to Scctlar.d, 313. an accommodation braught about by the
Q neen's influcr.ce, ibid. adheres t Murray in cppofing the
Qeen's marriage. 3'8. is yardoned on his humble application,
bu: forced ;o reside in France, ;4 . his Fartizas's grumble at
Mu.r--.'s beirg aJiar.ced to te Reency, 41, 452. returns
from ra.ce and h.' ad thc Q.ec,"' adhercn;-, m9. : rnade her

.icc-:-nnt-cer.eral id. h: rcicu.ion wavern, the Rcger:

cor-t'i:- him pn'i,.- o ' c- .:'e of .dirb;:-h, 496, 47. is f£-
a: i:' C: Kr.-idy r.! ;ci-. too (Q'tce:s pnrry, ..t. IS
pFr^<c.!:.e. trQ:t'r b . .nor- r tr :-'.;' Regent, 9. is :-ocl;!e
1o .x .m;~ le lt:' I-er:, a .

r: .c o a trceaty bet.wc-n thtns.
ibi. t.- c ..- --

g'
s

Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the union of the crowns,

II. 29g, 300. See cc5h:/, clergy.

Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parliament IT. ISS
Clans the infLitution and nature of - I. 27, 28
Clergy popifl, their great riches and power, I. 67. 141. were made

ufeofby K. James V. to tLpprefs the nobles, 68, 69. made acon-
fiderable body in Pariament, 1..2. their great influence over the
laity, 143 they engrofild learning, ibid. and held many of
the chief employments, ibid. 1i+4. their power encreafed by
celibacy, ibid. they seized the efiates of the inteilate, 145.
and tried all matrimonia! and ti t!lmentary causes, ibid. become
obnoxious to the laitv, 146. tihei great con:uptor, whence,
ibid. these of Scotland particularly diliollte, 147. their weak
defence of their tenets, 148. try i vain to irnpoe ta!fe mi-
racles, ibid. 149. their imnlitic coiiicl t to the ref.rmers 16-.
- reformed, try in vain to recov.r the revenues o the church,
1. z25, 252, 254. procure a eblition of all relicts of popry,
251. a new reoulation col.cerni:: thneir revenues. 2-5-z8o0
they are no gainers b it, 21i%. ti .' ip..s .at in those
days, ibid. are offended ..t the mnoder.,u;L of :nhir leaders, 302.
occaions a tumult among the pcop l, bid. 303. more com-
plaints of their poverty, 3 14, 39 1. are jealous of t . M iry, ibid.
392. the inmall allowance appointed to lfutppt them all, 392.
their application for payment of teir ipnlnds of lit e e,ccl,
451. freth complaints of the diclincey 1c the funds for their
maintenance, 5o9. are put off with tir words and pro.
mises, ibid. 5lo. archbilhops, &c. introiiuce among them by
Mototon, If. 39, their grievances under his adminiftr:.ion, 52,
53. they approve of the Ruthv'en couli iatars, 93. by fivour-
in; them they provoke the lill, >"4' . f:ve:e laws made
againlt them, IO8, o19. t ,cv o Edinourgh ny into Ingland,
log. as do several others th:: .re ii-o.l cmineint, ibid. more
rigorous measures againil them, i 6. they ubtain no ledrefs onr
the reitoration of ti:e exiled L.ords, 13 -. repr'elent their griev-
ances to Parliament. S3. a mailntc!;ance provied for thmn lly
Parliament, 18q . t. hey prevail to gt reiovtcrian govern-
ment eflablifhed bv la.Vw 20. rheir zeal againli thlie Popish Lord',
214, 215, 225. their ralph pcecdins, , 227. they erec
a handing Council of the Chu ch. 2'8. vindicate one of their
number who declined the civil jurildi0ion, 230, 231. their
itanding Council o:-d, e i to e..'c inburgh, 231. this occa-
sions a violent tumult tih:c, 232, 33, 234. they use cir ut-
molt effiorts to ipii- the i o ;,le, 36. arc dcc!rtcd and fly to
England, ibid 237. their power greatly reduced, ibid. are
prevailed on to ive up many of their pri:ilecg, 239. are re-
lcred to a feat ;: I':ija.ment, ' . this v'o!-ntlv opposed by
many oftle.m, .43. b ' canri-d :n their geeral! Afrembly. ibid.
2 1.. tiho; e til!cd ti

t i. pri"iicge are laid under many reg.-
l.,tons and relrittions, £50. :"" are brout under ^reat sub-

V'^i.. 11. N n ~~~~~~~~~jior:,

icction, 2; . the revolutions among them since the Union of thd
Cro r.s - - - 299, 300
1ntrcc Lord, appointed a commissioner at the conference at Weft-
minfler - -- I. 486
Cckburn of Ormiton, receives a upply of money from the English

to the congregation, I. z 2 z. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

CGin in Scotl-nd, some account of, - I. 206.II. 5
(crnn-areis appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual Court,

I. 3 o. they are deprived of all authority - 393
Csnfcijj of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parliament

I. 240
C-n r.a:.r, the Protestants diftinguihed by that name, I. 174

their lea ers enter into an afiociation, 179. are involved in dif-
fculies, o9. apply to Q Elizabeth for afifltance, 210. mo-
ney lent them b her intercepted, 21 . make a ralh and defpe-
rate attempt on Leith and are repulsed, ibid. 213. are no less un-
fortunate in a second flirmilh, 213. are quite dispirited and re.
treat to Stirling, ibid. ae joined by the body of the nobles,
z16. their army dwindles away, 216. are animated by Knox,
ibid. they apply again to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. their parties
harrafs the French, z 2. are aiilted by a fleet from England, 222.
conclude a treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk, 23, 224.
the design and substance of this treaty 224. negociate a peace
with France, 232. articles of the treaty, 233. they reap many
advantages from it, 234, 23;. See Rformation.
CcreT.ari, National, framed in defence of the King and Govern-

ment, If. 192. the nature and reasonableness of it, ibid. 193.
the progress of it since - 93

Csur,; of Scotland, what - -I. 159
Gra;g, a minifLer, boldly teflifies against Q. Mary's marriage with

Bohwell - -- I. 420
Cra-ufrd, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes Dumbarton Caqle, II.

1i, 16. the difficalties of that enterprize 16
---- rarl of, one of the heads f the Spanish faEtion, H. 19i,

lc,. ofers his fer:iceo tohe K. of Spain, 196. joins in re-
bel!:on aigaint the King, 99. i, forced to submit to him, ibid.
and imprisoned a short time - - ibid.
Ci'r.:to, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his bar-

barous policy - 1. 5z, 53.

a jesuit, a plat againf Q. Elizabeth discovered by his

means 1. 117
CG :an,:,, a remarkable inqfance of the diiTiculty of bringing them

to jitie, - 1. 20,

-
Cr: d u, he French .mbaiTador, refules to countenance Q: Mary's

rarr:og with Bothivcll, I. 421. attempts in vain a reconcilia-
tion be.,-een the Qeen and the confederate Lords, 427. 428.
mediate, a truce between the King's and Queen's party in Scot-
land 11. 3
C-. w..a::'::. -.:i of Scotland gra.n:ed by Pariiment to the Daa-

phin.

phin of France, I. 161. deputies appointed to carry it, but are
prevented 163, 164

Cuningham Robert, appears at the trialofBothwell in name of
the Earl of Lenox, 1. 408. demands a delay, which is refused,

ibid.

CurTe, one of Q Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried prisoner
to London, 11. 149. is produced an evidence againfi her, 158

D.

Arnly Henry, Lord, proposed as a hufbandc to Q_ Mary, I.
309. his right offucceflionconfidered, ibid. 310. is per-

mitred to visit the court of Scotland, 316. arrives there and
quickly gains the Queen's heart, 317. his charaer, 319. dif-
guits everal of the nobles, particularly Murray, ibid. 3zo. cul-
tivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 320. is despised on that
account, 321. grows intolerably insolent and haughty, 329.
schemes to aflaffinate Murray, 331. a plot to seize and fend
him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences of
this, 332, 333. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 335.
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, 335. is im-
placable withrefpec to the exiled nobles, 346. loses the Queen's
affection by his untoward behaviour, 352. demands the Crown
matrimonial, 253. becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, ibid. his resolution to beavenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 355. articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 357. heads the conspirators who perpetrate the mur-
der, 358. confines the Queen after it is committed, 359. pro-
hibits the meeting of the Parliament, ibid. irakes his escape
with the Queen, 360, 361. her hatred to him increases, 68.
is negleced by ler and treated with little refpea by the nobles,.
37z. resolves to leave Scotland, 374. his wayward and ca-
pricious behaviour, 375. he writes the reasons of his condu&t
to the Queen, ibid. his strange behaviour at the baptism of the
Prince, 388. a false reason alledged for this confuted, ibid.
389. retires to his father at Glasgow, 391. falls ick there, 394.
conjectures concerning his dilltemper, ibid. is neglected by
the Queen, 395. she afterwards visits and expresses affetion for
him, 396. he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 399.
is lodged in a separate house, ibid. he is murdered there, ibid*
400. his character, 400. a proclamation issued for discovering
the murderers, oi. a remits enquiry made into it, 40z-410.
Capt. Blackadderand thiee others executed on that account, 451.
the confession of Morton the Regent at his death concerning the
murder, II. 82. paper of objections of the Court of England
againit his marriage with QMary, App. a diiertaton.concern-
ing his murder, at the end of vol. II.
David I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church I. 142

1- 1. troubles during his minority, I. 34
Oavi/on, ent into Scotland by Q Elizabeth, gs a spy on the French

N n z Ambaf-

Amb-.;-dor, II. 96. is sent to gain Arran's interet to QL Eli-
zabe:h, 1 . tis he loon accompiifhes, ibid. brings the war-
ran; for Q /Mar.'s death at Q. lizabeth's desire, 16S, 169.
is charged by lI-er with difobeving her order;, 179. is imprison-
ei. :ri-d and fincd, a-d o!ois all avocr, ibid. objections against
him in the cauf o the te Scottish Queen App. 48

D,7: Monsieur, is sent v a
i lhpply of forces to affill the French

agarin. the En_:i in Scriad, 1. 1-:3, i24. his success there,

I24
Di-.-:r., i. t:e C'.'rC-l, the r. book ofcompofed, I. 251. ibid.

v., objecte aainit in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other ater-: i:- faour c.f Church discipline frustrated II. 8;
Douanias, the pov. r and Fr3nerty of that family, I. 3' they

al-ire to indeDer.dnc', 5. \Wih. E-rl of, murdered by K.
Iames II. ibid. his son endeavours to resent it, 5j. is forced
to f' into Enan. -ibid.
- W/'lliam, Q Man. committed a prisoner to his caitleof
Lochleven 43+

- George, brother to the above, affits the Queen in mak.
ing her escape -452, 43
-- Archibald, one of Darn!'s murderer, II. 141. under-

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted, 142. is sent
Am.rbagfador to England, ibid. letter from him to the Q of
Scots, app. 452. to the King. 43'

Drur-,, Sir \Vm. enters Sco;:and with an army to support the QQeen's

pa;t:, 11. 6. they join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the King's and Queen's parties, 32.
comes v. bih forces -o :.::' Morton in besieging the castle of Edin-
burgh. * 7-. Si'h L forced o irr.ender, . ..
- Sir Drue. i apoi.ntcd one of Q( Mary's keepers II. 120
Dud-: Lord Robe::, re co.mended b Q Elizabeth as a husband

to Mry . 3:-. swhy a favourite of Q_ Elizabeth's, ibid. is
highl-. prormone by her, ibid. 306. his situation extremely
del:cte. 3:-. becomes iufpicious of Cecil 3c-

D -r;~.
r .: Cea!e, furrrized and taken in the King's name by the

Reget - -II. 15,

Dr;', a mini:rer of Ei rburgh, banifned from his charge by King

james, for his free in-etives againi the courtiers, I. 87. at-
ter being re;iored he is driven from it a second time for approv-
ing the Raid of Rush\e - 10;

E.

DiEs-ur^, is ta!<en and burnt by the English, I. oS. Ic9.
a gre..t fray there bet een the French and Scots, 128, 129.

is seized by he Reforicrs, 18;. its inhabitants are terribly
alarmed by the French, 212. a treaty there with the French
and Englih, 232, 233. a loin demanded of it by Q. Mary,
342. which is granted f r the superiority of Leith, ibid. the
treaty ofiniiled cn by Q Elizabth, 389, 3o0. is possesed

by

by the Queen's party, IT. 4. and fortliled by them; 18. tile
City and Cafale hold out agaill the ing'b ibrces, 0o. is re-
duced to great liraits by famine, 3 . is rered b a truce, 32.
the citizens take up arms to proilote the ing's nmrriage, 200.
thev rife again and insult the King and his mini'trs on the mur-
dcr of the E.rl of Murray, zo, 207. aliilt the Ki;ng aainlt
Huntlv, 21i'. a violent tumult there on account of the Clergy,
232-235. thcy are fcvcrcly punilled for it by the King, 236-
z2j. their miniilers return to their carge, 2, 2z .

241. divided

into paniiles and nulmbr of ininiitcrs inclrealcid, 41. they de-
cline publiifing the account of Gowlic's corniracy, 268. all,
except one who is banished, are per:ilaldd by the King to do
it - - - ibid. z69

Ediw.ardI. of England, destroyed the public archiies of Scotland,

i. A. is made umpire between Pruce :and aliol, ii. his art to
acquire the huperiority ot Sotl;:;id, ii;;d. li v.wars with the
Scoto under Rob. Bruce --, i1, 46

Eglirton, Earl of, is prevailed on to oin the ]ing's party 11. i2
Elizabeth, her peaceable accession to tue t. rou'n of Eugialnd I. 14.

supports the congregation in Scotland, 2z l, 1 . is sparing in
her supplies, 211. resolves to iupport them on a econd appi-
cation, 216. her good conduc in mat:ers of importance, 217.
motives that determined her to afliil them, ibid. z19, 220. h-r
deliberate and resolute conduct, 222, 223. fends a flrong fleet
to their afiflance, 223. conclucdes a rcatv with them. ibid. 224.
her right to the Crown of England afiet;d b i-rancis and Mary
in France, 2 3. obtains advantageous terms for the Scots, 234.
is follicited by the Parliament of Scotland to marry the Earl of
Arran, 244. thisie declines, 24;. the fieds of her discontent
with Q.IVary, 2z5, 256. her jealo-.iy of the ficceflion, 257,
_6o. her exceflive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty, 26o,
261. her dissimulation to her, 261. reftiues her a safe con-
dut, 262. fends to congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 269.
refules a concession mad'- by Q.Mary, 27e. her jealousy of her
right betrayed her into mean Ictioins, ibid. Icer resemblance
to Hen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with Q Mary proposed,
293. hie artfully declines it, ibid. her vie.s in regard to Q.
ilary's marniage, 297, 298. assumes a diiagreeable authority,
298. nancs one for a hulband to Q, Mary, 305. the different
qualifications of her ministers and favou ites, ibid. 306. difiembles
with Q_ Mary about her marriage, 307-309. and li!es\ifc
with regard to L. Darnly, 310. affrionts Q aMary by her infinua-
tion concerning Lenox, 311 . is perplex.ed about the ma;-riage
of the Scottish Queen, 315, 316. permits Darnly to visit the
court of Scotland, 316. assets to declare against Q Mary's
marriage to him, 322, 323. her realbns for this conduct, 323,
324. her great dissimulation in that afiair, ;30. hcr harsh and
deceitful behaviour to Murray and his all;ciates wiho had fled
to her, 339. is firuck at hearing ol' the birth of James VI
372. consents to sand godmother to him:, iid. the Parli .-

_ n 3 r-:

ment address her to fettle the succession, 379. this greatly em-
baraffes her, ibid. 380, 381. she sooths and gains her Parlia-
menr, 38-. endeavours to accommodate her differences with
Mar., 389. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's mur-
derers, 407. interposes in her behalf when a prisoner, 437. her
ambaffaior is refafed access to Q. Mary, ibid. Ihe offers affiift-
ance to the other nobles, 438. her deliberations concerning the
disposal of QMary on her arrival in England, 461, 462. re-
solves to detain her there, ibid. 463. her motives to this con-
duct, ibid. 464. fends her letters of condolance, and gives or-
ders to watch her conduct, ibid. 464, 465. she gladly accepts
the office of umpire between her and her subjects, 465, 465.
receives a very pressing letter from Q Mary, 469. her precau-
tions againit her, 470. appoints commissioners to hear Q_ Mary
and her accusers, 4-6. her important situation on that occa-
sion, ibid. her views in this affair, 477, 478. receives the Re-
gent's demands, 481. removes the Conference to Weltminlter,
483. her mean artifices to get the evidence of QI Mary's guilt
from the Regent, 49o. treats her with greater rigour, 491.
writes a harfi letter to Q Mary, ibid. he dismisses the Regent,
without approving or condemning him, 493. but secretly sup-
ports his party, ibid. makes propofais to the Regent in her fa-
vour, 49-7. Norfolk's project concealed from her, 50o. dif-
covers and defeats a rebellion in Q Mary's favour, o56, 507.
resolves to deliver her up to the regent, 51o. her great con-
cern at his death, 11. . continues to encourage faions in
Scotland, , 3. her political conduct with regard to Lenox,
6-9. is excommunicated and deprived of her kingdom, &c.
by the Pope, 8. supports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lenox to be Regent, q. proposes a treaty of accommo-
dation between QMary and her fubjeds, o. procures a cef-
sidon of hostilities, ibid. fends proposals to QMary, 1 . her ar-
tifices in the condct of this affair, ibid. I z. appoints commis-
fioners to f.ame a treaty, 13. finds a pretence to render their
meeting fruit!efs, 14. a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjou, 25. declares openly against the Queen's part),
29. concludes a treaty with France, 31. her motives for ne-
gociating a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 42, 4.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary, 5o. negociates a
treaty between Morton and his adversaries, 6. her answer to
K. James's demand of a possession of an eate in England, ibid.
65. a marriage between her and the D. of Alencon proposed,
69. interposes in behalf of Morton, ;4. her measures in or-
der to save him, 76, . countenances the conspirators at
Ruthven, 92. is alarmed at a conspiracy against her, I i , i12.
the designs of Queen Mary's adherents againfr her, 13. endea-
Yours to recover her inrereft in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interest, 114. amuses Q Mary with a fruitless negociation, 117.
a new conspiracy againit her, ibid. an affociaion formed for
her defencs, 118, 119. her suspicions of Q_ Mary, 119. her

ii;

life endangered by a conspiracy, 125. this how discoverej
and prevented, 26. occasions an extraordinary statute for her
preservation, ibid. is in a dangerous situation fiom the progress
of the holy league, I 31. endeavours to form a confederacy
of the Proteflant Princes, ibid. 13z. and to proceed with ri-
gour againt Q Mary, 133. advances her interest in Scotland,
and proposes a league with it, ibid. 134. fettlesa penlion upon
K. James, 134. concludes a treaty with Scotland, 140. ac-
count of Babington's conspiracy against her, 142-146. her difli-
mulation after (Q Mary's conviction, 161, 6z. her anlfier to
K. James's interceflion for her, 164. her farther diflimulation
and anxiety, 167. signs the warrant for her execution, 168. her
speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid. affect to lament
Q_ Mary's death, 178. several marks of her artifice in that
affair,ibid. 179. the endeavours to sooth K. James, 80. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, 189, 19o. prepares to meet
its resentment, 9go, 191. endeavours to secure Scotland, ibid.
tries to prevent K. James's marriage, 199. follicits him to treat
conspirators against him with rigour. 211. evades the decision
of K. James's right of succession to the Crown of England, 24 ,
245. is disgusted at several of his proceedings, 246, 247.
discovers his correspondence with the Pope, ibid. fresh grounds
of her suspicion, 273. her conduft with regard to the Earl of
Eflex, ibid.-279. herirrefolution concering his death, 279.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives .amballadors from
K. James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 286. her Iat
illness, 283. conjeaures concerning the caule of her melin-
choly, 284-286. her death, 236. and chara'1cr, 2S7, z.::.
declared the K. of Scots her successor, 289. some of er let-
ters, app. 327, 35., 362, 363, 368, 380, 382, 387, 406.

E hinftin, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a corref-

pondence with the Pope, 11. 248. is tried and found guilty of
high treason, ibid. and pardoned on the (O.meen's intercession ibid.

Engiand, the English seize and detain Kiig James 1. of Scotland

long a prisoner, I. 34. the nobles theie hunbled, 38. had
early two houses of Pailiament, So. they invade Scotland,
108. their depredations there, lo, iii. a peace between
England, France and Scotland, I i. invade Scotland again,
11S. gain a great vicory, 119, 120. it proves of little ad-
vantage to them, 121. they force the Scots into a closer union
with France, 122. conclude a peace, 126. an English fleet ar-
rives in Scotland to aiil the congregation, 222. a peace con-
cluded between them, 223, 224. they enter Scotland and be-
siege the French in Leith, 224. are several times repulsed,
226. causes of their bad success, ibid. 227. articles of a treaty
of peace, 235. they quit Scotland, 236. reflections on the
right of succession to their Crown, 257-260. the Parliament
favours Q. Mary's right of succession, 379. A league between
England and France, 11. 31. between England and Scotland,
+o. the national covenant adopted in England -- 193

N n Etallc

Ertc-i's with what view introduced I. 22, 2
E:-~rc!. gcvern.nenr in ;he Church, some account of, I. 248. an

ar:en^.pt to relc .t, 11. 9. it is abolihed by the Assembly
*'. , '--:'

:J:s r.o' ilr.ed, 1-4. See .-rchi/jho:s.
Err:., J--: o:. o: - of the head= of the Spanifl fathion, IT. 19.

h, cfTe-s or ser ice to the K. of Spain, 196. appears in rebel-
lio., i:. is forced to ubmit to to th king, 199. imprisoned
fc- a aort time, ibid. loins in ano:her confpiracv, 29g. is
summoned by the King to irircnder, 210. offers to fubir to
a :ria, 21;. Sentence pronounced against him 216
Eri. of Dun, is employed y the Queen-Regent to deceive the

Protef;tnts, I. 1-5 his refmentnt of this uage - ibid.

Lord, governor of iFdnburgh Castle, as a neutral part

be:ween the Qesen-Regent and thc congregation, I. 214. re-
ceives the Qieen-Regnt into the Caitle, 226. is created Earl of
Mar, 29. See M?-.
-- Alexander h; the chief directions of the education ofK.
James VI1. II. 55. amits iome of the nobles to make complaints
to him against Mcrton the Regent, ;,S. is turned out ofStirling
Ca:!e by his Nephew the Earl of Mar 6
Ekh: a', the French Envoy, endeavours to oblrud a treaty between

Eng and and Scotland 11. 140
FTx, Earl of, set p by the Englih Papiis as a candidate for

the 'trown, II. 222. heads a party in England, 23. his
chaacer, ibid. is greatly diinguihed bV the Qeen, ibid. 24.
favours the K. of Scots, -4. obtains the oices of Lord Licu-
tenrnt and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is unfuc-
cefsful in that expedition, ibid. 275. receives a harfih letter
f.om the Queen. 27;. returns to England and is confined, ibid.
is tried and cenfared, ibid. endeat ours to spirit up King James,
276 hi; rfh and frantic conduct, 2-7. is again taken into
cualodv, z78. h. death, 2-9. his son and aibociates are reliored
to their honours after the ccelion of K. James - ibid.
E;rs;- , the fiate cf, a: t.e beginning of the Sixteenth Centurx

I. 84
E.rXo.w-'':r:::a:;.., a :er::uieb engine of the Po:ih cergy I. 14

F.

'EL '7/0 ,\; an Englil'rman, rxes the Ponp' exommunication
of . E'izabeth, on :he gates of the b.;'hop of London's pa-

lace I1.
Fc-t-c. M. de la Mo:te, fert byv the Frer.ch ing to interpose fcr

K. lames x;hen conined b': the Ruthvcri confiiratars, . 95.
is trried ro rc; . v. .::-:nt scccs ibid.
Fczua/-l .r-..rt. i:s c-:.:: and arófocratical genius, I. i5, 16,

18. causes v. hch ii..:;d the pc'er of feud.l Monarchs, 17.
feudal vaf.sl- ib:-- to fev te. e . . remakabie inflance of
the feebleneis c: f-:a. ro'errment, , 2:. tihe mos per-

fedt

fct idea of the feudal fyslem, how attained, 44. state of it in
England, 77-79. and in Scotland - 9, 80
ifej, a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-
gregation, I. 22 . is destroyed and pluniered by the French, ibid.
the fynod of, excommunicacts the Ar-ilbiihop of St. Andrews
for contumacy, II. 139. tc: e:.c;co;nmua;i.ca e
te Poilil Lords,

21
Fra-es Lord, with the Earl of A:g1l, is sent agaii!t the Popilh

Lords, I. zzo. are defeated by tic: ---- ibid. 2zz

Fcradtn, John de, his hioory of Scotia:id whes v.io:e - I. 5
Ffry/er Sit john, warden of the Eng:;lh borl,:r, a fcu.le between

him and the Scots -- . 15
Fothazringay Castle, Q Mary's imprifonmclU, itral and death there,

II. 40-174

-Fance, the confequcnices of the fubvcrfion cc tie fcudai govern-
ment there, I. 85. a boJy cf Frcnch ari;': in :colan to ip-
port the Catholics, 11 . they reduce the ca'tle of 't. 'Ani:c..'s,
16. another party of them arrive there, 123, r '4. their tranf-
actions there, ibid. 127. conc ud a peace with iigiand, 126.
their politic conduCt, 127, I z. I'ley leavrc cJtlandl1, 127.
their artifices in a treaty of marria e betn¥een the Daup!i: and
the Q:ofScots, 157, 158. endcaours o expci the French armnv
out of Scotland, 19o. another arty of them arrive there and
fortify Leith, 98S. they exafperait the pco-i. by their info-
lence, ibid. they are ient againli tile cigregation, z22. they
defiroy and plunder Fife, and are much arraTied by parties of
the congregation, a21, 22 . are greatly al ir,.red by the ar:rival
of the Eng!ilh fleet, 222. they return to Lei;h g.eatly harrafed
and exhautcd, zz3. are bfieged there by the thng;iii and the
congregation, 2zzJ. they aail ileveral a;'ant.:cs, ibiJ.- z8.
their motives for conciuding a pac:, 230. gotation ibr that
purpose, , 23 32. articlesof the treaty, 233, 34-. ineV l]e.\e
Scotland, 23'. the French advi;. Q. Mary to m.idcrate nmeafu:es,
253. their propoSals by ani am.ilfadu; re:,tcid, 254. ti/
agree to Q Mr;;v's ma;rri'ge with Lord Daril., 3:. thc -
centioufnef! of their mno;i, - ,/7

F-'a;!zc, King of, a copy of i:s di cions sent to, Sco and, a,: ,19
Franlcis I. gives a chcc.I' to th ambitious roji'.. f Ch- '.s V.

I. S9. his fidii to tile co's, i 1. his dca.' 51 5

l--- II. comes to the cro'.;', of F'r::nce, 1. 193 hij clharac-

ter, ibid, z15. is guice b.- the Duke of Guile .nid cardinal
of Lorrain, bid. he treats the Protctanits with great rigour,
Z31. his death ----- -- 245

G.

I F FOR DS, Dccor anl Gilbert, their notion concerning
the !awfuinef- of kiiling heretic-l i.xco;im inicated Princes,

II. 142. they join in a conspiracy to kii l.dlzabth, ibid.
Gilbert being gained by Walfiighain betray:; iis associates, t4;.

ii

is employed to carry on a foreign correspondence with Q. Mary

146, 147
Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft I. 69

Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Morton to

surrender the Regency, II. 59. is killed in a rencounter at Stir-
ling - 6l
--- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, II. 89,

his bold speech to King James, 91. he with the other confpira-
tors seize the cafile of Stirling and erea their standard, o16. he
is attainted, and his eate forfeited I 5
G'afgosw, bihop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of Scot-

land's cowry, app. 415

Gler.cairr, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators II. 89
G/eli-.at, the battle of II. 220
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the itreets of Edinburgh between him

and Lord Ogilvy, 1. 28;. being confined for it, he makes his
escape, 286. when ordered by the Queen to surrender himself
he takes up arms againit her, ibid. 287. is defeated and together
with his brother made prisoners, 290. he is beheaded and his
brother pardoned 291
Gordor, Lord, set at liberty - 3 6

- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in the
north, II. 3o. his chara&er and good conduct as a soldier, 32,

33
Go-rie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, II. 89. is visited and pardoned by the King after his escape,
99. ecomes fufpeaed and is ordered for France, o6. delays
his voyage, and is taken into cultody, ibid. he is tried and
executed - 107
Goa.-rir, John and Alexander, sons of the above, their character and

conspiracy, II. 251. the surprising circumitances of that re-
markable transaction, ;z2--26. several different conjectures
concerning it, 257-2z6. their dead bodies brought into Par-
liament and condemned, 269. their estates and honours forfei;-
ed, and name abolished for ever, ibid. different accounts of this
ffair published but not fatisfaftory, 27c-27z. See Ruw:,ven.
Grahamr Sir David of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the po-

pish Lords in favour of Spain, II. z0o. is convied and be-
headed 211
Grar, mafler of, ome account of him, II. 12, 121. he becomes

a favourite of King James VI. ibid. is gained to Q Elizabeth's
interest, IzI. betrays Q Mary, ibid. persuades K. lames to
write a harsh and undutiful letter to her, 129. joins with others
in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in Scotland, 133. his trea-
chery when sent to intercede for QMary, 167. his bafenef;
discovered, he is disgraced, i82. his vain attempt againfr fecre-
tary Maitland, iS . acts in Italy as a spy from the court of
England, 246. a memorial of his for his Majesty, app. 441.
448. to the secretary of slate 445

Ga4je

Gu.fe duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots, I. 193,

i94. is murdered at the liege of Orleans - 296
·---- his intrigues againit Q Elizabeth, II. z, 113. is a,

principal promoter of the holy league, 131, 189. drives the,
French King out of his capital - .. 189

H.
H AD D N G TO UN, seized and fortified by the English, I.

Iz. is relieved by the French 124
Hamilton, the rife of that family, I. 36. arbitrary proceedings

of Morton the Regent against it, I1. 67, 68. See Chahelhlerault.
--- of Bothrelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-

fide, I. 470. is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent by the intercession of
Knox, 471. an account of his murdering Murray, 511, 512.
makes his escape, 512. is received in triumph at Hamilton II.
Hamilton Mr. Patrick, the first who fffiFred in Scotland for the Pro-

teftant religion I. 165
Hartford Earl of, invades Scotland with an English army, I. Io8.

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ibid. 1og. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protector of England, 8. See Samerft.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which he

prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial - II. 153
Henry II. of France, fends forces to assist the Scots, I. 1 5. a mar-

riage proposed between his Ton the Dauphin and the young Queen
of Scots, 23, 124. excites the Scots to invade Ehgland, 153.
his infamous imposition on Q, Mary in the trcaty of marriage,
157, 158. persuades his son and Q Mary to assume the titles
of Kingand Queen of England, 70o. his death - 191
---- III. degenerates greatly on his acceflion to the crown of

France, II. 130. enters into a private negociation with Q. Eli-
zabeth, 132, 133. interposes feebly in behalfof Q Mary 162

- VIII. of England, by his fyltem of reformation becomes
formidable both to Papists and Proteitants, 1. 7. proposes an
interview with K. James V. ibid. is disappointed by him and
declares war against Scotland, 71, 72. invades it but is forced
to retreat, ibid. his importance as to the balance of power
in Europe, 89. his influence in Scotland how obtained, 92.
his fehemes with regard to it on the death of ames V. 98.
were ill-conduaed by himself and odious to the Scots, 99. at-
tempts to gain the Regency by great promises, o03. invades
Scotland, o8. this being ill-conduted turns to n accobnt,
1og. receives and rewards the Earl of Lenox, ibid. encourages
the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 114. his death and character,

S15. his inconsistent conduct, 169. excluded the Scots line by

his telament 39o
Herreis Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regent, I. 45.

comes to a treaty with him, 496. he and the duke are coin-
mnited pifoners to the catlle of Edsfiburgh, 497. intimates the

King's

King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, If. 59. account
of hi: beha\iour in Parliament, app. 38. a letter from him
to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis 4-4
H:fc -';-, iecre;ary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by dif-

cn:.e-rg his intrigues with () Mary - II. 25-28
"/.'-- .'--.; a2,l'i.' . an attemp: :o ci:i'iz -hem by K. James VI. II.

24i. .'rC!ula i.s for that -urpoDO., 232. three towns endued
v.ih te Cpi-iges cf roval boroughs ordered to be built there

ibid.

r.-,;,-. a prie2 cf Re;ms, maintained the lawfulness of killing

!;-re:ica! e-xcoai; u,'cated Princes II. 142
:N.;e, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fecrct embassy to the
po-e -- - I1I. 249
.-.-. rj. See ' rs:.

/-'/,.r.i Lord, gczv..or of Eenrick, his interviev with Arran

1r. 114, 11;

TiE; ia., Eto' a cath'olic, joins the reformers in opposing the
French arm,, I. 9:. afils them only with fair promise,, 213.
21. his fuither concurrence with them, z-8. some account
of thatfamil, ' 3, 284. his enmity againf the young Qieen's
-ir.n:lers, ibid. his resentment ii;amed by an accident, 285.
appears in open rebellion againif the Qc een, 288. his plot
2agin'. her miniflers diiappointed, ibid. breaks out into open
rebellion, 2S9. is trodden to death in a battle, 290. his fami-
ly rot'cu:ed with the ut:nofR rigour, 91r. several anecdotes
and conjeures concerning his plot, ibid. 29:. is attainted by
Parliament, 300. the attainder repealed and the family refored
to elate and honours 411

his at:ach:en-: to Bo:hweil ,

401 3. refuses to submit

to t'- Regern, 496. is forced to do it, 497. ats as lieutenant
to the QJ-en after tle Regent's murJer, II. 6. is proclaimed a
traisor by Lenox te new Regent, 9. receives some money
a-d promises ofsiri.ance from Spain, ibid. I0. agrees to a trea-
t.- ih ;- :oron the Regent, 45. is one of the heads of the Spa-
r.i fation, 1r. engages to the Prince of Parma to serve the
!ing of ain, i r. is impriibned for a short time, 198. ereas
..a :idard o rebellion, ibid. but forced to submit to the King,
ird. i- again impFrioned, iq. is soon set t liberty, ibid. re-
c.aie; a ccremi fcn from the King, oj. his barbarous murder
of r:e Earl of Murray, ibid. is lurnaoned to surrender to jus-
tice, 2-. flies to the mountains, : 1. offers to submit to a
trial, 21,. sentence pronounced againfl him, zi6. refules to
submit, 17. makes another desperate attempt but is forced to fly

21S, Zl9

I.

T - S

.' I. \v-a detained long a priolner in England, I. 34.

J troub!le in Sco:'and during tha: ui-e, ibid. ;5. was much
iin-:o-ved by an EngliSh educaiion, 7, 48, his policy on his re-

turn

turn to Scotland, 49. his character, ibid. o5. suppresses the
power of the nobles, ibid. they being exasperated conspire
againit and murder him -- 5 5
-- - II. troubles in Scotland during his minority, I. 35, 36.

his attempts againfi the nobles, 52, 53. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 53. procures several good laws to be pafied, 54, 55.
reduces the power of the nobles, 55. his death 56
--- III. the state of Scotland during his minority, I. 36. his

impolitic conduct, 56, 57. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 57, 58. is greatly insulted by his nobles,
59. his despicable minions, ibid. was the first that appointed
a flanding guard to his person, 60. the nobles are provoked
to take arms against him, 61. is killed in a battle against them,
ibid. his character -- ibid. 6z

- V. his characaer, . 62. is killed in a battle againtt the

English at Flowden 6z, 63
---- V. his minority longand turbulent, I. 6. tranfaaions dur-

ing that time, 63, 64.. assumes the government while very
young, 65. his chaianter, ibid. 66. his scheme for humbling
the nobles, 66-99. is diverted from it by the clergy, 7 , 72.
takes arms for the defence of his kingdom, 72. his nobles re-
fusing to follow him, throws him into a deep melancholy, 7 3-
75. which is increased by a surprising defeat of his forces, 75.
his death, ibid. refle&ions on his conduct, ibid. 76. herefucd
an alliance with Charles V. Emperor 91

7ames V. his birth, 1. 7 1. his baptism, 357. the care of him

committed to the Earl of Mar, 404. is by him preserved from
falling into the hands of Bothwell, 422. is crowned, 441. the
nobles oppressed by Morton the Regent, turn their eyes to him
for redress, II. 56. his education and dispositions, ibid. 57.
he becomes suspicious of the Regent's power, 57. discovers
early a great attachment to favourites, o7. adopts two of dif-
ferent dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great folemni-
ty, 72. is by his favourites engaged in unpopular measures, 88,
89. is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven, go. and forced
to receive complaints against his favourites, ibid. 91. dit-embles
with them and banishes Lenox, 92. is brought to Stirling and
Holyroodhoufe, 94. his concern at Lenox's death, and regard
for his memory, 95. receives the French ambafrador with great
refpe&, 96. makes his escape fom the conspirators, ibid. 9-.
resolves to treat them wih moderation, 99. visits Gowrie and
grants him a pardon, ibid. renews his fondness for Arran, ibid.
loo. is by him persuaded to violent measures against the con-
fpirators, ioo. his answer to a haughty letter from Q. Elizabeth
on their behalf, lot. i by herinterpofition rendered more vio-
lent against them, 1oz. is provoked by the clergy, c14. his
iteps to humble them, 107. his profusion to Arran, I C6. ends
a new favourite to England againt the baiilhied Lords, o20. de-
volves the whole regal authiority o Arran, 122, 123. writes an
undutiful letter to his mother, 129. is threatened to be difi;-

heritzd

hesited by her, Ibid. receives a pension from Q Elizabeth, 134:
is reconciled to the exiled Lords, 136. becomes popular by con-
duding a treaty with England, 140, 141. his scandalous beha-
viour with regard to Arch1. Douglas, ibid. 142. his endea-
vours to ave his mother's life after her condemnation, 63, 164.
is greatly incensed at her death, 180. arguments used by the
English ministers to pacify him, ibid. 181. is forced to stifle
his resentment, 182. attempts to unite the nobles, 184, 185.
is courted both by Spain and England, 190, 191. resolves vi-
goronfly to adhere to the latter, 191. takes several Iteps
with that view, ibid. his iill in the popish controversy, 192.
wrote a commentary on the Revelations, ibid. his maxims with
regard to popery, ibid. 198. his excessive lenity to conspirators
against him, 198. resolves to marry the Princess of Denmark,
i99. arts used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confummat-
ed in Norway, 2. pafles several months in Denmark, ibid.
refleions on his conduct there, ibid. zcz. his arrival in Scot-
land with his Queen, o03. indulges the Presbyterians, 204.
the ill consequences of his lenity, ibid. 205. his zeal against
witchcraft. o;. is follicited by Q Elizabeth to treat the con-
fpirators against him with rigour, l, z212. is fufpeted of con-
riving with them, 2. is furprized and seized by Bothwell,
ibid. 213. and forced to comply with his terms, 213. his lenity
to Bothwell abused, ibid. 216. is fufpe&ed of favouring the
popish Lords, ibid. is in new danger from them, 218. dele-
gates his authority to Argyl and Sorbes against them, 220.
goes in person against them. 221. wafles their lands, and gar-
rifons their castles, ibid. his right of the fuccefiion to the crown,
of England opposed by the papiRs, 22. his lenity to them in-
censes the clergy and people, zz6, 227. is much provoked by
the obfinacy of the clergy, 229. gives orders againit them, 232,
is much insulted and in great danger at Edinburgh, 232-235.
leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against the citizens,
235--239. acquires absolute dominion,in ecc!efiaftical affairs, 240,
=z. . Itrengthens his interest in parliament by restoring the feats
of the ecclefiafics, 241-243. endeavours with success to gain
a party in England, 244. increases his reputation by publishing
his Bafilicon Doron, 245. is accused by Q Elizabeth of cor-
responding with the Pope, 247. this he denies and how account-
ed for, ibid. 248. other reports concerning this, 248, 249.
is at great pains to gain the Roman catholics, 249. his regu-
lations with regard to the church, z o, 251. the mysterious as-
fair of Gowry's conspiracy, 251-273. his cautious behaviour
in regard to to the Earl of Effex. 277. fends ambaffad-rs, to
save him, 278. they arrive too late 279. he restores his son and
afociates to their honours after his accefion, ibid. continues
his intrigues in England, ibid. 280, zSi. his interest greatly
ftrenethened there, ibid. endeavours to civilize the highlands
and isles, 28i, 282. is proclaimed King in England after the
death of Q Elizabeth, 289. is proclaimed iikewife in Scotland,

290.

2g0. prepares for his journey to England, 291. enters London
and takes possession of the throne, 292. his charafter how dif-
ferent from that of Q Elizabeth, ibid. a letter from him to Mr.
Archibald Douglas, app. 437
Invernes Castle, refuses to surrender to Q. Mary, I. 88. it is

ftrced, and the governor punished ibid. 289
Italy the liberty of, how preserved - . 86

K.
K E IT H Sir William, ent to intercede for Q_ Mary when

under sentence, 11. 163. letter to him from ecretary Mait-

land, app. 437
Kent Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q Mary exe-

cuted - . 70
Ker of Ferniherft, ravages England on the murder of Murray the
Regent, II. 2. his design, 5. has a scuffle with the Englilh 135

Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is discovered when ready to

fail to promote a plot in Spain, II. 209, his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison 21z
Killigrew Henry, his declaration on the peace, app. - 413
Kings, feudal, the most limited of all Princes, I. 15. general

causes of this, 17. their revenues were but small, ibid. 18. had
no Rfanding armies, 19. and jurifdition limited, 20. means
used to extend the royal authority, 39. their jurifdi&ionen-
larged, 41. the extraordinary influence of the Scottish Kings
in Parliament, 76. the reason of this -ibid. 8s

Kirkaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q. Dowager, I. 155. his attainder reversed in Parlia-
ment, 300. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 428,
his interview with Q; Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
42,9 rescues Maitland from confinement, 506. labours to sup-
port the King's authority and restore harmony after the murder
of the Regent, II. 3, 4. accedes to the Queen'sparty, 4. pro-
vides for a siege by increasing his garrison and fortifying Edin-
burgh, 18. proclaims Lenox's authority unlawful and ufarped,
ibid. attempts in vain to prevent a meeting of the Parliament,
19. forms a scheme for surprising the King's party, 22. is at
sirs fccefsful but afterwards defeated, 23, 24. comes near to
an agreement with Mar the Regent, 36. a treaty with Morton,
breaks it off, 43-45. fires upon Edinburgh from the caBle,
45. is besieged by the Regent assisted by English forces, 47.
is forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitulate, 48. furren-
ders to Drury the Englifll general, ibid. is by order of Q, Eli-
zabeth delivered up to the Regent, 49. he and his brother
are executed ibid. o

Knollys Sir Francis, ent by Q Elizabeth with letters of condolence

to Q. Mary on her arrival in England, I. 464., some of his let-
ters, app. 386-388-393

Knox John, a famous reformer, his charaEter, 1. 1-30. after being
some time abroad he is recalled by the persecuted Proteflants, 76.

2 inflames

inflames the multitude at Perth with rage againif the Papils,
ibid. his notion concerning the government of women whence,
182, 183. his residence fixed in Edinburgh, 187. corn-
!lains of the lukewvarmne; of the reformers, 202. his opinion
to the convention of reformers that it is lawful to refill and de-
prive tyrannical Princes, 2-5. animates and revives the despond-
iag Congregation, 2-5, -1. ccmplains of the negle& of the
reformers in prov:dii; rmaintzinance for their preachers, 242.
recommen-s the Gencxa model of church government, 29.
propc,.s fiperinten ents in the church, 250. compotes the frIt
book of diei,line, z51. renounces friendship with the Earl of
Murray for his moderation, 277. is tried for encouraging a mu.
ti-". among the people and accuit:ed,,33, 30+. popish judges
concur in this deciin, ibid is pubiickly accused by Maitland
of preaching fedi:ious d ctrine concerning resistance, zi2. cha-
racters of the two disputants, ibid. approved of several intlances
or;affaination, ;36. agrees to iobne regulations concerning the
election ofBiIhc.ps, II. 4. his death and character, 41, 42,
his eulogium b MIorton the Regent, 42. articles sent by him
to the general as:embly, app. 412

L.

W G SID E, the battle of I. 457
LJ LaurL cardina!. is sent as Nuncio from the Pope with a

present to Q_ iMary of Scotland, I. 383. is i'opped at Paris,

384
Lra-ue holv, a confede-acy of roman catholics so called, II. 131.

was univeriali: azrce to bv them all over Europe ibid.

Lcarrzr.g, the revival cf, promotes the reformation I. 139
LEiCr/iPr Ear! of, ap.cintcd a commifioner to the conference at

Weltminler - I. 486
Leitn, burnt by the En'ii, I. 109. fortified by the French, 198.

beneged b- the Englih, 215 . (Q Mary lands there fom France,
-S ;. the i'uperiority of it granted by her to Edinburgh, 342. is
eizcd and fortised b- orton and the Regent - II. S
L-.:x, Earl of, arriv-s in Scotland from France, I. 102. is much

courted cv cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretcnfions to the fuc-
ccfon how founded, 0o5. resents Beatoun's deceitfulness to
him, ic6. heads the reformers and the advocates for the Eng-
i.h aiiiance, I7. fLrprizes the Regent and cardinal, ibid. is
cuewitted by the cardinal, ibid. o08. continues alone in the in-
terelt of Lnilar.d, ioQ. is forced to fly to that court, where
he i; rewarded, iid. is narried to a niece of K. Henry's, by
- hich he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. his claim
.o the fucceclon. ,c9. is imprifned for a secret correspondence

with Q .Mar

. 31 . is invited secretly by her to return to Scot-

land, ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received with great fa-
miiiari;v bv her, 12 , 313. his forfeiture is repealed, and he is
reslored to his cit;te and ho.nours by the Parliament, 313. his

lad

lady sent prisoner to the Tower of London, 325, and treated
'with rigour, 330. he infills on the prosecution of his son Darnly's
murderers, 403. charges Bthwell with it, ibid. the prosecution
is hurried, 405. he craves a delay which is refuled, 405, 407.
he is left'alone in it, ibid. follicits Q Elizabeth's 'intere'st to ob-
tain a delay, 407. inflis on it by proxy at the trial, but is over-
ruled, 408, 409 being apprehensive of danger he flies towards
England, 410. his counters accuses QMary of the murder to
Q Elizabeth, 467. he appears at the conference at Westminster
and accuses Q.Mary of the murder upon oath, 488. returns to
Scotland protecaedhby an Englifl army, II. 6. is ele&ed Regent,
9. his progress against the Queen's party, ibid. appoints c6m-
missioners to frame a treaty with thole of the Qu.een, i3. fur-
prizes Dumbarton caflle, 15-17. joins the Earl of Morton at'
Leith, 8. holds a Parliament in the Canongate, 9. another at
Stirling, 22. he is furprized and killed there - 23

Lrnox, late Aubigny, his charaEter, I. 7 . joins with the King's

other new favourite to undermine Moi ton, ibid. renounces Pope-
ry, 73. Q.Elizabeth demands him to be removed from the
privy council, 74. is accused by her ambassador, 8 Arran
tries in vain to supplant him, 84. is commanded by K. James
at the request of the nobles to leave the kingdom, 9z. puts Off
his departure on various pretences, 93, 94. returns unwillingly
to France where he loon dies, 94. his memory vindicated and
much regarded by the King, 9. died a Protestant ibid.
- E of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north after dirperfing

the Popish Lords, II. 221.

L/iie, Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, I. 2z, 113. he and

his associates keep possession of the catlle of St. Andrew's, 13.
makes a truce with the Regent, 114, 1t . are encouraged by
Henry VIII. - ' ibid.

- bilhop of Rols, is sent by the catholics in Scotland to en-

gage Q. Mary in their interest, I. 2 2. his proposals to her re-
jeced, ibid. 253. his negotiations in England in favour of Q.
Mary, II. 26. is confined long in the Tower, and afterwards is
banished England - 29

Lndfay Lord, carries the proposal from the confederates to Q.

Mary, that she should resign the government, . '441. joins the
Ruthven corifpirators 11. 9

Lrchlevin castle, Q. Mary committed a prisoner there, I. 434. her

escape from thence, 453

----- Lord, letters to and from him, Appendix -- 4 o
LganofReflalrig, an alleged accomplice in Gowries conspiracy,

11. 258, 259. is'tfied, and his cltate forfeited long after his
death, 59, 260

.ords confederate, associate againlt Bothwell and Q. Mary, 1. 424.

raise forces against them, 4z;. publish the motives of their
condut, 426. prevail on the Queen to surrender to them, 430.
afume' the title of Lords of the secret council and the royal
authority - 43;
VOL. 1l. 0 o Lrds

Lcrs popilh, conspire against K. James, II. 196. are treated by

him with great lenity, t98. form a new conspiracy, 209. the
Kingproceeds against them, 210. moreof his lenity to them,
214. fresh dangers from them, 218. they receive money from
Spain, 219. zeal of the clergy againfl them, ibid. are declared

uilty of treaCon and their estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the
King's army, 220, 22T. are dispersed on the King's approach,
221. go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave' to reside in their own
houses, 227. this granted by a convention of estates, ibid.
recant their errors and are absolved from excommunication, o0.
rdeapfe, and are again reconciled to the church of Roiie, ibid.
are reltored to their estates and honours - 24
terrain cardinal, gets some of the bes benefices in Scotland, I; i63

Princes of, their ambitious views, I. 168. inftigatethe

Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of King and Q'een
of England, 17o. resolve to invade England, ibid. and to check
the reformation in Scotland, 171. the cardinal's great influence
over the young King, 193, 194- drives the Queen Regent of
Scotland to violent measures, zoo. their violences occasion a con-
fpiracv againit them, 231. are forced to withdraw their troops
from Scotland, ibid. they inftut the Scottish ambassador, 244.
have great power over the young King and Queen, 245, z46.
are forced to contraa their views on the death of the King

- _ - ~ 247
Lu'Aer, a bold and principal promoter of the reformation, I. 139.

the rapid progress of his doctrine 140

M.
aM A_70R John, his history of Scotland, some account of L

M lairland of Leihington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the Congregation, I. 214. his cha-
racter, ibid. 215. is sent by them ambassador to Q. Elizabeth,
z26. fends them assurances of her protection, 220. is sent by Q;
Mary to the court of England, 269. makes a concession to Q
Elizabeth, ibid. z7o. accompanies Qj Mary in a progress to the
north, 286. he is employed by Q Mary to desire a perfonal-in-
terview with Q. Elizabeth, 293. publickly accuses Knox'of
preaching fedirious doctrine concerning reflftnce, 315. inti-
mates to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q Marv to marry Darnly,
322. prudently conceals her resentment from Q Elizabeth, 3js.
proposes moderate measures with regard to 'Q_ Mary when im-
'prioned, 439. atterids the Regent when called on to accuse her
in England, 475- he disapproves of this measure, ibid. his'n-
trigue with the Duke of Norfolk, 48o, 498, 499. is imnpriined
by the Regent, 5o;. is relieved by Kirkaldy and secured 'i the
cafe, 5o6. proposes a coalition of the two parties after the milr-
der of the Regent, IT. 3. accedes to the Queenr's party 4., is
deprived of his office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor,'9. 'is

.-. attainted

attainted in a Parliament of the King's party, 9. ,agrees with
Mar, 36, 37., his views in refulinga reconciliation with IMorton
the Regent, 43, 44. reje oiveitures of a treaty with him,ibid. is
besieged by him iii the cfle of. Edinburgh, 45,. is forced to
capitulate and fui-renders to the English gener lj:4. to avoid
the Regent's resentment ie dispatches himself, o.- several of
his leters, app. .- - .., .43 37

Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, II. . 33.. concurs

with others in promoting Q Elizabeth's interests tHere, ibid.' at-
tempts against him by capt. James Stewart, late Arran,. i8z.
they prove abortive, and he is advanced. to be chancellor, i 3.
an attempt to remove iim from that office, fruitraite, 198. his
death, 223. a copy of veifes'in hnour ofhim wrote by the
King . - - . . ibid.
Mar Eairl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews I.

285. accdmpanies the .Qeen in a.progrefs to the. nortli, 286.
he aid his associates narrowly escape affafinatinol 287, 288.
is create'd Eal of Murray, iSg. See Murray.

t-h [e title is conferred on t. Erfiine, 289. itl person of the

young isnce put into his hands, 404. his refuion in pre-
fevinig ,iim fr6m BothweUi, 422. is chosen Regent, II. 24. la-
bouis so bring aboit a.general peace, 36. is thrwired by Mor-
ton and his fibciates, ibid. 37. dies of melacloly, 3.7. iis
charaer, iid. his rmerit and integrity was aciiwiedged by
both parties - - ibid.
- the young Earl, being imposed on by Mortoh, turns.out his

uncle from the castle of Stirling, 11. 62. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 89, 9g. he with the others seize Stirling castle, and
ere& their standard, o16. is attainted and his ellate forfeited,.
11. is pardoned and restored to eflate and honoprs 137
March countess of, her infamous marriage with the Aarl of Arran

-_~~~ _-~~~~ - 11.83.84

Afary of Guie, Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes a considerable Ihare

in the government, I. zz. is much addi&ed to. the French in-
terest, ibid. projets i

a marriage of her daughter io the Dauphin

of France, 23. becomes inlrumental in promoting the refor-
mitioni, i32. aspires tq'the office of Regent, ibid. 133. pro-
motes difaffetion to the present one and favours the reformers,
133', 34. visits the court of France, 134. returns to Scot-
landto tale oillffion of the Regency,- 135. after some oppofi-
tion flie obtains it, 137. conses several offices of truf upon
ilraner'ss 1, 151. proposes to lay a tax upon land, 152. is
forced so drop it, ibid-. ries in vain to excite a war with Eng.
land, j.. the no6I 'e vigoro ufly .oppbfe her measures, '54.
trs the' .reformers .with great refpel, 5 5.. obtains a cor-
ceOfifn'r m.onithe Patliamehnt in favour. of the Dauhin,. ,6. h6 L
artful, irmageiment of the reformers, 162, 63, .beows the va-
cant benefices on foreigners, 63. - fne alters lier cnduft.tot
reformeirs, 167. r emonttrates againf the. violent measures of
the Princes of Loriain, 172. is perfuadeby them to perse-

0 o z cute

cute the reformers, 173. her rash answer to their remonfirance,
ibid. 174 summons their preachers to appear before her, 174.
breaks a promise he had made them, 175. marches with an army
against them, 177. concludes a treaty with them, 178. this
fheagain breaks, 179. her feverityat Perth, ibid. her schemes
discovered, ibid. o. she goesto attack them, 81. has a-
gain recourse to negotiation, 182; lhe is startled at their de-
mands and gets time to answer them,--; 83. violates another trea-
ty, 184. loses Perth a.d forced to abandon Stirling and Edin-
burgh, she retires with precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 185.
marches to attack the rformers at Edinburgh, 188. gains tine
by her artifice, ibid. 189. makes another treaty with them, 189.
her arriices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews, 197. the
abfurditv of her scheme, ibid. 9gS. gets a reinforcemiient of
French troops who fortify Leith, ig9. ihe disregards a emon-
firance of the reformers, 199. is influenced by French coun-
feior and perfwaded to violent meafires, 2co. retires to Leith
on the approach'of the reformers army, 20z. her prudent and
artful conduEt there, ibid. her haughty arid imperioui 'answer to
a fresh remontrance from them, 203. is by a convention of
them deprived of her office of Regent, 20;. the foundation of
this sentence, ibid. 26. foments differences among them, 209.
2io. is deerred by her principal secretary, 214. fends French
troops againi the reformers, 22o. retires into the castle of
Edinburgh on the approach of the Englill, zz;. her death- and
charafter, 229. repented of her violent measures, 230. liltened
to the infruEtions o a reformed preacher - ibid.
Mar Queen of England, her persecuting reign, I. 137, 138. her

death - - 16
- Queen of Sco:s born, I. 95. a proposal to marry her to Ed.

VI. 98. he is demanded by Henry VIII. 99. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, 123. a treaty for that
purpose concluded, 12I, 125. The is sent to be educated in
France, 125. the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is imposed
on by the artifices of the French in the treaty of marriage, 157.
her marriage celebrated with great pomp, 58. they take the
title of King and Queen of England, 17o. /he makes con-
cefilons to the Congregation, 232, 233. declares Q EIizabeth's
right to the crown of England, 235. The acquires an entire
ascendant over her husband, 245. the is overwhelmed with
great afflition on his death and retires to Rheims, 247. she is
invited by the convention to return to Scotland, 25 . an emifa-
r- from the catholics in Scotland proposed violent measures io
her, ibid. Ihe is determined to moderation by the French and
the prior of Sr. Andrews, ibid. 253. is prevailed on to prepare
for her return to Scotland, 25z. the origin of the discord be-
-tween hefand Q.Elizabeth, ibid. 256. her pretensions to the
crown-of England, 257. is envied on account of he beauty,
260. demands a safe condut from Q Elizabeth which is refused,
z6z. leaves France with great reluctance, ibid. 263. lands at

Leith.

Leith, 263. is much affeRed by the change of her Stuation, ibid.
several disadvantages attending her accession, ibid.-265. some
circumstances to her advantage, 265, 265. her accomplishments
of body and mind, ibid. the Iervants of her chapel insulted, 266,
267. procures the free exercise of her religion, 267. issues a
proclamation in favour of the Proteflants, z68. employs them
only in the adminifiration, ibid. attempts to gain Q Eliza-
beth's favour, 269. makes a concefion to her. 270. which is
rejeted, 271 she makes her public entry into Edinburgh, ibid.
an insult offered to her religion on that occasion, ibid. z;2. dil-
courages the attempts of the papilts to gain her favour, 273.
her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 274. makes a progress
into the north, 286, 287. her ministers narrowly escape affafli-
nation, 287, 288. is refused access to the cattle of Inverness,
288. when in the utmost conftcrnation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and other Clans, 288, 289. her forces defeat Huntley's re-
bellion 290. the desires an interview with Q. Elizabeth, 293.
negociations concerning her marriage, 294. is solicited by diffe-
rent Princes, 295, 296. her deliberations concerning it, 296,
is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q Elizabeth,
298, 299. to please her ufbjects determines against a foreign
alliance, 299. determines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,
303. further negociations for her marriage, 304. discovers
the views of Catharine of Medicis, ibid. 305. Lord Robert
Dudley recommended to her as a huband by Q_ Elizabeth, 305.
She is highly offended at this, 306. diflembles with Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. 309. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly,
309. the recalls Lenox, 310. is affronted at a letter of Q Eli-
zabeth, 312. her indifference as to the reformed, and zeal for
the catholic religion, 314. is taken with Darnly at first fight, 317.
is greatly moved at Q.Elizabeth's insulting crafiinefs, ibid. 318.
negotiates with the court of Rome for a dispensation to marry
Darnly, 318. and the content of the court of France, 319. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to QElizabeth for content to
her marriage, 322. which he affects to refute, 323. in
resentment he proposes to fend an angry message to Elizabeth,
which Maitland prevents, 325. jutfifies her condu& to the Eng-
tifh ambassador, ibid. 326. endeavours to get Murray's consent,
327. courts the pope's protecion, and receives a subsidy from
him, 328. her great address in gaining the consent of her sub-
jets, 329, 330. prevents a plot against Darnly, 331. fum-
mons her vassals to take arms against Murray, 332. and him
to appear before her, 334. her marriage with Darnly celebrated,
335. he confers the title of King of Scots upon him, ibid. this
ftep censured, ibid. her resentment against the malecontents, 336.
she marches against them, 337. rejecs the intercession of Q
Elizabeth in their behalf, ibid. continues her march againfi the
rebels, 338. her conduc and courage on that occasion, ibid. 339.
drives them out of Scotland, 339. her further. resentment
againaf them 30o, 341. has recourse to several devices to raise

0 o 3 money

money, 341. 342. her prosperity promotes her religion, 343.
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 345. de-
termines to treat them with lenity, 347. is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, 348, 349. this the source
of her after misfortunes, 350. her intention to restore popery,
3t5. is disgusted with Darnly's insolent behaviour, 352. her
familiarity with Rizio offends the King, 355. vindicated
from any criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356, 357. uses
her atmoft endeavours to prevent his murder, 359. (he is con-
fined by the conspirators, ibid. /he gains the King, and es-
C2pes from them, 360. is reconciled to the exiled nobles, 361.
her hau-cd to Darnly increases, 368, 369. and favour for Both-
well commences, 369. extinguiffes ome domestic feuds among
the nobles, 371. is delivered of her son James VI. in the Castle
of Edinburgh, ibid. invites several foreign princes to his bap-
film, 72. continues to treat Darnly with neglect, ibid. her
Pttachmeut to Bothwell increases, 373. prevents Darnly's in-
tended flight. 375, 376. visits the borders, 377. an instance of
her regard for othwell on that occasion, ibid. how ihe rival'd
Q_ Eliz beth, 378. her right of succession favoured by the
English parliament, 379. (he endeavours to avail herself of that
opportunity, 381, 382. he takes an extraordinary ftep in fa-
vour of popery, 333. receives a present from the pope, but
stops his nuncio at Paris, 384. endeavours to procure a bet-
ter fubfiflence for the reformed clergy, ibid. 385. her aversion
to the King exceiive, becomes melancholy, ibid. he declines
a divorce from him, 386. goes to Stirling to celebrate her son's
baptism, 387. is greatly offended at the king's behaviour on
that occafton, 33. restores the popilh ecclesiastical jurifdiion,
392, 393 her neglect of the King during his sickness, 395.
the breach between them becomes irreparable, ibid. 396. she
visits him at Glasgow, 396. the motives of her dissimulation on
that oc.lon, ibid. 397. prevails on him to come to Edinburgh,
399, her suspicious behaviour to him there, ibid. 400. issues a
proclamation fordifcovering his murderers, 401. is supposed to
have been accessory to it, ibid. 402. is charged with it abroad
as well as at home, 402. goes to visit her on at Stirling, 417.
is me: on her return by Bothweil, who seizes and carries her to
Dunbar, ib:d. 4S. this supposed with her consent, ibid. is
conducied t Edinburgh, 419. and married to Bothwell, 4o.
ferds an apology to the courts of France and England, 42I.
her conduft causes a general indignation againlt her abroad, 423.
is alarmed at a combination of the nobles againlt her, 44.
/he Dublifhes a manifeilo to vindicate her conduc, 425. is con-
dusted to the cafl!e of Borthwick, 426. marches with Both-
've's forces against the confederate Lords, 427. an attempt of
an accomr.modaton proves vain, ibid. 428. is forced to fur-
reae- to the confederates, 430. is insulted by the soldiers and
mob, ibid. 431. is carried to Edinburgh, where many abuses are
fFic; ad her, bid. is sent a prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 434. Q

Elizabeth

Elizabeth interpoes in her behalf, 436. the English ambafla-
dor is refused access to her, 437. various proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 438, 439. they oblige her to re-
sign the Government, 439-441. different rcafonings on this
measure, 442-445. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 446, her party among the nobles be-
come dispirited, 448. her resignation of the Crown accepted
by the Parliament, and her imprisonment declared lawful, 40.
her letters to Bothwell, read, and she declared accessory to the
King's murder, ibid. escapes from Lochlevin, 452, 453. ar-
rives at Hamilton, 453. is attended by many nobles and a nu-
merous army, 453, 454. an association signed in her defence,
454. her imprudence in hazarding a battle, 47. her army
defeated by the confederates, ibid. her precipitate flight into
Galloway, 458. rashly determines to retire to England, 459.
goes thither against the advice of her attendants, ibid. 460. ar-
rives at Carlisle, 461. writes to Q Elizabeth, imploring her
good offices, ibid. receives letters of condolance from her, and
demands admittance into her presence, 464, 465. this refused
and why, 465. offers to ubmit her cause to Q. Elizabeth, ibid.
is much deceived in her expecation from this, 468. and offen-
ded on discovering the artifices of Q Elizabeth, ibid. 469. ear-
nefily follicits to be admitted into her presence, 469. she is car-
ried to Bolton Castle, 471. chagrin'd at finding herself a pri-
soner, 472. agrees to an enquiry into her condua, ibid. her
dissimulation with regard to religion, ibid. commiflioners appoint-
ed to appear in her name, 475. her chief view in this affair,
476, 477. consents to moving the conference to Westminster,
483. he is carried to Tuthbury in Staffordfilire, 484. is much
offended at the regard shewn the Regent, and recalls her content
to the conference, 485. the accusation against her produced by
the Regent, 487. is accused likewise by the Earl ofLenox,
488. her commissioners refute to answer, and demand a per-
fonal interview, 488, 489. they protest against futureproceed-
ings, 489. a suspicious circumstance againt her, ibid. 490. er
commissioners withdraw from the meeting, 490. her resolute
answer to a harsh proposal of Q. Elizabeth, 492. avoids any
farther progress in the enquiry, ibid. is enraged at the proceed-
ings, and proposes desperate measures, 493, 494. spreads chi-
merical corjectures with that view, 494. propnfe a divorce
from Bothwell, 498. is influenced by the D. of Norfolk's schemes,
ibid. exchanges many letters and love tokens with him, 499.
consents to propoals from the Engliih nobles, 5oi. their views
in this tran!faaion, 5co-502. a rebellion by her adherents
against Q.Elizabeth, 506. is removed to Coventry, 508. Q.
Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 510. this
project how disappointed, ibid. i . accefion of several to her
party after the murder of the Regent, II. 5, 6. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ibid. her authority proclaimed
at Linlithgow, 5, her parties defeated by the new Regent, '9,

004 0o.

ia, r-.e n.'-ers p opoals by Q Eizabeth, it. attempts in
v.in to get fe-ign asilance, ibid. 12. appoints commissioners
to fram.e a treaty for h r liberation, 13. this proving fruitless,
ihe is more ilrictiv confined, 14. the invalidity of her refigna-
ticn declared in a Parliament held by her adherents, 19. a of
Parliament in England to curb her and her party, 24. The
lo k tr protection from the King of Spain, 2z'. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court of England, z9. is
more c;cfe confined and watched, ibid. proceedings against her
in Eng'and, 33. her interefi reglefetd by the French, 34. is
hurt by the mafiacre at Paris. 35, 36. her adherents divided
into t.o fa2ionrs, 4. o.ie of them joins with Morton the Re-
gen:. 46. review of the c-acter of her adherent- and oppo-
nerts, 4, 4.r. her foriorn ituation, 49. is carried to Buxtcn
WSells, 50. loess levera: of her friends by death, 53. fends a
!ett-r and p-reiens to her fn, 68. her meffcrger why difmifed
without feeing him. ibid. her uneasiness at his confinement by
the Ruthven conspirators, 95. complains to Q Elizabeth of
her hard uzge, ibid. 96. and bess her i-terce-lon f.r the King
he.l-on, ibid. Throgmoron's conspiracy in her favour, i I-
113. a fruitless negcciation w;ih Q Elizabeth, 17 is alarmed
at an afiociation in defence of Q Elizabeth, 119. is committed
to more severe keepers, 120. betrayed by Lord Gray the Scots
a2mbITLo' r , 2, I22. a statute for the preservation of Q Eli-
zabeth, proves fatal to her, ' 26. is more rigorously treated,
1 7. her complaints to Q Ezabeth disregarded, 128. is by
the French abaiffdor's intereit, removed to Tuthbury, 128.
is undu:ifu!lv treated by the King her son, ibid. 29. her pas-
ficnate comrlaint to the French ambassador on that occasion,
129. threatens to disinherit him, o. several discoveries al-
ledged againlt her, , 1,47. fhc is guarded iith unusual vi-
g Lrce, 1:9. her dom.eft:cs, papers, &c. are seized, ibid. he
is cor.vev-d to Fotheringav Castle, ibid. deliberations concern-
i.g the rn-hod of proceeding against her, 50o, 151. is, fufpi-
cioUs cf oi son or Frivate mu.der, 15 1. 152. vindicates herself to
tne D. o:- Guie, iid. the cmmifiioners for trying her arrive
a: Fo;herina. Cfltie, i;5. her spirited speech when refusing
t3 pead, iid. I53. is at length prevailed on, 1.3. she pro-
tet:s agar.1l t e authori;v of the court, 154. the accusation
againfi her, icid. her defence, I 5;-157. her sentence, 158.
irreglarties in her trial, I 5c. the sentence is confirmed by
Parlianrent, ibid. ho demand the execution of it, iCo. France
interposes feebly in her behalf, iLz. the sentence against her
publi&fed, 164. ihe is treated with the utmost rigour, 165.
her last reque to Q. E!izab-th, ibid. refuses the aifiance of
a Protilant Eishop or Dean, 166. artifices used to inflame
the pople againnt ,er, 63, 69. her behaviour at her death,

0-;7-.. fen:.menets of hii'orians cncerning her, 174, 17;.

her charcter, 175, 76. her per'bn described, 177. is bu-
ried, f.z at Pietrborcuh, and afterwards in Weilmiri'er-Abbey,

ibid.

ibid. 178. letters from her, Appendix 427, 451, 45. - her
will, App. 49. objecions againlt her by Walsingham, App.
467. what course to be taken with her, ibid. a dissertation on
the genuineness of her letters to Both:vell. End of Vol. II.
Max'well Lord arrives from Spain and prepares forces to join the

Spaniards, II. i91. his followers difpcrfed, he is taken prisoner,
ibid.
ei/'il is rent by the French King to observe the motions of the
Queen-Regent and her adversaries, I. 19z. sent to make up a
difference between Elizabeth aad Mary, 3 2. brings about an
appearance of fiiendShip between them, ibid. is ent to inform
Q.Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 372. puts a letter in-
to the Queen's hand againlt her marriage with Bothwell, 416.
is forced to fly from court, ibid. advises K. James to moderate
measures upon his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, I1. 99.

--- , Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his character, II. 54. zeal

oufly opposes Episcopacy, ibid. declines the civil jurifldiion
in ecclefiallical matters, o14. is forced to fly into England to
avoid persecution ----o
o--- Sir Robert, fentby K. James to interceed with Q. Elizabeth

for Q Mary when under sentence, II. ;66. excutes his com-
million with fidelity and zeal, 167. a memorial of his to the'
King, App. - 446

-- Master of the houfhold to Q Mary, takes his last farewel

of her, II. 172. her parting fpecch to him - ibid. 173
Mi/dmay, SirWalter sent by Q. Elizabeth with proposals to Q.

Mary II. to, I
Mlon/uc, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the French to conclude

a peace with England and Scotland, I. 23, 232. terms agreed
to by him 233-235
llontgomery appointed Archbishop of Glasgow, II. 86. is refused

and excommunicated by the general Assembly for his immoral
life -- ibid. 87
Monrtorency, Constable of France, endeavours to prevent the Dau-

phin's marriage with Q Mary, . 156. his prudent advice to
Henry II. 19z. makes a slender appearance in favour of Q.
Mary - 11. 3,
lorton, Earl of, his irresolute conduEt as to the Reformation, I.
z 24. accompanies Q_ Mary in a progress to the North, 286.
inffigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 355, 356. takes the
direeion of that enterprize, 358. is admitted into the Queen's
presence, who promises him a pardon, 360. is forced to fly into
England, 362. obtains his pardon on Bothwell's intercefion,
391. seizes a casket with letters from Q.Mary to Bothwell, 435.
he is, by Q. Elizabeth's interposition, in favour with the King's
party after the murder of the Regent, II. 4. appointed one of
the commissioners to treat with the Queen's party, 13. his de-
mands frultrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, 21. commands the King's forces at
Leith, 30. has several fkirmilhes with the Queen's forces, ibid.

clofcly

dofely besieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ibid. a
suspension procured by the English and French ambassadors, 32.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 36, 37. he is chosen
Regent, 37. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumberland, 38. obtains the temporalities of the Archbishop-
rick of St. Andrew's, 39. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 42. attempts in vain to gain MIaitland and
Kirkaldy, 43, 44. makes a treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt-
ly, 45. gets possession of the Cafile of Edinburgh, 48. his
severity to Kirkaldy and his brother, 49, 50. his adminifira-
tion becomes odious, 51. his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 52. connives at the disputes of the clergy, 54.
he irritates the nobles, 55. Argyll and Athol refuse to an-
fwier his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton, 56. discovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and proposes to resign his office, 58, 59. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 59, 60. obtains an
approbation of his conducE and a pardon in ample form, 60.
continues to watch the motions of his adversaries, 61. is forced
to surrender the Caftfe of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his authori-
ty, 6z. gains the Cafile of Stirling and a feat in the Privy
Council, 63. procures a meeting of the Parliament at Stirling,
ibid 64. his security ratified in it, 64. forces are raised for
and againlt him, 65. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the
intercession of Q Elizabeth, ibid. is fufpe&ed of foul play at
an entertainment in his own house, 66. his illegal proceedings
against the family of Hamilton, 67. the King's new favourites
undermine him, 71, 72. he endeavours to prevent them, 73.
Q: Eiizabeth interposes in his favour, 74. is charged with being
acceifory to the late King's death, 75. he is confined in differ-
ent prisons, 76. discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid.
all his friends are turned out of office, 79. he is tried and
condemned, 81. his resolute calm behaviour and confession be-
fore and at his death, 81-83. his body is treated with igno-
miny, 83.
iw-ray, Earl of, late prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a handful
of men against Hundy, I. 29. by his great skill and courage
he gains a complete victor), ibid. his grant is confirmed by
Parliament, 300. cabals againff him by Lenox and Darnly, 320.
his aversion to Darnly and other court favourites, 326. calls
Bothwell to stand a trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly's marriage with the Queen, 327. he and his associates
are made the dupes of Q. Elizabeth's policy, 330. concerts to.
seize Darrly and carry him to England, 331. this prevented
by the Queen, ibid. avoids affafination intended him by Darnly,
ibid.-333. evidences of there plots, ibid. the Queen's vassals
are called to arms against him, 23z. he is summoned to appear
before, her, 3 :4. is again summoned and outlawed on his non-
Fppearance, 36. is forced to fly with his associates into Argy!-
i;.:, .;-. Itcv are intercded for b QElizabeth, ibid. are

pur-

pursued by the Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 339.
they meet with unexpected ill treatment from Q Elizabeth, ibid.
340. courts Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 346. '
many of his old friends follicit for him, ibid. 347. the Q(ueen's
favour how intercepted, 348, 349. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 350, 351. this how prevented, 352. he and his
aflociates arrive at Edinburgh, 360. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ibid. are alarmed at the Queen's escape,
but oon reconciled to her, 361. he is appointed Regent dur-
ing the minority of King James VI. 445. his harsh behaviour in a
visit to the Queen, 446. the success of his wife administration,
448. procures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid.
449.gets the places offtrength into his hands, 449 his office of
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 450. his severe and haughty
behaviour difgults several, 45 i, 45 2. his adherents in great con-
fternation at the Queen's escape from Lochleven, 454. his pru-
dent condua on that occasion, 455. Defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 457. he improves this vicory, 47o. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament. 473. is called up-
on by Q. Elizabeth to vindicate his condu&, 474. he arrives
at York, 4.76. his views in this affair, 477. complaints of
the Queen's commissioners against him, 478. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 479. this part of his condu&
accounted for, ibid. 480. intrigues with the Duke of Norfolk,
480. his demands from the English commissioners, 481, 48'.
answers the complaints of the Queen's commissioners without
touching on the murder, 482, 483. agrees to have the confe-
rence moved to Wefminfler, 483. is affeaionately received by
Q Elizabeth, which offends Q. Mary, 485. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth, to accuse Mary of the murder, 487. produces his evi-
dences, 491. is dismissed by Q_ Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his condut, 492, 493. his party is secretly sup-
ported by her, 493. returns to Scotland and by his vigorous con-
duc breaks the Queen's party, 495. he receives proposals both
from Q Elizabeth and Q Mary, 497. he disappoints Norfolk,
503, 504. an account of his murder, 5 1, z. his character,
512, 513. his death much lamented by Q. Elizabeth and the
King's party, I. t. much anarchy the consequence of it, z. part
of a letter of his, App. 396. his heir murdered by the Earl of
Huntly - - II. 0o6

N.

uTAU, secretary to Q.Mary, is sent by her with a letter, and
presents to her son, 11. 68. why difmifed without feeing

him, ibid. is ent with offers of humble resignation to QL Eli-
zabeth, 119. is seized and ent prisoner to London, 140. is
produced an evidence againit her 158
MNvil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q. Elizabeth,

Ii. 126
a,,.

ios-r, their extensive power, I. 22, 23. become turbulent and
formidable, 24. their power greater in Scotland than in any
other kingdom, 25. the causes of this, 26-33. their powerof
long duration, 38, 39. it becomes intolerable to the Prince:,
ibid. they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but con-
tinne vigorous in Scotland, 39. discords among them encouraged,
40. their jurisdiction circumscribed, 4. are greatly mortified
by K. James V. 66-69. are disappointed in a scheme to ihew
their resentment, 72. refuse to attend the King into England,
73. they seize the revenues of the church, 241. refuse to
part with them to the reformed clergy, 242, z, zz5. diffen-
sions among them, z8o, 281. a convention of them approve
the Queen-s marriage to Darnly, 328. several of them recom.
mend Bothwell as a hfband to her, 413, 41x. a itrange com-
bination of them on this occailon, 414, 415. a body of them
afociate against her and Bothwell, 424. their different views in
this, 424. a party of them favours the Queen, 436. they are
much dispirited by the good conducE of Murray, 448, 449. they
are much provoked by Morton the Regent, II. 55. think
of redress from the King, 56. infuse fufoicion of the Re-
gent's power into him, 57. a meeting of them called by him,
58. a pary of them conspire againit the King's favourites, 89.
they seize his person and drive them off, go, 91. their neglect
of, and ingratitude to the clergy, 138. the King attempts to
reconcile their feuds and unite them, 184. See Lr-as.
Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commifioner to hear the cause be-

tween Queen Mary and her accusers, I. 476. forms a scheme
of mounting the throne of Scotland, 479, 480. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 481. he repre-
sents the demands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 481, 482. his
farher negociations with rerpea to Q Mary, 498, 499. en-
deavours to conceal his designs from Q Elizabeth, 499. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent, ibid. 500. gets the
consent of many of the English nobles, 501. his projec ap-
proved at foreign courts, 52. is discovered and defeated by
Q Elizabeth, 5c3, 50+. flies to Norfolk, 505. he surrenders
on a second fumnmons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is set at liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q Mary, II.
-5. is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pendants, and accused by them, 28. is executed, ibid.
r:tbumnrlc.d, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q Ma-
r,, I. ;6. his scheme defeated, 507, 508. he is seized by
the Regent, 5;o. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York -I. 38
!stznghamg, Countess of, some account of the tranfation concern-

ing the E-rl of Efiex's ring - II. 285

0.

o.

CT7AJIANS, their institution and extensive powers, II.
224. they undermine the King's minilers, ibid. become

odious, and a combination is formed against them, zz5. being
split into faaions, and envied by the courtiers, they resign their
commission z241
Ogilvie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John Gordon in the fireets

of Edinburgh - -. 285

Oliphant, Matter of, joins the Ruthven conspirators - II. 89
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, I[. 79. his in-

firuaions, ibid. is assassinated 131
D'Oyfel, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endeavours

to promote a war with England, I. 154. his design frustrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his command, i 80. instigates
the Queen Regent to violent measures against the Reformers,
ibid. is ent by Q Mary to demand a safe condu& from Q
Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland - 26

' ' P.

AISLE'Y, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, . loz. creates a
suspicion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,
103. is made Archbithop of St. Andrews - 116

Paris, the massacre of, II. 34, 35. rejoicings of the popish party

on account of it, 35. the consternation and horror of the Pro-
teftants ibid.

Parliameni, the nature of their original constitution, I. 76-79.

particularly that of Scotland, 79-93, 236. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, z36. a difficulty flarted and anf-
wered, 238. their proceedings with regard to religion, ibid.
239. condemn the Popish and approve the Reformed Doetrines,
240. several other regulations of the fame tendency, ibid.
241. their validity called in question, 242. exceed their powers,
243. their p:oceedings laid before the King and Queen, ibid.
244. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 410. pass an at in
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 412. confirm the proceed-
ings of the confederates, 450. parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen's parties, II. i . another of the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. attaint upwards of zoo of their opponents, 21.
a parliament at' Stirling by the King's party, 22. furplized by
the Queen's adherents, ibid. another at Stirling, 63, 64. one
at Edinburgh, 72. and on the King's being of age, 183, 184.
several new laws made there, 184, 187. the lesser Barons ad-
mitted into parliament -- 187
Parry, Docor, undertakes to murder Q. Elizabeth, I. 125. is

encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. 126. is executed - z6;
Parsons, a Jesuit, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of Spain's

right

right of fuccefion to the Crown of England - II. 2z
Paojuinats and Picures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's murder, I.

4ol, 4oz, 41. a law made againit them
Patten, William, his account of the Scottilh antient military dif-

cdpline -I. 126, i a
Paliet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q_ Mary's keepers, I. 20o.

his rigid everity to her, 127, 128. difrbvers her foreign cbr-
refpondence, 147. his rude treatment of her, 165. refuies to
be concerned in privately assassinating her, 169. a letter from
him, App. , 472
Pelievi. Bihop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popii in-

terest in Scotland, I. 2oo. drives the Queen Regent to vio-
lent measures against the Protestants ibid. Zoi
Pertb, an infirrecion of the Reformers there against the Papists, I.

176, 177. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Qen
Regent, 179. a French garrison placed there, ibid. is beifeged
and taken by the Proteflants, 14. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy II. 256

Phili II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of England, I. 138.

reinforces his army with her troops, 153. his great power, II.
131. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade and
conquer England, 9go. his preparations for it dilatory, 194.
his design frnftrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 195. intrigues with rome Scottish Lords with
that view, 96. remits money to them 219

Pir.ey, the battle of - I. 119
Piut V. Pope, excoimmnnicates Q. Elizabeth, deprives her of her

kingdom, and absolves her fubjefts II. 8
PClr, one of Babington's conspirators against Q Elizabeth, II. 144

discovers the plot- 45
Potrof, a frantic zealot, afaffinates the Duke of Guise at the siege

ofOrleans I. 297
Pnt, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

protests against laws opprefive to the Church I . 168
Pcpery, where most flourishing, I 40o. what kind prevailed in

Scotland, 141. was partly grafted on Heathenism, 186. is
much hurt by the Congrega on, z 39. their doctrines condemned
by parliament, 40. the jurifdition of their courts abolished,
240. their worfiif prohibited, ibid. attempt in vain to gain
Queen Mary's favour, 273. the great influence of Popery, 349.
Po-wer, the ballance of, the great consequence of preserving it, 1I.

85, 86
Prfjireriav church government eftablifed in Scotland, I. 246. is

confirmed by King James VI. 207
Protftants, in France, violently persecuted, I. 194, 195. ae mo-

derate on Q. Mar's arrival from France, 267. are employed
bv her in the adminitration, z68. a scheme for fupprefing
them all over Europe, 348. a league formed for that purpufe,
II. 11. See Refsrmainm.

R.
4

R.

R AMS X, a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escapes the

. fate of his associates, I. 59. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Bothwell, 60. See Both.well.

Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French to negociate a peace
with England and Scotland, . 232. terms agreed on by him,

z33, 234.

Randolph, ent to encourage the Congregation, I. 211. con-

gratulates Q. Mary's arrival in Scotland, 269. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is imposed on
by Q Mary in the affair of her marriage with Darnly, 32.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Murray, II. 2, 3. inter-
pores for Morton, 77, 78. flies from Scotland in the night, 80.
is Cent again there, and concludes a treaty with England, 144.
several of his letters, App. 318, 329, 331, 345, 353, 354, 359.

Ratcli. See Sex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, I. 129. account of its firt

preachers, ibid, 130. is much influenced by England, 130, 131.
two remarkable infiruments of promoting it, ibid. it makes
great progress, 137. causes contributing to promote it, 139.
its advantages over popery, 149. is favoured by the Q, Re-
gent, 55. an inRance of regard for it in Scotland, 156, 157.
the whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Bearoun's mur-
der, 165. A priest burnt for embracing it, ibid. 166. there-
formers violently persecuted by the Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
ibid. are prote&ed by the ( Regent, 166. apply in vain to
the Popish clergy, 167. a persecution against them pufled on
by the French interest, 172, 173. the preachers summoned be-
fore the Regent, 174. they are deceived and declared out-laws
by her, 175. riotous infurrefion of them at Perth against the
Papists, 176. prepare to defend themselves againit the Queen,
177, 178. conclude a treaty with her which she presently breaks,
178, 179. they take arms again againftthe, Qeen, 180, 181.
infit on redrefling civil as well as religious grievances, 18z. the
influence of the reformation on liberty, ibid. they besiege and
take Perth, 84. they seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. 185.
commit great violence on churches and monaReries, 185. their
condut how accounted for, ibid. 186. an infRance of their mo-
deration, 187. fix their residence at Edinburgh, ibid. the
Queen prepares to attack them, 188. make another treaty with
her, 189. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed
the exercise of their religion, ibid. demand the expulsion of
the French army, 19o. are aware of their danger from France,
194. their party strengthened, ibid. remonltrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 199. take arms in their own defence,
201. remonstrate again to the Regent, zo3. are highly in-
cenfed at her'imperious answer, ibid. 204. by advice of a con-
vention deprive the Queen Dowager of the office of Regent,

2C5.

tc5. the foundations of this condut, ibid. 206. the growth
of it encouraged by Parliament, 450, 451. See Congregation.
-lgaliries, the ample jurifdi&ion of 1. 21
Reledgig, the privilege of, to whom belonging - . 22
Revenge, encouraged both by custom and law - I. o4
Pj-,e-ees of the church, proceedings of Parliament concerning them

1. 241
Rids 'phi, an agent for the Pope at London negociates for Q Mary,

II. 26. his arguments with the D. of Norfolk - 27, 28
Rizio David, ome account of him and his rife, I. 320, 321.

Darnly's connection with him, 322. his good offices courted
by Murray, 346. his great interest and familiarity with the
Qteen, 353. incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, 34. several concurring causes of
this, ibid. 355 a combination formed to murder him, 355.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace 358, 359.
Romans invade Britain, 1. . give the earliest accounts of the

Scots ibid.
Ro/, Bishop of, zealouflv promotes Queen Mary's interest at Lon-

don, II. 27, 8. is confined to the Tower and threatened with
capital punishment, 28, 29. is set at liberty and banilhed the
kingdom, z9. some letters of his, App. - 388, 409
Ruays, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland I.

so

R:t-.'tn Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darnly,

I. 355. heads the cor.fpiators againit him, 358. his part in
that tranfacion, ibid. 35;. is admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence who promifzs him a pardon, 356. did not repent of it at
his death - 367
*-- created E. of Gowrie, he a.d his associates seize the King,

and remonflrate against his favourites, II. o5, 9t. drive them
from him, ibid. their condut approved in an assembly of the
states, 93. the King escapes from them, 97. by Arran's in-
fluence violent measures are determined against them. ico. Q
Elizabeth intercedes in their behalf, icl. are declared guilty
of high treason. 103. take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are haribly treated by QI Elizabeth, 22. a reconciliation with
her brought about, I35, 136. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 136. their moderation on being reflored
to their effates and honours, 138. their negle& of their friends
the Clergy -ibid.

·--- that name abolished by Parliament, II. 269. See Gowrie.
Rut]zb-en raid, what -I. g9

S.
SA D L E R, Sir Ralph, appointed a commissioner to hear the

cause between Q.Mary and her accusers - 1. 476
S;ndias of Calder, Lord St. John, sent to lay the proceedings

of the congregational Parliament before the King and Queen

in

in France, I. 243. is coldly received and dismissed without a ra
tification by them - 244.
Savage, a Spanih officer, his desperate resolution to kill Q. Eliza-

beth -- 11. 142, 143
Scotland, its ancient history fabulous, . . the origin of the Scots,

z. their hiflory why remarkably obscure, 3. some account of
the writers of it, 4, 5. is divided into four periods, 5, 6. a re-
view of the third era, 7. some account of the controversy con-
cerning its independency, ibid.-I2. this the cause of great
animofities and much bloodshed, 3. the state of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 14. it begins to have an influence ol0
the fate of distant nations 90, 91. influence as to the balance
of power, 91. rfate of Scotland at the birth of Q. Mary, 96.
is invaded by the English, and several places burnt and plunder-
ed, o8, oq9. much alienated from the English, lto, i.
a peace concluded between England, France and Scotland, 1l .
computation of damages done by the English in Scotland, I o,
i I. a new breach with England, 116. is invaded by a great
Englith army, 118. the Scots are defeated with great flaugh-
ter, 9, 120. their manner of fighting at that time, 2zo, 12 I.
a marriage agreed of their young Queen and the Dauphin of
France, 124, 125. they soon repent this ftep, 127. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to the French, 2zS,
129. this inflamed by another incident, 50, 15 . they decline
a war with England, 153. fend representatives to witness Q
Mary's marriage, 56. their care as to the marriage articles,
157, 158. they refute consent to the demands of the French,
159. four of their deputies fufpeaed to be poisoned, 6c.
which much increases the aversion, 61. grant the crown ma-
trimonial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the Englilh for
afiiftance againit the French, 210. zI6. an English fleet arrives
for that purpose, 2z2. conclude a peace with England and re-
ceive an English army, 223, 224. all parties agree in relenting
the French, 233. a treaty between England, France and Scot-
land, 231, z32. both English and French armies leave Scot-
land, 236. they rejoice much at the death of the young King
of France, 247. fend to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252.
rejeA proposals of an ambassador from France, z53, 254. state
of Scotland on Q. Mary's return from France, 64. the great
zeal of the nation against Popery, 267. the Scots brought into
contempt by QMary's conduat, 423. in a miserable condition
after the murder of Murray the regent, II. 20. fate of factions
at that time in it, ibid. z2. a league concluded between Scotland
and England, 14o. a view of the revolutions ot Scotland since
the accession of James VI. 293-307. of the policy of the fate,
293-299. and of the church, 299, 300. of the genius and
taste as to learning 301 307

S ott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages England after the murder

of Murray the Regent, II. z. the design ofthis - 5
V oI. 11. P $Scop

Scr-p, Lord, lent to condole with, and watch Q. Mary on her ar-

rival in h-gland I. 264
&Sffn Lords and court of, by whom firRt appointed, I. 43. the

Preiident and one half of their number of the Clergy - 44

Sic.;j Lord, aflii; the Queen regent in defending Leith - I. 213
Sire'-jlur, Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's person committed to

him, I. 4S. why removed from that office, II. 120. is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence againit her executed, 170. letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Appen-
dix -- - 475
Sinclair, Biihop of Ross, a zealous Papist, concurs as President

of te Sei n acquitting Knox of a charge of treason, I.

303
S-re .', Duke of, enr-s Scotland with apowerful army, I. 19g.

is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
"ip,. great laughter, ibid. this victory why of little advantage,
1::. cabais againit him at the court of England, force him to
rc:urn, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 126
S;:-r, great w.-rlike prepratons there, II. igS, i90. See Ar-

r,.a-. the Infanta of, fe: up as candidate for the crown of Eng-
land - 222
spa.-ri ambatador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing in

fasour of QM ary II. 29
8tri;, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 259-261.

is executed -z6--
£:c:-'3rt, James, prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to carry the

crown mrimonr.: :o the Dauphin of Franc-, I. 163, i64.
S.e -t. Ane'r ces.

Efme-, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, II. c7. See

CaSt. James, his character, I. 71. becomes a favourite

of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 75. is cre.-ted Earl of Arran. See Arran.

Col. WViUiam, commander of the King's guard, contri-

butes :c his efpe from the Ruthven conspirators, II. q8. seizes
the E-I of Goisri -- ic6
- Franci, c caed Earl of Botihwell, II. 196. joins in a
treaso.nable correpporence with the Popish lords, ibid. See

-- , a of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor, II. 213
S:rr-z feiz. d b the Reformers, I. iS . a parliament there by

the King's p-r', ]I. z. is f-rprized by the Qeen's adhe-
renrr', and a gre:i ;;: erLues ibid. z3
:i; ;z: L- on- commands a body of French sent into Scotland, 1.

:, ;. rccs ad demolifes the caitie of St. Andrews, 116.

:f -::., a-ern2rkl-.!e a tute concerning it - I. 117
S;-?-z!,i r:im Frc.d! i, the Church of Scotland, . 250. their

u-.~
-- ---~ :~-i~-~

~ibid.
>." .r Erl of, ore of the commiiifoners to hear the cause between

1 QL

d: Mary and her accusers, I. 476. assembles a powerful army
on the borders, II. 3, 4. he and Scroop enter, and ravage Scot-
land - - 5

9.

AX upon land, firt proposed in Scotland --- I. 52

j Throgmorton Sir Nicholas, ent ambassador extraordinary
from QElizabeth, to oppose Q Mary's marriage with Darnly,
I. 324, 325. his intercession for the exiled lords is much regard-
ed, 346, 347. his enmity to Cecil, 347. is ent to negociate
Q.Mary's liberation, 437. is refused access to her by the con-
federates, ibid. ome letters of his, Appendix, 365, 366, 374,
378, 381, 383; 384.

----

F Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q. Elizabeth,
II. 1 I . at firIt he denies, but afterwards confesses it, ibid. 11 z.
refleftions on his confefion, 112, 113. is executed 114

Tihbourne designs to assassinate Q Elizabeth II. 14
freaJon, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of
Scotland - - I. 259, z6o

U.
V IL MORT , a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland, .

150
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of II. 298

W.

W 7 ALLACE Sir William, bravely asserted the liberty of his
W/ country .

-- I. I

a11lfngham, secretary to QElizabeth, sent ambassador to K. James
VJ. II. 102. returns without success, ibid. makes a favourable
report to her concerning James, ibid. interposes in favour of O
Mary, 119. discovers Babington's conspiracy, 145. why a
determined and inveterate enemy to Q. Mary, 149. a letter
from him, Appen. 460
Warwick Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the government of England,

I. 120

'eftminfier, the conferences concerning Q Mary there I. 483
t>neimorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q. Mary,
I. c56. his schemes discovered and defeated, 508, cg9. he
escapes to the Netherlands - - cg
fWhithorn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating Mass, I. 3ol
il'illox, a miniftcr, declares for refifrance and deprivation of tyran-

nical rulers, 1. zo5. is called to attend the Q Dowager on
her death bed --23

ilj hart George, his illegal execution, revenged - I. 1 i
litch-raft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland, - I. z20

Wctton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace with

France --I. 23 2

Sir Edward, sent by Queen Elizabeth into Scotland, II.

Ii3. his character, ibid. soon gets into high favour with K.
lames, ibid. i 54. procures a league between the two kingdoms,
ibid. undermines Arran's power, 134, 135. forms a plot on
tKng James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave, 13;,

136

Y.
y o R K, the conferences there concerning Queen Mary, I. 476

Z.

OUlC H: F. Lord. sent ambafiador by Q. Elizabeth, to remon-
irate aa'nil Kiing lames's lenity to the Popish lords, II. 217,
hi; treacher.' o t'.at o:caio - ibid.

:' A; ..
