# PREFACE.

D \

\ '.-..., '

P R E F A C E.
I Deliver this book to the world with all the

diffidence and anxiety natural to an Author

on publishing his first performance. The time
I have employed, and the pains I have taken,
in order to render it worthy of the public ap-
probation, it is, perhaps, prudent to conceal,
till it be known whether that approbation shall
ever be bellowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many instances,

from former Historians, as I have placed fats
in a different light, and have drawn chara&ers
with new colours, I ought to account for this
conduc to my readers; and to produce the evi-
dence, on which, at the distance of two cen-
turies, I presume to contradiac the teflimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary historians.

THE tranfa&ions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated against each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embit-
tered by religious zeal. Each of these pro-
duced historians of considerable merit, who
adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their actions. Truth was not the sole object
of thee Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and

A z heated

heated by the part which they themselves had
acted in the scenes they describe, they wrote
an apology for a fa&tion, rather than the hifto-
ry of their country. Succeeding Hiflorians
have followed these guides almost implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
Ientations. But as the fame passions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to
their poflerity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the object of doubt or of
dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon
discovered, that without some evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of
Hiltorians, none of the points in queflion could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been
pro duced, and public archives, as well as the
repolitories of private men, have been ransack-
ed by t)be zeal and curiosity of writers of dif-
ferent parties. '1 he attention of Cecil to col-
i 'd whiatever related to that period, in which
he adted io conspicuous a part, hath provided
fi'.ch an inlmentie ilore of original papers for
iilultrartil this part of the Englih and Scot-
tilli l iflol', as are :Illoft luflicient to satisfy
the ut1:oC[ .vidity of' an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
lb)rt Cotton w\vh:lie lbtrary is lnow the pro-
perty of the public) nlade great i.d '.aluable
ad.Ll ti s to Ceci 's c llcc1ii n; :itl frcnl ehis
nag. lzi;e, D)i jo--, t: co rpilcr ,of the C;i[ -
h;.la, Aiderlbun Keith, I layncs, I'orles, have
drawn n .o:,' of the papers which they haCve
printedl. N, IlTilorv (;f cotland, tlhat merits
anl'' dl..r^'c of( attc' tio;, has apnmcarcd linecd

7 t. l:

there colletions were published. By consult-
ing them, I have been enabled, in many in-
flances, to correct the inaccuracies of former
Hillorians, to avoid their mistakes, and to de-
tect their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped

the notice of those industrious Colledors, and
after all they have produced to light, much
fill remained in darkness, unobserved or un-
published. It was my duty to search for these,
and I found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable tfculty of

Advocates at Edinburgh, contains not only a
large collecion of original papers relating to
the affairs of Scotland, but copies of others
no less curious, which have been preserved by
Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
Offices in England. Of all there the Curators
of that library were plealtd to allow me the
perusal.

THOUGH the Britiff Mufxum be not yet

open to the public, Dr. Birch, whose oblig-
ing disposition is well known, procured me
accels to that noble collection, which is wor-
thy the magnificence of a great and polished
nation.

TiHAT vafi and curious ccllecion of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
nade by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he pubifli-

ed

ed only two volumes, having been purchased,
since his death, by the Lord Viscount Royfloi,
his Lordship was o good as to allow me the
use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing
that part of them which is connedted with my
subjec.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a

very valuable collection of original papers, in
two large Volumes. They relate chiefly to the
reign of James. Many of them are marked
with Archbishop Spotfwood's hand; and it ap-
pears from several passages in his history, that
he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an
History of Scotland from the beginning of the
Reign of James V. to the death of James VI.
in fix large. Volumes; wherein he has inserted
many papers of consequence, which are no
where elle to be found. A copy of this hifto-
ry, which still remains in manuscript, in the
poffeflion of the church of Scotland, was put
into my hands by my worthy friend the Re-
verend Mr. George Wi(hart, principal Clerk
of the Church.

Sin David Dalrymple not only communi-

cated to me the papers which he has collected
relating to Gowrie's conspiracy; but by ex-
plaining to me his sentiments with regard to
that problematical paiagein the Scottish hifto-
ry, has enabled me to place that tr.nfation in

6 a light

a light which dispels much of the darkness
and confusion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my senti-

ments with regard to the conduct and charac-
ter of Queen Mary to be extremely different
from his own, communicated to me a Volume
of manuscripts in his possession, which con-
tains a great number of valuable papers copied
from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper office, by the late Reverend Mr.
Crawford, Regius Profffior of Church History
in the University of Edinburgh. I likewise
received from him the original Register of let-
ters kept by the Regent Lennox during his
administration.

I HA-E consulted all thee papers, as far as

I thought they could be of any use towards il-
lultrating that period of which I write the his-
tory. With what success I have employed
them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was controverted, the public mull judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the dif-

ferent repositories to which I had access, as ma-
ny papers as would have rendered my Appen-
dix equal in size to the mofr blkv collecion
of my predecessors. But I have latisfied my-
feds with publishing a few of the nmot curious
among them, to which I found it necessary
to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.

None

None of these, as far as I can recolkUe, ever
appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical

Diertation concerning the murder of King Hen-
ry, and the genuineness of the ueen's letters to
Bothwell. The fans and cbfervations which
relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my friend
Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hath examined this point with
his usual acuteness and industry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK I.
Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH Hi.tory pre-

vious to the Death of JAMES V.
T H E first ages of the Scottish history are BOOK I.

dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as ---,

The origin

men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and of nations

the events, which happened during their infancy or fabul,"'S
early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not fcure.
to be remembered. The gross ignorance, which an-
ciently covered all the North of Europe, the conti-
nual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent
and defirudive revolutions which there occasioned,
render it impollible to give any authentic account
of the origin of the different kingdoms now ela.
blifled there. Every thing beyond that hort
period, to which well attested annals. reach, is ob-

VOL. I. B fcure;

BOeK I. feure; an immnenfe space is left for invention to
- v 4 occupy; each nation, with a vanity inseparable

from human nature, hath filled that void with
events calculated to dilplay its own antiquity and
lustre. And history, which ought to record truth
and teach wisdom, often sets out with retailing
fiEtions and absurdities.

Otiin of THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as
i.,c sco. high as any of their neighbours. Relying upon

uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,
still more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a
particular detail of the occurrences, which happened
in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as
well as the other northern nations, we receive the
earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from
their own, but from the Roman authors. When
A. D. 8. the Romans under Agricola, sirs carried their arms

into the northern parts of Britain, they found it pof-
sessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike peo-
ple; and having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they erected a strong wall between the firths
of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the diffi-
culty of defending such a distant frontier, contrat-
.4. D, . ed the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by

building a second wall, which ran between New-
castle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had
abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans,

and

and the Caledonians. About the beginning of the BooK L
fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other
Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order to defend
the centre of their empire, to recal those legions,
which guarded the frontier provinces; and at that
time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.

THEIR long residence in the island had polished, A. D. 4s1;.

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the Ro-
mans, for the art of writing, and the use of num-
bers, without which it is impoflible long to preserve
the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left un:

der the dominion of the Scots and Picls. The for-
mer, who are not mentioned by any Roman author,
before the end of the fourth century, were probably
a colony of the Celta or Gauls: Their affinity to
whom appears from their language, their manners,
and religious rites; circumstances more decisive,
with regard to the origin of nations, than either fa-
bulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and
credulous Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe
the common accounts, fettled at firt in Ireland;
and, extending themselves by degrees, landed at
last n the coast opposite to that illand, and fixed
their habitations there, Fierce and bloody wars
were, during several ages, carried on between them
and the Pics. At length, Kenneth II. the sixty- A. D. 838i
ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fa-
bulo1us authors) obtained a complete vicory over

B the

*BooK 1. the Pils, and united under one monarchy, the
^'^vV whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the

northern ocean. And his kingdom became known
by its present name, whichiit derived from a people
who at first fettled there as strangers, and remained
long obscure and inconsiderable.

BIAory of FROM this period the history of Scotland would
Scotland peculiarly merit some attention, were it accompanied with any
obflurc. certainty. But as our remote antiquities are invol-

ved in the fame darkness with those of other nations,
a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal obscurity over our more recent tranfaaions.
This was occasioned by the malicious policy of Ed-
ward I. of England. Towards the end of the thir-
teenth century, this monarch called in question the
independence of Scotland; pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of Eng-
land, and fubjeaed to all the conditions of a feudal
tenure. In order to establish his claim, he seized
the public archives, he ransacked churches and mo-
nafteries, and getting possession by force, or fraud,
of many historical monuments, which tended to
prove the antiquity or freedom of the kingdom, he
carried ome of them into England, and commanded
the reft to be burned . An universal oblivion of
past tranfafions might have been the effet of this
fatal event, but some imperfect Chronicles had
escaped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had re-
corded ome important faas relating to Scotland;
and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were

路 Innic, Essay 5 2, .

fr b

fresh and worthy of credit. There broken fragments BOOK I.
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth cen- -~.~
tury, collected with a pious industry, and from them
picked out materials, which he formed into a regu-
lar hiflory. His work was received by his country-
men with applause; and, as no recourse could be
had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copi-
ed in many monasteries, and the thread of the nar-
rativewas continued by different monks, through the
fubfcquent reigns. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century, John Major and Hetor Boethius published
their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccin8t and
dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and
both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bu-
chanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal
to the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and
vigour of his tile, his history might be placed on a
level with the mot admired compositions of the an-
cients. But, instead of rejecing the improbable
tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains
to adorn them; and hath clothed with all the beau-
ties and graces of fiction, those legends, which for-
merly had only its wildness and Extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may properly be divided Four re.
into four periods. The first reaches from the ori- markable

ras. in (lie

gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. Scorih
The second from Kenneth's conquest of the Pits, t h oy
the death of Alexander IIf. The third extends to

B 3 the

BoOK I. the death of James V. The last, from thence tb
uv~- the accession of James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and

conjecture, and ought to be totally negleEted, or be
abandoned to the industry and credulity of antiqua-
ries. Truth begins to dawn in the second period*
with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened* may be
slightly touched, but merit no particular or labori-
ous enquiry. In the third period, the history of
Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in
England, becomes more authentic: not only are
events related, but their causes and effets explained;
the characters of the aors are dilplayed; the man-
ners of the age described; the revolutions in the
conffitution pointed out: and here every Scotsman
hould begin not to read only, but to fudy the his-
tory of his country. During the fourth period, the
affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of
other nations, its situation in the political state of
Europe was so important, its influence on the ope-
rations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so vifble,
that its history becomes an object of attention to
Foreigners and without some knowledge of the va-
rious and extraordinary revolutions which happened
there, they cannot form a julf notion either of the
most illufirious events, or of the characers of the
most ditinguifhed personages in the sixteenth cen-
tury.

THE

THE following history is confined to the last of BOOK I.

these periods: To give a view of the political slate Aie
of the kingdom, during that which immediately of the rhird
preceded it, is the defiga of this preliminary Book. a"'
The imperfect knowledge which strangers have of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen
thlemfelves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and a half, from the year 286, to the
year 542.

IT opens with the famous controversy concern- Rice of re

ing the independence of Scotland. Before the union controer
of the two kingdoms, this was a question of much the ide-

pendcnceof

importance. If the one crown had been confidered Scotland.
not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory
to the other, a treaty of union could not have been
concluded on equal terms, and every advantage
which the dependent kingdom procured, must have
been esteemed the conceflion of a Sovereign to his
vafTal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the
present century, and while a treaty of union between
the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy was
agitated with all the heat, which national animofities
naturally inspire. What was then a subjet of fcri-
ous concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath
rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But though
tlhe objects, which at that time warmed and intcreft-

B 4 ed

BOOK I. ed both nations, exist no longer, a question which
贸v- appeared so momentous to our ancestors, cannot

be altogether indifferent or uninftruftive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottiih Kings, who, as
far back as the feudal customs can be traced, held
these possessions of the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on that account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in Eng-
land, was in no wife derogatory from their royal dig-
nity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a
Vassal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another*. The Crown of England was without
doubt imperial and independent, though the Princes
who wore it were, for many ages, the vaflals of the
Kings of France; and, in consequence of their pof-
feflions in that kingdom, bound to perform all the
services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history.

Arpin fold the vicomte of the city Bourges to Philip . who
did homage to the Count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which held of that Nobleman, A. D. 1 oo. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjeas,
is to be met with in the histories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bel abolified this pratice in France A. D. 1302. He.
taut Alrege Chronol. Somewhat finilar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. 1535, conltituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abbey, veiling in him all the powers
which pertained to that office, and requiring him to be answer-
able to the Abbot for his exercise ol the fame. Archiv. pull,
Adin.

cxaA.

exat. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs Booi I.
,of Scotland; free and independent as Kings, but, as.-.'
poffefling English territories, vassals to the King of
England. The Englilh Monarchs, satisfied with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more.
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being di-
vided by them into many small kingdoms, was in no
condition to extend its dominion over Scotland,
united at that time underone Monarch. And though
these petty principalities were gradually formed into
one kingdom, the reigning princes, exposed to con-
tinual invasions of the Danes, and often fubjeced
to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turn-
ed their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly in-
capable of establishing new rights in that country.
The first Kings of the Norman race, busied with
introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with main-
taining themselves on the throne which some of them
possesscd by a very dubious title, were as little soli-
citous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An uncxpe'ed calamity
that betel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the Englilh to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependence. William King of Scotland being taken
priloner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his
liberty, not only extorted from him an exorbitant
ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatest tirength in his dominions, but compelled
him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Ri-
chard 1. a generous Prince, solemnly rc;;outced this

claim

BooK I. claim of homage, and absolved William from the
I~"V hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon

the death of Alexander III. near a century after, Ed-
ward I. availing himself of the situation of affairs in
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom
which no Engiifh Monarch before him everpoffef-
fed, and imitating the interested policy of Henry,
rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived
the claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Pretenfon s M A R G.A R E T of Norway, G ra ndaughter of A lex-
of Bruce
and Blliol ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive
examined, him. The right of succession belonged to the de-

fcendants of David Earl of Huntingdon, third son
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illutrious competitors for the
crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel, Earl
David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of
Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the
rules of fuccefflon which are now established, the
right of Baliol was preferable, and notwithstanding
Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl David,
Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother
and grandmother, would be deemed inconteftible.
But in that age, the order of lucctflion was not as-
certained with the fame precision. ]'he queltion ap-
peared to be no less intricate, than it was important.
And though the prejudices of the people, and per-
haps the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each
of the rivals was supported by a powerful faction.
Arms alone, it was feared, mufft terminate a dilpute
too weighty for the laws co decide. But, in order

to

to avoid the miseries of a civil war, Edward was Boo I.
thofen umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce -
in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to
the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by
its eagerness to guard against a civil war, was not
only exposed to that calamity, but almofi fubjeaed
to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of
competitors ready to acrifice their country in order
to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to lubject the Icingdom. The au-
thority of an umpire, which had been unwarily be-
stowed upon him, and from which the Scots dread-
ed no dangerous coniequences, enabled him to exe-
cute his schemes with the greater facility. Under
pretence of examining the question with the utinoft
solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish Barons to
Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated
others, he prevailed on all who were present, not
excepting Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to ac-
knowledge Scotland a fief of the English Crown,
and to swear fealty to him as their Sovercign or Liege
Lord. This flep led to another ill more impor-
tant. As it was vain to pronounce a sentence which
he had not power to execute, cidward demanded
poffefion of the kingdom, that he might be able to
deliver it to him whose right flould be found prefer-
able. And such was the pusillanimity of the nobles,
and the impatient ambition of the competitors, that
both afninted to this (Irange demand, and Gilbert de
Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who

reftifed

BOOK I. refused to surrender the castles in his custody to the

C**V- enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol the

most obsequious and the least formidable of the two
competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Baliol once more professed himself the vassal of Eng-
land, and Submitted to every condition, which the
Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged was
pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled the
nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and indepen-
dence of their country, had reason to conclude that
his dominion was now fully established. But he be-
gan too soon to assume the master; his new vassals,
fierce and independent, bore with impatience a yoke,
to which they were not accustomed. Provoked by
his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Baliol be.
gan to mutiny. Bur Edward, who had no longer
ife for such a pageant King, forced him to resign the
Crown, and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to
himself, by the rebellion of his valfal. At that cri-
tical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to
whom the fond admiration of his countrymen hath
alcribed many fabulous as of prowess, though his
real valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such,
as needs not the heightenings of ficion. He, al-
most tingle, ventured to take arms in defence of the
kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit of his
countrymen. At lall, Robert Bruce, the grandson
of him who stood in competition with Baliol, appear-
ed to afflrt his own rights, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of his country. The nobles, aamed of their

former

former baseness, and enraged at the many indigni- BOOK I.
ties offered to the nation, crowded to his ltandard. (--.
In order to crulh him at once, the Englilh Monarch
entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army.
Many battles were fought, and the Scots, though
often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent
zeal with which the nobles contended for the inde-
pendence of the kingdom, the prudent valour of
Bruce, and above all a national enthusiasm inspired
by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which
he derived from the number, and wealth of his sub-
je&s. And though the war continued with little in-
termiflion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and his
posterity kept potTfflion of the throne of Scotland,
and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of
itsformer Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employed
to terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor
the Scots seemed to distrust thejuftice of their cause;
and both appealed to history and records, and from
these produced, in their own favour, such evidence,
as they pretended to be unanswerable. The letters
and memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and
often appealed to as the common judge of all Chri-
ftian Princes, are ill extant. The fabulous tales
of the early Britilh history; the partial testimony of
ignorant Chroniclers; supposititious treaties and char-
ters; are the proofs, on which Edward founded his
title to the fovereignts of Scotland; and he homage

d(,ne

BOOK I. done by the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in
^vvY England is preposterously supposed to imply the

fubjestion of their whole kingdom . IIIl founded,
however, as their right was, the English did not fail
to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it
with the utmost indignation. To this, we must im-
pute the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national antipa-
thies were excited, not only by the usual circumftan.
ces of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries;
but the Englilh confidered the Scots as vassals who
had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,
regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at en,
slaving their country.

306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign

kingdomh in Scotland, the fame form of government was efta-
whenBruce blifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the
began his
reign. surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonfirates that the nations which overturned the
Roman empire, and erected thee kingdoms, though
divided into different tribes, and diftinguifled by
different names, were originally the fame people,
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws
and policy, that stupendous and singular fabric
ereted by them; the first object that strikes us is the
King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that
all his ubjeEs derive their poffeflions from him,

Andcrfon's THi!loical .iray concerning the Independency,

s~&r ~ ~sc.nd

and

and in return consecrate their lives to his service; Bool I,
when we hear that all marks of diftinaion, and titles "vu
of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of
honour; when we behold the most potent peers, on
their bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be
their Sovereign and their Liege Lord; we are apt to
pronounce him a powerful, nay an absolute Mo-
narch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all
the ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances
of despotic power, a feudal King was the most li-
路mited of all Princes.

BEFORE they allied out of their own habitations Or-iin of

the Feudal

to conquer the world, many of the northern nations Goiern.
seem iot to have been subjet to the government of iment, o
Kings *; and even where monarchical government cratical g-
was established, the prince poffefled but little autho-
rity. A general rather than a king, his military
command was extensive, his civil jurifdieion almost
nothing-t. The army which he led was not com-
posed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his ltandard $.
These conquered not for their leader, but for them-
selves; and being free in their own country, re-
nounced not their liberty when they acquired new
settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient
inhabitants of the countries, which they subdued,

Caf. lib. vi. . z;. f Tacit. de Mor. Germ . 7.
7 .

t C;r. ibil.
路 but

BooK I. but seizing the greater part of their lands, they took

their persons under protection. And the difficulty
of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger
of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, the
form of government which they eftablilhed was al-
together military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country.
Their general fill continuing to be the head of the
colony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him; the remainder, under the name of beneficia or
fiefs, was divided amongst his principal officers. As
the common safety required that these officers hould,
upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arms, for
the commoh defence, and hould continue obedient
to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number
of men, in proportion to the extent of their territo-
ry. These great officers, again parcelled out their
lands among their followers, and annexed the fame
condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military Subordination was efta-
blilhed, and the pofeflion of land was the pay which
soldiers received for their personal service. In con.
sequence of these notions, the poffeflion of land was
granted during pleasure only, and Kings were elec-
tive. In other words, an officer disagreeable to his
general was deprived of his pay, and the person who
was most capable of conducting an army, was cho-
fen to command it. Such were the firfl rudiments,
or infancy of feudal governme Ct.

BUT

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth BOOK ,

century, the feudal system had undergone many t
changes, of which the following were the moss con-
fiderable. Kings formerly elective, were then here-
ditary; and fiefs granted at firit during pleasure,
descended from father to ion, and were become per-
petual. These changes, nor less advantageous to
the nobles than to the prince, made no alteration in
the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal conftirution.
The King, who at a diffance, seemed to be inveffed General

* ry~

. * n i * ~~~~~~causes

with majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, which limi.
to polfefs none of those advantages, which bestow on ted the

power of

monarchs their grandeur and authority. His reve- tie feudal
nues were scanty; he had not a sanding army; and monarchs
he enjoyed no proper jurifdiacion.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were un- Theirreve

o ,nues were

known, even in the palaces of kings; when the of- fmal.
ficers of the crown received little salary besides the
fees and perquisites of their office; when embassies
to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not
necessary that a king hould possess a great revenue;
nor did the condition of Europe, in thole ages, al-
low its princes to be opulent. Commerce made
little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal go-
vernment was established. Institutions, which had
no other object but to inspire a martial spirit, to
train men to be soldiers, and to make arms the only
honourable profeflion, natural y d ifcouraged the com-
mercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes
imposed on thedifferent branchesof commerce, were
by consequence inconsiderable and the prince's

VOL 1. C tre.tfury

BaoK I. treasury received little supply from a source, which
^'VY among a trading people, flows with such abundance,

and is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levi-
ed even on land; such a burthen would have appeared
intolerable to men who received their eRtates, as the
reward of their valour, and who confidered their ser-
vice in the field as a full retribution for what they
poffcffcd. The King's demesnes, or the portion of
land which he still retained in his own hands unalie-
nated, furnished subsistence to his court, and defray.
ed the ordinary expence of government*. The
only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vas
fals to pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldest
son was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married; and a third in order to ran-
fom him if he should happen to be taken prisoner.
Bcides there, the king received the feudal casualties
of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals. And,
on forne extraordinary occasions, his subjects grant-
ed him an aid, which they difRinguiflhed by the name
of a benevolence, in order to declare that he received
it not in confcquence of any right, but as a gift,
flowing from their good-will . All there added
together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious,
which, far from enabling the king to attempt any
thing that could excite the jealousy or fear of the
nobles, kept him in continual indigence, anxiety,
and dependence.

* Craig. de Feud. lib. i. Dig. 14. Du Cir.rTe C. .. rc c.
Dominicum. t Du Cange vec. Aux'l.n;.

No;

NOR could the king supply the defet of his re- BOOK I.

venues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary troopsTy hd
and standing armies were unknown as long as the no fianding
feudal government subsisted in vigour. Europe wasrmes
peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and
the fub-vaflrls of the barons were all obliged to carry
arms. And while the poverty of princes prevented
them from fortifying their fiontier towns, while a
campaign continued but a few weeks, and while a
fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring
every quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was fuffieient
for all the purpofcs both of the security and of the
glory of the nation. Such an army, however, far
from being an engine at the king's disposal, was
often no lels formidable to him, than to his ene-
mies. The more warlike any people were, the
more independent they became; and the fame per-
sons being both soldiers and fubjecs, civil privileges
and immunities were the consequence of their viEto-
ries, and the reward of their martial exploits. Con-
querors, whom mercenary armies, under our pre-
sent forms of government, often render the tyrants
of their own people, as well as the scourges of man-
kind, were commonly, under the feudal conftitu-
tion, the most indulgent of all princes to their sub-
jeets, because they flood most in need of their alift-
ance. A prince whom even war and viktories did
not render the master of his own army, possesed no
hih.dow of military power during times of peace.
I is disbanded soldiers mingled with his other sub-
;cs ; not a tingle man received pay from him;
manly ages elapsed even before a guard was appoint-

C 2 ed

BooE T. ed to defend his person; and destitute of that great
VrT instrument of dominion a itanding army, the au-

thority of the king continued always feeble, and was
often contemptible.

T.hr;:if- NOR were these the only circumflances, which
d:slc, n wai
,imi,,,, ' contributed towards depressing the regal power. By

the feudal fyflem, the king's judicial authority was
extremely circumscribed. At first, princes seem to
iave been the fuprerne judges of their people, and,
in peroin, heard and determined all controversies
amrong them. The multiplicity ofcaufes soon made
it ncceffary to appoint judges, who, in the king's
name, decided matters, that be'onged to the royal
juriiition. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Eu-
rope, having dtftroyed most of the great cities, and
the countries which they seized being cantoned out
among powerful barons, who were blindly follow-
ed by numerots vafeils, whom, in return, they
were bound to protect from every injury; the ad-
minifration ofjuffticc was greatly interrupted, and
the execution of any legal ientence became alrrmot
impraCticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and (dior-
dcr of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Eu-
roSe, to a degree almost incredible, and scarce com-
patible with the fubfltfnce of civil society. Evcry
cfirnder fieltcred himiflf under the protection cf
some powerful chicftain, wlo screened Iinm fm
the piurfiits ofjuftice. To aprchend, and to pu-
nilh a crii.inal, often required the union antl el!ort
of half a kingdolm. In order to remedy thce

evils,

'. :\ ;A . ! :;I; n

;i:.i on lllCC i' ;lii cctr in the f,! cv.'i: I his-

e . '.

!L.;'
,= t.'' .. :, '.,. v.;;ry, },av n : pr.ontc! ;i coult

of

evils, many persons of diftincion were entrutedl BooK I.
with the administration of justice within their own
territories. But what we may presume was, at firfl,
only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the
incroaching spirit of the nobles soon converted into a
right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of orme
were erected into Baronies, those of others into Re-
galities. The jurifdition of the former was exten-
five, that of the latter, as the name implies, royal,
and almost unbounded. All causes, whether civil
or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord
of the regality appointed; and if the king's courts
called any person within his territory before them,
the lord of regality might put a stop to their pro-

ofjultice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no left
than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person, who
was to at as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions,
p. 234. The words ofa proclamation, which afford such a con-
vincing proof of the feebleness of the feudal government, deserve
our notice.-" And bcaufe it is necessary for the execution of
her Highness' commandments and service, that her juflice be
well accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the
concurrence of a good power of her faithful fuhjet,-Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons,
FreeholderS, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling with-
in the aid counties, that they, and every one of them, with
their kin, friends, servants, and hou.'hold men, well bodin in
fcir of war in the mos fubilantious manner, [i. e. compleatly
armed and provided,] and with twenty ldays itU31als to mrect
and to pars forward with him to the borough of Jccburllh, and
there to remain during tie said space of twenty diay, and to re-
ccive such direion and commands, as fliall be given by him to
them in our Sovercign Lady's name, for quietness of the coun.
try; and to put the fame in executon under the pain of losing
their life, land', and goods." Keith's Hill. of Scotland, 1lR.

C 3 ceedings,

BoOK I. cecdings, and by the privilege of repldging, remove
0V the cause to his own court, and even punish his

vassal, if he fubamitted to a foreign jurifdiaion *.
Thus almot every question, in which any person,
who resided on the lands of the nobles, was inte-
rtfted, being dettrmined by judges appointed by the
nobles tl;emlilves, their vassals were scarce fcnfible
of being, in any degree, subjet to the crown. A
feud.; kingdom was split into many small principa-
lities, almnoft independent, and held together by a
foeble and commonly an imperceptible bond of
union. And the king was not only stripped of the
authority annexed to the person of a supreme judge,
but his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the
loss ofthofe pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
that age, due to the person who adminiftredjutice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles rose towards independence. Not
satisfied with having obtained a hereditary right to
their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and
by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as hu-
man ingenuity and invention can reach that end, to
render their poffeflions unalienable and everlaflingc
As they had full power to add to the inheritance
transmitted to them from their anceflors, but none to
diminish it; time alone, by means of marriages,
legacies, and other accidents, brought continual ac-
cefions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family,
like a river, became confidcrable from the length of

* Cra;g. lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

its

its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new BOOK I.
property flowed fuccefively into it. Whatever in- ,'
fluence is derived from titles of honour, the feudal
barons likewise poffTcfcd in an ample manner.
These marks ofdifinction are, in their own nature,
either official or persbnal, and being annexed to a
particular charge, or bestowed by the admiration of
mankind upon illustrious characters, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the fun, however un-
worthy, could not bear to be stripped of that ap-
pellation, by which his father had been distinguish-
ed. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and
added new lustre to nobles already in pofflffion of
too much power. Something more audacious, and
more extravagant still remained. The fulpreme di-
reetion of all affairs, both civil and miiitary, being
committed to the great officers of the crown, the
fame and safety of princes, as well as of their peo-
ple, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of there
officers. But such was the prepolterous ambition
of the nobles, and so fuccelsful even in their wildest
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all the
kingdoms where the feudal inifitucions prevailed,
niofl of these offices were annexed to great sarmi
lies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A
,erlfon wlhofle undutiful behaviour rendered him odi-
uus to his prince, or whoic incapacity exposed him
to the contempt of the people, often held a place of
power and trult, of the greatest importance to both.
In Scotland, the offices of Lord Jultice General,
Great Chamberlain, Iligh Scevard, High Co:,ta-

C 4 blc,

Boom I. ble, Earl Marihal, and High Admiral, were all he-

reditary; and in many counties, the office of Sheriff
was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great, could not fail of eing tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want inftru-
ments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
r:erous band of faithful and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own hands,
enabled them to live with a princely splendour. T he
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more
crowded than the court of his sovereign. The
Jtrong castles, in which they resided, afforded a fe-
cure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A
great part of their revenue was spent upon multi-
tudes of indigent, but bold retainers. And if at any
time they left their retreat to appear in the court
of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in
times of peace, with a vast train of armed follow-
ers. The usual retinue of William the sixth Earl
of Douglas consisted of 2000 horse. Those of
the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and
forgetting their proper rank, such potent and .ugh-
ty barons were the rivals, rather than the fubjets of
their prince. They often despised his orders, in-
fulted his person, and wrested from him his crown.
And the history of Europe, during several ages,
contains little else, but the accounts of the wars and

rev-

revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant ambi- BooK I.
tion. hY#

BUT, if the authority of the barons ftr exceeded Theirpow-

its proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, we en gcotnd
may affirm that the balance which ought to be pre- than in any
served between a king and his nobles was entirely lolt dom.
in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in com-
mon with those of other nations, all the means for
extending their authority which arise from the arif-
tocratical genius of the feudal government. Betides
there, they possessed advantages peculiar to them-
selves: The accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumitances concurred
with the spirit of the constitution toaggrandize them.
To enumerate the most remarkable of these, will The pari-

cular causes

serve both to explain the political state of the king- of this.
dom, and to illuflrate many important occurrences,
in the period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of The nature

the power and independence of the Scottifl nobility. of the
Level and open countries are formed for ervitude.
The authority of the supreme magistrate reaches
with eale to the moti diflant corners, and when na-
ture has erected no barrier, and affords no retreat,
the guilty or obnoxious are toon detccted, and
punifled. Mountains, and fens, and rivers set
bounds to despotic power, and amidst theci, is the
natural feat of freedom and independence. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their refi-
dence. By retiring to his own casle, a mutinous
baron could defy the power of his sovereign, it be-

ing

BOOK I. ing impracticable to lead an army, through a bar-

ren country, to places, almost inaccessible to a single
man. The fame causes, which checked the pro-
grefs of the Roman arms, and rendered all the es-
forts of Edward I. abortive, often proteced the
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their prince;
and they owed their personal independence, to those
very mountains and marshes, which saved their
country from being conquered.

The mall II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contri-
"ImUitefs. buted not a little to increase the power of the nobi-

lity, and to weaken that of the Prince. Where-
ever numbers of men assemble together, order muff
be e.stablished, and a regular form of government
initituted, the authority of the magistrate muff be
recognized, and his decisions meet with prompt and
full obedience. Laws and subordination take rife
in cities; and where there are few cities as in Po-
land, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no
traces of any fort of police. But under the feudal
governments, commerce, the chief means of affin-
bling mankind, was negleEted; the nobles, in or-
der to strengthen their influence over their vasals,
riedded among them, and seldom appeared at court,
where they found a superior, or dwelt in cities,
where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich
counties in the South lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or popu-
lous amidift continual inroads and alarms: The re-
fidence of our monarchs was not fixed to any par-
ticular place; many parts of the country were bar-
ren and uncultivated; and in confcquence of thlee

peculiar

peculiar circumflances, added to the general causes BOOK I.
flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions, sV
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very
inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupi-
ed a ditint portion of the kingdom, and formed
a separate and almost independent society. Instead
of giving aid towards reducing to obedience their
seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his
protection, they were all in arms for his defence, and
obftruted the operations of justice to the utmost.
The prince was obliged to connive at criminals,
whom he could not reach; the nobles, conscious
of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and
the difficulty o punilhing almost aflured them of
impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had The inRi.

no fiall effect in rendering the nobles considerable. Clans.
The nations, which over-ran Europe, were original-
ly divided into many small tribes; and when they
came to parcel out the lands which they had con-
quered, it was natural for every chieftain to beltow
a portion, in the first place, upon those of his own
tribe or family. Thele all held their lands of him;
and as the safety of each individual depended on the
general union, these small bcieties clung together,
and were distinguished by some common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the intro-
duftion of surnames, or ensigns armorial. But when
these became common, the descendants and relations
of every chieftain afrumed the fame name anti arms
with him; other vassals were proud to imitate their
example, and by degrees they were communicated

to

Boo;K I. to all those who held of the fame superior. Thus

w'v' clanfhips were formed; and in a generation or two,

that consanguinity which was, at first, in a great
measure, imaginary, was believed to be real. An
artificial union was converted into a natural one;
men willingly followed a leader, whom they regard-
ed both as the superior of their lands, and the chief
of their blood, and served him not only with the
fidelity of vaflals, but with the affection of friends.
In the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such
unions, as we have described, imperfectly formed;
but in Scotland, whether they were the prodution
of chance, or the effect of policy, or introduced by
the Irith colony above-mentioned, and strengthened
by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Such
a confederacy might be overcome, it could not be
broken; and no change of manners, or of govern-
ment, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom,
to dissolve associations which are founded upon pre-
judices so natural to the human mind. How for-
midable were nobles at the head of followers, who
counting that cause jurf and honourable which their
chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence
cf his person, or of his fame ? Against such men, a
king contended with great disadvantage, and that cold
cervice, which money purchases, orauthority extorts,
was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

rh. (-mai IV. TE smallness of their number may be men-
:Lti-!. riorned among the causes of the grandeur of the

Sccttifh nobles. Our annals reach not back to the

firlt

first division of property in the kingdom; but so far BooK I.
as we can trace the matter, the original poffefions '
of the nobles teem to have been extensive. The an.
cient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of their
prince. Many of the earls and barons, who fuc-
ceeded them, were matiers of territories no less am-
ple. France and England, countries wide and ser-
tile, afforded settlements to a numerous and power-
full nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither extensive
nor rich, could not contain many fuich overgrown
proprietors. But the power of an ariltocracy always
diminishes, in proportion to the increase of its num-
bers ; feeble if divided among a multitude; irre-
fiftible if centered in a few. When nobles are nu-
merous, their operations nearly resemble thoei of the
people, they are routed only by what they feel, not
by what they apprehend; and filbmit to many ar-
bitrary and oppressive ats, before they take arms
againri their sovereign. A small body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick
in discerning, and prompt in repelling danger; all
its motions are as sudden, as thufe of the other are
flow. Hence proceeded the extremejealoufv, with
which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs,
and the fierceness with which they oppc;ed their
incroachmcnts. Even the virtue of a prince did not
render them lcfs vigilant, or less eager to defend
their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithihlnineng
the splendor of his vitorics, and the glory of his
name, was upon the point of cxp):ricncing the vi-
gour of their resistance, no le's tlian his unpopi.)l.ir
delccnd.ent James III. Bcfics this, the n.ir alii-
ance of tle great faiiilics, Iby frequent intc;lrmr-

n,1

BOOK I. riages, was the natural consequence of their small
* -3 number. And as consanguinity was, in those ages,

a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a
nobleman interested themselves in his quarrel, as a
common cause, and every contest the king had,
though with a single baron, soon drew upon him
the arms of a whole confederacy.

T'!eir V. THOSE natural connexions both with their
legues r.d equals, and with their inferiors, the Scottilh nobles
t ns. itrengthened by a device, which if not peculiar to

themselves, was at least more frequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of pro-
found peace, they formed associations, which when
made with their equals, were called leagues of mu-
tual defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. By the former, the contraAing parties
bound themselves mutually to assist each other, in
all causes, and against all persons. By the latter,
protection was ilipulated on the one hand, and fide-
lity and personal service promised on the other *.
Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men at firfi
into these confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded,
near neighbours found it necessary to unite in this
manner for their security, and the weak were ob-
liged to court the patronage of the strong. By de-
grees, these aflociations became so many alliances
offcnfive and defensive againfl the throne; and as
their obligation was held to be more sacred than any

*A&. o0. Pl,. i4:+. Ad 43 P. 1555.

ti,

tie wvatever, they gave much umbrage to our Kings, BOOK I.
and contributed not a little to the power and inde- - -
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Clawford, Ross,
Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Balveny,
&c. and so formidable was this combination to the
king, that he had recourse to a mealure no less vio-
lent than unjufft, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and The fe-

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the qu,: ntng"
power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar- Ilnd
rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the ea(t;
on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The finall revenues of our kings prevented them
from fortifying, or placing garrisons in the towns
on the frontier; nor would thejealoufy of their sub-
jets have permitted such a method of defence. The
barons, whose estates lay near the borders, confider-
ed themselves as bound both in honour and in inte-
reft to repell the enemy. The warden/hips of the
different marches, offices of great trust and dignity,
were always beflowed on them. This gained them
the leading of the warlike counties in the outh;
and their vassals, living in a state of perpetual hofli-
lity, or enjoying at bell an insecure peace, bcame
more inured to war than even the reft of their coun-
trymen, and more willing to accompany their chitt-
tain in his most hardy and dangerous enterprizc;.
It was the valour, no lels than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Dougla s great. The

6 i]o.!lc'

BooK I. nobles in the northern and midland counties were
^- ' often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our

monarchs always found it impracticable to subdue
the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domestic quarrels, those, who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the south-
ern counties, were sure of vitory; and conscious of
this advantage, the lords who possessed authority
there, were apt to forget the duty which they owed
their sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of
fubjets.

The fre. VII. THE calamities which befcl our kings con-
quent mi-
noriies tributed more than any other cause to diminish the
enlh hap- royal authority. Never was any race of monarchs
.S:'i;ad. so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix fuccefive

princes, from Robert III. to James Vs. not one died
a natural death; and the minorities, during that
time, were longer, and more frequent, than ever
happened in any other kingdom. From Robert
Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and
seven of these were called to the throne, while they
were minors, and almost infants. Even the most
regular and best eftablifled goverments feel fenfi-
bly the pernicious effects of a minority, and either
become languid and inative, or are thrown into
violrnt and unnatural convulsions. But, under the
impctrfc and ill adjusted system of government in
S. o land, thcfe efiecs were still more fatal; and the
lierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrcftrain-
cdl by the authority of a king, feorncd all fubj&ion
to the dclegate. juiflietion of a regent, or to the
ft;iele commands of a minor. '1 lie royal authority

Wva3

was circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; BOOK 1L
the prerogatives of the crown, naturally inconfider- v
able, were educed almot to nothing; aid the arif-
tocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins of the
mionarchical. Left the personal power of a regent
Ihould enable him to act with too much vigour, the
authority annexed to that office, was sometimes rcn-
dered inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a
single regent was hofen, the greater nobles, aid
the heads of the mnor illuRlrious families, were fcl-
dom aifed to that dignity. It was often cohferred
upon men, who possessed little influeice, and excit-
ed no jeloufy. They, conscious of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook fme irregularities,
and to permit others; and in order to support thei
uthority, which was dftitute of real fitengtli, they
endeavoured to gain the nmofi powerful and ative
barons, by granting them poiTelfons and immuni-
ties, which railed them to still greater power. When
the king himself carme to assume the reins of go-
vernment, he found his revehues wafRed or alienat-
cd, the crown lands seized or given away, and tl;e
nobles so accullomled to indpendenice, that after the
fruggies of a whole reign, hie was seldom able to
reduce them to the fame itate, il which they had
bsvcn at the beginning of his minority, or tu wrvtL
from theilci what they had tiuriped during that time. cii '
If' we take a view of what happened to each of our 卤,,a'vu, .
kilns, w ho t'as ft unfortunate as to be placed in to l0

10obles (:1'-

thlis situation, tie truth and importance of this ob- ig e;,Ic
.'va*.:;l will fu;ly appear. nsi,,.

v-'iL. 路. n路 r:>.

BOOK I. TIE minority of David II. the son of Robert
'- -"" Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Edward
Daid I. Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and on

the support of some difafTEted barons among the
Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at first attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and Baliol took pofleion of the
throne. A fall body of the nobles, however, con-
tinuiing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Baliol
out us Scotland, and after an absence of nine years,
Davi returned from France, and took the govern-
ment of the kingdom into his own hands. But
nobles, who wre thus wafling their blood and trea-
sure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-
diflurbed poelTlion of their ancient privileges; and
even some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to
have been a maxim in that age, that every leader
might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobility in that way; and
to these the gratitude and liberality of David added,
by distributing, among fch as adhered to him, the
vast poss sions whih fell to the crown by the for-
feiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the
reign o'f l;is father, .au.mented btli its power and
its prLci'c't, during his minority.

r!,'. J..::s I. was s(ized by the nglifh during the
I 1.a . a TrLlCe, a uri gth1 .

co~iri~ii.':cc c a lce, ;rpd tll g垄.inerolsy detained
a i;:iun:, ', a;11; t: ninettcin iyears. ILcring that pe-
ro 1, te k;in dj!un 'a. s

,'i ov rn. !, firli by his uncle
lR'uWrt dkc of 1Abany, and then, by Murdo hi3

lun.
q

son. Both there noblemen aspired to the crown, BOOK I.
and their unnatural ambition, if we may believe
molt of our historians, not only cut fiort the days
of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but pro-
longed the captivity of James. They flattered them-
selves, that they might ftep with less opposition in-
to a throne, when almost vacant; and, dreading
the King's return, as the extinction of their autho-
rity, and the end of their hopes, they carried on
the negociations for obtaining his liberty, with ex-
treme remissness. At the fame time, they neglect-
ed nothing that could either sooth or bribe the no-
bles to approve their scheme. They slackened the
reins of government; they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon ; they suffered the moit ir-
regular as of power, and even wanton instances
of oppression, to pass with impunity; they dealt
out the patrimony of the crown among those whole
enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had
gained; and reduced the royal authority to a state
of imbecillity, from which succeeding monarchs la-
boured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the admini- ,

ftration of affairs and the custody of the King's J-lles U''
person were committed to Sir William Crichton,
and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and di-
cord were the effcets of their conjunt authoiity,
and each of them, in order to strengthen himself,
beflowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young carl
of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ercled
a fart of independent principality within the king-

D 2 dom

Boo. I. doum; and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any.

authority but his own, he created Knights, appoint-
ed a privy council, named officers civil and mili-
tary, aflumred every ensign of Royalty, but the title
of King, and appeared in public with a. magnifi-.
'cnce more thanroyal.
t6o. EliHT. persons were cho!en to govern the king.

dom during the minority of James III. Lord
B:avd, however, by fiizing the person of the young
King, ad bv the acendant which he acquired over
him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious projet of raising his family.
to the fame pitch of power and grandeur with those
ot the prime nobility; and he effected it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern-
ment, and the Barons became accuffomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power,
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long continuance, and the fall of his
fa.iv.ll. .according to the fate of favourites, was
luddien and d(Tftruive; but upon its ruins, the
family of Halmiton :-oli:, which loon attained the
highef: rank in the kingdom.
i,,.' v. As the: minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And'the contending nobles, encour-
. ged or protedted cither by the King of France, or
of England, fornmed thenifelves into more regular
i';c.i(.ns, and dii'egarded more than ever the re-
ilraints of order and authority. The French had
the ad:amag. te of liein g qnc, devoted to thei interrei,

r.lilsd'~

'raied tobe regent. This was the duke of Albany, BooK I.
a native of France, and a grandson of James II. '--
But Alexander Lord Home, the moll eminent of
drl the Scottish peers, who survived the sat.i bat-
tle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, drirg
the first years of his administratiion; and the in-
trigues of the Queen Dowager, si ter of Henry VIII.
rendered the latter prt of it nolels feeble. Though
supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised
his authority, and regardless either of his threats, or
his erintreaties, peremptorily refused, two several
;times, to enter England, to the borders of which
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandon-
ed his troublesome station, and retiring rto ;France,
preferred the tranquillity of a private life, to an
office detitute of real autlhority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of An.us became master of the
King's person, a;id ',,

' rned the kingdom in his

name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of
his illiped' Aiiciority. But the numerous vafalIs
.:nO. fiiencds of his family adhered to him, because
hec ivi'cd with them the power and emoluments
,f his office; the people reverenced and loved the
namc of Douglas; he exercised, without the title 6d
regent, a fuller and more absolute authority than any
\vho had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but
('min:crous pre-eminence of the DouglalI, lei emcd
t:) bc reltored.

To these, and to many other causes, 'cmitted or

unoblervcd by :, did' the Scottiili nobiliry owe thai.
'cxorbitajut an':.l 1:omlmon io\,ecr,' f which instances

.,' l,,:,i,,,!~rc r.

BOOK I. occur, so frequently, in our hiflory. Nothing how-
_--v- ever demonfirates to fully the extent of their power,

as the length of its duration. Many years after the
declension of the feudal systems, in the other king-
doms of Europe, and when the arms or policy of
Princes had, every where, shaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that antient fabric remain-
ed, in a great measure, firm and untouched in Scot-
land.

Tile power THE powers, which the feudal institutions vest-
of tile /cU-
dl nb:cs ecd in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
tboe^ blei Princes of Europe, who longed to pollefs some-
to Princes. thing more than a nominal and precarious autho-

rity. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated
Henry 111. of England, Edward II. and ome other
weak Princes, into rath and premature attempts
againfl the privileges of the Barons, in which they
vwere disappointed or perished. Princes, of greater
abilities, were content to mitigate evils which they
could not cure, they fought occupation for the tur-
bulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars; and
allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign
expeditions, which if they brought no other advan-
tage, secured at least dometic tranquillity. But,
time and accidents ripened the feudal governments

Thl at- for dcftruction. Towards the end of the fifteenth
itemll3i '
hunmle l,e century, and beginning of the ixteenth, all the
nobhIl lfuc Frinces of Europe attacked, as if by concert, the
cUf(ul in
France and SO er of their nobles. Men of genius then under-
(n Elgland. took with success, what their unskilful prcdeceffors

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the
molt profound and the moll adventrous genius of

that

that age, began, and in a ingle reign, almost corn- BOOK I.
pleated the scheme of their deftrudion. The sure '- -
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England
produced the fame effect. The means, indeed, em-
ployed by these monarchs were very different. The
blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and fatal.
The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons,
which waste the constitution, but become not mor-
tal till ome distant period. Nor did they produce
consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly added to
the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them
to fell their lands, which enriched the commons,
and gave them a weight in the legislature unknown
to their predecessors. But while thele great revolu- But the no-
tions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with bes conu
which Scotland was intimately connected, no alte- gather

ftrcengl in

ration happened there; the King neither extended Scotland.
his own prerogative, nor enabled the commons to
encroach upon the ariflocracy; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and pofefions, but
daily made new acquisitions.

THIS was not owing to the inattention of cur o,,l. kns

Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were "'l1"
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of thei: .ii .!e
nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble tcat th,'i't,
order. They did not, however, poffels means uft-
ficient for accomplishing that end. The relburces
of our monarchs were few, and the progrels which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number ofcne.
their followers, and the extent of their jurfiiicion, mnlcinl r)-

wardis ti
were the two chief circumfitances wlichh rendeecled'd.'

D 4 the

BooK I. the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance
YVL>t the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings had

recourse to the fame expedients.

.nc-:urle I. A ONc nobles of a fierce courage, and of un-
rond tlc polilhed manners, frrounded with vassals bold and
-oys.3 licentious, whom they were bound by interest and

honour to prote&, the causes of discord were many
and unavoidable. And as the contending parties
could seldom agree in acknovledging the authority
of any common superior or judge, and their impa-
tient spirit would seldom wait the flow decisions of
uftice, their quarrels were usually terminated by the
sword. The offended Baron affemrbled his vassals,
r.nd wafted the lands, or shed the blood of his ene-
my. To forgive an injury, was mean, to forbear
revenge, infamous or cowardly *. Hence quarrels

* The fpitit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the

manners, but what is more remarkahle, by the laws of those
naes. If any person thought the profecttion of an injury offer-
ed to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publickly to defilt from demanding venge-
ance; but the fame laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and

ant of ancalion to his family, deprived him of the right of fuc-
c'llion. ILennut's Abrcg(:Chronol. p. 81. Among the Anglo-
S.i\ons, we find a singular inflitution diftinguiihed by the name

; id:li,,'.; a voluntary association, the obje whereof was
the personal fiucurity of tlhosl who joined in ir, and which the
fIthc'lccf ofgovernment at that time rendered nceflarv. Among
other regulations, which are contained in one ofthere ltill extant,
the following dccrves not;ce. " If any afl ciare f(ill either
eat or idrink with a perlbn who has killed any member of the
l i/.':,'./,', unless in the pefenceof the King, th: ifhiop, or the
Count, and unless he can prove that he did not know the per-
ion, let im pay a reat fine." I-licks Dillcrt. I.piltolar. npud
'Ihct;Itr. Linr . Septentr, vol. i. p. 21.

weCrc

were transmitted from father to son, and under the Boosc I.
name of deadlyfeuds, subsisted for many generations, '*
with unmitigated rancour. It was the interest of
the crown to foment rather than to extinguilh these
quarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds
of difiord among the nobles, that union which
would have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and
which muff at once have annihilated tle preroga-
tive, was effetually prevented. To the fame cause,
our Kings were indebted for the success, with which
they sometimes attacked the molt powerful chief-
tains. They employed private revenge to aid the
impotence of public laws, and arming against the
person who had incurred their displeasure, those ri-
val families which wifled his fall, they rewarded
their service, by flaring among them the spoils of
the vanquifled. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the
body of the nobility. Those, who were now the
initruments of their Prince's vengeance, became, in
a lort time, the objects of his fear. Having ac-
quired power and wealth by lerving the Crown,
they, in their turn, ft up for independence:. And
though there might be a fluctuation of power, and
of property; though old families fell, and new
ones role upon their ruins ; the rights of the arifto-
cracy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the adminilration ofjuftice i one of tie T,,end the
molt powerful ties between a King and his flibjeCts, J ,ir."'io"'

(Iof the

all our monarchs were at the utmolt pains to cir- Ting's
cumfcribe the jurifliction of the Baror, and to <'cts
tx:nd that of the crown. The cternal forms of

lub-

BooK I. subordination, natural to the feudal system, favour-
' - ed this attempt. An appeal lay from the judges

and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first instance,
belonged to the nobles, and they eaily found means
to defeat the effet of appeals, as well as of many other
feudal regulations. The royal jurifdition was al-
rnoft confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which his judges claimed indeed
much authority, but poiefsed next to none. Our
Kings were sensible of these limitations, and bore
them with impatience. But it was impossible to
overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted;
or to strip the nobles, at once, of privileges which
they had held so long, and which were wrought al-
most into the frame of the feudal constitution. To
accomplish this, however, was an objec of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other in-
ilances, towards a more regular and perfect police.
He made choice, among the etates of parliament,
of a certain number of peribns, whom he diltin-
guilhed by the name of Lords of Se/ion, and ap-
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil
caules, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their
juriti;ftion extended to all matters, which formerly
came under the cognizance of the King's council,
and being a committee of parliament, their deci-
sions were final. Janes II. obtained a law, annex-
ing all regalities, which should be forfeitcd, to the
crown, and declaring the right ofjurifdietion to be
unalienable for the future. James Ill. impoled ce-

ve r

vere penalties upon those judges appointed by the BOOK I.
Barons, whose decisions hould be found on a re- v
view to be unjult; and by many other regulations,
endeavoured 'to extend the authority of his own
court *. James IV. on pretence of remedying the
inconveniences arising from the short terms of the
court of Seflion, appointed other judges called
Lords of Daily Council. The Sefion was an ambula-
tory court, and met seldom: the Daily Council was
fixed, and fat conitantly at Edinburgh; and though
not composed of members of parliament, the fame
powers, which the Lords of Session enjoyed, were
veiled in it. At last James V. ereced a new
court that till fubfits, and which he named the
College of yuftice, the judges or Senators of which
were called Lords of Council and Seon. This court
not only exercised the fame jurisdiCtion which for-
merly belonged to the Sefflon and Daily Council,
but new rights were added. Privileges of great
importance were granted to its members, its forms
were prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
power and splendor conferred upon it. The per-
Ions constituted judges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpets, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their kill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions
more confillent. Such judicatories became the ob-
jcs of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
lingly fubmlitted their property to their determina-
tion, and their incroachmcnts on thejurifdictions of

As. z2. P. 116. A94. P. 1493. A. 99. '. 487.

the

BOOK I. the nobles were popular, and for that reason s'i-
"'*' cefsful. By devices of a similar hatuie, thejurifdic-

tion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrained,
and the authority of the court of 7ufticiary extend-
ed. The crown, in this particular, gaining insen-
sibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample autho-
rity ; and the King, whose jurifdition once refem-
bled that of a Baron, rather than that of a fove-
reign *, came more and more to be confidered as

the

The most perfec idea of the feudal fyterm of government

imay be attained by attending to the state of Germany, and to
the history of France. In tlhe former, the feudal infittions
fill fubfill with great vigour; and though altogether abolified
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved,
that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with
inore certainty aid preciiion, than those of any other country in
Europe, to trace its rife, its Frogrefs, and revolutions. In Ger-
many, every principality may be confdered as a fief, and all its
great Princes as vafl;ls, holding of the Emperor. They possess
all the feudal privileges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurif-
dictions within their own territories, separate and extensive; and
the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed
to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them.
his claims and pretensions arc innumerable, and his power final ;
his jurifdidion within his own demefies or hereditary countri,,,
is compleat; beyond the bounds of these it is almost no;hilg,
and o permanent are feudal principles, that although the feu-
dal fytlem be overturned in almost every particular slate in Ger-
many, nid although its Pinces have all become aolurc, the
original fIudal conllitution ofthe empire llill remains, and ia'.
peculiar to that frm ns governmcn', direc all ii; oypciaioi:,l
and determine the rights of all its Princes. Ciir nbl Ivl:i'nT ,
with regard to the limited jurifiictlion of i:ings under thlic t i.-
dal gvernments, arc rcatly illulih'atcl v \\l hat happcpc in
F'lance. The feeblelef, and duo:agn of ille clfccnd.ints l (C.:.nr-
lcmaine cnecuraged the Peers to usurp an inIdcIpendc it Jlrili'.-

tio:.

she head of the community, and the supreme dif- BOOK I.
penser ofjuftice to his people. These acquisitions .
of our Kings, however, though comparatively
great, were in reality inconsiderable; and notwith-
standing all their efforts, many of the feparateju-
riiditions possessed by the nobles remained in great
vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a
distant and more happy period.

BUT besides these methods of defending their pre- Each of ou;

rogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which may pursued
be confidered as common to all our Princes, we some p.1

of hum-

flall find, by taking a review of their reigns, that iling the
almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce nob"le.
to James V. had formed ome particular system for
depressing the authority of the nobles, which was
the object both of their jealousy and terror. This
condut of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with
the accounts of their historians, muit be confidered
as flowing entirely from their resentment against
particular noblemen; and all theirattempts to hum-
ble them, mut be viewed as the tallies of private
passion, not as the conl'quences of any general

tion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was
feLzed by them. When Hugh Captlt alccnidc t[he throne, A. ).
i~8-, he kept poffcflion of his private patrimony the Comt of
fParis, and all the jurifdilion, which the Kirngs his fucceflrs
exercised for ofme time, was wit!sin it territories. ' here were
only four towns in France, wheic he could eftablifl G(;rl,
I>;'i/;, or royal judges; all the other land;, towns, and bail-
iagce belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French
irqona:rchs had recourse for extending their jurifdiiion we:e
exntlly imilar to those employed by our Princes. -cnaut's
Ab:egr, p. o6-, &c. De l'; prrt do Loi, liv, o, ch. ,-2, c.

.talct,

BOOK I. plan of policy. But, though some of their actions
_wv^ may be imputed to those passions, though the diffe-

rent genius of the men, the temper of the times,
and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned
great variety in their schemes, yet, without being
chargeable with excessive refinement, we may as-
firm that their end was uniformly the fame. And

'his prov. the projec of reducing the power of the arifiocracy,
ed by a re sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; some-
view of te
eveos in times concealed, or seemingly suspended; was never
their rigns. altogether abandoned.

Rbcrt No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles
uc""c. than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the

kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gra-
titude and generosity bestowed on them the lands of
thie vanquished. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to
which it was fubjeft, at that time, in Scotland.
Edward I. having forfeited the estates of mos of
the ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to his
English fubjeEts. These were expelled by the Scots,
anti their lands seized by new masters. Amid{t
lhch rapid changes, confifion was unavoidable;
:nu ndany possesstd their lands by titles extremely
dcective. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their being weary
of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed a
clhcrne for checking the growing power and wealth
of the nobles. He flinmoned them to appear, and
t; fnlcw by what rights tl.cy held their lands. They
afilmbled accordingly, and the question being put,
they itbrted up, at once, and drew their swords,

"By

,( By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and BOO I.
with these we will defend them." The King, in- y'
timidated by their boldness, prudently dropt the
projet. But so deeply did they resent this attack
upon their order, that notwithstanding Robert's po-
pular and plendid virtues, it occasioned a danger-
ous conspiracy against his life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, after- David I.

wards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
tend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OUR historians have been more careful to relate Robert n.

the military, than the civil transactions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmishes and inroads of little con-
sequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years
of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble adminiliration of Robert III. mufstRobert 11i.

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and fckly constitution,
was not a fit person to enter the linss with anive a
martial barons, or to attempt wresting from them
any of their rights.

THE civil tranfic'tions in Scotland are betterJ,,,,rs1.

known since the beginning of the reign of James I.
and a compleat series of our laws fpplies the de-
sects of our historians. The Enililf made ome
amends for their injutLicc in detaining that Prince a

7 p: ioncr,

Boor I. prisoner, by their gcrteroas care of his educatio6:
4-'禄 During his long residence in England, he had art

opportunity ofobferving the feudal system in a more
advanced fate, and refined from many of the im-
perfetions which fill adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but not in-
dependent; a King powerful, thou fat fr rom ab-
solute; he saw a regular administration of govern.
ment; wife laws ena&ed; and a nation floIrifhihg
and happy, becaule all ranks of men were accul.
tomed to obey them. Full of thefc ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to
him a very different scene. The royal authority
never great, was now contemptible, by having been
so long delegated to regents. The ancient patti-
mony, and: revenues of the crown, were almof
totally alienated. D hlring his long absence, the
name of a King was little known, and lIss regard.
ed. The licence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Univertll anarchy prevailed,.
The weak were exposed to the rapine and opprcl-
sion of the strong. In every corner some barbarous

ichietinr ruled at pleasure, and neither feared tlh-
King, nor pitied cilc people .

JAMES was too wile a Prince to employ ot:p.
force to corre& fiuch invveterate ev ils. Nciclr the

* A cotcmporary Monloifl writer defcribcs there c lnitir.c

v rv fccliiigly, in his rude Latin. In dicbus illi3, non crat lex
iii Scotia, lid quilibet potentiorum juniorem oppreffit; e; totuns
r.gnumi suit unum ltliocirium; homicidia, depra;datione:, in-
cimlii, et c:tcra malelitia iinmatia lcunt impunit;t; t julitii;t e-
lc,,at:i extra terlinos regni exulavir. Ch'Iil; . Mra. apud

iw: n.,

men, nor the times would have born it. He ap- BOOK I.
plied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws "vY
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his return, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
eflablili order, tranquillity andjuftice in the king-
dom. But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured
to secure there blellings to his fubjeas, he disco-
vered his intention to recover those poffeflions of
which the crown had been unjuffly bereaved; and
for that purpose obtained an at by which he was
impowered to summon thore, who had obtained
crown lands during the three last reigns, to produce
the rights by which they held them *. As this
statute threatened the property of the nobles, ano-
ther which passed in a fublequent parliament, aimed
a dreadful blow at their power. By it the leagues
and combinations, which we have already described,
and which rendered the nobles so formidable to
the crown, were declared unlawful t. Encouraged
by this success in the beginning of his enterprize,
James's next flep was fill bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized at once,
his cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons;
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and above twenty other peers and barons of prime
rank. To all of them, however, he was imme-
diately reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
and Lennox. Thelf were tried by their Peers, and
condemned; for what crime is now unknown.
Their execution struck the whole order with terror,
and their forfeiture added vatl poffefions to the

* A. 9. P. 1424路 Aft. 30 P. 1424.
Vor I. E crown.

Booic I. crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Bu-
<--r- chan and Strathern, upon different pretexts; and

that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The pa-
tience and inativity of the nobles, while the King
was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the
crown, are amazing. The only obitrucion he met
with was from a flight infurretion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that wlas eafly
suppressed. The splendor and presence of a King,
to which the great men had been long unaccustomed,
inspired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and condu&ed his operations with much
pruc'ece. He was in friendship with England,
and closely allied with the French King: He was
adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual security
and happiness under his administration: And all
his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individu-
als ; were obtained by decisions of law; and being
founded on circunftances peculiar to the persons
who suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehen-
sions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge-
neral rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
wirh which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body of the
nobility, and which the event (hews either to have
been entered into with too much precipitancy, or
to have been carried on with too much violence.
The father of Geor2e Dunbar Earl of March had
taken arms against Robert III. the King's father;
but that crime had been pariloned, and his lands
retorcd by Robert Duke of Albany. James, on

pre-

pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, and Boo I.
that it was the prerogative of the King alone to par- - -n
don treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the
crown, obtained a fenence declaring the pardon to
be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
Many of the great men held lands by no other right
than what they derived from grants of the two Dukes
of Albany. Such a decision, though they had rea-
son to expec it in consequence of the flatute which
the King had obtained, occasioned a general alarm.
Though Dunbar was, at present, the only sufferer,
the precedent might be extended, and their titles to
possessions, which they confidered as the rewards of
their valour, might be fubjeaed to the review of
courts of law, whose forms of proceeding, and ju-
rifdition, were in a martial age little known, and
extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread
fast upon this discovery of the King's intentions;
the common danger called on the whole order to
unite, and to make one bold itand, before they were
stripped fuccefively of their acquisitions, and re-
duced to a (late of poverty and insignificance. The
prevalence of these sentiments among the nobles
encouraged a few desperate men, the friends or fol-
lowers of those who had been the chief fuicFrers
under the King's administration, to form a confpi-
racy against his life. The first uncertain intelligence
of this was brought him, while he lay in his camp
before Roxburgh cattle. He durst not confide in
nobles, to whom hle had given so many caufs of
difgut, but instantly difmifed them and their vas-
fals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
soon after murdered there, in the most cruel man-

E 2 ner.

BOOK I. ner. All our historians mention, with atonilh-
'- 4 ment, this circumstance of the King's dilbanding

his army, at a time, when it was so necefTary for
his preservation. A King, fay they, surrounded
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barons
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it
is evident, from this review of his administration,
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expe& defence from their hands. It was the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived.
-Happy ! had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-
lized; his love of peace, of justice, and of ele-
gance, would have rendered his schemes successful;
and instead of perifling because he had attempted
too much, a grateful people would have applauded
and seconded his efforts to reform and to improve
them.
ja1nieC I CRICHTON, the most able man of those, who

had the direction of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been the minifRer of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquilh the design, and
ie. endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the fame
sentiments. But what James had attempted to es-
sect lowly, and by legal means, his son and Crich-
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scots-
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to that age.
Wiliiam the sixth Earl of Douglas was the first
vJit m to their barbarous policy. That young no-
bleman (as we have already oblcrved) contemning

the

the authority of an infant prince, almost openly re- BooK I.
nounced his allegiance, and aspired to independence. '-
Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such an insult,
but too weak to curb or to bring tojuftice so power-
ful an offender, decoyed him by many promises to
an interview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, not-
withflanding there, murdered both him and his
brother. Crichton, however, gained little by this
a& of treachery, which rendered him universally
odious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was
no less powerful, and no lets formidable to the
crown. By forming the league which we already
mentioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other
Barons, he had united against his Sovereign almost
one half of his kingdom. But his credulity led
him into the fame snare, which had been fatal to
the former Earl. Relying on the King's promises,
who had now attained to the years of manhood,
and having obtained a safe conduct under the great
feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle.
James urged him'to dissolve that dangerous confe.
deracy into which he had entered; the Earl obfti-
nately refud; " If you will not," laid the en-
raged monarch, drawing his dagger, " this hall ;"
and stabbed him to the heart. An action so unwor-
thy of a King filled the nation with atonifhmenr,
and with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms
with the utmost fury, and dragging the fafi con.
du&, which the King had granted and violated, at
a horse's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
the town, and threatened to besiege the castle. An
accommodation en ed, on what terms is not known.

3 But

BooK I. But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power
'- "'"and refentmenr, prevented it from being of long

continuance. Both took the field, at the head of
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe-
rior to the King's, both in number, and in valour;
and a single battle must, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas
was henceforth to pofflfs the throne of Scotland.
But, while his troops impatiently expected the fig-
nal to engage, the Earl ordered them to retire to
their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow,
the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
convinced of his want of genius to improve an op.
portunity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This exam-
ple was followed by many; and the Earl, despised,
or forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the king-
dom, and obliged to depend for his subsistence, on
the friendship of the King of England. The ruin
of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which
such an example of unfucccfsful ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for ome time, from op.
position; and the royal authority remained uncon-
trouled and almost absolute. James did not uffer
this favourable interval to pass unimproved; he
procured the consent of parliament to ws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and more fubver-
five of the privileges of the ariltocracy, than were
ever obtained by any former or fubefquent monarch
of Scotland.

BY

BY one of these, not only all the vast poffefions of BooK I.

the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but -
all prior and future alienations of crown lands were
declared to be void, and the King was impowered to
seize them at pleasure, without any process or form
of law, and oblige the pofleffors to refund what-
ever they had received from them *. A dreadful
instrument of oppression in the hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; refirained, in
several instances, the jurifdiion of that office; and
extended the authority of the King's courts t.

BY a third, it was enaled that no Regality, or

exclusive right of adminiftringjuflice within a man's
own lands, hould be granted in time to come, with-
out the content of parliament $, a condition, which
implied almost an express prohibition. Those no-
bles who already pofefled that great privilege would
naturally be solicitous to prevent it from becoming
common, by being bestowed on many. Those,
who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering diftintion;
and both would concur in rejecting the claims of
new pretenders.

BY a fourth a&, all new grants of hereditary of-

sices were prohibited, and those obtained since the
death of the last King were revoked 搂.

A . 41. P. 1455. Ibid. A. 4.. Ibid. A&. 43.
i A,. 4.

E 4 EAcF

BooK I. EACH of these statutes undermined sone of the
~'^"' great pillars, on which the power of the aristocracy

refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
Prince pursued the plan which he had begun, with
the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death,
occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burit
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his
progress, he wanted neither genius nor courage to
perfect it: And Scotland might, in all probabi-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, which
would have seen the subversion of the feudal
system.
Jmics in. JAMES III. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and poffefled of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were
likewise his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif-
tance, and bellowed every mark of confidence and
affetion upon a few mean persons, of profeflons
so dilhonourable, as ought to have rendered them
unworthy of his presence. Shut up with there, in
his catle of Stirling, he fcldom appeared in public,
and amused himself with architecture, music, and
other arts, which were then little efleemed. The
nobles beheld the power and favour of these mini-

ons

ons with indignation. Even the sanguinary mea- BooK I.
fures of his father provoked them less than his -
neglect. Individuals alone suffered by the former;
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights
to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
every other conceiflon, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual
preparatives for civil war, were the effects of their
resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
againit James, who treated them with the fame
coldness as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into all their cabals. The King decected
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh Castle. The Earl of Mar
having remonstrated with too much boldness against
the King's conduct, was murdered, if we may be.
lieve our historians, by his command. Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of the caftie, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which firIt induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the profpec of the advantages which
might be derived from their general difaffteion,
added to the resentment which he felt on account

of

BOOK I. of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon

-i inspired Albany with more ambitious and criminal

thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.
of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
alfitance which was promised him towards dethron-
ing his brother, he bound himself, so soon as he
was put in poffefion of the kingdom, to swear
fealty and do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contraf a new one with England, and to surrender
some of the strongest castles, and molt valuable
counties in Scotland*. That aid, which the Duke
so basely purchased at the price of his own honour,
and the independence of his country, was punau-
ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with
a powerful army conducted him towards Scotland.
The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to
implore the aliiflance of those nobles whom he had
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were m-
patient for any event, which would reltore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
field, however, at the head of a powerful army of
their followers, but with a ironger disposition to
redress their own grievances, than to annoy the ene.
my; and with a fixed resolution of punishing those
minions, whose insolence they could no longer to-
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
near Lawder, with a military dilpatch and rigour.

*Abercr. Mart. Atch, v. ii. 445.

Ilaving

Having previously concerted their plan, the Earls BOOK I
of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by almost all _v_
the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
tered the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all
his favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they
could not tear from the King, in whole arms he
took helter, and without any form of trial, hanged
them instantly over a bridge. Among the most
remarkable of those who had engrossed the King's
affetion, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan
a fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
the capriciousness of James's charater, and accounts
for the indignation of the nobles, when they be-
held the favour, due to them, bestowed on such
unworthy objets.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his command, and difnifling ir, shut
himself up in the cattle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he stemed even to
have regained his brother's favour, by ome impoi.
tant services. But their friendship was not of long
duration. James abandoned himself, once more,
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those
who had suffered at Lawder, did not deter others
from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Al-
bany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poiibn, fled from court, and
retiring to his caltle of Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the
King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his

formner

BOOK I. former confederacy with Edward; the Earl of An-
路L-v' gus openly negociated that infamous treaty; other

Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba-
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, inltead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety; and flying
first to England, and then to France, he seems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Ministers multiplied the insults which
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconfiflent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles,
was raised for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Both-
well, the fame person who had so narrowly escaped
when his companions were put to death at Lawder.
And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient,
a proclamation was issued forbidding any person to
appear in arms within the precincts of the court *;
which, at a time, when no man of rank left his
own house without a numerous retinue of armed
tollowers, was, in effect, debarring the nobles from
iall access to the King. James, at the fame time,
became fonder of retirement than ever, and funk
in indolence, or superstition, or attentive only to

'* 'errcrius, 3j8.

arl use-

arnufements, devolved his whole authority upon his BOOK I.
favourites. So many injuries provoked the most
considerable nobles to take arms, and having per-
fuaded or obliged the Duke of Rothesay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to et himself at
their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
:overed himself to be so unworthy. Rouzed by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army
of the malecontents was chiefly composed, soon
put his troops to flight, and he himself was slain in
the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a fee-
ble mind, are visible in his whole condua; but the
characer of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems
to be unjustly affixed to him by our historians.
His negle&t of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them; and their discontent, the immoderate
ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have
disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents un-
happy.

lTHE indignation, which many persons of rank

expressed against the conduc of the conspirators, to-
gether with the terror of tI.e fcntence of excommu-
nication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their victory with great mode-
ration and hlimanit'. And being conscious how
deteftabl the crim of imbruing their hands in the

blood

BOOK I. blood of their sovereign appeared, they endeavour-
O'Vc ed to regain the good opinion of their countrymen,

and to attone for the treatment of the father, by
jimn Iv. their loyalty and duty towards the son. They pla-

ced him instantly on the throne, and the whole king-
dom soon united in acknowledging his authority.

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he

felt, in an high degree, all the palions which ani-
mate a young and noble mind. He loved magni-
ficence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and here-
ditary enmity between the King and nobles seems
almost entirely to have ceased. He envied not their
splendor, because it contributed to the ornament of
his court; nor did he dread their power, which he
confidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an
objec of terror to himself. This confidence on his
part met with the proper return of duty and as-
feaion on theirs; and, in his war with England,
he experienced how much a King, beloved by his
nobles, is able to perform. Though the ardour of
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than
the profpe&t of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his
subjects for the King's glory, that he was followed
by as gallant an army, as ever any of his ancestors
had led upon English ground. But though James
himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimen-
tal to the aristocracy, his reign was distinguished by
an event, extremely fatal to it; and one accidental
blow humbled'it more than all the premeditated at-
tacks of precedingl Kings. In the rafl and unfor-

~4 ti;nate

tunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chore ra- BooK I.
ther to die than to desert their Sovereign. Twelve '--v-
Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen,
and an incredible number of barons, fell with the
King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and
sensibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full
age had then acended the throne, their confterna-
tion and feebleness would have afforded him advan-
tages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an James v,

infant of a year old; and though the office of re-
gent was conferred on the Duke of Albany, a man
of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the
King was already great; though he made many
bold attempts to extend the royal authority, though
he put to death Lord Home, and banifled the Earl
of Angus, the twonoblemen ofgreateft influence in
the kingdom, the aristocracy loit no ground under
his adminiltration. A firanger to the manners, the
laws, and the language of the people whom he was
called to rule, he ated, on ome occasions, rather
like a Viceroy of the French King, than the gover-
nor of Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own
privileges, and contended for the interest of their
country, with a boldness, which convinced him of
their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. A.ft-r ifveral unt!ccci;ful flruggles, he
voluntarily retired to lrance, and the King, being
then in his thirteenh year, the nobles agreed that

Abr. ii. 54S-.h

he

BOOK I. he (hould assume the government, and that right

VJ persons should be appointed to attend him by turns,

and to advise and afift him in the administration of
public affairs. The Earl of Angus, who was one of
that number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained some of his colleagues,
removed others, and intimidated the reft. When
the term of his attendance expired, he flill retained
authority, to which all were obliged to fubrit, be-
cause none of them was in a condition to dispute it.
The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an
ative and high spirited Prince submitted, with great
impatience, to the restraint in which he was kept.
It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be confined
as a prisoner within his own palace; to be treated
with no refpe&, and to be deprived of all power.
Ie could not, on some occasions, conceal his in-
dignation and resentment. Angus foresaw that he
had much to dread from these, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of
his person. James was continually surrounded by
the Earl's spies and confidents; many eyes watched
all his motions, and obfcrved every ftep he took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all
their vigilance. He escaped from Falkland, and
fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of the
Queen his mother, and the only place of strength
in the kingdom which was not in the hand of the
D)ouglases. The nobles, of whom some were influ-
enced by their hatred to Angus, and others by their
refpc& for the King, crowded to Stirling, and his
court wa: loon filled with persons of the greatest dif-

tinftion.

tinction. The Earl, though aftonihed at this un- BOOK I.
expe&ed revolution, resolved, at first, to make one I
bold push for recovering his authority, by march-
ing to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he
wanted either courage or trength to execute this
resolution. In a parliament held soon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after escaping from
many dangers, and enduring much misery, he wa'
at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. lie
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefulness
of person, or in vigour of mind. His understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm; the former
capable of great improvement, and the latter sus-
ceptible of the bel impreflions. But according to
the usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been negleAed.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to instruct him. It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from
knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in
order to divert him from business, gave him an early
taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and
engrossed him more than became a King. Accord-
ingly we discover in James all the features of a
great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent paflions, implacable relentment, an immo-
derate desire of power, and the utnoft rage at dif-
appointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punifnmncnt of private opprclffors, on-

VOL 1. I. F li!tce

BOOK I. fidence in his favourites, and the most engaging
芦v-J oFennefs and affability of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exor-

bitant power of the nob!es led him early to imitate
his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.
The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more systematic, and purlued with great-
er constancy and fteddinefs, than that of any of
his ancestors. And the influerce of the events
in his reign upon those of the fubrequent period,
render it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of
his acions. He had penetration enough to discover
those defects in the schemes adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
'pirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by
these alone. The effesls of the violent measures of
James II. convinced him, that the oppreflion of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and
resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its
spoils some new family, which would oon adopt
the fame sentiments, and become equally formidable
to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
James III. that negle was still more intolerable to
the nobles than opprefflon, and that the Ministry of
new men and favourits was both dishonourable and
dancgrous to a Prince. At the fame time, he felt
that the authority of the crown was not sufficient to
counterbalance the powtr of the aristocracy, and
that without oml new acceliun of tlrength, he

could

could expec nobetter success in the struggle than his Boot I.
anceflors. In this extremity, he applied himfelfto _V
the clergy, hoping that they would both relish his
plan, and concur, with all their influence, in en-
abling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal
government, the church being reckoned a third
estate, had its representatives in parliament; the
number of thef was considerable, and they polffefed
great influence in that assembly. The superstition
of former Kings, and the zeal of an ignorant age,
had bcftowed on ecclefiafticks, a great proportion
of the national wealth, and the authority which
they acquired by the reverence of the people, was
superior even to that which they derived from their
riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding
their attention to extend their usurpations, had ne-
glected Scotland as a distant and poor kingdom, and
permitted its Kings to exercise powers, which they
disputed with more considerable princes. The Scot-
tifh monarchs had the sole right of nomination to
vacant bishoprics and abbeys *; and James natu-
rally concluded, that men who expeted preferment
from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by
promoting his deigns. Happily for him, the nobles
had not yet recovered the blow which fell on their
order at Flowden, and if we may jdge either from
their conduct, or from the charaaer given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience in
business, and incapable of a&ing either wilh u:a-

* F? !.. Kr ec.;t. 1. 9 '. & . 1 P. i;.

F 路 hilyi,

BOOK I. nimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy on
wV%' the other hand, were distinguished by their great

abilities, and no less by their ambition. Various
causes of disgust had arisen between them and the
nobles, who despised their characer, and envied
their power, or their wealth. By aing in concert
with the King, they not only gratified him, but
avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by depressing those, who were their sole
rivals. Secure osso powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a per-
son, so far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard,
or render ineffe&tual all his schemes, he solemnly
swore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland, and, notwithstanding the repeated
fblicitations of.the King of England, he adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then pro-
ceeled to repair the fortifications ofEdinburgh, Stir-
ling, and other cafles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken these
precautins by way of dcfience, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve.
Those offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
fcfflon. to cnider as appropriated to their order,
were now beflowed on ecclefialics, who alone pof-
fccd lhe King's ear, and together with a few gentle-
men of inferior rank, to hom he had communi-
cated his schemes, were entrusted with the manage-
ment of all public aairs. Thlie ministers were
chofn wit!hjudgmtent and Cardinal Beatoun, who

soon

soon became the most eminent among them, was a BOOK r.
man offuperior genius. They served the King with vo
fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour,
with reputation, and with success. James no longer
concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered
no opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight
offences were aggravated into real crimes, and puo
nifhed with severity. Every accu!ation againftper-
sons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every
trial proved fatal to those who were accuscd: the
banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons ex-
tremely frivolous, the beheading the Mafler of
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt, and
the condemning Lady Glamis, a filter of the Earl
of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witchcraft,
of which even that credulous age believed her inno-
cent, are monuments both of the King's hatred of
the nobility, of the severity of his government, and
of the stretches he made towards absolute power.
By these ats of authority, he tried the pirit of the
nobles, and how much they were willing to bear.
Theirpatience increased his contempt for them, and
added to the ardour and boldness with which he
pursued his plan. Meanwhile they observed the
tendency of his schemes with concern, and with re-
fentment; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of
his ministers, and the want of a proper leader, made
it dangerous :o concert any meaflurcs for their de-
lfnce, and ipoffible to aft with becoming vigour.
James and his counsellors, by a false ltep which they
took, prcfented to them, at length, an advantage
which they did not fail to improve.

F 3 MOTIVES,

BOOK T. M'TIVxES, Which are well known, had prompted
'-- -1I Henry VIII. to dii;limn the Pope's authority, and

to seize the revenues of the regular clegy. His
l;Rlcm of retFrmnatin fatsfied none of his 'ul:'ects.
Some were en::iaged becaurLe !h: had Iproceeded io far,
others murmured bec-ufr he proceeded no farther;
and by his impriobs te::per, and al:ernite perlcu-
ticns f the zealots fr Pcpe'y, and the converts
to te I'roteant opinions, he was equally born;i-
dable ro buth. Henry was atraid that this gceral
diflatisi'::ion of his peonle might encourage his
eremies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
Hei knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the fiiendl iip of tle king of Scors, and endeavoured
to enii- .' hin in an al.iance agai::ft England. He
refilvcL!, tierfti.re, to dilai point the eitct. of their
negotiations, by entering into a clo!'er tunion with
his n.phvw, and fur Iha- purpolL ent ambafeadors
into Scotland, to p'opofc a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept this ivitation; the alliflance of so power-
ful an ally, the hgh honours which were promised
him, and the liberal fubidies he might have Lotain-
ed, viould have addted no little dignity to his do-
nef.ic ,ov.-rn t inr, and mniu l have greatly ftcilitat-
ed the execution of his fvo:rite plan. On the
O:';' : haind, a w.,r wil.h England, which he had
realun t: appichciid, if he' nrjcied Ienry'sofiI sos
frit n..:l ip. \\as inconliifltcn with all his views. This
wvl,!l Lbring !ilm to ('cpend on his barons ; an army
cui;u'.l not be raifLd wirlhou: t their aiTillance: To call
n.Iblu.s i;;-cenlJa againit their prince into the field,
was to u:nitc his enemies, to make them fenibleof

their

their own strength, and to afford them an opportu- BOOK I.
nity of revenging their wrongs. Jan:es, who was ''v"
not ignorant that all there consequences mightt fol-
low a breach with England, linened at first to Hen-
ry's propolal, and coniented to the interview at
York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
must have been eftabli{hed on the ruins of the
church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse into
his nephew his own fatimenrts concerning reli-
gion, and had frequently solicited him, by amb.if
fadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the
Pope, which was no less dishonourable to princes,
than grievous to their subje&s. The clergy had
hitherto, with great address, diverted the King from
regarding these Iblicitations. But, in an amicable
conference, Henry expe&ted, and they feared, that
James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced
by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of
the church were an alluring object to a Prince, who
wanted money, and who loved it; that the pride
and ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indignation
of the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence
to the people; that the Protestant opinions were
spreading fast through;out the nation; and that an
univcrfal dfection from the etabliffed church,
would be the conlequence o giving the falleft de-
gree of enc;,.ragcment t thele principles. For
thee reasons, they cmplloyed all their credit with
the King, and h;ad rcourfe to every artifice and in-
finuation, in order to divert himn from a journey,
which must have been so fatal to their interest.
T hey endeavcured to inspire him with fear, by
magnifying the danger to which he would expose

F 4 his

BOOK I. his pcrfon, by venturing so far into England, with-

out any security but the word of a Prince, who
having violated every thing venerable and sacred in
religion, was no longe- to be trusted; and by way
of compensation for the rums which he might have
received from I-enry, they offered an annual dona-
tive of 5s,oo crowns; they promised to contribute
liberally towards carrying on a war with England,
and fl.tiered him with the rofpect of immense
riches, arising from the forfeiture of persons, who
were to be tried and condemned as heretics. In-
fluenced by these confiterations, James broke his
a;reement with Henry, who, in expectation of
meeting hiia, had already come to York ; and that
haughty and impatient Monarch relented the affront,
by declaring war against Scotland. His army was
loon ready to invade the kingdom. James was ob-
liged to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence
of his dominions. At his command, they assembled
their followers; but with the fame dispositions,
whlch had animated their ancestors in the reign of
James 11I. and with a full rclolution of imitating
thcer example, by puniflhing those to whom they
imputed te grievances, of which they had reason
to complain; and if the King's Miniters had not
been men of abilities, fiperior to those of James III.
and of LonlidL rable in:ercft even with their enemies,
~ Iho coulll not agree among thllni:lves what victims
to fa. riice, the camp of Fala would have been as
rcn;markal'le as that of Lawder, for the daring en-
croaciln;iencs of :le no! ility on the prerogative of
the Prince. But thl;uih I; is Ministers were saved by
this acci'n;, the nblcs had soon another opportu-

nity

nity of discovering to the King, their diffatisfaftion BOOK I.
with his government, and their contempt of his au-
thority. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of
the season having obliged the Englilh army, which
had invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined
that he could attack them, with great advantage, in
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an ob-
ftinacy and disdain, which greatly aggravated their
disobedience, refused to advance a itep beyond the
limits of their own country. Provoked by this in-
fult to himself, and suspicious of a new conspiracy
againit his ministers, the King instantly disbanded
an army, which paid so little regard to his orders,
and returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could not

brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes of fuc-
cess had been rath, and his despair upon a difap-
pointment was exceflive. He felt himself engaged
in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead
of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he ex-
pected, had begun with such circumstances, as en-
couraged the insolence of his fubjets, and exposed
him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain
and ineffecual all his projects to humble the nobles
had been, andl that, though in times of peace, aPrince
may endeavour to depress them, they will rife, dur-
ing war, to their former importance and dignity.
Impatience, refenrment, indignation, filled his bosom
by turns. The vio!nce of there pafions altered his
temper, and, perhaps, impaired his reason. He
became pensive, fullen, and retired. He seemed,
through the clay, to be swallowed up in profound

meditation,

BOOK I. meditation, and through the night, he was dilturb-

..V. ed with thole visionary terrors which make impref-

sion upon a weak underfianding only, or a dilbrder-
ed fancy. In order to revive the King's spirits, an
inroad on the weflern borders was concerted by his
ministers, who prevailed upon the Barons in the
neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops as
were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's
country. But nothing could remove the King's
averion to his nobility, or diminish his jealousy
of their power. He would not even entrust them
with the comnmand of the forces which they had
assembled; that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair
his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
poefiiion of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal
mutiny in the army. Five hundred Englilh, who
happened to l:c drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. -latred to the King, and
contempt of their general, produced an effet, to
which there is no parallel in history. They over-
came the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far
inferior, without flriking a tingle blow. No man
was desirous of a viaory, which would have been
acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the Eng-
lifl had the choice of what prisoners they pleated to
take; and almost every perlbn of diftinftion, who
was engaged in the expedition, remained in their
hands. This aonilhing event was a new proof to
the King of the general difaffe.ion of the nobility,
and a new dilifovery of his own weakness, and want

of'

of authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated BOOK I.
insults, he found hinllelf unable to revenge them.
The deepest mtlancholy and despair succeeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the firt ac-
count of the rout of hi, army occasioned. All the
violent pafllons, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, ant wafted and consumed a
youthful and vigorous contitution. Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison;
but the diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; nd the known eff'ts of
disappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, sufficiently accot:ntior
his unhappy fate. " His death (ays Drummond
proveth his mind to have been railed to an high
strain, and above mediocrity; he could cli:, but
could not digelt a dcfafter." Had James lurvived
this mistortune, one of two things must have hap-
pened: Either the violence of his temper would have
engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in H-enry a willing and powerful
protector, and have derived the fame affiltance from
him, which the milecontents, in the fticceeding
reign, did fromn his daughter Elizabeth; in that
caf., a dangerous civil war would have been the
certain conicqLeicc. Or, perhaps, neceTity might
have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers, and
be reconc;lcd to i';i n,bility. In that event the
church would hlave Ial n a lacrifice to their union,
a Reformation, uon lenry's plan, would have
been eflablified by law, a great part of the tempo-
ralities of the church would have been Itizcd, and

the

BOOK I. the friendlhip of the King and Barons would have

L-s^" been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re-

ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they
were not attended with success, we mufi nor, for
that reason, conclude that they were not conducted
with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have
combined gainfl the Crown. Accidental events
concurred with political causes, in rendering the best
concerted measures abortive. The afaffination of
one King, the sudden death of another, and the
fatal clefpair of a third, contributed no leis than its
own natural trength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our

Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circum-
fiance seemingly inexplicable, and which merits par-
ticular attention. As these aflenmblies were com-
posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to ima-
gine, must have dictated all their decisions; but,
instead of this, every King found them obsequious
to his will, and obtained such laws, as he esteemed

rThe extra. necessary for extending his authority. All things
ordinry
inc ofwln,f were conducted there with dispatch and unanimity;
thcscuttin and, in none of our historians, do we find an in-
Kiim: in
,ri.a- .fiance of any opposition formed against the court in
Ml""t' Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying

through the measures which were agreeable to the
King. In order to account for this singular fact, it
is necessary to enquire into the origin and conftitu-
tion of Parliament.

THE

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform BOO I.

in all its operations, produced the fame effects in C-'
small, as in great ocieties; and the territory of a tons of it.
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom.
He poifeffed the right ofjurildiction, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
assist both in pating and executing his sentences.
When assembled, on these occasions, they establish-
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended
to the welfare of their small society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior,
as his neceflities required. Change now a single
name: In place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its first rudiments, and ob-
serve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now poisess as Judges, as Legislators, and
as dispensers of the public revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the Ki;g's Court*,
and of the King's Great Council, by which, Parlia-
ments were anciently distinguished; and suitable to
this, likewise, were the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal king-
doms, those who held of the King in c,ief were
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to afift in his courts. Nor was this eftecned a
privilege, but a service. It was exated likewise of
Bishops, Abbots, and the gre.ter ecc!efiaftics, vho
holding vall poffefflons of the Crown, were deemed
subject to the fame burden. Parliaments did not
continue long in this fli.t. Cities gradu,'.l; acquir-
ed wealth, a ccnlidcrablc fidarc (,f the puclie taxes

^ l u (.a'', VL:. C'A. i.

were
,P

BOOK I. were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into efti.
_*V mation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign,

a place in Parliament was the consequence of theW
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or to
impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chufe one or two of its
citizens to appear in the name of the corporation;
and the idea of representation was sirs introduced in
this manner. An innovation, still more important,
naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful;
but as it is impossible to render property fixed and
permanent, many of their possessors came, gradu-
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence
arose the diflinction between the Greater and the
Leser Barcns. The former were those who retain-
ed their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and lets potent vasals of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services,
and, of consequence, to give attendance in Parlia-
ment. To the Ieffer Barons, who formed no incon-
fiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance.
Barons sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs re-
nounccd their right cf eledting, charters were ob-
tained, containing an exemption from attendance;
and the anxiety, with w;ich our ancestors endea-
voured to get fire from the obligation of fitting in
Parliament, is furpaed by that only, with which
their spoieriKy silicic to be admitted there. In order
to acnimmodate both prtics, and, at once, to fe-
cure to the King a ;Ificient number of member.

in

in his great council, and to save his vassals from an BOOK I.
unnecelary burden, an easy expedient was found ''
out. The obligation to personal attendance was
continued upon the Greater Barons, from which the
Lesser Barons were exempted, on condition of their
electing, in each county, a certain number of Re-
presentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became compleat in all its members, and
was composed of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
Knights of the shires, and of Burgesses. As many
causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfetion in England, than in Scotland; as the ri-
gour of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and
its defects were supplied with greater facility in the
one kingdom, than in the other; England led the
way in all thee changes, and Burgefes, and
Knights of the hire appeared in the Parliaments of
that nation, before they were heard of in ours.
Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottish Parlia-
ments by Robert Bruce*; and in the preamble to the A.D.t 36-
laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the con-
fituent members of that assembly. The Lesser Ba-
rons were indebted to James I. for a statute ex- 4'7
empting them from personal attendance, and per-
mitting them to eleCt reprefenratives ; the exemp-
tion was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was
so little valued, that, except one or two instances,
it lay neglected during 16o years; and James VI.
first obliged them to fend representatives regularly
to Parliament t.

* Abercrnoby, t. 6;;.
t EffTys on Brit .

Atti.- . I ', .' p, [I'1, of eu,.
Pr',p, ch .

2 .\ COT-

BOOK I. A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, consisted anci-

楼V-" ently of Great Barons, of Ecclesiastics, and a few

representatives of burroughs. Nor were these divid-
ed, as in England, into two houses, but composed
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor prefid-
ed *. And, in rude ages, when the science of go-
vernment was extremely imperfet, among a mar-
tial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
firangers to the talents which make a figure in de-
bate, and despising them, Parliaments were not held
in the fame estimation as at present; nor did haugh-
ty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared
with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments
were often hastily assembled, and it was, probably,
in the King's power, by the manner in which he
issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his measures. At a time
when deeds of violence were common, and the re-
ftraints of law and decency were little regarded, no
man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of

* In England, the Peers and Commons eem early to have

met in eparare houses; and James I. who was fond of imitat
ing the Englilh in all their customs, had probably an intention
of introducirg some considerable diftin'tion between the G reater
and Lcffer BEaro:s in Scotland; t leaf he determined that their
consultations fliou!d not be carried on under the direilon of the
fame Prcfident; for by his law, A. . 1327, it is provided,
" that out of the Coiiiiniioners of all the hires shall be chofcn
a wife and epert man, called the Common Speaker of the Par-
liament, who flall propose all and sundry needs and causes, per.
tainig to the Commons in the Parli:ment or general council."
No iach Speaker, it wou!.l fctm, \ as ever chosen; and by a
fulit;quernt la:v the Clhainccllur wa declared perpetual President
of larli;.nmci:.

Parlia-

Parliament, were extremely few; even so late as the BOOK I.
beginning of the reign of James VI. * they amount- Y-
ed only to fifty three. The Ecclefiaflics equalled
them in number, and being devoted implicitly to
the Crown, for reasons which have been already
explained, rendered all hopes of vicory in any
struggle desperate. Nor were the nobles themselves
so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent ads
of Parliament favourable to the royal Prerogative;
conscious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry these as into execution without
their concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to
contemn them ; and the statute revoking the King's
property, and annexing alienated jurifditions to the
Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
despised as often, is a standing proof of the impo-
tence of laws, when opposed to power. So many
concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account
for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired in Par-
liament. But without having rccourfe to any of
these, a single circumstance, peculiar to the confli-
tution of the Scotti Parliament, the mentioning
of which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly
explain this fad, seemingly so repugnant to all our
reasonings concerning the weakness of the King,
and the power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the

constitution of our Parliaments, we find a commit-
tee, distinguished by the name of Lords of Articles.
It was their business to prepare, and to digest all
matters which were to be laid before the Parlia-
ment; every motion for a new law was first made

0And. Coll v. i. pref. 40.
VOL. . G there,

BOOK I. there, and approved or rejected by them at pleasure;

-^ 3 what they approved was formed into a bill. and pre-

sented to Parliament; what they rejected could not
be introduced into the house. This com:ittee owed
the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the military
genius of the ancient nobles; too impt;ent to sub-
mit to the drudgery of civil business, ito impetu-
ous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details
necelfary in conducting it, they were glad to lay
that burden upon a small number, while they them-
selves had no other labour than simply to give, or
to refuse their fantion to the bills, which were pre-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not
only directed the whole proceedings of Parliament,
but pofefsed a negative before debate. That com-
mittee was chosen and constituted in such a manner,
as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's
hands. It is extremely probable, that the King once
had the sole right of nominating the Lords of Ar-
ticles *. They came afterwards to be elected by

the

It appears from authentic records, that a parliament was

appointed to be held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of
Articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before the
aiTembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly eleced so
long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude,
that the Prince alone poifeffed the right ofelecting them. There
are two different accounts of the manner of their election at that
time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbilhop of
Glasgow; " We, accompanied with our nobility for the time,
" pas to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding of our Par-
' liament on the 7th day of this instant, and elCled the Lords
"Articulars." If we explain there words, according to ri&
Grammar, we mutl conclude that the Qucen herself ele&ed
them. It i, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay,
that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counllors,

and

the parliament, and consisTed of an equal number BooK I.
out of each estate, and most commonly of eight *.
Temporal and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight repre.
fentatives of burroughs, and of the eight great offi-
cers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight eccle-
fiaftics, together with the Officers of the Crown,
were entirely at the King's devotion, and it was
scarce poflible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgelcs as would unite in
opposition to his measures. Capable either of in-
fluencing their ele&ion, or of gaining them when
eleced, the King commonly found the Lords of
Articles no less obsequious to his will, than his own
privy council, and by means of his authority with
them, he could put a negative upon his Parliament
before debate, as well as after it; and what may
seem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince
in Europe atually poffefled in one instance, a pre-
rogative which the most absolute could never at-
tain *

To

and others, eleced the Lords of Articles. Keith's Hidf. of Scot-
land, p. 3 3 . The other account is Lord Ruthven's, whoexprelly
affirms that the Queen herself eleted them. Keith's Append.
1 z6. hether we embrace the one or the other of these opi-
nions, is of no consequence. If the privy counsellors and nobles
attending the court had a right to elet the Lords of Articles, it
was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had
bad the sole nomination of them.

* Having deduced the hiflory of the committee of Lords of

Articles, as low as the subjea of this preliminary book required,
it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers, to know
the subsequent variations in this singular inflitution, and the po-
litical ue which our Kings made of there. When Parliaments
became more numerous, and more considerable by the admiflion
of the representatives of the leier Barons, the preferrving their

G influence

BOOK I. To this account of the internal constitution of
So- 1 'Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of
State of
lurope at the political state of Europe at that period, where
he begin- the following history commences. A thorough
ning of the
.6th cna- knowledge of that general system, of which every
t'ry. kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re-

quifite towards understanding the hiltory of a na-

tion,

influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise, an object
of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence,
that the Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the
great multitude of affairs laid before them, obtained an at,
appointing four persons to be named out of each eate, who
should meet twenty days before the commencement of Parlia-
ment t, to receive all supplications, &c. and rejecting what they
thought frivolous, ihould engross in a book what they thought
worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No provision is
made in the a& for the choke of this fele& body, and the King
would, ofcourfe, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when
Charles I. was beginning to introduce those innovations which
gave so much offence to the nation, he dreaded the opposition
of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was
made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The
Temporal Peers were appointed to chute eight Biflops and the
Bishops eight Peers, there fixtecn met together, and eleAed eight
Knights of the shire, and eight Burgelles, and to these the crown
officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight per-
sons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were be-
come, by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obvious,
would be the men whom the Bilhops would chufe, and of confc-
quence, the whole Lords of Articles were the tools and creatures
of the King. This pratice, so inconfiltent with liberty, was
abolifled during the civil war: And the statute of James VI. was
repealed. After the Refloration, Parliaments became more ser-
vile than ever. What was only a temporary device, in the
reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a flanding law.

For my part," fays the author from whom I have borrowed

t A. zzz. P. s594.

many

tion, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern- BOOK I.
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to com- -
prehend domestic occurrences and revolutions, but
without the former, foreign tranfaftions must be al-
together mylterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of
historians have seen only the effet, we may be able
to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
doms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
litical state of Europe. Kingdoms, which were in-
considerable when broken, and parcelled out among
nobles, acquired firmness and strength, by being
united into a regular monarchy. Kings became
conscious of their own power and importance. They
meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged in wars
at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and
great taxes imposed for their subsistence. Confider-
able bodies of infantry were kept in constant pay;
that service grew to be honourable; and cavalry, in
which the strength of European armies had hitherto
consisted, though proper enough for the short and
voluntary excursions of Barons who served at their

many of these particulars, " fliould have thought it lees crim;-
' nal in our Relloration Parliament, to have openly btllowed
"upon the King a negative before debate, than, in fiich an un-

derhand artificial manner, to betray their confituents, and

"the nation." Eys on Brir. Antiq. S5. It is probable, how
ever, from a letter of Randolph's to Ctcil to Aug. 156o, pinted
in the Appendix, that this Parliament had fomn appearianc ot
ancient precedent to jullify their unworthy conduQ.

G 3 osvw

BOOK I. own expence, were found to be unfit either for
''v- making, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into so many small states, the lux-
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom-
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their quar-
rels by innocent and bloodless vicories, were afto-
niihed at the fight of real war; and as they could
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
supplied the want of strength; and necessity and
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to the
great secret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preserved.
The feales were poised by very kilful hands; the
smallest variations were attended to, and no Prince
was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be
dangerous.

A SYSTEM of condu&, pursued with o much

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the fituaion of Eu-
rope rendered it fu necesSary, that it loon became a
matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.

Every

Every 1tep any Prince took was obrerved by all his BOOK I.
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable '"r
spies, authorized by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
resided almost constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
vented with more cafe. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which rose above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; and war, both in its com-
mencement, and in its operations, was more an
exercise of the judgment, than of the paflons of
men. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
ral, and the most inconsiderable states acquired im-
portance, because they could add weight to either
scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year I 515, and Charles V. who obtained the
Imperial Crown in the year 1519, divided between
them the strength and affections of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
fonal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
but was founded so much in nature and true policy,
that it subsisted between their posterity for several
ages; and, notwithltanding their present acciden-
tal and unnatural union, must again revive. Charles
succeeded to all the dominions of the houe of Au-
stria. No family had ever gained so much by wife'
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a flort time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to 1e3 Arch-

G 4 dukes

BOOK I. dukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were

- in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-

reditary right. Betides there territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all
the dominions which belonged to the house of Bur-
gundy. The Burgundian provinces engrofled, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew from them, on many occa-
sions, those immense fums, which no people with-
out trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnilhed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his conquests.
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust.
These advantages rendered Charles, the first Prince
in Europe; but he wifihed to be more, and openly
aspired to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an
unexpeEted height and vigour. He poffefred, in
an eminent degree, the charaaeriftic virtues of all
the different races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-
father; he pursued them with that obstinate and in-
flexible perfverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood ; and in executing them, hie
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his
Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal
to his power, and neither of them would have been
inferior to his cefigns, had not Providence, in pity
to mankind, and in order to preserve them from

4 the

the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised BOOK I.
up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His '-
dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjeds were numerous, ac-
tive, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of
their King. To Charles power was the only obje&
of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and
elegance with his ambition; and though he neglet-
ed some advantages, which a more phlegmatic or
more frugal Prince would have improved, an acive
and intrepid courage supplied all its defects, and
checked or defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
had recourse to the expedient, which they had often
employed with success. They endeavoured to di-
vide the power of the two contending Monarchs
into equal scales, and by the union of ifveral finall
flates to counterpoise him, whole power bcan:;e
too great. But, what they concerted with much
wisdom, they were able to execute with little vi-
gour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the ot'er fide, Hlenry VIII. of ngland le:I(l

the balance with Isl- delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. I le was the third Prince of the nce in dirg-
nity and in power; and the advantageous fituatiJn
of his domilions, h s domneftic tranquillity, hlis

immciiic

BOOK I. immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered
_'Vr hl;m the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.

Each of the rivals courted him with emulation; he
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely with
either of cidem. But he was seldom able to reduce
his ideas to pracice; he was governed by caprice
more than by principle; and the pallions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the
King. Vanity and rcfentment were the great springs
of all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily
found the way, by touching there, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politics,
and while he esteemed himself the wisest Prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who found
itneccfiary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had

hitherto wated her strength in the quarrels between
France and England, emerged from her obscurity,
took her station in the system, and began to have
fomc influence upon the fate of dillant nations.
Fler afitlance was, frequently, of consequence to
the contending parties, and ti:e balance was often
so nicely adj used, that it was in her powcr to nke
it lean to either fide. The part afigned her, at
this untcure, was to divert Henry from carrying
his arms into tl.e continent. That Prince, having
routed the French at Guinegat, and invefctd Te-
rou:nne, IFrance attempted to divide his forces, by
eng.,ging James IV. in that unhappy exp'.lition
which ended wsith his life. For the fame rtalon

Ii ancis

Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Al- BOOK L
bany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home, i1
which werz in the interet of England, and would
willingly have persuaded the Scots to revenge the
death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was
the interest of both Kings, that the Scots should
continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
effe& of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
this, and to embarrass Henry by another inroad of
the Scots. For this end, he made great advances
to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by ele&ing him a Knight of the Golden
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the impe-
rial family; while, in return for thee empty ho-
nours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war against England.
But James, who had much to lose, and who could
gain little by embracing the Emperor's proposals,
rejeced them with decency, and keeping firm to
his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to a&
upon the continent with his whole strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
that he was at no pains to gain its friendaip; but
on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of
England to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his
own experience, and the example of his enemies,
gave him a higher idea of its iportalnce. It was

impofflble

BooK I. impoflible to defend an open and extensive frontier,
*-v--J against the incursions of an active and martial peo-

ple. During any war on the continent, this obliged
him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of obfer-
vation in the north of England; and after all pre-
cautions, the Scottilh borderers, who were superior
to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and
desolation over many counties. He fell, at last,
upon the true secret of policy, with refpedt to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little penetra-
tion to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people made the conquest of Scotland impolr-
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence of
faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to
govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the forme:
design, and resolved to employ the utmost address
in executing the latter. It had not yet become ho-
nourable for one Prince to receive pay from ano-
ther, under the more decent name of a subsidy.
But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been
good in courts, and of weight with ministers, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the argu-
ments by which Henry brought over so many to
his interest during the minority of James V. we
know by the original warrant rill extant *, for re-
mitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a
proper distribution of these, many persons of note
were gined to his party, and a fatlion which held
fccrct corrcfpondence with England, and received

* Burn. H-ll, Ref. . i. p. 7.l

all

all its directions from thence, appears henceforward BooK I.
in our domestic contests. In the sequel of the his- '-v
tory, we hall find Henry labouring to extend his
influence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
fame plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of
the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almoff equally between them, and the
authority, which she inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which he acquired in the other.

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK II.
IM RA R Y Queen of Scots was born a few days B o o K

before the death of her father James V. II.

The situation in which he left the kingdom alarmed Dec.'
all ranks of rmen, with the profpest of a turbulent 1s4-.

Birc of

and disastrous reign. A war against England had Mn'y,, and
.been undertaken without necessity, and carried on taJ'do te
without fuccffs. Many persons of the first rank
had fallen into the hands of the English, in the un-
fortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were
still prisoners at London. Among the reft of the
nobles there was little union, either in their views,
or in their affections; and the religious diiiutes oc-
carsoned by the opinions or ihe reformers, growing
every day more violent, add d to the rage of thole
factions wlhicl are natural to a form of gocrnn-ent
nearly driitucratical.

T I

B o o R THE government of a Queen was unknown in

II. Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
\V"v' the minds of a martial people. The government

of an infant Queen was flill more destitute of real
authority; and the profpe& of a long and feeble
minority invited to faction by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
against the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's educa-
tion, and the adminiitration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold
that they would quickly burst into a storm, he was
so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities,
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre-
tender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfation.

Pretensions CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
Bearounf t been confidered as prime minister, was the first who
the regen claimed that high dignity; and in support of his

pretensions, he produced a testament*, which he
himself had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other right, instantly aftumed the
title of Regent. He hoped, by the affifance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Quleen Dowag:';, and the support of the
whole popish faction, to hold by force, what he
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too lung to be a favourite of the nation.
Tl'hol among the nobles who wished for a Refor-

* Sadlr's Lctt. 161.

mation

mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others o o K
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the II.
highest office in the kingdom as a deprefflon of"v'
themselves. At their iniigation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed
himself from his inactivity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that station, to which proximity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Earl of Ar
were assembled for that purpose, unanimoufy con- ran chosen
ferred on him the office of regent; and the public Regent.
voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in difpo- Charaeter

fition and character, than the Earl of Arran and of Beatun.
Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of
immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence
grew upon him from continual success. His high
station in the church placed him in the way of great
employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
eft of there; nor did he reckon any of them to be
above his merit. As his own eminence was found-
ed upon the power of the church of Rome, he was
a zealous defender of that Luperflition, and for the
fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the
Reformers. Political motives alone determined him
to support the one or to oppose the other. His
early application to publick bufinets kept him unac-
quainted with the learning and controvcrfics of the
age; he gavejudgment, however, upon all points
in dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour,
which cotemporary historians mention with indig-
nation.

VOL. I. H THE

B o o K THE character of the Earl of Arran was, in al.

II. modt every thing, the reverie of Beatoun's. He
Of Arran. was neither infeded with ambition, nor inclined to

cruelty: 'The love of ease extinguished the former,
the iuftnefs of his temper preserved him from the
latter. Timidity and irresolution were his predo-
minant failings, the one occasioned by his natural
constitution, and the other arising from a conscious-
ness that his abilities were not equal to his station.
With these dispositions he might have enjoyed and
adorned private life; but his public condua was
without courage, or dignity, or consistence. The
perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence,
the perpetual tool of those, who found their advan-
tage in praCtising upon them. But as no other per-
Ibn could be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with
any probability of fuiccefs, the nation declared in
his favour with so general a content, that the arti-
sices of his rival could not withstand its united
strength.

Schemes of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffeflion
Henry
vil witll Of his new dignity, when a negociation was opened
rSr.in tod with England, which gave birth to events of the

moit fatal consequence to himself, and to the king-
dom. After the death of James, Henry VIII.
was no longcr afraid of any interruption from Scot-
land to his designs against France; and imme-
diately conceived hopes of rendering this security
perpetual, by the marriage of Edward his only son
with the young (Qiien of Scots. He communi-
cated his intention to the prisoners taken at Solway,
and prevailed on liem to favour it, by the promire

of

of liberty, as the reward of their success. In the B o o
mean time he permitted them to return into Scot- II.
land, that, by their presence in the Parliament' '
which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in
with his propofaIs. A cause, entrulted to such able
and zealous atlvocates, could not well miss of com-
ing to an happy issue. All those who feared the
Cardinal, or who delired a change in religion, were
fond of an alliance, which afforded protetion to
the doctrine which they had embraced, as well as to
their own persons, against the rage of that powerful
and haughty Prelate.

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was llconiua-

ed y him-

incapable of improving this favourable conjuncture. felfi.
Addrels and delicacy in managing the fears, and
follies, and interests of men, were arts with which
he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
formed upon Scotland were obvious from the mar-
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise, or to conceal them. In-
stead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would oon have enabled
him to recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated
the whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
person should be immediately committed to his cuf-
tody, and that the government of the kingdom
should be put in his hands during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignomi- Odious to

the Scot%

nious conditions to a conquered people, and it is no touS in
wonder they were rejected, with indignation, by part ac

cepted by
H 2 men them.

B o o K men who scorned to purchase an alliance with Eng-

II. land, at the price of their own liberty. The par-
^li liament of Scotland, however, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; desirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the
Marci Iz, Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from

154;. any opposition to which he might have given rife;

contented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but
upon fomcwhat a more equal footing. And after
some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his
ambafador endeavoured to carry off the young
Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and to
accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that
the Queen should continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any share in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand,
the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into Eng-
land as soon as she attained the full age of ten
years, and instantly to deliver fix persons, of the
first rank, to be kept as hottages by Henry till the
Queen's arrival at his court.

Favourel THE treaty was frill so manifestly of advantage
s'ct tc. to England, that the Regent loft much of the pub-

lic confidencc by consenting to it. The Cardinal,

hlio had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not
fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmost.

CpPrLd hy SHe complained loudly, that the Regent had be-
tlt C:ardi- trayed the kingdom to its moit inveterate enemies,

and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He
foretold the extinction of true catholic religion,

贸~5~~~~ under

mnder the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic; B o o K
but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient king- II.
dom consenting to its own flavcry, descending into C"
the ignominious flation of a dependent province;
and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a
single man surrendering every thing for which the
Scottish nation had atrugglcd and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal
were not without effc't. They were addrefded to
prejudices and pafions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jealouly of na-
tional honour, and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the present century, went near
to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
again ftthealliance which had been concluded. In the
one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace be-
tween the two nations, the habit of being fbjeccted
to the fame King, and governed by the fimc max-
ims, had confidirably abated old aninofities, and
prepared both people for incorporating. In the
other, injuries were frill freb, the wounds on both
iides were open, and, in the warmth of refcntment,
it was natural to feklc revenge, and to be averle fironm
reconcilement. At the Union in 1707, the wis-
ldon of parli.ment despised the groundlets murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in I543,
the complaints of the nation were better founded,
and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is nei-
ther jult nor aife to dircgard. lThe rage of the
People roile to luch an height, that the English am-

II 3 baffador

B o o K baffador could hardly be protected from their in-

II. fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards
'^"v preserving the church from the dominion of a Prince,

whose fyflein of Reformation was so fatal to their
power. The nobles, after having mortified the
Cardinal, ib l.tely, in such a cruel manner, were,
now, ready to a;plaud and to second him, as the
defender of the honour and liberty of his country.
Heexc tes ARGYLL, luntly, Bothwell, and other power-

oalo nah ful Barons declared openly against the alliance with
tion gainlt England. By their afillance, the Cardinal seized

on the persons of the young Queen and her mother,
and added to his party the splendor and authority
of the royal name *. He received, at the fame
time, a more real accession to his strength, by the
arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose
return from France he had earneffly follicited. This
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to de-
prive him of the possession of his private fortune.
The Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the prospect
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and asseted to
treat him with so much respect, that the Regent
became jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS ful'picion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paiflcy, who returned into Scotland ome
time before the Earl of Lennox, and ated in con-
cert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

Klcit!'s Hifl. of cotl. 3o.

of

of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a B o o K
warm partizan of France, and a zealous defender II
of the eflablifhed Religion. He took hold of the
Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working
upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
difaffeaion of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all
represented with aggravation, and with their most
threatening aspeCt.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-

tion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
of the hostages approached, and the Regent was
Rill undetermined in his own mind. He aed to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
which is peculiar to weak men, when they are b
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the conduct
of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he obliges th
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Reent to

renounce
Cardinal, who still continued to oppole it, an ene- thti friend-

si in with

my to his country. On the 3d of September, he Engllnd.
secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendflip of
England, and declared for the interelts of rrance .

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not

spared the nmoft magnificrnt promilcs. He had of-
sered to give the PrinceIs Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to confitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Fortly.

* Sadler, 339, 356.

I 4 But

B o o K But upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be

II. less coniderable than he had imagined, the English

moniarch began to treat him with little refped. The
young Queen was now in the custody of his ene-
mies, who grew every day more numerous and more
popular. They formed a separate court at Stirling,
and threatened to elect another Regent. The French
King was ready to afford them his proteAion, and
the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the
Regent could not retain his authority, without a
sudden change of his neafures; and though he en-
deavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve the
appearances of good faith with England, he was
obliged to throw himself into the arms of the party,
which adhered to France.

ecute thpe SCON after this sudden revolution in his political
Reformers. principles, the Regent changed his sentiments con-

cerning religion. The spirit of controversy was
then new and warm; books of that kind were ea-
gerly read by men of every rank; the love of no-
velty, or the conviction of truth, had led the Re-
gent to express great esteem for the writings of the
Reformers; and having been powerfully supported
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fami-
ly, two of the most noted preachers of the Frotef-
tant doctrine, and, in his first Parliament, consented
to an at, by which the laity were permitted to
read the Scriptures in a language which they under-
flood. 1'rutli needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long

im禄

imposed on the -ignorance and credulity of man- B o o K
kind, were detected and exposcd to public ridicule; II.
and under the countenance of the Regent, the Re- '
formation made great advances. The Cardinal ob-
served its progress with concern, and was at the ut-
most pains to obftrua it. He represented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's preten-
sions; that his own legitimacy depended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the
Pope's authority; and that by fufficring it to be
called in question, he weakened his own title to the
fuccefion, and furnished his rival with the only ar-
gument, by which it could be rendered doubtful *.
These insinuations made a deep imprelTion on the
Regent's timorous pirit, who, at the profpet of
such imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
the Cardinal could have wilhed; and his zeal for
the Protestant religion was not long proof against
his fear. He publickly abjured the dotrine of the
Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and
declared not only for the political, but the religious
opinions of his new confidents.

* THE prctenfdons cf the Fnrl of Lennox to the fucceclion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to James Lord Haimilton. Elizabeth, adaughterofthat
marriage, was the wife of M.tttiewv Earl ot Lennox, and the
present Earl was her grandson. The Rgcnt was lhkewife the
grandson of the Princcfa M.1ry. But hi f:lther having irmaried
Janet Beaton the Rcgen'b mothcer, ;iftr he had obtained a di-
vorce from Elizabeth ome his forncr wil, Lennox pretended
that te sentence of divorce was unjult, nnil that the Regent,
being born while Elizbeth Hlome was iill alive, ought to be
confidered as illegitimatc, Crawf. Peer. 13z.

TiB

B o 0 K THE Protestant do&rine did not susser much by

II. his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep root
1- rin the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity

could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the eftabliflied reli-
gion. The Reformers were persecuted with all the
cruelty, which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the pu-
nifhment of its enemies; but they suffered with a
spirit so nearly resembling the patience and fortitude
of the primitive martyrs, that more were converted
than terrified by such fpetaclcs.

Beatoun THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffefflon
the"chief of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
dleaion ercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the
or affairs.

envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trusted by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were the
only thing which remained to embarrass him. !e
had very successfully made use of that nobleman to
work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but as
he no longer flood in need of such an inftrumenr,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufpet his intention; promises,
flattery, and refpet were the only returns he had
hitherto received for substantial services; but at last
the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be conceal-
cd, and Lennox, instead of attaining power and

dig-

dignity himself, saw that he had been employed B o o
only to procure there for another. Resentment and II.
dilappointed ambition pushed him on to seek revenge
on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his in-
terest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of
Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that reason,
from court, and declared for the party at enmity
with the Cardinal, which, with open arms, received
a convert, who added so much lustre to their cause.

THE two fascions which divided the kingdom

were still the fame, without any alterations in their
views or principles; but, by one of those strange
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the par-
tizans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lennox in the fame station with the advocates for
the Englilh alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work,
which the other upheld with the fame hand, that
had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it,

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start

of the Cardinal's activity. He surprised both him
and the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
with a numerous army; and might easily have
crushed them, before they could prepare for their
defence. But he was weak enough to liften topro-
pofals for an accommodation; and the Cardinal
amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to
fich a length, that the greater part of the Earl's
troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal

infti-

B o o K institutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted

II. him; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving
y''" ' the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second

attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfor-
tunately. One body of his troops was cut to pieces,
and the reft difperied; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he must either have submitted
to the conqueror, or have fled out of the king-
dom, if the approach of an English army had not
brought him a hort relief.

Henry in- -IENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
ands.sco indignity, with which he had been treated, both

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who,
at the time when they renounced their alliance with
him, had entered into a new and Ilriter confede-
racy with France. The rigour of the season retard-
ed for tome time the execution of his vengeance.
But in the spring, a considerable body of infantry
which was defined for France, received orders to
fail for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry
was appointed to join it by land. The Regent
and Cardinal little expeced such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable
security, were wholly unprovided for the defence
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hartford, a leader
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this ar-
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles
M.ly 3, above Leith. He was quickly master of that place;

'+ and marching direcly to Edinburgh, entered it

with the fame eale. After plundering the adjacent
country, the richest, and most open in Scotland, he

let

set on fire both these towns, and upon the approach B o o K
of tome troops gathered together by the Regent, II-
put his booty on board the fleet, and with his land '
forces retired safely to the English borders, deliver-
ing the Kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of
an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was still in his view, he loft a
great deal. Such a rough courtflip, as the Earl of
Huntly humorously called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into ab-
horrence; and exasperated by so many indignities,
the Scots were never at any period more attached
to France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Re-

gent and French King, continued a correspondence
with England, which ruined his own interest, vith-
out promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
preferring their duty to their country before their as-
section to him, refused to concur in any design to
favour the public enemy. And after a few feeble
and unsuccessful attempts to diftirb the Regent's
administration, he was obliged to fly for safety to
the court of ]Ingland, where Henry rewarded ser-
vices which he had the inclination, but not the
power to perform, by g8ving hiun in marriage his
niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
exile, however, was defined to be the father of a
race of kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-

clufion

B o o K cluflon of that rival who now triumphed in his

II. ruin. And, from that time, his posterity have held
,--,- the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which he

was cast out as a criminal, and by the other received
as a fugitive.

Apence MEAN while hostilities were continued by both
concluded. nations, but with little vigour on either fide. The

historians of that age relate minutely the circum-
stances of several fkirmilhes and inroads, which as
they did not produce any considerable efft t, at this
distance of time, deserve no remembrance *. At
last an end was put to this languid and inactive war,

by

Though this war was diltinguiflied by no important or de-

cifive acion, it was, however, extremely ruinous to ii dividuals.
There flill remain two original papers, which give us some idea
of the miseries, to hich tie molt fertile counties in the king-
dom were exposed, by the udden and defirucive incursions of
the borderers, The first seems to be the report made to Henry
by the Englith wardens of tie marches, for the year 1544, and
contains their exploits from the zd of July, to the 7th of No-
vember. The account it gives of the different inroads, or For-
rays, as they are called, is very minute; and in conc'ufion, the
fum total of mischief they did i thus computed:

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekynf, parilhe-churches,

ballel-houfes cast down or burnt - 19

Scots slain - - - - 403
Prilners taken - - -
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken - 10,386
Sheep - , 2,492
Nags and geldings . - 1,29
Goats - . c0o
Bolls of corn 850
Infight-gear, i. e. houiiold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynlcs's ate papers, 43.

The

by a peace, in which England, France, and Scot- B o o K
land were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex- II.
elude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and June 1s
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was
of the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em-
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, who had
served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to pur-
chafe Henry's friendflhip with disadvantage to him-
self, than to leave them exposcd to danger. By
yielding some things to the interest, and more to
the vanity of that haughty Prince; by lubLmi;on,
flattery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
have the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a fort time before t The Te mr.
conclusion of this peace, rendered it more accept- derof Bee-

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of

Hartford, between the 8th and z3d of September, 15 t;; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
razed, and deflroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
only,

Monafierics and Friar-houfes - 7
Cailles, towers, and piles - - 16
Market towns - 5
Villages 3

- .3

Milns - - - - 13

ofpitals - - - - 3

All there were calt down or burn'. ITayrcs 52. As the Scots
were no ItCj kUiful in the pr:ifice of irregular war, we may
conclude that the damage which they did in ELglnd w:as not
ii.confiderable; and that their raieri wcte no Idcs walleiui, than
thefarrays of the Englilh.

6 able

B o o K able to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had

II. not used his power with moderation, equal to the
< '" * prudence by which he attained it. Notwithftand-

ing his great abilities, he had too many of the pas-
sions and prejudices of an angry leader ofa fation,
to govern a divided people with temper. His re-
fentment against one party of the nobility, his info-
lence towards the reft, his severity to the Reformers,
and, above all, the barbarous and illegal execution
of the famous George Wifhart, a man of honour-
able birth, and of primitive san&ity, wore out the
patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold
hand was wanting to gratify the public with by his
deflruction. Private revenge, inflamed and fanCti-
fled by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied
this want. Norman Lefley, the eldest son of the
earl of Rothls, had been treated by the Cardinal
with injustice and contempt. It was not the temper
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to di-
gpet an affront. And as the profefion of his adver-
farv screened him from the effects of what is called
1an1 hinoutrable relencment, he resolved to take that
iatistaci(:n, which he could not demand. This re-
iblution dcdcrvcs as much censure, as the singular
courage and conducl: with which he put it in exe-
cution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at that time,
relidcd in the caflle of Saint Andrews, which he had
fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of the
age hald rendered it impregnable. His retinue was
numerous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh-
bouring country full of his dependents. In this
situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his
castle, and to assassinate himself and their success

was

was equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early in B o o K
the morning they seized on the gate of the cafle, 11.
which was set open to the workmen who were em- May g9,
ployed in finishing the fortifications; and having s46.
placed sentries at the door of the Cardinal's apart-
ment, they awakened his numerous domestics one by
one, and turning them out of the castle, they with-
out noise, or tumult, or violence to any other per.
son, delivered their country, though by a most un-
justifiable action, from an ambitious man, whofepride
was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and
cunning were the great checks to the reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and The Pe-

to the French interest in Scotland. The fame i7el empL',n
for both continued among a great party in the na- Van tofUize
tion, but when deprived of the genius and authority drers.
of so kilful a leader, was of small consequence.
Nothing can equal the consternation which a blow
so unexpeted occasioned among his adherents;
while the Regent fc-cretly erjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only
eclipsed his grcatnefs, hut almost extinguished his
power. Decency, however, the honour of the
church, the importunityofthe Queen Dowager and
her facion, his engagements with France, and,
above all there, the desire of recovering his eldest
son, whom the Cardinal had detained fr some time
at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with the castle, had fallen into the hands
of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in
order to revenge the death of a man he hated.

VOL. I. I He

B o o K 11E threatened vengeance, but was unable to exe-

II. cute it. One part of military science, the art of at-
4~w. tacking fortified places, was then unknown in Scot-

land. The weapons, the discipline, and impetuosity
of the cots, rendered their armies as unfit for
sieges, as they were ative in the fitld. An hun-
dred and fifty men, which was the greatelt number
the confpilators ever aTembled, retifted all the es-
forts of the Riegent for five months *, in a place,
lwhich a ingle battalion, with a few battering can-
non, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedi-
ous siege was concluded by a truce. The Regent
undert(ook to procure for the conspirators an abfo-
lution lom the Pope, anl a pardon in parliament;
and upon obtaining thfe, they engaged to surrender
the caltle, a:d to fct his Son at liberty.

Ir is probable, t;t neither of them were sincere

in this treaty. On both fdes, they fought only to
amnuf, and to gain time. The egent had applied
to France fcr afltiance, and expcied loon to have
tile conpltirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Lelly and his aT'.ciares were not at firlt incited by
l'cnry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in the
1cquel, powerfully fiuppored by him. Notwith-
ttalnding the silence of co:enpo;'ary hifllorians, there
are violent refuimptions (cf the former; ,of the lat-
ter it;c:'e is undoubted crI.Tintv -. L)ur!ng;1 the
flie., tl:e ccnp)irla'ors h.i.l rcceivl i' .olm I:ngland
ifupplies bctih of mnoney amn proviiions; and as
l .knry was preparing to renew his trolpolls con-

* lp 1t. I c. Sect. 2. 3 ,' '' '. i-i K i.i!, 6c.

icrning

cening the marriage and the union he had projet- -B o o K
ed, and to second his negociations with a numerous II.
army, they hoped, by concu ring with him, to be"
in a situation, in which they would no longer need
a pardon, but might claim a reward.

TfIE death of Hlenry blafl-cd al tcf hiopes. It f"anuryi

happened in the beginning of next year, atcr ,
reign of greater fIlendor tan true lory ; buffling,
though not ative ; opprflive in do;ciftic govern-
metn, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more :eneficial to
mankind, than the virtues of others. lis rapaci-
oulines, his ptrfufion, and even his tyranny, by
depressing the ancient nobility, and by adding ncw
property and power to the Commons, laid the ])un-
dations of the; British liberty. Ilis other pallions
cohtribnited no lets towards the downfali of Popery,
and the ef-ablii'hent of religious fre edom in the n:a-
tion. His rcltntment led him to aboiliih the power,
an(l his covetou!ne(s to 1cize the w:'th of the
church; and hy withdrav'irg tlli l!l})oris, made
ir caly, in lIthe lololwing reign, tou u\'overn !the whule

*.:~'[s I. did 1not 1i' !: fi;i'\i'-c i a 'ic<', who)

1'd [c c ailterl. T.c!> ilis ri'.val ;;:Xd h;.; J'ri.iid; Ihu:;
h-'; l1ic'iflir) l.lcirl' I!l w. s nr ti .:: . .. il of l;;:
FTrench itCreftL!l: ii .c',tlJ Mi. I; k! ' i: ,

'!:C li.cr- :.,.., ;,r.

al)lc body of r'rw , Il 'er the c Dii't.n ( r' L .'co i,'r

tl")/'/Z., to t I c'. '"i ' ; 4 ;linc'. ];y :; ,ir

tl
:': riencelC inl to'e l.l:l a:d (C. ril;.n \il's, th

1 ch1 had becoe I

as axtr i tl
the . s,'

s^ 7

B o o I lieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the bold-

II. ness and despair of the conpirators could not defend
v~ them against their superior art, they, after a hort

Force the resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in
catle of St. 0
Andrew's the name of the King his master, for the security of
to furren- their lives; and as his prisoners transported them into

France. The castle itself, the monument of Bea-
toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obedi-
ence to the canon law, which, with admirable po-
licy, denounces its anathemas even againftthe houses
in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal happens to
be shed, and ordains them to be laid in ruins *.

THE archbifloprick of St. Andrew's was bestow-

ed by the regent upon his natural brother John
Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

New hlrecli THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the
l,'d'.n conspirators. Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who

had the chief direction of affairs during the mino-
rity of his son Edward VI. conduced themselves,
with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late
mafier, and resolved to frighten the Scots into a
treaty, which they had not abilities or address to
bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which

their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall flop
to take notice of a circumstance unobserved by co-
temporary historians, but extremely remarkable for
the discovery it makes of the fntiients and pirit,

Burn. Hill. Ref. . 338.

2 which

which then prevailed among the Scots. The con- B o o K
fpirators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re- II
gent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's; and "
as they needed the protection of the Englith, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase
it, by delivering to them this important.prize. The
presumptive heir to the Crown, in the hands of the
avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
prospect. And, in order to avoid it, the Parlia-
ment fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
an a made of purpose, they excluded " the Re-
" gent's eldert son from all right of fucceflion,
' public or private, so long as he should be detain-
" ed a prisoner, and substituted in his place, his
" other brothers, according to their seniority, and
" in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
"the Regent *." Succeflion by hereditary right
is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation
seldom ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes
of extreme necessity. Such a necessity did the Par-
liament discover in the present situation. Hatred
to England, founded on the memory of pals hofti-
lities, and heightened by the smart of recent inju-
ries, was the national paflion. This dictatcd that
uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal
fucceflion was so remarkably broken. The modern
theories, which represent this right as divine and
unalienable, and that ought not to be violated upon
any consideration wharfoever, seem to have been
then altogether unknown.

Epif. Reg. Scot. 2. 3;9,

I 3 IN

B o o K IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Hart-

II. ford, now Duke ot Somerfct, and Protetor of Eng-

Scotlnd land, ente:ed Scotland at the head of i 8,coo men,
invaded by and, at the fame time, a fleet of 6o ships appeared
the En8Iihh.

on the coalt, to second his land forces. The Scots
had for ome time observed this storm gathering,
and were prepared for it. Their army was almost
double to tht of the enemy, and pofted.to the great-
eln advantage on a rising ground, abovcMufflbeargh,
not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these
circuminlances alarmed the Duke of Somcrfet, who
fiw his danger, and would vwillingly have extricated
hinlfcf out f ir, by a new overture of peace on con-
ditions extremely rcafbnable. But this moderation
being imputed to fear, his proposals were rejeced
with that scorn, wh.ich the confidence of fuccels in-
spires; and if the condut of the Regent, who com-
manded the Scottish army, had been in any degree
equal to his confidence, the defiruclion of the Eng-
lilh must ha., e ,een inevitable. They were in a si-
tuation, prcicilcl; Hmi lar to that of their countrymen
under Oliver Cromwell, in the following century.
The Sots had co!fn their ground lb well, that it
was ipon'ible to force them to give battle; a few
days had cxlauled the forage and provision of a
narrow cot:nr.r ; the fleet could only furnifl a icanty
and precarious fubfiltcnce; a retreat therefore was
neceflary; but difrrace, and pc:haps ruin, were the
conlequences of retreating.

ON bth these occasion, the national heat and

impetuofiry of he Scots saved the l.nglih, and pre-
cipltated their own country into the ur.uloll danger.

T'he

The undisciplined courage of the private men be- B o o K
came impatient at the fight of an enemy. The Ge- II-
ncral was afraid of nothing, but that the Englifll B~
would escape from him by flight; and leaving his 'inkey.
firong camp, he attacked the Duke of Someret

September

near Pinkey, with no better success than his rfhlncefs Io, 1547.
deservcd. The Protetor had drawn up his troops
on a gentle eminence, ad h.d now the advantage
of ground on his fide. he Scotrilh army confil-
ed almost enti:ely of infantry, whole chif weapon
was a long spear, and for that reason their files
were very deep and their ranks close. They ad-
vanced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and
as they pasfd the river, were confiderab!y exposed
to the fire of the Englilh fleet, which 1y in the
bay of Muffelburgh, and had drawn near the llore.
The English cavalry, flunfed with an advantage
which they had gained in a flkirnmilh some days be-
fore, beg:in the attack with more ipctuoitry, t;lil
good condut. A b.'y so firm and conmpat as the
Scots, easily rfiftcd the iprciion ofcav.lry, broke
them, and dr';ve the o the field. The :nolifh
infantry, howver, alvanced, and the Scots were at
once expu!fed to a fliht of arrows, to a lire in 11 nk
from 4'-o for ign Fuifileers who fervtd the cn,::: ,
and to tihicr cannon which were planted behind tric
infantry, on the hi!:ell part of the eminence. 'The
depth and clolehrn! of their order making it inpol-
fibl fr hlie .ct:ts to .tand long in this situation;
the L'Earl ou' Angus, who cornmmand d the van:ularkl,
enleavourtd to chin.e his ground, and to ricir: t.,-
wvarts the main b::;d. lBt is 'riends tir..ipniy
nriltook his mo.ion tsr a ii!ht, and fell i;:;o c',Ui-

I .p '1!!'(,;.

B o o K fusion. At that very infiant, the broken cavalry

1I. having rallied, returned to the charge; the foot
Cc--- pursued the advantage they had gained the prof-

pea of vitory redoubled the ardour of both: And,
in a moment, the rout of the Scottish army became
universal, and irretrievable. The encounter in thp
field was not long, nor bloody but in the pursuit,
the Englisi discovered all the rage and iercenefs,
which national antipathy, kindled by long emula-
tion, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to
ipfpire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great distance. All the three roads, by
which the Scots fled, were strewed with spears and
swords, and targets, and covered with the bodies
of the lain. Above o1,ooo men fell on this day,
one of the mofl fatalScotland had ever seen. A few
were taken prisoners, and among these some persons
of distinction. And the Protecor had it now in
his power to become mater of a kingdom, out of
which, not many hours before, hb was almost ob-
liged to retire with infamy ,

OUT

* The following paflage in a curious and rare journal of the

Protector's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who
was joined in commmiion with Cecil, as Judge Marshal of the
army, and printed in i5+g, deserves our n;otice; as it gives a
jift idea of the military dilciplinm of the Scots at that time,
*' Eut what after I learned, spec ally touching their order, their
armour, and their manner as well of going to offend, as of Iland-
ing tc def-nd, I have thought necessary here to utter. Hack.
burters have they few or non.., and appoint their fight molt com-
monly always .n-tfot. They come to the field well fuinilhed all
with jack and iull, dgge and buckler, and woids all broad
and thin, of exceeding good temper, and anivecgflly ro made tq

* ' b~~~~~~~~~~~ied

BUT this vitory, however great, was of no real B o

utility, for want of kill, or of leisure, to improve H.
it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more Tei.v
averse from an union with England; and the Pro- tory of

little be~

tcor neglected the only measure, which would fit to
have made it neceflary for them to have given Engtih
their consent to it. He amused himself in wafting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty castles; whereas by fortifying a few places
which were acceffble by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a short
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his

slice, that as I never aw none so good, so I think it hard to de.
vise the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for
cutting, In their array towards joining with the enemy, they
cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, houlder and houlder
together, with their pikes in both their hands fireight afore them,
and their followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying
their pikes over their foregoers shoulders, that, if they do aflail
undiscovered, no force can well withstand them. Standing at
defence they thrust houlders likewise so nigh together, the fore
ranks well nigh to kneeling, oop low before, their fellows bo.
hind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their
left their bucklers, the one end of their pike againt their right
foot, and the other against the enemy breaft-high; their followers
crossing their pike points with them forward; and thus each with
other so nigh as space and place will susser, through the whole
ward, so thick, that as easily hal a hare finger pierce through
the kin of an angry hedge-hog, as any encounter the front of
their pikes." Other curious partic"lars are found in this jour-
nal, from which Sir John Haywaid has borrowed his account of
;his expedition, Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by AR
,4. P. +7 1, to be fix ells; i.. e ighteen feet fix inches.

terms,

B o o r term, or havc fubitted to his power. By such an

II. improvement of it, his victory at Dunbar gave
.-- Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle

cf inkey had no other cffct but to prccipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
fit uation of the Englilh court may, indeed, be plead-
ed in cxcufe for tie Duke of Somerset's conduct.
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned his tra-
gical end, was already iormed ; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they fecreily undcrmined his
power and crcdit at home. Slf-prefirivation, there-
fore, obliged him to prefer his fafcty before his
tame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his
victory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; the con!piracy by which he fell was not yet
riic for exccuton ; and lis reielncc suspended its
tcl. f-;r tmi-ic time. 'le. fircm power flill re-
n--.. ning i is hlinds, he cmpioycd it to recover the

oppo; tunitv, v. lichl I.e had loft. A body of troops,
Apri?, by hia c,,.in.'.;;;d, Isizl altnd irctified Hliadingtoun,

a4

. pllace, hilch, on account of is diilance from the

1;.-, and a nnd

; l li garrison, could not be

ct.!ci:dcd wv.rlhout grcat expencc and dnger.

Force :'. * ILA \ \v.i 'e tli l:'renchi gained more by the de-
sc'tr,.. scat of tir allil.s, than the English did by their
wilhl icr:orv. Af''trr the ldath of Cardinal Beatoun,

Fary of Gu;il', the Queen )Dowilger, t)ok a con-
tfdLra'glc sijarc in lie ireliun (j, atntirs. She was
wvarmlv atiachc.1 by i acl.l, and in inclination, to
the French inrir 11; anl, in oder t romote it,
im:proveLd with ,cait C.Ixterit y very event vlich
occurred. he lirit and Itrclhtl of tlhe Scots w re

broken

broken at Pinkey; and in an aembly of nobles B o o K
which met at Stirling to conult upon the situation II.
ofthe kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France, LV
no profpeft of safety appearing but in assistance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace
with England, the Queen reprelented that they
could not expect him to take part in their quarrel,
but upon views of personal advantage; and that
without extraordinary concefions in his favour, no
afliftance in proportion to th. ir present exigences
could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully fcconded these repreflntations of the
Queen. What often happens to individuals took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
were swayed entirely by their p.ffions, and in order
to gratify them, they defrted their former prin-
ciples, and disregarded their true interest. In the
violence of rntment, they t'orgot that zeal for
the independence of Scotland, which had prompted
them to reject the propotals of I-enry Viii. and by
ofering, voluntarily, their young QueCen in mar- d oo.
riage to the I)auphin elcefl: ton of Henry II. and r their
which waii fiill mr)ie, by propoling to end hert',ign
imnicdiately into lFrance to be educated at his court, t, '>e Dau-

phin.

they grlntee from athir of venceance, what tr-
merly they would not yield upon any conlideration
of their own iffcty. To glin at oncc lilch a kingdomn
as Siocland, was a matter of no iin;ll conleciqc nce to
1Fr.ncc. 1Icnry!, virhuut tor lit.ition, acccpted the
oferrs of te Y.

'eil a!lbaltcdu'1, and prepared

f;r the vi;.ror ,lo lcincc ot n

I. new acquiilion. Six

tlo:i;l;ii.l vctul an loldicrs, ull.in r tlie conriniand of
Mon,.c.,r Di .c, allffiled by lmte of the bllt officers,

who

B o o K who were formed in the long wars of Francis I. ar-

1. rived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scot-
L'-* land, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But

their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
soon became jealous of their designs, and negleted
to support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the English, in acting wholly upon the de-
fenfive, prevented them from attempting anyenter-
prize of consequence; and obliged them to exhaust
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under
many diadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
not without rome benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ling the Englilh to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to
flrrender several small forts, which they polffced in
different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequence of these operations of his

troops were fill of greater importance to the French
King. The diversion which they occasioned en-
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the Englilh; and the influence of his army in Scot-
land obtained the concurrence of Parliament with
the overtures made to him, by the assembly of no-
bles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court
of France. In vain did a few patriots remonstrate
againRf such extravagant conceflions, by which Scot-

TSh treaty land was reduced to be a province of France; and
pFrpore Henry, from an ally, railed to be matter f the
soaluded. kingdom; by which, the friendship of France be-

came more fatal then the enmity of England ; and
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that
had been bravely defended against the other. A

point

point of so much consequence was hastily decided, B o o K
in a Parliament, assemblcd in the camp before Had- II.
dingtoun: The it rig l of t he Queen Dowager, the j.,, s禄
zeal of the clergy, and refentmeni againt England, 拢548.
had prepared a great party in the nation for fch a
siep; the French General and Ambassador, by their
liberality and promies, gained over many more.
The Regent himflf was weak enough to stoop to
the offer of a penlion from France, together with
the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom.
A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
the interest of a faction was preferred before the
honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this ralh and fa- Mary ret

to be edu.

tal resolution, the fourceof many calamities to them- cated in
selves, and to their Sovereign, the French allowedF'n"C'
them no time for reflection or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was still
in Scotland, and without delay, convoyed the Queen
into France. Mary was then fix years old, and by her
education in that court, one of the politest, but molt
corrupted inEurope, (he acquired every accomplish-
ment that could add to her charms as a woman, and
contrated many of those prejudices, which occa-
sioned her misfortunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to susser
the war in Scotland to languihl. The recovering
of the Boulonnois was the oleij~ Henry had mot
at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sus-
ficient to divide the attenion and flrength of the

Enliil,

B o o K English, whose domestic factions deprived both their

II. arms and councils of their accustomed vigour. The

government of England had undergone a great re-
volution. The Duke of Somerset's power had ben
acquired with too much violence, an(t was exercised
with too little moderation, to be of long continuance.
Many good qualities, added to great love of his
country, could not attone for his ambition in usurp-
ing the sole direcion of affairs. Many of the most
eminent courtiers combined against him; and the
Earl of Warwick their leader, no leis ambitious,
but more artful than Somerset, condued his mea-
fures with so much dexterity, as to raise hitnfelf up-
on the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious
name of Protector, he succeeded to all the power
and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be neceffarv for the ca-
blilhment of his new authority, and the execution
of the vail dciigns he had conceived.
P..e con- H-NI: Y was no ifranger to Warwick's situation,

and improved his knowledge of it to good pnrpolc,
in conlutiing tle negociations for a er.el peace.
-Ic prclribed what terms he pleased to the English
Miniftcr, who scrupled at notl.ing, however adv.n-
rtacous to that Monarch and his al;! . L.tglanl
cunitlrc\l to rctore Boulogne ;and its dcpendcncis
to Fr-.ce, anld gavc ,p all ': "'tcn.ol to a treaty
(t m ;arri''e \x ith the (B cn

, ii,'

o, ol., or to the con-

(quit of hir country. A few In;:.tll t;rs, ci v.'licl
tlih l:nglilh troops had hi:herto kept pioffTcrion, were
r. -c'!; and peace betweern the t\vo kinCloLiiS was
e'l;,.li ieJ on its ancient Ioundac'.ii.

BOTH[

BOTH the Britiffi nations loft power, as well as B o o K

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on I
both fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interest; and was carried on, under the
influence of national animofities, which were blind
to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater ccolnefs, conducted it with more
ikill; and by dexterously availing themfelvcs of
every circumstance which occurred, recovered pof-
felion of an important territory which they had loft,
and added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
ambition of the English Minifcr betrayed to thcm
the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies beflowed on them te
latter; their own address and good policy mcrited
both.

IMMEDIATELY after the concusion of the peace, Til ~::;

theFrench forces left Scotland, as ;1uch to their own .;,.U, .
satisfaction, as to that of the nation. The Scots foun ,til '.
found, that the calling to their afsiilance a people
more powerful than thelniflves, wa a dan.crous tx-
pedient. They beheld, with the uttnl ini;;atience,
those who had cone over to pt(tclJ the kilngilr, ,
taking upon them to cotnlland in it; andl on i.i;v
occasions they r tpcntc' te. rilh in.i',ion th..') ha
given. The peculiar n li t r'

Ie'nch i

hcightened this di:'ul;, an.l i ''!.rcl the .:,c;.
throw off the yoke, Ibcf.i'c y 11ad vell ,;';ii;
fcl it. The lrcnc' vt., in that ;a', .'v;.t ,'
are in the prclint, one ot' tlic mnol p .li::,; o.: in., in
l'.urope. But ic is to he obic rvcci, ;:i1.!! ril; c.,j -
ditions ito t Lrci, n countries, v , .:h r. ',i .;.

7

B o o K south or north, that their manners have been re-

I1. markably incompatible with the manners of every
* -- other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own

cufomns, because they want knowledge and taste to
discover the reasonableness and propriety of cufoms
which differ from them. Nations, which hold the
first rank in politeness, are frequently no less tena-
cious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the
ancient world; and the French are the fame in
the moder. Full of themselves; flattered by the
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to
confider their own modes as the standards of ele-
gance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the
diftinguilhing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them
among others. For this reason, the behaviour of
their armies has, on every occasion, been infupport-
able to strangers, and has always exposed them to
hatred, and often to deftru&ion. In that age, they
over-ran Italy four several times by their valour,
and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The Scots,
naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people, and
who, of all nations, can leat bear the most distant
infunuation of contempt, were not of a temper to
admit all the pretensions of such assuming guests.
The symptoms of alienation were soon visible; they
seconded the military operations of the French troops
with the utmost coldness, and their disgust grew in-
sensibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly
be restrained; and on occasion of a very flight
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A pri-
vate French fuldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took

arms,

arms, with equal rage, in defence of their country- B o o A
men. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and fe- 1I.
veral citizens of diftin&ions were killed in the fray; '
and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
withstanding the ancient alliance of France and Scot-
land, and the long intercourse of good offices be-
tween the two nations, an aversion for the French
took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the es-
fes whereof were deeply felt, and operated power-
fully through the subsequent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing Progress of

has been said of the state of religion. While the theRoeft
war with England continued, the clergy had no lei-
sure to molest the Protestants; and they were not
yet considerable enough to expet any thing more
than connivance and impunity. The new doCtrines
were still in their infancy but during this hort in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired strength, and
advanced, by large and firm steps, towards a full
establishment in the kingdom. The first preachers
against Popery in Scotland, of whom several had
appeared during the reign of James V. were more
eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation
was partial, and at second hand; some of them had
been educated in England; all of them had borrow-
ed their notions from the books published there;
and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did not
venture far before their leaders. Bur, in a flort
time, the dotrines and writings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known the inquisitive

VOL. I. K genius

B o o K genius of the age pressed forward in quest of truth;

II. the discovery of one error opened the way to others;
L~--t the downfal of one imposture drew many after it;

the whole fabric, which ignorance and superstition
had ere&ed in times of darkness, began to totter;
and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a
daring and ative leader to diret the attack. Such was
the famousJohn Knox,who, with betterqualifications
of learning, and more extensive views than any of his
predecessors in Scotland, possessed a natural intrepidi-
ty of mind, which et him above fear. He began his
public ministry at St. Andrew's in the year 1547,
with that success, which always accompanies a bold
and popular eloquence. Instead of amusing himself
with lopping the branches, he struck diretly at the
root of popery, and attacked both the doctrine and
discipline of the eftablilhed church, with a vehe-
mence peculiar to himself, but admirably suitable
to the temper and wifhles of the age.

AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not

have easily escaped the rage of the clergy, who ob-
tcrved the tendency and progress of his opinions,
with the utmost concern. But, at first, he retired
for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while
the conspirators kept pofieflion of it, preached pub-
lickly under their protection. The great revolution
in England, which followed upon the death of
Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal of
Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in
Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. The Ministers of his
son Edward VI. cast them off altogether, and efta-

blilhed

blifhed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame B o o x
footing, whereon it now itands in that kingdom. II.
The influence of this example reached Scotland, and
the happy effects orecclefiaftical liberty, in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been
obliged to condut themselves with the utmost cau-
tion, and seldom ventured to preach, but in private
houses, and at a distance from court; they gained
credit as happens on the first publication of every
new religion, chiefly among persons in the lower
and middle rank of life. But several noblemen of
the greatest diftindion, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they werenolonger
under the necessity of acting with the fame reserve;
and with more security and encouragement, they
had likewise greater success. The means of acquir-
ing and spreading knowledge became more com-
mon, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that
period, grew every day bolder and more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was

still under some restraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, sufficient to overturn a system,
founded on the deepelt policy, and supported by
the moi formidable power. Under the preicnt cir-
cumtlances, any attempt towards ation mult have
been fatal to the Protelfant doctrines; ad it is no
small proof of the authority, as well as pinetation
of the heads of the party, that they were able to
reftr.in the zeal of a fiery and i pertuous people, till
that critical and mature jun&ture, when every ftp
they took was decisive and fucccfsful.

K 2 MIEA-

B O O K MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement

II. from two difirent quarters, whence they never could
y"" have expeted it. The ambition of the house of

Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of England has-
rened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scot-
land; and by a singular disposition of Providence,
the persons who opposed the Reformation in every
other part of Europe with the fiercest zeal, were
made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

The Queen MARY of Guise poffefled the fame bold and as-
Do.';er piring spirit which diftinguiffed her family. But
the of-iC. Of in her it was softened by the female charater, and

accompanied with great temper and address. Her
brothers, in order to attain the high objects at which
they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures,
as suited their great courage. Her designs upon the
iupreme power were concealed with the utmoftcare,
and advanced by address and refinements more na-
tural to her sex. By a dextrous application of those
talents, she had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted
with the government of women; and without the
Imallett right to any share in the administration of
: lairs, had engrossed the chief direction of them
ilnto her own hands. But he did not long reft fa-
ti: i.d v. 'ith the enjoyment of this precarious power,
ul.i:;, t lc ficklenefi o' the Regent, or the ambition
Gi : IL :'c ,l) ovcrinedI him, might Io rafily disturb;
;Ili flhc Li.an: tu f on foot new intrigues, with a
detfign t iu: lcrmihing him, and of opening to her-
fclf a vw.y ro f'.lcecd him in that high dignity.
I !ci blrothelrs l:tcred warmly into this scheme, and

fulp-

supported it with all their credit at the court of B o o
France. The French King willingly concurred in II.
a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland'"''
entirely under management, and in any future broil
with England, to turn its whole force upon that
kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the dcfired elevation, the

Queen Dowager had only one of two ways to chul;
either violently to wrest the power out of ihe hands
of the Regent, or to obtain it by his content. Un-
der a minority, and among a warlike and factious
people, the former was a very uncertain and dan-
gerous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
les impracticable. To persuade a man voluntarily
to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a le-
vel with those, above whom he was raised; and to
be content with the second place where he hath held
the first, may well pass for a wild and cime;icai
projec. This, however, the Queen attempted;
and the prudence of the attempt was ufficiently
justified by its success,

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, toge-

ther with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his administration, railed the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly
fomented these with much industry. All who wilh-
ed for a change met with a gracious reception in
her court, and their pirit of difaffedtion was nou-
rilhed by such hopes and promises, as, in every age,
impose on the credulity of the factious. The fa- court ,e

K ; vourers

B o o K vourers of the Reformation being the most nume-

II. rous and spreading body of the Regent's enemies,

'v fliThe applied to them, with a particular attention;

and the gentleness of her difpofirion and eeming
indifference to the religious points in dispute, made
all her promises of protetion and indulgence pass
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the natibn willing to fall in with her measures, the
Queen set out for France, under pretence of visit-
Oa. zsso. ing her daughter, and took along w'th her those

noblemen, who polreffed the greatest po,,er and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the
pleasures of an elegant court. flattered by the civi-
lities of the French King, and the cr.,ffes of the
houle of Guise, and influenced by the eatbnable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal pro-
mile of many more, they were brought to approve
of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE fie advanced by these flow but sure steps,

the Regent either did not foresee the danger which
threatened him, or neglected to provide against it.
The first discovery of the train which was laid,
came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of
Kinnaird, and Panter Bilhop of Ross, whom the
(Quecn had gained over to her interest, and then
employed as the mot proper instruments for obtain-
ing his content. The overture was made to him
in the name of the French King, enforced by pro-
per threatenings, in order to work upon his natural
timidity, and sweetened by every promise that could
reconcile him to a proposal lb disagreeable. On the
one hand, the confirmation of his French title, to-

5 gether

gether withaconfiderablepenfion, the parliamentary B o o K
acknowledgment of his right of succession to the II-
Crown, and a public ratification of his conduct '
during his regency, were offered him. On the
other hand, the displeasure of the French King,
the power and popularity of the Queen Dowager,
the disaffection of the nobles, with the danger of an
after-reckoning, were represented in the firongeft
colours.

IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so ex-

traordinary and unexpected, without some previous
struggle; and had the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's
been present to fortify the irresolute and palfive fpi-
it of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejected it with disdain. Happily for the Queen,
the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
this time, be no obftrution to her views. He was
lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the
influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
per counterbalanced several of the strongest pas-
sions in the human mind, and obtained his content
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

AFTER gaining a point offuch difficulty, with Dec. sssi;

so much ease, the Queen returned into Scotland, in
full expectation of taking immediate pofefllon of
her new dignity. But, by this time, the Archbi-
hop of Sc. Andrew's had recovered of that diltem-
per, which the ignorance of the Scottifl Physicians
had pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
the aliftance of the famous Cardan, one of those
irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy

K 4 pro-

B o o K produced so many about this period. A bold ge-

II. nius led him to ome useful discoveries, which me-
~.v-' rit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild ima-

gination engaged him in those chimerical sciences,
which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries.
As a pretender to astrology and magic, he was re-
vered and consulted by all Europe; as a proficient
in natural philosophy, he was but little known.
The archbishop, it is probable, confidered him as
a powerful magician, when he applied to him for
relief; but it was his knowledge as a philosopher,
which enabled him to cure his disease *.

TOGETHER with his health, the archbishop re.

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dishonourable
promifc, which he had been reduced by the artifices
of the Queen to grant. However great her fur-
prize and indignation were, at this fresh instance of
his inconflancy, he was obliged to dissemble, that
the might have leifirc to renew her intrigues with
all parties; with the Protestants, whom The favour-
ed and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to
whom he rendered herself agreeable by various
arts; and with the Regent himself, in order to gain
whom, she employed every argument. But what-
ever ipreflions her emissaries might have made on

路 Cardan himfilf was more desirous of being confidered as an

Altrologer than a Philosopher; in his book Dc GnituriJ, we find
a calculation of the Archbilhop's nativity, from which he pre-
tends both to have predicted his difcafe, and to have effcfted his
cuie. I-le received, from the Archbilhop, a reward of 18co
crowns. A great fumin that age. Ds iaa, p. 3z.

the

the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or B o o K
to intimidate the archbishop. Under his manage- 1I.
ment, the negotiations were spun out to a great
length, and his brother maintained his Ration with
that address and firmness, which its importance so
well merited. The universal defection of the no-
bility, the growing power of the Protestants, who
all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated
follicitations of the French King, and, above all,
the interposition of the young Queen, who was now
entering the twelfth year of her age, and claimed a
right of nominating whom she pleased to be Regent,
obliged him, at last, to resign that high office,
which he had held many years. He obtained, Prevail on
however, the fame advantageous terms for himself, the Regent

to resign
which had been formerly fipulated. hi office.

Ir was in the Parliament which met on the loth She obtains

of April 1554, that the Earl of Arran executedc Regen-
this extraordinary resignation and at the fame time
Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the obje& of her withes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman and a firanger,
was advanced to the supreme authority, over a fierce
and turbulent people, who seldom Submitted, with-
out relu&ance, to the legal and ancient government
of their native Monarchs.

WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contri-
buted so much towards the progress of the Refor- Reform.

ion conti-

mation, by the protetion which ihe afforded itr,nueto
from motives of ambition ; the Englilh Queen, by pmak reat
her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons

aaive

B o o R acive in promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended

II. the throne of England, on the death of her brother

Edward, and soon after married Philip II. of Spain.

July 6,
153.* To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,

and the fierceness of that age, he added the private
resentment of her own and of her mother's sus-
ferings, with which he loaded the reformed Reli-
gion; and the peevishness and severity of her natu-
ral temper carried the acrimony of all these paflions
to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her perse-
cution equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who
have been the greatest reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace
with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unre-
lenting Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to
mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the
doctrines which they had taught; others fled from
the storm. To the greater part of these, Switzer-
land and Germany opened a secure asylum; and not
a few, out of choice or neceflity, fled into Scotland.
What they had seen and felt in England, did not
abate the warmth and zeal of their indignation
against Popery. Their attacks were bolder and
more successful than ever; and their doctrines made
a rapid progress among all ranks of men.

THESE doctrines, calculated to reaify the opi-

nions, and to reform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other effects; but they oon
began to operate with greater violence, and proved
the occasion, not only of ubverting the eftablilhed
religion, but of haking the throne, and endanger-

ing

ing the kingdom. The causes which facilitated the B o o K
introdudion of thee new opinions into Scotland, I1.
and which difemrinated them so fast through the ^,icw,
nation, merit, on that account, a particular and thepolitica
careful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the which con.
greatest events in the history of mankind, and in tributedht..
whatever point of light we view it, is inftrudive
and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the i5th and i6th

centuries rouzed the world from that lethargy, in
which it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
athority by which it had been so long restrained,
and venturing to move in a larger sphere, pulhed
its inquiries into every subjed, with great boldness,
and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of

exercising their reason, than religion was one of the
first objes which drew their attention. Long be-
fore Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the imposture
and absurdity of the established fuperitition. That
subtle and refined people, satisfied with enjoying
those discoveries in secret, were little difpoled to as-
fume the dangerous characer of Reformers, and
concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
gative of the wife, while vulgar minds mutt be over-
awed and governed by popular errors. But, animat-
ed with a more noble and disinterested zeal, the Ger-
man Theologian boldly ereced the standard of truth,

and

B o o K and upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity,

II. which merits the admiration and gratitude of all
'-C ' succeeding ages.

THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the
heart of Germany, his opinions spread, with afto-
nifhing rapidity, all over Europe; and wherever
they came, endangered or overturned the ancient,
but ill founded system. The vigilance and address
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigotry
of the Austrian family, suppressed there notions on
their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated
by multiplied impositions, could neither be molli-
sied by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame force;
and encouraged by fume Princes from piety, and by
others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE superstition of Popery seems to have grown

to the most extravagant height, in those countries
which are situated towards the different extremities
of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and fen-
fibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of
southern climates, rendered them susceptible of the
deepest impreflions of superstitious terror and cre-
dulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less fa-
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among
the northern nations. They knew little, and were

t dif-

disposed to believe every thing. The most glaring B o o K
absurdities did not hock their gross understandings, II.
and the most improbable fictions were received with 'L*
implicit afgent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-

vailed in Scotland, was of the most bigoted and
illiberal kind. Those dosrines which are most apt
to shock the human understanding, and thofelegends
which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the
people without any attempt to palliate or disguise
them; nor did they ever call in question the reason.
ablenefs of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace

with the progress of fuperfition; for it is the na-
ture of that spirit to observe no bounds in its re-
fpe& and liberality towards those, whose character it
eftems sacred. The Scottih Kings early demon-
firated how much they were under its influence, by
their vast additions to the immunities and riches of
the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
ferred almost the whole crown-lands, which were at
that time of great extent, into the hands of eccle-
fiaftics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his fuccebors. The spirit spread among
all orders of men, who daily loaded the priellhood
with new poffeflions. The riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland was one
of those countries, wherein they had farthell excccd-
ed the just proportion. The Scottifhl clergy paid one
half of every tax imposed on land; and as there is

no

B o o K no reason to think that, in that age, they would be

II. loaded with any unequal hare of the burden, we
-r-- may conclude, that, by the time of the Reforma-

tion, little less than one half of the property in the
nation had fallen into the hands of a society, which
is always acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature too, of a considerable part of their

property, extended the influence of the clergy.
Many etates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were poffefred by the younger sons, and
descendants of the best families *. The connexion
between superior and vaJfal, between landlord and
tenant, created dependences, and gave rife to an
union of great advantage to the church; and in
cftimating the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics
over the nation, these, as well as the real amount
of their revenues, mufft be attended to, and taken
into the account.

THIS extraordinary hare in the national property

was accompanied with proportionable weight in the
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time, when
the number of temporal Peers was extremdly firall,
and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Eccle-
fiaftics formed a considerable body there. And it
appears from the ancient rolls of Parliament, and
from the manner ofchufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court mult have
been, in a great measure, under their directiont.

*Lcith, 5a1, Not.'b). potf.Hif. ofthc Ch. of Scc t. 449.

THE

THE reverence due to their facied charater, B o o K

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed I
not a little towards the growth of their power.
The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pish clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
fe&s of that dominion, which they had acquired
over the reft of mankind. They were regarded by
the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither subjet to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
gion could supply, was placed around their power,
their poffeflions, and their persons and endeavours
were used, not without fucccfs, to represent them
all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in place
of these, were substituted fludies, barbarous and
uninftru&ive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were
conversant in them, this procured them eteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the ad miration of
rude ages, which knew nothing. Wr was the
sole profefflon of the nobles, and hunting their chief
amusement; they divided their time betw een there;
unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by
science, they disdained any employment so reign from
military affairs, or which required rathtr penetra-
tion and address, than bodily vigour. Wherever
the former were neceflfry, the clergy were entrusted;
because they alone were properly qualifi cd for the

trult.

B o o K trust. Almost all the high offices in civil govern:

II. ment devolved, on this account, into their hands.
*''' The Lord Chancellor was the first subjet in the

kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of
Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that
high office; and of there, forty-three had been ec-
clefiatics*. The Lords of Sefflon were supreme
Judges in all matters of civil right; and by its ori-
ginal constitution, the President and one half of the
Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy; and undiftra&ed by those cares, and un-
incumbered with those burdens which occupy and
oppress other men, the interest of their order be-
came their only obje&, and they were at full leisure
to pursue it.

THE nature of their funtion gave them access to

all persons, and at all seasons. They could employ
all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror and
of consolation, which operate most powerfully on
the human mind. They haunted the weak and the
credulous; they besieged the beds of the sick and
of the dying. They fuitred few to go out of the
world without leaving marks of their liberality to
the church; and taught them to compound with
the Almi;ghty for their fins, by bestowing riches
upon thof,:, who called themselves his servants.

Crawf. Offic. of State.

WHEN

WHEN their own industry, or the fuperfticion of B o o K

mankind failed of producing this effect, the eccle- II
fiatics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. Whoever died intestate, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uses. The church
took pofleflion of them. The children, the wife,
the creditors of the person deceased were often ex-
cluded from any Ihare, in what was eitemed a fa-
cred property *. As men are apt to trust to the
continuance of life with foolish confidence, and
childishly shun every thing, that forces them to
think of their mortality, many die without fettling
their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the
clergy in this cafe, of which there are frequent
vestiges in our laws, though none in our historians,
may be reckoned among the moil plentiful sources
of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-

tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
and by laws which the clergy thenlflves had framed.
The penalty, too, by which the decisions of these
courts were enforced, added to their authority. A
sentence of excommunication was no lss formida-
ble, than a entence of outlawry. It was pronounced-
on many occafions,and against various crimes: And
betides excluding thole, upon whom it fell, from
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their
rights as men, or as citizens; and the aid of the
ftcular power concurred with the ifuplrftition of
mankind, in rendering the th' ;:i.>rq of the church
no less dtruEtive than tcrribl.

EfT y en :i:. . t' . -
VOL. I. 1. o

B o o K To these general causes, may be attributed the

II. immense growth both of the wealth, and power of
b-*- the Popish church; and without entering into any

more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftru6ture so stupendous was
erewted.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own (uperflition and profuseness, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at
their incroachments. No wonder haughty and mar-
tial Barons hould view the power and pofleffions
of the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
inactive charater of churchmen with the utmost
contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just
offence to the people, and considerably abated the
veneration, which they were accustomed to yield to
that order of men.

I.1M i NS E wealth, extreme indolence, gross igno-

rance, and, above all, the ievere injuntion of ce-
Lb:cy, ad concurred to introduce this corruption
of norals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the fubmiflion of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their own
vices. According to the accounts of the Reform-
ers, confirmed by several Popish writers, the most
open and scandalous diflolution of manners pre-
vailed among the Scottih clergy *. Cardinal Bea-

* Whizet. ap. Keith Append. zc2. 2o5. Lefl. deReb. Gelt.
ScJt. 232.

toun,

toun, with the fame public pomp, which is due to B o o
a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his II
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son*, '
and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly conti-
nued to the end of his days a criminal correfpon-
dence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gular and exemplary than their Primate t.

MEN of such charaters ought, in reason, to have

been alarmed at the first clamours raised ag3inft their
own morals, and the dotrines of the church, by
the Protefant preachers; but the Popish ecclesias
tics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleced
the proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they
asseted to despise the censures of the people. And
while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
auferities, endeavoured to resemble the first propa-
gators of Christianity, the Popish clergy were com-
pared to all those persons, who are most infamous,

* The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in
which he calls her my daughter, are fill extant. Keith, p. 42.

t A remarkable proof of the difToute manners cf the clergy

is found in the public records. A greater number of letters of
legitimatio was granted during the firit thirty years after the
Reformation, than during the whole period, that has eiapfed
since that time. These were obtained by the ions of the Popilh
clergy. The ecclefiafics, who were allowed to rtain their be-
nefices, alienated them to their children; who, when they ac-
quired wealth, were dcfirous that the slain of illeitimacy might
no lorger remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue o the
Scottijh Bii/ops, we find several inlances of luch a!ieinltions of
church lands, by t;e Popilh incumbents, to their natural chil-
dren.

L in

B o o K in hillory, for the enormity and scandal of their

II. crimes.

ON the other hand, inflead of mitigating the ri-

gour, or colouring over the absurdity of the efta-
blifled dotrines; instead of attempting to found
them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reason;
they lce't them without any other support or recom-
mendation, than the uthority of the church, and
the decrees of councils. The fables concerning
purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the me-
rits of the faints, were the topics, on which they
inifted in their dilcourfes to the people; and the
duty of preaching being left wholly to Monks of
the lowelt and moit illiterate orders, their compo-
fitions were ill mere wretched and contemptible,
tlan the fubjiecs on which they infilted. While
the Reformers were attended by crowded and ad-
miring audiences, the Popish preachers were either
univcllally delcrted, or liitened to with scorn.

T E only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
lirm the wavering taith of the people, was equally
imprudenzt and uniucceltsfl. As many doctrines
t' their church had derived their credit, at first,
from the authority of falle miracles, they now en-
deavoured to c.ill in thele to their aid*. But those
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpici-
ous idlniirition, or heard with implicit faith, in
tims of darknels and of ignorance, met with a

* potswo:d, 69.

very

very different reception, in a more enlightened pe- B o o K
riod. The vigilance of the Reformers detc贸&ed II.
these impostures, and exposed nor only them, but '^ '
the cause, which needed the aid offuch artifices, to
ridicule.

As the popish eccleiaftics became more and more

the objects of hatred and of contempt, the dif-
courses of the Reformers were litcened to as so many
calls to liberty; and besides the pious indignation
which they excited against thole corrupt doctrines,
which had perverted the nature of true Christianity;
besides the zeal, which they inspired for the know-
ledge of truth, and the purity of religion; they
gave rife alto, among the Scottifhl nobles, to other
views and paflions. They hoped to flhake off the
yoke of ecclcfiaftical dominion, which they had
long felt to be oppressive, and which they now dif-
covered to be unchritian. They expected to re-
cover poffcffion of the church revenues, which they
were now taught to confider as alienations made by
their ancestors, with a profusion no lefsundifctrn-
ing than unbounded. They ,fattered themselves,
that a check would be given to the pride and lux-
ury of the clergy, who would be obl!ed, hence-
forward, to confine themselves within the plhere
peculi;.r to their sacred charactcr. An aversion for
the etablithed church, which liolwed from lb many
concurin7 cufcs, wvhich was raifel by confidcra-
tiois of irlisioln, and heighte;,cdl by nmotives of o-
licy, Ifpcad It:fa through the ntion, and excircl a
piI.t, t:;: bl'. t, at a,

a wi th

i riiil- v -
kic 1 e.

1 3 r.i
.

B o o K RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient

II. to have rouzed this spirit. The points in contro-

verfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to establish them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effec of some wild and en-
thufiaftic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt
to account for the eagernels and zeal with which
our ancestors embraced and propagated the Protef-
tant doctrines, by taking a view of the political
motives alone, which influenced them, and by
(hewing how naturally these prompted them to at
with so much ardor, will not, perhaps, be esteem-
ed an unnecessary digression. We now return to the
course of the history.
14 THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent

seems to have transported her, at first, beyond the
known prudence, and moderation of her character.

The Quhen :he began her adminiilration, by conferring upon
Regent be- toreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a
gins her ad- b
sinL ad t'(p, which both from the inability of strangers to
tioul wlh di;iChir,.e these offices with vigour, and from the
fomt un 0
pular nLa. envy which their preferment excites among the na-

tives, is never attended with good confcquences.
Vilinort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with
t!ie management of the public revenues; Bonot
tvas appointed Governor of Orkney; and Rubay
honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and
the title of Vice Chancellor*. It was with the

L*Lcn, do Rcb. Gel. Scot. 89.

highest

highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of B o o K
the greatest eminence and authority, dealtoutamong II.
strangers. By these promotions they conceived the tv
Queen to have offered an insult both to their under-
standings, and to their courage; to the former, by
supposing them unfit for those Rations, which their
ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to the
latter, by imagining that they were tame enough
not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this difpoficion, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highest degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
strength by the sudden and formidable incursions of
their allies, the Scots. But, as there inroads were
seldom attended with any real advantage to Scot-
land, and exposed it to the dangerous resentment
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
less tradable than formerly, and scrupled, any lon-
ger, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their
own quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war, rendered
the afiftance of the Scottish forces of less import-
ance to the French Monarch. For there reasons,
Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would
take part in her husband's quarrel, was extremely
solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the aliftance of
some troops, which would be more at his command

L 4 than

B o o ^; thn an urt. 'iiplined army, led by chieftains who

i. were almo:r ircicp'ndent. In prosecution of this
* design, but u (. r p:etence of relieving the nobles

from the expence and d.inger of defending the bor-
,5 5. ders, the Queen Regent Iprop(fed, n Parliament,

to register the value of lands throughout the king-
dom to impole on them a friall tax, and to apply
that revenue towards maintaining a body of regular
troops, in conflant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath in-
troduccd into alinot every part of Europe, was
unknown at that time, and feermed altogether in-
confifent with the free and independent Jpirit of the
feudal government. Nothing could be more shock-
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the en-
trufring, to mercenary hands, the defence of those
territories which had been acquired, or preerved,
by the blood of their anceflors. They received this
proposal with the utmoll inclination. About 300
of the lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Queen
Regent, and represented their sense of the intended
innovation, with that manly and determined bold-
nls which is natural to a free people, in a martial
age. Alarmed at a remonltrance delivered in so
firm a tone, anld ltpported by such formidable num-
bers, the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme,
which hc found to be universally odious. As the
Qteen l-hrfelf was known perfectly to underltand
the circufhtancis and temper of the nation, this
meafutre was imputed wholly to the suggestions of
her forcign cunfellors ; and the Scots were ready
to procced to the moil \ iolent extremities againfl
them.

T H1

THE French, instead of extinguishing, addedB o o K

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced hof- II.
tilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed on Attem
the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with to cnage

the king-

a considerable body of her troops. In order to de- dom in a
prive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he E',ngadI
projected, to the Scots; and attempted to excite
them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's charac-
ter, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
turbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
endeavouring to reclaim her heretical subje&s; the
nobles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent
at Newbottle, listened to the solicitations of the
French Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
dently declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
prize so dangerous and unnecessary. What she
could not obtain by persuasion, the Queen Regent
brought about by a tfratagem. Notwithstanding
the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, she commanded her French oldiers to re-
build a small fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
ed, by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison
of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the work and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult rouztd
the fiery lpirit of the Scots, and their promptness
to revenge the least appearance of national injury
dissipated, in a n.oment, the wile and pacific refo-
lutigns which th had t lately formed. War was
determined, an2, c.lvkrs inftan:ly given for rairing a
numerous army. Eut before their forces could a-
iemble, the ardor of their indignation had time to
cool, and the Englilh ving dli'overed no inten-

tion

B o o K tion to puff the war with vigour, the nobles re-

II. fumed their pacific system, and resolved to stand al-
,(. together upon the dfenfive. They marched to the

banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy, and having done what they thought
sufficient for the safety and honour of their country,
the Queen could not induce them, either by her
intreaties, or her artifices, to advance another flep.

WHILE the Scots perfifled in their inactivity,

D'Oyfcl, the Commander of the French troops,
who pofieffed entirely the confidence of the Queen
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en-
gage the two nations in hostilitics. Contrary to the
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werk,
a garrison of the Englilh. The Scots, inflead of
seconding his attempt, were enraged at his prefump-
tion. The Queen's partiality towards France had
long been fufpeted; but it was now visible that he
wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of Scotland,
to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally.
Under the feudal governments, it was in camps,
that fubjets were accustomed to address the boldest
remonstrances to their Sovereigns. While arms
were in their hands, they felt their own strength;
and at that time all their representations of grievances
carried the authority of commands. On this occa-
sion, the indignation of the nobles broke out with
such violence, that the Queen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in acion to be vain, abrupt-
ly difmifled her army; and retired with the utmost
shame and disgust having discovered the impotence

of

of her own authority, without effeting any thing B o o
which could be of advantage to France. II.

IT is observable, that this firit instance of con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree,
be imputed to the influence of the new opinions in
religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the Re-
gency had been principally supported by thole who
favoured the Reformation, and as he still needed
them for a counterpoise to the Archbilhop of St.
Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of Hamil-
ton; they were now treated by her with great re-
fpe&, and even admitted to no inconsiderable harc
in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and the other surviving conspirators against Cardi-
nal Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her
from baniflment; and, through her connivance,
the Proteflant preachers enjoyed an interval of tran-
quillity, which was of great advantage to their cause.
Soothed by there instances of the Queen's modera-
tion and humanity, the Protestants left to others the
office of remonitrating; and the leaders of the op-
pofite fa&ion ser them the first example of disputing
the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre- The
carious her authority was, while it depended on the Queen's

marrlage

poise ofthefe contrary fadcions, flie endeavoured to wih ht
establish it on a broader and more secure foundation, Daulhin.
by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's mar-
riage with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of
Scots then was, in the bloom of youth and confi-
derable as the territories were, which he would have

added

B o o added to the French Monarchy; reasons were not

II. wanting to dissuade Henry from compleating his
*--'r frft plan of marrying her to his son. The con-

stable Montmorency had employed all his interest to
defeat an alliance, which refleted so much lustre on
the Princes ofLorrain. He had represented the im-
poflibility of maintaining order and tranquillity
amone a tu rbulent people, during the absence of their
Sovereign; and for that reason, had advised Henry
to bestow the young Queen upon one of the Princes
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might
preserve that kingdom an uleful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union t the Crown, would be-
come a mutinous ad ungovernable province.
But, a this time, the Coriable was a prisoner in
the hands of rh :-.paniards, and the Princes of Lor-
rain were at the height of their giory; and their in-
fluence, econdcd by the charms of the yoang Queen,
triumphed over the prudent, but envious remon-
firances of their rival.

,c. ,4, THE French King accordingly applied tothePar-
5s57. liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of its

members-j to rcprelint the whole bodyof the nation,
at the marriage of the Queen. Among the pcrlbns
on whon thepublic choice conftirred this honourable
chara&ter, were obme of the noft avowed and zea-

*Melv. MeIm. I;.

+ Viz. The Archbilhop of Gl f;n,., t'e r, (hop of Rof, the

Bilhop of Orkney, the E r'! of .R,,th: i; .d

t aifTI , Lord Flee-

niing. Iord Sc;ii, the I'rior of St. AnrLw's, and John Lrfkine
of Dun.

ouls

lous advocates for the Reformation; by which, may B o o K
be estimated the degree of refpe& and popularity, II-
which that party had now attained in the kingdom. ' J
The infiruaions of the Parliament to those Commis-
fioners still remain -, and do honour to the wisdom
and integrity of that aflembly. At the fame time
that they manifested, with refpea to the articles of
marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity and in-
terest of their Sovereign, they employed every pre-
caution which prudence could dicate, for preferv-
ing the liberty and independence of the nation, and
for securing the succession of the Crown in the
house of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain- Artificesof

ed whatever satisfaction their fear or jealousy could i the mar-
demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and ria.r "'
the King of France ratified every article with the
most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds
in form, under their hands and feals. But on the
part of France, all this was one continued scene of
studied and elaborate deceit. Previous to these pub-
lic tranfa&ions with the Scottifl deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to fublcribe privately three deeds,
equally unjust, and invalid; by which, failing the
heirs of her own body, fie conferred the kingdom
of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or succession
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
France, declaring all pomii'.s to thecontrary, which
the neceflity of her aTnirs, and the solicitations of
her subjects had extorted, or mignit extort from her,

[ )iv t!', A ler':;, X .

to

2

B o o K to be void and of no obligation *. As it gives us

II. a proper idea of the chara&er of the French court
- - under Henry II. we may observe that the King him-

self, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the per-
sons engaged in conducing this perfidious and dif-
honourable projet. The Queen of Scots was the
only innocent aCtor in that scene of iniquity. Her
youth, her inexperience, her education in aforeign
country, and her deference to her uncle's will, must
vindicate her, in the judgment of every impartial
person, from any imputation of blame on that ac-
count.

THIS grant, by which Mary bestowed the inhe-

ritance of her kingdom upon strangers, was conceal-
ed with the utmost care from her fubjets. They
seem, however, not to have been unacquainted with
the intention of the French to overturn the settlement
of the fucceflion in favour of the Duke of Chatelhe-
rault. The zeal, with which the Archbilhop of St.
Andrews opposed all the measures of the Queen Re-
gent, evidently proceeded from the fears and fufpi.
cions of that prudent prelate, on this head t.
April 4, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with

great pomp and the French, who had hitherto as-
sected to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-

* Corps Diplomat. tom. v. at. Kith, 73.
+ About thi. time, the French seem to have had omedefign

of reviving the Earl of Lennox's pretensions to the fuccellion, in
order to int:midate and alarm the Duke of Chatelherault.
Kaynes, 215, 219. Sorbes Collci. vo'.i. 189.

land,

land, began now to unfold their intentions without B o o K
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the depu- II.
ties had agreed that the Dauphin fliould assume the "
name of King of Scotland. This they confidered
only as an honorary title; but the French laboured
to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They
insisted that the Dauphin's title should be publickly
recognized; that the Crown Matrimonial hould be
conferred upon him; and that all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a Queen hould be veiled in
his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
married an heiress kept poffeflion of her estate dur-
ing his own life, if he happened to survive her and
the children born of the marriage*. This was cal-
led the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private in-
heritances, to the fucceflion of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Crown Matrironial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
tifh historians, and which they have neglected to
explain. As the French had reason to expec diffi-
culties in carrying through this measure, they began
with founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The Englilh, in the marriage articles between their
Queen and Philip of Spain, had fct an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with
which a foreigner ihould be admitted so near the
throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish depu-
ties had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,
expressed themselves with remarkable caution t.
Their answer was in the fame jfirit, relpetful, but
firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of consent-

Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 8. t Kcth, Appcnd. zo.

9 ing

Bo o K ing to nothing, that tended to introduce any alte;

II. ration in the order of succession to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies t happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was uni-
verfally imputed to the effecs of poison, which was
supposed to have been given them by the emissaries
of the house of Guise. The hiftoriansofall nations
discover an amazing credulity with refpe& to stories
of this kind, which are so well calculated to please
the malignity of tome men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that in
every age they have been swallowed without exa-
mination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots should easily give credit to a sus-
picion, which received such strong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known character of the Princes of Lorrain, so
. little scrupulous about the jufice of the ends which

they pursued, or of the means which they employ-
ed. For the honour of human nature, it muff,
however, be observed, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. But the Scots of that age,
influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the
cafe with calmness, or of judging concerning them
with candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this detestable acion
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase

t The Bishop of Orkney, the Fail of RoLhc, the Earl of
Casals, the Lord Fening.

the

the aversion for them, which was growing among B o o K
all ranks of men. II.

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which TheRegent

their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial P'hia',O"
met with from the Scottilh deputies, the French mentto

grapt it.

ventured to move it in parliament. The partizans Nov. 19.
of the House of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
signs upon the fuccefiion, opposed it with great zeal.
But a party, which the feeble and unfeady conduct
of their leader had brought under much difreputa-
tion, was little able to withstand the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, fe-
conded, on this occasion, by all the numerous ad-
herents of the Reformation. Besides, that artful
Princess dressed out the French demands in a leis
offrnfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
seemed to render them offinall consequence. There
'either deceived the Scots, or removed their scruples;
and in compliance to the Queen, they passed an a,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin;
and, with the fondest credulity, trusted to the frail
security of words and statutes, against the dangerous
encroachments of power *.

* 1he A' cf PiIamrcnt is wnr.lcd with the utmost cirf,

willt a view to fiuard ag.inll aw.T breach of the order of Sur c:-
fiun. lut the l)D ke, not ielying on thi, a!one, cntercd ;i len: "
protcllatio:; to fccurc hi own right, Xr:ith, 6. 1: i:; p:;
ti.it lie iLlpcLtd the Frcr 1i of hi:ving I;)me intention to rct ide
his ilight of lcceilon .::31, ii.:eJ, if thvey hild no tdlii, of
;:;:t \:id3, tln cnl'i .f .It \i:'.h th"y urZc ! 'th'c .c:nnl'
. ', . lIi' :'lli,

\'i . 1. NI '.'i , '

B o o K THE concurrence of the Protestants, -with the

II. Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so accept-
ontinues able to France, while the Popish clergy, under the
to court influence of the Archbiihop of St. Andrew's, oppof-
the Prote.
nants. ed it with so much violence *, is one of those fmgu-

Jar circumstances, in the condut of parties, for
which this period is so remarkable. It may be afcri-
bed, in ome degree, to the dextrous management
of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of
thole who favoured the Reformation. The pro-
teftants were, by this time, almost equal to the Ca-
tholicks, both in power, and in number; and, con-
fcious of their own frength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which
the ancient laws armed the ecclesiastics against them.
They longed to be exempted from this oppreflive
jurifdition, and publickly to enjoy the liberty of
profesSing those opinions, and ofexercifing thatwor-
Ihip, which so great a part of the nation deemed to
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to the
Deity. This indulgence, to which the whole weight
of priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence must ex-
tort it from the reluctant hand of their Sovereign,
or by prudent compliances, they might expe it
from her favour, or her gratitude. The former is
an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which
no nation has recourse suddenly and fubjeds fe}-
dom venture upon refifance, which is their last re-
medy, but in cafes of extreme necefity. On this
occarion, the Reformers wiiely held the opposite
course, and by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's

' Mclv. 47

derrgns,

dofigns, they hoped to merit her protection. This B o o
disposition the Queen encouraged to the utmost, and II.
amused them so artfully with many promises, and '-"
some concessions, that, by their aliftance, she fur-
mounted in Parliament the force of a national, and
perhaps alaudablejealoufy, which would, otherwise,
have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat

to acquire the Regent such considerable influence in
this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bilhoprics,
and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown *. From
the time of her acceflion to the Regency, the Queen
had kept in her own hands almost all those which
became vacant, except such as were, to the great
disgust of the nation, bestowed upon foreigners.
Among these, her brother the Cardinal of Lorrain
had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two
of the most wealthy foundations in the kingdom t.
By this conduct, {he thinned the ecclesiastical bench,
which was intirely under the influence of the Arch-
bilhop of St. Andrew's, and which, by its numbers
and authority, usually had great weight in the house,
so as to render any opposition it could give, at that
time, of little consequence.

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior
of St. Andrew's, one the most powerful, and the

'See Book I. t Lefy, 202.
t It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Lefly

calls a very full one, that only seven Bilhops and fixtetn Abbots
were present.

M 2 other

B o o R other the mot popular leader of the Protetantc,

IL were appointed to carry the Crown and other ensigns
c "v'Wof royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they

were diverted by the part they were called to a&, in
a more interesting scene, which now begins to open.

Elizabech BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necessary to
fucceds toob
the Crdnobferve, that on the 7th of November, Mary of
o England. England finilied her short, and inglorious reign.

Her filter Elizabeth took pofferion of the throne
without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, established by law in England. The
accession of a Queen, who, under very difficult cir-
cumRtances, had given strong indications of those
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered
lier reign so illustrious, attracted the eyes of all Eu-
rope. Among the Scots, both parties observed her
firit motions with the utmqf concern, as they easily
otrefaw that Ilhe would not remain long an indiffe-
rent fpetator of their tranfaftions.

UNDER many discouragements, and much op-

pression, the Reformation advanced towards a full
titabliflment in Scotland. All the low country, the
most populous, and, at that time, the most warlike
part of the kingdom, was deeply tinLtured with the
Protestant opinions; and if the finme impreflions
were not made in the more distant counties, it was
owing to no want of the fame dili:ofitions among
the people, but to the fearcity of piachers, who
most indefatigable zeal could not atistfy the avidity
of those, who desired their inflrutions. Among a
people hred to arms, and so prone o mutiny as the

Scots;

Scots; and in an age, when religious passions had B o o K
taken such strong pofleflion of the human mind, II
and moved and agitated it with so much violence;
the peaceable and regular demeanor of so numerous
a party is truly aflonifhing. From the death of Mr.
Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scotland
for the Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed,
and during so long a period, no violation of public
order or tranquillity had proceeded from that set*;
and though rouzed and irritated by the most cruel
exceffesof ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no in-
fiance, transgress those bounds of duty which the
law prescribes to subje&s. Besides the prudence of
their own leaders, and the protection which the
Queen Regent, from political motives, afforded
them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St. An-
drew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That
Prelate, whose private life cotemporary writers tax
with great irregularities t, governed the church, for
some years, with a temper and prudence of which
there are few examples in that age. But some time
before the meeting of last Parliament, the Arch-
bishop departed from those humane maxims, by
which he had hitherto regulated his conduc&; and
whether, in spite to the Queen, who had entered in-
to so close an union with the Protestants, or in com-
pliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let
loose all the rage of persecution against the Reform-
ed; sentenced to the flames an aged priea, who had

*The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private

revenge, and being contrived and cxccuted by sixteen prfons
only, cannot, with juitice, be imputed to the whole I'roteltint
party. j lia;orx, Bilrhanan, l ith, zo0.

M 3 been

B o o K been convi&ed ofembracing the Proteftantopinions;

II. and summoned several others, fufpeted of the fame

crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which
was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protest-

ants at this unexpeced and barbarous execution, but
the zeal, with which they espoused the defence of a
cause, that now seemed devoted to deftruion.
They had immediate recourse to theQueen Regent;.
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then
about to meet, depended on their concurrence, flhe
not only feltered them from the impending florm,
but permitted them the exercise of their religion,
with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by which
they held their religious liberty, the Protestants la-
boured to render their pofleffion of it more secure
and independent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for fime legal protedion,
against the exorbitant and oppressive j urifdition of
the cclefiaftical courts, which, by their arbitrary
method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the moit hocking to humani-
ty, by maxims the most repugnant tojuftice. But
the Queen, who dreaded the effe&t of a debate on
this delicate subject, which could not fail of exciting
hi h and dangerous pafllons, prevailed on the lead-
ers o' the party, by new and more olemn promises
of ler protection, to desist from any application to
parliamc nt,whe; e their numbers and influencewould,
in all probability, have procured them, if not the

entire

entire redress, at least, ome mitigation of their B o o K
grievances. II.

THEY applied to another afiembly, to a convoca-

tion of the Popish clergy, but with the fame ill fuc-
cess, which hath always attended every proposal for
Reformation, addressed to that order of men. To
abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has,
on Come occasions, offered to truth; but from any
ibciety of men, no such effort can be expeEted. The
corruptions of a society, recommended by common
utility, andjuftified by universal pra&ice, are view-
ed, by its members, without hame, or horror; and
Reformation never proceeds from themselves, but
is always forced upon them by ome foreign hand.
Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behaviour of the Convocation in the present
conjuncture. All the demands of the Protestants
were rejeted with contempt; andthe Popish clergy,
far from endeavouring, by any prudent concessions,
to ooth and to reconcile such a numerous body,
asserted the doctrines of their church, concerning
some of the mods exceptionable articles, with an
ill-timed rigour, which gave new offence *.

DURING the fitting of the Convocation, the Pro-

teftants firt began to suspect ome change in the
Regent's disposition towards them. Though joined
with them for many years, by interest, and united,
as they conceived, by the strongest ties of affection
and of gratitude, he discovered, on this occasion,

' Keith, 81.

M 4 evident

B o evident symptoms, not only of coldness, but of a

1II. growing disgust and aversion. In order to account
XT'' for this, our historians do little more than produce
559. tie trite observations concerning the influence of

prosperity to alter the character, and to corrupt the
heart. The Queen, fay they, having reached the
utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer prelerved her accustomed moderation, but,
with an insolence usual to the fortunate, looked
down upon those, by whose afliftance he had been
enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the de-
pra-ity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude
of the Queen's disposition, that we must search for
the motives of her present condu&. These were
derived from another, and a more remote source,
which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfaftions,
we hall endeavour to open with ome care.

Ambitious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been
v.'e.s 0o

f c no less successful, than daring; but all their schemes

Pi nces of
Lorrain. were diftinguiiied by being vast and unbounded.

Though rangers at the court of France, their emi-
nent qualities had raised them, in a hort time, to
an height of power, superior to that of all other
fubjccts, and had placed them on a level even with
the princes of the blood themselves. The church,
the army, the revenue, were under their direction.
Nothing but the royal dignity remained unattained,
and they were elevated to a near alliance with it, by
the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Dauphin.
In orJer to gratify their own vanity, and to render
their n: ce nlre worthy the heir of France, they set

on

on foot her claim to the Crown of England, which B o o K
was founded on pretences not unplaufible. II.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry 159

VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his rc-fntment, that im-
patient and arbitrary Monarch had divrccd, or be-
headed four of the fix Queens, whom he married.
In orderto gratify him, both his daughters halu been
declared illegitimate by Aft of P.lr'iamnent; and
yet, with that fantastic incorfiflence wi, h dtltin-
guifhes his character, he, in his last wiil, w'lercby
he was impowered to fettle the order of luccefri ;n,
called both of them to the throne, upon the d.th
of their brother Edward; and, at the fame time,
palling by the posterity of his elile sifter Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of si.c-
cefflon to continue in the de!cendants of his
younger sifter, the Dutchess of Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, vMary had reigned in Eng-
land, without the least complaint of neighbouring
Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her
acceiflon to the throne, were obftaclcs to the cleva-
tion of her sifter Elizabeth, and rendered her p(,ffof-
sion of it precarious and ilecure. Rome tremrbled
for the Catholic faith, under a I'rote(anr tI (cn of
such eminent abiliti-s. The fame lrperiicio.s lears
alarmed the court of Spain. And France belield,
with indignation, a throne, to which the Queen of
Scots could form so many pretcnfions, occupied by

a

Bo o K a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Ca-

Il. tholics, excluded her from any legal right of fuc-
J- ceflion. The impotent hatred of the Roman Pon-
1559' tiff, or the ow councils of Philip I. would have

produced no sudden or formidable effec. The ar-
dent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lor-
rain, who, at that time, governed the court of
France, was more decisive, and more to be dread-

Theyper. ed. Instigated by them, Henry, soon after the
fuade Mary death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in-law and
the tit)e of her husband, to assume the title of King and Queen
Queen Of of England. They asseted to publilh this to all
Zngland.

Europe. They used that style and appellation in
public papers, ome of which fill remain *. The
arms of England were engraved on their coin and
plate, and born by them on all occasions. No pre-
parations, however, were made to support this im-
politic and premature claim. Elizabeth was already
feated on her throne; she possesed all the intrepidi-
ty of spirit, and all the arts of policy, which were
necessary for maintaining that station. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The ma-
rine of France had been utterly neglefled; and
Scotland remained the only avenue, by which the

Rcfovc to territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It
invade England. was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lor-

rain determined to make their attack ; and, by
ufng the name and pretensions of the Scottish Queen,
they hoped to rouze the English Catholics, formi-
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and

Anders. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 & 164.
j- Sorbes, Collce1. i. :53, 77.

exafpe.

exasperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, on ac- B o o
count of the change which he had made in the II.
national religion.

1559.
IT was vain to expe& the aflifance of the Scot- In orderto

this, ncef-

tih Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all Eu- fary to
rope esteemed the guardian and defender of the re- becfO the
formed faith. To break the power and reputation tion in
of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, Scotland.
a necessary flep towards the invasion of England.
With this the Princes of Lorrain resolved to open
their scheme. And as persecution was the only me-
thodfor suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or dictated by the despotic and sanguinary fpi-
rit of the Romish superstition, this, in its utmost
violence, they determined to employ. The Earl of
Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other lead-
ers of the party, were marked out by them for im-
mediate deftruion *; and they hoped, by punish-
ing them, to intimidate their followers. Inftruc-
tions for this purpose were ent from France to the
Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious Prin-
cess condemned a neafure, which was equally vio-
lent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
she had become acquainted with the eager and im-
patient temper of the nation; f he well knew the
power, the number, and popularity of the Protef-
tant leaders; and had been a witness to the intre-
pid and unconquerable resolution which religious
fervour could inspire. What, then, could be gain-
ed by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which, hither-

Fobes, i. 15.

to,

B o o K to, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to re-

II. strain ? If it oce broke loose, the authority of a
- ' n Regent would be little capable to subdue, or even

to moderate its rage. And if, in order to quell it,'
foreign forces were called in, this would give the
alarm to the whole nation, irritated already at the
excefive power which the French possessed in the
kingdom, and suspicious of all their designs. A-
midt the Ihock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the ProteRlant dotrine, it
would be well if the whole fabric of the eftabliffied
church were not shaken, and perhaps overturned
from the foundation. These prudent remonstrances
made no impreflon on her brothers; precipitant,
but inflexible in all their resolutions, they infited on
the full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
passionately devoted to the interest of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions
to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe-
cute their commands, with implicit fubmiflion *;
and, contrary to her own judgment, and to all the
rules of found policy, she became the instrument of
exciting civil commotions in Scotland, which ended
with the ruin of the French power, and of the Pot
pith religion in that kingdom.

ThcRcgent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for
:ted h the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the
wiah regard Popish clergy, under the direction of the Archbi-
to the Pro-
tenants. shop of St. Andrew's, had et themselves in oppo..

fition to all her measures. Her first ftep towards

* Mel. 48. Mcm. de Cafllenau. app. Jebb, vol. ii. 446,

5 the

the execution of her new scheme, was to regain their B o o K
favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matcer of II.
difficulty. The Popish ecclcfiaftics, separated from ''"
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the 1559.
boldest and most successful invention of human po-
licy; and combined among themselves in the closest
and most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pas-
sions to the dignity and interest of their order. De-
lighted, on this occasion, with the profpe of tri-
umphing over a faction, whose encroachments they
had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes
of re-etablilhing their declining grandeur on a
firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory
of past injuries, and engaged to second the Queen
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being secure of their ailift-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convo-
cation, by which the principles of the Reformers
were condemned; and at the fame time, she ifflued
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the
Romish ritual.

As it was no longer poflible to mistake the Queen's

intentions, the Protestants, who saw the danger ap-
proach, in order to avert it, employed the Earl of
Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudon to
expostulate with her, concerning this change, to.
wards severity, which their former services had so
little merited, and whichher reiterated promifcs gave
them no reason to expect. She, without disguise or
apology, avowed to them her resolution of extirpat-
ing the Reformed religion out of the kingdom.

And,

B o o K And, upon their urging her former engagements,

II. with an uncourtly, but honest boldness, he so far
'"J forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a sentiment,

which, however apt those of royal condition may be
to entertain it, prudence should teach them to con-
ceal as much as poflible. " The promises of Princes,
fays he, ought not to be too carefully remembered,
nor the performance of them exaced, unless it suits
their own conveniency."

Summron THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into
their preachers this rash expreflion, was nothing in comparison of
operP that, with which the was animated, upon hearing

that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once, fle threw off the mak, and commanded all
the Proteitant preachers in the kingdom to be fum-
moned to a court ofjuftice, which was to be held
at Stirling on the tenth of May The Protefants,
who, from their union, began, about this time, to
be distinguished by the nameof the CoN CR EC ATION,
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger;
and intantly relblved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all blelfings, the knowledge of truth. At that time,
there prevailed in Scotland, with respect to criminal
trials, a culton, introduced, at first, by the infti-
tutions of valfaiage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
afterwards, under a feeble government any person
accused of a crime was 2e companied to the place of
trial, by a retinue of his friends and adherents, as-
femblcd fur that purpose, from every corner of the
kingdom. Authorized by this ancient practice, the

Reformed

Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend B o o K
their pafors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their I-
approach with a train so numerous, though unarm- 55
ed, and in order to prevent them from advancing,
the empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
eminent authority with the party, to promise, in
her name, that the would put a flop to the intended
trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue
advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erflkine, being con-
vinced himself of the Queen's sincerity, served her
with the utmost zeal. And the Protestants, averse
from proceeding to any a of violence, listened
with pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The
preachers, with a few leaders of the party, remain-
ed at Perth; the multitude, which had gathered
from different parts of the kingdom, difperled, and
retired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Breaksa

Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to Phch thc
trial the persons who had been summoned, and upon had relicd.
their non-appearance, the rigour of justice took
place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this
ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real dignity,
and so inconsistent with that integrity which hould
prevail in all tranfa&ions between Sovereigns and
their fubjecs, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Protestants,
Ihocked no less at the indecency with which flie
violated the public faith, than at the danger which
threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been
made the instrument for deceiving hisparty, instantly

拢 mu 2!l

B o o K abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth, add-

II. ed to the zeal of his aflbciates, by his representations

of the Queen's inflexible resolution to suppress their
1559.

religion.

This occa- TH E popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully second-
fure*aon- ed his representations: He having been carried a
at Pclth. prisoner into France, together with the other perfuns

taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon made his
escape out cf that country; and residing sometimes
in England, ofmetimes in Scotland, had, at lafl,
bcen driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of
the Popish clergy, and was obliged to retire to Ge-
neva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Pro:eftants in Scotland; and, in compliance with
their solicitations, hc: let out for his native country,
where he arrived a w days before the trial ap-
pointed at Stirling. He hurried inflantly to Perth,
to share with his brethren in the common danger,
or to a tit them in promoting the common cause.
While their minds were in that f'rment, which the
Queen's erfidioufilcfi ad their own danger occa-
sioncd, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement
iaranue again!t idilatry, infl;ned the multitude
vith he uticoit r;ige. The indilcretion of a priest,
x!.o, i.:lnl'diiately after Knox's fernmon, was pre-
pr-in r to cilcbratc mass, and br:gan to decorate the
altar or thr.a purpo!'c, precipit.:rcd them into im-
Inc'.lirt action. \Widi tulmultuary, but irrcfiflible
violence, thley ftell upon the churches in that city,
.v :.ur.cd tlhe altars, deraced the piElurcs, broke
; p!. cc' the i:i;;i -s; and proceeding next to the
.!:!.ilcri s5, thlcy, in a. few hours, laid those linmp-

tluous

tuous fabrics almost level with the ground. This B o oK
riotous infurreftion was not the effect of any con- II.
cert, or previous deliberation: Censured by the re- '
formed preachers, and publickly condemned by the
perforts of moR power and credit with the party,.
it mull be regarded merely as an accidental eruption
of popular rage '.

BUT to the Queen herself, there proceedings ap- Tie Regent

peared in a very different light. Betides their ma- agat"
nifeft contempt for her authority, the Protestants tem-
had violated every thing in religion, which he
esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both these ac-
counts, he determined to inflit the severest venge-
ance on the whole party. She had already drawn
the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden,
The marched diretly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
ing the ProteRfant leaders, before they could aftem-
ble their followers, whom, out of confidence in her
disingenuous promises, they had been rashly induced
to dismiss. Intelligence of these preparations and
menaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The Fro-
teftants would, gladly, have oothed the Queen, by
addresses both to herself, and to the persons of great.
eft credit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
they, with great vigour, took measures for their
own defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so
good a cause, flocked in such numbers to Perth,
that they not only secured the town from danger,

Knox, Hist. 127, 129.
VOL. . N but,

B o o K but, within a few days, were in a condition to take

II. the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced

with an army 7000 strong.
1559.

NIITHER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised above
the sense of fear, or of danger. The Protestants
beheld with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons
of their party, flill adhering to the Queen; and
destitute of their aid and counfcl, declined ha-
zarding an action, the ill success of which m'ight
have proved the ruin of their cause. The profpe&
of an accommodation was for there reasons highly
acceptable to both fides: Argyll and the Prior, who
were the Queen's commissioners for conducting the
negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of
reconciling the contending facions; and the Earl
of Glencairn arriving unexpectedly with a powerful
reinforcement to the Congregation, augmented the
Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord-

A treary ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, that
nclud'd. both armies flould be disbanded, and the gates of

Perth set open to the Queen; that indemnity should
be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late insurrection; thatno
French garrison should be left in Perth, and no
French bldier fuould approach within three miles
of that place; and that a Parliament should imme-
diately be held, in order to compoe whatever diffe-
rlences iiht (till remain *.

l*ith, 89.

THB

THE Leaders of the Congregation, dilfruftful ofB o o K

the Queen's sincerity, and sensible that concefions, II.
flowing not from inclination, but extorted by the -'

159.

neceflity of her affairs, could not long remain in May 29.
force, entered into a new aflociation, by which they
bound themselves, on the first infringement of the
present treaty, or in the least appearance of danger
to their religion, to reassemble their followers, and
to take arms in defence of what they eteemed the
cause of God, and of their country *.

THE Queen, by her conduEt, drnonftrated thefc roken h

the Il~lcut,

precautions to be the result of no groundlcls or un-'
necefary fear. No sooner were tie Proteilant forces
dismissed, than (he broke every article in the treaty.
She introduced French troops into Perth, fined fbime
of the inhabitants, banished othrs, removed te
Magistrates out of office, and, on her retiring to
Stirling, she left behind her a garrison of 6co men,
with orders to allow the exercil of no other reli-
gion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of lbwor lrength, and
a town the molt proper of any in the kingdom fr
the Itation of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Queen to this unjultifiable, antl illjudged breach
of public faith; which she endcavoured to colour,
by alledging that the body of men lrft at Perth was
entirely compoed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold;
it was now apparent, that not only the rel'gon, but

' Krox, 13 2.

N 2 the

B o o K the liberties of the kingdom were threatened i and

1I. that the French troops were to be employed as in-
- _ f'truments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the

55 yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius ot

the Scots then was, the poverty of their country
made it impoflible to keep their armies long aflem-
bled; and even a very small body of regular troops
might have proved formidable to the nation, though
consisting wholly of soldiers. But, what number
of French forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in the 550, we cannot,
with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary his.
torians often felet, with little judgment, the cir-
cumRtances which they tranfinit to posterity; and,
wiLh refpea to matters of the greatest curiosity and
importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
dark. We may conjecture however, from ome
passages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at leaf to 3o0o men, under
the command of Mons. D'OyfCl, a creature of the
house of Guie ; and they were soon augmented to
a much more formidable number.

THE Queen, encouraged by having so confider-

able a body of well diliiplined troops at her com-
mand, and instigated by the violent counli-ls ot
D'Oyfel, had venturcd, as we have obflc-ec!l, to
violate the treaty of Pcrth, and, by th.it rlh act;on,
once more threw the nati;n into the nolf dinerous
convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and Prior of St.
A.,, ,.\ndrcw's inlantly dcl:rtct a court, where faith and

,',,: ' .;" ' u
, i ciur lcned o :n t be o lorgcr regardd.

' Th'

The Barons from the neighbouring counties repair- B o o K
ed to them, the preachers rouzed the people to I-
arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent '
operations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, 559
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged
multitude was let loose, and churches and monas-
teries, the monuments of ecclefiailic pride and lux-
ury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, with-

out losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
but the zeal of the Congregation got the start, once
more, of her vigilance and ativity. In that war-
like age, when all men were accustomed to arms,
and on the least profpea of danger were ready to
run to them, the leaders of the Protcftants found
no difficulty to raise an army. Though they set
out from St. Andrew's with a flendel train of an
hundred horse, crouds flocked to their itandards
from every corner of the country through which
they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
the Quten with superior force *.

THE Queen, surpriscd at the approach of so for-

midable a body, which was d awn up by its leaders
in such a manner, as added greatly in appearance
to its numbers, had again recourle to ncgociation.
She found, however, that the prdesrvation of the
Protestant religion, their zeal for which had at frft
rouzed the leaders of the Congegation to take
ai ms, was not the only objcta they lad now in

' Knox, .i.

N 3 vicv.'.

B o o K view. They were animated with the warmest love

II- of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in im-
-.'-a minent danger, from the attempts of the French
1559.

forces; and these two paiflons mingling, added re-

Theryir ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with
i1l civil as more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation
veil as re.-
Ji.ous filled the human mind with more liberal and gene-
gie.ances. rous fentinients concerningcivil government. The

genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the
power of Princes. The implicit submission to all
her decrees, which is exacted by the Romish Church,
prepares and breaks the mind for political servitude;
and the dodrines of the Reformers, by overturning
the established system of superstition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold
fpir t of enquiry, which led men to rejet theologi-
cal errors, accompanied them in other sciences, and
discovered every where the fame manly zeal for
truth. A new study introduced at the fame time,
added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men
bccame acquainted with the Greek and Roman au-
thors, who dc;eribcd exquisite models of free go-
vernmlnt, far uperior to the inaccurate and oppres
iive fyflem eablifled by the feudal law; and pro-
duced liich illutrious examples of public virtue, as
wonderfully suited both the circumltances and fpi-
rit of that age. Many, among the most eminent
leformers, were themlelves considerable mailers in
ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted
the Inaxims and 1pirit of the ancients, with regard
to govcrnment'X. The mocf ardent love of liberty

accouni

4 The ecei.vr aqmirro:;on ninc'cnt policy was the orcafion

o! .P;nfi's f;auou buokn conccrni g te G.uer Mcrmut
,r ls Smtan,

h !crcin>

accompanied the Protetant religion, throughout all B o o K
its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it II
rouzed an independent spirit, which rendered men 559
attentive to their privileges as ubjeds, and jealous
of the encroachments of their Sovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Reformation, infused
generous sentiments concerning government into the
minds of their hearers, and the Scottish barons, na-
turally free and bold, were prompted to assert their
rights with more freedom and boldness than ever.
Inflead of obeying the Queen Regent, who had en-
joined them to lay down their arms, they demand-
ed not only the redress of their religious grievances,
but, as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and
securing its liberties, required the immediate expul-
sion of the French troops out of Scotland. It was
not in the Queen's power to make so important a
concession, without the concurrence of the French
Monarch; and as some time was requisite in order to.
obtain that, he hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would
insure the accomplishment of that design, which
fne had twice attempted with unequal ilrength.
Mean while, he agreed to a cessation of arms for June ,:
eight days, and before the expiration of theli,
engaged to tranport the French troops to thl fuutth

wherein, conformable to the maxims of the ancient cgiflator..
which modern experience has proved to be ill-f(undd, lie pro-
nounces the elevation of women to tec supreme anulhoiitv, to
be utter'y deflrultive of good governmint, lt is pr ciplcs, au-
thorities, and examplcs were all dinawil frorn ankr. itit writr.
The fame obfirvaiin may he m:;. : %i repard t iall .'-
Dialogue, De 7Pure R ri aI,, t

1 Sc.:'. It is flunl J II.;i; i;n li'c
maxim of t'uJal, but ul' .! cirnt vc: ;,;:c':.

N -+
.PJ<:

B o o K fide of the Forth; and to fend commissioners to

II. St. Andrew's, who hould labour to bring all diffe-

rences to accommodation. As he hoped, by means
15J9. of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants

in the southern counties, the former article in the
treaty was punctually executed; the latter having
been inserted merely to amuse the Congregation,
was no longer remembered.
A recond Be these reiterated and wanton intances ofper.

iod'0 fidy, the Qeen loft all credit with her adverfariesi

and no safety appearing in any other course, they
again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The
removing of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country situated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjefted to the insolence and exa.tions of the gar-
rilbn, which the Queen had left there, implored
the afiftance of the Congregation for their relief.
Thither they marched, and having, without effec,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms
of the former treaty, they prepair: to besiege it in
form. The Queen employed wEarl of luntly
and Lord Erskine to divert them from this enter-
prize. But her wonted artifices were now of no
avail ; repeated lo often, they could deceive no lon-
ger-; and without listening to her offers, the Pro.
t:flants continued the siege, and fuon obliged the
.:arri'on to capitulate.

AFTER the loss of Perth, the Qieen endeavour-
rd o fi7r Stirlinz, a place of fbrne flrengrh, and,

froll

frOpm its command of the only bridge over the B o o t
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of II.
the Congregation, having intelligence of her de. ,

'1 559.

Jgn, prevented the execution of it, by an hasty Rapid
march thither, with part of their forces. The in- m"c' "nd
habitants, heartily attached to the cause, fet.open the Prote-
to them the gates of their town. Thence they ad- 'n'm
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edinburgh,
which the Queen, on their approach, abandoned
3vith precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kind-

led, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excefes of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries. The former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then efeemed fa-
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at
this distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many Rately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceftors magnificence, and among the noblest orna-
ments of the kingdom. But amidst the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more
proper to allure and interest the multitude, or more
fatal to the grandeur of the eftablilhed church.
However absurd and ill-founded the 1peculative
errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and atten-
tion are requisite towards discovering them. The
abuses and corruptions, whii had crept into the
public worship of that church, lay more open to ob-
servation, and by triking the nfres, excited more

tlni-

B o o K universal difgut. Under the long reign of Hea.

II. thenifm, fuperitition seems to have exhaulted its ta-

lent of invention, so that when a superstitious fpiric
seized Chriltians, they were obliged to imitate the
Heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their
ceremonies, and to borrow from them the ornaments
and decorations of their temples. To the pure and
simple worship of the primative Christians, there
succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly re-
fembling those pagan originals, whence it had been
copied. The contrariety of such observances, to
the spirit of Chrifianity, was almost the first thing,
in the Romish system, which awakened the indig-
nation of the Reformers, who. applying to these
the denunciations in the Old Testament against ido-
latry, imagined that they could not endeavour at
iupprefing them, with too much zeal. No talk
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to
overturn those feats of superstition; they ran with
emulation to perform it, and happy was the man
whose hand was most adventrous and successful in
executing a work eteemed so pious. Nor did their
leaders labour to restrain this impetuous spirit of
Reformation. Irregular and violent as its allies
were, they tended direstly to that end which they
had in view; for, by demolishing the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and etting at liberty their
wretched inhabitanrs, they hoped to render it im-
polible ever to rebuild the one, or to reafclmble
the other.

BE T am'.:lf these irregular proceedings, a c-
cui;Iltance, wLicli does I;oniour to the condut and

3 hinnia

humanity of the leaders of the Congregation, de- B o o K
fcrves notice. They so far restrained the rage of II.
their followers, and were able so to temper their' -"
heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics 1559.
were exposed to any personal insult, and not a ingle
man suffered death *.

At the fame time, we discover, by the facility

with which there great revolutions were effe6ted,
how violently the current of national favour ran to-
wards the Reformation. No more than co men
marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll
and Prior of St. Andrew's t; with this inconfider-
able force they advanced. But wherever they came,
the people joined them in a bodoy; their army was
seldom less numerous than 5000 men; the gates of
every town were thrown open to receive them; and,
without striking a tingle blow, they took poftffiiion
of the capital of the kingdom.

Ti'is rapid and allonifhing fccefs seems to have June zg.

encouraged the Reformers to extend their views
and to rile in their demands. Not satisfied with
their first claimn of toleration for their religion, they
now, openly, aimed at eifablifiing the roteltant
dourine on the ruins of Popery. For this ralbn,
they deternined ro fix their refidrnce at Edinburgh;
and, by their appointment, Knox and fime other
preachers, taking poflifion of the pulpits, which
had been abandoned by the affrightened clergy, de.
claimed against the errors of Popery, with lilch

* LAey, z:3. t Kc:th, 9r.

fervent

B o o A fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many

II. proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which he could not
resist, observed with pleasure, that it now began to
lubfide. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the ex-
pences of a campaign, protracted so long beyond
the usual time offervice in that age, had exhausted
all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to supply. The multi-
tude, dazzled with their success, and concluding
the work to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons, remained with their preachers at
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in civil
wars with little difficulty, whatever was tranfa&ed
at Edinburgh, was oon known at Dunbar. And
the Queen, regulating her own conduct by the si-
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amused them
with the profpet of an immediate accommoda-
tion; while, at the fame time, fle, by fludied
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpose,
to such a length, that, in the end, the party dwind-
led to an inconliderable number, and, as if peace
had been already re-established, became carelel' of
military discipline. The Queen, who watched for
such an opportunity, advanced, unexpectedly, by
a sudden march in the night with all her forces,
anti appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city
with the t:nmof consternation. The Protestants,
weakened by the imprudent dispersion of their fol-

lowers,

lowers, durst not encounter the French troops in B o o K
the open field ; and were even unable o dcfend an II
ill fortified town, againt their aflaults. Unwilling,'""
however, to abandon the citizens to the Queen's 59
mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the enemies
army, to gain time for collecting their own affo-
ciates. But the Queen, in spite of all their relift-
ance, would have easily forced her way into the
town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce had
not procured her admillion, without the effusion of
blood.

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced theAthlird

Congregation to li1ten to any overtures of peace; trea,'
and as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
of a ttrong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pe&ed great advantages from a cessation of arms,
ihe also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
Together with a suspension of hostilities, from the
24th of July to the oth of January, it was ftipu-
lated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the
Protetants hould open the gates of Edinburgh
next morning to the Queen Regent; remain in du-
tiful fubjetion to her government; abitain from all
future violation of religious houles; and give no
interruption to the eftabliflhed clergy, either in the
discharge of their funtions, or in the enjoyment
of their benefices. On the other hand, the Queen
agreed to give no molectation to the preachers or
professors of the Proteflant religion; to allow no
other form of wvclfip in Edinburgh but the Re-
formed; and to permit tle free ind public exerile
of it all over the klngilom. The QuLen, by hec'c

6 lhberal

B o o K liberal concefllons in behalf of their religion, hoped

II. to sooth the Protetants, and expeced, from indulg-
1559, ing their favourite pallion, to render them more

59compliant with refpet to other articles, particularly

the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland.
The anxiety which the Quleen expressed for retain-
ing this body of men, rendered them, more and
more, the obje&s of national jealousy and aversion.
The immediate expulsion of them was therefore
demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but
the Queen, taking advantage of the distress of the
adverse party, eluded the request, and would con-
sent to nothing more, than that a French garrrifon
ihould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

TrIE desperate state of their affairs, imposed on

the Congregation the necessity of agreeing to this
article, which, however, was very far from giving
them fatisfa6tion. Whatever apprehensions the
Scots had conceived, from retaining the French
forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified
during the late commotions. A small body of those
troops, maintained in constant pay, and rendered
formidable by regular discipline, had checked the
progress of a martial people, though animated with
zeal both for religion and liberty. The finalleit
addition to tlher number, and a considerable one
was daily expected, might prove fatal to public
liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the dan-
ger of being reduced fromn an independent king-
don, to the mean condition of a province, annexed
to thea epire of isr . oweiful aliy.

IN

IN order to provide against this imminent cala- B o o K

mity, the Duke of Chatelherault, nd Earl of II.
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce,
dsfired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the
party, which adhered to the established church.
They had followed the Queen, during the late com-
motions, and having access to observe more nar-
rowly the dangerous tendency of her councils, their
abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing for
their country, urmounted all other considerations,
and determined them rather to endanger the reli-
gion which they profcffed, than to give their aid
towards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
should, with her usual iofincerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the
wilhes of the whole nation, by difrniffing her French
troops, they would, then, inftantlyjoin with their
countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public safety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered necessary *.

ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; lly ,.

just when he had adopted a fyltct with, regard to
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility have restored union anJ ranquiility to that
kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain began, vilibly, to decline in

* hn:x, ;4. t nMt.a. ;.r

favour,

B o K favdur, and the Conitable Montmorency, by the

IE afiffihnce of the Dutchfs of Valentinois, recovered

^-3 cthat ascendant over the spirit of his master, which
1559' his great experience, and his faithful, though often

unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the ifairrefions in Scot-
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
of moderation, men, whose minds were possessed
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from the
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in order
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivals
with any groundlefsaccufation, he prevailed to have
Melvil*, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inftrutions
to observe the motions both of the Regent, and of
her adversaries; and the King agreed to regulate
his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mel-
vil's report.

DID history indulge herielf in these speculations,

it would be amusing to enquire what a different
direction might have been given, by this refilution,
to the national spirit; and to what a different iue,
Mclvil's report, which would have set the condut
of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conduced the public disorders. Per-
haps by gentle treatment, and artful policy, the
progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon

* The Author of she M:moir!.

France.

France. Perhaps, by gaining poffelion of this B o o K
avenue, the French might have made their way into II.
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's 1"5.
title to the Crown, they might have re-established
the Roman Catholic religion, and deltroyed the li-
berties of that kingdom. But, into this boundles
field of fancy and conjeture, the historian must
make no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and
to explain their real causes and effects, is his pecu-
liar and only province.

THE tragical and untimely death of the French Acceflion

Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacific f. F,"nc
measures, with regard to Scotland. The Duke of crown of
Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-
ceflion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and
without experience, assumed the chief direction of
French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
the marriage of their niece the Queen of Scots
with the young King, they now wanted but little
of regal dignity, and nothing of the regal power;
This power did not long remain inactive in
their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the for-
mer reign, were again resumed; and they were
enabled, by possessing such ample authority, to pur-
sue them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret,
the progress of the ProteRant religion in Scotland;
and sensible what an unlbrmountable obstacle it
would prove to their designs, they bent all their
strength to check its growth, before it role to any
greater height. For this purpose, they carried on

VOL. 1. 0 their

B o o K their preparations with all possible expedition, and

1I. encouraged the Queen their fiter, to expe&, in a

f hort time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as
1559. the zeal cf their adversaries, however desperate,

would not venture to oppose.

NoR were the Lords of the Congregation either

ignorant of thole violent counsels, which prevailed
in the court of France since the death of Henry,
or carclefs of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of
their caule, as well as their personal safety, depend-
ing entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their
own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard against
division, and to cement together more clofcly, by
entering into a ftiiter bond of confederacy and
mutual defence. Two persons concurred in this
new affuciation, who brought a great accefflon both
of reputation and of power to the party. Thele
were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eldest on
the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having
relided ome years in France, where he command-
ed the Scottilh guards, had imbibed the Protef-
tint opinions concerning religion. Hurried along
by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered lentiments, with retfect to the points
in controverly, which did not uit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, a that jundure, on the cx-
t.ntion of the Protestant religion; i order to ac-
conmpliil which, the greatel excefles of violence
wiere committed. The church was suffered to wreak
its utrnot fulry upon all who were fufpceted of he-
rY.. Cul:rs; were erected in d;tfcrent parts of

France,

France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by B n o K
their fentcnces, several persons of diflinAion were I.
condemned to the flames, -

1559.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror,

the Princes of Lorrain resolved to feleEt, for a fa-
crifice, some person, whose fall might convince all
ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth, nor
eminence in station, could exempt from punifb-
ment, those who hould be guilty of this unpar-
donable transgression. The Earl of Arran was the
person destined to be the unhappy victim *. As he
was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir
to another; as he possessed the firit rank in his own
country, and enjoyed an honourable station in
France; his condemnation could not fail of making
the desired impression on the whole kingdom. But
the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some ex-
prefflions, which raised Arran's ufpicions of the
design, he escaped the intended blow by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt-
ed him to seek revenge upon these persecutors
of himself and of the religion which he pro-
sessed; and as he passed through England, on his
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes
and promises, inflamed thole p.iflons, and lnt him
back into Scotland, animated with the fime impla-
cable averlion to France, which pofffTcd d a great
part of his countrymen. He quickly communi- rarl,,r .
cated thefC sentiments to his father the Duke of r' J'i"n
Chatelherault, who was already extremely diIguitcd tans.

* Thuan. lib. xiv. p. 4'2. E i:. Frwnicf.

0 with

B o o x with the measures carrying on in Scotland; and as

II. it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in

every instance, by those about him, he now suffered
1559' himself to be drawn from the Queen Regent; and

having joined the Congregation, was confidered,
from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpe& to him, this diftin&tion was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St. An-
drew's, was the person who moved and auated
the whole body of the Protestants, among whom,
he poeffcd that unbounded confidence, which his
firenuous adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities so justly merited. He was the natural
son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
and as that amorous Monarch had left several
others a burden upon the Crown, they were all de-
ftined for the church, where they could be placed
in tations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had
been conferred upon James: But, during so busy a
period, he oon became disgusted with the indolence
and retirement of a monastic life , and his enterprif-
ing genius called him forth, to a a principal part
on a more public and conspicuous theatre. The
scene, in which he appeared, required talents of dif-
ferent kinds: Military virtue, and political discern-
ment, were equally necesary in order to render him
illustrious. These he pofelfed in an eminent degree.
To the mofl unquestionable personal bravery, he
added great fill in the art of war, and in every en-
terprize his arms were crowned with success. His
sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled him,

8 amidst

amidst the reeling and turbulence of factions, to hold B o K
a prosperous courle. While his boldness in d-fcnce II.
of the Reformation, together with the decency, and r
even severity of his manners, secured him the repu- 9
tation of being sincerely attached to religion, with-
out which, it was impofiblc, in that age, to gain
an ascendant over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that tle Quecn dread-

ed the enmity of a man, so capable to obltruct
her deligns. And as fle could not, with all her
address, make the least impression on his fidelity to
his associates, he endeavoured to lessen his influ-
ence, and to scatter among them the feeds of jea-
lousy and diltruft, by insinuating that the ambitioh
of the Prior alpired beyond the condition of a
subjec, and aimed at nothing leis than the Crown
itlclf.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little

credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
fumption ofurexpettd fLcccf-, andi his elevation
to the higheflt dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
ledged to have inlpircd, at any sulbleiluent priod,
it is certain that, at thisjundtuii, he could firm no
such vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who was
lineal heir to an ancient race of !onarclhs; who
had been guilty of no aion, by which the could
forfeit the cfteem and affcdtion of her fuibjcots; who
could employ, in defence of her rights, the forces
of a kingdom, much more powerful than her own;
and to substitute, in her platc, a peribn whom the
illegitimacy of his birth, by the pra6tice of all

0 3 civilized

B o o K civilized n3tions, rendered incapable of any inheri-

II. tance, either public or private; was a proje&, so

chi;merical. as the molf extravagant ambition would
59 Ic;arce entertain, and could never conceive to be

pracicable. The promise too, which the Prior
made to NMlvil, of residing constantly in France,
on condition the public grievances were redressed ;
the confidence repofld in him by the Duke of Cha-
teher.au!t and his son, the presumptive heirs to the
Clown; and the concurrence of almost the whole
Scottilh nobles, in promoting the measures, by
which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from thoe illegal and cri-
minal designs, with the imputation of which, the
Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

Trocps ar- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers com-
France and penfated, in some degree, for the loss which the
fotify Lt^ltfy Queen sustained by the defection of the Duke of

Chatilherault. Theie were, immediately, com-
mandedto fortify Leith, in which place, on account
of its commodious hlrbour, and its situation in the
neighibourhood of Ecinburgh, and in a plentiful
country, the Queen resolved to fix the head-quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular mea-
ftre, by the manner of executing it, was rendered
ttill n-c.re unpopular. In order to bing the town
entirely uildcr their command, the French turned
out a grc:it part of the r.n.icnt iiliabitants, and
tkiri pllir(Ion of the huulis, which they had ub-
;I,'d tlih'ln to abandon, pre' nted t the view of
thc SiCO:, nto o!jScTis co.ailly irritatiing ad olSen-

路' l \vi, ,..

five; on the one hand, a number of their country- B o o K
men expelled their habitations by violence, and 11.
wandering without any certain abode; on the other, . .
a colony of foreigners, ifetling with their wives
and children, in the heart of Scctland, growing
into fRrength by daily reinforcements, and openly
preparing a yoke, to which, without tome timely
exertion of national firit, the whole kingdom must,
-of neceflity, fibmiit.

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the The rotc.
Congregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep, ^l',,re

, 0 niontrat,

taken by the Qicen Regent: Nor did they hesitate, aa11ir
a moment, whether they ihould employ their whole
strength, in one generous effort, to re!cue their re-
ligion and liberty from impendingdeltruction. But,
in order to juitify thir own conduit, and to throw
the blame entirely on the ir atrlt:ries, they rlolved
to prelerve the appc-arances of decency and refpet
towards their ilL;criars, Ind to hav- no recurse to
arms, without the rnoil urgent ant apparent neccl-
lity. I'hey joinllce, with tils view, n an adrels s)t. q.
to tle I{%citnr, reprl'cinting, in the ItrongefL terms,
their diit.sfatiti.:n with tlhe meaiures fle was pur-
suing, ad beeching her to qutik tl:e fears and
.aloufies of the nation, by dceiiling fromi trt;tf ing
Leith. The Qiucern, conlcious of ler prcleint ad-
vant i'cous ficuati.n, andi clated with the iho,,es of
1';:ii ':.ccit;rs, w\; in no ,,ilpolitien bor illcninl o
dmiiliainds, utterly inconfiliict with her views, ard
ured w! vitii tat L ,l i in:o rtiiuity, wich is lt iictic
accptable to Princes.

0 4 T'i

B o o K THE suggestions of her French counsellors con.

II. tributed, without doubt, to alienate her Rill farther

from any scheme of accommodation. As the Queen

1550.
The Rent was ready on all occasions, to discover an extraor-
disregards dinary deference for the opinionsofhercountrymen,
their re-
mrnltran. her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of

the violent measures they were driving on, took
care to place near her such perfuns, as betrayed her,
by their insinuations, into many aions, which her
own unbiased judgment would have highly con-
demned. And as their success in the prefentjunc-
ture, when all things were haftning towards a cri-
sis, depended entirely on the Queen's firmness, the
Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the in-
fluence of their ordinary agents; but, in order to
add the greater weight to their councils, they called
in aid the Ministers of religion and, by the autho-
rity of their sacred character, they hoped effetually
to recommend to their sifter, that system of severity
which they had espoused*. With this view, but
under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
the skill of such able masters in controversy, they
appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-
land. At the head of these, and with the charac-
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of
Amiens, and afeerwards'Archbilhop and Cardinal
of Sens, a furious bigot t, servilely devoted to the
house of Guise, and a proper instrument for re-
commending or executing the molt outrageous
measures.

路 Lefy, i . Caflenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446, 473.
t Davila, Brantome.

AMIDST

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these B o o K

Doaors had little opportunity to display their ad- II.
dress in the use of their theological weapons. But /,
they gave no small offence to the nation by one of 59
their a&tions. They persuaded the Queen to seize
the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
remained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
the Protestants; and having, by a new and oflemn
consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane ministrations
of the Protestants to have defiled it, they, in direct
contradiction to one article in the late treaty, re-
eftabliihed tlere the rites ps the Romifli church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Queen received their remonitrances,
convinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not only vain to expect any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely neccfLiry to
take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as Tlhcy take

well as every conideration of good policy, prompt- rns in.
ed them to take this bold tep without dlay. It d'icnc.
was but a small part of the French auxiliaries which
had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fast, were still far from being
compleat. Under there circunnfalnces of difadvan-
tage, they conceived it poflible to furprize the
Quren's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
blow, to prevent all future bloodshicd and conten-
tion. Full of these expecations, they advanced
rapidly towards Edinburgh wih a numerous army.
But it was no aly matter to deceive an advc'ii y,1 obei 6.

lu

B o o K so vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent.

II. W5ith her usual sagacity, he both foresaw the dan-

ger, and took the only proper course to avoid it.
Irifead of keeping the field against enemies, fupe-
rior in number, and formidable on a day of battle,
by the ardour of their courage, he retired into
Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival
of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished as the
fortifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military stores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place forified with more art than those ancient
towers, erected ail over the kingdom, in defence
of private property against the incurlions of ban-
ditti.

NOR id the Queen, mean while, neglec to

Iaive r-couticto th ole arts, which she had often
C-rnpir'c.i, to wea;kn or divide her adversaries. By
private I;licitations and romiles, fthe ihook the
iiddliry, er abated tlhe ardor of Ibfoe. By open re-
}:-;Lach and accta 't:on, she blasted the reputation,
;dl/ dI .iii i rl cdl tI'.:e ;;tihoity of othe rs. Her emif-

rlics vr.L .-cvcry where at workl: , n, otwihlifanJ-

i;: ',i.e zeal tor rligic:n an::d lbcrty, which then
;nim.iil'.d th tne r;an, they crm to have laboured
not ;.ithout fuccLi. We lind Knox, about this
.,'imd, aboundiilrg in co0:. lilits of th ILIkewarm
1nl L;,ou d iii;t, wl;.c!i ai.d begun to idreadi a-
monn i.is p;:rt! . But if their zeal flackl-ncel a lit-
tle, ad ll crci a n',.o)nrary i.tcrni:i., i';lJn

* 'o7, 1ba.zcd

7 l. ;c:d

blazed up with frelh vigour, and rose to a greater B o o K
height than ever. I1.

THE Queen herfelfgave occasion to this, by the Renw9
reply which he made to a new remonltrance from tllfC rc-

montran-

the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their arri- ccs ;
val at Edinburgh, they once more reprelented to
her the dangers arising from the increai'e of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be deftruc-
tive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom ; and
in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order to
put a itop to such dangerous encroachments. To
a remontrance of this nature, and urged with so
much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less
vigorous and explicit. She pretended chat he was
not accountable to the contederate Lords tor any
part of her conduct; and upon no repreifer.tation
of theirs, would he either abandon measures, which
she deemed nceclTary; or d:fmils forces, which he
found u'fi; or dcemolilh a fortificarion, which
might prove of advantag . :t the llin tc, fle hut wih-
require: tem, on :pa:n of tcalon, to ciiband tce ut fu'cc'rs
fo;ces whichl th(-y had alTcmnllcd.

THTs ilar'htry and irnperious 1til founded h;ira;-

ly to c'. :!. i 1:lel:1;, in ctienr, si in titr national
cl;lr;;(tci. r, f' ihe tlihllt' i aiii;'c rance of itjui' ;
a'.c'.tloinced even inro their own Mt(n'rtli, t rthe
11slq rcli ect!'il treitilnent; anl iosslti. ,, ,n, .;' ,;in
ariltcIJatical iurmn ut' ovc'nmcnr, lIdc! a 1..; - . f

B o o K power as equalled, at all times, and often control.

II. led that of the sovereign. They were sensible, at
o55' once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and

alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's
intentions; and as there now remained but one flep
to take, theywanted neither public spirit nor refolu-
tion to take it.

Dcliherate BuT, that they might not seem to depart from
concerning the efablilhed forms of the constitution, for which,
the course
which they even amidst their most violent operations, men al-
"kuht to ways retain the greatest reverence, they aembled

the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of
oa. i. borroughs who adhered to their party. These form-

ed a convention, which exceeded in number, and
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parlia-
ment. The leaders of the Congregation laid before
them the declaration which the Queen had given in
answer to their remonltrance; represented the un-
avoidable ruin, which the measures, he therein
avowed and justified, would bring upon the king-
dom ; and requiring their direction with regard to
theobediencedue to an administration so unjust and
oppressive, they submitted to their decision, a quef-
tion, one of the molf delicate and interesting that
can possibly fall under the conideration of fubjecs.

THIS aflmrbly proceeded to decide, with nolefs

dispatch, than unaniniry. Strangers to those forms,
which protra& bufinl ; unacquainted withthe arts,
which make a figure in debate; and much more
fittcd for ation, than dilcurl: A warlike people
always haften to a conclufiun, and bring their de-

liberatiuns

liberations to the hortelf ifiue. It was the work B o o c
but of one day, to examine and to resolve this nice II.
problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjets to-
wards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however 59
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were not
deifitute of solemnity. As the determination of the
point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were
called to aflift with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and ex-
amples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjets
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, be-
comes an instrument for destroying those, whom
the Almighty ordained them to protec. The de-
cifion of persons, revered so highly for their sacred
charaaer, but more for their zeal and their piety,
had great weight with the whole aembly. Not
satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying content, every person precsnt was called
in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up
in order, all gave their uffrages, without one dif-
senting voice, for depriving the Queen of the of- Tbeyde.
fice of Regent, which she had exercised so much to re thoe
the detriment of the kingdom '. ti office

of Rcisent.

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less The right

to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In 掳codi
the a of deprivation, religious grievances are
slightly mentioned; and the dangerous incroach.
mcnts of the Qticen upon the civil confitution are

v* KX, 1pro84.

pro-

Bo o K duced, by the Lords of the Congregation, irl

Il. order to prove their conduct to have been not only
559 .just, but necessary. The introducing foreign troops

into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the
seizing and fortifying towns in different parts of the
country; the promoting firangers to offices of great
power and dignity; the debating the current coin *
thefubverting the ancient laws; the imposing of new
and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to sub-
due the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by
open and repeated as of violence, are enumerated
at great length, and placed in the frongeft light.
On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained
that the nobles, as counsellors by birth-right to their
monarchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Queen, and with many expreflions of
duty and submission towards them, they deprived
the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience should be given to her
commands --. Vo-

The flandard of money in Scotland was continua!y varying.

In the 6 h of James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold,
when coined, produced Io8 pounds of current money. But
under the Queen Regent's adminiltration, A. I). 1556, a pound
we i.ht of gold, altl:olph the quantity of alloy was confijcr-
a'!y cnrrei!ctd, produced 144 1. current money. In 1529, a
punid wright of silver, when coined, produced! el. ! .; but in
i; :, it produced 1; I. current money. Ruddin. PI'.ftt. al
A:..irI. Diplomat. Scotia;, p. So, S. trom which it appears,
tih.:: i. coinplitn:, which the malecontcnts often repeated, was
u.,t :i,:en ther d.lliJite of foundation.

-:- '., L...:lnu. afte:r condemning the dangerous councils of
t)ie '. : Lorrair, with reliard tu the alF.irs of Scotland, ac-

knowidgus,

*

VIOLENT as this a&ion may appear, there wanted B o o K

not principles in the constitution, nor precedents in I.
the hifory of Scotland, tojuftify and to authorize it. '
Under the arifiocratical form of government efta-
blifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sove-
reign was extremely limited. The more confider-
able nobles were themselves petty princes, possessing
extensive jurifdicions, almolt independent of the
crown, and followed by numerous vafflls, who, in
every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in
opposition to the King. Hence the many instances
of the impotence of regal authority, which are to
be found in the Scottish history. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of
controuling the King. Jealous of their privileges,
and eager to take the field in defence of them, every
errorinadminiftration was observed, everyencroach-
ment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited in-
dignation, and no prince ever ventured to transgress
the boundaries, which the law had prescribed to
prerogative,without meetingrefiftance, which shook,
or overturned his throne. Encouraged by the spirit
of the conflitution, and countenanced by the ex-
ample of their ancestors, the Lords of the Con-
gregation thought it incumbent on thrm, at this
junture, to enquire into the mal-acliniilltration of
the Queen Regent, and to prlcfrve t-ir country
from being enllaved or conquered, by depriving

knowledges, wi'h h's usual candour, that thr Scots ('r '.rc va-r
againll the Qgecn iRegenr, ra her from a d'!/rc : v i:iic:;; i g
their civil libcrtics, than from an)y nrc.': c i: rc

Li'. n. iviem.
446.

her

B o o her of the power to execute such a pernicious.

II. scheme .
1559' * The a of deprivation, and a letter fom the Lords of the

Congregation to the Queen Regent, are till extant, Knox, 184.
They discover not only, that mafcul ne and undaunted pirit,
n.atural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are remark-
able for a precision, and vigour of expreflion, which we are fur-
prized to me.t with in an age To unpolifhed. The fame obfer-
vation may be made with refpea to the other public papers of
that period. The ignorance or bad tafle of an age may render
the compositions of authors by profeflion obscure, or affeAed,
or absurd ; but the language of business is nearly the fame at
all times; and wherever men think clearly, and are thoroughly
intcreiltd, they express themselves w:th pcrfpicuity and force.

T IIE

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTO R Y

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IIL
T HE Lords of the Congregation oon found, B o oK

that their zeal had engaged them in an under- Ill.

taking, which it was beyond their utmost ability to '
accomplilh. The French garrison, defpiling their Th 5c,
numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender gtSi,,o
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom nor were difficultic,.
they ufficiently skilful in the art of war to reduce
the place by force, or possessed of the artillery, or
magazines, requisite for that purpose; and their fol-
lowers, though of undaunted courage, yet being ac-
customed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were
itrangers to the fatigues of a long campaign, and
soon became impatient of the severe and constant
duty which a liegc requires. The QCeecr's emifTa-

VOL. . P rie,

B o o K ries, who found it easy to mingle with their coun-

111. trymen, were at the utmof pains to heighten their

diiguf, which discovered itielf at firit in murmurs
and complaints, but on occasion of the want of mo-
ney for paying the army, broke out into open mu-
tiny. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure
from the unbridled insolence of the soldiers; while
some of inferior rank, interposing too rashly in or-
der to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.
Dil-cord, coniternation, and perplexity reigned in the
camp of the Reformers. The Duke, their General,
funk, with his usual timidity, under the terror of
approaching danger, and discovered manifest fymp-
toms of repentance for his rashness, in espousing
such a desperate cause.

Apply to IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation
Elizabeth
soZ arat- had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose proteEtion
acc. they could derive their only reasonable hope offuc-

cess. Some of their more sagacious leaders, having
foreseen that the party might probably be involved
in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a re-
source in any such exigency, by entering into a fe-
cret corrdlpondence with the court of England.
Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which
the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her
Crown, was early sensible of how much importance
it would be, not only to check the progress of the
French in Scotland, but to extend her own influence
in that kingdom -; and perceiving how effctually
the prefcnt inlurre&cions would contribute to retard

Burn. Il!i. Rcf. 3. Arpend. ;. Kei:l, Append. 21.
l'' cc ;Alpend. >u. I.

or

or defeat the schemes formed against England, l.eB o o K
listened with pleasure to these applications of the III.
malecontcnts, and gave them private assurances of--

1559.

powerful support to their cause. Randolph *, an
agent extremely proper for conducing any dark in-
trigue, was dispatched into Scotland, and residing
secretly among the Lords of the Congregation, ob-
served and quickened their motions. Money leem-
ed to be the only thing they wanted at that time
and it was owing to a seasonable remittance from
England -, that the Scottish nobles had been enabled
to take the field, and to advance towards Leith.
But as Elizabeth was diftrultful of the Scots, and
studious to preserve appearances with France, her
subsidies were bestowed at firt with extreme fruga-
lity. The fubfillence of an army, and the expen-
ces of a siege soon exhausted this penurious fpply,
to which the Lords of the Congregation could
make little addition from their own funds; and
the ruin and difperion of the party must have in-
ftantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormilon sie Iunds

was fenr, with the utmost expedition, to the gover- rh', fu
nors of the town and cattle of Berwick. As Ber- of zI":u;y,
wick was, at that time, the town ofgreateft impor-
tance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and
Sir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure,
were employed to command there, and were entrust-
ed with a dlifcretionary power of upplying the Scot-
tial malecontcnts, according tothe exigency of their

h*kilhi, ppendl. 19. f Knox, 214. Kcith, Appcnd. ;.

t' 2 sra

B o o K affairs. From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns,

III. but little to the advantage of his party. The Earl
'T of Bothwell, by the Queen's infsigation, lay in wait
1559-
which is for him on his return, dispersed his followers,
i.t-rctpt- wounded him, and carried off the money.
ed.

THIS unexpected disappointment proved fatal to

the party. In meer despair, fume of the more zea-
lous attempted to assault Leith but the French beat
them ba, k with disgrace, seized their cannon, and
pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on
the point of entering along with them. All the ter-
ror and confusion, which the profpe& of pillage or
of mafficre can excite in a place taken by torm,
filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants fled
from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces of
theCongregation were irrelblute and dismayed; and
the Qucen's partizans in the town openly insulted
both. At last, a few of the nobles ventured to face
the enemy, who, after plundering some houfcs in
the suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered
the city from this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days

after, wasno less unfortunate. TheFrench lentout a
detachment to intercept a convoy ofprovifions which
wasdefignedfor Edinburgh. TheLords oftheCon-
gregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all haste with a considerable body of their troops,
and falling upon the enemy between Reftalrig and
Leith, with more gallantry than gocd conduct, were
almost surrounded by a second party of French, who
..di;anced in order to support their own men. In

2 this

this situation, a retreat was the only thing which B o o
could save the Scots; but a retreat over marshy III.
ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in
number, could not long be conduted with order. 5
A small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, They retire
horse and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it from eith

in confu-

was entirely owing to the caution of the French, sion.
that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the

Congregation funk altogether. They did not think
themselves secure, even within the walls of Edin-
burgh, but instantly determined to retire to some
place at a greater distance from the enemy. In vain
did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few others, op-
pose this cowardly and ignominious flight. The
dread of the present danger prevailed over both the
sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-
night they set out from Edinburgh, in great con- Novemb .,
fusion, and marched without halting till they
arrived at Stirling.

DURING this las infurrefion, the great body of

the Scottilh nobility joined the Congregation. The
Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only persons
of rank who took arms for the Qut en, and afTlced
her in detending Leith *. Borhwell openly favour-
ed her cause, but resided at his own hule. he
Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy
which diftlnguilhes his character, amt led the leld-
ers of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to

K* ith, Append. 31.

P 3 aflft,

B o K aflfit, with many fair promises, but never joined

11. tiem with a single man *. The Earl ofMorton, a
1 i ,:c:rnber.cf the Congregation, fluutattcl in a state

or' irrcfblution, and did not act heartily for the com-
nmon causie. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edinburgh
Ciltlc, though a roteftant, maintained a neutrality,
which lie elleemed becoming the dignity of his of-
fice; and having been entrusted by Parliament with
the conmand of the principal fortres in the king-
dom, he relolved that neither fa&ion should get it
into lheir hands.

Mi;!rd A FEW days before the retreat of the Congrega-

r'svolts
rfion I!:e tion, the Queen suffered an irreparable lols by tle
oe.nrr. defetion of her principal Secretary, William Mait-

landi of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re-
ligion, together with his warm remonstrances against
the violent measures which the Queen was carrying
on, exposed him so much to her resentment, and
to that of her French Counsellors, that he, fupect-
ing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly from
Lci:h, and fled to the Lords of the Congregation -f;
a;: they, with open arms, received a convert, whose
aLiii:ics added both strength and reputation to their
cauL. Marirland had early applied to public bufi-
ne!s ;dmirable natural talents, improved by an ac-
quaintance v iti the liberal arts; and, at a time of
lite, when his countrymnen of the fame quality were
flilowine the picalures of the chace, or lerving as
a.'ve:ruires in the armies of France, he was admit-
tld into aii t!:! iccrets of the cabinet, and put upon

* J,.ihl, Ai;, cnil. 33. nox, 2z2. Kno.x, 192.

a level

a level with persons of the mot consummate expe- B o o x
rience in the management of affairs. Hepoffe!ird, Ill.
in an eminent drgree, that intrepid fpirir, which '"
delights in purfung bold designs, and was no less
malter of that political art and dexterity which is
necessary for carrying them on with success. But
there qualities were deeply tin&ured with the neigh-
bouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon exceft of
subtlety and refinement; his invention, over fertile,
suggested to him, on some occasions, chimerical yf-
tems of policy, little suitable to the , scius of te
age; and his enterprising spirit engaged limi n tn ro-
jeas valt and Iplendid, but beyond his :t.:of
power to execute. All the cotemporary writer, to
whatever fction they belong, mention him vw:th
an admiration, which nothing could have ex,'itct
but the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-
lities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregatin in-

crcaled, to ilch a degree, the terror and (.onfu lion
which had sized them at Edinburgh,, tr:a bcf)r
they reached Stirling, their army dwindi; to a:1
inconsiderable number. The spirit ofKnox, hw-
ever, fill remained undaunted and e:Ce;, and
having mounted the pulpir, lie a :dresSid, t<J is
delponding lhearers, an exhortation whichl wondeir-
fully animared and revived thcm. The heads of
this difcourlc are inlfrted in his h. ilory ., andl a!I'ro
a f(riking example of the boltidnlcs 1nd frcc'.u., of

K nox, 193.

P 4 rcpro)f

B oo K reproof afurnumed by the first Reformers, as well as a

IIl. specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most
- fitted to influence and rouse his audience.

1559.

The Lords A MEETING of the leaders being called, to con-
grfa', i Gder what course they 拢hould hold, now that their
apply againown rrfources were all exhausted, and their deflruc-
to Eliza.
beth. tion appeared to be unavoidable, without foreign

aid they turned their eyes once more to England,
and relolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth
towards finishing an enterprise, in which they had
so fa: ,ily experienced their own weakness, and the
strength us th ir adverlaries. Maitland, as the most
able negociator of the party, was employed in this
embassy. In his ablence, and during the inaftive
season of the year, it was agreed to difiifs their fol-
lowers, worn ou. by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the usual time of service.
But. in o dcr to preserve t;e counties mofi devoted
to tlc-ir intPrelt, the Prior of S.t. Andrew's, with
part of the leaders, retired nto Fife. The Duke
of Chaeitr.,ult, with the reft, fixed his residence
2: HI-amilton. 1 here was little need of Maitland's
adJrc'; or l ,quence t.) induce Elizabeth to take his
co: ntry under htr protetion.' She observed the
pre, alcnee of he French cunfels, and the --rogrefs
cft,. ir arms in Sco!land, with cgctat concern ; nd
a, he well foresaw the angerots tndency of their
fchrm s in th t kingdom, lhe had alr.eidy come to
a :r f lution with regard to the part ie herftlf would
ac!, it' ther power there should grow still more for-
midabdc.

I.Y

IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Coun B o o P

cil a full and diilind view of any important matter III
which might come before them, it seems to have 5
been the pratice ot Elizabeth's Ministers to prepare Mo,; 2
memorials, in which they clearly ltated the point bhh de-

termined

under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the her oawm
condut, which they held t be most reaobnable,
and proposed a method for carrying their plan into
execution. Two papers of this kinu, written by Sir
William Cecil with his own hand, still remain*;
they are intirled, " A short discussion of the weighty
' matter of Scotland," and do honour to the in-
duffry and penetration of that great Minister. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so
warmly the defence of the Congregation, are repre-
sented with perspicuity and force; and the confe-
quences of suffering the French to eftablifl them-
selves in Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy
and di'cernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the

laws both of God and of nature, that every society
hath a right to defend itself, not only f;om present
dangers, but from such as may probably ensue; to
which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every
Prince to defend himself by the larre means, which
his adverlarics employ to dittres him. Upon these
grounds, he elablifhes the right of England to in-
terpofe in the affairs of Scotljnd, and to prevent the
conquer of that kingdom, at which the French
openly aimed. The Fnrnch, he observes, arc the

* Burn. vol. iii. Append. z23. Keith, Append. 24.

ancient

B o o K ancient and implacable enemies of England. Iof-

IIl. tilities had fubfilted between the two nations for
1559. many centuries. No treaty of peace, into which

they enercd, had ever been cordial or sincere. No
good effect was therefore to be expected from the
peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted by
present neceSity, would be negligently observed,
and broken on the slightest pretences. In a very
hbort time, France would recover its former opu-
lence; and though now drained of men and money
by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly
be in a condition for aing, and the restless and
martial genius of the people would render aion
necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that
time had the entire direction of French affairs, were
animated wi:h the most virulent hatred against the
Englifl nation. They openly called in quetlion the
legitimacy of the Queen's birth, and by advancing
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of
Scotland, studied to depriveElizabeth of herCrown.
With this view, they had laboured to exclude the
Englih from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis,
and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
Qteen of England; and even since the conclusion
of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and ob-
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be ille-
gitimate. And though the wisdom and moderation
of the Constable Montmorency had, for ome time,
checked their career, yet these reltraints being now
removed by the death of Henry II. and the disgrace
of his Miniser, the utmost excefics of violence were

to

to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed B o o K
with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter, II.-
whence they can attack England with rrioft advan-'

0 1559.

tage. A war on the borders of that country ex-
poses France to no danger, but one unsuccessful ac-
tion there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
government of England. In political conduct, it
is childiih to wait till the designs of an enemy be
ripe forexecution. The Scottish nobles, after their
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
and far from expelling the invaders of their liber-
ties, they oehold the French power daily increaring,
and must at last cease from Lfruggling any longer in
a contest so unequal. The invading of England
will immediately follow the rcdution of the Scot-
tifh malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to
the mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a
way for her enemies irto the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the dangerofconqueft. Nothing thereforeremained
but to meet the enemy while yet at a distance from
England, and by supporting the Congregation with
a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre of
the war, tocrufh the dcfigns of the Princes of Lorraia
in their infancy, and, by such an early and unex-
peAed effort, to expel the French out of Bria-in,
before their power had time to talke ruot, and grow
up to any formidable height. But as the matter
was of as much importance, as any which could
fall under the conideration of an Englifl Monarch,
wildum and mature counll were neceflry in thefirll
place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in-con-

du'l;

B o K du&t; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a

III. single moment, might become unavoidable .
1559' THESE arguments produced their full effit up-

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme de-
g-ee, of every pretender to her Crown, and no less
anxious t prekerve the tranquillity and happiness of
her ful'jeds. From thele motives he had a&ed, in
granting the Congregation an early supply of mo-
n .y; and from the lame principles he determined,
in their p:rJent exi:crcy, to afford them more es-
fetual aid. One of \!aitland's attendants was in-
ftantl! dispatched into Scotland with the itrongeft
afiutrance, of her protection, a d the Lords of the
Congregation were desired tu fend commissioners
into England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle
the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of
Norfolk t.

The Queen MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom
Dowager
nan while no motion of the Congregation could long be con.
fends her cealed, dreaded the success of this negociation with
Fr nch
troops a- the court of England, and foresaw how little he

tnhn. would be able to refit the united effort of the two

kingdoms. For this reason he determined, if pof-
fible, to get the start of Elizabeth; and by ventur-
ing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the winter
season, to attack the malecontents in their prelent

The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to ob.

tain Lli.4hbie h' al!:flante, are urged with great force, in a paper
of .: itiLnJ . See Apicrdix, N . 11.

t Kti, .iered

Ai,.erFfe

dispersed and helpless situation, he hoped to putB o o K
an end to the war, before the arrival of their En- II1.
glilh allies. 5-

z559,

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,

who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded to
march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth,
they proceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying
and plundering, with excessive outrage, the houses
and lands of those whom they esteemed their ene-
mies. Fife was the molt populous and powerful
country in the kingdom, and most devoted to the
Congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence
their molt conliderable supplies, both of men and
provisions; and therefore, besides punishing the dif-
affe&ion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the coun-
try, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. An-
drew's, and to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle
the mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
fellion of a port situated on the main ocean.

BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's,

Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of
the molt ative leaders of the Congregation, per-
formed, by their bravery and good conduct, a ser-
vice of the ut1most importance to tle!ir party. I lav-
ing aernbled fix hundred horti, they inflcted the
French with continual incurlions, beat up their
quarters, intercel,ted their convoys of provifiu;;;,

tcut(!.'l' l ir ,l ,,

" 垄:r ~[i.a

ir'' ; :; .....
: i.: , !, Iri '(i : d t's, ,,I

" t: .1

B o o K with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for

III- more than three weeks from advancing*.
15Go. AT last the prior, with his feeble party, was

constrained to retire, and the French fit out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coast to-
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
January3. few miles, when from an eminence they descried a

powerful fleet steering its course up the Frith of
Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded that
thee ships belonged to him, and gave way to the
molt immoderate transports of joy, on the profpe&
of this long expected succour. Their great guns
were already fired to welcome their friends, and to
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival among
their enemies, when a small boat from the opposite
coast landed, and blasted their premature and short-
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the
fleet of England which was in fight, intended for
tle aid of the Congregation, and was loon to be
followed by a formidable land army t.

ThtEnglim THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was
floeti rrive cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude in
to their
ait.iiicc. executing her rebolutions, joined to the deliberation

with which she formed them, her adminitration
became remarkable, no les for its vigour, than for
its wisdom. No sooner did fe determine to afford
her protection to the Lords of the Congregation,

" Knx, 1aC. 1 Ibid. c23.

than

than they experienced the aivity, as well as the B o o K
extent of her power. The season of the year would Ill.
not permit her land army to take the field; but lelt 56.
the French should, in the mean time, receive new
reinforcements, flhe instantly ordered a rong fqua-
dron to cruise in the Frith of Forth. She fems,
by her instructions to Winter her Admiral, to have
been desirous of precfrving the appearances of friend-
ship towards the French *. But these were only ap-
pearances; if any French fleet should attempt to
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every ac
of hofility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occasioned at firt ib much joy
among the French, but which bon intpircd them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the fclfets of
their vengeance. Apprehenfivc of being cut off
from their companions on the opofie forc, they
retreated towards Stirling with t!e utmost precipi-
tation, and, in a dreadful fealbn, and tlirough roads
alnmof impassable, arrived at Leith, harriltcd and
cxhaufted with fatigue t.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of

Leith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clufron of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fidcrably facilitated the operations of their own for-
ces by land.

SO.;N after the arrival of the Engli:1i squadron, They con.
the Comnmilloners of the Congri(cation repaired to t1f1uiea

treaty with
England.
* I;i:th, Appeni;x .5. t ; Kl)x, 203. b. aFb ;.

BicBrik,

B o o K Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of Norfolk,

III. a treaty, the bond of that union with Elizabeth,

-- ' which was of so great advantage to the cause. To

give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of
the French arms in Scotland, was the professed de-
sign of the contracting parties. In order to this,
the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union
of their country with France; and to defend them-
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of con-
quest; and for their assistance, Elizabeth promised
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no
place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the
English; whatever should be taken from the enemy
was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at their
choice; if any invasion hould be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themselves to
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protestations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not incon-
fiftent with their religion, and the liberties of their
country *.

The Eng- THE Englilh army, consisting of fix thousand
,y, flge foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
to Lith. of Lord Grey of Wilton, entered Scotland early in

the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-
fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their

* Knox, 217.

new

new allies; and having joined them with great mul- B o o K
titudes of their followers, they advanced together III.
towards Leith. The French were little able to keep 6
the field against an enemy so much superior in num-
ber. A strong body of troops, destined for their
relief, had been scattered by a violent Ltorm, and
had either perished on the coast of France, or with
difficulty had recovered the ports of that kingdom *.
But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
Princes of Lorrain Should make good the magnifi-
cent promises of affitance, with which they daily
encouraged them; or till fcarciy of provisions should
constrain the English to retire into their own coun-
try. In order to halten this latter event, they (tid
not neglet the usual, though barbarous precaution
for diftreng an invading enemy, by burning and
laying wa!te all the adjacent country t. The zeal,
however, ot the nation fruitrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards remo;in, their oppref-
fors, the people produced their hidden itorcs to sup-
port their friends; the neighbouring cout;ndCs p-
plied every thing necelfary, and far from wanting
subsistence, the i.nglifl found, in teir camp, 1ai
forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had t r
lome timie been known in tat part of dtie king-
dom t.

ON the approach of the EnAlinl army, the Qucen

Regent retired into the calt'e of L'Ediiiburgh. i-Icr
hcalth w.:s now in a declining tatc, and her mind
broken and dcpreffcd by the iifbortuins of her ad-

* Mcr. de l. o

. K :c.

t Kn:x. ili.-
VOL. I. Q m n-

B o o K miniltration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of

II-. a siege, he committed herself to the protetion of
560o Lord Erskine. This nobleman still preserved his

neutrality, and by his integrity, and love of his
country, merited equally the esteem of both parties.
lie received the Queen herself with the utmost ho-
nour and refpedt, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the
castle *.
Ap'il 6. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the

English inveted Leith. The garrison, hut up
within the town, was almost half as numerous as the
army which fat down before it, and by an obstinate
defence protracted the siege to a great length. The
circumrnances of this siege, related by cotemporary
historians, men without knowledge or experience in
the art of war, are often obscure and imperfect, and
at this distance of time are not considerable enough
to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep poflTf-

sion of the Hawk Hill, a riling ground not far dif-
April r. tant from the town, but were beat from it with

great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottish cavalry. Within a few (lays, the French
had their full revenge; having sallied out with a
firong body, they entered the English trenches,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at cast double the number they had lolt ill
the former lkirniilh. Nor were the Englifl more

* Folbcs Co1:垄9 vo!. i. j5c;.
C};ilh, r, '.

iurunIate

fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the B o o e
place by assault; they were met with equal courage, III-
and repulsed with considerable loss. From the de- I'

56o0.

tail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, May 7.
it is easy to obiirve the different charaters of the
French and English troops. The former, trained
to war, under the ative reigns of Francis I. and
Henry II. defended themselves not only with the
bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accustomed to peace, still pre-
served the intrepid and depecrate valour peculiar to
the nation, but discovered few marls of military
genius, or of experience in the praEcice of war.
Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege
muff be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. The
success of the besieged in their ally was owing en.
tirely to the security and negligence of the English:
many of their officers were absent; their soldiers had
left their stations; and the trenches were alinoft
without a guard. The ladders, which had been
provided for the afault, wanted a great deal of the
necessary trength; and the troops employed in that
ifrvice were ill supported. The trenches were open-
ed, at firif, in an improper place; and as it wis
found expedient to change the ground, both time
and labour were loft. The wc;knefs of their own
Generals, no less than the ltreng;l of the French
garrilbn, rendered the progress of the Englilh won-
derfully low. The length, however, ofthe liege, and
the loss of p.rt of their magazines by an acc.iental
fire, reduced le F'rench tocxtrcmen dla lr.s , \v'lich tile

( 2 pru1 ct

B o K profpet of relief made them bear with admirable

III. fortitude.
156o. WH ILE the hopes and courage of the French pro-

tracted the siege so far beyond expeAation, the lead-
ers of the Congregation were not idle. By new as-
fociations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfectly to unite their party. By publickly ratify-
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endea-
voured to render the alliance with England firm and
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of there pa-
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others,
who had not hitherto concurred with the Con-
gregation in any of their measures*. Several of
these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, still
adhered to the Popish church; but on this occasion,
neither their religious sentiments, nor their former
c.utious maxims, were regarded; the torrent of na-
tional resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on t.

* Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 221.

t The dread of the French power did, on many occasions,

surmount the zeal, which the Catholic nobles had for their re-
ligion. Beides the prtfumptive evidence for this, atrifng from
the remnorial mentioned by Burnet, Hilt. of the Reformation,
vol. iii. aS . and publilhed by him, App. p. 278; the inltruc&
lions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all
doubt, that many zealous Papills thought the alliance with Eng-
land to be neceffry for prefcrving the liberty and independence
of the kingdom. Keith, i 5. Huntly hiiftlf began a corref-
poUideuce widh liz;ibtth' Milni!icrs, before te warch of the
I:ng'ih army into Sco:and. ll'ynes';3 .te i'.il1crs, ,61, 63.
'Sec Appcnd. No. Ill.

THiE

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than B o o K

the cause of involving Scotland in those calamities, 11.
under which it groaned at that time, died during .r
the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pofflefed Dar.ti ,nd
qualities more capable of rendering her adminiftra- hc',cr ons
tion illustrious, or her people happy. Of much Dowager.
discernment, and no less address; of great intrepi- Junc to.
dity, and equal prudence; gentle and humane, with-
out weakness; zealous for her religion, without bi.
gotry; a lover of justice, without rigour. One cir-
cumfrance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all theie great
qualities, and rendered hcrgovernment unfortur.atc,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interct' of
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with nmoft paflion-
ate fondncfs; she departed, in order to gratify t!:em,
from every maxim, which her own wiftlom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in a
greatmeafure, that reputation and popularity, which
had smoothed her way to the highell llation in the
kingdom; and many examples of fallchood, and
lome of severity, in the latter part of her adtinlillra-
tion, totally alienated from her the affecions of a
people, who had once placed in her an unbounded
confidence. But, even by her enemies, thefc un-
juihfible aions were imputed to the facilit', nor
to the malignity of her nature; and while they taxed
her brothers, and French counsellors, with rashness
and cruelty; they ttill allowed her the praile of pru-
dence and of lenity *. A fw days bcfu.e ihr death,

* Blchan. 3;: .

(- 3 ,h

B o o K he desired an interview with the Prior of St. An-

III. drew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the
I贸-<'C Congregation. To them he lamented the fatal issue
i56o.

of those violent councils, which he had been oblig-
ed to follow; and, with the candour natural to a
generous mind, confefled the errors of her own ad-
ministration, and begged forgiveness of those, to
whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time,
she warned them, amidst their struggles for liberty,
and the hock of arms, not to lose fight of the
loyalty and fubjeEion, which was due to their fove-
reign . The remainder of her time, heemployed
in religious meditations and exercises. She even in-
vited the attendance of Willox, one of the most
eminent among the Reformed preachers, listened to
his inltru&ions with reverence and attention t, and
prepared for the approach of death with a decent for.
titude,

Motives of NOTHING could now save the French troops, shut
the French
toconcud- Up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a
* ia'e. peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from the

continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their
party in Scotland, with continual expetations of tl;e
latter, and had thertby kept alive their hopes and
the ir courage. But at last, th situation of France,
rathtr than the terror of the Englifl arms, or the
remonstrances of the Scattifh malecontents, con-
strained them, thotugh with reluctance, to turn their
thoughtstowards pcific councils. The Protestants
in France were, at that time, a party formidable by

* tcny, d' R-bus Gci, Scot. 2zz. f Knox, 22S.

their

their number, and more by the valour and enter-B o o K
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had 111
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered, 7
by every ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin those who profeled
it. At the profpeclt of this danger to themselves,
and to their cause, the Proteltants were alarmed,
but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
ed with resentment, they not only prepared for their
own defence, but relolved, by some bold aion, to
anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were eteemed the authors of all
the King's violent measures, they marked them out,
to be the first victims of their indignation. Hence,
and not from any dilioyalty to the King, proceeded
the famous conspiracy ofAmboife; and though the
vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor- Mar.h S5.
rain discovered and di'appointed that design, it was
easy to observe new forms gathering in every pro-
vince of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with
all the fury and outrage of civil war. In this fitua-
tion, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was cal-
led off from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to
defend the honour and dignity of the French crown,
and instead of fending new reinforcements intoScot-
land, it became neclirary to withdraw the veteran
troops already employed in that Iingdom *.

IN order to conduCt an affair of so much import- T n.

unce and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made ,",', ir
choiLC of Mcnluc Bilhp of Valence, and of tl.e -I,1.

* Lefn! , :...

Q(4 Sieur

B o o K Sieur de Randan. As both thee, epecially the for-

III. mer, were reckoned inferior to no perons of that
560. age, in address and political refinement; Elizabeth

opposed to them Ambafladors of equal abilities
Cecil her Prime Minister, a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and
\Votton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art
cf negociating under three fucceflive Monarchs.
The interests of the French and English courts were
loon adjusted by men of so great dexteriry in bufi-
nef.; and as France easily consented to withdraw
those forces, which had been the chief occasion of
the war; the other points in dispute, between that
kingdom and England, were not matters of tedi-
ous, or of diicult difcuflion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress, em-
ployed longer time, and required to be treated with
a more delicate hand. Afterfo manyopen attempts,
carried on by command of the King and QLeen,
in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and
to fprCfs the religion which they had embraced,
the Scottifli nobles coli not think themselves f-.
cure, without ixing onic new barrier against the
future ecro.>chmilents of regal power. But the le-
g il steps towards; ecompl)f'iing thli.' were rot lb ob-
vio;s. Til FIrcnhii ambafifdors confidcrced the cn-
tering into ai:y treaty '.vth il'bjds, and with rebels,
ac a condi'eceniolt uni ort',y tlhe di nity of a Sove-
rt'ign; and their f.rup!:. cn t!is head might have
pu; an tndl to the rre:;r', if thle inatii nce of both
parti.s I';r peace ha1 '1jot l i itc,!' an e:p)cdicnr,

whlich

which seemed to provide for the security of the sub. B o o IC
je&, without derogating from the honour of the Il.
Prince. The Scottilh nobles agreed, on thisocca- -60.

z56o.

sion, to pai from the point of right and privilege, Anles of
and to accept the redress of their grievances, as a the trety.
matter of favour. Whatever additional security
their anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for
public liberty, prompted them to demand, was
granted in the name of Francis and Mary, as as
of their royal favour and indulgence. And left
conceflions of this kind hould seem precarious, and
liable to be retracted by the fame power, which
had made them, the French ambaflador agreed to
insert them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and there-
by to bind the King and Queen inviolably to ob.
serve them *.

IN relating this tranfadion, cotemporary hiftori-

ans have confounded the concefi:ons of Francis and
Mary to their Scottish fubjests, with the treaty be-
tween France and England; the latter, betides the
ratification of former treaties between the two king-
doms, and stipulations with re'arc! r th, time and
manner of removing both armies out .t Scotland,
contained an article, t., uw;iich, as tl- source of
many important event, w: ihall oLfrn nave occa-
sion to refer. The ri s

lit of Elizal,, to her crown

is thereby aLknow!eudiJ ;. 'l , irongclt terms;
and Francis and Mary folrlni .- *, neither to
afumre the title, nor tc i ar he arms ,'j King
and Queen or England, in ns ,,iic LO come,

K ei, t 13, &34, c.

Ho-

B o o K HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

II. herself, the conditions he obtained for her allies te
1560' Scots were no less advantageous to them. Mon-
i 56o.
jply 6. l:c and Randan conented, in the name of Francis

and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland hould
instantly be sent back into their own country, and
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into the
kingdom without the knowledge and content of
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar fliould immediately be razed, and no new
fort ' erected without the permiflion of Parlia-
ment; that a Parliament should be held on the
firt day of August, and that afembly be deemed
as valid, in all refpefts, as if it had been called by
the express commandmenrof the King and Queen;
that, conformable to the ancient laws and customs
of the country, the King and Queen flould not de-
clare war, or conclude peace, without the concur-
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queen's ab-
fence, the administration of government flould be
veiled in a council of twelve persons, to be cholen
our of twenty-four named by Parliament, icvcn of
which council to be eleaed by the Queen, and five
by the Parliament; that hereafter, the King and
Quten flould not dvance foreigners to places of
truti or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the of-
sices of'lrealurer or Comptroller of the Revenues
upon any eclcetiafic; that an act ofoblivion, abo.
lilhing the guilt and mc:,ory of all offences, corn-
n'itted since the 6th of March, 1558, fIhuld be
palTcd in the enftiing Parliament, and be ratiiecd by
the King and Queen ; that the King ani Qeen
hlloull not, under colour of puniihing any violation

of
/

of their authority during that period, seek to de- B o o K
prive any of their subjes of the offices, benefices, II I
or eftares which they now held; that the redress '6-'
due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had
futained during the late infurredions, hould be
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With
regard to religious controversies, the Ambassadors
declared that they would not presume to decide, but
permitted the Parliament, at their first meeting, to
examine the points in difference, and to represent
their sense of them to the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of Theltabr

the Congregation, by their courage and perseverance,s it
conduc an enterprize, which, at first, promised a
very different issue. From beginnings extremely
feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by
degrees to great power; and being favoured by
many fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
their own Queen, aided by the forces of a more
considerable kingdom. Thefovere'.n authority was,
bythis treaty, transferred wholly into the handsof the
Congregation ; that limited prerogati;'c. which the
Crown had hitherto possessed, was almnott entirely
annihilated; and the ariftocratical power, wlihch al-
ways predominated in the Scottish governmen:, be.
came supreme and incontroulable. By this tre.::y,
too, the influence of France, which had long beca
of much weight in the affairs of Scotland, W2S
greatly diminished, and not only were the prrfenc
incroacliments of that ambitious ally restrained, but,

* Keith, 1j7, &c.

> ~by

B o o R byconfederating with England, protecion was pro.

III. vided against any future attempt from the lame
1560. quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in

religion being left to the consideration of Parlia-
ment, the Proteltants might reckon upon obtaining
whatever decision was mot favourable to the opi-
nions which they prfffcd.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and Englilh armies quitted Scot-
land.
ArPia- THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were

Wt h. turned towards the approaching Parliament. A

meeting, summoned in a manner so extraordinary,
at such a critical junEture, and to delib: rate upon
mnatters of so much consequence, was explj-ctd with
the utmofL anxiety.

A SCOTTIS-i Parliarrent, suit.able to t!:e arifocra-

ticul niusr' of. tie government, w..s properly an
al.'mbly cr tihe nobles. It was compoii d of Hi-
fnops, Albctst, Baruns, and a few co;lminfloners
of bum rnol hs, wio nmet all t :.rhtr in one hufe.
The Leffr Barons, though pofvl'-;.'d of a right to
!e preflent, either in person, or by tl;cir rci.'pltnta-
tives, fcldoin exerciscd it. Thlr expenie (t atc nd-
ing, according to the flion of t1ie imres, with a
nunmerous train of vafihls and dependtliis ; the in-
att-ntion of tl;e e, to :;ny lc^.l or regular l)yllem
of goveinment; buc above :'l!, the exorbitant au.
tliority o the greaTcr nl'l:'., \wlo ha;1( dir.iwv the
whul; pj.ti iiih, tih '

c'G;wI hli.,;0,
made this pri-

vil.(e

vilege of so little value, as to be almolt neglected. B o o X
It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times II.
of tranquillity, few commiflioners of burroughs, 560
and almost none of the Leflcr Barons appeared in
Parliament. The ordinary administration of go-
vernment was abandoned without scruple orjealoufy,
to the King and to the Greater Barons. But in ex-
traordinary conjunctures, when the struggle for li-
berty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to
the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and
Lesser Barons were roured from their inactivity,
and flood forth to vindicate the rights of their coun-
try. The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-
amples in proof of this observation*. The pub-
lic indignation against the rash designs of that weak
and ill advised Prince, brought into Parliament,
besides the greater nobles and prelates, a confider-
able number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occaioned the unusual conflu-

ence of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
met on the first of August. The universal passion
for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized the
nation, suffered few perfbis to remain unconcerned
fpe&tators of an afibmbly, whole acts were likely to
prove decisive with respect to both. From all cor-
ners of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager and
determined to aid, with their voices in the lenate,
the fame cautie, which they had defended with their
swords in the field. Betides a full convention of
Peers, Tenpor.l and Spirtual, there appeared the
prereentatikes of alinolt a'l ieIi burroughs, and

Kicbi, r,.;,

above

B o O K above an hundred Barons, who, though of the les-

III. ser order, were gentlemen of the first rank and
~~ fortune in the nation .
1560.

THE Parliament was ready to enter on business

with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started
concerning the awfulness of the meeting. No
Commiflioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their consent and
approbation was yet received. These were deemed,
by many, essential to the very being of a Parliament.
But, in opposition to this entiment, the express
words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by
which this aflembly was declared to be as valid, in
all refpees, as if it had been called and ap-
pointed by the express command of the King and
Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation
greatly out-numbered their adversaries, the latter
opinion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and those
of most approved zeal, were chosen to be Lords of
the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient
use, and of great importance in the Scottish Parlia-
ment. The deliberations of the Lords of the Ar-
ticles were carried on with the most unanimous and
active zeal. The act of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty four persons, out of whom the council,
entrusted with supreme authority, was to be eleted,
and every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
or which seemed necessary to render it effetual,

Is pro. passed without dispute or delay. The article of re-
c,.tnrd ligion employed longer time, and was attended with
to religion, greater difficulty. It was brought into Parliament,

. i4dli. '4贸by

by

by a petition from those who had adopted the prin- B o o K
ciples of the Reformation. Many doctrines of the III
Popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a 156o.
dilgrace to religion; its discipline had become cor-
rupt and oppressive; and its revenues were both ex-
orbitant and ill applied. Against all these, the Pro-
teftants remonstrated with the utmofc severity of
stile, which indignation at their absurdity, or expe-
rience of their pernicious tendency, could inspire;
and encouraged, by the number and zeal of their
friends, to improve such a favourable jun&ure, they
aimed the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and
besought the Parliament to interpose their authority
for reeifying these multiplied abufLs %.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-

cient superstition, were present in this Parliamenr.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teftants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They estee:med it impossible to refil or di-
vert that torrent of religious zeal, which was frill
in its full Ltrcngth; they dreaded that their oppo-
fition woull irrit:te their adiveral;:i,, and excite
them to new als of violence ; tlir-y ho-ed that t::
King and Quilen would oibo he at Lilire to plt a
stop to the career of their inlblcnt flbl)j.t:, and ti:,!r,
after the rage andl hlavock of the i.r.:cnt tL *.tn, tli
former tranqt':llt and order woikl b' retto:cd lo
the church anl kiig:!om. T'I!cy wvc; v. iii ;, ler-
hip,:, to .:icrilicc t;!c uj Trin., ar,(i ( .cv-.: ei' u.vi.r

s nrox, :j;'.

oi

B o o K of the church, in order to ensure the safety of thci'

III. own persons, and to preserve the pofeflion of rhoib
1560 revenues, which were Rill in their hands. From

whatever motives they acted, their silence, which
was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause,
afforded matter of great triumph to the Protcflants,
and encouraged them to proceed with more bold-
ness and alacrity .

THE Parliament did not think it enough to con-

demn those dotrines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the fan&ion
of their approbation to a Confeifon of Faith pre-
sented to them by the Reformed teachers t, and
composed, as might be expe&ed from fich a per-
formance at that junture, on purpose to expose the
absurd tenets and pra&ices of the Romilh church.
By another a&, the jurifdi&ion of the ecclesiastical
courts was abolished, and the causes, which for-
merly came under their cognizance, were tranf-
ferred to the decision of civil judges :. By a third
statute, the exercise of religious worship, according
to the rites of the Romish church, was prohibited.
The manner in which the Parliament enforced the
observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
assembly; the first tranfgreflion fubjecled the offen.
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpo.
ral punihmenr, at the diicretion of the judge; ba-
nifhment was the penalty of a ifcond violation of
the law; and a third at of difl!bedience was de-
clared to be capital搂. Such fliangers were n:en,

路 Knox, 5j3. I.
t I itd riih, ISz. i Knox, z-4.

at

at that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the B o o K
laws of humanity; and with such indecent haste III
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri- 6

z560.

gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate
those examples of severity, of which they themselves
had fojuftly complained.

THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, w;il, re-

in a few days, the ancient system of religion, which 'elnto ho1 f
had been established so many ages. In rformiii'g th 'l C'.iC.
the dofrine and discipline of the church, the no-
bles kept pace with the ardor and expetations even
of Knox himself. But their proceedings, with re-
spect to these, were not more rapid and impetuous,
than they were flow and dilatory when they entered
on the consideration of eccleliaftical revenue:;.
Among the lay members, some were already en-
riched with the spoils of the church, and others
devoured in expectation the wealthy benefices iwhich
still remain untouched. The alteration in rel'gion
had afforded many of the dignified ccclc;.;iics
themselves, an opportunity of gratifying their ava-
rice or ambition. The demolition us the inoinllte-
ries, having set the Monks at lii.criy f;omn tlitir
confinemlent, they instantly dlifplcr'! all over' the
kingdom, and commonly betook thnim rl:.'cs to li;)i;c
licular employment. 'lI'.e Abbo,t, if he l hIbcen
so fortunate as to embrace the principles ol thue Rc-
formation from conviction, or so cunning as to -
I)oufi then out of plicy, liizcd tl:e whoe reve-
nues of the fiaternity, and, except liat lie ;;l!ov,'';.
for the fubfifbltcce of a few tlCraniuai;cd Mol;'.*,

* K1:h, .;R,6. App n'. r., li.
VoL. 1. R aIT lkd

Bo o K applied them entirely to his own use. The propo-

III. fal made by the Reformed teachers, for applying

i0 othele revenues towards the maintenanceofMinifters,
I 6o.

the education of youth, and the support of the
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of
men. They oppofld it with the utmost warmth,
and by their numbers and authority, easily prevailed
on the Parliament to give no ear to such a disagree-
able demand *. Zealous as the first Reformers
were, and animated with a pirit superior to the
low considerations of interest, they beheld there
early liymptoms of felfilhnefs and avarice among
their adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox
exprefiing the utmost sensibility of that contempt,
with which they were treated by many, from whom
he expected a more generous concern for the success
of religion, and the honour of its Ministers t.

The validi-A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to
ty of this
Parliament the as of this Parliament, concerning religion.
quld on. This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this dif-

tance of time of no importance, is founded on the
words'of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the
Parliament was permitted to take into consideration
the state of religion, and to signify their sentiments
of it to the King and Queen. But, instead of pre-
fenLing their dcfires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble form of a supplication or address, the Parlia-
ment converted them into so many as; which,
although they never received the royal assent, ob-
tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and au-

Sec Append. No. IV. ' Knox, 239, 256.

thority
9.

thority of laws. In compliance with their injunc- B o oK
tions, the eitablifhed system of religion was every 1II.
where overthrown, and that recommended by the '
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality 56
and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any
defe& in the form of there as of Parliament, and
rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the
most regular or confitutional assembly. By those
proceedings, it mulf, however, be confessed that
the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the
last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
exceeded the powers which belong to fubjets. But
when once men have been accustomed to break
through the common boundaries of fubjeftion; and
their minds are inflamed with the pafilons which
civil war infipire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
to measure their condut by those rules, which can
be applied, only where government is in a state of
order and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to
employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of its
liberties, avails itself of every thing which can pro-
mote this great end; and the necessity of the cafe,
and the importance of the obje&, justify any de-
parture from the common and eftabliIhed forms of
the constitution.

IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Ambafr.

well as by the ordinary forms of business, it bcame b" the'
necessary to lay the proceedings of Parliament be- liament to
fore the King and Qeen. For this purpose, Sir
James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
appointed to repair to the court of Frranc. A ftcr

R z holdin g

B o o K holding a course so irregular, the nobles had no rea.

III. son to flatter themselves that Francis and Mary would

ever approve their conduct, or confirm it by their
royal afent. The reception oftheirAmbaffidor was
no other than they might have expected. He was
treated by the King and Queen with the utmost cold-
ness, and dismissed without obtaining the ratifica-
tion of the Parliament's proceedings. From the
Princes of Lorrain and their partizans, he endtred
all the scorn and insult, which it was natural for
them to pour upon the party he reprelented *.
and to Eli- THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and

Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of the
Parliament to Elizabeth their Protectres, met with
a very different reception; they were not more fuc-
cefsful in one part of the negociation intrusted to
their care. The Scots, sensible of the security which
they derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this
view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their
party to tetlify to Elizabeth their gratitude for
that seasonable and effecual aid which he had as-
forded them, and at the fame time, to beseech her
to render the friendlfhip between the nations perpe-
tual, by condcfcending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a fubjeLt, was nearly allied to the
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth
listened with the utmost fatisfation, and encouraged

* Knox. 255. Buch. 3z7.

7 the

the Scots in any future exigency, to hope for the B o o
continuance of her good offices; with regard to the I1.
latter, she discovered those sentiments to which she ..
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from
marriage, as iome pretend through choice, but
more probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
cess would never admit any partner to the throne;
but del;ghted with the entire and uncontroled ex-
ercife of power, fle acrificed to the enjoyment of
that, the hopes of transmitting her crown to her
own poetcrity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arran could not be attended with any such extra-
ordinary advantage, as to ihake this relolution; she
declined it, therefore, but with many exprefflons of
good w:, towards the Scottiih nation, and of re-
spect for Arrani himtfelf*

TOWARDS the conclurinn oft!;is year, ldiRfinguifh- The death

ed by so mna.l; rcl.:a';:l;lcl e;cnits, there happened f Frans'i
one of great inipo tanc . On the 4th (cf Decem-
ber, died Francis !. a Prince of a feeble contlitu-
tion, and of a mean udtcrAlan

. in. As lhe did not

leave any ili:e by tic Qt:cn, no incident could
have been more tfrtirlluna to tilhot, who, during
the late commoti,,ns in Scotland, bad takcn part
with the Congregation. Mary, by the charm of
her beauty, had ac(uirc an ii; ire alc('ndlant over
her hluiand; annd as Ihe t, ariierrcd .il hr irnience
to hlr tncles the rinces of l.)r-a. !, irancis Ibl-
lowed thein implictly in v,'.h!tlver rrack th y were
ple:ilcd to lead him. The power o 1t'r..nc, under
such direction, alrimned t!.e Scotiifh malecuntents,

L* rn. . AepcndlI. lr s Keith, , &c.

R 3 with

B o o K with apprehensions of danger, no less formidable,

lIl. than well founded. The intestine disorders which

raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
England in behalf of the Congregation, had hi-
therto prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carry-
ing their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impolfible that the commotions in France could
be of long continuance, and many things might
fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the future,
from the affairs of Scotland. In either of theie
events, the Scots would stand exposed to all the ven-
geance, which the resentment of the French court
could inflict. The blow, however long suspended,
was unavoidable, and must fall at last with redoub-
led weight. From this profpe& and expectation of
danger, the Scots were delivered by the death of
Francis; the ancient confederacy of the two king-
doms had already been broken, and by this event,
the only bond of union which remained was difllv-
ed. Catherine of Medicis, who, during the mino-
rity of Charles IX. her second son, engrofefd the
entire direcAion of the French councils, was far
from any thoughts of vindicating the Scottilh
Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been
rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
had contended for the government of that weak
and unexperienced Prince; but as the charms of the
wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo-
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a difap-
pointment in her favourite pafflon, and beheld now,
with fccret pleafire, the difficult and perplexing
fccne, on which her daughter-in-law was about to

enter.

enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow B o o K
which so fad a reverse of fortune could occasion; Ill.
flighted by the Queen mother * and frfaken by 1560
the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun- Mlary re-
lhine of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, trfrom
in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indigna- France.
tion. Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
contract their views; to turn them from foreign to
domestic objects; and initead of forming vast pro-
jets with regard to Britain, fiund it neceffiry to
think of acquiring, and establishing an interest with
the new adminiitration.

IT is impossible to escribe the emotions of joy,

which, on all thelhe accounts, the death of the French
Monarch excited among the Scots. They regarded
it as the only event, which could give firmness and
ltability to that fvlyin ot religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder
cotemporary hihlorians (hould acribe it to the im-
mediate cre of Providence, which, by unforelicen
expedients, can fi'cure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human pru-
dence and invention would utterly dcfp.iir t.

ABOUT this time, the Protefzant church of Scot- r.ftahli-

land began to aume a regular form. Its princi n'"';-
ples had obtained the sanction of public authority, " chll -

go vcrn-

and ome fixed external policy became necessary for nient.
the government and prelervation o the infant so-
clety. The model introduced by the Reformers,
differed extremely from that, which had been so

* Henaut, 34o. Cafleln. 44. t Knox, :;9.

4 long

B o o K long efnablified. The motives, which induced them

III. to depart so far from the ancient fyltern, deserve to

贸0~o be explained.
56o.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited

the indignation of mankind, and rouzed that spirit
of enquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
l'opilh it flem : As this dilguft at the vices of ec-
clefiatics was soon transferred to their persons, and,
ihifiing from them, by no violent transition, fettled
at last on the offices which they enjoyed; the efifets
of the Reformation would naturally have extended
not only to the dodrine, but to the government
of the Popish church; and the lame Ipirit which
abolished the former, would have overturned the
latter. But, in a great part of Germany, in Eng-
land, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
were checked by the power and policy of their Prin-
ces; and the ancient Episcopal jurifdiition, under
a ft.' limitations, was still continued in those
churches. 'he Epilcopal hierarchy appears to be
more conformable to the practice of the church, since
Chrifti;nity became theetaiblithd religion of the Ro-
man empire. 'Ihe ecclesiastical government was, at
th.t time, plainly copied from the civil; the firll not
only or)rwed its form, but derived its authority
fr.)ni tllc latter; and the (ioctl'-s and ju rifdiclions of
P' rri:rc:s, :\rcl bil hcp' , anJ lil:!ops, correlfondt'd
witi tl d nivific

n ncl oin!l:ri;ti .n of the emi'irc. In

S'.vizerlan!J, and hthe ow- tri s the nature of
tilhe ',ocrnimcnt ailo 'vi lll l'op C) the gnius of
tile Kcsb'rmaion, !l Ii)r-t: iiinice of crder in the

clill i !i

church was destroyed, and an equality eftablilhed B o o K
more suitable to the spirit of republican policy. The III.
situation of the primitive church fuggefled the'--'
idea, and furnifled the model of the latter system, 56.
which has since been called PreJZyterian. The first
Chriflians, oppressed by continual persecutions, and
obliged to hold their religious assemblies by stealth,
and in corners, were contented with a form of go-
vernment extremely simple. The influenceof reli-
gion concurred, with the sense of danger, in ex-
tinguifhing among them, the spirit of ambition, and
in preserving a parity of rank, the effe&t of their
sufferings, and the cause of many of their virtues.
Calvin, whose decifons were received, among the
Protestants of that age, with incredible submission,
was the patron and restorer of this scheme of ec-
clefiaitical policy. The church of Geneva, formed
under his eye, and by his direcion, was efleemed
the moit perfet model of this government; and
Knox, who, during his residence in that city, Ilad
lludied and admired it, warmly recommended it to
the imitation of his countrymen.

AMONG tlhe Scttifl nobility, ome hated the per-

sons, and others cvetcd the wealth of the dignified
clergy; and by abolifning that order of men, the
formcr indujlcdl their rciLntllncnt, and the latter hop-
el to gr.til'y their avaice. The people, inflamed
w'i!h the mir.l vi ,lnt avrlion of l'opery, and ap.
in'ovin, of veriy ltliteme tlh.ir lc;arted fartelle from
the pra.icc ii' il' Ro1mif i c irch, were delighted
with a l 'cl Ln, i) ;a lmirably slitcl to thlir predomi-
nant 1 afiin. V hile the ii ic(mls of civil liberty bc-

held,

B o o K held, with pleaiure, the Protestant clergy pulling

III. down, with their own hands, that fabric of ecclefi-
560 affical power, which their predecessors had reared

6. with so much art and industry; and flattered them-

selves, that by lending their aid to irip churchmen
of their dignity and wealth, they might entirely de-
liver the nation from their exorbitant and opprefive
jurisdiction. The new mode of government easily
made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interelfs and paflions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his fyvtem, Knox

did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from
the ancient form *. Instead of Bishops, he propos-
ed to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in dif-
'erent parts of the kingdom. These, as the name
implies, were ir.powered to inspect the life and doc-
trine ofthe other clergy. They presided in the in-
terior judicatories of the church, and performed fe-
veral other parts of te Eifcopal funaion. Their
jurisdiction, however, xtended to sacred things
only; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and pre-
tended no right to the dignity, or revenues, of the
former Bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care

of parochial duty could be committed, was still ex-
tremely small; they had embraced the principles of
the Reformation at different times, and from various
motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the difflrent pro-

* Spofwo:d, 158.

vinces

vinces of the kingdom; and, in a few places only, B o o i
were formed into regular classes or societies. The III.
first general assembly of the church, which was held 560'
this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un- Decmn .
formed lbciety. The members were but few in
number, and of no considerable rank; no uniform
or consistent rule seems to have been observed in
electing them. From a great part of the kingdom
no representatives appeared. In the name of ome
entire counties, but one person was present; while,
in other places, a ingle town or church sent fcveral
members. A convention, so feeble and irregular,
could possess no great authority; and conscious of
their own weakne's, the members put an end to their
debates, without venturing upon any decision of
much importance *.

IN order to give greater Rrength and consistence 1561.

to the Prefbytcrian plan, Knox, with the affance
of his brethren, compoed the first book of difci-
pline, which contains the model or platform of the
intended pol;,y . They presented it to a conven-
tion of eftdtes, which was held in the beginning of
this year. Whatever regulations were proposed with Jan. js
regard to ecclcfiaftical discipline and jurifdi&ion,
would have easily obtained the fandion of that as-
fembly; but a design to recover the patrimony of
the church, which is there infnuated, met with a
very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages
which would accrue to the public, by a proper ap-

* Kei:h, 98. t SpotAf. 152.

_t:. _

B o o K plication ofecclefiaftical revenues. In vain did they

III. propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,
156. to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and

to support the poor. In vain did they even inter-
mingle threatenings of the divine dilpleafure against
the unjust detainers of what was appropriated to a
sacred use. The nbles held fast the prey, which
they had fcizd ; and bestowing upon the proposal,
the name cf a devout imagination, they asseted to
confider it as a projeEt altogether visionary, and
treated it with the utmost scorn *.

T'eQucen TFIis convention appointed the Prior of St. An-
invired to
rurn into drew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite her to
SccLnd. return into her native country, and to assume the

reins of government, which had been too long com-
mitted to otler hands. And though some of her
ftlbjit t: dreaded her return, and others foresaw dan-
gerous cnfequences with which it might be attend-
ed -t, the bulk of them (lefired it with so much ar-
dor, that the invitation was given with the greatest
apearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Ro-
man Catholics got the fiart of the Prior in paying
court to Mary; and Lelly, aitcrwards bilhop of
l'ols, who was coml,iffiocd by them, arrived be-
If;-e him at the 1;{i.ce of her rcfidence ;. Lefly
ti:'.'.:; vourcd to iiLI'c iiirt tlhe (iten's mind, fiupii.
cins ci her Protcltant l;lIcCLs, and to pcrlluade her
to t!iow licr;'clt eliiircly ino ti!e : I.;;is of thocli who
adhiercd to lher o\v!w rcliin. 1-or ti.is purfiole, he
iniitled that Ihe P:jlutld lanJ at \ berdeen; and as

* K;:o., :(. + Sc..p-i'c; 2ix, No. V. : Lcfly, 227.

the

the Protestant doctrines had made no considerable B o oK
progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave her III.
assurance of being joined, in a few days, by 20,000 56
men; and flattered her, that with such an army,
encouraged by her prefenceand authority, fhemight
easily overturn the Reformed church, before it was
firmly fettled on its foundations.

BUT at thisjuncture, the Princes of Lorrain were

not disposed to liften to this extravagant and dange-
rous proposal. Intent on defending themselves
against Catherine of Medicis, whole insidious policy
was employed in undermining their exorbitant pow-
er, they had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wished their niece to take poffeftion
of her kingdom, with as little disturbance as pof-
fible. The French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, dissuaded Mary from all violent mea-
fures; and, by representing the power and number
of the Protestants to be irresistible, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as her ministers, than
to provoke them by a fruitless opposition, to be-
come her enemies *. Hence proceeded the confi-
dence and affeeion, with which the Prior of St. A n-
drew's was received by the Queen. His repre-
fentation of the slate of the kingdom aincei great
credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new chan-
nel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTI-ERa Convention of Eflates was hel in
May. The arrival of an .mbaf.dor froni lrancc,

* iMcl. 61.

;".: 1 ,TS

Bo o K seems to have been the occasion of this meeting.

III. He was inftruted to solicit the Scots to renew their
1561 ancient alliance with France, to break their new
'5615 confederacy with England, and to restore the Popiih

cclefiaftics to the pofleflion of their revenues, and
the exercise of their functions. It is no easy matter
to form any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making these extraordinary and
ill-timed propositions. They were rejected with
that scorn, which might well have been expected
from the temper of the nation .

IN this convention, the Protestant clergy did not

obtain a more favourable audience than formerly,
and their prospect of recovering the patrimony of the
church still remained as difiant and uncertain as ever.
But with regard to another point, they found the
zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book
of discipline feemedto require, that the monuments
of Popery, which still remained in the kingdom,
should be demolilhedt; and, though neither the
fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable
rage of the people, remained to justify or excuse this
barbarous havoc, the Convention, confidering every
religious fabric as a relict of idolatry, passed fen-
tence upon them by an at in form; and persons,
the most remarkable for the acivity of their zeal,
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, ca-
thedrals, churches, libraries, records, and even the
lepulchres of the dead, perished in one common
ruin. The form of popular infurrcftion, though

* Knox, 269, 273. t Spotfwood, 15:.

impt-

impetuous and irresistible, had extended only to B o o
a few counties, and soon spent its rage but now a IlL
deliberate and universal rapine compleatcd the de- '-贸
vaftation of every thing, venerable and magnifi-
cent, which had escaped its violence *.

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re- Mary be

gin topre

turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, par frit.
splendor, and gaiety of a polite court, she fill fond-
ly lingered in France, the scene of all these enjoy-
ments, and contemplated, with horror, the barba
rifm of her own country, and the turbulence of her
subje&s, which presented her with a very different
face of things. The impatience, however, of her
people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all,
the studied and mortifying neglec, with which he
was treated by the Queen Mother, forced her to
think of beginning this disagreeable voyage t. But
while he was preparing for it, there were sown be-
tween her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal
jealousy and discord, which imbittered the life, and
shortened the days of the Scottfh Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh Origin of

was the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; bween
the true caules of it lay much deeper. Alrmoft herand
every article, in that tre-ty, had been executed by
both parties, with a scrupulous exatne:li. The for-
tifications of Leith were demoli lhcd, and the armies
of France and England withir.n hin the ap-
pointed time. The grievance o' hce Scottil :r.ae-

Spo;fwocd, 174. + iEan:,rn, jrbb, vl. i . ,:.

2 COn. ts

B o K contents were redrefled, and they had obtained

III. whatever they could demand for their future fecu-
t.-v.' rity. With regard to all these, Mary could have

little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the
ratification of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of

contest and difficulty. No Minister ever entered
more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign, or
pursued them with more dexterity and success than
Cecil. In the condut of the negociation at Edin-
burgh, the found understanding of this able politi-
cian had proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc's
refinements in intrigue, and had artfully induced the
French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right be-
long to Elizabeth alone, but also to promise, that in
all times to come, Mary hould abstain from using
the titles, or bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article would have been

of the most fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown
of Eingland was an object worthy of her ambition.
Iler pretensions to it gave her great dignity and im-
portance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was ceemed preferable to that of Elizabeth.
Among the English rhemfelves, the Roman Catho-
lics, who formed, at that time, a numerous and ac-
tive party, openly elpoufcd this opinion; and even
the l'roteftants, who supported Elizabeth's throne,
could not deny the Q re!n or Scots to be her imme-
diate heir. A proper I porunity to avail herilf
ors all therf advanctages, Louid! nor, in the c,,iuce of

thinig,

things, be far dilant, and many incidents might B o o K
fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was III.
expeted. In these circumitances, Mary, by ra- 56
tifying the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which he had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing Princes; the zeal of her adherents must have
gradually cooled; and the might have renounced,
from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
Englilh Crown.

NONE of the ie bencf cial confequencecs cfcaped the

penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reafln,
had recourtl to every thing, by which ilni could hope
either to sooth or frighten the Scottilh Q)een into
a compliance with her demands; and it tht Prin-
cess had been o unadviled as to ratify the rath cn-
cefflons of her AmbafTad(,rs, lizabeth, by th3t
deed, would have acquirced an advantage, which,
under her management, mu!t have tu'ned to great
account. By lich a renunciatiun, the qucil:on,
with regard to the right of fi;ccclion, would have
been left altogether ,pen and unlecield ; and, by
means of that, E lizabeth might eiher have kept her
rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by
the authority of her Parlian'cnr, she n;ight iave
broken in uon the order of lineal fucccltion, and
transferred tlhe Crown to fomle other diefccil. nt or
the royal blood. The furmer condlut sith uobfrvcl
towards James V . whom, d uri n hlis whole reign, she
hell in perpetual fear and liiljcciion. The iater,
an'i nore rigorous method of prcc. edling, wouid, ir
all probabilits, have been c'n11loyed againtt Mary,

Vo I. I. wli),,

Bo o K whom, for many reasons, lhe both envied and

III. hated.
1561.

NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unprece-

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the con-
ftitution of England. Though fucceflion by here-
ditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been established in almost every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable in-
stances of deviations from that rule. The Crown of
that kingdom having once been seized by the hand
of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprif-
ing in every age to imitate such an illustrious ex-
ample of fortunate ambition. From the time of
William the Norman, the regular course ofdefcent
had feldm continued through three successive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to
them a way to the throne, called in the authority of
the great council of the nation to confirm their du-
bious titles. Hence, parliamentary and hereditary
right became in England of equal consideration.
Thatgreat assembly claimed and atually pofiefled a
power of altering the order of regal succession; and
even so late as Henry VIII. an at of Parliament
had authorized that capricious Monarch to fettle
the order of fuccefflon at his pleasure. The Ene.
iifh, jealous of their religious liberty, and averfC
from the dominion of firangers, would have eager-
ly adopted the pafions of their lovereign, and
might have been easily induced to exclude the Scot-
tilh line from the right of succeeding to the Crown.
'These seem to have been the views of both Queens,

and

and these were the difficulties which retarded the B o o K
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. III.

1561.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be

traced no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alteration in the words of it, might have brought the
present queltion to an amicable issue. The indefinite
and ambiguous expreflion, which Cecil had inserted
into the treaty, might have been changed into one
more limited, but more precise; and Mary, instead
of promising to abstain from bearing the title of
Queen of England in all times to come, might have
engaged not to afflume that title, during the life of
Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful posterity.

SUCH an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for some time, the prosecution
of her title to the English crown, he had not how-
ever relinquiihed it. She determined to revive her
claim, on the first profpeat of success, and was un-
willing to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
not to take advantage of any such fortunate occur-
rence. Nor would the alteration have been more
acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it,
would have tacitly recognized the right of her rival
to ascend the throne after her decease. But neither
the Scottifl nor Englilh Queen durl avow tlhee fe-
cret sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery
of an inclination to disturb the tranquillity of Eng-
land, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's
hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any llf-
picion of a design to alter the order of fucccflion,

S . anJ

B o o K and to set ade the claim of the Scottish Queen,

III. would have expoed Elizabeth to much and deferv-
5i贸 r ed censure, anJ have rail'd up againit her many

and dangerous enemies. These, however carefully
concealed, or ar;.'lly .il uiilc, were, in all proba-
bility, the real motives which determined the one
Queen to solicit, and the other to refute the ratifi-
cation of the treaty, in its original form; while nei-
ther had recourse to that explication of it, which to
an heart unwarped by political interest, and fin-
cerely desirous of union and concord, would have
appeared so obvious and natural.

BL'T though considerations of interest first occa-

sioned this rupture between the British Queens, ri-
valfhip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all thole
extraordinary qualities, by which he equalled or
furpaired such of her sex, as have merited the great-
elt renown, discovered an admiration of her own
person, to a degree, which women of ordinary un-
derftandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, her
solicitude to display her charms, her love of flatttry,
were all excessive. Nor were these wveakneffes con-
fined to that period of life, when they are more par-
donable. Even in ve-ry advanc.cl years, the v.'ilft
woman of thar, or perhaps of any otlier age, wore
the garb, and a tf[ic:.l tih: Ili.;ninES of a girl*.

* .JAI;! oi:;( tIli. Per A,:. . .;;, ; L .iltc, vo. iii. 699.

k''IIV;t u ort R';.,ii FI:r
: tAJ : 2i;IlJ . .;ticlc '. ; h.r.

1T1olugl

Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, B o o K
in beauty, and gracefulness of person, as he excel- III
led her in political abilities, and in the arts of go- 16
vernment, he was weak enough to compare herlelf
with the Scottiih Q'een ; and as it was impofible
she could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the compariion, she envied and hated her
as a rival, by whom {he was eclipled. In judging
of the condut of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too
much to political motives, and too little to the pas-
sions which they feel in common with the reft of
mankind. In order to account for Elizabeth's pre-
sent, as well as her subsequent conduc towards
Mary, we must not always confider her as a Queen,
we must sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's diffi-

culties with rlped to the treaty, continued to urge
her, by repeated applications, to ratify it t. Mary,
under various pretences, still contrived to gain time,
and to elude the requill. But while the one Queen
lolicited with perfevcring importunity, and the other
evaded with artful delay, they both fludiei an ex-
trcme politeness of beh.lviour, and loaded each other
with prufellions o filterly love, with reciprocal de-
clarations of unchangeable efitem and amity.

Ir was not long before Mary was convinced, that, ri/zal.ti

among l'rinces, thctie expclEolns of friendlip are ,y ' '*,t
commonly far diitant from the heart. In failin cnoI:t.
trom F rance to Scotland, the couric lies along the

* MAIlvl, 9. t Kcl, 7, 6c, c.

S 3 Englii

B o o K English coaf. In order to be safe from the insults

III. of the Engliih fleet, or, in cafe of tempestuous wea-
贸-' ther, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that king-
5 dom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand of Eliza-

beth a safe condu& during her voyage. This re-
quest, which decency alone obliged one Prince to
grant to another, Elizabeth rejected, in such a man-
ner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design,
either to obftru&t the pafage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottish Queen *.

'Mary c- THIs ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled

gins her
voY4ge. Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de-

parture from France. She was accompanied to Ca-
lais, the place where fle embarked, in a manner uit-
able to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful
kingdoms. Six Princes ofLorrain her uncles, with
many of the moll eminent among the French nobles,
were in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly re-
joiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
fance ofmagniticcnce and respect. After bidding
adieu to her mn.urning hrte'icants, with a fad heart,
and eyes bathed in tars, Mary left that kingdom,
the short but only scene of her life, in which fbr-
tune finiled upon her. While the French coast con-
tinued in fight, he intently gazed upon it, and
mufirg, in a t' oughtful poture, on that height of
fortune whence ihe had fallen, and presaging, per.
haps, the diflaRers and calamities which imbittered
the remainder of her days, he sighed often, and
cried out, " Farewel France ! Farewel beloved coun-

* Keith, 17:. Camden. See Appendix, No. VI.

" try,

c try, which I hall never more behold !" Even B o o K
when the darkness of the night had hid the land II.
from her view, ihe would neither retire to the cabin,
nor taste food, but commandin g a couch to be pla-
ced on the deck, she there waited the return of day,
with the urmott impatience. Fortune oothed her
on this occasion; the galley made little way during
the night. In the morning, the coast of France
was still within fight, and (he continued to feed her
melancholy with the profpet; and as long as her
eyes could diftinguith it, to utter the fame tender
exprelllons of regret *. At last a brisk gale arore,
by the favour of which for ome days, and after-
ward under the covert of a thick fog, Mary ecaped
the English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept
her t; and on the t 9th of August, after an absence Artiv in
of near thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in her sco'lld.
native kingdom.

MARY was received by her fubjecs with fhoutq

and acclamations ofjoy, and with every demonftra-
tion of welcome and regard. But as her arrival was
unexpected, and no suitable preparation had been
made for it, they could not, with all their efforts,
hide from her the poverty of the country, and were
obliged to conduct her to the palace of Holy/ood-
ho.:le with little pomp. The Queen, accustomed
from her infancy to fpilendor and magnificence, and
fond of them, as was natural at her age, could not
help oferving the change in her situation, and
feermed to be deeply affcted with it :.

Br;intome, 4.83. le hIlmfclf as in the fame galley sith
the Q(2cc. t Goodal, vd. i. I:,. Cattlen. I5 Brant. 4'4.

S 4 NLVE

B o K N}c EvER did any Prince ascend the throne at a

II.- juncure which called for more wisdom in council,
561. or more courage and lteadinefs in action. The rage

Stte ofthe of religious controversy was frill unabated. The
Iingdomar memory of past opprfflion exasperated the Protef-
that time.

tants; the nfmart of recent injuries rendered the Pa-
pifis desperate; both were zealous, fierce, and irre-
concileable. The absence of their Sovereign had
accuilomed the nobles to independence; and dur-
ing the late commotions, they had acquired such an
increase cf wealth, as threw great weight into the
scale of the arilocracy, which stood not in need
of any accelETon of power. The kingdom had long
been under the government of Regents, who exer-
cifed a delegated jurifdition, attended with little au-
thority, and which inspired no reverence. A state
of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last
years, without a Regent, without a supreme council,
wit!out the power, or even the form of a regular go-
vernment *. A licentious spirit, unacquainted with
subordination, and disdaining the restraints of law
and jullice, had spread a.ong all ranks of men.
The influence of France, the ancient ally of the
kingdom, was withdrawn or defpif(d. T'he English,
of enemies become conftderates, had grown into
confidence with thei nation, and hadl gained an as-
ceniant over all its councils. 'Ihe Scottilh Mo.
jarchs did not (dcrive more splendor or power from
the friendlliip of the former, th;n they hdl re;ifon
to dread injury ain diminuiltion from the intcrpo!i-
tion o' the lat:er. Evcry consideration, whether oi'

Ecith, A ppnJix 9:.

intere:O,

Interest, or of self preservation, obliged Elizabeth B o o K
to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to III.
create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by foment.-
ing the spirit of dissatisfaction among the people. 56

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when

the administration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a iran-
ger to her fubjeats, without experience, without
allies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find

some circumstances, which, though they did not
balance these disadvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them; and, with skilful management,
might have produced great eflfcts. Her subjects,
unaccustomed so long to the residence of their Prince,
were not only dzzled by the novelty and splendor
of the royal presence, but inlpired with awe and re-
vcren e. Besides the places of power and profit
beftow:,'e )y the favour of a Prince, his protection,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
and win the hearts ot men. From all corners of
the kingdom, the noble. crowded to testify their
duty anti afflCion to their iovercign, and studied,
by every art, to wipe out the memory of past mif-
conduct, and to lay in a lock of uture merit. The
amusements and gaiety of her courr, which was
filled with the most acconplinfcd of the I'rench no-
bility, who had attended her, begal to bofien and
to p'olish the rude manners of the ration. Mary
Iriclf polTflred many of there qualifications, which

raise

B o o r raise affetion, and procure esteem. The beauty

IIU. and gracefuinefs of her person drew universal ad-
561'^ miration, the elegance and politeness of her man-

ners commanded general refpet. To all the charms
of her own sex, the added many of the accomplish-
ments of the other. The progress the-had made in
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteemed
necessary or ornamental was far beyond what is
commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courte-
ous affability, which, without lessening the'dignity
of a Prince, fReals on the hearts of fubjets with a
bewitching insinuation.

FROM there circumtances, notwithstanding the

threatening aspect of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithianding the clouds which gather-
ed on every hand, a political observer would have
predi:.cd a very different issue of her reign; and
whatever sudden gulls of faction he might have
expected, he would never have dreaded the defruc-
tive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who ihould

discover the molt dutiful attachment to the Queen,
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable inatance. On the Sunday after
her i.rrival, the Queen commanded mais to be cc-
luIrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
mour ot this occalioned a secret murmuring among
the Protestants who attended the court; complaints
and threatenings lbon followed; the servants belong-
ing to the chapel were insulted and abused and, if

the

the Prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably inter- B o o t
posed, the rioters might have proceeded to the IIl.
utmost excesses *. I

1561.

IT is impossible, at this diltance of time, and

under circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal aa;liat ilopery, which then
poflfffed the nation. Ever) infiance ofcondelcenfion
to the Papists was eteemed an act of apuftacy, and
the toleration of a single mals pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the invasion of
ten thousand armed men t. Under the influence of
these opinions, many Protestants would have ven-
tured to go dangerous lengths; and, without at-
tempting to convince their Sovereign by argument,
or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have abrupt-
ly denied her the liberty of worlhipping God in that
manner, which alone he thought acceptable to him.
But the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leadcr.: of
the party, not only reii rained thi;. impecuous Ipirit;
but, in pite of the murmurs of the eople, and
the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for
the Queen and her domeics the undiftur.Ltl exer-
cife ot the Catholic Religion. Near an hundred
years after this period, when the violence of religi-
ous animofities had begun to fublide, when time
and the progrels of learning h.d ilarged the views
of the human mind, an rEiglilh house of Com-
mons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private utf of the mals. The Protefant
leaders defcrve, on this ocafion, the praise both of
wilforn and of moderation for conduct so different.

* Knox, 284. t Ibil. 237.

But,

B o o K But, at the fame time, whoever reflets upon the

II. encroaching and sanguinary Ipirit of Popery, will
561 be far from treating the fears and caution of the

more zealous Reformers as altogether imaginary,
and deltitute of any real foundation.

TIIE Proteflants, however, by this compliance

with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tia;i highly favourable to their religion. The Re-
formed doctrine, though eflablilhed all over the
kingdom, had never received the countenance or
Acu. 5. fan&ion of royal authority. On this occasion, the

Qeen declared any attempt towards an alteratioa
or lubverfion of it, to be a capital crime .

S, em- THE Queen, conformable to the plan which had
I :.:=,!i been cor.certcd in France, committed the adinini-
',.'T" ltration of affirs entirely to Protestants. Her

council was filled with the molt eminent persons of
that party; not a tingle Papist was admitted into any
dcree of confidence +. The Prior of St. Andrew's
and Maitland of Lethington fiemed to hold the
si路 . place in the Queen's affection, and pofleffed
.1 te power and reputation of favourite Ministers.
l er cho'cc could not have fallen upon persons more
nccepltabie to her people ; and, by their prudent ad-
vice, Mary conduted herself with so much mode-
ration, nnd deference to the icntiments of the na-
tion, as could not fail of gaining the afitcAion of
her f.' .j..'.s $, the irmelt fundation of a I'rince'.
power, and the only genuine source of i;s happi-
nl. and ory.

* I c .sl, 5-' t K::ox, 23;. t LiC, z3.

-A CUR-

A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was B o o

another objet of great importance to Mary; and III.
though he seems to have had it much at heart, in'i
the beginning of her administration, to accomplish Attempts
such a deirable conjuntion, yet many events oc-'掳s ain E
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach. favour.
The formal offices of friendlhip, however, are leiL
dom negleted among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obarut the Queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratulate
her safe return. Mary, that he might be on equal
terms with her, fnt Maitland to the Englilh court,
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for
Elizabeth *. Both the Ambassadors were reccivld
with the utmost civility; and, on each fide, the
professions of kindness, as they were mad.: with
little sincerity, were listened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intruflcd, howcver, with something

more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with frcilh inmportunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoure to
amui Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduct of his Mliftres with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public afairs ince hcr arriv,;l in
Scotland, the importance of tie qtef ioi in difput",
and the ablcnce of many noblemenn, with vwlomt flit
was obliged in Idcency to coniulit, were t.;e pre-
'cniccs of'red ii exul : t(,r i.c-r cond :L.t; th real

i:*. ;..j.' ; C, %'$.

C 'ZU];9

Bo o rcaufes of it were those, which have already been

HI mentioned. But, in order to extricate herself ouc
1'- 'of thee difficulties, into which the treaty of Edin-

burgh had led her, Mary was brought to yield a
point, which formerly he seemed determined never
to give up. She inftrueted Maitland to signify her
willingness to disclaim any right to the crown of
England, during the life of Elizabeth, and the lives
of her posterity; if, in failure of these, he were
declared next heir by aa of Parliament *.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to

Wlary, who thereby precluded herself from disturb-
ing Elizabeth's polfeffion of the throne, nothing
could be more inconfitent with Elizabeth's interest,
or more contradiAory to a paflion, which predomi-
nated in the character of that Princess. Notwith-
standing all the great qualities which threw such
lustre on her reign, we may observe, that she was
tinctured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous
acions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infuse
this paflion. It deiccnded to her from Henry VII.
her grandfather, whom, in everal features of his
Charater, she nearly relcmbled. Like him, she sus-
fcred the title by which she held the Crown to re-
main ambiguous and controverted, rather tlharfub-
mit it to parliamentary difcuflion, or derive any
addition to her right, from such authority. Like
lim, he observed every pretender to the luccellion,
not only with that attention, which prudence pre-

.amdcn, 37 . Euch. 3:9.

fcribbo

scribes; but with that aversion, which suspicion in- B o o K
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the III.
right of succession, operated for Elizabeth's advan- I'贸-
tage, both on her fubjeas, and on her rivals. A-
mong the former, every lover of his country re-
garded her life as the great security of the national
tranquillity; and chore rather to acknowledge a
title which was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, wh!lt nothing was de-
cided, were held in dependence, and obliged to
court her. The manner in which he received this
ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She reject-
ed it in a peremptory tone, with many expreflions
of a resolution never to permit a point of so much
delicacy to be touched.

ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public Sept. c*

entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was neglected, which could express the duty and as-
feetion of the citizens towards their Sovereign. But
amidit these demonstrations of regard, the genius
and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves,
in a circumstance, which, though inconsiderable,
ought not to be overlooked. As it was the mode
of the times to exhibit many pageants at every pub-
lic solemnity; most of these, on this occasion, were
contrived to be representations of the vengeance
which the Almighty had inflicted upon idolaters *.
Even while they studied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her fubjets could not refrain from tcfify-

* Keith, 189.

'sas

B o o K ing their abhorrence of that religion which he pro-

IIf. esed.

leftrins To restore the regular administration of justice,
thflicence and to reform the internal policy of the country,
of the bor-
derers. became the next obje& of the Queen's care. The

laws enaced for preservation of public order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized country.
But the nature of the Scottish constitution, the im.
potence of regal authority, the exorbitant power of
the nobles, the violence of facion, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution of
these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. In the
counties which border on England, this defect was
most apparent; and the consequences of i most
sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to indus-
try, averse from labour, and unacquainted with the
arts of peace, subsisted intirely by spoil and pillage,
and, being confederated in septs or clans, commit-
ted these excesses not only with impunity, but even
with honour. During the unsettled state of the
kingdom from the death of James V. this danger-
ous licence had grown to an unusual height; and
the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were be-
come no Iefs intolerable to their own countrymen,
than to the Englifl. To reltrain and Funilh these
outrages, was an aAion equally popular in both
kingdoms. Ihe Prior of St. Andrew's was the
peron chosen for this important ifrvice, and extra-
orlin.r pjwers, together with the title of the
(QOtcc is I'cul)enr~, wcre vi'k..l ill himl ftr iis

No-

NorHINC can be more surprising to men, accuf- B o o K

tomed to regular government, than the preparations III.
made on this occasion. They were such as might 56
be expe&ed in the rudest and most imperfet fate
offociety. The freeholders of eleven several coun-
ties, with all their followers completely armed, were
summoned to assist the Lieutenant in the discharge
of his office. Every thing resembled a military ex-
pedition, rather than the progress of a court ofjuf-
tice *. The Prior executed his commission with
such vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great
increase of reputation and popularity among his
countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffered the
punilhment due to their crimes; and, by the impar-
tial and rigorous administration ofjuftice, order and
tranquillity were refored to that part of the king-
dom.

DU.RING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, The Papifli

the leaders of the Popilh facion seem to have taken attenP8. in
some steps towards insinuating themselves into the into favour
Queen's favour and confidence t. But the Arch-
bihop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable per-
son in the party for abilities and political address,
was received with little favour at court; and what-
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who profefled the fame religion with herself,
she discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the administration of affairs out of the hands, to
which she had already committed it,

TNE cold reception of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's was owing to his connetion with the

.Keith, s. + Ibid. 2zc.
VOL. I. T hou{e

B o o K house of Hamilton; from which the Queen was

III. much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car-

贸'' dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the

Duke of Chatelherault and his son the Earl of Arran
had espoused the caule of the Congregation Princes
seldom view their fuccefiors without jealousy and
distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps,
dreaded the Duke as a rival in power. All these
causes concurred in infusing into the Queen's mind
an aversion for that family. The Duke, indulging
his love of retirement, lived at a distance from
court, without taking pains to insinuate himself
into favour; and though the Earl of Arran openly
alpired to marry the Queen, he, by a most unpar-
donable aft of imprudence, was the only nobleman
ofdiflindion who opposed Mary's enjoying the ex-
ercif: of her religion; and by rashly entering apub-
lic protestation against it, entirely forfeited her fa-
vour *. At the lame time, the fordid parsimony
of his father obliged him either to hide himself in
obme retirement, or to appear in manner unbe-
coming his dignity as first Prince of the blood, or
his high pretensions as suitor to the Queen t. His
love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impa-
tience exasperated by neglet, preyed gradually on
his reason; and, after many extravagances, broke
out at last in ungovernable frenzy.
Dec. 0o. TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of

Ellates was held, chiefly on account of ecclesiastical
affairs. The acmbly of the church, which fat at
the fame time, prelented apetition, containing many

* iKeith, ol, 204. nox, .86. Keith, I .

demands

demands with refpec to the fupprefling of Popery, B o o
the encouraging the Protestant religion, and the 1II.
providing for the maintenance of the clergy . The J 6'
last was a matter of great importance, and the steps
taken towards it deserve to be traced.

THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers A new re-

gulation

was now considerably increased, many more were ncerning
fill wanted, in every corner of the kingdom. No thereve-

nues ofthe

legal provision having been made for them, they chuich.
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsist-
ence from the benevolence of their people. To
susser the Ministers of an established church to con-
tinue in this state of indigence and dependence, was
an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of
religion, and to the maxims of found policy; and
would have justified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the Reformation was then loaded by its
enemies. The revenues of the Popi.h church were
the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three last years, the state of
these was greatly altered. A great majority of Ab-
bots, Priors, and other heads of religious houses,
had, either from a sense of duty, or from views of
interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and, not-
withstanding this change in their sentiments, they
retained their ancient revenues. Almost the whole
order of Bishops, and several of the other dignita-
ries, till adhered to the Romifl fuperlition: And
though debarred from every spiritual function, con-
tinued to enjoy the temporalities of their benefices.
Some laymen, clpecially those who had been acive
in promoting the Reformation, had, urder varicous

* Keith, 20o.

T 2 prc-

B o o i pretences, and amidst the licence of civil wars, got

III. into their hands poeffions, which belonged to the
~6i church. And thus, before any part of the ancient

ecclesiastical revenues could be applied towards the
maintenance of the Protestant miniRers, many dif-
ferent interests were to be adjusted; many claims to
be examined and the prejudices and passions of the
two contending parties required the application of a
delicate hand. After much contention, the follow.
ing plan was approved by a majority of voices, and
acquiesced in even by the Popish clergy themselves.
An exact accopt of the value of ecclesiastical be-
nefices throughout the kingdom was appointed to
be taken. The prefcnt incumbents, to whatever
party they adhered, were allowed to keep poffeflon:
Two thirds of their whole revenue were reserved for
their own use, the remainder was annexed to the
Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook to
afign a sufficient maintenance for the Protestant
clergy A.

As mot of the Bishops and several of the other

dignitaries were ill firmly attached to the Popish
religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an ac of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been expeced from the zeal of the preachers,
and from the spirit which had hitherto animated the
nation. But, on this occasion, other principles ob-
ftructed the operations of such as were purely reli-
gious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth,
two pafions extremely opposite, concurred in de-
termining the Protestant leaders to fall in with this

Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 194.

plan,

plan, which deviated so manifestly from the max- B o o K
ims, by which they had hitherto regulated their Ill.
condu& .-

1561.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to at with-

out controul, and to level all diftintions in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclesias-
tical dignities could not, with any colour ofjuftice,
have been retained by those in whose hands they
now were; but must either have been distributed
amongst the ProteRant clergy, who performed all
religious offices, or must have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater
part of them was originally derived. The former
scheme, however suitable to the religious spirit of
many among the people, was attended with mani-
fold danger. The Popish ecclesiastics had acquired
a lhare in the national property, which far exceeded
the proportion that was consistent with the happi-
ness of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter-
mined to guard against this evil, by preventing the
return of those vast poffefions into the hands of the
church. Nor was the latter, which exposed the
constitution to more imminent hazard, to be avoid-
ed with less care. Even that circumscribed prero-
gative, which the Scottish Kings possessed, was the
objet of jealousy to the nobles. If they had al-
lowed the Crown to seize the spoils of the church,
such an increase of power mull have followed that
acceflion of property, as would have raited the royal
authority above controul, and have rendered the
molt limited Prince in Europe the mot absolute
and independent. The reign of Henry VIII. pre-

T 3 sented

Bo o K sented a recent and alarming example of this nature.

III. The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from
i6i~ the fuppreflion of the monasteries, not only changed

the maxims of his government, but the temper of
his mind; and he who had formerly Submitted to
his Parliaments, and courted his people, dicated,
from that time, to the former, with intolerable in-
folence; and tyrannized over the latter with unpre-
cedented severity: And if his policy had not been
extremely hort-fighted, if he had not squandered
what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his ra-
pacioufnefs, and which defeated his ambition, he
might have eftablihed delpotifm in England, on ,a
balis so broad and strong, as all the efforts of the
fubjeas would never have been able to shake. In
Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore as
great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom,
the acquisition of church-lands would have been of
no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal
to the aristocracy. The nobles, for this reason,
guarded against such an increase of the royal pow-
er, and thereby secured their own independence.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for

the interest of their order. The re-uniting the
poffeions of the church to the Crown, or the be-
flowing them on the Protestant clergy, would have
been a fatal blow, both to those nobles, who had, by
fraud or violence, seized partof theft revenues, and to
those Abbots and Priors who had totally renounced
their ecclesiastical charater. But as the plan, which
was proposed, gave some fanc6ion to their ufurpa-
t'ons, they promoted it with their utmost influence.

The

The Popish ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a B o o K
third of their revenues was by no means agreeable III.
to them, conented, under their present circum- 贸J
flances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions, in 56.
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the re-
mainder; and after deeming the whole irrecoverably
loft, they confidered whatever they could retrieve as
so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries
were men of noble birth; and as they no longer
entertained hopes of restoring the Popiih religion,
they wished their own relations, rather than the
Crown, orthe Protestant clergy, to be enriched with
the spoils of the church. They connived, for this
reason, at the encroachments of the nobles; they
even aided their avarice and violence; they dealt
out the patrimony of the church among their own
relations, and by grantingfeus and perpetual leafes
of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their
power, some colour of legal poffefion, to what was
formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such
alienations ill remain*. The nobles, with the
concurrence ofthe incumbents, daily extended their
encroachments, and gradually stripped the ecclesias-
tics of their richest and most valuable pofleflions.
Even that third part, which was given up in order
to silence the clamours of the ProteRant clergy,
and to be ome equivalent to the Crown for its
claims, amounted to no considerable um. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially
by such as had embraced the Reformation, were
almost universally remitted. Others, by producing
fraudulent rentals; by etimating the corn, and

*Keith, 507. Spotrw. 175.

T 4 other

B o o z other payments in kind, at an under value; and by

II- the connivance of collectors, greatly diminilhed

the charge against themselves : And the nobles had
much reason to be satisfied with a device which, at
so finall expence, secured to them such vait pof-
fefions,

Tie Protc. NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gain-
slant clergy
no gainers rs by this new regulation; they found it to be a
by it. more easy matter to kindle zeal, than to extinguilh

avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they
had swayed with ablblute authority, were now deaf
to all their remonstrances. The Prior of St. An-
drew's, the Earl of Argyll, the Earl of Morton,
and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders of the
Congregation, were appointedto afign, or, as it
was called, to modify their Ripends. An hundred
merks Scottilh was the allowance which their libe-
rality afforded to the generality of Ministers. To
a few three hundred merks were granted 搂. About
twenty-four thousand pounds Sottish appears to
have been the whole fum allotted for the mainte-
nance of a national church established by law, and
efleemed, throughoutthe kingdom, thetrue church
of God t. Even this fum was paid with little ex-
atnefs, and the Miniters were kept in the fame
poverty and dependance as formerly.

1562. THE gentleness of the Queen's adminifRration,
Dimrntigs and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in
nqblm. some degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac-

* KIith, Append. 188. Spotfw. 183. 搂 Knox, 301.
t Keith, Append. 88.

cuftpmd

customed them to greater mildness and humanity; B o o K
while, at the fame time, her preence and authority III.
were a check to their faetious and tumultuary spirit. 562
But, as a slate of order and tranquillity was not
natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not be of
long continuance; and this year became remark-
able for the most violent eruptions of intestine dif-
cord and aninofity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could pollefs little authority,
and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdilion.
The interfering of interest, the unfettld fate of
property, the frequency of public commotions, and
the fierceness of their own manners, sowed, among
the greac families, the feeds of many quarrels and
contentions. These, as we have already observed,
were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the
Monarch, or acknowledging his superior authority,
afembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with
his estate and honours, every nobleman transmitted
some hereditary feud to his posterity, who were
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with
the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a dissention had subsisted between the house

of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and was
heightened by mutual injuries during the late com-
motions *. Both the Earl of Arran and Bothwell
happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their

* KJith, z,215

fOl;

B o o R followers quarrelled frequently in the freets of Ed-

Ill. inburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that city.
56. At las, the mediation of their friends, particularly
Febuary. of Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but an

unfortunate one to both these noblemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and,

with the utmof terror and confusion, confefled
firt to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's,
that, in order to obtain the sole direcion of affairs,
Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had con-
spired to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other
favourites of the Queen. The Duke of Chatelhe-
rault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had sup-
planted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the blood. Both-
well, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late com-
motions, was no less exasperated against him. But
whether he and the Hamiltons had agreed to cement
their new alliance, with the blood of their common
enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in
the frantic and disordered imagination of the Earl
of Arran, it is impofible, amidif the contradiction
of historians, and the defecivenefs of records, po-
firively to determine. Among men inflamed with
refe ltmenr, and impatient for revenge, rash expref-
sions might be uttered, and violent and criminal
expedients proposed i and on that foundation, Ar-
ran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fu-
perftru&ure of a conspiracy. All the persons ac.

* Knox, 305.

cufed,

cued, denied their guilt with the utmof confidence. B o o K
But the known chaa&ers of the men, and the vio- I11.
len spirit of the age, added greatly to the probabi- '
lity of the accusation, and abundantly justify the 562.
condut of the Queen's ministers, who confined
Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-leaders, in
separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender
the strong castle of Dumbarton, which he had held
ever since the time of his resigning the office of
Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the ThEarilof

Hunty's

Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro- ,mry to,
duced more memorable and more tragical events. the Quen's
George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and
who raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoy-
ed a great hare in the confidence of that generous
Prince t. By his bounty, great accessions of wealth
and power were added to a family, already opulent
and powerful. On the death of that Monarch,
Alexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend for offices at court;
and retiring to the north, where his estate and in-
fluence lay, resided there, in a kind of princely in-
dependence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent
hisencroachments. Some of his rivals he secretly
undermined, others he subdued by open force. His

*Knox, 307, 3oS. Keith, 7.02. Crawf. Officers
of State, 56.

ellate

B o K estate far exceeded that of any other fubje&, and

III. hisfsniorites and jurifdi&ions extendedover many
'- ' of the northern counties With power and poflef-
1562. ions so immense, under two long and feeble mino-

rities, and amidst the ihock of civil commotions,
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the most
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an
a&tive and enterprizing spirit was not the charaCte-
riitic of that family, and whatever object their am-
bition might have in view, they chose rather to ac-
quire it by political address, than to seize it openly,
and by force of arms.

THz conduc of George the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfeCtly suitable
to the character of the family, in that age, dubi-
ous, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
affifed the Queen Regent in her attempts to crulh
them. When their airs put on a better aspet,
he pretended tojoin them, butnever heartilyfavour-
ed their cause. He was courted and feared by each
of the contending parties; both connived at his
encroachments in the north; and, by artifice and
force, which he well knew how to employ alter.
nately, and in their proper places, he added every
day to the exorbitant power and wealth which he
poffleid.

HE observed the growing reputation and autho.

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the great-
r.t jealousy and concern, and confidered him as
a rival who had engroflcd that hare in the

Queen's

Queen's confidence, to which his own zeal for the B o o K
Popish religion seemed to give him a preferable IIIl
title. Personal injuries soon increased the mifunder- I -
standing occaioned by rivallhip in power. The 562
Queen having determined to reward the services of
the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an
Earl, he made choice of Mar, as the place whence
he should take his title; and, that he might be bet-
ter able to support his new honour, bestowed upon
him, at the fame time, the lands of that name. Feb. o.
These were part of the royal demesnes *, but the
Earls of Hundy had been permitted, for several
years, to keep pofeflion of them t. On this occa-
sion, the Earl not only complained, with some rea-
son, of the loft which he sustained, but had real
cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable
neighbour into the heart of his territories, who
might be able to rival his power, and excite his
oppressed vassals to {hake off his yoke.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreaf- June rt.

ed and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John
Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie had a dif-
pute about the property of an estate. This dispute
became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfor-
tunately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh, and
being both attended with armed followers, a scuffle
ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dangerously
wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates seized both
the offenders, and the Queen commanded them to
be ftritly confined. Under any regular govern-

Crawf. Pcer. 97. t Bush. ;34.

men.,

B o o K ment, such a breach of public peace and orderwould

III. expose the person offending, to certain punishment.

At this time, ome severity was neceflry, in order
to vindicate the Queen's authority from an insult,
the most heinous which had been offered to it, since
her return into Scotland. But, in an age accustom-
ed to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exer.
cife of her power, in ordering them to be kept in
custody, was deemed an at of intolerable rigour;
and the friends of each party began to convene their
vassals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to
frustrate the decisions of justice . Mean while,
Gordon made his escape out of prison, and flying
into Aberdeenfhire, complained loudly of the indig-
nity with which he had been treated; and as all
the Queen's aftions were, at thisjuneture, imputed
to the Earl of Mar, this added not a little to the
refintment, which Fluntly had conceived against
that nobleman.
Augud. AT the very time when these pailons fermented,

with the utmost violence, in the minds of the Earl
of Huntly and his family, the Queen happened to
set out on a progress into the northern parts of the
kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mararnd
Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party.
The pretence of the Queen, in a country where no
name greater than the Earl of -untly's had been
heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised, for many years, was an event, of itlelf,
abundantly mortifying to that haught) nobleman.

* Ici:h, 2:,B

But

But while the Queen was entirely under the direc- B o o K
tion of Mar, all her actions were more apt to be III.
misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a ,
thousand circumstances could not but occur to 5
awaken Huntly'sjealoufy, to offend his pride, and
to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
of so many violent pafions, ome eruption was un-
avoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employ-

ed his wife, a woman capable of executing the com-
miflion with abundance of dexterity, to sooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But theQueen peremptorily required, that he should
again deliver himself into the hands ofjuftice, and
rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to
do so; and being enjoined by the Queen to enter
himself prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised
likewise to obey that command. Lord Erskine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this
fort. The Queen's severity, and the place in which
{he appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and
augmented the hatred of the Gordons against him.

MEAN time, Sir John Gordon set out towards Sept. .

Stirling; but instead of performing his promise to
the Queen, made his escape from his guards, and
returned to take the command of his followers, who
were riling in arms, all over the north. These were
destined to second and improve the blow, by which
his father proposed, secretly, and at once, to cut of'
Mar, Morton, and Maitland, his principal adver-

f;tric.,;.

B o K saries. The time and place for perpetrating thbs

IIl horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the exce
'贸' cuting of it was wonderfully prevented, by some of

those unforeseen accidents, which so often occur to
disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate the hearts
of aafllins *. His own house at Strathbogic was
the las and noft convenient scene, appointed for
committing the intended violence. But, on her
journey thither, the Queen heard of young Gordon's
flight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first tranf-
ports of her indignation, to enter under the father's
roof, by that fortunate expreflion of her resentment,
saved her Ministers from unavoidable defirudion t.

Take ams THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge
aainfl the
eea.tn precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the

Queen was entirely under the direL ion of his rivals,
it was inpoffible to work their ruin, without violat-
ing the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the caflle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates
against her. Mary was ohliged to lodge in the town,
which was open and defcncelefs; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's
followers$. The urmoft consternation seized the
Qieen, who was attended by a very (lender train.
She every moment expcted the approach of the re-
bels, and some ships were already ordered into the
river to secure her cfcape. The loyalty of the Mon-
roes, Frazers, Mackintohes, and some neighbour-

Keith, 23C. f Knox, 318. $ Crawf. Offcers
of State, 7, 8S.

ing

ftig clans, who took arms in her defence, saved ler B o o K
from this danger. By their affifance, he even III.
forced the catle to surrender, and infli&ed on the Go- -
vernor the punishment which his insolence deserved. 56.

THIS open a of disobedience was the occasion

of a measure more galling to Huntly than any the
Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erskine, having
pretended a right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time Mary
conferred upon him the titleofEarl of Murray, with
the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been
in the poffeflion of the Earl of Huntly since the year
1548 *. From this he concluded that his family
was devoted to deftrution; and dreading to be
stripped, gradually, ofthofepoffeflions, which, in
reward of their services, the gratitude of the Crown
had bestowed on himself, or his ancestors, he no
longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance of
the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. In-
stead of yielding those places of strength, which
Mary required him to surrender, his followers diif
perfed or cut in pieces the parties which Ihe dispatched
to take possession of them t; and he himself, ad-
vancing with a considerable body of men towards
Aberdeen, to which place the Queen was now re-
turned, filled her finall court with consternation.
Murray had only a handful of men in whom he
could confide :. In order to form the appearance
ot an army, he was obliged to call in the aflilance
or the neighbouring barons; but as mol of thele

Crawf. Pecr. -,:- t Jno?, ,Ie9. , '..'i;\ :;掳-
Vm.I. !. J cU cIhc'r

B o o R cither favoured Huntly's dcfigns, or flood in awe of

III. his power, from theai no cordial or effeccual ser-

--52. vice could be expc ed.
1562.
om.. . rll thcfetro(:ps, however, Murray, who could

gain nothing by delay, marched brilkly towards the
enemy. He found them at Corrichie, pofled to
great advantage; he commanded his northern affo-
ciates inlantly to begin tle attack; but on the first
motion of the enemy, they treacherously turned their
backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing aside their
spears, and breaking their ranks, drew their swords,

Hei de- and ruffled forward to the pursuit. It was then,
l.tc by
:. Eal, flthat Murray gave proof both of steady courage,
MU;IJy. and of prudent condust. He stood immoveable,

on a iling ground, with the small but trutly body
of his adherents, wvho prcFcnting their spears to the
enemy, received them with a (determined relolution,
which thry little expeted. The Highland broad
sword is not a weapon fit to encounter the Scottish
lpear. In every civil commotion, the fperiority
of the L:tter has been evident, and has always de-
cided the contef. Cn this occasion the irregular
attack of Huntly's troops was easily repulfrct by
Murray's firm battalion. Before thry recovered
from the confusion occasioned by this unfortfeen re-
fiilance, those who had begun the fiight, willing to
regain their credit with the victorious party, fell
ulpon them, and compleated thc rout. Huntly him-
, lt;, who was extremely corpulent, was trodden to
dIeath in the purfuir. His fins, Sir .luhn and Adam,
were taken, and Murray returned in triu.!)lnp to
*'.b -dcen with his prifbners.

THE

TH E trial of men taken in acual rebellion againfi B o o K

their Sovereign was extremely hort. Three days III.
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at 1562
Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned on
account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been
privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south,
and upon trial found guilty oftreafon; but, through
the Queen's clemency, the punishment was remit-
ted. The first Parliament proceeded against this
great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and
reduced their power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

As

This conrpiracy of the Enrl of Hantly is one of the molt in-

tricate and myftericus passages in the ScottiSh hittory. As it was
a tranfadlion purely domeflic, and in which the Enlilh were
little interesttd, fw original papers concerning it have been
found in Cecil's Collelion, the great storehouse of evidence and
information with regard to the affairs of this piiod.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a dcfign about this

time of dcfroying Murray, and of emph ying the power of the
Earl es Huntly for this purpo... Eut is account of th.s whole
tranfadion appears to be fC void cf truth, a;rd even of probabi-
lity, as to deserve no serious examiiation. At that time, Mary
wanted power, and seems to have had no ircl nation to commni
apy a of violence upon her brother.

Two otother hypOth's ilh Ce been. t-.v. , in ccr to ex-

plain th:s matter; but they appear to be eal;y leiovcd fron
truth.

I. I: ,: not well be conccie'c, that the QCec-n' journey to

th.c noi.;: .'as a C:le.nc coi'c,-rtc I)by 'lurr,, in crdr to ruin
the Earl of -Huntly. I. Iluntly l.i rlidcl at c.)ut aolt
ever ntc: the Qucen'., cturn. 1Li.J1, 1q. AINcnd. 17j,
5; . 'ihs wns the p:: ... ia. wiY: to hin'e si;:ed

.: . 'i o ;it;; !k;in i .\us:,i.ccl:hi n . the !i.t of i'
i puwer,

U' anl

B o o K As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most im,

11. portam event of this year, it would have been im-
1^b2. ant in te midR of his vafais, was a projec equal'y ab-

ford and h:;zar,ous. 2. The Queen was not accompanied with
a body of troops, capable of attempting any thing againlt
Hundy by violence; her train was not more numerous, than
was uual in times of greateit tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3. There
remain two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, o.e
from Rindolph the English Resident, and another f.om Mait-
land both direced to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures
as not.riouly treafunable. Randolph mentions his repeated at.
tempts to afla'linate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any pre-
vious resolution, formed by Mary's Mirifters, to ruin Huntly
and his family. Had any such design ever exilted, it was Ran-
do'ph's duty to have di'covered it; nor would Maitland have
laboured to conceal it from tie Englith secretary. Keith, 229,
z32.

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for

seizing the Queen, and her MinilferF, seems to be no less im-
probable. . On the Queen's arrival in the north, he laboured,
in good earnef, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, firR at Aberdeen,
and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any such treasonable resolution. Knox,
318. 3. His condu was irresolute and wavering, like that of
a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one exe-
cuting a concerted plan. 4. The mod considerable persons of
his clan submitted to the Queen, and found surety to obey her
commands. Keith, zz6. Had the Earl been previously deter-
min.d to rife in arms againt the Queen, or to seize her Mini-
flers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal
followers, nor would they have deserted him in this manner.

For there reafone, we have, on the one hand, vindicated the

Eirl of Marray from any deliberate intention of ruining the fa-
mily of Gordon; and on the other hand, we have imputed the
violent condut of the Earl of Huntly. to a sudden Ilart of re-
Ientnient, without charging hinm ih any remeditated purpore
of rebellion.

proper

proper to interrupt the narrative by taking notice B o o K
of lesser tranfations, which may now be related Il.
with equal propriety. 1-62.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was de- An in-r.

firous of entering into a more intimate correfpon- tween El-
dence and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed zab'thand
Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, poscd.
somewhere in the north of England. As this pro-
pofal could not be rejected with decency, the time,
the place, and the circumstances of the meeting were
instantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
who outshone herself, sofar, in beauty, andgrace-
fulness of person ; and who excelled, so eminently,
in allthe artsofinfinuation and addrcfs. Under pre-
tence of being confined to London, by the attention
which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in
France, she put off the interview for that season *,
and prevented her subjects from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whose appearance, and beha-
viour, the envied, and had some realon to iread.

DURtIN this year, the Assembly of the church June s

met twice. In both these meetings, were exhibitel UDvwn. 15.
many complaints of the povertyand dependcnce-of the
church; and many murmurs againit the neglgence
or avarice of thole, who had be. n api;oiitic to) col-
let, and to dilribute the fl.all folnd, appropriated
for the maintenance of :rcacheirst . A petition,
craving redrels of their grievalLes, was prelentedl to

Iicith, zt6, . Knox, 3, , j23.

U 3 the

B o o K the Queen; but without any effec'. Th'ere was no

III. reason to expect that Mary would dilcover any for-
j"62z wardnefs to grant the requcfs of luch supplicants.

And as her Ministers, though all n.it zea!ous Pro-
teltants, were themf-lves growing r;ch on the inhe-
ritance of the church, they were equally regardless
of the indigence and demands of thleir brethren.

1 i63. MIARY had now continted above two years in a
Ngccia. flare of wiJowhood. ecr gentle ad:niniiraticn had
iions wui
,.,:i to flecured the ,earts of her iu.jects, who were impa-
's" ' ient for h;er marriage, and w.ilhed the Crown to de-

scend in the right iine from their ancient Monarchs.
She hcrfif w-s the moI amia'le wo.m.an of the age,
and the fame of her accompli imer.ts, togetiier with
tle avourable circumti ance of her having one king-
dom alrt ady in her poiefrion, and the prolpe of
mounting the throne of another, prompted many
differenr Princes to solicit an alliance lb iluftrious.
Scotlard, by its fitu.tion, threw so much weight
and power into whatever scale it fell, that all Eu-
rope waited with iolicitude for Mary's dcrermina-
tiln; and n event in that age excited fl'onger po-
litical fears and jealousies; none intre-eftd more
deeply the paflions of several Princes, or gave riie
to mure contradictory intrigues, than the marriage
of tile Scottish Q)ecn.

S.le i fr!i. Ti i Princes of the H-oufl of Auflria rerrember-
,i.', hy ed what val pj ,ts the French h id founded on
I ri Ct. their former alliiincr with the Queen of cots ; and

though the unexpcIed death,firit of Henryand then

of

of Francis, had hindered these from taking efTcl, B o o K
yet if Mary hould again make choice of a husband II.
among the French Princes, the fame deigns might 5
be revived and prosecuted with better success.

I' order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into By the

Achduke

a negociation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, whocziarl-s.
had proposed to marry the Scottiih Queen to the
Artidiuke Charles, Ferdinand's third son. The

.attr vas comnlmunicated to Mlary; and Melvil,
.ho, at th.;; time, attended the Elector Palatine,
was commanc'.le to enquire in.o the character and
situation o the Archduke ".

PiHILIP II. though no leTs apprehensive of Mary's By Don

路 Carlos

failing once more into the hands of France, envied cf Spaii,
his uncle Feidinand the acquifriton ot' o important
a prize ; and as bhs ov.'wn ,;r:'. ,alc ainbirtin grasped
a: all the kingdoms of Eurup;, he C; ployed his am-
balfador at the -rcnch court, to l;!icir hle Prirces
of Lurrain in behalf of h:; ion Don Carrlus, at that
time, the eir t fall th cwa.c;ive vl,,mn'nins, vhihch
bdlonged to the Sp;if. ml.o'rrcl. ,

CATHERINE Of \c.'iciS, (n. the other and, y the

dreaded the marriage c tht .Icmtiihi Qu.c'n with Du/ki
any of the Aultrian P, inccs, v> hih wouldt have add-
ed o much to the power and retenficns of that
ambitious race. Her jalhufy of (he Princes of
Lorrain rendered her no lets a erie from an alliance,
which, by ecuring them the proteion of the L.m-

* Melv. 63, 6;. Keith, 239. cc ..pp n. No. V II.
t 'altueln. 61. Addit. a Lalour. o50, 53.

I 4 peror

B o o K peror or King of Spain, would give new boldness to

III their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the
-63. power of the Crown, which they already rivalled,

at open defiance: And as she was afraid that these
splendid proposals of the Austrian family would
dazzle the young Queen, he instantly dispatched
Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
Duke of Anjou, the brother of her former husband,
who soon after mounted the throne of France *.

Mary's de MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so
liberations '
cunccining many riv:ls. The Archduke had little to recom-
'i' nmend him, but his high birth. The example of

lHenry VIII. was a warning against contracting a
marriage with the brother of her former husband;
nor could he bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which she had for-
merly held in that kingdom. She listened therefore,
with partiality, to the Spanilh propositions, and the
proipe& of such vast powver and dominions flattered
the ambition of a young and aspiring Princess.

THRE several circumfiances, however, concur-

red to divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign
alliance.

T'i'E rfi of there was the murder of her uncle

the Duke of Guise. The violence and ambition of
t'-at nobleman had involved his country in a civil
war; which was conduced with furious animosity,
and various success. At lait the Duke laid siege to

* C.aflnau, ,.6z.

Orleans,

Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and B o o K
he had reduced that city to the last extremity, when III.
he was affaflinated by the frantic zeal of poltrot. 1
This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. The 5
young Duke was a minor; and the Cardinal of
Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing, wanted that
undaunted and enterprising courage, which rendered
the ambition of his brother so formidable. Cathe-
rine, instead of encouraging the ambition, or fur-
thering the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took
pleasure in mortifying the one, and in disappointing
the other. In this situation, and without such a
protector, it became neccffary for Mary to contract
her views, and to proceed with caution; and what-
ever profpeca of advairage might allure her, fTe
could venture upon no dangerous or doubtful
mea'ure.

THE second circumstance which weighed with The ,,-,.

Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England. of Eli-
The marriage of the Scottish Queen interestcd Eli-
zabeth more deeply than any other Prince; and he
oblcrved all her deliberations concerning it w;rh
the molt axious attention. She herfilfleteims early
to have formed a reollution of living unmarri:.l;', and
she discovered no Iinall inclination to impoi'c t,e
fame law on the Qlecn o' Scots. She had already
experienced what uife might be made of Ma y's
power and pretensions, to invade her dominions, a, i
to diiturb her poffcflion of the Crown. ' : (e.' :i
of Francis II. had happily dcliveredl her t.iln i.;!
danger, which (he determined to g.L:trl again ,'
tce future, with the utmost care. as tce re' , ,

B o o K ambition of the Aufirian Princes, the avowed and

III. bigotted patrons of the Catholic fuperfition, made
~ - her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbour-
J563' hood, he inftru&ed Randolp to remonfIratc, in

(he itrongeit terms, againrtany alliance with them;
and to acquaint Maiy, that as afe herfell woJd
confider such a match to be a breach of the pec ,;.nal
friendship, in which they were so happily un::-.:. ; i;)
the Elngli nation would regard it, as the .;;iolu-
tion ot that confederacy ntich now tUbliil'tjd he-
twecn the two kingdoms: That, in order to p:e-
fcrve their own rl:gion and libertiec, they wo.ld,
in all prob bility, take some ftcp prejudiicil to
her right of fuccili;on, which, as she well kntw,
they nither wanted power nor preLcnces to in-
validate, and set aside. This threazening was ac-
companied with a promise, but exprcffcd in very
ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of a hur-
band fliould prove agreeable to the L nglifh nation,
Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine
her title to the fuccefion, and, if well founded,
command it to be publickly recognized. She ob-
'erved, however, a mylterious silence concerning
the person, on whom he wished the choice of the
Scottish (ueen to fall. The revealing of this fcrct
was reserved for some future negociation. Mean
while she threw out lome obscure hints, that a na-
tive ot Britain, cr one not of princely rank, would
be her safest and mos inuflcntive choice *. An ad-
vice ofrrzd with such an air offu:pcriority and com-
mand, mortilizd, no doubt, the l ide of the Scot-

* 7cithl, : 1 ', ' si

tifi

tilh Queen. But, under her present circumfitances, B o o
she was obliged to bear this indignity. Deflitute of III.
all foreign assistance, and intent upon the Englilh 1563.
fucceffon, the great object of her wishes and am-
bition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifeit imprudence, she could not ven-
ture to ostend.

THE inclination of her own subjects was another, The renti.

and not the leall ccnfiderable circumstance, which her own
called for Mary's attention at this cnjunture. rubja
They had been tauht, by the fatal experiment of
her former marri. ge, to dread an union with any
great Prince, whose power n ight be employed to
oppress their religion and liberties. They trembled
at the thoughts of a match with a foreigner; and
if the Crown should be strengthened by new domi-
nions or alliances, they foreclw that the royal pre-
rogative would soon be stretched beyond its ancient
and legal limits. Their cagernefs to prevent this
could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms of
England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them
her aid, towards obltrue.ing a mtJfure bs di!igrce-
able to herself. 'Twas ely for them t fcizc the
person of the Sovereign. By the aillfance of the
En^lilh fleet, they cculd render it di'l.Ciclt for any
foreign 'rince to land in Sc'.tland. The Roman
Catholics, now an inconfi'erabl party in the king-
dorm, and difpiiited by the lols of te Earl of
1 Iuntly, could give no oibllruticn to their designs.
To what violent extremes, the rational ..bhorrence
of a foreign yoke mi ht have been carric!, is ma-

nifedt

Bo o K nifet from the tranfadions both previous, and sub-

II. sequent to the present period.
156.

3 So R these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed willing
to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to remove
the je loufi s of Elizabeth, and to quiet the fears of
her own subjects.
A Parlia. T HE Parliament met this year, for the first time,

ty 2'1d. since the Queen's return into Scotland. Mary's ad-

minftration had hitherto been extremely popular.
Her Ministers possesscd the confidence of the na-
tion; and, by confcquence, the proceedings of that
assembly were conducted with perseEt unanimity.
The grant of the earldom of Murray to the Prior
of St. Andrew's was confirmed: The Earl of Hunt-
ly, and s!veral of his vassals and dependants, were
attainted: The attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange,
and fme of his accomplices in the murder of Car-
dinal Batoun, was re' erfcd *: The at of oblivion,
mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the
royal fanclion. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify thar treaty, took care that this fanc-
tion Ihould not be deemed any acknowledgement
of its validity; she granted her consent mncr ly in
condeftenfion to the Lords in'Parliament, who, on
their knees, besought her to allay the jealousies and
apprehensions of her fubjeas, by uch a gracious
law -.

* Knox, 330. t Srotf. 88.

No

No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to B o o

procure the Queen's assent to the laws establishing III.
the Protestant religion. Her Ministers, though zea- 1563.
lous Protestants themselves, were aware that this Nothling
co'ild not be urged without manifest danger and im- de',rmine^

with regard

prudence. She had consented, through their influ- to religioni
ence, to tolerate and protet the reformed doctrine.
They had even prevailed on her to imprison and
prosecute the Archbilhopof St. A ndrew's, and Prior
of Whithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her
proclamation*. Mary, however, was still paflion-
ately devoted to the Romi(h fuperfition; and tho',
from political motives, he had granted a temporary
proteation of opinions, which file disapproved, there
were no grounds to hope that fIe would agree to
eftabliih them for perpetuity. The mcderation of
those who professed it, was the befc method for re-
conciling te Queen to the Proteftan religion.
Time. might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at Lit lle might
yield to the wishes of her people, what their impor-
tunity or their violence could never have extorted.
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in
Parliament; and to defeat all thle, by such a f:ti-
lels and ill-timed application to the (Quecn, would
have been equally injurious to indiviitulls, a:.. de-
triinental to the public.

THE zeal of the Proteflanlt clcre;v v.is i.;ca;' to all ,,l,;, .

there coniderations of policy. I'.a':r and i.:a- " '0
tienr, it brookcd no Idelay: ir.:c e !;i incic;i.'C, it

* i:!', '9.

B o o K would condescend to no compliances. The leading

II- men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of

establishing religion by law, was not to be neglet-
ed. They pronounced the moderation of the cour'
tiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to gain the
Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox
solemnly renounced the friendship of the Earl of
Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so blind-
ly zealous for her ifrvice, as to become regardless
of thofeobjedts which he had hitherto esteemed most
sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of
Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at that
period, continued above a year and an half *.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in

whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. These
echoed ore loudly than ever, with declarations
against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with
bitter reproaches against thoie, who, from interest-
ed motives, had deserted that cause, which they

a,, oc4- once reckoned it their honour to support. The
ul"lit a- people, inflamed by such vehement declamations,
song tlh which were dictated by a zeal more sincere than

prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable ats of
violence. During the Queen's absence, on a pro-
grefs into the welt, nills continued to be celebrated
Ausuf. in her chapel at Ioly-rood house. The multitude

of those who openly relorted thither, gave great
ofFi:.nce to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being

* KI.ox, j31.s

free

free from the restraint which the royal presence im- B o o t
poled, affcmblcd in a riotous manner, interrupted III.
the ervice, and filled such as were present, with the '"
utmolt conternation. Two of the ringleaders in 53
this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for
their trial *.

KNox, who esteemed the zeal of these persons Knoxtried

laudable, and their conduc meritorious, confidered n"'' that
them as sufferers in a good cause; and in order to acquitted.
screen them from danger, he issued circular letters,
requiring allwho profelfedthe true religion, or were
concerned for the prefcrvation of it, to assemble at
Edinburgh on the day of trial, that by their pre-
fence, they might comfort and alfift their distressed
brethren-t. One of these letters fellinto the Queen's
hands. To assemble the fubjeets without the au-
thority of the Sover ign, was construed to be trea-
Ion, and a resolution was taken to prosecute Knox
fur that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily Decem. 1
for him, his judges were not only zealous Protest-
ants, but the very men, who, during the late com-
motions, had openly refifed, and set at defiance the
OQecn's authority. It was unlkr precedents, drawn
fr In their own condut, that Knox endeavoured to
iheltcr himself. Nor would it have been an easy
;natter for these Counfcllors t.) lave found out a
dti'lin:lon, by which they could censure him, with-
ULi condemning themselves. After a long hearing,
;.e was unanim,.utly acqt:itted. Sinclair Biflop of

ofs, and Prelident of the Court of SelTion, a zea-

Knox, 33;, + lb;J. 35.'
2 ]Ie:s

B o o K ous Papist, heartily concurred with theother C6un.

III. fellors in this decision ; a remarkable fa&, which

6 Ihows the unsettled state of government in that age;

the low condition to which regal authority was then
funk; and the impunity with which subje&s might
invade those rights of the Crown, which are now
held sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued
Negocia- still to be the objea of attention and intrigue.
regrd Though Elizabeth, even while she wished to direct
the Qreen's Mary, treated her with a difgufiful reserve; though

she kept her, without necefity, in a slate of sus-
pence; and hinted often at the person, whom he
defined to be her husband, without directly men-
tioning his name; yet Mary framed all her actions to
expreisfuch a prudent refpe& for the English Queen,
that foreign Princes began to imagine he had
given herself up implicitly to her direction t. The
profpet of this union alarmed Catherine of Medicis.
Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all along, in
doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon
after the Duke of Guise's death, he had put upon
hera most mortifying indignity, by (topping the pay-
ment of her dowry, by depriving her subjea the
Duke of ChaLulherault of his pension, and by be-
flowing the command of the Scottifl Guards on a
Frenchman:; flfi resolved, however, to prevent
this dangerous conjunction of the British Queens.
For this purpose, the now employed all her art to
appeatl Mary 搂, to whom fie had given so many

* Knox, 4 t Kc Iithi, 24q. Id. 244.
$ Scu .\pp;;:dix, No. x 111.

caures

causes of offence. The arrears of her dowry were B o o K
instantly paid; more punaual remittances were pro- II.
miled for the future; and offers made, not only to 6
reRore, but to extend the privileges of the Scottith 564.
nation in France. It was easy for Mary to pene-
trate into the motives of this sudden change; she
well knew the characer of her mother-in-law, and
laid little stress upon professions of friendihip,
which came from a Princess of such a false and un-
feeling heart.

THE negociation with England, relative to the

marriage, suffered no interruption, from this appli-
cation of the French Queen. As Mary, in com-
pliance to her subjects, and pressid by the ltrongef:
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry,
Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable M3rci.
silence, which he had hitherto assetcd. The Ie- Elizabeth
cret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert [m,'dLei-
Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared ceterrohor
to be the happy man, whom he had chosen to be b:,i.
the husband of a Qleen courted by so many
Princes *.

ELIZABETH'S wifdo-n and penetration were re.

markable in the choice of her Ministers; in dittin-
guifhing her favourites, those great qualities were
less conspicuous. She was influenced in tvo cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their
capacity for bulinefs, their knowledge, their pru.
dence, were the talents to which alnll Ihe atended

* K itLh, 2 1.
VOL. I. X in

B o o K in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and grace-'

III fulness of perion, polished manners, and courtly

' address, were the accomplishments on which he be-
1564. flowed her favour. She ated in the one cafe with

the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, the disco-
vered the weaknes of a woman. To this Leicef-
ter owed his grandeur. Though remarkable nei-
ther for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abi-
lities, the Queen's partiality distinguished him on.
every occasion. She raised him to the highest ho-
nours, he bellowed on him the most important em-
ployments, and manifested an affetion so difpro-
portionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that
age, it could be accounted for only by the power of
planetary influence .

Mary o- THE high spirit of the Scottith Queen could not
fended t well bear the first overture of a match with a sub-

je&t. Her own rank, the splendor of her former
marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of so
many powerful Princes, crouded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dif-
rcfpeEtful Elizabeth's proposal was. She diffem-
bled, however, with the English Resident; and
though nie declared, in strong terms, what a de-
gradation (he would deem this alliance, which
brought along with it no advantage, that could
justify such neglect of her own dignity, he men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in
terms full of refpectt.

* Camden, 5.,9. , Keithi, 25;.

L 1

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wish thatB o o K

the proposal hould be received in any other man- III.
ner. After the extraordinary marks Ihe had given 156.
of her own attachment to Leicester, and while he Elizabeth's
was fill in the very height of favour, it is not pro- rieo in
bable she could think seriously of bestowing him mending
upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade, but
only to amuse Mary*. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
solicited by her fubjets, and courted by the great.
eft Princes in Europe, she had hitherto been pre-
vented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the Englifli
Queen could have engaged Mary to liflen to her
proposal in favour of Leicester, her power over this
creature of her own would have enabled her to pro-
trat the negociation at pleasure; and by keeping
her rival unmarried, she would have rendered the
p!ofpea of her fuccefflon less acceptable to the
Englilh.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely deli-

cate, and embarrassing. To gain poffeflion of the
most amiable woman of the age, to carry svway this
prize from so many contending Princes, to mount
the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have fla:-
tered the ambition of a lubject, much more conli-
derable than him. He s:aw all these advantages, no
doubt; and, in fecrct, they made their full im-
preflion on him. Bur, without offending L'lizabeth,
he durst not venture on the most diflanc discovery
of his sentiments, or take any tep towards facili-

* Melv. 104, to;.

X 2 tatng

B o o K tating his acquisition of objects so worthy of de.

III. fire.

4 ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards

him, which she was at no pains to conceal*, might
inspire him with hopes of'attaining the supreme
rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scotland.
Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her
resolution to lead a single life, and his being born
her own fubje&, would have hindered her from
chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often fur-
mounted by love; and Leicester might flatter him-
seif, that the violence of her affection would at
length triumph both over the maxims of policy,
and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proporal of
his marriage with the Scottihf Queen to be a pro-
jeet for his deftrudtion; and he imputed it to the
malice of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of
doing him honour, intended to ruin him in the
good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary -.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen,

who dreaded its success; listened to by another,
who was secretly determined against it; and scarce
desired by the man himself, whose interest and re-
j:utation it was calculated, in appearance, to pro.
mote; could not, under so many unfavourable cir-
cumfances, be brought to a fortunate issue. Both
lliz'ibeth and Mary continued, however, to aa
wiLh equal dissimulation. The former, notwith-

* Mclv. 93, 94. t Ibid. og.

standing

standing her fears of losing LeiceRfer, folicitedB o o K
warmly in his behalf. The latter, though Ihe be- 1I.
gan about this time to cast her eyes upon another S贸
fubje& of England, did not, at once, venture
finally to reje& Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn Mary en.

her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, thoughts of
eldest son of the earl of Lennox. That nobleman, mSnrdyiD
having been driven out of Scotland under the re- y.
gency of the Duke of Chatelheraulr, had lived in
banishment for twenty years. His wife, Lady
Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous
rival in her claim upon the English fuccefion. She
was the daughter of Margaret, the elellt filRer of
Henry VIIi. by the Earl of Angus, whom tha'i
Queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of
succession was not fettled with the fame accuracy,
as at prefenr. Time, and the deciion of almost
every cafe that can poflibly happen, have at lait in-
troduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
is fubjeet to all the variety, arising from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imagi-
nary analogies. Lady Lennox, though born of a
second marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daugh-
ter, Mary only the grandaughter of Margaret.
This was not the only advantage over Mary which
Lady Lennox cnji ycd. She was born in England,
and by a maxim of law in that country, with re.
gard to private inheritances, " whoever i not born
in Elngland, or at Iealt of parents, lwho, at the

X 3 time

B o K time of his birth, were in the obedience of the

III. King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in
v 'the kingdom '." This maxim, Hales, an Eng-
x564.

li4hl lawyer, produced, in a treatise, which he pub-
lifhed at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to
the right of fucceflion to the Crown. In a private
cause, there pretexts might have given rife to a long
and doubtful litigation; where a Crown was at stake,
such nice disputes and fubtilties were to be avoided
with the utmost care. If Darnly should happen to
contract an alliance with any of the powerful fami-
lies in England, or hould publickly profess the
Protestant religion, these plausible and popular to-
pics might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the
Fretenfions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to

prevent any danger from that quarter, had early
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correspondence
with the family of Lennox. In the year 562 t,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken
into cultody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of
their holding a secret correfpondtnce with the
Scottith Qleen.

E!.ahrt, FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the
c~'f'Y difficulties, which would attend her marrying a so-
wih :,is. reign Prince, he entered into a still closer Connexion

with the Earl of Lennox , and invited him to re-
turn into Scotland. This he endeavoured to con-
ceal fron Elizabeth; but a tranl'ation of 1b much

+ Carte, Hil. of Eng. vol. iii. 422. t Camnd 39.

Id. 3,6.

iin

importance did not escape the notice of that dif- B o o K
cerning Princess. She oblerved, but did not inter- III.
rupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly x 64.
with her views, concerning Scottish affairs. She 5
was pleated to fee the pride of the Scottilh Queen
stoop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub-
je& to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to
excite her jealousy, or her fears. His father's
estate lay in England, and by means of this pledge,
Ihe hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her
own hands, to play the fame game of artifice and
delay, which she had planned out, if her recom-
mendation of Leicester had been more favourably
received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no sub-

jet of one kingdom could pass into the other with-
out the permission of both sovereigns; no sooner
did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, he gave him
letters, warmly recommending his person and cause
to Mary's friend(hip and protection *. But, at the
fame time, as it was her manner to i.volve'all her
tranfations with regard to Scotland, in some de-
gree of perplexity and contradiction; fl;e warned
Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might prove
fatal to herself, as his return could not fail of re-
viving the ancient animosity between him and the
houfc of Hamilton.

* Kc;th, , 2, 68,

X 4 TIIS

B o K THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

III. drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,

贸'" ' for some time, a total interruption of allcorrefpond-
1564.

ence between the two Queens *. Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; the both dreaded the effe&s
of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly the dif-
advanLage of being excluded from a free intercourse
with England, where her Ambassadors had, all
along, carried on, with some success, secret nego-
ciations, which increased the number of her parti-
zans, and paved her way towards the throne. In
order to remove the causes of the present difficulty,
Melvil was sent express to the court of England.
He found it no difficult matter to bring about a re-
concilement; and oon re-established the appear.
ance, but not the confidence of friendship, which
was all that had subsisted, for some time, between
the two Queens.

DuRING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions

of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in name of his
Mitrcfs, were made in the language of the warm-
eit and most cordial friendship. But what Melvil
truly observes, with refpet to Elizabeth, may be
exteniicd without injutice to bothQueens. " There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great diflimulation, envy and fear t."

Lrnox ar. LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence
Scotand. which he had obtained, set out for Scotland, and

was received by the Queen, not only with the re-
fpFe& due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the royal

* Keith, 253. Melv . t. Mclv. ac4.

fa

family, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, B o o x
which could not fail of inspiring him with more IlI.
elevated hopes. The rumour of his son's marriage a -
to the Queen began to spread over the kingdom; and 56.
the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him, asthe
father of their future Mafier. The Duke of Cha-
telherault was the first to take the alarm. He con-
fidered Lennox, as the ancient and hereditary ene-
my of the house of Hamilton; and, in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But
the Queen interposed her authority to prevent any
violent rupture, and employed all her influence to
bring about an accommodation of the differences *.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread-

ed Lennox's return, from an apprehension, that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER thee preliminary steps, Mary ventured Dcccibte,

to call a meeting of Parliament. The a of br-
feiture, passed against Lennox in the year 154,.
was repealed, and he was publicly restorcd to the
honours and eate of his ancestors :.

THE ecctfiltEcal tranfaFtions of this year were june IS.
not confidcraLle. In the alrfnblics of the church, Dec'. .s

Kith, 2. t Id.

I . Notc ().
$ See Appendix, No. IX.

the

B o o K the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the

II. fame representations concerning the poverty of the
-64 clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen

Theclergy made to these, and her promises of redress, were
ffpicious" more attisfyig to the Protestants than any they
of the pecen's had hitherto obtained *. But, notwithstanding her
zeal for
opery. declarations in their favour, they could not help

harbouring many suspicions concerning Mary's de-
signs against their religion. She had never once
consented to hear any preacher of the reformed doc-
trine. She had abated nothing of her bigotted at-
tachment to the Romifi faith. The genius of that:
superstition, averse, at all times, from toleration,
was, in that age, fierce and unrelenting. Mary
had given her friends on the continent repeated as-
furances of her resolution to re-establish the Catho-
lic church --. She had induitrioufly avoided every
opportunity of ratify ing the ass of Parliament 1560,
in favour of the Reformation. Even the protetion,
which ever since her return, she had afforded the
Protestant religion, was merely temporary, and de-
clared by her own proclamation to be of force, only
* till (he hould take some final order in the mat-
ter of religion 1." The vigilant zeal of the preach-
ers was inattentive to none of there circumstances.
The coldnc's of their principal leaders, who were,
at this time, entirely devoted to the court, added
to their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they esteemed suit-
able to the ncceflity of the times, and which the
Queen reckoned dilrefpectful, and insolent. In a

* Keith, ;. 5;,9. t Carte, vol. iii. 415.
: Keith, 5jo, 510,

meet-

meeting of the General Assembly, Maitland pub- B o o K
lickly accused Knox of teaching seditious do&trine, III.
concerning the right of fubjeas to refill those So- 16-4
vereigns, who trespass against the duty which they 56
owe to the people. Knox was not backward tojuf-
tify what he had taught. And upon this general
doetrine of refifance, fojuft in its own nature, but
so delicate in its application to particular cafes, there
ensued a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
lents and chara&er of both the disputants; the
acuteness of the former, embellished with learning,
but prone to subtlety, the vigorous understanding
of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu-
perior to all fear .

Two years had already been consumed, in fruit- 1565.

less negociations concerning the marriage of the Didmula-
Scottish Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- Elizabeth
tunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- awih rgar
beth's proceedings, with refpe& to that affair. But, to her mar
in order to set the real intentions of the Englifth
Queen in a clear light, and to bring her to some
explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at
last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her Fb. ;
right of succession to the Crown of England were
publickly acknowledged, the was ready to yield to
the solicitations of his Miftrels in behalf of Leicef-
ter -t. Nothing could be farther than this from the
mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of
fuccelion was a mystery, which, during her whole
reign, herjealoufy preserved untouched, and unex-
plained. She had promised, however, when fle

; Knox, 349. t Keith, :69.

first

Bo o K first began to interest herself in the marriage of the

III. Scottifi Queen, all that was now demanded. How
X6c to retreat with decency, how to elude her former of-
565. ser, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained

permilion to visit the court of Scotland, was owing,
in all probability, to that embarrassment. From
the time of Melvil's embafly, Lady Lennox had
warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth
was no stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which
that young nobleman flattered himself. She had
received repeated advices from her Ministers, of the
sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour*. It was entirely in her power, to pre-
vent his stirring out of London. In the present
conjuncture, however, nothing could be of more
advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scot-
land. She had already brought one a&or upon the
stage, who, under her management, had, for a
long time, amused the Scottith Queen. She hoped,
no less absolutely, to dire& the motions of Darnly,
who was likewise her subjea; and again to involve
Mary in all the tedious intricacies of pegociation.
These motives determined Elizabeth and her Mi-
nifters to yield to the solicitations of Lady Lennox.

Darnly ar. Bur this deep laid scheme was in a moment dif-
Scotland. concerted. Such unexpeted events, as the fancy

of poets ascribes to love, are, at ome times, really
produced by that passion. An affair, which had
been the object of so many political intrigues, and

* Keith, 2z;, z261, z66.

had

had moved and interested so many Princes, was B o o K
at last decided by the sudden liking of the two young III.
persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the 1565
first bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and
gracefulness of person, he furpafed all his cotem-
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts, as
add cafe and elegance to external form, and which
enable it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary Gaios the

Qieen'$

was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full hian.
power of there accomplishmenrs. The impression
which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
from the time of their first interview. The whole Feb. '3-
business of the court was to amuse, and entertain
this illustrious guest *; and in all those scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-
ther superficial and howy, appeared to great ad-
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
came compleat; and inclination now prompted her
to conclude a marriage, the firtl thoughts of which
had been suggesttd by considerations merely poli-
tical.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with-

out design, to increase the violence of this pafflon.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, she, in re-
turn to that meffge, whereby Mary had signified
her willingness to accept f Lciceftcr, gave an an-
fwer, in such terms, as plainly unravelled her ori-
ginal intention in tl;at intrigue t. She promilid, if
the Scottish Queen's marriage with Leicelter (flould
take place, to advance him to great honours, but
with regard to her title to the Englilh 1ltcccfion,

* Knox, 39. t K:itl, 27c. .Appt!. 53,

fe

B o o she would neither susser any legal inquiry to be

III. made concerning it, nor permit it to be publicly

-a 'recognized, till lhe herself should declare her refolu-

tion never to marry. NotwithRanding Elizabeth's
former promises, Mary had reason to expect every
thing contained in this reply; her high spirit, how-
ever, could not bear, with patience, such a cruel
discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mock-
ery with which, under the veil of friendhip, he
had been so long abused. She burst into tears of
indignation, and expressed, with the dtmoft bitter-
ness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her *.

THE natural effect of this indignation was to add

to the impetuosity with which she pursued her own
scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love,
she observed no defefts in the man, whom she had
chosen; and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impa-
tience, natural to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen;

the canon law made it necessary to obtain the Pope's
dispensation, before the celebration of the marriage.
For this purpose, he early set on foot a negotiation
with the court of Rome -t

The rench SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring
court aof the consent of the French King and his mother.
the matsc. Having communicated her design, and the motives

Whi h determined her choice, to Caftclnau theFrench

.Keith, Append. 59. t Camd, 396.

Am

Ambafador, she employed him, as the most pro- B o o K
per person, to bring his court to fall in with her III.
views. Among other arguments to this purpose, X. 6
Catclnau mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly,
which he represented to be so violent and deep-
rooted, that it was no longer in her own power to
break off the match*. Nor were the French Mi-
nifters backward in encouraging Mary's paflion.
Her pride would never scoop to an alliance with a
fubjest of France. By this choice, they were deli-
vered from the apprehension of a match with any
of the Austrian Princes, as well as the danger of
too close an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly
professed the Roman Catholic religion, this suited
the bigotted schemes which that court had adopted.

WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile so- Darnly d.-r

gufis Feve-

reign courts to a measure which she had so much at ,, of th
heart; Darnly, and his father, by their behaviour, nbles'
were raiing up enemies at home, to obftruft it.
Lennox had, during the former part of his life, di!-
covered no great compass of abilities, or political wis-
dom; ad appears to have been a man of a weak un-
derftanding, and violent parlions. Darnly was not
superior to his father in und(ertnding, and all his
paflions were still more impetuous -. To these, he
added that insolence, which the advantage of exter-
nal form, when accompanied with no quality more
valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the
Queen's favour, he began already to assume the
haughtiness of a King, and to put on that imperi-

Caleln. 464. t Ktiih, 272, 273.

8 . Ous

B o o K ous air, which majesty itself can scarce render to-

UI. lerable.

z565.
pnia'cuarly IT was by the advice, or at least with the consent
Murray. of Murray, and his party, that Lennox had been

invited into Scotland *; and yet, no sooner did he
acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noble-
men, who were known to be avowed enemies to
Murray, and with regard to religion, to be either
neutrals, or favourers of Popery t. Darnly, still
more imprudent, allowed tome raih expreflions con-
cerning those favours, which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him :.

BUT, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust of
the nobles.

The rire o THE low birth, and indigent condition of this
rzio's fa-
Rour. faman, placed him in a tation, in which he ought

naturally to have remained unknown to posterity.
But what fortune called him to a&, and to susser in
Scotland, obliges history to descend from its dig-
nity, and to record his adventures. He was the
son of a musician in Turin, and having accompa-
nied the Piedmontefe Ambaffidor. into Scotland,
gained admilnion into the Queen's family, by his
kill in muic. His servile condition had taught
him suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.

' Knox, 367. Keith. 274. t Keith, 272. . IJ. 274.

He

He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her B o o K
French Secretary happening to return at that time il .
into his own country, was preferred by her to that ~~~"

156.

office. He now began to make a figure in court,
路and to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
The whole train of suitors and expetants, who
have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths
which lead moit direLtly to fuccels, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over tlil: Queen, and he grew to be con-
fidered not only as a favourite, but as a Minister.
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which al-
ways attends such an extraordinary and rapid change
of fortune. Hc studied, on the contrary, to dif-
play the whole extent of his favour. He aiReed
to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen il
public. Heequalled the greatest and molt opulent
lubjets, in richness of (dress, and in the number of
his attendants. He discovered, in ail his behavi-
our, that afliuming infblence, with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with
the utmofl indignation that the nobles behel the
power; it was with the utnmof difficulty, that they
tolerated the arrogance, of this unworthy minion.
Even in the Quieen's prelcncc they could not for-
bear treating him with marks ot contempt. Nor
was it his exorbitant power alone, which exalpratcd
the Scots. They conlidercd lini, an.! not withouc
reason, as a dangercus enemy to tc roicftant 1c-
ligion, and iLifpccdcd that he held, fur this lpupoi:,
a lecret orrcisondence witli the court of KRnmc .

VOL uc, .

M.. 1II.
VOL. I. Y IT

B o o K IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under te ma.-

111. nagement of this man, who, by flattery and affi-

duity, easily gained on his vanity, and inexperience.

56.5.

Dalny' Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was employ-
cunnietionl ed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt,
with him.

towards ftalbifihing him more firmly in her assec-
tions *. But whatever benefit he might reap from
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con-
te;l:pt, and even infamy, to which he was ex-
pt:,l;, on account of his familiarity with such an
. itir:.

T ;:ov. Darnly daily made progress in the

Queten's afEtiicns, {he condlcled '. erfelf, however,
wit!; such prudent rlerve, as to impose on Ran-
dolph the English Relident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this
period, that he entertained not the leaf suspicion
of the intri ue which was crrying on; and gave
his court repeated afir..nces, that te Scotil
Queen had no dcfign cf marr) ing Darn'y -. In
thel midll of his c'.rity, rvM'ary difpatc! ed Mait-
lald to ignify iher intention to Elizabeth, and to
luiicit her confic!: to the ircarriage with Darnly.
This enjmalTy was t!e firfi: iling, which opened the
c es of Randolpl.

nAprl I". .2L~LIZA.rBTH a tfeccd the greatefl fu:.-::: :': 'his

垄K;tii.uiri fuddtl n resolution of the Scortis; ( . ).:; 1, . v, th
(:J.>ru> a-
r.aiinit. le out realfn. The train \was lidl by ic'r.!r, .!:ii!
cIe

h,,,,,.. ad no caule to w.oniclr when it took c.L-;.. '-jit
.y. .' .in . .x : i .i, at tl.c tv:c ;tn ', i,, r d .! ::; ' '.... ' ft

*" ?..,; . I I. , I'.. '

, : ,,. I,.;
-i '; ': . i ').

the

the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended B o o
to foresee many dangers and inconveniences arising IIl.
from it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was 6
mere affeaation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impossible
the could make any choice more inoffensive. The
danger of introducing a foreign intercft into Britain,
which Elizabeth had fojuftly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and pofflffcd of lands in both kingdoms, could be
formidable to neither. It is evident from all there
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of
danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in
all her violent declarations againfl Darnly, there
was much more of grimace than of reality*.

THERRF were not wanting, however, political

motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great displeasure.
Mgry, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrue
with a weakness that little suited the di;ity of her
mind, and the elevation of her character. Besides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom vwas the gtac
object of Lliiabeth's policy; and by declaring :;r

E.Ce: the Hiilolians of that ae :-l':n,.'Iled'e, iiit t'le

rr.arri:ac of the co.)ti!'.h Q e n nvith a i.l'j*-t \.was .r ilon b -
i. diihgL'Cee:lib! to !i. icth. Kno:;, :(:, 33. L'cc!:. . '39.
C cl.al u ,

lh. , , :: that time, was vti' a.tl.i.,;.:d i.; ; 11 -
i-

Y2 di-

B o o K dissatisfaction with Mary's conduct, he hoped to

Ill. alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached
j565^ to the Englith interelf, and to encourage such of

the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, open-
ly to oppole it. The feeds of discord would, by
this means, be scattered through that kingdom.
Inteisine commotions might arise. Amidst these,
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes,
to which the union of her people might have
prompted her. Elizabeth would become the um-
pire between the Scottish Queen, and her contend-
ing subjects. And England might look on, with
lecurity, while a storm, which she had raised,
wafled the only kingdom, which could possibly dif-
turb its peace.
Mr.y . IN prosecution of this scheme, he laid before

her Privv Council the mefage from the Scottiih
Queen, and contillted them with regard to the an-
s.er fie should return. Their determination, it is
alty to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her
frcret views. They drew up a remonitrance against
tl.e irs.ended matcl, full cf the imaginary dangers
.ith vhich tat event threa:ened the kingdom*.

, GNo:- did the tink it enr.ugh, to' ignify her clilap-
'i : .o- 'probation of the neaflure, either by Maitland,
t,,au., Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph, her own

Relident in Scotland; in order to add more dig-
nity to the farce which fie chose to a, she ap-
pointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambalfador
Extraordinary. She co:::manded hiu to declare, in
the ftrongctt terms, her difLtisfaiioL \with the flep

*Kcith, 74. See Aperd. No. X.

which

which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame B o o K
time, to produce the determination of the Privy 111.
Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the 56
nation were not different from her own. Not lung J
after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prisoner, firt
in her own house, and then lent her to the Tower *.

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland,'be-

fore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In the
first transports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
no longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth;
and ent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return inflantly to the Englifl
court, and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth,
that after having been amused so long to so little
purpose; after having been fooled, and imofed on
so grossly by her artifices; fne was now rlved to
gratify her own inclination, and to afi; no other con-
ent, but that of her own fubjcts, in the choice of
an husband. Maitland, with his uual l.{>;lciry,
foresaw all the effets of such a rafl andl arry mef-
sage, and ventured rather to incur the dili;leafii;c
of his Mistress, by disobeying her command::, th.ui
to be made the infirumcint of tearing afiinJtr, so
violently, the few remaining ties, which still lil;lcd
together the two Queens -.

MARY herself soon became sensible of iher error.

She received the Englifl Ambassador with rei;cect;
juitified her own condu with decency; and though
unalterable in her recblution, flne affeEted a wonder.

' Kith, Append. 61. -t Id. :;c.

Y 3 fiu

B o o K ful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;

III. and even pretended, out of complaisance towards
I her, to put off the consummation of the marriage

for some months *. It is probable, however, that
the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the profpet
of gaining the consent of her own subje&s, were
the real motives of this delay.

Murray's THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost in-
aversion to
Dani. dultry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the

person in the kingdom, whose concurrence was of
the greatest importance; but ihe had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme dif-
ficulty. From the time of Lennox's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's assec-
tions began gradually to be etranged from him.
Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites,
combined against him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom
he was unable to contend t. The return of the
Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been
accused of a design upon his life, and who had refid-
ed for forme time in foreign countries, obliged him
to attend to his own safety. No intreaty of the
Queen could persuade him to a reconcilement with
that nobleman. He insisted on having him brought
to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not ap-
pear in opposition to a man, who came to the place

' ;,;;,, Anr. cr.di:C ;". ti. - Z7, 7;. Ar rrcnti. r;7.

o.

of trial, attended by 5000 of his followers on horse- B o o K
back. He was once more constrained to leave the I1I.
kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, the fen- -
tence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear- 565
ance, was not pronounced againit him .

MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much May .

importance it was, to gain a bjeit lb powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited him
back to court, and received him with many demon-
ftrations ofrelpe& and confidence. At lift she de-
fired him to set an example to her other subjects by
subscribing a paper, containing a formal approba-
tion of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many realbns to hesitate, and even to with-hold his
assent. DLrnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion,
a rooted averfin to his perlon. By continting t:)
his elevation to the throne, he would give him iuch
an acceflion of cignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly bellows on an enemy. The unhappy conl:-

:l:ci!C.s v.'hich might follow upon a breach with

)nilan,:l were, likewise, of confidrrable weight witil
Murray. He had always openly plrctcrlcd a confe-
dcracy w\ith nglandl, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his mieans chi; fl, this change in
the fytlemi of national pulitics had bcen bro!ght
;iabout. A lea uc with Eniland haLl bcn dc'ablii-
c ; and he could nct think of I. critici:g, to a ra.sh
a;lr1 yo(uth'll parion, an alli.nce ofl ) i 'uch u;t!ity
to itc kingd:m; and wlhichl he and th cu:'lr nobles

Y 4 wMcTre

B o o K were bound, by every obligation, to maintain *.

1II. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this

occasion. Mary, though surrounded byProteftant
Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerous
correipondence with foreign Catholics. She had
even courted the Pope's protection, who had sent
her a subsidy of Sooo crowns -t. Though Murray
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the
reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's conduct in
the most favourable light, yet her obltinate adhe-
rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm-
ing him, and by her resolution to marry a papist,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,
vwas for ever cut off. Each of there considerations
had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-
mined him to decline complying, at that time, with
the Queen's request.

SyT '4. THE convention of nobles, which was aembled
lt Loi.n.-
ion of !le a few days after, discovered a greater disposition to
' ' gratify the Queen. Many of them, without hefita-
'..,in. tion, exprefed their approbation of the intended

match ; bu: as others were start!ed at the fame dan-
gers which had alarmed Murray, orwere influenced
by his example, to refuse their consent, another
Convention was appointed at Perth, in order to de-
liberate more fully concerning this matter.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The

* cith, IC.q. - i . 2;35. icl. 114.

l Kcltl, 283. Kr.0x, 373.

oppo-

opposition the had hitherto met with, and the many B o o K
contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her III.
inclination, produced their usual effec on her heart, 156
they confirmed her passion, and increaied its vio-
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an assec-
tion, to excessive, to the influence of witchcraft *.
It was owing, however, to no other charm, than
the irrefitible power of youth and beauty over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
and the applause of many among her subje&s, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
able, and he could no longer bear advice, far less
contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
the first perobn who informed him that Mary, in
order to ooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for tome
time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a fren-
zy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to stab
him --. It required all Mary's attention, to pre-
vent his falling under that contempt, to which iich
behaviour defervedy exposed him.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- M.ry's ad.

dress more remarkably displayed. Love sharpened ,gi ir
her invention, and made her itudy every method of ubjcs'
gaining her fubjefts. Many of the nobles she won
by her address, and more by her promifcs. On
some he bellowed lands, to others the gave ne- ti-
tles of honour t. 'ihe even condecended to court
the Protceiant clergy; and having invited three of
their fperintendants to Stirling, he declared, in

路 .eith, 283. t bl,'. Appent. 16;. : Ibid. 283.

strong

B o o K strong terms, her resolution to prote& their religion,

III. expressed her willingness to be present at a confe-
-- rence upon the points in do&rine which were dif-
1565. puted between the Protestants and Papists, and went

so far as to show some desire to hear such of their
preachers as were most remarkable for moderation *.
By these arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon
the people, who, unless theirjealoufy be raised by
repeated injuries, are always ready to view the ac-
tions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his aflociates

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
tal';d in so high a strain, of her displeasure at the
intended match; he treated Lady Lennox with so
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottish Queen in
such strong terms; ihe recalled the Earl of Lennox
and his son, in fucl a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if they
fhouid presume to disobey t; that all these expref-
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her fin.
cerity. This belief fortified their scruples with re-
spect to the match, and encouraged them to oppose
it. They began with forming among themselves
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they en-
tered into a fecrer correspondence with the English
Resident, in order to fcure Elizabeth's aflance
when it fiould become needful ; they endeavoured
to fill the nation wilh such apprehensions of dl;n-
ger, as might counterbalance the influence of clioic
arts, which the CQecn had employed.

* Kn, -,. * K'ih .;, 2'.'.

Ibi . -59,
: $:, 5 9 ;.S

BcSlDI j

BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly car- B o o K

tied on, by both parties, dark designs of a more cri- III.
minalnature, and morefuitable to the spirit of theage. 6

1565.

Darnly, impatient of that opposition, which he im- Schemes of
puted wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate Darny and

Murray a-

to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot gaint aach
to aflafinate him, during the meeting of the Con- other.
vention at Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing
of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and
the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effe&,

this convention might have been attended with con-
sequences extremely tragical; but both were ren-
dered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, be-
ing warned of his danger by ome retainers to the
court, who still favoured his interest, avoided the
blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intel-
ligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with the ut-
wn e expedition, along with Darnly, to the otherfide
of Forth. Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and in-
flamed with resentment, it was impoflible they could
either forget the violence, which themselves had me-
ditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against
them. From that moment, all hope of reconcile-
mtnt vwas at an end, and their mutual enmity burst
ou with every 1ymptoin of implacable hatred *.

ON

' The reality of th'e two opposite conspiracies has givcn
occasion to many disputes and much cntradition. S deny

that

B o O K ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, he summoned

III. her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by
'Y ' her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
Mary fum- tedaion of her person against her foreign and do-
mons her mesic
vatils to
take arms
a^ainlt that any design was formed against the life of Murray ; others
lMurray. call in queflion the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly.

There seen, however, to be good reasons for believing both ;
thc.ugh the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added to
each, many exaggerated circumtances. The following argu.
ments render it probable, that ome violence was intended
againf Murray.

I. This is positively aferted by Buchanan, 341. 2. The Eng-

lifli Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was afluredly inform.
ed that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and describes
the manner in which this plot was to have been executed.
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself constantly and publicly affirm-
ed, that such a delign was formed against his life. Keith, App.
ic8. And though he was called upon by the Queen to bring
legal evidence of his aertion, and a safe condut offered him,
while he came to court for that purpose; Ibid. yet whoever
confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled
in court at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt,
that he did not chufe to rifle his person on such security. 4. The
furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of his resentment, which
scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, render the
imputation of such a crime lcIt improbable.

II. That Murray and his afrociates had resolved to seize

Darnly's person, appears with ill greater certainty; . From
the express tellimony of Melvil, 112. although Buchanan,
p. 341. and Knox, p. 377. affect, without any reason, to re-
prcnt this as an idle rumour. 2. The quction vas put to Ran-
dollh, whether the Governor of erwick would receive Lennox
and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This
plainly hews, that rome fich design was in hand, and Randolph
did not difcourngc it by the answer which he gave, Keith, 29o.
3. The precipitation, with which the Qpecn retired, and the

reafiun

meftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the B o o K
promptness and alacrity, with which fubjefs run to III.

reason he gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned by Ran. 1565.
dolph, Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottifl nobles,
and among these the Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were
themselves privy to the design, afert the reality of the confpi-
racy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All there circumnftances leave little room to doubt of the truth

of both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this proof,
though drawn from public records, falls short, on both fides, of
legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
accounts of the conspiracy againil Murray, differ widely in al-
most every circumstance. The accounts of the attempt i:pon
Darnly, are not more consistent. Mclvil alledges, that the dc-
sign of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner into Eng-
land; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ra.-
dolph fays, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. An-
drew's, and Darnly to Castle Campbell. The Lords, in their
declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been to
murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Loch-
leven during life, and to usurp the government. To believe
implicitly, whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to
which Antiquaries are extremely prone. Ancient papers, how-
ever, often contain nothing more than the sanders of a party,
and the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred
to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very
heat of faction. Many things assertcd in it, are evidently fl'e,
or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as amhii-
tious as we can suppose, they muf have had ome pretences,
and Flaufible ones too, before they could venture to impribon
their Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of government;
but, at that time, the Queen's conduf had afforded no colour-
able excuse for proceeding to such extrenities. It is, likewise,
remarkable, that in all the proclamations agairft Murray, of
which so many are published in Keith, Appendix lo8, &c. nci-
ther the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that hich e is al.
ledged to have formed againlt the Queen herself, are ever once
mentioned,

* Keith, 298. 9~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,L

B o o K defend a mild and popular administration. This

III. popularity, however, he owed in a great measure
565- to Murray, who had direced her administration

with great prudence. But the crime of opposing
her marriage, obliterated the memory of his former
services; and Mary, impatient of contradiction,
and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as
enemies to her person, determined to let him feel
the whole weight of her vengeance. For this pur-
pose the summoned him to appear before her upon
a hort warning, to answer to such things as should
be laid to his charge t. At this very time, Murray,
and the Lords who adhered to him, were afembled
at Stirling, to deliberate what course they should
hold, in uch a difficult conjuncture. But the cur-
rent of popular favour ran b strongly against them,
and, notwitliftanding some fears andjealoufies, there
prevailed in the nation such a general disposition to
gratify the Queen, in a matter which so nearly con-
cerned her, that, without coming to any other con-
c!uEon, than to implore the Queen of England's pro-
tcctin, they put an end to theirineff'ctual confulta-
tioas, and returned every man to his own house.

TOCGTHER with this discovery of the weakness

of r enemies, the confluence of her fubjedts froml
a!l courers cf the kingdom, afforded Mary an aree-

'- pro:af of her own strength. Whilk tle (,ulcen
v..s i:. tinis profpcrous situation, she d:rcrlnlld to
b: i,: o a; period, an alffir, which ha;d it long en-

o:'ofli ir1 h'er rt, and occupied her atic:iti(n. On

f Ki.h, Appen'. ioS.
7 the

the 29th of July, she married Lord Darnly. The B o o K
ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, ac- III.
cording to the rites of the Romith church; the '-

565.

Pope's bull dilpenfing with their marriage, having Celbrates
been previouly obtained*. She issued, at the her marri-

_ age with

fame time, proclamations, conferring the title ofDarnly.
King of Scots upon her husband, and command-
ing that henceforth all writs at law should run in
the joint names of King and Queen t. Nothing
can be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's
love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last
ftep. Whether he had any right to chufe a hus-
band, without consent of Parliament, was, in that
age, a matterof some dispute :; that (he had no right
to confer upon him, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of King; or, by a simple procla-
mation, to raise her husband to be the Mailer of
her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Fran-
cis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation;
and the content of Parliament was obtained, before
he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a
fubje&, rendered it still more ncceflary to havc the
concurrence of the supreme Council in his favcu'.
Such a violent and unprecedented l'etch of p;cro-
gative as the iLibftituting a proclaation in lace
of an act of Parliament, might have j.fliy alarmed
the nation. But the Qc;ecn p(;ff;iiicl so intircly tile
confidence of hlr fli.'jc.is, th.:r, nor. 'il: andi) all
the clamnoulr-s of the malccontn;;;, -:o ;: mtor;;s o:
gcncral dii:ontent appearcd on :;,t accou.'.

" eithl, 307. 'f .ndcr, .3. 33 Sc' . cn . N ;i. Xl.
4 L;chan. ,! 1.

I:.' 1:N

B o O K EVEN amidift that scene of joy, which always ac-

III. companies successful love, Mary did not susser the
'-贸' course of her vengeance against the malecontent
56' nobles to be interrupted. Three days after the

marriage, Murray was again summoned to court,
under the severest penalties, and upon his non-ap-
pearance, the rigour of justice took place, and he
was declared an out-law *. At the fame time, the
Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who, ever since
his father's insurrection in the year 1562, had been
detained a prisoner; lhe recalled the Earlof Suther-
land, who, on account of his concern in that con-
fpiracy, had fled into Slanders; and he permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The first,
and last of these, were among the most powerful
fubjets in the kingdom, and all of them animated
with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author
of their own sufferings. This common hatred be-
came the foundation of the firicteft union with the
Queen, and gained them an afcerrdant over all her
councils. Murray himfelfconfidered this confede-
racy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain
indication than any measure she had yet taken, of
her inexorable rfcntment.

Marches a- THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up
R.,ny M,,, arms t- But the Queen having ordered her sub-
a:rociates. jeiS

*Keith, 3cy, 310.

- Aftcr tcir f. uitlcs cor.fultntion in Silllng, the Lordls re-

tired to their own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was ltill at St.
Andrw's on Jlly zz, Kciih, 31. By the places of rcndz-

vous

,jets to march againfl them, they were diven toB o o K
the lat extremity. They found themselves unable Ill.
to make head against the numerous forces, which 1,6-
Mary had afftembled; and fled into Argylelire, in
expetation of aid from Elizabeth, to whjm thcy
had secretly difparched a meffciger, in order to
implore her immediate afliitance *.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to emba- Elizaetl

rafs Mary, by a new declaration of difgutt at her ,n'l,,, .i
conduct. She blamed both her choice of l.ordtvor'
Darnly, and the precipitation with hich file had
concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and
Iarnly, whom fle fill called her fubjets, to re-
turn into England; and at the fame time, he warm-
ly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
she represented to be not only innocent, but laud-
able. This meflage, so mortifying to the pride of
the Queen, and so full of contempt for her husband,
was rendered ill more insupportable, by the petu-
lant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
ibn who delivered it f. Mary vindicated hr own
conduct with warmth, but with great iirength of
realbn; and rejected the iterceflion in behalf of
Murray, not without ligns of reenltmcnit at lliza-

vous, appointed for the inlibitats of the dc'.-cnt c!u-nics,
Augutl 4, it nppl(::rs that thc (':'.: 's in:ctnion 'w.s tu mn.r.l
into Fife, the oilrtv in 'li:ch Ml.;' .U, .tirkies, Iilally, :d
other chiefs of the m.al c.'.tCI:S I: d Kii ..L i, 310. '1'hir
fli ht irt the well, I. ciil, t , pr- ctcti ti

L i. x;.Jiiioll, aI:d
the l;Jrmer icr;ldcz;vuu wa, al:,':cd, !..itni, 3 0.

' K.jit, 312. Knox, 3o. t Camd. 39s,
VOL. I. Z Lth's

B o K beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal

IlL. government of her kingdom *.
1565

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

least the ardour, with which he pursued Murray
and his adherents t. They now appeared openly in
arms; and having received a small supply in money
from Elizabeth :, were endeavouring to raise their
followers in the western counties. But Mary's vi-
gilance hindered them from assembling in any con-
fiderable body. All her military operations, at that
time, were concerted with wisdom, executed with
vigour, and attended with success. In order to en-
courage her troops, she herself marched along with
them, rode with loaded pistols II, and endured all
the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. Her
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refo-
lution, which, together with their superiority in
number, deterred the malecontents from facing them
in the field ; but having artfully passed the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edin-
burgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of
August 3. that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them

to remain long unmolested; and, on her approach,
they were forced to abandon that place, and retire
in confusion towards the western borders 搂.

* Keith, ApSend. 99.
t Tle mcft considerable persons who jined Murray, were

the Duke of Chatelherault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn,
Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
t unninghamhead. Balcomie, Carmylie, l.nwers, Bar, Dreghorn,
Piltarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 38z.

t Knox, 3t'o. ; Keitl, Append. 16+. 搂 d1. 315.

As

As it was uncertain, for ome time, what routB o o.K

they had taken, Mary employed thatinterval in pro. III.
viding for the security of the counties in the heart "~' '
of the kingdom. She seized the places of strength They are
which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the con- bed to

retire into

fiderable Barons in those hires, which the most sus- England.
peRed, to join in associations for her defence*.
Having thus left all the country behind her in
tranquillity, he, with an army 18,ooo frong,
marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had ent letters
to the Queen, from almost every place where they
halted, full of fubmifllon, and containing various
overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary,
who determined not to let flip such a favourable op-
portunity of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
jets, rejected them with disdain. As he advanced,
the malecontents retired. And, having received no
effectual aid from Elizabeth t, they despaired of
any other means of safety, fled into England, and Oaob. o.
put themselves under the protection of the Earl of
Bedford, Warden of the marches.

NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendship They mcee

for Murray could supply, was wanting to render` ,1,ux-
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- treatment
ed them with extreme negle&. She had fully gain- beth.
ed her end, and, by their means, had excited uIch
discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would,
in all probability, long diftraa and weaken Mary's
councils. Her business now, was to save appear-

Keith, Append. lI3. + See Appendix, No. XII. XIII.

Z 2 ances,

Bo o K ances, and to justify herself to the MinilRers of

III. France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting
("'' v the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The

5 5
' expedient ihe contrived for her vindication, strong-

ly displays her own character, and thewretched con-
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a so-
reign Prince. Murray, and Hamilton, Abbot of
Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugitives
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that
welcome reception which was due to men, who,
out of confidence in her promises, had hazarded
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly con-
fentedto acknowledge, in the presence of the French
and Spanilh Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner
did they make this declaration, than (he altonifled
them with this reply, " You have declared the
truth; I am far from letting an example of rebel-
lion to my own fubjets, by countenancing those
who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treason,
of which you have been guilty, is detestable; and
as traitors I banish you from my preence *." Not-
withtanding this scene of farce and of fallehood, so
diihonourable to all the persons who aced a part in
it, Elizabeth permitted the mrlecontents peaceably
to reside in her dominiions, lupplied them secretly
with money, and renewed lher iiterccilin with the
Scottilh Qucnl in their favour i.

TIE. advantage fle had gained over them did not
satisfy Mary; ile rfovcd to follow the blow, and

Melv. 1i. 'J Knox, 39.

to

to prevent a party, which he dreaded, from ever B o o K
recovering any footing in the nation. With this Ill.
view, ihe called a meeting of Parliament; and in '"
order that a sentence of forfeiture might be legally
pronounced against the banished Lords, he fum-
moned them, by public proclamation, to appear be- Decemb. r.
fore it *.

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not with-
out difficulty, as the King violently opposed it. He
was obliged, however, to leave the kingdom, and
to reside for some time in Frange --.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into

the field, the vigour with which he ated, and the
length of time she kept them in arms, resemble the
efforts of a Prince with revenues much more confi-
derable than those which ihe poflefled. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at finall
charge. The vassal followed his superior, and the
superior attended the Monarch, at his own expence.
Six hundred hIorfemen, however, and three com-
pazi:s of foot, bfliJcs her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extaordinary chlrge,
together with the deburfements occafoned by her
mariiagc, exhausted a treasury, which was far from
being r;ch. In this exigency, many devices were fal-
len upon for railing mon'y. Fines were lviclon the
toywns of St. Anl.rcw's, Perth, and Dunde, whichi
uere filperacd ol' favouting the malccortcnts. An
unulual tax was impoled on the burroughs tlhro)ih-

* !;l..I 3^. t Ins, 39.

Z 3 ot

B o o K out the kingdom; and a great fum was demanded

III. of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.
'A"- * This unprecedented exa&tion alarmed the citizens.

1565. They had recourse to delays, and started difficulties,

in order to evade it. These Mary conRrued to be
ats of avowed disobedience, and instantly commit-
ted several of them to prison. But this fcverity did
not subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Queen was
obliged to mortgage to the city, the fuperiorily
of the town of Leith, by which ihe obtained a
considerable fum of money *. The thirds of ec-
clefiaftical benefices proved another source, whence
the Queen derived some supply. About this time,
we find the Protestant clergy complaining more bit-
terly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is
probable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which
was appropriated for their maintenance t.
Church as- THE afemblies of the church were not uncon-

cerned fpetators of the commotions ofthis turbulent
year. In the meeting June 24, several of the male-
content nobles were present, and seem to have had
great influence on their decisions. The high firain
in which the assembly addressed the Queen, can be
imputed only to thole fears and jealoulies, with re-
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
into the nation. The aflembly complained, with
some bitterness, of the stop which had been put to
the progress of the Reformation by the Queen's arri-
val in Scotland; they required not only the total
fuppreflon of the Popilh worlhip throughout the

Knoy, 383, 386. - Maid. Ilif. of Edinburgh, 2-.

king-

kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; andB o o K
besides the legal eftablilhment of the Protestant re- III.
ligion, they demanded that Mary herself should X-'
publickly embrace it. The Queen, after some de-
liberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a ftep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a
change, which proceeded from no inward convic-
tion the latter would susser by the offence, which
her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and
her other allies on the continent *.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous Situation of

the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to work
some change in favour of her religion. The Earls
of Lennox, Athol, and Callils, openly attended
mass; he herself afforded the Catholics a more
avowed protetion than formerly; and, by her
permilion, some of the antient Monks ventured to
preach publickly to the people t.

Knox, 374, 376. 1 Id. 389, 390.

z +

# BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.

S the day appointed for the meeting of Parlia- B o o K
nunt approached, Mary and her Minifers IV.
were employed in deliberating concerning the course ''

3566.

which i was most proper to hold with regard to the Mary's dc.
exil'di nul;ls. Many motives prompted her to set liberations

concernin

no bounds to the rigour ofjuftice. The malecon- te exiled
tents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her nobles.
interel conspired with her panfions in rendering dear
to hr; they were the leaders of a party, whose
fricndfliip iie hadi been obliged to court, while fle
held lcir principles in abhorrence; and they were
lIrn.ly attached to a rival, whom she had good
r,'Jlll bolt to iar and to hate.

LBur,

B o o K BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi-

IV. derations might be urged. The noblemen, whose
'66' fate was in suspense, were among the most powerful

fubjets in the kingdom; their wealth great, their
connexions extensive, and their adherents nume-
rous. They were now at mercy, the objects of com-
panion, and suing for pardon with the most humble
fubmifllon.

IN those circumstances, an act of clemency would

exalt the Queen's character, and appear no less fplen-
did among foreigners, than acceptable to her own
fibje&s. Mary herself, though highly incensed,
,-was not inexorable; but the King's rage was im-
placable and unrelenting. They were solicited in
behalfof the fugitives, from various quarters. Mor-
ton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had been
members of the Congregation, were not forgetful
of their ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-
sufferers; nor neglectful of their safety, which they
esteemed ofgreat importance to the kingdom. Mel-
vil, who at that time possessed the Queen's confi-
dence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray,
having stooped so low as to court Rizio, that fa-
vourite, who was desirous of securing his protection
against the King, whose displeasure he had lately
incurred, seconded the interceflions of his other
friends, with the whole of his influence *. The
interpoftion of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who
had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotland,
in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all

Melv. 125.

these,

these, and attended with more success. Throgmor- B o o R
ton, out of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply VI.
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the 贸贸'
English court, in order to undermine the power and
credit of that minister. He espoused, for this rea-
son, the cause of the Scottilh Queen, towards whose
title and pretensions the other was known to bear
little favour; and ventured, in the present critical
junture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the
most salutary advices with regard to her condu&c
He recommended the pardoning of the Earl of
Murray and his associates, as a measure no less pru-
dent than popular. An ation of this nature, fays
he, the pure effect of your Majesty's generosity,
will spread the fame of your lenity and moderation,
and engage the English to look towards your accef-
sion to their throne, not only without prejudice, but
with desire. By the fame means, a perfect har-
mony will be restored among your own fubjeds,
who, if any rupture ihould happen with England,
will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your
clemency cannot fail of inspiring*.

THESE prudent remonifrances of Throgmorton, shereolve,

to which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- e"^ith
tachment to the Queen, added great authority, clemenc.
made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed
on her, notwithstanding the King's inflexible tem-
per, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
intercession of her fubjeds, and the wifies of her
friends t. With this view, the Parliament, which

路 Melv. 19. t Id. 12.

had

B o o K had been called to meet on the 4th of February, was

IV. prorogued to the 7th of April *; and in the mean
% 6 time, he was busy in confidering the manner and

form in which he hould extend her favour to the
Lords who were under disgrace.

Is diverted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a
tom this

olutrion mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable of
y the o!i forgiviiag, he wanted firmness, however, to resist
cirations of
rranc:, ,nd the influence, which was fatally employed to difap-
er 7y.a for point the effels of this amiable dif:ofition. About

this tilme, and at no great distance from each other,
tb -;ary3. two envoys arrived from the French King. The

former was intrulled withmatters of mere ceremony
alone; he congratulted te Queen on her mar-
riage, and invested the King with the ensigns of the
order of Sr. Michael. The inftruions of the lat-
ter related to matters of more importance, and pro.
duced greater efei&s --.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter

tle Queen of Spain had been often proposed; and
after many obilacles arising from the opposition of
pclitical intcrel, was at last appointed at Bayonne.
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the
Duke of Alva at:ended his Mistress. Amidst the
fcencs of pu'lic pomp and pleaure, which seemed
to be the oble occupation of both courts, a scheme
was formed, and mealures concerted, for extermi-
nating the -l;ucnots in France, the Protelanrts in
the low counti-ie:, ani for tilpprcffing the Recforma-
tion throughout all L.u:oe . TIhe ative policy

* Goo!. vol. i. 2:4. t KIcitli, 3z; . Apr-cnl. 67.

; 'Il.-l n. lib. 1 -
.

of

of Pope Plus IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of B o o
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so IV.
suitable to the genius of the Romilh religion, and 1""-5
so beneficial to their own order.

IT was on account of this holy league which the

second French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring
her, at the fame time, in the name of the King cf
France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to retore
the leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to
power and favour, at the very time when the Ca-
tholic Princes were combined to deRtroy that fc-,
in all the countries of Europe*.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable

for the strong possession it takes of the heart. Con-
trived by men of deep infight in the human ci-
racter, and improved by the experience and oi:r-
vation of many fucceflive ages; it arrived at lait to
a degree of perfetion, which no former system of
superstition had ever attained. There is no power
in the understanding, and no passion in the heart,
to which it does not present objects, adapted to
route, and to interest them. Neither the love of
pleasure, which, at that tire, prcvailed in th court
of France, nor the purli:s of amblion wichl oc-
cupied the court of Spr. i, h:.d :c.::'c.l t:cm ': a-
the dominion of bigotry. Liym: n a;: colurtics
were agitated with tlat iu:'ious n:.d i:nmzrciiul zeal,
which is commonly coCrniii(r-d as peculiar to cclc-
fiaflics; and Kings and Mi:ii;Urs tho !t thecm-

* Melc. 1:6.
7 :1. es

B o o selves bound, in conscience, to extirpate the Pro-

IV. teftant dotrine. Mary herself was deeply tinctured

w6 ith all the prejudices of Popery; a pafionate at-
tachment to that superstition is visible in every part
of her chara&er, and runs through all the scenes of
her life: She was devoted, too, with the utmolt
fubmiflion, to the Princes of Lorrain, her uncles;
and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to lif-
ten to all their advices, with a filial refpet. The
profpe& of restoring the public exercise of her own
religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles,
and the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch,
whom the present situation of her affairs in England
made it necessary to court, counterbalanced all the
prudent considerations which had formerly weighed
with her. She instantly joined the confederacy,
which had been formed for the deftrudion of the
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her con-
duEt, with regard to Murray and his adherents *.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height,
it had, however, suffered no considerable interrup-
tion. A thick and fettled cloud of adversity, with
few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoyment,
covers the remainder of her days.

THE effects of the new system, which Mary had
adopted, were soon visible. The time of the pro-

See Appendix, Nn XiV,

rogation

rogation of Parliament was hortened; and by a B o o C
new proclamation, the z2th of March was fixed IV.
for its meeting *. Mary resolved, without any fur- 166
ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel A Parlia-
Lords, and, at the fame time, determined to take m"'O-
some steps towards the re-establishment of the Ro- taint the
mifh religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the nbls.
Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufi-
ness which was to come before the Parliament.
They were all persons in whom the Queen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of Murray and his party seemed now inevita-
ble, and the danger of the Reformed Church im-
minent, when an event unexpecedly happened,
which saved both. If we regard either the barba-
rity of that age, when such as of violence were

*Keith, 326.

t It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of re-efablifhing the Roman Catho.
lic religion. He, indeed, aflerts that the altars, which hould
have been ereled in thp church of St. Giles, were already pro-
vided, 394. . Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbishop of
Glasgow, her Ambassador in France, acknowledges, " that in
that Parliament, she intended to have done some good, with re-
fpe& to restoring the old religion." Keith, 331. 2. The Spi-
ritual Lords, i. e. the Popi(h ecclefiafic., had, by her authority,
retumed their ancient place in that assembly, ibid. 3. She had
joined the confederacy at Bayonne, Keith, Append. 167. 4. She
allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom.
ibid. and declared that he would have maf free for all men who
would hear it, Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who was fur-
nilhed by the Archbilhop of Ulagow with materials for writing
his Martyre dt Marie, alirms that the Queen intended to have
procured, in thib Parliament, if not the re-establishment of the
Catholic rcligio,, at Icalt fometbing for the ease of Catholics.
Jibb, vol. ii. z2i.

coIn-

B o K common, or the mean condition of the unhappy

IV. person who suffered, the event is little remarkable;
1566. but if we refle& upon the circumstances with which
And pre- it was attended, or upon the consequences which
ate nri-followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and
,^cyagainft the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with
Rizio.

great care.
Darnlylofes DARNLY'S external accompliihments had excited

"the Q"n's that sudden and violent pallion which raised him to
aff垄eion.

the throne. But the qualities of his mind corref-
ponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak understanding, and without experience, con-
ceited, at the fame time, of his own abilities, and
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dif-
tinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impreflion on such a temper. All her gentleness
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable
spirit. All her attention to place about him
persons capable of directing his condu&, could
not preserve him from rash and imprudent ac-
tions . Fond of all the amusements, and even
prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by
degrees, careless of her person, and a stranger
to her company. To a woman, and a Queen,
such behaviour was intolerable. The lower he
had stooped in order to raise him, his behaviour
appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of her first afFection,
was the violence with which her disappointed passion
now operated. A few months after the marriage,

* Good. vol. . zz.

their

their domeffic quarrels began to be observed. The B3 o o
extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to iV.
these. Instead of being atisflcd with a share in the 566'
administration of government, or with the title of
King, which Mary, by an unprecedented stretch of
power, had conferred on him, he demanded the
Crown Matrimonial with most inlolcntimportunity *.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was be-
yond her power, and tlat the authority of Parlia-
ment must be interposed to btftow it, he wanted
either underitanding to comprehend, or temper to
admit so just a defence; and often renewed and
urged his request.

Rrzio, whom the King had at first taken into sQ,,urs
great confidence, did not humour him in these fol- RIziolh

hine cuse

lies. By this, he incurred Henry's dipleafuire;ofit.
and as it was impolible for Mary to behave to-
wards her husband with the fanme aection, which
dilfinguified the firfl and happy days of their union,
he imputed this coldness, not to his own lehaviour,
which had so well merited it, but to the insinuations
of Rizio. Mary's own condud confirmed and
strengthened these suspicions. She treated this
flranger with a familiarity, and admitted him to a
lhare in her confiience, tL w!:ich n' ithcr his sirs
condition, nor the office nc had lately btftowed
upon him, gave ii:n any title. ti was perpetually
inl her prci:ncc, interme'd:c! ii;' ,vr: y buLiines, ad,
troet!h'er witl' a 4'.'

- lvcuris, w\.lS he companion

ur';,.l! her private n,-!.'mnc:t.s . 'lie !haughty 'piric
ft LDrnly coL.U not b;ar the i.':u.lon or !Lch an

'* i:itb, ;39. I.;:ox 4 ;.
,'O)L. I. A. a up-

B o oK upstart; and impatient of any delay, and unre-

IV. strained by any lcruple, he instantly relolved to get
566. rid of hi:n by violence.
1566.
R;7io .1-t. AT the fame ti:. e another design, which toak
ed! he .
si.:;!, its ril^ from very ci.:1;rcnt motives, was carrying on

ii. : a.infl the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind-

fai, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In
all former commotions they had been ftriLly united
with Murray, though in the late infurre&ion they
had delertcd him, tor various reaolns. Morton
was nearly allied to the family of Angus, and dur-
ini the minority of the present Earl, ated as Chief
of thel name of Douglas. Ruthven was married
ti, the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame
blood. Ail thtefe had warmly concurred with the
(ueen in promnoting a marriage which did so much
honour to the houf. of Doug',s, and naturally ex-
peetl, that under a King o their own blood, the
clhief management of affairs would be committed to
them. Maitland, with his uiual sagacity, foresaw
that Mura-y's oppo4qtion to the match would prove
(dangerous and inefieclual; but whoever ruled at
court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to
render himfelfneceffary and of importance. They
were all equally disappointed in their expectations.
The King's hcaditrong temper rendered him inca-
pable of advice. The Qtueen could not help dif-
truling men who had been so long and so inti-
nately connecied with Murray, and gave herself
up) enirely to iuch Counsellors as complied with all
her irclinations. The return of that nobleman and
his tfliiwci was tlerefore the only event which

could

could restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates B o o K
to their former ascendant over the Queen's councils. IV.
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying 166-
to them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray
with all his interest, was now the most active inftru-
ment in promoting the measures which were con-
certed for the ruin of that nobleman. This offi-
cious zeal compleated the difuft which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to
justice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, Tley corm.
the King communicated his refolutioh to be avenged "ine in or-

derto mur-

of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his assist- der him,.
ance, and that of his friends, towards the execution
of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable
to them than this overture. They saw at once all
the advantages they would reap, by the concurrence
of such an associate. Their own private rcvengo
upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an act of
obedience to the King; and they did not despair of
obtaining the restoration of their banished friends,
and security for the Protestant religion, as the price
of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than rash, they

hesitated for some time, and determined to advance
no farther, without taking every pofible precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Mor.

A a ton,

B o o K ton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing

1V. age, in all the arts of insinuation and address, took
1566 the young Prince under his management. He

wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to obtain
the Matrimonial crown. He represented Rizio's
credit with the Quieen to be the chief and only ob-
ftacle to his success in that demand. This minion,
alone, he said, poffifed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to him, her fubjets, her nobility, and
even her husband, were excluded from any participa-
tion of her Iecret councils. Under the appearance of
a confidence merely political, he insinuated, and the
King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of quite a
different and of a very criminal nature might be
concealed *. Such various and complicated pafflons

raged

* Of all our hiflorians, Euchanan alone avowedly accuses

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio, 340, 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that uch' a fuf)icion was entertained, 391. Melvil,
in a converation with the Queen, intimates that he was afraid
her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to miiconfructicn, I io.
The King himfcif fIcmns, ;!th by Mclvil's account, and by his
expotu!atiion with t:e Qucen, which Ruthven mentions, to
have given credit to thcfi suspicions, Melv. 127. Keith, Ap-
pend. 123, 124. That the King's urpicions were firong, is
likcwifc evident from the paper publilhed Append. No. XV.
But, in opposition to there fufpiic oni, and they are nothing more,
we mav observe that Raulet tlh O Qeen's French Secretary was
difinilted from her feivice, and Pizio advanced to that office in
December 1564. Keth, zbS. t was in conlequenceof this.
prefernent, that lie ac.lui:cd hi, great credit with the Queen.
Melv. o17. Darnly arrived in Scil!iid about two months as-
ter, Kcitlt, 269. The Qcr iri.rncdiatcly conceived for him a
pafion, which had all the fymptoins of genuine and violent
love, Rizio aiied his passion, and promo:cd the nlmrriiae with
ail his intercil, Mclv. I I . During nelii nonlhs after the mar.
riagl, the Qc I

n'a nC
fodcf or Lanrily continued. She soon

piovvd

raged in the King's bosom, with the utmost fury.B o o K
He became more impatient than ever of any delay, IV.
and even threatened to strike the intended blow with -"
his own hand. At last, preliminaries were fettled
on both fides, and articles for their mutual security
agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent the
attainder of the banished Lords, to conlent to their
return into Scotland, to obtain for them an ample
remilfion of all their crimes, and to support to the
utmost of his power, the religion which was now
established in the kingdom. On their parts, they
undertook to procure the Crown Matrimonial for
Henry, to secure his right of succession, if the
Queen hould die before him, and to dtfend that
right to the uttermolt, against whatever peribn
should presume to dispute it; and if either Rizio,
or any other person, flould happen to be killed in
prosecuting f the dceign, the King promied to ac-
know ledge himlclfro be the authorot theenterprize,
and to protect thoie who were embarked in it *.

NOTHIING now remained but to concert the plan Perpetrate

of oreration, to chufe the aors, and to afign them ',,h'1tcri '
their parts in perpetrating this deteftaule critnc.~ "cn'i

proved with child. From this enumnration of circiumftnc!,
it appe.rs almoit impofliblc that the Q!een, unleh'l we iupnle
her to have been a o.nan utterly aandoi c!, could rv r
any crimitral intrigue tith Rizio. But the ilence ot Kaint !,,'
the Eng!ifi R'iidcint, a ian abunianily rea.!v to m, :i.. , and
to aggr.avatc Mary's faultS, and ho does not once nfiuate
that her confidence in Rizio conealeil any :hing criminal, i in
itself a fuicient vindication of her inocence.

Good. vol. i. 266.

A a 3 Every

B o o K Every circumflance herepaints and charaaerizes the

IV. manners and men of that age, and fills us with horr
56- ror at botl. The place chosen for committing such

a deed, was the Queen's bedchamber. Though
Mary was now in the sixth month of her pregnancy,
and though Rizio might have been seizcd elsewhere,
without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of
reproachin g Rizio with his crimes beforetheQueen's
face. 'lhec Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chan-
cellor of the kingdom, undertook to diret an en-
terprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of
which he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord
Ruthven, who had been confined to his bed for
thrce months, by a very dangerous diaemnper, and
who was flill so feeble that he could scarce walk, or
bear the wcight of his own armour, was entruffed
with the excutivc part; and while he himfclf need-
ed to be supportcd by two men, he came abroad to
commit a murder in the pretence of his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court

of the palace witl an hundred and sixty men; and
withcut noi'e, or meeting with any refinance, seized
all t e gates. hile the Queen was at supper with
the Countels of Argyli, Rizio, and a few domet:
tics, the King fuddc;iiy ea;cred the apartment, by
a private pafiage. At his back, was Ruthven, clad
in comiple)'e armour, and with tlat ghailly and hor-
rid look v.hich long licknels had given him. Three
or four of his molt trully accomplices followed
him. Such an unulual appearance alarmed thofl
who were prelcent. Rizio inflantly apprehended that

he

he was the victim at whom the blow was aimed; B o o K
and in the utmolt coniternation retired behind the IV.
Queen, of whom he Lid hold, hoping that the re- -6-
verence due to her person might prove Ibme pro.
teaion to him. The conspirators had proceeded
too far to be restrained by any consideration of that
kind. Numbers of armed men rulhed into the
chamber. Ruthven drew l;is da.ger, and with a
furious mien and vice, commanded Rizio to leave
a place of which he w.'as unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary c.nploycd tears, and
entreaties, and thrcLtr-.ings, toive hcic favouliritc.
But, notwith iandi:g 11 thci, I.e was torn fino
her by violence, and befolre he could be dragged
through the nex;t partment, the rage of his tne-
mies put an end to lis life, piercilg his body with
fifty-iix wou!n.i ''

ATHOL, :ilU:,, ;:;".tcil, ad other confidents

ofthe aQueen v.'o lo'- . i the palice, were alarm-
ed at the upro;;r, ar.l t1!: wit t!:e ut:. o. terror
on their own acco;;;;; uiit ci,!Ter no violence was
int aintendd aain tc.n, cr th: conr Jir.ltcrs dui ll not
flicd the noblclt bl;io'I in t: kini dom, in he ;lIe,
iilegal manner with w.hich t;!;cy had ventured to
t.,lke the liie of a :t:'a:,cr. 'c;;me of tihe;n were
dillniffe, and oh;rs tn._d1 tki:: t.:.C.

THIE coni')irators, in t!i; n' c.m tilm , 1keptt pci'r- C,, ,, c

frcion of the pIlace, an'. u.l.'.:;dl ilic (-
Qt , wth liii) 1 1'

(

U,' C CII [icr-

tile unc olt care. p:

) .:t. ;:: i)n *as )l }) (h.(l 111
by the King, prohibiting the p:arliaimlent to meet on

* cc A\ !'i.. .,
Ai . .'-.

A 4 the

B o K the day appointed ; and meaf.ires were taken by

IV. him for preventing any tumult in the city *. Mur-
-'6-' ray, Rothes, and their followers being informed of
x566.

every ftep taken agiinl: Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh
next evening. Murray was graciously received both
by the King and Qcen. By the fo;rmer, cn ac-
count of the articles which had been agreed upon
between them; by the latter, becsu'. iiie hoped to
prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take
part with the mrirderers of Rizio. Their pow.er
fle still fit, and d:-eaed ; and tle inflilt which they
lhad offtred to her a;:uthority, and even to h:er per-
lb.o, io iar exceeded any crime she could impute to
BMurray, tL.t in ihcps of wreaking her vengeance
on thec:i, ,.le ,eca..: extremely willing to be re-
con:. i to i.i:. The ol)ligtions, however, which
MIurray lay under t- men, v/'hio had hazarted their
lives on his account, engaged him to labour for
tleir .f I

ty. iThe (Queen, who i'carce had the li-

berty ii !lloice left, was perluade.l .t admit Mor-
ton :ii:i iuthve;n i'tto her prcence, and to grant
themn he pr.nife of pardon in whatever terms they
1lh;ui (.. c:*! n:ceuilJry for their own fecuriry.

TH;: Kinr, nI:Cn .vi)ic, flood aflonifled at the

bol'ncl; :in;i ii'. c-F. of: his own enteriprize, and un-
c.'i L.tn v. ha1 co'r; to liold. Thle Queen oblervcd

Blt c h.:' i r.:lUli'n, ,11.' av:'. (.d ci lci o(i it. She em-
Km,!, :i p'.;l '.1 l :r t: to d: il'n age him from his new

a''''"'' ai;:,-';.rcs. i-I; i; ;co ). ;

i ,;n l':; ot tle infuit which he

ha;' (n r,;.l u ,) i' L; ';:i.; a benei.ctiels, inspired
hiim v'ith ulcoi l;itiir, l.iclity and complailance. In

* Icili, .;'i.!. 'S,fpite

spite

spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the B o o K
Queen's artifices, file prevailed on him to difmnils IV.
the guards which the conspirators had placed on her 6

1566.

person; and that fame iiglit he made his escape
along with her, attended by three peribns only, and
retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had Marsh t.
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and
they were quickly joined by them, and several other
of the nobles. Bothwell's eate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crouded to
their Chief, in such numbers, as loon enabled the
Queen to let the power of the conspirators at de-
fiance.

THIs sudden flight filled them with inexpreffiblc Ti rcon-

consternation. They had cbrained a promifi of par- xiled ,o
don; and it now appeared from the Queen's con- hc.
dut, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mile than to amulic them, and to gain time. They
ventured, however, to demand the accomplif-neent
of it; but their mcstdnger was detained a prilfner,
and the Queen avancing towards ,ldiiburgh, at
the ha. o Scoo men, talked in the hliihed lirain
of refcntrncnt and reve n e. She had the aild;- fs,
at the tle tin-e, to leparate Murray and his afro-
ciatcs frmrn th cnlpiraors aainil: Rizio. Selli'',le
that the union oi llitce partles would form a con-
fejerac,, wihichl might prove ormnidable to the
Crown, file >'; .il: ,u reat williin.;nefs co rccive the
former into savoir twar(;S til lattcr, fl(e declared
herflel' incxorabl,. Murray and his tollowers wcrc '!l.cll, 9.
no lets willing to acccp a prd(n, on her terlns. (;i,:I.,. I.,
lThe conirators againlt Rlizio, deiprved of every ,ll '
',

2 re- Enl,tnd.

B o o K resource, and incapable of refilance, fled precipi-

IV. tately to Newcastle, having thus changed situations
'-.r- with Murray and his party, who lerc that place, a

566- few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for

cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a
more unfortunate enterprize. nefp-:d balely by
the King, hu now denied his knowledge of the
conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandon-
ed ungencroully by Murray and his party *, he was
obliged to fly from his native country, to resign
the higheli ossie, and to part with one of the most
opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to

proceed againit those concerned in the murder of
Rizio, with the umoft rigour of law. Bur, in
praise of her clemency, it niuft be obfirved, that
only two persons, and these of no considerable rank,
fulIered for this crime t.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance,

which, though Ibmewhat d-tached, deflrves not to
be forgotten. In the cortedbl.'racy between the King
and the conlpirators, tlc real intention of which
was aflaflination, the prelcrving of t;ie Retorned
Church is, neverthele1s, one of the molt conrfider.
able articles; and the famne men vwho :':c!e preparing
to violate one of the firti ct(Itie f morality, as-
fcafed the higheSt rega-d rcr religicn. tliftory rc-
lates theft extravagances or the lu:;n mind, with.

* Mclr. 13o. t Keith, Appeldix 13", 33'.

OUi.

out pretending to juitify, or even to account for B o o
them; and regulating her own opinions by the eter- IV.
nal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, "贸
points out such inconfiltencies, as features of the 566.
age which he describes, and records them for the
inftrution of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate affaf- An account

fination which has occurred, and as we hall here- qtncy of
after meet with many other inltances of the fame alalraIna-

tious in

crime, the caules which gave rife to a practice so that age.
,hocking to humanity, de!erve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea
sons, one of the frongeft pafions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this paslion is, that
the person who feels the injury should himself in-
flit the vengeance due on rhat account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftru-ive
to society; and punilhment would have known no
bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social late, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and com-
mitted to the Magillrate. But, at sirs, while laws
aimed at reLraining, they really trcngthcnecd the
principle of revenge. The arliell andl mo, fimn-
pie punithment for crimns was retaliation; the of-
fender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the perlbn in-
jured, Lfccceded to the rigour of the former infi-
tution. In both these, the gratification of private
revenge was the objeEt of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to
pursue, to ea&, or to remit the puniflhmenr.

While

B o o K While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of

1V. one party, the interests of the other were not neg-

'- T-贸 leted. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount
1566. to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself to be

unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime was
imputed had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and on obtaining the vitory, vin-
dicated his own honour. In almost every confider-
able c.ufc, whether civil or criminal, arms were ap-
pealkd t o, in def:nce, either of the innocence, or
the property of the partes. Justice had seldom
occasion to fe her balance; the sword alone de.
ciled evi ry c nteit. The parson of revenge was
rn rilticd by all there means, and grew, by daily
i;)'dulgence, to be inc'e;ibly ftr. ng Mankind be-
ca.ne ha.bitua el to blooJ, not onlj in times of war,
bu; c;f lpe iCe; and it:o: tliis, as cil as other
cat'ces: co;atr..;&ed an a;n;ing ,rccity of temper,
an.j f irmanners. '1 hi, ferocity, however, made it
r:cc-';arv to c li.iourac- tihe trial ':y combat; to abo-
lili i i c p;: n!ei; I of comn priatio.s in criminal cafes;
ind thlinkl; of Ibme milder n-:cthod of terminating
(;ii: uies c(incerning civil riTihts. The punifnments
f)nr crin'es Lecamne more severe, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed ; but the Princes,
wliofe province it was to infict the one, and to
enforce the other, polffcfled little power. Great of-
fenders delJilied their authority ; smaller ones flel-
tc'rcd themlilves under the jurisdiction of those,
1fom whose proteaion theycxpedIed impunity. 'he
adminillration of jullice was extremely feeble and
dilat,ry. An attempt to punifil the crimes of a
Chieftain, or even of his valals, often excited re-

bellion'

bellions and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and B o o Kr
independent, among whom the caues of dii;ord IV.
were many and unavoidable, who were quick in 566.
discerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it;
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy,
and cowardly to forgive him; who confi iered the
right of punishing those who had injured them, as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extremely unfa-
tisfaaory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not hed, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fufpe&ed,
and a stain was left on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate
could not infli&t, their own could easily execute;
under governments so feeble, men assumed, as in a
state of nature, the right of judging, and redref:
sing their own wrongs. And thus afTaffination, a
crime of all others the molt destructive to society,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed ho-
nourable.

THE history of Europe, during the 14th and

isth centuries, abounds with detetiable inlances of
this crime. It prevailed chicfly among the French
and Scots, between whom there was a close intcr-
course at that time, and a furprizing rcicmblance in
their national characrs. In I 407, tlhe only bro-
ther of the King of I:rnce w;.:s .uircdred p-lblickly
in the flrccts of Paris; ;:ntrld so f.'r \as this horrible
a,.ion ftomn mceting with propc'r'j"ni!men'', thlat. u
cmnillcnt l;iwyir Wis ali\.vRc t' .' i..;al in c'.lt.:'c .es

it

B o o K it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to'

Ir. maintain the lawfulness of afaffination. In 1417,
C566 it required all the eloquence and authority of the

famous Gcrfon, to prevail on the Council of Con-
fiance to condemn this proposition, That there
are some cafes in which aflafination is a virtue more
meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire, and more
meritorious in a King than in a Knight *." The
number of eminent persons who were murdered in
France and Scotland, on account either of private,
or political, or religious quarrels, during the isth
and 16th centuries, is almost incredible. Even as-
ter those causes, which first gave rife to this barba-
rous pratice, were removed; after the jurifdi6tion
of Magistrates, and the authority of laws were bet-
ter established, and become more universal; after
the progress of learning and philosophy had polish-
ed the manners, and humanized the minds of men,
this crime continued in some degree. It was to-
wards the close of the 17th century before it dif-
appeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the acceflion of
James VI. to the throne of England, seems to have
put a flop to it in, Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national custom,

both on the understanding and on the heart, and
how far it may go towards perverting or extinguilh-
ing moral principles of the greatest importance, is
remarkable. The authors of those ages have per-
fectly imbibed the sentiments of their cotempora-
ric, with regard to affaflination; and they, who

*L'Enfant, Hil. Cone. de Conft.

had

had leisure to refle&, and to judge, appear to be no B o o K
more hockcd at this crime, than the persons, who IV.
committed it during the heat and impetuosity of 566
palion. Buchanan relates the murder of Cardinal
Beatoun, and of Rizio, without exprefling those
feelings which are natural to a man, or that indig-
nation which became an historian*. Knox, whose
mind was fiercer and more unpolifhed, talks of the
death of Beatoun and of the Duke of Guise, not
only without censure, but with the utmost exulta-
tion t. On the other hand, the Biflop of Ross
mentions the affaflination of the Earl of Murray,
with some degree of applause . lackwood dwells
upon it, with the most indecent triumph, and as-
cribes it direcly to the hand of God . Lord Ruth-
ven, the principal aor in the conspiracy against
Rizio, wrote an account of it some hort time be-
fore his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expreflion of regret, or one fymp-
tom of compunction for a crime no less dif-
honourable, than barbarous **. Mor-on, equally
guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame 4en-
timents concerning it; and in his lait moments,
neither he himself, nor the Ministers who attended
him, feeni to have confidered it as an ation which
called for repentance ; even then he talks of la:-'t,-i
flaughier as coolly, as if it had hecn an innocent or
conmmendablc dced -t-. The vi es of another age
afrtonih and fllocl us; the vi;cs of our o;: ; be-
come familiar, and excite little horror I re-

* DL.-ll.n. 29;, ,;;. . 1- ' ;':.; J. . Ar.'es.

3. :掳' . i J.l,b, . ' .;. ; ;:1. A '. -,;. :,'.
i [ Crawf. RN'cu. A, Fl'li.

t l;l :

B o o K turn from this digreflon to the course of the hit.

IV. tory.

1566. THE charm, which had at first attached the
The Qcen's Queen to Darnly, and held them for some time in

rnrd tn- an happy union, was now entirely dilrolved; and
creases. love no longer covering his follies and vices with its

friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full
dimension and deformity *. Though Henry pub-
litned a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was fully
convinced, that he was not only accessory to the
contrivance, but to the commiflion of that odious
crime -. That very power, which, with liberal
and unfufpicious fondness, she had conferred upon
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person.
Such an outrage, it was impossible any woman could
bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret diflruft, fre-
quent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affe-tion and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands. The
crowd of expectants ceased to court his patronage,
which they found to avail so little. Among the
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others
complained of his perfidiousness; and all of them
deJpiied the weakncfs of his understanding, and the
inconstancy of his heart. The people themselves
observed tobne parts of his conduc&, which little
ilited the dignity of a King. Addited to drunken-
ncls, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular paffiuns, which even

* Sec Appendix, No. XVI. t Keith, 3;c.

the

the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by B o o K
his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the IV.
utmost; and the passions which it occasioned, of- 6
ten forced tears from her eyes, both in public and 66.
in private *. Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with little
splendor, and was trusted with no power. Avoid-
ed equally by those who endeavoured to please the
Queen, who favoured Morton and his associates, or
who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was
left almost alone in a negleced and unpitied soli-
tude t.

ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great The rite of

credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascendant favour.
over her heart, which encouraged his enterpriling
genius to form designs that proved fatal to himfelt;
and the occasion of all Mary's fubiequent misfor,
tunes. This was James Hepburn Earl of Both-
well, the head of an ancient family, and by his ex-
tensive poefflions and numerous vassals, one of the
most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in
that turbulent age, when lb many vast projects were
laid open to an aspiring mind, and invited it to ac-
tion, no man's ambition was more daring than Beth-
well's, or had recourse to bolder or more singular
expedients for obtaining power. Whcn almost every
pcrfon of diftinetion in the kingdom, whether Pa-
pift or Proteflant, had joined the Congregation in
opposing the dangerous encroachments of the

路 KciLh, 329 . i, &c.
VOL. 1. B b French

B o o K French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though

lV. an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Re-
i5 66. gent, and aed with vigour on her fide. The fuc-

cess which attended the arms of the Congregation
having obliged him to retire into France, he was
taken into the Queen's service, and continued with
her till the time of her return into Scotland . From
that period, every ftep of his condut towards Mary
was remarkably dutiful; and amidst all the hist-
ings of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding
any course which could be offensive to her. When
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umbrage to the Queen, he recalled Bothwell
from that banishment into which he had with re-
lu&ance driven him, and confidered his zeal and
abilities as the most powerful supports of her au-
thority. When the conspirators against Rizio feiz-
ed her person, he became the chief instrument of
recovering her liberty, and served her, on that oc-
cafion, with so much fidelity and success, as made
the deepest impression on her mind, and greatly in-
creased the confidence which he had hitherto placed
in him t. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of
her bounty; he raised him to offices of profit and
of trust, and tranfated no matter of importance
without his advice $. By complaisance and afmi-
duity, he confirmed and fortified there dilpofitions
of the Queen in his favour, and insensibly paved
the way towards that vast project, which his immo-
derate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and at the ex-
pence of many crimes, he at last accompliflled.

Anders. i go. t lb. 1, 92, 93, Mclv. 133. Knov, 396.

THa

THE hourofthe Queen's delivery now approach. Bo o K

ed. As her palace was defended only by a lender IV.
guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person, .66
at this time, to the insults the might susser in a
kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny.
For this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen
to fix her residence in the Castle of Edinburgh, the
firongeft fortress in the kingdom, and the most pro-
per place for the security of her person *. In order
to render this security more perfeCt, Mary laboured
to extinguish the domefic feuds which divided some
of the principal nobles. Murray and Argyll were
exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell, by reci-
procal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her
authority and entreaties, effected a reconcilement
among them, and drew from them a promise to
bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that he
made it the condition on which (he again received
Murray into favour-t.

ON the i9th of June,, Mary was delivered of her Birh -f

only son James, a Prince whose birth was happy for Jamci ViE
the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His accefflon to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and eftablilhed the power of Great Britain on a firm
foundation. While lhe, torn early from her son by
the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge thole tender pallions, nor to tafe thoei joys
which fill the heart of a mother.

* Keith, 33i. t Ibid. 33~. Apt:nd. z39.

B b 2 i L L-

Bo o K MEI.VIL was inftantlydifpatched to London with

IV. an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at
-F -firit, in a fenrible manner; and the advantage and

superiority which her rival had acquired by the birth
of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, she had so far re-
covered the command of herself, as to receive him
not only with decency, but with excellive cheerful-
ness; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her son *.

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, she

resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young Prince
with great pomp; and for that purpose sent invi-
tations of the fame kind to the French King, and
to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
husband.
rnLi ceen THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no

,otitt change in her sentiments with refpe& to the King+.

[.,nly The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had
with indil'-
tcriceand given to an aion (o insolent and unjustifiable, were
e~gc- itill frefli in her memory. She was frequently pen-

live and dejected s. And though Henry sometimes
attended at court, and accompanied her in her pro-
grtlles through difierent parts of the kingdom, he
met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated hi; with the greatest reserve, and
didl not filuTer him to pofft's any authority 11. The
breach between them became every day more ap-
parcnt 搂. Attempts were made towards a reconcile-

'i. 13.,. 1 See Appcnd. No. X\ II. I Lid. 148.
ij W'.,!, 3,~o. TMllv. 1r3. Kiciti, Api'crd. 169.

ment,

ment, particularly by Caftelnau the French Am-B o o K
baflador; but after such a violent rupture, it was IV.
found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; 5l贸贸
and though he prevailed on the King and Qleen to
pass two nights together *, we may, with great pro-
bability, pronounce this appearance of union, to
which Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere;
we know with certainty that it was not iafting.

BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime Hernttc'h-

confident. Without his participation no buffnes Bot,,t,.c
was concluded, and no favour bestowed. Together incrca':s
with this ascendant over her councils, Bothwell, if
we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired
no less sway over her heart. But at what precise
time, this ambitious Lord first allowed the senti-
ments of a lover to occupy the place of that duty
and refpe which a subjed owes his Sovereign; or
when Mary, instead of gratitude for his faithful ser-
vices, felt a paflion of another nature rising in ler
bulbm, it is no easy matter to determine. Such de-
licate transitions of pallion can be discerned only by
thole, who are admitted near the perlbns of the par-
ties, and who can view the fecrct workings of the
heart with calm and acute obfervati n. Neither knox
nor Buchanan ejoyed thcl' advantag;s. Their
humble (tation allowed them only a ditlant acccls to
thlc Queen and her favourite. And the ardor of
thcir zeal, and the violence of their prejudices, ren-
der their opinions rafli, precipitate, and inaccurac.
It is by the fct:bs of this reciprocal palion, rather

* KIcit, App:ndl i.y

B b 3 !

Bo o K than by their accounts of it, that subsequent hifto

IV. rians can judge of its reality.
j56.

ADVENTROUS as Bothwell's projec to gain the

Qileen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary was
young, gay, and affable. She poflefled great fen-
fibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tendcrnefs of affection. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy objet, who requited it with ingra-
titude, and treated her with neglet, with insolence,
and with brutality. All there he felt, and resent-
ed. In this situation, the attention and complai-
fance of a man, who had vindicated her authority,
and protected her person; who entered into all her
views, who soothed all her paflions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his
design, and recommending his paflon*, could
scarce fail of making an impreflion on a heart of
such a frame as Mary's.

The Kin THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-
f iv~S1t0 tery, and accuflomed to command, could not bear
1'i1ve Scot-
land. the contempt under which he had now fallen, and

the iate of insignificance to which he saw himself
reduced. But in a country, where he was univer-
filly hated or clfpifcd, he could never hope to form
a party, which would second any attempt he might
make torecover power. Headdrefibd himself, there-
fore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France and
Spain, with many profcfi(ons of his own zeal for
the Catholic religion, and with bitter comFlaints

t A*detkr I. . ,3, 94.

againg

agairt the Queen, for neglecting to promote that B o o
interest *.: And oon after, he took a resolution, IV.
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board 6
a hip, which he provided, and of flying into foreign x566
parts. It is almost impotfible to form any fatisfac-
tory conjecture concerning the motives which influ-
ence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent, by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards
reinstating him in the poffcfflon of thatpower which
he had loft. Perhaps, he expected nothing more
than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which
he was now fallen, among firangers, who had
never been witnesses of his former prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French Am- His apri-
baffador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl of io b'la

viour.

Lennox. They both endeavoured to dissuade him
from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's con-
fidence, and who, about this time, was seldom at
court, instantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accom-
pany the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
likewise absent from court. HIe arrived there, how-
ever, on the fame day he received the account of
his intended flight. But he was more than usually
wayward and peevilh and scrupling to enter the
palace, unless certain Lords who attended the Queen
were difmifnid, Mary was obliged to meet him

路 Knox, 399.

B b 4 ,wih-

B o o K without the gates. At last he suffered her to con-

IV. duet him into her own apartment. She endeavour.
贸贸/' ed to draw from him the reasons of the strange re-
366. solution which he had taken, and to divert him

from it. In spite however of all her arguments and
intreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next
day the Privy Council, by her direcion, expoftu-
lated with him on the fame head. He persisted,
notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obLtinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of his
conduct, nor signified any intention of altering it.
As he left the apartment, he turned towards the
Queen, and told her, that she hould not fee his
face again, for a long time. A few days after, he
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as grounds
of his difgut. She herself, he said, no longer ad-
mitted him into any confidence, and had deprived
him of all power; and the nobles, afterherexample,
treated him with open neglect, so that he appeared
in every place without the dignity and splendor of
a King.

Mary en. NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary,
deacvnr,,, o than this intended flight of the King's, which would
prevcnt his

.d have spread the infamy of their dometfic quarrel all

over Europe. Compafifon for a Monarch who
would then appear to be forced into exile by her
neglct and ill usage, might have disposed mankind
to entertain fentimnts concerning the caufesof their
discord, litle to her advantage. In order, there-
fore, to repofTcfs the minds of her allies, and to
I.recn her reputation from any censure with which
P)A..ly migh ed..Lavour to load it, the Privy Coun-

掳q

cil transmitted a narrative of this whole tranfaftion, B o o it
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of IV.
France. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's 566.
condut in the most favourable point of light .

ABOUT this time, the license of the borderers call-

ed for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court
ofjuftice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several ad-
jacent countieswere summoned to attend their Sove-
reign in arms, according to custom t. Bothwell
was, at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the
marches, an office among the most important in the
kingdom; and though usually divided into three
diftin&t governments, bestowed by the Queen's fa-
vour upon him alone. In order to display his own
valour and acivity in the discharge of this trust, he
attempted to seize a gang of banditti, who, lurk-
ing among the marfnes of Liddefdale, infested the
reft of the country. But while he was laying hold
of one of those desperado's, he was wounded by oai.,'xor
him in several places, so that his followers were ob-
liged to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary in-
itantly flew thither, with an inltpatience which strong-
ly marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the
dignity of a Queen $. Finding that Bothwell was

threatened

* Keith, 34, 347. t Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 02.
t The dillance between Jedburnh and Hermitage is 18 Scottifl

miles, through a country almoll i'nI:fTible. 1 he season of tl
year was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been wounded
in a cuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man, rathcr
than any open infurredion of the borderers. It does not ap!pc;r
that the Queen was attended thither by any confiderablc train.
$lad any military operation been ncceflary, as is supposcd,

Good;

B o o i threatened with no dangerous symptom, he return.

IV. ed that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue offuch
L- -

J a journey, added to the anguilh of mind she had
J566. a

suffered on Bothwell's account, threw her next
morning into a violent fever *. Her life was despair-
ed of, but her youth, and the vigour of her confti-
tution, refiflcd the malignity of her disease. During
the continuance of the Queen's illness, the King,
who relided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t;
and when he afterwards thought fit to make his ap-
orcnib.s. pearance there, he met with such a cold reception,

as did not encourage him to make any long itay $.
Mary soon recovered firength enough to return
along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

W-HILE she resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith-
/tanding her promiie, and even proclamations to the
contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged Mor-
ton and his afrociates to remain in England.t. Mary,
on the other hand, afforded her protection to several
Engl.fh fgitives. Each Queen watched the mo-
tions of the other with a jealous attention, and fe-
cretly countenanced the praices, which were car-
rying on, to disturb the adminiitration of her rival.

C;nod. vol. i. 30o. it wou!d have leen extremely improper to
rili;!i:: , ie Q.c(n's per(bn in ;n expedition againit thieves. So
!i1., !s the QLeen found Boliwe'l to be in no danger, he i;:-
i;:.. i! r<t:rule , and after this we he.,r no more of the infurcec-
t! i. :;. .r have w.e any proof that the rioters took refu . i Etg-
1.,i,. !'o thtr reason but that which we kave produced, feins
:is:i'::' .c :t srou;:t fr the Quccn's conduC&.

; .;*;^1, ?. ^ 3路5 2 t [t:id. Append, 33.
; . :.c,, ,;o. U Culd. vol. ii. t5.

FoR

FOR this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, Robert B o o K

Melvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely IV.
a&ive and successful. We may impute, in a good 1-6
degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which appear- The Eng-
ed in the Parliament of England, and which raised flih Parli"-
a storm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic tran- vous Ma-
quillity, more than any other event of her reign, yoSPtrotle
and required all her art and dexterity to allay it. f"cwrOn.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, with-

out discovering the least intention to marry. A vio-
lent distemper, with which she had lately been feiz-
ed, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation with the profpe& of all those calamities which
are occasioned by a disputed and dubious fucceffon;
a motion was made, and eagerly listened to in both
houses, for ddreffing the Queen, to provide acainft
any such danger in times to come, either by figni-
fying her own resolution to marry, or by conenting
to an a&, establishing the order of succession to the
Crown *. Her love to her fubjeds, her duty to
the public, her concern for posterity, it was pre-
tended, not only called upon, but obliged her to
take one of there steps. The insuperable averrion
which she had all along discovered for marriage,
made it improbable that he would chute the for-
mer; and if fle complied with the latter request, no
title to the crown could, with any colour ofjuftice,
be set in opposition to that of the Scottih Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the remotest
con!equences of this motion, and observed then

*D'wes Joun. of Parl. 1i5.

witlh

B o o K with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by refusing so

IV. often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly
^s66sJ intimated a design of embracing the first promising
;566.

opportunity for prosecuting her right to the Englilh
Crown; and by her secret negociations, he had
gained many to favour her title *. All the Roman
Catholics ardently wished for her fuccefion. Her
gentleness and humanity had removed many of those
apprehensions which the Protestants entertained on
account of her religion. The court fation, which
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest
the administration out of his hands, advanced the
pretensions of the Scottish Queen in opposition to
him. The union of the two kingdoms was a desire-
able objec to all wife men in both nations; and the
birth of the young Prince was a ecurity for the con-
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its
perpetuity.

ErTlabeTh's UNDER there circumflances, and while the nation
perple in

y

To that 'c. was in such a temper, a parl.amentary declaration of
贸ou"t. Mary's title would have bern highly detrimental to

Elizabeth. The prefelnt uni.ctt!d late of the fuc-
cession left much in her power. I-Icr rlcntnlen
alone might have gone far towards excluding any
of the competitors from the Crown; and the dread
of this had hitherto restrained, and overawed the
ambition of the Scottifli (Qecn. But if this check
flould be removed, by te legal acknowledgment
of lier title, Mary would be at full liberty to pursue
her dangerous dfigns, and to a without fear or
r.ci vce, 7'er prtizi.s were already meditating

* .Me'!,'. ~f C.
, fckeCI]e

cfhemes for infurretions in different parts of the B o o K
kingdom*; and an ad of Parliament, recognizing IV.
the rights of that Princess, whose pretensions they 566
favoured, would have been nothing less than a fig-
nal to arms; and notwithstanding Elizabeth's just
title to the affections of her iubjeCts, might have
lhaken and endangered her throne.

WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in both nrary en.

houses, an account of it was transmitted to Mary improve
by Melvil her Ambassador. As lhe did not want this oppor-

tunity.

advocates for her right, even among those who were
near Elizabeth's person, he ndeavoured to culti-
vate the disposition which appeared towards fettling
the right offuccefion in her favour, by a letter to
the Privy Counsellors of England. She expressed
in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendihip, which
Ihe ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their
Sovereign, in her behalf. She declared her refolu-
tion to live in perpetual amity with England, with-
out urging or purluing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen.
But, a: the fame time, as her right of succession
was undoubted, nfe hoped it would be examined
with candour, and judgcd of with impartiality. The
nobles who attentldi her wrote to the Englilh Privy
Council in tihe l:e frainl -. Mary artfully gave
thcic letters the air of being nothing more than a
declaration of her own, and of her fubjeLts gratitude
towards i-l'z.bzath. But as she could not be igno-
rant o the j !louly and tic.r with which Elizabeth

* XIIlv. I.,;, f i-cith, 3,.t. Append. t56.

obl'rved

B o o K bferved the proceedings of Parliament, a ftep fb

IV. uncommon as this, of one Prince's entering into

,- , public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of

another, could not be otherwise conitrued than as
taken with an intention to encourage the spirit which
had already been raised among the Englilh. In this
light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth her-
self*. But the disposition of her people rendering
it necessary to treat Mary's person with great de-
cency, and her title with much regard, he menr
tioned it to her only in the softest language.

Elizabeth NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor-
sooths and
aiTs her tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's chara&er,
'arlia- than the temper which both houses of Parliament

discovered on this occasion. She bent all her policy
to defeat or elude the motion. After allowing the
firit heat of their zeal to evaporate, he called into
her pretence a certain number of each house. She
toothed and carefled them; she threatened and pro-
mifed; ffhe remitted fubidies which were due; and
refused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off for
that feflion. Happily for her, the conduct of the
Scottish Queen, and the misfortune3 which besel
her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any
future Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputaton
of impartiality, and that Ihe might not drive M'aLry

* Kciih, 3;7.
f- D'Ewcs Journ. 1-4-13i, Ca;J. ;9. M;c. 1i9.
'ay)ncs, 4iO.

in :o

into any desperate measure, The committed to the B o o K
Towerone Thornton, who had publilhed something IV.
derogatory to the right of the Scottish line*; and 56
signified her displeasure against a member of the
house of Commons, who seemed, by tome words
in a speech, to glance at Mary -.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever soli- An extra.

citous to.promote the interest of that religion which R'np of
the professed. The re-establishment of the Romiffi Mary, ir
doctrine seems to have been her favourite palfion; Popcy.
and though the design was concealed with care, and
condu&ed with caution, he pursued it with a per-
fevering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay
aside somewhat of her usual reserve; and the aid
which Ihe expeted from the Popifn Princes, who
had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged
her to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper
of the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Hav-
ing formerly held a secret correspondence with the
court of Rome, he now resolved to allow a Nun-
cio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time bishop of Mondovi,
was the person on whom Pios V. conferred this of-
fice, and along with him he eint the Queen a pre-
sent of 20,000 crowns . It is not the charaer ,f
the Papal court, to open its treasury upon diitant r
imaginary hopes. The bulinefs of the Nuncio in
Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a re-
conciliation of that kingdom to the Romith Ice.
Thus Mary herllf understood it; and in her an-

* Camd. 4o. f Fi;i.nre, 4,9.
I Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burr. s\o. ii!. 32;.

fwer

B o o K fwer to a letter which she received from the Pope,

IV. after exprefling her grateful lense of his paternal
1566. care and liberality, the promises that hewould bend

her whole strength towards the re-eftablilhment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that she would
receive the Nuncio with every possible demonftra-
tion of refpef, and concur, with the utmost vigour,
in all his designs towards promoting the honour of
God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that Ihe
would celebrate the baptism of the Prince, accord-
ing to the ceremonies which the Romish ritual pre-
scribes, hoping that her fubjefts would be taught,
by this example, again to reverence the sacraments
of the church, which they had so long treated with
contempt; and that ihe would be careful to instill
early into her son the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith*. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
sent over one of his attendants with part of the mo.
ncy, the Queen did not think the juncture proper
for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, againit the
time of the Prince's baptism, and as it would have
been improper to oEind her, fle wifely contrived,
under various preter.ces, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris -. The ccnvilifiuns into which the kingdom
vwas throw n atbn after, made it impoflible for him
tu purlie his jou;rey any farther.

A'r t:he very timl t!:; Mar ry was ecretly crrying
0:1 tcl.a: no;ciuas our fibvercin:g the Rcform-

'' ~ ~ ~ t
(e'*.11\;; \ i . ;*.^u .v l i

ed Church, she did not scruple publickly to employ B o o K
her authority towards obtaining for its Ministers a IV.
more certain and comfortable subsistence . Dur- *贸
ing this year, he issued several proclamations and
ats of council for that purpose, and readily approv-
ed of every scheme which was proposed for the
more effecual layment of their stipends. This
part of her conduct does little honour to Mary's in-
tegrity; and though justified by the example of
Princes, who often reckon fallhood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even
authorised by the pernicious cafuiflry of the Roman
Church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics,
from the lift of crimes, to that of duties, such dif-
simulation, however, must be numbered among
those blemishes which never stain a truly great and
generous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambaf- December.

fadors were yet arrived, the baptism of the Prince on so the
was put off from time to time. Mean while Mary Kingsex-
fixed her residence at Craigmillar t. Such a re-
tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her
mind, and induced her to prefer it before her own
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. Her aversion for the
King grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
come altogether incurable. A deep melancholy fuc-
ceeded to that gaiety of spirit, which was natural to
her. The ralhnefs and levity of her own choice,
and the King's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her
with hame and with despair. A variety ofpaffions

* Keith, 51i, 562. KIox, 401. t eCith, 3.
VOL. I. C c preyed

B o o K preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations were

IV. exquisite, and all its emotions trong, and often ex-
566. torted from her, the last wilh of the unfortunate,
566' that life itself would come to an end *.

A divorce MURRAY and Maitland observed all those work-
betwet n
them pro. ings of passion in the breast of the Queen, and
posed. conceived hopes of turning them to the advantage

of their ancient aflociates, Morton, and the other
conspirators against Rizio. They were still in ba-
nifiment, and the Queen's resentment against them
continued unabated. Murray and the Secretary
flattered themfclves, however, that her inclination
to be separated from Darnly would surmount this
deep-rooted aversion, and that the hopes of an event
so desirable might induce her to be reconciled to the
conspirators. It was easy to find reasons, in the
King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of
divorce. This fenrence they had interest enough to
obtain, and to procure the ratification of it in Par-
liament. In return for this service, they proposed
to stipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon to
Morton and his followers. The design was first of
all communicated to' Argyll, who, as well as Mur-
ray, owed his return into Scotland to the confpira-
cy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who at
that time dircted all Mary's councils, were like-
wife admitted into the concert. They joined toge-
ther in inaking the overture to the Queen, and en-
forccd it with all bailand's eloquence t. But
Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliver-
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they en-

* Kc;it, rrer. vii. - Anders, vol. iv. Part ii. 188.

deavoured

deavoured to allure her, had nevertheless good rea- B o o
sons for rejecing the method, by which they pro- IV.
poled to accomplih it. The birth of her son had '.rs
greatly trengthened her claim upon the English
fuccellion, and encouraged the abettors of it to ap-
pear with greater boldness, and to a with more
vigour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
her husband, without throwing ome imputation on
her son. This might open a new dispute with re-
gard to the fuccefflon, and put it in the power of
Elizabeth and her Ministers to call in question the
Prince's legitimacy, or at leaR to subjet it to all
the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
fear of these inconveniences weighed with Mary,
and determined her rather to endure her hard fate,
than to seek relief, by venturing on such a dange-
rous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,

the English and French Ambassadors, being arriv-
ed, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the bap-
tifm of her son. Bedford was attended by a numerous
and splendid train, and brought presents from -.li-
zabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and the relice
with which she affected, at that time, to treat the
Queen of Scots. Great preparations had been made
by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on
this occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly
known in Scotland. The ceremony itiflf was per- D垄cem. 7.
formed according to the rites of the Romilh Church.
But neither Bedford, nor any of the Sco;tifh nobles
who professcd the Protestant religion, entered with.

C G. 2 in

B o o K in the gates of the chapel . The spirit of that age,

IV. firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-
<C贸贸 ducement, condescend to witness an acion, which

it esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this junture, perfectly
'caricious discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of his
behaviour
at the bap. folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but confined
tifm of the
Prince,, himelf to his own apartment; and as the Queen

distrusted every nobleman who ventured to converse
with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing
could be more singular, or was less expected, than
his chufing to appear in a manner, that both pub-
lifhed the contempt under which he had fallen, and
by exposing the Queen's domestic unhappiness to
the observation of o many foreigners, looked like
a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and tooffend her.
Mary felt this insult sensibly; and notwithstanding
all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suited the
occasion, and which was neceflary for the polite re-
ception of her guests, she was fornetimes obliged to
retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her for-
row, and give vent to her tears t. The King fill
perifted in his design of retiring into foreign parts,
and daily threatened to put it in execution $.

T HE

* Keith, 3(o. -[ Ibid. Praf vii.
: Camden affirms, 41, that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this wis
an idignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her hulband,
it hath been asserted to be the cause of the King's absence fromn
the ceremony of his son's baFti:.m. Keith, 36. Good. 319.
But, . No such thing is to be found among Bedford's inltruc-

tlins,

THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptifmB o o K

was not the sole business of Bedford's embassy. is IV.
inftru&ions contained an overture, which ought to 566

566.

have gone far towards extinguishing thofejealoufies Elizabeth
which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. dedavours
The treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often modate her
mentioned, was the principal occasion of these. The with Mary.
spirit, however, which had risen to such an height
in the late Parliament, the power of the party which
favoured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
and aivity of her agents in different parts of the
kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to
forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and

tion, the original of which Rill remains. Keith, 3. 2. Bed-
ford's advice to the Queen by Melvii is utterly inconfilent with
Camden's aflertion. Melv. 153. Melvil's account is confirmed
by Elizabeth's inlirutions to Sir Henry Norris, where she as-
firms that he commanded Bedford to employ his bell offices to-
wards reconciling Mary to her husband, liich he had attempt-
ed to no purpose. Digges's Ccmnpl. Ambaf. p. 13. A paper
published Append. No. XVIII. pro.'cs the fame thing. 3. Le
Croc the French Resident mention' the Kino's ablence, but with-
ojtgiving that rcafon for it, which !i:s been founded on Camden's
word, though, if that had been te real one, he would scarce
have tiilcd to mention it. I is ;:ccoLIIt ot thi; matter is that
which I hate followed, Keith, 'icf. ii. 4. lie informs his
court, that on account of the difference Letvixt the King and the
Qu,.en, he had refurcd to hLld any further cu.orcpoi:dence with
t e former, thou,h he appcar, in many inltnicef, to have been
hi. Sreat conii'cnt. Ibid. . 5 A the King was not present at
the baFt;fm, hl reens to have been 'xclidnd fomn any fliare in
the ordinary adminilration of bufirefi. T'wo ats of Privy
Courcil, one on the 2oth, and the other on the 21 it of Decem-
Ler, are f.,und in KIcih, 6z. They bolth run in the Queen's
name alone. Te ling seems rot to have been prefcnt. This
could not be owing to Llizabcth'l iltruCio.s to Ucdfurd.

C c 3 artful

B o artful expreflions in that treaty might afford her.

IV. Noth ng was now demanded of Mary, but to re-

66. nounce any title to the crown of England during

Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity
who, on the other hand, engaged to take no siep,
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon
the fucceflon *.

MARY could not, with decency, reje a propo-

fition so equitable; she insisted, however, that Eli-
zabeth should order the right upon which she claim-
ed to be legally examined, and publickly recognized,
and particularly that the testament of Henry VIII.
whereby he had excluded the descendants of his eld,
eft filter the Queen of Scotland, from the place due
to them in the order of succession, might be pro-
duced, and confidered by the Englilh nobility.
Mary's Ministers had creduloufy embraced an opi-
nion, that this testament, which they so justly con-
ceived to be injurious to their mistress, was a mere
forgery; and on different occasions had urged Fli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered
considerably by gaining this point. The original
tefament is Rill extant, and not the least doubt can
be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or
to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the queflion
concerning the fuccefflon perplexed and undecided,
and by industriously eluding this requefr, he did
real service to Mary's cause t.

? Keith, ;56. t Ibid. 31, 358. N. te () Murdin, 3'8.

A FIw

A FEw days after thebaptifm of the Prince, Mor- B o o K

ton and all the other conspirators against Rizio ob- IV.
tained their pardon, and leave to return into Scot- x' .
land. Mary, who had hitherto continued inexor-
able to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded at las
to the solicitations of Bothwell*. He could hope
for no success in those bold designs on which his am-
bition resolved to venture, withoutdrawingaidfrom
every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his afrociates, of which they had good reason
to despair, he expeted to secure a band of faithful
and determined adherents.

THE King fill remained at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt. His impatience in this fitua-
tion, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumour of a design to seize his person, and confine
him to prison t, was the occalion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his
father at Glasgow.

Two assemblies of the Church were held during June s.

this year. New complaints were made, and upon Church as-
good grounds, of the poverty and contempt under fair"s
which the Protestant clergy were suffered to lan-
guilh. Penurious as the allotment for their sub-
fiftence was, they had not received the lelft part
of what was due for the preceding year $. Nothing
less than a zeal, ready to endure and to susser every
thing for a'good caule, could have persuaded men
to adhere to a church, so indigent and li negleded.

*Good. vol. i. 14o. Melv. 154. t Kcih, Pref. viii.

I lbid. Sliz.

C c 4 The

B o o K The extraordinary expences, occasioned by the

IV. Prince's baptism, had exhausted the Queen's trea-
566. fury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence

of the clergy were diverted into other channels.
The Queen was herefore obliged t. prevent the
just remonstrances f hie aflembly, by falling on
some new method for the relief of thechurch. Some
symptoms of liberality, some ifretch towards muni-
ficence might have een expeded in an aflignment
which was made with an intention of soothing and
silencing the clergy. But both the Queen and the
nobles held fast the riches of the church which they
had seized. A fum, which, at the highest compu-
tation, can scarce be reckoned equal to 9000ooo. fter-
ling*, was deemed sufficient for the maintenance of
a whole national church, by men who had lately
seen ingle monafteriespoflefled of revenues far fupe-
rior in value.

THE eccleiaftics in that age bore the grievances

which affeced themselves alone with astonishing pa-
tience; but wherever the Reformed religion wasthrea-
tened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and to
proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions
of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given
them, a short time before the meeting of the Aflem-
bly. The usurped and oppreflive jurifditlion of the
piritual court had been abolished by the Parlia-
ment 560, and commiffarieswere appointed to
hear and determine the causes which formerly came
under their cognizance t. Among the few acts of
;hat Parliament, to which Mary had paid any re-

* Keith, 562, t Id. 152.

gard,

gard, this was one. She had confirmed the autho- B o o K
rity of the Commiflaries, and had given them in- IV.
ftruaions for direting their proceedings *, which
are fill of great authority in that court. From that566
time thefejudges had continued in the uninterrupted
exercise of their funtion, when of a sudden the
Queen issued a proclamation, restoring the Arch-
bilhop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurisdiction,
and depriving the commiffaries of all authority -.

A io'rTIV I., which cannot be jutified, rendered

the Qtecn not unwilling to venture upon this ram
acion. She had betn contriving, for fonie time,
how to re-establish the Popifl religion and the re-
storing the ancient ecclefiaitics to their former jurif-
diRion, seemed to be a confideiable ftep towards
that end. The motive which prompted Both well,
to whole influence over the Queen this aion must
be chiefly imputed :, was till more criminal. His
enterprising ambition had already formed that bold
design, which he soon after put in execution, and
the use which we shall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics re-
gained, discovers the reasons of his present condut&,
in contributing to revive their power. The Pro.
teftant clergy were not unconcerned fpe&ators of an
event, which threatened their religion with unavoid-
able deftrution; but as they delpaired of obtain-
ing the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addrcffed a remonstrance to the whole body of the
Protestant nobility, flll of that ardent zeal for re-
ligion, which the danger to which it was exposed at

' Kcilh, 25 1. t Knox, 403. $ IJ. ibid.

that

B o o K that time, seemed to require*. What effe&ts this

IV. vehement exhortation might have produced, we
66' 'have no opportunity of judging, the attention of
5 the nation being quickly turned towards events of

another, and more tragical nature.

The King IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling,
falls ick at
clafgow. and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
1567. with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which

attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effe~ts of poi-
son t. It is impoflible, amidst the contradicions
of hitorians, to decide with certainty concerning its
nature, or its cause . His life was in the utmost

* Keith, 567. f Melv. 154. Knox, 401.
t Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been

poilbned. They mention the black and putrid pufRules which
broke out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's physician plainly declared that poison was the cause
of there symptoms, and that the Qeen refued to allow her own
physician to attend him, Buch. 349. Knox, 40r. 2. Blackwood
Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 24, 5). aflirt, that the small pox was
the disease with which the King was seized. He is called a
Pockih man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 15. The rea-
fan given by French Paris fr lodging the King at the Kirk of
Field, viz. left the young Prince hould catch the infection if he
laid in the palace, teems to favour this opinion, Anders. vol. ii.
193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her
hulband, that though 'he never had the small pox herself, he
ventured to attend him, vol. iii, 446. This, if it had been true,
would have afforded a good pretence for not visiting him sooner;
but Mary had the small pox in her infancy, Sadler's Letters.
3. Bithop Lefly affirms, that the King's disease was the French
pox, Keith, 364. Note (b). In that age, this disease was efleem-
ed so contagious, that persons infcted with it were removed
without the walls of cities,

dan,

danger; but after languilhing for some weeks, the B o o K
vigour of his constitution surmounted the malignity IV.
of the disease.

1567.

MA RY's neglect of the King, on this occasion, Neeaed

was equal to that with which he had treated her dur- by Mary.
ing her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts to
sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices
which sooth and alleviate icknefs and pain. At
this juncture, she did not even put on the appear-
ance of this paion. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, hc anused herfelfwith excursions to diffe-
rent parts of the country, and suffered near a month
to elapse before fle visited him at Glasgow. By
that time, the violence of the diftcmper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was
out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her husband was Thei hbr,icI

not occasioned by any of those flight dirguats, which bee,"
interrupt the domestic union, without dissolving it parable.
altogether. Almost all the passions, which operate
with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
it to the molt dangerous extremes, concurred in
raising and for.enting this unhappy quarrel. Ingra-
titude for the favours she had betlowed, contempt
of her perlbn, violations of the marriage-vow, en-
croachments on her power, conspiracies against her
favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obtinacy, were
the injuries of which Mary had great reason to com-
plain. She felt them with the utmolt sensibility;
and added to the anguish of disappointed love, they

pIro-

B o o K produced those symptoms ofdefpair which we have

IV. already described. Her reefntment against the King
X- . seems not to have abated from the time of his leav-
1567. ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand,

to her Ambassador in France, just before {he et out
forGlafgow, no tokens offudden reconcilement ap-
pear. On the contrary, he mentions, with some
Jan. 2o. bitterness, the King's ingratitude, thejealoufy with

which he observed her actions, and the inclination
he discovered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost
scorn *.

vifitsthe AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it
King at was scarce to be expected that she would visit the

King, or that any thing but marks ofjealoufy and
diltruft hould appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; he not only
visited Henry, but, by all her words and actions,
tndeavoured to express an uncommon affection for
him: And though this made impression on the cre-
dulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on
some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to
those who are acquainted with the human heart,
and wl-o know how fildom and how slowly futch
wounds in domestic happilefs are healed, this 1hd-
den trinfition will appear with a very suspicious
air, and will be confidcred by them as the effect of
artifice.

her dim. BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is
,iuliton. charged with diflimulation in this part of her con-

Keith, Pref. viii.

dut&.

duct. Two of her famous letters to Bothwell were B o o K
written during her ay at Glasgow, and fully lay IV.
open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded i' '
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an
absolute ascendant over the Queen; and in a fitua-
tion, such as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, ser-
vices of far inferior importance, and addrcfs much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be fuppoied to
steal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are,
unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the
manners of that court, in which Mary had been
educated, contribute to increase or to fortify them.
The amorous turn of Francis I. and Henry II. the
wildness of the military character in that age, and
the liberty of appearing in all companies, which be-
gan to be allowed to women, who had not yet ac-
quired that delicacy of sentiment, and those polilh-
ed manners, which alone can render this liberty in-
nocent, had introduced, among the French, a licen-
tioufnefs of morals that rose to an aftonilhing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary fom
her infancy, could hardly fail of diminifling that
horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous nind.
The King's behaviour would render the first ap-
proach of forbidden sentiments lel fliocking; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to re-
present whatever toothed her revenge, as jultifiab!e
on that account; and so many concurring cauies
might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new painion
in her heart.

CU'T

B o o K BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard

IV. to the rife and progress of this passion, the letters
Lt4贸J themselves breathe all the ardour and tenderness of
1567.
The mo- love. The affeiion which Mary there expresses for
tives of it. Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part

of her condut; which, without admitting this cir-
cumftance, appears altogether mysterious, incon-
fiftent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement with
her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impofible to give any plausible account, is dif-
covered, by the Queen's own confeflion, to have
been mere artifice and deceit. As her aversion for
her husband, and the suspicious attention with which
ihe obierved his condut, became universally known,
her ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such
cafes, with groundless or aggravatedaccounts of his
ations. By some, he was told, that the King in-
tended to seize the person of the Prince his son, and
in his name to usurp the government by others
Ihe was assured, that he resolved instantly to leave
the kingdom; that a vessel was hired for this pur-
-pose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive
him *. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have
been highly dishonourable to the Queen, and would
have intirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided at Glasgow, at a distance from
her, and in that part of the kingdom where the in-
terest of his family was greatell, he might, with
more facility, accomplish his designs. In order,
therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild
scheme, it was necessary, to bring him to some place

* Keith, Pref, viii.

6 ' where

where hewould be more immediatelyunder her own B o o K
eye. For this purpose, he first employed all her 1V.
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to 567-
remove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, Prevails on
under pretence, that there he would have easier ac- him to
cess to the advice of physicians, and that she her- Edinburgh.
self could attend him without being absent from
her son *. The King was weak enough to susser
himself to be persuaded ; and being still feeble and
incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter
to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house

belonging to the Provost of a collegiate church,
called Kirk of Field. It stood almost upon the
fame spot where the house belonging to the Princi-
pal of the University now sands. Such a situation,
on a rising ground, and at that time in an open
field, had all the advantages of healthful air to re-
commend it but, on the other hand, the solitude
of the place rendered it extremely proper for the
commission of that crime, with a view to which, it
seems manifestly to have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the He;i mur-

mofl alliduous care. She seldom was absent from dred thle-.
him through the day; he sept several nights in the
chamber under his apartment. She heaped on him
so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in
a great mealure, quieted those suspicions which had
so long disturbed him. But while he was fotndly
indulging in dreams of the return of his formcr

Gocd. vol. ii. 8.

B o o K happiness, he Rood on the very brink of deftruc.

IV. tion. On Sunday the ninth of February, about
"' eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of Field,

7 in order to be present at a masque in the palace.

At two next morning, the house in which the King
lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise and
Ihock, which this sudden explosion occasioned,
alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to
the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame
room, were found lying in an adjacent garden, with-
out the city wall, untouched by fire, and with no
bruise or mark of violence.
Hischarac- SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart

ter Lord Darnly, in the twenty-firft year of his age.

The indulgence of fortune, and his own external
accomplilhments, without any other merit, had
railed him to an height of dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingrati-
tude, he loft the heart of a woman who doated on
him to diftra&ion. His insolence and incontfancy
alienated from him such of the nobles as had con-
tributed mos zealously towards his elevation. His
levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the
people, who once revered him as the descendant of
their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a na-
tural death, his end would have been unlamented,
and his memory have been soon forgotten; but the
cruel circumtanccs of his murder, and the remilf
ness with which it was afterwards avenged, have
made his name to be remembered with regret, and

have

have rendered him the obje&t of pity to which he B o o K
had otherwise no title. IV.

567.

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guefsotwclt
who had contrived and executed this execrable deed. and he.

Quecn f-

The suspicion fell, with almost a general conent, peaed of
on Bothwell*; and some reflecions were thrown
out, as if the Queen herself were no firanger to the
crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the ful-
left evidence, that the nature of the aion will
admit. The Queen's known sentiments with re-
gard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which she was
loaded -.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was

issued by the Queen, offering a considerable reward
to any person who hould discover those who had
been guilty of such a horrid and detestable crimet;
and though Bothwell was now one of the greatels
fubjets in the kingdom, formidable on account of
his own power, and protected by the Queen's fa-
vour, it was impossible to suppress the sentiments
and indignation of the people. Papers were as-
fixed to the most public places of the city, accuf-
ing him of the murder, and naming his accom-
plices; pitures appeared to the fame purpo!ei, and
voices were heard in the middle of the night, charg-
ing him with that barbarous action. But the au-

M clv. I5;. Andcrf. vol. i. r15).

t See Differit;ticn concerning the murder of Henry Darnly,
and the genuincnefs of Mary's letter to ohwcll. Appendix.

: Ander. vol. i. 36.
VOL. I. D c thors

B o o K thors of there rumours did not confine their accu-

IV. fations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that the

L' 贸'- Qucn herself was accessary to the crime*. This
1567. bold accusation, which so dire&ly attacked Mary's

reputation, drew the attention of her council; and
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of
these libels, diverted them from searching for the
murderers of the King t. It could scarce be ex-
pected that Mary herlelf would be extremely folici-
tous to discover those who had rid her of an hus-
band, whom he had so violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme diretion
of this, as well as of all other affairs, to stifle and
suppress whatever evidence flould be oered, and
to cover, if polible, the whole transaction under
the veil of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry,
however, was made, and tome persons called be-
fore the council; but the examination was conduct-
ed with the most indecent rmiiincfs, and in such
a manner, as to let in no light upon that fie:ne of
guilt '.

IT was not her own fiubjecs alone who fuiiieCted

Mary of having been acccfl.ry to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, tb dihonourable to her
charaEter, owe its rile and progrels to the jaluifv
and malice of her faLious nobles. The rcport o拢
the manner and circuimftanccs of the King's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europ, anl, even in
that age, which \ as tIcuftoe.c:.l to cleds o v-
lence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy

' Anders. vol. ii 156. -1 . vo'. i. 38. Id. v!.
i'. 1( , .8.

bre.cl

breach with her huiband had long been matter of B o o K
public discourse, the first conjeetures which were IV.
formed with regard to his death, were extremely to 6

z567.

her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offier for her conduct, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and
expected that the rigour of her proceedings would
prove the best and fullelt vindication of her inno-
cence *.

LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to ven- Lnnox ac-

cures Botlh-

geance with incessant importunity. This nobleman wl of-hi
had hared in his son's disgrace, and being treated Kinsre
by Mary with neglct, usually resided at a diflance
from court. Rouzed, however, by an event no
less ihocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to
all his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write
to the Queen, and to offer his advice with re-Feb. r.
Ipea to the moil effectual method for lifcovcring
and conviEting thole who had so cruelly deprived
him of a son, and her of a husband. I-e urged
her to prolccute thole who were guilty, with vi-
gour, and to bring them to a peedy trial; he de-
clarcd his own i lilpicion of Bothwell, and of those
who were named as his accomplices; he required
that out of regard to decency, and in order to en-
courage evidence to appear against them, the per-
bons iaccufcd of liclh an atrocious crime flouli be
committed to cuflody, or at lcaft excluded from her
court and plclncle- .

MARY was then at Seaton, whither flie had re-
tired after the burial of the Kin, whuoe body wai

* Keili, Pref ix. II ^

D dl * de-

B o o K deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a

IV. private, but decent manner*. The former part of
贸r-,,' the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be

/eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell im-

mediately to trial. But, instead of confining him

Mary cn- to any prison, Mary admitted him into all her
fanuts to councils, and allowed a peribn, univerlally reputed

the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the fecu-
rity, the dignity, and the power of a favourite t-.
The offices which irothwell already poffefled, gave
him the command of all the south of Scotland.
The catle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much consequence, not to wish it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the
March 19 person of the young Prince in his hands, and im-

mediately bestowed the government of that impor-
tantfortrefs upon Bothwell:. So many steps in her
condu&, inconfiflent with all the rules of pru.
dence, and of decency, must be imputed to an ex-
cess either of folly or of love. Mary's known cha-
raAer fully vindicates her from the former; of the
latter, many and striking proofs oon appeared.

Haflenson No diret evidence had yet appeared against
is trial. Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the

circumfances of a crime, in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great import-
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than general suspicions, and uncertain surmises,
could be produced by his acculers. For this rea-

* Anders. vol. i. z3. t Id. ibid. 40, &c. $ Id.
ibid. Pref. 64. Keith, 3-9.

son,

son, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th B o o K
of March, the 12th of April was appointed for the IV.
day of trial. And tho' the law allowed, and the -67
manner in which criminal causes were carried on in
that age required a much longer interval, it appears
from several circumstances, that this hort space was
considerably contra&ed, and that Lennox had only
eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a per.
son, so far superior to himlelf, both in power and
in favour . No man could be lels in a condition
to contend with an antagonist who was thus sup-
ported. Though Lennox's paternal elate had been
retored to him, when hewas recalled into Scotland,
it seems to have been considerably impaired during
his banifliment. His vaflals, while he resided in
England, had been accustomed to ome degree of

* The at of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's

trial, bears date March the zStn, which happened on a Thurf-
day, Anders. vol, i. 5o. The Queen's warra!.t to the CfCngers,
impowering them to summon Lennox to be p.efent, is datc on
th zth. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was firmmoned by public
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid.
ico. He was summoned at his dwelling-hbufes in Glalgow
and Dumbaiton the 30th of March, the and zd days of
April. Ibid. o1. He was summoncd at P'rth, April lit, Ibid.
Icz. Though Lennox resided at that time 40 mi'es from Edin.
burgh, the citation night hae been given him i(oncr. Such
an unieccfflry delay affords some cui: thfr fufpicikn. 'T:; true,
Mary in her Ictter, March 2.1th, invited I.ennox to conme to
Edinburgh the eniuing week; this gave him warning oime d.iys
sooner, that she intended to bring on the trial withocut delay. Bu;
the prccife time could not be legal:y, or crtuin'y klnown to Len.
nox oIoncr than II or 2 dai s, btbrre the day on whicl h<u was
requied to appear. By the law and praAicc of Scotlnci, at
that time, parties wxcre summoned in calcs t trcralbn 4c days
previous to thc trial.

D d 3 inde.

B o o K independance, and he had not recovered that abfo-

IV. lute a'cendant over them, which a feudal chief ufti-

61 ally possescd. He had no realon to expe& the con-

' currcnce of any of those factions into which the

nobles were divided. During the short period of
his son's prosperity, he had taken such steps as gave
rife to an open breach with Murray and all his ad-
herents. The partizans of the house of Hamilton
were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closes confederacy with Bothwell;
and thus, to the disgrace of the nation, Lennox
stood alone in a cause, where both honour and hu-
manity called so loudly on his countrymen to second
him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy Council, which gave diretions with regard
to the time and manner of his trial; and he liill en-
joyed not only full liberty, but was received into the
Queen's presence with the fame difLinguifhed fami-
liarity as formerly *.

Lennox NOTHING could be a more cruel difppointment
raves a to the withes and reftntment of a father, than such
delay.

a premature trial; every ftep towards which seemed
to be taken by direcions from the person who was
himself accused of the crime, and calculated on
purpose to conceal rather than to dete& his guilt.
Lennox foresaw what would be the issue of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himself,
or success to his cause, lie could venture to appear

* Anderr, vol. i. o5, 5.'

on

on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though B o o K
under expressions the most respectful, some fymp- IV.
toms of his distrusting the Queen may be disco-' 5

1567.

vered. He spoke out now in plain language. He
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying
on the trial with such illegal precipitation. He re-
presented once more, the indecency of allowing
Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
retain his former influence over her councils. He
again required her, as he regarded her own honour,
to give some evidence of her sincerity in prolecut-
ing the murder, by confining the person who was,
on good grounds, fufpectedl to be the author of it;
and, till that were done, he signified his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumstances of which were so irregular, and un-
fatisfatory *.

HE seems, however, to have expecEed little fuc- Applies for

cess from this application to Mary; and therefore, por o Eli.
at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to interpose, abetlh.
in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded -.
Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufpeted the one Queen, than his ubmitting to
implore the aid of the other, who ha I treated his
son with the u.moft contempt, and himleulf and fa-
mily with te greatest rigour. iizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpole in the afrfirs of Scot-
land, wrote instantly to Mary, a lvifd her to delay
the trial for some time, and urgi d, in such strong
terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had utld,
as might have convinced her to wll.i an unfavour-

*Anders. vol. i. 5. t God, vol. i. ;5 '

D d 4 able

B o o K able conftruEtion her conduct would be liable, if

IV. she persisted in her present method of proceed-

567. ig

The trial NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of
proceeds. Lennx, could prevail to have the trial put off:

On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with
such a formidable retinue, that it would have been
dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish
him. Besides a numerous body of his friends and
vaTals aflembled, according to cuflom, from diffe-
rent parts of the kingdom, he was attended by a
band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying
colours along the streets of Edinburgh --. A court
of justice was hld, with the accuftorned formali-
ties. An indictment was presented against Bothwell,
and Lennox was called upon to make good his ac-
cufation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning-
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his Maf-
ter's absence, on account of the shortness of the
time, which prevented his aflembling his friends and
vassals, without whose aliftance, he could not, with
safety, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antago:ift. For this reason, he desired
the court to flop proceeding, and protested, that
any sentence which should be pailcd at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell,
on the other hand, insistcd, that the court flould
instantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prose-
cute the murderers without delay, was produced.

, Andc.f.Pref. 60. Sec Appendix, No. XIX. t Anders.
ol. i. 135. u ..

Cun.

Cunningham's objecions were over-ruled and the B o o K
jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the first rank, IV.
found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.56

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single Bothwll ii

witness was examined, nor any evidence produced "uitt
against him. The jury, under these circumstances,
could do nothing elie but acquit him. Their ver-
di&, however, was far from gratifying the withes,
or silencing the murmurs of the people. Every cir-
cumfance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation; and the judgment pro-
nounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's
innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt.
Pasquinades and libels were affixed to different
places, expressing the sentiments of the public, with
the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of

the cenilure, to which their proceedings would be
exposed; and, at the fame time, that they return-
ed their verdidt acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of
Caithness protested, in their name, that no crime
should be imputed to them on that account, because
no acpufer had appeared, and no proof was brought
of the indi&tment. He took notice, likewise, that
the ninth instead of the tenth of February was men-
tioned in the indictment, as the day on which the
murder had been committed. A circurnfance,
which difovers the extreme inaccuracy of those
who prepared the inditment; and at a time when
fpen were ditpol:, and not without reason, to be

fur.

B o o K suspicious of every thing, this small matter contri-

IV. buted to confirm and to increase their suspicions*.
1567' EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judg.

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full
vindication of his innocence. Immediately ater
his acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom
which was not then obsolete, publihed a writing,
in which he offered to fight, in tingle combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who hould presume to
accuse him of being accefiary to the murder of the
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and fatisfa&ory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her councils,
was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who
could not expeet that his own person would be safe
in a country where the murderer of his ion had been
absolved, without regard to justice; and loaded with
honours, in contempt of decency; fled with preci-
pitation towards England -.

A r.arli- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held,
int hield. at the opening of which the Queen diftinguiflied

Botlwcll, by appointing him to carry the sceptre
before her :. Moe of the as passcd in this Als
fen-mbly, were calculated on purpose to ftrengthcn
his party, and to promote his designs. He ob-
tained the ratification of all the polefllions and ho-

Bothw. Tril, Anacr. vol. . 97, &c. t Keith, 378,
Notc (,). 1 . ibd.

6 nours

nours which the partiality of the Queen had con- B o o K
ferred upon him; and the act to that effect con- 1V.
tained the firongeft declarations of his faithful icr-
vices to the Crown, in all tir,-es palt. The fur-
render of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was con-
firmed. The law of attainder against Huntly was
repealed, and he, and his aidhcrnts, were reltored
to the etlates and honours of their ancestors. Se-
veral of thoie who had been on the jury which ac-
quitted him, obtained ratiications of the grants
made in their favour; and as palquinades daily mul-
tipliud, a law paflcd, whereby those, into whose
hands any paper of that kind fell, were command-
ed instantly to deltroy it; and if, through their ne-
gle&, it fhouldbe allowed to spread, they were sub-
je&ed to a capital punishment, in the fame manner
as if they had been the original authors t.

BUT the abSolute dominion, which Bothwell had Rcmik-

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the cleare't ^ lfwi"
manner, by an at in favour of the Protestant reli- t Retor.

Ilmation.

gion, to which, at this time, she gave her assent.
Mary's attachment to the Romiah faith was uniform
and flipertitious; she had never laid aside the de-
sign, nor loft the hopes of refl-oring it. She had,
of late, come under new enpagements to that pur-
pose, and in consequence of these, had ventured
upon sone steps r..cre public and vigorous than any
she had forrn.crly taken. But 3otlhvcll was prompt-
ed, by powUerfll1 nm:i';e, to romote this law.
I-e had been guilty of ci;n;es, v.'lich rende;cd hin
the objeti of jl ad univer, l de^tef.tiun. l-i

+ KIi{i2: :75.s

was

Bo o K was meditating others, which he easily foresaw

IV. would heighten the public indignation against him.
"L'' By this popular law, e might hope to divert, or

7 to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered

himself, that the obtaining this unexpeted and le-
gal security for the Protestant religion, would atone
for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate
his crimes. The at itself was so favourable to the
doctrine of the Reformers, that the Parliament,
which met next year, under very different leaders,
could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit
in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratify it
word for word *. To pass such an a was utterly
inconfitent with all the maxims which Mary follow-
ed in every other period of her life; but what could
never be extorted from her by the solicitations of the
Assemblies of the church, or by the intreaties of the
people, the more powerful influence of Bothwell
now obtained t.

* Parl. . Jac. V. . .

t Buchanan, Hill 35;, not only omits taking any notice of

this law, but aflerts, that the Queen, though he had given prc-
nrifes in favour cfthe reformed religion, retu!;: to permit any
at to pass in support of it, and even difiidi' the deputiesof the
chu,ch with contempt. Spotfwood, cz. and Calderwood, vol.
iii. . both affirm the fame thing. I; would not have been
r.c:cflary to ohferve this inflance of Buchanan's inaccuracy; but
that an author so conversant in our laws as potfwood, and one
si, irdufricus as Ca'derwood, flouldcor.mitfuch an error, whcn
rot only the origin., lla:u;e was extant in the records of Mary's
l'ria3nnent, hut vcn hcn the printed aft of Murray's Pailia-
n,,eit wa, befoic thtir eye, is remarkable. Even Buchanin

: ::i.ii: .a: ..'?
nc. :; of h: aft. D:tctio, p '.

EVERY

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been B o o K

attended with all the success which his molf sanguine IV.
withes could expe&. He had intirely gained the '-.
Queen's heart; the murder of the King had ex- Bothwcn
cited no public commotion ; he had been acquitted Pv'nb oe

the nobles

by his Peers of any share in that crime; and their to recom-
decision had been, in ome fort, ratified in Parlia- md hi'
ment. But in a kingdom, where the regal autho- Itc,: to tl
rity was so extremely limited, and the power of the
nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on the
last acion, towards which all his ambitious projects
tended, without their approbation. In order to fe-
cure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of Aprl 'q
Parliament, invited all the nobles who were prelent
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose consent, he told
them, he had already obtained; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
les acceptable to their sovereign, than honourable
to himfelft. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with
the utmost zeal; the Popish ecclesiastics, who were
abbolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth
all her paflions, instantly declared their fatisfaion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dread-
ed the exorbitant power which Bothwell had acquir-
ed, and observed the Queen's growing afTction to-
wards him in all her ations, were willing to ma!:e
a merit of yielding to a measure, which they couid
neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were con-

* (Go.d. vo'. ii. 1i+. j An 'crf. vol. i. 94.

isu,. irJ .'-. d

B o O K founded and enraged. But, in the end, Bothwell,

IV. partly by promies and flattery, partly by terror and
367. fforce, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe

a paper, which leaves a deeper stain than any occur-
rence in that age, on the honour and charater of
the nation.

THIS paper contained the ifrongeft declarations

ofBothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac-
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future accusation should be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub-
scribers promised to stand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
proper person she could chufe for a husband; and
if mhe should condescend to bestow on him that mark
of her regard, they undertook to promote the mar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces, in op-
poling any person who endeavoured to obftru& it .
Among the subscribers of this paper, we find some
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who
were firangers to her councils, and obnoxious to
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to
her through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and
others who became the principal authors of her sus-
e1'rings; iome passionately attached to the Romish
l;perltition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protelhant sith --. No common intercft can be sup-
1.ofed to have united men of such opposite princi-
ples and parties, in recommending to their Sove-
reign a ie, foi injur.ic;us to her honour, and so fatal

* An .tf. v. i. 17. 1 2.c!, 382.

to

to her peace. This trange coalition was the effea B o o K
of much artifice, and mult be confidered as the IV.
boldest and most masterly stroke of Bothwell's ad- *
dress. It is observable, that amidst all the alterca- 57
tions and mutual reproaches of the two parties which
arose in the kingdom, this unworthy transaction is
seldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, that
in this particular, their conduf could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame,
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and fcem
desirous that it should remain in darkness, or be
buried in oblivion. But as so many persons, who,
both at that time, and ever after, poIeffed the
Queen's favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion
becomes strong, that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
were neither unknown to Mary, nor disapproved
by her *.

THESE

* Of all the diffirent systems with regard to this tanfcfion,

that of Camden seems to be the Icaf: accurat", and the worLt
founded. He supposes that Bothwell as liatcd by Murray,
Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin hil. I-e affirms, at
the nfme time, th;it the subscriptions to thisi papcr were obtained
by them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody fccret, 4. Cut bcflfdes the abfl'lJi-
ty of ilppoiing, that any man's enemies would cnntrbute to-
wards raising him to such high dignity, on tle uL.ccit.in hopcs
of afterwards depriving llim of it; bfildes the imilillbi!ity of
acconmplifling such a marriage, if it had been either uklnowvn
to the Q(een, or difagrccable to cr; v. mniy ubfLirve that th;.;
supposition is deilroycd by the d(ircLa ticiimiy of the Q.cec
herfclf, who nifribcs the conent of 'tlie oltlc; to B.;lthvell' 3' -
sices, q.o l mc/.,,./:l it 11

gi .i:..:g ' ..i lo mi,,ltclnI //u:

,'.'* "': ,'e

conittett t,'cr.'../,'. AndcrIl vol. i. q .. It wou!Il hl:v e Lbcc no
fiaill advantagc to Mary, if s(he coud !: .,: rpi :.:;J t路 c .;-

B o o K ,i THESE suspicions are confirmed by the moRs di-

IV. ret proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a confi-
''67 derable lhare in her favour. He, as well as his
A567.

brother, kept a secret correspondence in England,
with those who favoured her pretensions to that
Crown. The rumour of her intended marriage
with Bothwell having spread early in that kingdom,
excited universal indignation; and Melvil received
a letter from thence, which represented, in the
itrongeft terms, what would be the fatal effects of
such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter into the
Queen's hands, and inforced it with the utmost
warmth. She not only disregarded there remon-
ftrances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell;
and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged
to fly from court, whither he durst not return, till
the Earl's rage began to abate . At the fame time,

Eli-

sent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed. It
is still more furpriling to find Lefly acribing this paper to Mur-
ray and his faction. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bilhop himself was
one of the persons who subscribed it, Keith, 383. 'I he King's
commiflioners, at the conference held at York 1568, pretended
that none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly, would sub-
scribe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was produced,
by which they were allowed to do so; this warrant they had in
theircuftody, and exhibited. Anders. vol. iv. Part 2. . This
differs from Buchanan's account, who supposes that all the nobles
present subscribed the paper on the 9gth, and that, next day,
they btained the approbation of what they had done, by way
of ecurity to themselves, 355.

* Melv. i56. According to Melvil, Lord IIcrreis like-

wife rmonftrated against the marriage, and conju ed the
Q(ccn, on his kncce, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dif-
lionourable alliance, 156. But it has been cblervcd, that Hcr-
scis i one of the .olles who subscribcd the bond, April iq.

KLith,

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infanm B o o K
to which he would expose herself, by such an in- IV.
decent choice; but an advice from her met with still `
less regard*. i567.

THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary Bothwell

carries the

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit Ou, nbe
the Prince her son. Bothwell had now brought his forceto

Dunbar.

fchemesto full maturity, and every precaution being
taken which could render it safe to venture on the
last and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his
spirit did not fiffer him to deliberate any longer.
Under pretence of an expedition against the free-
booters on the borders, he aembled his follow-
ers; and marching our of Edinburgh with a thou-
sand horse, turned suddenly towards Linli:hgow, April a.
met the Qucen on her return near that place, dif-
perlcd her lncnder train without resistance, seized
on her person, and conducetel her, together with a

Keith, .3-. 2. That he is one of the witnrrfies to the mar-
riage articles bctween the !,Qieen anJ Bhwell, May 14. Good.
vol. i. 61. 3 That he it in council w:th EBocthel, May 17.
Keith, 36. But thi rcmcnl!rancc of Lord I-erreis ngsinlt the
marriage hipp:r.cd t; bore: these, nade by Melvil hiinl!f, 7.
itMcvil'禄 rcninillrance mull have happened some time before the
nieeting ot 1'lliamnent; for after offending lDoie:hw:, le retired
tr.)n corut; he allowed is rage time to ublidc, aitd had again
joined the Queen, when Ihe was feczed,' April :4. v5S. 'e
time whiclh mulf have cpfid, by this account of the matter,
wa.i plh;i..ps ffiie: t to havc gained llertcis from bin~ ant
oppoiun t:i bccone a prnmoter of the marriage. Peihaps Mcl.
vil nlui have cominitted (fini( niilitke with repaid to this ft,
it;,ir r.i;ates to Lord Herrciy. Iie coul. not vu ll be mif-
talcci w:it regard to w!i;a hiimclf did.

* Andcrl; vol. i. ic6.
VUi. I. E e si:

B o o K few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his castle of

IV. Dunbar. Sheexprefled neither furprize, nor terror,

nor indignation, at such an outrage committed on
1567' herperfon, and such an insult offered to her autho-

rity, but seemed to yield without struggle or regret*.
Melvil was, at that time, one of her attendants;
and the officer by whom he was seized informed
him, that nothing was done without the Queen's
own consent t. If we may rely on the letters pub-
lihfed in Mary's name, the scheme had been com-
municated to her, and every ftep towards it was
taken with her participation and advice :.

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of ad-

vantage to employ this appearance of violence. It
afforded her a decent excuse for her condu&; and
while he could plead that it was owing to force ra-
ther than choice, she hoped that her reputation,
among foreigners at least, would escape without
censure, or be exposed to less reproach. Bothwell
could not help distrusting all the methods which had
hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any
concern in the murder of the King. Something
was till wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the Great
Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most heinous
crime must be mentioned by name in a pardon, and
then all lefrer offences are deemed to be included
under the general clause, and all other crimes what-
ofeer I1. To seize the person of the Prince, is high
teafun; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon ob-

Keith, 383. f Melv. 159. + Good. vol. ii. 37.
1 Parl. 6. Jac. IV. c. 62.

tained

lained for this, would extend to every thing of B o o K
which he had been accused * IV.

i
BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's peron Is divorced

frox:n hi

into his hands, it would have been unbecoming ei- own wve.
ther a politician or a man of gallantry to have de-
layed consummating his schemes. For this purpose,
he ihftantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a
feitence of divorce from his wife Lady Jane Gor-
don, the Earl of Huntly's filler. This process was April 2
carried on, at the fame time, before Protestant and
Popilh judges; before the former, in the court of
Commiffaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual
court of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, whose
jurifdi&tion the Queen had lately reflored. The
pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. But his authority had greater weight than
the jftice of his cause; and in both courts, sentence
of divorce was pronounced with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy t.

Wt .ILE this infamous tranfiEion was carrying

on, the Queen residcd at Dunbar; detained as a
prioner, but treated with the greatefr refpe&. Soon
after Bothwll, with a numerous train of his de- r.y 3;
pendants, conducted her to Edinburgh; but infPead
of lodging her in the Palace of Holy-rood-houfe,
he conveyed her to the castle, of which he was go-
vernor. The discontent of the na(on rendered this
precaution neceflary. In an house unfortified, and
of ealy accefi, the Queen might have been relcued
without dilficuly out of his hands. In a pce ct

a Anders vj'. :. pirt ii. 61. t And. i. r .

1. 垄 z t frcngh,

B o K strength, he was secured from all the attempts ot

IV. his enemies.

7 ON E small difficulty still remained to be surmount-

ed. As the Queen was kept in a fort of captivity
by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that condi-
tion might be imputed to force, and be held inva-
lid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in
the court of Session, and in presence of the Chan-
cellor, and other judges, and several of the nobility,
declared that The was now at fullliberty; and though
Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had, at
first, excited her indignation, yet his refpetful be-
haviour since that time, had not only appeared her
resentment, but determined her to raiei him to
higher honours*.

la married WHAT these were soon became public. The title
to the of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell;
Q'C"* and on the i5th of May, his marriage with the

Queen, which had so long been the obje& of his
withes, and the motive of his crimes, was folem-
nized. The ceremony was performed, in public,
according to the rights of the Protestant Church, by
Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one of the few
prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day was celebrated in private, accord-
ing to the forms precribed by the Popifli religiont.
The boldness with which Craig, the Minister who
was commanded: to publifl the banns, teltified
against the design; the mall number of the nobles,
who were. present at the marriage; and the fillen

* And. . ,7. t Id. 36 :. 276

and

and difrefpe&ful silence of the people, when theB o o
Queen appeared in public; were manifest fymp- 1V.
toms of the violent and general diffatisfation of -1
her own fubjeds. The refusal of Du Croc the
French ambafflador to be present at the nuptial cere-
mony or entertainment discovers the sentiments of
her allies, with regard to this part of her condua;
and although every other ation in Mary's life could
be justified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled
to the principles of virtue, this fatal marriage would
remain an inconteftible proof of her rashness, if not
of her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer tome apology for

her conduC, to the courts of France and England.
Theinftrutions to her ambassadors still remain, and
are drawn by a maflerly. han:.. But under all the
artificial and false colouring she employs, it is easy
ro discover not only that many of the steps he had
taken were unjustifiable, but that she herself was
conscious that they could not be justified .

TIHE title of King was the only thing, which was

not bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwihlftanding her
attachment to him, Mary remembered the in-
conveniencies which had arilen from the rafl ad-
vancement of her former husband to that honour.
She agreed, however, that lie hould sign, in token
of consent, all the public writs iued in her namet.
This was nothing more than mere form, but, to-
gether with it, he polleired all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; he was fur-

*And. . 89. t Good. 2. Co.

E e 3 rounded

B 9 o K rounded more closely than ever by his creatures

1V. none of her fubjeas could obtain audience without
56. his permiflion; and, unless in his own presence,

none but his confidents were permitted to converse
with her*. TheScottifh Monarchswere accustomed
to live among their fubjees as fathers or as equals,
without distrust, and with little state; armed guards
sanding at the doors of the royal apartment, diffi-
culty of access, distance and retiremrent, were things
unknown, and unpopular.

Endea- THEsE precautions were necessary for securing to
become Bothwell the power, which he had acquired. But,

a1 of. 1without being master of the person of the young
perto3. Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained to be

precarious and uncertain. The Queen had com-
mitted her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were too
well known to expect that he would be willing to
put the Prince into the hands of the man, who was
fa violently fufpe&gd of having murdered his father.
Bothwell, howei er, laboured to get the Prince into
his power, with an anxiety, which gave rife to the
blackest suspicions. All his address as well as au,
thority were employed to perfiade, or to force Mar,
into a ccn li: t,,'; . wit'; i.is demandsT. And it is
no flight pr.of both of the firmness and dexterity
of tha nobleman, that he prelerved a life of so much
importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

9 And, . rj6. t Mclv, T6o. uch, 361.

TH

TFE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at B o o K

that time, upon the great events, which had hap- IV.
pered in Scotland, during three months. A King 5
murdered with the utmost cruelty, in the prime of General in.
his days, and in his capital city; the perron suspect- ditin
td of that odious crime suffered not only to ap- Qen 's
pear publickly in every place, but admitted into the excired.
presence of the Queen, diflinguilied by her favour,
and entrusted with the chief direction of her as-
fairs; fubje&ed to a trial which was carried on
with most ffamelefs partiality, and acquitted by a
sentence, which served only to confirm the fufpi-
cions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pre-
tences frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, in-
stead of meeting with the ignominy due to his ac-
tions, or the punishment merited by his crimes, per-
mitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had alas-
finated, and the guardian of those laws which he
had been guilty of violating. Such a quick fuc-
cession of incidents, so singular, and so detestable,
is not to be found in any other history. They left,
in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on
the chara&er of the nation. The Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst scarce
appear any where in public; and after suffering so
many atrocious deeds to pass with impunity, they
were univerlally reproached as men void of courage,
or of humanity, as equally regardless of the repu-
tation of their Qleen, and the honour of their
country .

Andcrf. vol. i., 12, ;i. Melv. 163. See Ap.endiy,
o. XX. T

E e 4 THESE

B o o i. '!:rL reproaches rouzed the nobles, nio had

IV. been hii'.:rto amufcc by Botiwevel's artiices, or in-
156 ti:nidated by his power. The manner in which he
The nobles exercised the authority which he had acquired, his
SaiflThcr repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's
and Both person, together with tomne rash treatenings against

him, which he let fall *, added to the violence and
promptness of their resolutions. A considerable
body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into
an association for the defence of the Prince's person.
Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home,
Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy
of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy t. Stewart Earl of Athol
was remarkable for an uniform and bigoted attach-
ment to popery, but his indignation on account of
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of re-
ligion, and united him with the most zealous Pro-
tetants. Several of the other nobles a&ted, with-
out queftiop, from a laudable concern for the safety
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the spirit which ofme of them ditcovered, dur-
ing the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room
to doubt, that ambition or rntment were the
real motives of their condu&t and that, on many
occafiqns, while they were pursuing ends just and
peceffary, they were actuated by principles and pal-
AI9Rs altogether tnjulliliable.

* Mvil, 161. t Kith, 394.

Tar

THE first accounts of this league filled the Queen B o o K

and Bothwell with great consternation. They were IV.
no strangers to the sentiments of the nation, with C贸
refpet to their conduct; and though their marriage 567
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the storm,
Mary issued a proclamation, requiring her subjeCts May ,8,
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, (ibe published a fort
of manifesto, in which (he laboured to vindicate
her governnent from those imputations with which
it had been loaded, and employed the strongest
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her son. Neither of these pro-
duced any considerable effect. Her proclamation
was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their prepara-TheQueen

tions with no less activity, and with much morel"Bh
success. Among a warlike people, men of so much toDunbar.
power and popularity found it an easy matter to raise
an army. They were ready to march before the
Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to resist
them. The catle of Edinburgh was the place
whither the Queen ought naturally to have retired,
and there her person might have been perfectly safe.
But the confederates had fallen on means to hake,

' Keith, 387. 395, 396.

or

B o o K or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de-

IV. puty governor, and Bothwell durst not commit to

'-r- him such an important truRt. He conduted the
u, g6.7 Queen to th ae
cale of Brothwick, and on the ap.

pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen difguif-
ed in men's clothes. The confederates advanced to-
wards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in
vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were instantly joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmest support of their
cause *,

IN order to set their own conduc in the mod fa-

vourable light, and to rouze the public indignation
against Bothwell, the nobles publiihed a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
arms. All Bothwell's par crimes were enumerated,
all his wicked intentions displayed and aggravated,
and every true Scotfinan was called upon to join
them in avenging the one, and in preventing the
other t.

M EAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he soon gathered such strength, that he ven-
tured to advance towards the confederates. Their
troops were not numerous; the suddenness and fe-
crecy of their enterprize gave their friends at a dif-
tance no time to join them; and as it does not ap.

c Keith, :<8. t Anders. vol. i. 2I.

pear

pear that they were fupporced either with money or B o o m
fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they IV.
could not have kept long in a body. But on the X
other hd, Bothlell durst ljot rifque a delay*. 5
His army followed him with reiu.tancc in this quar-
rel, and lerved him wth no cordial affciion so
that his only hI)le of success was in furprizing the
enem, or in tl ik.ng the blw before his own troops
had leiir.re to recollet themselves, or to imbibe the
fanme unfavourable opinion of his ations, which
had ipread over the reft of the nation. These mo-
tives determined the Queen to march forward, with
an inconsiderate and fatal speed,

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the The nobl

confederates advanced to meet her. They found her mrh '-
forces drawn up upon the fame ground which the tl'".
English had occupied before the battle of Pinkie. jly zS
The numbers on both fides were nearly equ.l; but
ghere was no equality in point of discipline. The
Queen's army consisted chiefly of a multitude, has-
tily afembled, without courage or experience in
war. The troopsaL the confederates were corn.
pored of Gentlemeh of rank and reputation, fl-
lowed by their most truty dependanlts, who were
po less brave than zealous t.

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was iAn accom.

the field, laboured, by negociating both with the 'a '1掳,
Qreen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel
without the effusion of blood. He represented to
the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards

a Kcith, 401. t Cld. :o. ii. 4,4 49.

peace;

B o o K peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences

IV. which they had committed. Morton replied with
"'r" warmth, that they had taken arms not against
1567. the Queen, but againfR the murderer of her hus.

band; and if he were given up tojuftice, or banish-
ed from her presence, he flould find them reaiy
to yield the obedience which is due fron fibjeCts to
their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did
not come to ask pardon for any offence, but to pu-
nifi tho!e who had oiTended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffectual, and that their palfins were too high
to allow tihem to liflcn to any pacific propoitions,
or to think of retreating after having proceeded b
far *.

THE Queen's army was polled to advantage, on

a rising ground. The confederates advanced to the
attack resolutely, but slowly, and with hlie caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and dilco-
vered no inclination to fiht. Mary endeavoured
to animate them; fle wept, flhe threatened, she re-
pro:'ched them %with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Iothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encotunter; the reft flood wavering and irre-
folutc, and some bcg:;n to fleal out of ihe fiie4
Bothwell attempted to inipirit them, by offering to
dtcide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno-
cence in single combat with any of his adverlaiies.
KrrkIal1y of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and
I.ord Lindfly contended for the honour of enter-

K TKith, 401.

il

Ing the lifts against him. But this challenge B oo K
proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confci- IV.
oufnefs of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted ',
courage, or the Queen, by her authority, sorbad 15 6
the combat *.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her

fol!owers, Mary would have been inexcusable,
had he hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which she flood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impracticable. In this situation,
she was under the cruel necetfity of putting her-
self into the hands of those fubjets who had taken
arms againrf her. She demanded an interview
with Kirk'aldy, a brave and generous man, who
commanded an advanced body of the enemy.
He, with the content and in name of the leaders
of the party, promised that, on condition she
would dismiss Bothwell from her presence, and go.
vern the kingdom by the advice of her nobles,
they would honour and obey her as their Sove-
reign t.

DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- E.,..,,i

well of the Queen, and rode off the ield with a few ohllstd so
followers. This dismal reverie happened exactly
one month after that marriage, which had cost him
so many crimes to accomplilh, and which leaves
tb foul a stain on Mary's memory.

Cald. vol. i. 50. t Good. vol. ii. 16 . Melv. 65.

As

Bo o As oon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered

IV. to Kirkaldv, who conduCted her toward the con.

6 federate army, the leaders of which received her

j567.
Macy rur- with much refpe&t; and Morton, in their name
tcndes to made ample profcffions of their future loyalty and

obedience *. But The was treated by the common
folditrs with the utmost insolence and indignity.
As the marched along, they poured upon her all the
opprobrious names, which are bestowed only on the
lowest and most infamous criminals. Wherever
The turned her eyes, they held up before her a fland-
ard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, stretched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words,
" Judge and revenge my cause, 0 Lord !" Mary
turned with horror from such a hocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to
which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
most bitter complaints, he melted into tars, and
could scarce be kept from finking to the ground,
The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh,
and, in spite of many delays, and after looking
withthe fondness and credulity natural to the unfor-
tunate for some extraordinary relief, fle arrived there,
The streets were covered with multitudes, whom
zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold liich
anunufual scene. The QlOeen, worn out with fatigue,
covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, was cx-
poled as a iel-acle to her own lubljeds, and led
to the Provost's house. Notwilhftanding all her
argumlcnts and intreatics, the lime italliard was

* Good. vol. ii. 165.

cariel

carried before her, and the fame insults and re- B o o .
proachesrepeated. A woman, young, beautiful, IV.
and in distress, is naturally the object of compassion. 16
The comparison of their present misery with their
former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld the de-
plorable situation of their Sovereign with infenfibi-
lity; and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt,
and so great the violence of their indignation, that
the sufferings of their Queen did not, in any de-
gree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that
sympathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate
Princes *.

*Aelvil, 66. Bch. 34,

THE

# BOOK V.

THE

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK V.
T H E confederate Lords had proceeded to such B o o K

extremities against their Sovereign, that it V.
now became almost impoflible for them either to --,"

1567.

tfop short, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- Delibera7
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them tion of the

nobles con-

in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. cerning thr
A small circumifance might abate that indignation Qe`n-
with which the multitude were, at present, animat-
ed against the Queen, and deprive them of that po-
pular applause which was the chief foundation of
their power. These considerations inclined ome
of them to treat the Queen with great lenity.

VOL. . F f BUT,

B o o K BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affection for

V. Bothwell continued as violent as ever; she obfti-
567' nately refused to hearken to any proposal for dif-

57 olving their marriage, and determined not to aban-

don a man, for whose love she had already sacrificed
so much *. If they fiould allow her to recover the
supreme power, the first exertion of it would be to
recall Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his
resentment, from her conduct, and from their own,
to expet the fevcret effets of her vengeance. Theei
considerations surmounted every other motive; and
reckoning themselves absolved, by Mary's incur-
able attachment to Bothwell, from the engage-
ments which they had come under when he yield.
ed herself a prisoner, they, without regarding the
duty which they owed her as their Queen, and
without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried
her next evening, under a strong guard, to the

riey Im. castle of Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to Wil-
'onhEr liam Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a pri-
vi1- toner. This castle is situated in a finall iand, in

the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belong-
ed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had mar-
ried the Earl of Murray's mother. In this place,
under flriEt custody, with a few attendants, and
uilbje&ed to the insults of a haughty woman, who
boasted daily of being the lawful wife of James V.
Mary ftffered all the rigour and miseries of capti-
vity --.
* Ieith, 419, 446, 449. Mv. 17. See AppendL. No. XXI

- Keith, 4jo. Note ,).

IMME-

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's impriforiment, B o o

the confederateswere at the utmost pains to strengthen V.
their party; they entered into new bonds of affocia-
tion; they aumed the title of Lords of tbefecret 5
Council, and without any other right, arrogated to
themselves the whole regal authority. One of their
firt as of power was to earch the city of Edin-
burgh for those who were concerned in the murder
of the King. This shew of zeal gained reputation
to themselves, and threw an oblique refletion on the
Queen forher remissness. Several fufpeted persons
were seized. Captain Blackadder and three others
were condemned and executed. But no discovery
of importance was made. If we believe some his-
* torians, they were convicted by sufficient evidence.
If we give credit to others, their sentence was un-
just, and they denied, with their last breath, any
knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered *

AN unexpeced accident, however, put into the

hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the ful-
left evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left in
the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing several
sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own
hand; he now sent one of his confidents to bring
to him this precious depofite. But as his messen-
ger returned, he was intercepted, and the caskec
seized by Morton t. The contents of it were al-
ways produced by the party, as the most ample
justification of their own conduct, and the moit unan.

v Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 3.
t Andcrf. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 90.

F f 2 fwerable

B o O K fwerable proof of their not having loaded their So-

V. vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes*.

sO567 BUT the confederates, notwithftandingtheirextra-
Some of he b
nobles fa- ordinary success, were still far from being perfectly
your the
qen. at ease. That so small a part of the nobles hould

pretend to dispose of the person of their Sovereign,
or to assume the authority which belonged to her,
without the concurrence of the reft, appeared to
many of that body to be unprecedented, and pre-
sumptuous. Several of these were now aflembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they
hould hold, in this difficult conjuncture. The
confederates made some attemptstowardsacoalition
with them, but without effect. They employed
the mediation of the assembly of the Church, to
draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh,
but with no better success. That party, however,
though its numbers were formidable, and the power
of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want
of unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no scheme
was concerted for obftru&ing the progress of the
confederates t.

Elizabeih THERE appeared some profpea of danger from
itprP'c, another quarter. This great revolution in Scotland
in her be.
half. had been carried on without any aid from Eliza-

beth, and even without her knowledge . And
though she was far from being displeascd to fee the
affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom

See Dissertation at the end ofthe Appendix.
t Keith, 4c7. : Id. 415.

6 ihe

he hated, reduced to distress; he neither wiihed B o o K
that it should be in the power of the one faction en- V.
tirely to suppress the other, nor could she view the 6 ^
steps taken by the confederates without great of- 567
fence. Notwithstanding the popular maxims by
which Ihe governed her own fubjets, her notions
of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the au-
thority of their sovereign, which they had no right
to controul, and had offered violence to her person,
which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other fubjecas, and
Mary's cause became thecommon cause of Princes*.
If ever Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the
affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of her heart, ra-
ther than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton June 3o.
into Scotland, with power to negociate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his in-
ftrutions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation -t. And
the choice of an ambassador, so devoted to the in-
terest of the Scottilh Queen, proves this solicitude
to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's friend-
ship, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail
to Mary. The confederates foreaiw what would be
the effects of these good offices; and that the Queen,
elated by the prolpe& of protection, would reje&t
with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that realun, peremptorily
denied Throgmorton access to their prioner; and

Keith, 41z, 415' t Id. +1i.

F f 3 what

B o o K what propositions he made to them in her behalf

V they either refused, or eluded *.

1.567. MEAN while they deliberated with the utmofs

Echen.es of
the cnfe- anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation,
noble. and the future disposal of the Queen's person. Eli-

zabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no pro-
grefs in his negociations with them, and that they
would liften to none of his demands in Mary's fa-
vour, turnmd towards that party of the nobles who
were aembled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and
promiicd to assist them in such an attempt, to the
utmost of her power -. But they discovered no
greater union and vigour than formerly, and behav-
ing like men who had given up all concern either
for their Queen or their country, tamely .liowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, whether we confi-
der it with respect to numbers, or to power, to fettle
the government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
the Queen's person at pleasure. Many consultations
were held, and various opinions arose with regard
to each of these. Some seemed desirous of adher-
ing to the plan on which the confederacy was at first
formed; and after punishing the murderers of the
King, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell;
after providing for the safety of the young Prince,
and the security of the Protestant religion; they
proposed to re-eftablifl the Queen in the poefllion
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired others

Keith, 417, 427. t See Appendix, No. XXII.

with

with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no- B o o
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the con- V.
demnation and punishment of the Queen herself, 56
as the principal conspirator against the life of her
husband and the safety of her son *: the former was
Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a pa-
cific and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the
temper or wishes of the party. The latter was re-
commended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics; but the nobles durst not, or would not
venture on such an unprecedented and audacious
deed t.

BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, nei- Theyoblige

the Queen

ther so moderate as the one, nor so daring as thetorefignthe
other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to re- gmpt
sign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
rity, with the name and authority of Regent. With
regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
termined. It seems to have been the intention of
the confederates, to keep her in perpetual imprilbn-
ment; but in order to intimidate herself, and to
overawe her partizans, they still reserved to them-
selves the power of proceeding to more violent ex-
tremes.

* Keith, 420, 421, 422, 52.
t The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have

been carried on by some of her fubjefs: At this time we often find
Elizabeth boasting that Mary owed her life to her interposition.
Digges's Compl. Amb. 4, &c. See Appendix, No. XVIII.

Fs 4 IT

B o o K IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-

V. cution of this plan. Mary was.young, ambitious,
"7g' high-fpirited, and accustomed to command. To

induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power which
she was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her
own fubjeas, to conent to her own bondage, and
to invest those persons, whom he confidered as the
authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which he herself was stripped, were
points hard to be gained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want
means to insure success. Mary had endured, for
several weeks, all the hardships and terror of a pri-
son; no profpe& of liberty appeared; none of her
fubjeas had either taken arms, or so much as soli-
cited her relief*; no person in whom he could
confide was admitted into her pretence; even the
Ambaflidors of the French King and Queen of
England were resiled access to her. In this solitary
Rate, without a counsellor or a friend, under the
pressure of distress, and the apprehension of danger,
it was natural for a woman to hearken almost to
any overtures. The confederates took advantage
of her condition, and of her fears. They employed
Lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to
communicate their scheme to the Queen, and to
obtain her subscription to those papers which were
neceflary for rendering it effetual. He executed
his commifflon with harshness and brutality. Cer-
tain death was before Mary's eyes, if the refuied to
comply with his demands. At the fame time, the

keith, 425.

was

was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of B o o K
Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among V.
the confederates who were most attentive to her in- X7
tereRf, that arefignation extorted by fear, and grant- 5
ed during her imprisonment, was void in law, and
might be revoked so soon as he recovered liberty.
Throgmorton, by a note which he found means to
convey to her, suggested the fame thing *. Defe-
rence to their opinion, as well as concern for her
own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing
which was required, and to sign all the papers which
Lindsay preefnted to her. By one of these, he re-
signed the Crown, renounced all share in the go-
vernment of the kingdom, and consented to the
coronation of the young King. By another, she July 4.
appointed the Earl of Murray Regent, and confer-
red upon him all the powers and privileges of that
high office. By a third, she substituted some other
nobleman in Murray's place, if he hould refuse the
honour which was designed for him. Mary, when
fie subscribed there deeds, was bathed in tears; and
while she gave away, as it were with her own hands,
the sceptre which (he had Iwayed so long, he felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest,
perhaps, which can touch the human heart t.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- James v.

nation all the weight and validity in their power, by crodWMrd
proceeding withoutdelay tocrown the young Prince. tay chorfn
The ceremony was performed at Stirling, on the
29th of July, with much solemnity, in preence of

* Keith, 425. Note (i). Mclv. 169,
t lb.d, .;o. Crawf, Mem. 38,

all

B o o K all the nobles of the party, a considerable number

V. of lesser Barons, and a great assembly of the people.

From that time, all publick writs were iued, and
1567. the government carried on, in name of James V1 *.

No revolution so great was ever effected with

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,
a part of the nobles, who neither poffefied the chief
power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and
who never brought 3000 men into the field, seized,
impriolned, and dethroned their Queen, and with-
out hedding a single drop of blood, set her son, an
infant of a year old, on the throne.

Reasonings DURING this rapid progress of the confederates,
of both
parties. the eyes of all the nation were turned on them, with

astonishment; and various and contraditory opi-
nions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the favour-
ers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the exorbi-
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince pofleffes
considerable power, and his person is treated with
great veneration. No encroachments hould be
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness
of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majority of

Keith, 437.

the

the society to judge of their existence. By what B o o K
a&tion could it be pretended, that Mary had invad- V.
ed the rights or property of her subje&s, or what '^ '
scheme had he formed against the liberty and con-57
flitution of the kingdom? Were fears, and fufpi-
cions, and surmises, enough to justify the impriobn-
ing, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
descended from so long a race of Monarchs? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned culpable
in her condu&, was now driven from her pretence.
The murderersof the King might have been brought
to condign punishment, the fafcty of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have
been etablifhed, without wresting the sceptre out
of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual im-
prifonment. Whatever right a free Parliament
might have had to proceed to such a rigorous con-
clufion, or whatever name its determinations might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, pafred by
a few nobles, without acknowledging or consulting
the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against
the person of their Sovereign.

THE partizans of the confederates reasoned very

differently. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave content to the King's murder,
or did afterwards approve of that horrid aion.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers and ho-
nours with which she loaded him, the manner in
which he suffered his trial to be carried on, and the
indecent speed with which he married a man, stained
with so many crimes, raise firong suspicions of the

former,

B o o K former, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To

V. have suffered the supreme power to continue in the
- hands of an ambitious man, capable of the most

atrocious and desperate aions, would have been
disgraceful to the nation, dishonourable to the
Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse
was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen had been
compelled to abandon a husband, so unworthy of
herself. But her affe&ion toward him frill continu-
ing unabated; her indignation against the authors
of this reparation being visible, and often expressed
in the strongest terms; they, by restoring her to
her ancient authority, would have amed her with
power to destroy themselves, have enabled her to
recall Bothwell, and have afforded her an opportu-
nity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagernels, and with more success. Nothing,
therefore, remained, but by one bold action to deli-
ver themselves and their country from all future fears.
The expedient they had chosen was no les refpeCc-
ful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public
safety. While one Prince was set aside as incapable
of governing, the Crown was placed on his head
who was the undoubted representative of their an-
cient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on com-

paring the arguments of the two contending parties,
whatever sentiments we may entertain concerning
the jutlice or neceflity of that course which the con-
federates held, it cannot be denied that their con-
dut, so far as regarded themselves, was extremely
prudent. Other expedients, less rigorous towards

Mary,

Mary, might have been found for fettling the na- B o o r
tion; but, after the injuries they had already offer- V.
ed the Queen, there was none so effectual for fe- '".
curing their own safety, or perpetuating their own
power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of

the confederates appeared not only wife, but just.
The King's accession to the throne was every where
proclaimed, and his authority submitted to without
opposition. And though several of the nobles were
ftillaflembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering
into ome combination against his government, an
association for supporting it was formed, and signed
by so many persons of power and influence through-
out the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt*.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murray a(.

fumes the

time, added strength to the party, and gave it govern-
a regular and finished form. Soon after the mur- ment-
der of the King, this nobleman had retired in-
to France, upon what pretence historians do not
mention. During his residence there, he had held
a close correspondence with the chiefs of the confe-
deracy, and at their desire, he now returned. He
seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of
Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray
wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition
to aspire to this high dignity. He had received the
firR accounts of his promotion with the utmost 1a-

* Andcrr. vol .
ii. 231.

tisf.tc-

B o o K tisfa&ion; but by appearing to continue for ome

V. days in fufpence, he gained time to view with at-
V. - tention the ground on which he was to at; to ba-

l567ance the strength and resources of the two contend-
ing fa&ions, and to examine whether the founda-
tion on which his future fame and success must relt,
were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This vifir, to a filler, and
a Queen, in a prison, from which he had neither
any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate the ri-
gour of her confinement, may be mentioned among
the circumitances, which discover the great want of
delicacy and refinement in that age. Murray, who
was naturally rough and uncourtly in his manner*,
expoftulared o warmly with the Queen concerning
her past conduct, and charged her faults so home
upon her, that Mary, who had flattered herself
with more gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to
defpairt. This interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein he
discovercd a spirit so revere and unrelenting, may
be reckoned among the most bitter circumstances
in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most un-
juflifiable in his conduct.

SooNx ier his return fiom Lochlevin, Murray
Augut :3. ccepted the olice cf Regent, and began to a in

that charadCer without oppofiion.

* Kc:ih . 95. * t.. ..;, 446.

AMID ST

.AMIDST so many great and unexpected events, B o

the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all, V.
hath been almost forgotten. After his flight from -
the confederates, he lurked for some time among Fat.s o
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But Bothwel-.
finding it impossible for him to make head, in
that country, against his enemies, or even to secure
himself from their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinsman the Bilhop of Murray; and when he, over-
awed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon
him, he retired to the Orkney ies. Hunted from
place to place, deserted by his friends, and accom-
panied by a few retainers, as desperate as himnflf,
he suffered at once the mifcrics of infamy, and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a course which
added to his infamy. He armed a few frall flips,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and at-
tacking every vessel which fell in his way, endea-
voured to procure fubfifEence for himlflf and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tul-
libardin were sent out against him by the confede-
rates; and surprising him while he rode at anchor,
scattered his small fleet, took a part of it, and ob-
liged him to fly with a tingle flip towards Norway.
On that coast, he fell in with a vefTcl richly laden,
and immediately attacked it; the Norwcgials .'iled
with armed boats to its assistance, and ar a def-
perate fight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prifuners. His name and quality were bth un-
known, and he was treated at lirll wilh all the in-
dignity and rigour, which the odious crine of pi-
racy merited. HIis real clhar3aLtr was loon cliicover-

l C*,i i

B o o K ed; and though it saved him from the infamous

V. death to which his associates were condemned, it
a6i could neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the

hardlhips of his imprisonment. He languished ten
years in this unhappy condition; melancholy and
despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unaflift.
ed by strangers *. Few men ever accomplished
their ambitious projets by worse means, or reaped
from them less fatisfation. The early part of his
life was retlefs and enterprising, full of danger and
of viciflitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur, to
which he attained by so many crimes, was extreme-
ly short; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquiet-
ed by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered
the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretch-
ed are subje6t, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.

Success of THE good effects of Murray's acceiflon to the
the Re-a regency were quickly felt. The party forming for
gent's ad-
minitra- the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited; and
'ion.

no sooner was the government of the kingdom in
the hands of a man, o remarkable both for his abi-
lities and popularity, than the nobles of whom it
was composed loft all hopes of gaining ground, and
began to treat separately with the Regent. So many
of them were brought to acknowledge theKing'sau-
thority,that scarce any appearance of opposition to the
eftablifed governmentwasleft in the kingdom. Had
they adhered to the Queenwithany firmness, it is pro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that

MItlv. 168.

she

fht would have afforded them such afltance as B o K
might have enabled them to face their enemies in V.
the field. But there appeared so little vigour or -1-
harmony in their councils, that he was difiouraged
from espousing their cause; and the Regent taking
advantage of their situation, ob'iged them to sub-
mit to his government, without granting any tern:s,
either to tlenifelves, or to the Quleen *.

THE Regent was n less successful in his attempt

to get into his hands the places of itrength in the
kingdom. B.Alfour, the deputy-governor, lurren-
dered the caitle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deferring Bothwell his patron,
obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
Governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity,
was soon forced to capitulate; forne other finall
forts surrendered without resistance.

THIs face of tranquillity in the nation encourag- A P3rlia-

ed the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. No- ,m. ,s,
thing was wanting to confirm the King's authority,
and the proceedings of he confederates, except the
approbation of this supreme court; and after the
success which had attended all their meafilres, there
could be little (doubt of obtaining it. The num-
bers that rclirred to an Assembly, which wa- called
to dlil'eratc on matters of so much importance,
were grat. ' lie meeting was opened with the
utitjmol o'emniry, and ;11 its ats passed ith nmuch
unaniity. Mirly, however, of the LuJ!is sho

* ;ci Gg,

44. ,

.; 4
VO L. . G g had

B o o Khad discovered the warmest attachment to the

V. Queen, were present. But they had made their
1567 peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly, and

Herreis acknowledged, openly in Parliament, that
their behaviour towards the King had been undu-
tiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in this
manner, with the measures of the Regent's party,
was either the condition on which they were ad-
mitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

Confirms THE Parliament granted every thing the confe-
the prngof derates could demand, either for the safety of their
the confe- own persons, or the security of that form of govern-

ment which they had established in the kingdom.
Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and
declared to be valid. The King's authority, and
Murray's election, were recognized, and confirmed.
The imprisoning the Queen, and all the other pro-
ceedings of the confederates, were pronounced law-
ful. The letters which Mary had written to Both-
well were produced, and he was declared to be ac-
ceffary to the murder of the King t. At the fame
time, all the as of Parliament 560, in favour of
the Protestant religion, were publickly ratified; new
statutes to the fame purpose were enacted. And
nothing that could contribute to root out the re-
mains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of
the Reformation, was negleted.

* Anderr. vol. iv. 153. See Appendix, No. XXIT.I
t Good. vol. ii. 66. And:rf. vol. ii. zc6.

IT

IT is obServable, however, that the fame p..rf- BE o o

monious lpirit prevailed in this Parliament, as in V.
that of 15-0. i he ProtcRtant clergy, notith-'
flanding many dfcouragemcnts, and their extreme
poverry, had, for le. en years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The ex;e:lients fal-
len upon for their lubfilftnce had hitherto proved
ineffectual, or were intended to be lb. But, not-
withtanding thrir known indigence, and te warm
remonstrances ofthe A fiimbly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more for
their relief, than prescribe some new regulations
concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices,
which did not pro,:uce any considerable change in
the situation of the clergy.

A vEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, I568.

four of Bothwell's dependants were convited ofJ""nuary3
being guilty of the King's murder, and suffered
deathas traitors. Their confeflions brought to light
many circumftinces relative to the manner of com-
mitting that barbarous crime, but they were per-
sons of a lo, rank, and feln not to have been ad-
mitted into the secrets of the conspiracy .

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fuLimillion to

the Regent's authority, there still abounded in te
kingdum many fceret murmurs and cabals. The
partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatcl-
hcraukt, who, as firit Prince of the blood, had, in

Anders. vol. ii. 165.

G g 2 their

B o o K their opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent.

V. The length and rigour of Mary's fuferings began
z:S8 to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who

leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded
the effects of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his ai-
lities were great, did not pofflfs the talents requ fire
for toothing the rage or removing the jealousies of
the different factions. By insinuation, or address,
he might have gained or softened many, who had
opposcd him ; but he was a Rranger to these gentle
arts. I is viitues were severe ; and his deportment
towards his equals, especially after his elevation to
the regency, distant and haughty. This behaviour
offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's faction, which had been so easily dif-
pcrlcd, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by some who had hitherto
zealously concurred with the confederates *.

Wmary SUCH was the favourable disposition of the na-
ftCaec tion towards the Queen, when he recovered her
levin. liberty, in a manner no Itss surprising to her friends,

than ullexpected by her enemies. Several attempts
had been made to procure her an opportunity of
escaping, which some unforeseen accident, or the
vigilance of her keepers, had hitherto dilappointed.
At last, Mary employed all her art to gain George
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and infinuac-
ing, he treated him with the molt flattering ditinc-
tion; he even allowed him to entertain the molt
ambitious hopes, by letting fall omc exprenilons, as

* Melv. 17;.

if

if lhz would chufe him for her hufand *. At his B o o i:
age, and in such circuneftances, it .:as il.puffible V
to refit filch a tcmp:..tion. I-I vildeL, and drew ..
others into the pi ,t. On Sunday the 2d o M.ly,
while I;is brLther fat at f;lpper, and the re. o tihe
fa;nily Acr rtired to :licir dlvotionl:, one of hii ac-
C(o:;p)iccs foundi means to fieal tle Otvt. out of his
brot!,cr's chimnber, and opening the .'t s to the
(tQuen and one of her maids, locked tll: n b -.ind
her, and then threw the keys inro the lake. rMa;vy
ran with prccipiia.ion to tle boat which w.is t;t'pir-
cd for hci-, and on r-c.chiing; the Ifhior,!, wad r. civ, d
w.thl the utmu.t j,, by l)ouil..s, I. .or Sca.(,n, and
Sir James I-laiilton, who, with a few at lat;anls,
waited for her. She intantly moui:t d on l.urlc
)b.ck, and rode fll ,fecd towards Nidi.,iri, L rd
Seatur's feat in \Vctl-Lo.hl::n. 'Se airvel l'chre
t;'at night, without bing purliedt, r int.rr:ted,
A.mr ,ha'tingt tlhree lhours, l-ic fTc out or liamil-
ton; a.ld traveillnr at the ldie p.ice, 1lic reached
it next mornini.

ON the firll news of Mary's ef:ipc, her fric'n.ls, Arriveq at

wh:om, in their )prelcnt (iilcfit;on, a mi.e, 'i, ,,Lr ai; "'l',i;.:',a
accident wouli have roirticd, ran to army. I:i :l fc w n:,llcl'uu
days, her court wab fil1id wilh a g!earc ,,

i 'i ;i'.iidid

tlain o01 nbles, accolipa;nitd by such n1tlli;(.rs of
fgllowers, as ril;ed na array abo,e cJ,.,) ll!on.
In their l.reflnce, fle declar!ci; tliat tlie r'.,;:.lli
of; hl' Crown, aild owilier eeds ':t !il [; .

* ti'r-
ing her inmpri;;nncn, were txlt rtd l Il'rul In- l y

* ;.citlh, ).

G g . e ar.

B o o K fear. Sir Robert Melvilconfirmed her declaration;

V. and on that, as well as on otl:cr accounts, a coun-
* ,6 cii of the nob:es and chief men of her party pro-
May a. nounced all thtfe transactions void and iilegal. At

the fame time, an association was fortned for the
defence of her per'on and authority, and 1fbfcribcd
by nine Earls, nine Bilhops, eigite!n l,oris and
many gentlemcn of diltintion *. Among them,
we find fevcral who had been present in the !aft
Parliament, and who had fined the counter-affo-
ciation in dteence of the King's government; but
such sudden changes were then lu comr.on, as to
b- no matter of reproach.

Conncrna- AT the time when the Queen nade her escape,
tion of the
R g-nt's the Rtgent was at Glaflow, holding a court of jul-
d..cn,;s rice. An event ob cntrary to their cxpt-cations,

and so fatal to their fchcmrres, gave a reat Ihock to
his adherents. Many cfthem apptare.. wavering
and irresolute; others began ro carry on private ne-
gociations with the Queen; and sonic cenly re-
volted to her fide. In so difficult a juncrure, where
his own lame, and the being of the parry depend-
ed on his choice, the Regent's nofl faithful afoci-
atcs weie divided in opinion. Some alvilled him
to retire, without lss of time, to Stirling. The
Queen's ;rmy wvs alrt'a'!y strong, and only eight
milks diflint; hlce at:jacenr ccl:ntrv was full of he
friends ad d;-pndents of t!'e houltf cf I lairilton,
and othir oris of tlh Qeen's faci.,n; Glasgow
was a iarg and u fortsid town; hi:; own train
conliled of no greater nunber than was ulial in

* Kcith, 475.

times

times of peace; all these reasons pleaded for a re- B o o K
treat. But on the other hand, arguments were V.
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of '.
Glasgow were well af'ected to the cause; the vafTals
of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple lay near at
hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal;
succours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, fuccc-l depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained, or loft, by the firlE fep one takes; in
his circumlfances, a retreat would be attended
with all the ignominy of a flight, and would at once
dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies with
boldness. In ifch dangerous c:.igencits as this, the His I'rdtent

Inr~~~

* 禄 * conddt.

superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and en-
abled him both to chule with wildom, and to a'
with vigour. He declared against retreating, and
fixed lhis head quarters at Glailow. And while he
amused the Queen for lornc days, by pretending to
hearken to some overtures, which nfe made for ac-
commodating their differences, he was employed,
with the urmnft industry, in drawing tgether his
adherents, from different parts ofthe kingdom. He
was soon in a condition to take the field ; and
though far inferior to the nemy in number, he
confided io much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the
negociation, and determined to hazard a battle *

AT the fame time, the Qtieen's generals had Na;y r;.
commanded her army to move. Their intention

Buchlan. 39.

Gg 4 was,

B o K was, to condu her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place of

V. great atrcength, whic h the Regent h id not been able to
56. wrct.' out of the hands of ord Il ming the gvtr-

nor; but if the enemy fhoulI en, eavur to inter-
ruSt their march, they refo!ved not to decline an
engagement. In Mary's firu:ir;o:, no rcolution
could be more imprudent. A part nly (;f i:er for-
ces wa assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, andi the nor-
thern clans were soon expectei; her i;flrings had
removed, or dininilhed the prejud:ces o many
among her fubjeas ; the addreis w th wiiich he
surmounted the dangers that obftrutetl her cfcape,
dazzled and intercfted tl;e .eople; the uiddcn con-
fluincc of so many nobles added lufire to her cause;
fl:e night aiTuredly depend on the friendfiip and
countenance of France; fle had reafun to xi:ea
the protecion of England; her enemies could not
pofibly look for fupporc from that qu.irter. She
had much to hope fr .m plur'iing flow and cautious
ncaluires; tl;ey had every th;ng t fa;r.

BUT Mary, whose opes were naturally sanguine,

and her paflions impetuous, was !o elevated by her
;iudcn transition from the dep h of diltrhli, to such
an unutual appearance of pro'periiy, that lJe never
tloubted of luccefs. Her arniy, lwhch was altofl
douible to the enemy in nunlmber, cn'nit dc ciciely
of tie I-lamiltons, and their depeiJtants. ()f thele
the Arci;bifhop of St. Andrew's h:idt the Ih:er di-
retion, a d h(l,ed, by a vi 'tory, nt on!y t, cr.lh
IVuirriy, thic aci n enemy hlis llot ft, Lict ro et
the per,or of the (iCuen into Ih; hi;!nd, and to obige
her, ciltcr o marry one ol ili: Duke's ins, or at

laalt

leal to commit te chief direcion of her affairs to B o o
himltf. Sis .nmbitiun proved fatal to the QueCn, .
to himlCelt, ilnd t his family *.

MARY'S inllrll'.cnce, in re'olving to fight, was nattie of

not gr.,tr t.ni tei ill conduct of her generals in LanSldc.
the b..ilc. L.;ccI te tih tO ilit. and on ihe
roa.d ou-ward l iLbarton, there was an eminence
cal.ed L.an fid'. ill. This the Regent ihad lhe
Frecautio, to :eize, nd posted his troops in a 1in;all
vila. , d a.i (tn son-e gardens and incluoifre; ad-
j.:ccnlL Ir this advantaoc, us situation l.e witied
the app:oaclh of ti:e encmy, whose luperioriy in
cavalry cuidi be ot no benefit to them, on fucl; bro-
ken gLound. 'I he HIamitons, who comppold the
vanguard, ran so eagerny to the aaack, that they
put temn!elves our of breath, and lift the main
battle far b. in . '1 he encounter of tht iplearn:eili
was fierce antl dci:prate; but as tie torcts of tlie
-lanl;ilLons wsce cxplo;Cl, n tlhe one fiank, to a
continued fire t'lfr'c a body of Ir.Tu!Lu tcc;s, attack-
ed on the other b thle Regent's mui' choice -rools. The
and not li1 iporltd by the reft o the Qucen's a-ry, ., " <,
they Weirte bolo oll-.g-d LO ive grc;utd. anJ the r. uLt ita;-.
immediately becatie univerlil. lew victories, il
a civil w.r, and anmong a barbarous ei)cl;e, ihve
Lben pu;i':ied vi'i lcl. violence, or .:ticKlccl v.it
less blooddlict. '1 Lee h:ndlred i l in tLec ,i I: l
the fli,t lcaice an)' were kijed. '1 ie'; ; .: .ad
his prin ;pal oli, ris rode abaut, befcle;;i r;,: li -
dicer to ip.are lcir cotultrvln'n. ';Te i' Irll.i'
priloners was great, and among them inany ,pil bnos

* Anderr. vl. iv. 3 . Mclv. sil.

of

B o o K of diftindion. The Regent marched back to Glaf-

V. gow, and returned public thanks to God for this
1568. great, and, on his ide, almost bloodless victory .
Her flight. DURING the engagement, Mary stood on a hill,

at no great dillsnce, and beheld all that palsed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When she saw the army, which
was her last ope, thrown into irretrievable confu-
lion, her spirit, which all her past misfortunes had
nor been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmoff conflernation, she began her flight,
and so lively were her impressions of fear, that he
never closed her eyes till she reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottish miles
from the place of battle -.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no lets rapid than singular. In the hort space of
eleven days, she had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies; flle had seen a pow-
erful army under her command, and a numerous
train of notles at her devotion: And now (he was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and
to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of her
kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that
retreat; her fears impelled her to an action, the
most unadvised, as well as the most unfortunate in
her whole life. This was her retiring into England,
a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her ralh and dangerous.

lKith, 477. t Id. 481.

BEFORE

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- B o o

trust ad jealouis h.ad ari!en between her and Eli- V.
zabeth. A' t i: labl -unt tranfieions had con- L

'butc~c

, 1568.

tribut -d t. -ai',.et c

;i :nd inflame the Fpaflions. Rve,

She had enyeavo . e '
, by ticrec negociations and in-o" li'"ing

in into Eng,

trigues, to uiilu':. the tr.:nquillity of Elizabeth's land.
govern enr, an-i to ;dvance her own pretensions to
the En0lilh Crown. L.lizabeth, who pof.iii:d
greattr owcr, and ated i;h less refetvc had
openly ljup,),rted Mary's rebellious fubjets. and
fomented all the ctifninions and troubles in which
her reign had I-ecn involved. The naxi.i,s of po-
liy still autlirized that Qicen to pu;fue the falme
course ; as by kcleingr Sco;land in confuifon, 'he
effectually tcuredl the peace ro her own kingdon.
The Regent, ;:fter his victorv, had marched to
Edinburgh, and not knowing what courf: the
Queen had taken, it was several days before he
thought of pui-fing her *. She might have been
concealed in that recired corner, among luijccts
devoced to her inte'lt, till her party, which was
difpCrlicl rathir than broken by the l.,te defeat,
fliould gather luch itrrn ,th, tihat ie c(ould again
appear wihl lal'ety at their head. Therce was not
any danger, whic' nPie ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throw lh-rl-f into the ha!ids of an enemy,
from whom fle had .,lrcady lufflcredl b many inju-
ries, and who was !prompted both by inclination,
and by interelt-, to renew them.

BtuT, on the otlher hand, during Mary's confine-
mernt, Elzabeth hal declared ;iaginit the proceedigs

* Cra.vf. Mi.m. j9.

Of

B o K of her fubjeEt, and fulicited for her liberty, with a

V. warmth which lhd all the appearance of finceriry.
:"8. She had invited htr to take refuge in England, and

had promised to meet her in pcrfon, and to give her
such a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally*. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might
entertain of Mar)'s designs, while Ihe had power
in her hnds, she was, at present, the objec, not
of fear, but of pity; and to take advantage of her
fiitation, would be both ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's me-
mrory, anj if fie flould fall a econd time into the
hands cf Lcr subje..s, there was no injury to which
the preiurpnt.ion of success might not embo!den
them to proceed. To . tthempt eilaping into France,
was dangerous; arr.d, in her situation, almost im-
pofib'e; nor ccuid -fle bear the thoughts of ap-
pearing as an c-xile, and a fugitive, in that king-
dom, where si: had once enjoyed all the splendor
of a (Quten. England remained her only aiflum;
and, in irpte of the entrearies of Lord tlerreis,
Fleming and l:er other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, nt to confide in Eliza-
beth's pron;ifcs or generosity, her infatuation was
invincibe, and she resolved to fly thither. H rrcis,

Her recep- by her command, wrote to Lowther the depury-
'i" at 'ar- governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his anfwcr could re-
turn, hcr fear and impatience were b reat, that
file got into a fiscer boat, and wth about twenry
NMay 6. attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland,

S Camb. 3S9. Anccrf. ol. iv. 99. 1 2. Murdin, 369.

anld

and thence fle wa, condur.ed with many marks of B o o K
reipctt to Carliflc . v.

r5贸S.
So soon as Mary arrived in FnglandL, she wrote Etiza!:eh

deiberates

a long letter to the Queen, rcpr-e!ntirg, in tt:he conrnin,
ftriongetl terms, the injuries which she had fifier.d t1te m:inc""

of treating

from her own fubjccs, and imploring that pity and h.r.
afiltance which her present situation demnanded
An event so extraordinary, and the conduc which
might be pro er in confcquecce of it, drew the at-
tention, and employed the thoughts of Elizabeth
and her council. If their dc!iberations had been in-
fluenced by considerations of jiutice or generosity
alone, they would r;ot have found them Iorn or in-
tricate. A Queen, vnquifcid by her own fluije s,
and threatened by them with tce Idsi of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from tl.cir vi!crce, and
thrown herself into the arms of l':ir nearet nei!gh-
bour and ally, from whom f e ha,' rc-i:ived rcpea.t-
ed aurances of fiendfi.ip andt pr';:cLion. T'icfe
circumlrlances entitl 'd her to refe.t and to c:npaf-
sion, and required that flie houlli either be rcilorei
to her own kingdom, (!r at least be Icft at full li-
berty to ek aid from any other quarter. But with
Elizabeth and her coulliclors, the queltion was not,
what was moftjll': or ge(neroui, but what was meilt
beneficial to hci'ell, and to the LEngl;n nation.
Three dilierent r-e'b'utions inigilt have btcn ta!:en,
with regard to t!ie Queen of Scots. To re-ilniat
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire
into France wa a n ther ; to detain hr in Englia:,tl,
wv.i a third. Each of telC: drew conii'qucnlcll

* K.id,, 493. A ..r. vcl. iv. z. ' * 1I!. 2..

at.er

B o o after it, of the utmost importance, which were exa-

V. mined, as appears from papers fill extant *, ith
C贸8 that minute accuracy, which Elizlibeth's i\ inifters

empiyed in all their consultations upon affairs of
moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they obleved, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the 1'nglifh interef
would quickly feel the umoft weight of her re-
lenrment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom strong or lasting, regard to her own interest
might ibon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own
pretcnfions to the Engliff Crown. Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent these dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and
courage; a tingle vic&ory might give them the fu-
periority, which they had loit by a ingle defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than ever
to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to re-

turn into France, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refuse his assistance towards reftor-
ing his filter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
would, once more, fee a foreign army in the iand,

Anders. vol. iv. 34, 91, z:.

over-

overawing the Scots, and ready ro enter her king- o K
donm; and if the commrotions in ira:c, on ac :-;.t V.
of religion, were firtticd, tle 'irincc. (of Lorrain --

15贸8.

might resume their ambitit!. priocct-, and the unit-
ed forces of France and Scoidnd n'l:iit invde Eng- -
land, where it is weakenl and inoll dcflcit'lei.

NOTHING therefore remained but to (detain her Rc.les o

de:lin hcr

in England; and to permit her eiiher to li .e at li- in Ens,
berty there, or to confine her in a prilbn. The'"and
former was a dangerous experiment. HI r court
would become a place of re!brt to all the Roman
Catholics, to the difaffecicd, and to the lovers of in-
novation. Though Elizahc h ar&ecled to represent
Mary's prctenfions to tle EnCiifr Crown as altoge-
ther extravagant and ill-founded, fcne was not igno-
rant that they did not appear in that light to tihe na-
tion, and that manythought them preferable even to
her own title. If the aivity of her emnfitries had
gained her so many abettors, her on personal in-
fluence was much more to be reaide; her beauty,
her address, her fLiufrrings, by the admlii'tin an.'
pity which t-ey would CXCLC, could not fil us
making many cnvcrs to her party .

IT was indeed to b1' aipprchienld, tlt the treat-

ing Mary as a p;i!:vr ;):;ld exc ir ul:ic..'.l il-
dignation agli .:tl :!;.i路;b tl, ;;nd t;:! 1 .' is t1!r"-
ampled ivcerity to;-a;;aJ: a Qulen, ''.

x ivl

,,

and to whom llih l .i promid i-: r roi.:ic i ! J'
would forfeit the pl.ll of julii, a. 1 !'' ''
which was hitheto duclc to her ad:ciillratin. i:'.lt

* Ai ci'芦 vu!. Iiv. z''', , .

B1 o o K the Englilh Monarchs were often so solicitous to fe-

V. cure their kingdom againt the Ccots, as to be little
~-.- . scrupulous about the means which they employed

for thit purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir
of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a ftorrm, to take rfuge in one of the
ports of his kingdomn; and, in contempt of the
r:ghts of hiuipiraiity, wilhout regarding his tender
age, or the trs and intreaties of his father, de-
tained him a prisoner for many years. This action,
though dtefled by polterity, Elizabeth resolved
now to imitate. Her virtue was not more proof
than Hecnry's had been, against the temptations of
interest; and the poffeiiori of a present advantage
was preferred to the prolpea of future fame. The
fatisf.ction which fle flt in mortifying a rival,
wvhole beauty and accomplilhments he envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political confidera-
tions, in bringing her to this rieclution. But, at
the lame time, in order to fcrecn herself from the
censure which this ccnduc merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scottifll Queen look like the
eirtc' uft ncctffiy, rather than of choice, he deter-
mincd to put on the appearance of concern for her
interest, and of deep sympathy with her fuilings.
May o. WITH this view, fle infhntly dispatched Lord

Sernope warden of the welt marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her Vize-chanblcrliin, to the Queen of
Suotr, with letters full of xprl fliiis of kindnels
and condolence. But, at tice lamc time, they had
privatc inftrulions to watch ;;11 her no:ions, and to
take car, that he fl:o ld not cfcape into her own

king-

kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary demanded aB o o K
personal interview with the Queen, that hc might V.
lay before her the injuries which fle had suffered, --
and receive from her those friendly offices which fie Ma;y de-
had been encouraged to expect. They answered, mindca
that it was with reluctance this honour Was at pre- into Eliza-

beth's pro.

sent denied her; that while he lay under the impu- rcnce.
tation of a crime so horrid, as the murder of her
husband, their Mistress, to whom he was so nearly
allied, could not, without bringing a stain upon her
own reputation, admit her into her pretence; but
as soon as he had cleared herflf from that asper-
sion, they promi-d her a reception fuitabie to her
dignity, and aid proportioned to her distress t

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this pre- sihe ofci

tence. It was the occalion, however, of leading tte her
the Queen of Scots into the snare, in which Eliza- cosndu*.
beth and her Ministers wiflied to intangle her.
Mary expressed the utmost furprize at this unexpect-
ed manner of evading her request; but as he
could not believe o many profc0ions of friend-
lhip to be void of sincerity, he frankly offered to
submit her cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth,
and undertook to produce such proofs of her own
innocence, and of the falfhood of the accusations
brought againit her, as should fully remove thefcru-
ples, and iatisfy the delicacy of the Englilh Queen.
This was the very point to which Elizabeth labour- Eliza,-.rh
ed to bring the marter By this appcal of the ',`,'d
ScottifliQ;ieen, nie becar.e the umpire between her thl fser
and her subjes, anda had it entirely in her own

* .Alidl'. vcl. iv. 3), '', 9Z. t Iid. vol. i. ; .
Vo.. I. H h power

B o o power to protrat the inquiry to any length, and

V. to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In
-- the mean time, she was furnished with a plausible

pretence for keeping her at a distance from court,
and for refuting to contribute towards replacing her
on the throne. As Mary's conduct had been ex-
tremely incautious, and the presumptions of her
guilt were many and strong, it was possible her sub-
jeets might make good their charge against her;
and if this fliould be the result of the inquiry, Ihe
would, thenceforth, cease to be the objet of regard,
or of compalion, and the treating her with cold-
ness and negleft would merit little cen'lre. In a
matt r so dark and mylerious, there was no proba-
bility that Mary could bring proofs of her innocence,
lo inconrefted, as to render the conduc of the Eng-
iifh Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her
impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Eliza-
beth's partiality, or her discovery of her artifices,
might engage her in such cabals, as would justify
the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETrH early foreraw all those advantages,

which would arise from an inquiry into the conduCt
of the Scottilh Queen, carried on under her direc-
tion. There was ome danger, however, that Mary
might discover her ecret intentions too soon, and
by receding from the offer which she had made, en-
deavour to disappoint them. But even in that
event, flc determined nt to drop the inquiry, and
hld thought of several different expedients for car.
rying it on. The Counteis of Lennox, convinced
that Mary was accessory to the nurder of her fun,

and

and thirfling for that vengeance which it was natural B o o K
for a mother to demand, had implored Elizabeth's V.
justice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her L"'"
own name, and in her husband's, to bring the 568.
Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime *. The pa-
rents of the unhappy Prince had ajuft right topre-
ser this accusation; nor could he, who was their
nearest kinf.vonman, be condemned for listening to
so equitable a demand. Besides, as the Scottish no-
bles openly cc'ufed Mary of the fame crime, and
pretended to bz able to confirm their charge by sus-
ficient proof; it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them, to petition the Queen of England to
take cognizance of their proceedings against their
Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the English
council, that it w:;uld be rafonable to comply with
the requefR -. At the fame time, the obsolete claim
of the superiority of England over Scotland began
to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pre-
tended that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her fbjets belonged of right to Eliza-
beth. 13ut though Elizabeth revolved all the垄i ex-
pedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve to
be mad; use of as occaficn t.ight require, nie wilh-
ed that the inquiry into \.ary's contius fl;ould ap-
pear to be undertaken purcly il c:!l,l):iatnce w.tii
her own demand, and in or.ler to v:indica!c her i-
nocence; and ib long as that alp alllce could be
preservcd, none of the ocller cxlC licti;s were to L,
employed.

* CrdmJ. 41z. Ilayncs, 4('9. t And. v,l iv. 37,

II h 2 WV EN

B o o K WHEN Mary contented to submit her cause to

V. Elizabeth, he was far from fufpeding that any bad
贸8o
e consequences could follow, or that any dangerous

pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
pe&ed that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences ; he meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfa&ion he was willing
to explain any part of her condu&, that was liable
to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom (he was bound to plead her cause. But
Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's of-
ser. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge in
the controversy between the Scottih Queen and her
fubjets, and began to at in that capacity. She
proposed to appoint commifionersto hear the plead-
ings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent of
Scotland, to impower proper perions to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he
could alledge in vindication of his proceedings
against his Sovereign.

Mary MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable
grc.ly of- credulity on Elizabeth's profeflions of regard, and
fended at
Elizabeth's expected that so many kind speeches would, at last,
condu. be accompanied with rome suitable aions. But

this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's condut, and
law what a diminution it would be to her own ho-
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious sub.
j Ets, and to stand together w;th them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. She retr.cued the offer
which (he had made, and which had ben perverted

Andcrr. vol. iv. o.

to

to a purpole so contrary to her intention. She de- B o o K
manded with more earnestness than ever, to 'be ad- V.
mitted into Elizabeth's pretence, and wrote to her,
in a strain very different from what he had for- June 3.
merly used, and which fully discovers the grief and
indignation that preyed on her heart. " In my
"present situation, fays he, I neither will, nor can
' reply to the accusations of my subje&s. I am
' ready, of my own accord, and out of friendship
I to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vindicate
"my own condu&. My fubjeas are notmy equals;
"nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial
" trial, acknowledge them to be so. I fled into
,' your arms, as into those of my nearest relation,
" and most perfec friend. I did you honour, as
" I imagined, in chufing you, preferably to any
"other Prince, to be the restorer of an injured
" Queen. Was it ever known that a Prince was
" blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
' those who appealed to his justice, againit the
' faife accusations of their enemies ? You admitted
' into your presence my bastard brother, who had
" been guilty of rebellion ; and you deny me that
"honour ! God forbid that I flould be the occa-
' sion of bringing any stain upon your reputation.
I expeced that your manner of treating me

" would have added luRtre to it. Suffer me either
" to implore the aid of other Princes, whose deli-
" cacy on this head, will be less, and their rcltnt-
* ment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
"from your hands that aflfifance, which it bccomes
"you, more than any other Prince, to grant; and

11 3 " by

B o o K " by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the indif-

V. ,' soluble ties of gratitude *."

1568. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
Elzibeth's plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution
pre'ncans of it. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun-

cil, and it was there determined, notwithstanding
the intreaties and remonltrances of the Scottish
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her condu&,
and till that were finihed, it was agreed that Eli-
zabeth could not, confitlently with her own ho-
nour or with the safety of her government, either
give her the assistance which he demanded, or
permit her to retire out of the kingdom. And left
Ihe hould have an opportunity of ecaping, while
Ihe resided so near Scotland, it was thought advile-
able to remove her to some place, at a greater
distance from the borders -.

Proceed. WHILE the English court was occupied in these
ings of the deliberations, the Regentdid not neglectto improve
Kcgent
again te the victory at Langfide. That event was of the
adcnt. utmost importance to him. It not only drove the

Queen herfelfout of the kingdom, but left her ad-
herents dispersed, and without a leader, at his
mercy. He seemed resolved, at first, to proceed
against them with the utmost rigour. Six persons
of some diftintion, who had been taken prilbners
in the battle, were tried, and condemned to death,
as rebels against the King's government. They
were led to the place of execution, but by the pow-
erful intercefion of Knox they obtained a pardon.

Andes. vol. iv. 94. t Id. ibid. loz.

9 Ha-

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the num- B o o c
ber, who lived to give both the Regent and V.
Knox rafon to repent this commendable a of -'7
lenity *.

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army,

consisting of 4coo horse and ooo foot, towards
the weft borders. The nobles in this part of the
kingdom were all of the Queen's faction; but as
they had not force sufficient to obftruc his progress,
he mufl either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid wafle their lands with fire
and sword. But Elizabeth, whole interest it was to
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to sooth the Scottiflh Queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the
English Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an
expedition, which might have proved fatal to his
opponents, ended with a few ats of everity t.

THE resolution of the English Privy Council with Mary car.

regard to Mary's person, was soon carried into exe- 'toD.BQ
cution; and, without regarding her remonltrances
or complaints, (he was conducted to Bolton, a caf-
tie of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkhfire . Ju"ly
In this place, her correfpondcnce with her friends in
Scotland became more difficult, and any prospect of
making her escape was entirely cut off. She now
felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and
though treated as yet with the respect due to aQueen,

* Cald. vol. ii. 99. ' Ibid. t And. vol. iv. 14.

II h 4 her

B o o t her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary

V. knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
'^*7 dreaded it as the wort of all evils. While the re-

membrance of her late imprisonment was still lively,
and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Eliza-
beth thought it a proper junture to renew her for-
July ms. mer proposition, that he would susser the Regent

and his adherents to be called intp England, and
content to their being heard in defence of their own
condua. And on her part, he promised, whatever
should be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all
her power and influence towards replacing Mary
on her throne, under a few limitations, which were

Agrees that far from being unreasonable. Fear, impatience,
en iquiry despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which
into her the proposition was accompanied, induced the

Scottish Queen to comply *.

Her dim IN order to persuade Elizabeth that the desired no-
M"latn thing so much as to render the union between them
gard to re- as close as possible, he (hewed a disposition to relax
li5ion. somewhat in one point, with regard to which, dur-

ing all her past and subsequent misfortunes, she was
uniformly inflexible. She expressed a great vene-
ration for the liturgy of the church of England;
the was often present at religious worship, accord-
ing to the rites of the reformed church; made
choice of a Protestant clergyman to be her chap-
lain; heard him preach against the errors of Popery
with attention and teeming pleasure; and difcovcred
all the symptoms of an approaching conversion t,

Anders. vol. iv. log. Haynes, 468.
t Anders. vol. iv. 13. flaync', 509

Suc

Such was Mary's known and bigoted attachment B o o
to the Popiff religion, that it is impbflible to be- V.
lieve her sincere in this part of her condut; nor 568.
can any thing mark more strongly the wretchedness
of her condition, and the excess of her fears, than
that they betrayed her into diflimulation, in a mat-
ter concerning which her sentiments were, at all
other times, scrupulously delicate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Aouft aS,

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- ment in
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The Sc'niand
Queen's fation was alarmed, and Argyll and
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants,
the one in the south, and the other in the north of
Scotland, began to assemble forces to obftruc this
meeting. Compassion for the Queen, and envy at
those who governed in the King's name, had added
so much strength to the party, that the Regent
would have found it difficult to withstand its efforts.
But as Mary had submitted her cause to Eliza-
beth, the could not refute, at her desire, to com-
mand her friends to lay down their arms, and to
wait patiently till matters were brought to a dccifion
in England. By procuring this cessation of arms,
Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to tile ce-
gent's fation, as she had formerly givcn to the
Queen's *.

THE Regent, however, would rnot conl.nr, e'.c i

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the mcreing ot
.arliament. But we may acribe to her influac,

* Andkr. vol. iv. 5.

as

B o o K as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la;

V. boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
/'贸 from exterminating the other, any appearances of
5 * moderation which this Parliament discovered in its

proceedings. The moit violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeired; the reft were
allowed Itill to hope for favour *.

Elizabetli No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her
tqeent cause to her rival, tilan Elizabeth required the Re-
to defend gent to fend to York, deputies properly inftruted
hs con-
dua. for vindicating his condut, in presence of her com-

missioners. It was not without hesitation and anxi-
ety, that the Regent consented to this measure.
His authority was already eablifhed in Scotland,
and confirmed by parliament. To susser its vali-
dity now to be called in question, and fubjeted to
a foreign jurifdition, was extremely mortifying.
To accuse his Sovereign before strangers, the an-
cient enemies of the Scottilh name, was an odious
task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to
fuccced in it was disgraceful. But the strength of
the adverse faction daily increased. He dreaded the
interposition of the French King in its behalf. In
his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had
io much at heart, her commands were neither to
be disputed, nor disobeyed t.

Poth the THE necessity of repairing in person to York
Qhe appndt added to t he ignominy of the ftep which he was ob,
commis. liged to take. All his associates declined the office;

they were unwilling, it would ieem, to expose them-

* Buci. 371. 4t Bl;ch. 372. Sec Append. No. XXV.

selves

selves to the odium and danger with which it was B o o K
easy to foresee that the discharge of it would be at- V.
tended, unless he himself contented to hare there '
I-

i568.

in common with them. The Earl of Morton, sept. is.
Bothwell Bifhopof Orkney, Pitcairh Commendator
of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay, were joined
with him in commifion. Macgill of Rankeilor
and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent Civilians,
George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man
whose genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
several others, were appointed to attend them as
afliftants. Maitland owed this diftinEion to the
Regent's fear, rather than to his affiedion. He had
warmly remonstrated againi this measure. He
wished his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that na-
tion. He was desirous of re-eltablifhing the Queen
in some degree of power, not inconsistent with that
which the King poffciffd; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose
views were so contrary to his own, and who, by his
superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the
nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families *.

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord

Livingston, Lord Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Ha-
milton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name 1-.

Buch. 372. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Mclv. 185, IS8.
t Anders. vol. iv. 33.

ELIZA-

B o o K ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

V. of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Surlex, and
L"'. 'Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commissioners to hear both

parties.

The on- THE fourth of Oaober was the day fixed for
ference at
V. a opening the Conference. The great abilities of the

deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole transaction no less illustrious, than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, firikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an independant Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and pof-
lesed the authority of a King, flood in person at
her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power
her ancestors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now absolutely at her disposal.

iews of THE views, however, with which the several
the diffe- parties consented to this conference, and the issue
tpar' to which they expected to bring it, were extremely

differenc.

MARY'S chief objec was the recovering her for-

mer authority. This induced her to conlent to a
measure against which he had long truggled.
Elizabeth's Fromifes gave her ground for entertain-

8 ing

ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom , in B o o K
order to which, ihe would have, willingly, made V.
many concefflons to the King's palty; and the in-''
fluence of the English Queen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more*. The Regent aimed at no-
thingbut fecurin gElizabeth's protection to his party,
and seems not to have had the moll diflant thoughts
of coming to any composition with Mary. Eliza-
beth' viie'. were more various, and her schemes
rn-. .-lcate. S seemed to be full of concern
Zv.i Mlary's honour, and olicitous that ihe should
wipe off the aspersions which blem'"1ed her charac-
ter. This {he pretended r ... ;:: intention of the
conference; aufing ,iary, and eluding the soli-
citations of the French and Spalnifh ambassadors in
her behalf, by repeated promises of assisting her, as
soon as he could venture to do so, without bring-
ing disgrace on herfilf. Bur, .;nder this veil of
friendfhiip and generosity, EU. ctll concealed fen-
timents of a different nature. She expe(ted that the
Regent would accuie D..iry of being accessory to
the murder of her husband. She encouraged him,
as far as decency wc.ild permit, to take this delpc-
rate flep+. And as this accuation millit termi-
nate two different ways, she liad concerted measures
for her future corduct suitable to each of there. If
the charge ngainit Mary hould ap1'ar to be well
founded, she relflved to pronounce her unworthy
of wearing a Crown, and to dcc:are tt lhe would

* An(r. rC\ .

vn 3.

3 , . vi. : .'. t Ald:-rf.
vol iv. 1, . Itl;).c, 47.

never

B o o K never burthen her own conscience with the guilt of

V. an aion so detestable, as the rcloring her to her
`-68 kingdom *. If it should happen, that what her

accusers alledged, did not amount to a proof of
guilt, but only of mal-administration, she deter-
mined to fct on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own
fubjeas t. And as every ftep in the progress of
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was
in her own power, she would still be at liberty to
chute which of there courses ihe would hold; or if
there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency in
pursuing either of them, flie might protract the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in in-
extricable perplexity.

Comp!aint THE conference, however, was opened with much
of tile
,,_cn's solemnity. But the very first flep discovered it to
commnii- be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than to
oners a-
sainft the extinguifl the difentions and animofities among the
1(egnt. Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the

contending parties, or to n:ollify the fierceness of
their hatred, by bringing the Q(ileen to offer pardon
for what was palt, or her fubjets to promise more
dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary,
Mary's coinmilioners were permitted to prefer a
caLber . complain: against the Regent and his party, con-

taining an cnumeraton of their trealbnable actions,
of their seizing her peribn by frce of arms, com-
mitting her to prilbn, compelling her to resign the
Crown, and maling ufc of her oIn's name to colour

*Ander voiv. iv 1. 't' Id. ibid. 16.

their

their ururpation of the whole royal authority. And B o o K
of all thele enormitics, they required such speedy V.
and effe&ual rcdrets, as the injuries of one Queen 6

1568.
demanded from the justice of another *.

IT was then expeced that the Regent would have

disclosed the whole circumtances of that unnatural
crime, to which he pretended the Queen had been
accessory, and would have produced evidence in sup-
port of his charge. But filr from accusing Mary,
the Regent cdid not even answer the complaints
brought againit himself. Ie discovered a reluctance
at the undertaking that office, and flarted many
doubts and icruples, with regard to which, he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herfclf --. Iiis
reserve and hesitation were no less furprizing to the
greater part of the English commiflioners than to
his own afsciates. They knew that he could not
vindicate his own conduct without charging the
murder upon the Queen, and he had not hitherto
shown any extraordinary delicacy on that head.
An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arriva; at York, which explains this mystery.

T!Ir Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, thei-,,iguesof

mofl po' .erful and mot popular man in langland. * ,,i,,
His wis was lately dead; and he began already to R~nt.
form a prcojcL, wliich he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a
marriage with tr.e Queen of Scots. Ite saw the
infamy w.ich wo. ;'i be the consequence of a pub-
lic accuf..tiun .gaiik Mary, and how prejudicial it

Anderl. vol iv. sz. l Hayres, 478.

might

B o K might be to her pretensions to the Englihi fuccef-

V. sion. In order to save her this cruel mortification,
6S' he applied to Maitland, and expressed his aftonilh-

ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for
wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so dishonourable to themselves, to their Queen, and
to their country; submitting the public tranfafions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of
their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own con-
du&. He assured him, that he had employed all
his credit, to dissuade his countrymen from this
measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This encou-
raged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame argue
ments which he had used with Maitland. Hewarned
him of the danger to which he must expose himself,
by such a violent ation as the public accufationof his
Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a man, who
had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on her
character. If ihe ever recovered any degree of
power, his deltrution would be inevitable, and he
would justly merit it at-her hands. Nor would Eliza-
beth screen him from this, by a public approbation
of his condu&t. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, (he was resolved to give no
drlinittive Intence in the cause. Let him only de-
mand that the matter hould be broug t to dc-cilion
immediately after hearing the proof, and he would

be

be fully convinced how false and insidious her in- B o o K
tentions were, and, by consequence, how improper V.
it would be for him to appear as the accuser of his 贸7"
own Sovereign*. The candour which Norfolk
seemed to discover in these remonstrances, as well
as the truth which they contained, made a deep im-
preiflon on the Regent. He daily received the
firongeft assurances of Mary's willingness to be re-
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her
of such an odious crime, together with thedenuncia-
tions of her irreconcileable hatred, if he afted a con-
trary pr.rt t-. All thelf considerations concurred in
determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had fug-
gested.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before Oao;er 9.

he proceeded farther, whether the Englifl commis-
fioners were impowered to declare the (Queen guilty,
by a judicial at; whether they would promise to
pass sentence, without delay; whether the Queen
lhould be kept under such reflraint, as to prevent
her from disturbing the government now established
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if she approv-
ed of the proceedings of the King's party, would
engage to prote: it for the future . The paper
containing these demands was signed by himnilf
alone, without communicating it to any of his ar-
tendants, except Maitland and Melvil搂. Nothing
could appear more natural than the Regent's folici-

* Melv. I?7. IIaynes, 573. t Ai,d.if vol. i. 77.
Good. vol. ii. ;;. See AppLid. No. X\VI.

:: Andcrf. , iv.

iv . 搂 Ibid. 56. .!M;v. Ico.
VOL. I. I i tuje,

B o o K tude, to know on what footing he flood. To have

V. ventured on a fep so uncommon and dangerous, as
,-0 'the accusing his Sovereign, without previously as-

certaining that he might take it with safety, would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Eliza-
beth, who did not expe&t that he would have mov-
ed any such difficulty, had not impowered her com-
missioners to give him that fatisfaion which he de-
manded. It became necessary to transmit the arti-
cles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that
they should make no flight impreftion on Elizabeth
and her ministers. " Think not the Scots, said
" he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us view their

conduct as we would with our own to be viewed
in a like situation. The game they play is deep;

" their estates, their lives, their honour are at stake.
" It is now in their own power to be reconciled to
" their Queen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and
" in a matter of so much importance, the utmost
' degree of caution is not exceflive*."

WHI LE the English commifioners waited forfuller

inftru&ions with regard to the Regent's demands,
he gave in an answer to the complaint, which had
been offered in name of the Scottith Qtieen. It was
exprefed in terms perfedlly conformable to the system
which he had at that time adopted. It contained
no insinuation of the Queen's being accessory to the
murder of her husband; the bittcrnefs of flile
peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the

* Andlcf. V'"l. i. 7.

Iiar-

marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary to take B o o K
arms in order to diflolve it; though Mary's attach- V.
ment to a man so odious jutified the keeping her "56
for ome time under restraint; yet nothing more
was said on these subje&s than was barely requisite in
his own defence. The Queen's commillioners did
not fail to reply *. But while the article with re- oaQobirl7
gard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence to-
wards ending.the contest, and were little regarded
by Elizabeth or her commissioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conducted in The confe-

a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and mvct
produced none of these difroveries which ihe had Wcamin4
expected. The distance between York and Lon-
don, and the necessity of consulting her upon every
difficulty which occurred, consumed much time.
Norfolk's negociation with the Scottiih Regent,
however secretly carried on, was not, in all probabi-
lity, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for her
sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies,
and feeing through their deepest schemes t. In-
stead, therefore, of returning any answer to the Re-
gent's demands, he resolved to remove the confe-
rence to Weftminlter, and to appoint new commis-
fioners, in whom she could more absolutely con-
fide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this
resolution .

* Anderr. vol. iv. 64, o8. t Good. vl. ii. 0,
And. vcl. i.i. 2. I-I.yncs, 8, Anderr. vol. i.. .

li 2 WE

B o o K WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

V. of her commiifloners during the conference at York,

--- and how, by the strength of their arguments, they
568confounded her adversaries, and silenced all their

cavils*. The dispute stood, at that time, on a
footing, which rendered her vicory not only appa-
rent, but easy. Her participation of the guilt of
the King's murder was the only circumstance, which
could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjests.
And while they industriously avoided mentioning
that, her cause gained as much as that of her adver-
saries loft by fupprefling this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
Westminster. She deliberated with the utmost anxi-
ety, how he might overcome the Regent's scruples,
and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She confi-
dered of the moil proper method for bringingMary's
commifioners to answer such an accusation; and as
Ihe forelaw that the promises with which it was ne,
ceflary to allure the Regent, and which it was im-
polfible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would
naturally exasperate her to a great degree, she de-
termined to guard her more narrowly than ever;
and though Lord Scroop had given her no reason
to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he
was the Du',e of Norfolk's brother-in-law, file
thought it proper to remove the Queen as soon as
poiiible to Tuthbury in Staffbrdnlire, and commit
her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewibury, to
whom that cI1le belonged -.

* Good. vol. i. 8S6. :84. 350. t Ilarcs, 4'7

MARV

MARY began to fufpe& the design of this fecondB o o K

conference; and notwithstanding the fatisfaftion he V.
expreled at feeing hercaufetaken more immediately ' 58
under the Queen's own eye*, he framed her in- M.,ry'sfur-
ftru&tions to her commiflioners, in such a manner, lizabeth's
as to avoid being brought under the necessity ofintenrions.

Odtob. a .

anwivering the acculation of her subjects, if they
Ihould be so desperate as to exhibit one againt hecrt-.
These suspicions were oon confirmed by a circum-
fance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's presence, and received by her, not only with
refpeet, but with affection. This Mary jutfly con-
fidered as an open declaration of that Queen's par-
tiality towards her adversaries. In the first emo-N o-:.
tions of her refcntmcnr, rne wrote to her commil- perfonai
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the Ellijzbeth.
pretence of the English nobles, and before the am-
baifadors of foreign Princes, of the usage (he had
hitherto met with, and the additional injuries which
she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious flib-
jeEts were allowed accels to the Queen, he was ex-
cluded from her prelcnce; they enjoyed full liberty,
fle la.guifhied under a long impribonment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
fle laboured under every disadvantage. For theie
reasons he once more renewed her demand, of be-
ing admitted into the Queen's prclence; and if that
were denied, Ihe instructed them to declare, that
hie recalled the conlcnt he had ivtn to the con-

* Anldei. voL iv. 95. t Gold. vo!. ii. 34o.

I i 3 terence

B o o K ference at Westminster, and protested, that what-

V. ever was done there, hould be held to be null and
'568' invalid *.
1568.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
she declined the conference were plausible, and the
juncure for offering them well chosen. But either
the Queen's letter did not reach her commiflioners
in due time, or they suffered themselves to be de-
ceived by Elizabeth's profeflions of regard for their
Mistress, and consented to the opening of the con-
ference t.
R.v. s. To the commiflioners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of Arun-
del and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil :. The difficulties which obftruAed the pro-
ceedings at York were quickly removed. A satis.
fying answer was given to the Regent's demands
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and raise
objections as formerly. His negociation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by some of
Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to
Cecilll His personal safety, as well as the conti-
nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By
favouring Mary, she might at any time, ruin him,
and by a question which she artfully flarted, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of

Good. vol. ii. 184. + Anders. vol. iii. 25.
; Id. vol. iv, 99, I Me:v. 191.

Scoct

Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, B o o K
she let him ee, that even without restoring the V.
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive him 1 68
of the supreme direction of affairs *. These con.
fiderations, which were powerfully seconded by most
of his attendants, at length determined the Regent
to produce his accusation againlt the Qleen.

HE endeavoured to lesen the infamy, with The Re-
which he was sensible this acion would be attend- gnt a,

cures the
ed, by protesting, that it was with the utmost re- Que of

bcingaccei-

lu&ance he undertook this disagreeable taflc; that fcy, to her
his party had long suffered their conduct to be mif- thnubdnd'
construed, and had borne the worst imputations
in silence, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of lrangers; but that now,
the insolence and importunity of the adverse fation,
forced them to publish, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to con-
ceal-I. Thcfe pretexts are decent; and had the par-
ty discovered any delicacy or relerve, with regard to
the Qu-en's ations, in the reft of their condu&,
might have pased for the real principles by which
they were influenced. But their former treatment
of the Queen renders it impofible to give any credit
to there professions. A nd the Regent, it is plain,
was drawn by the necessity of his afairs, and Eli-
zabeth's artifices, into a licuation, where no liberty
of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himfeif to be guilty of rebellion, or to
charge Mary with having committed murier.

* Uayne, 4'4. + Adcr. vol. iv. Ii5.

i 4 THE

B o o K TH E accusation itself was conceived in the 1trong.

V. eft terms. Mary was charged, not only with hav-
i68 ing conented to the murder, but with being accef-

fory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
pursuits ofjuftice by her favour; and lhe had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than subversive of the liberties and confti-
tution of the kingdom. If any of these crimes
should be denied, an offer was made, to produce
the most ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge *,

AT the next meeting of the commiflioners, the
2tov. 9. Earl of Lennox appeared before them; and after

bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he acculed, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he ailedged. 1 he entrance of a new aor on
the fge, so opportunely, and at a junture so cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifestly i lizabeih's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy of
the Scottilh Queen t.

Ser eon. MARY'S commiflioners exprefled the utmost fur-
reft"u掳" prize and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
anwer. in loading the Queen with calumnies, which, as they
Gemb. 4' affirmed, she had so little merited. But, inftcad of

attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to

'Andcrf, vol. iv. 119. t Id. ibid. 122,

the

the charge, they had recourse to an article in their B o o K
inftru&ions, which they had formesly negleced to V.
mention in its proper place. '1hey demanded an' '
audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their
Mistress's request, of a personal interview, they pro-
tested, if th;.t were denied her, againit all the fu-
ture proceedings of the commitrfoners*. A pro-
teftation of this nature, offered jiill at the critical
time, when such a bold acculatin had been preter-
red a anft Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to sus-
pect that he dreaded he event of that examination.
This suspicion received the strongest confirmation
from another circumlance ; Ross and t'erreis, be-
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protcftation, privately acquainted Leicef-
ter and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards bring-
ing the differences between herlelf and her fubjets
to an amicable accommodation, so fl(e was flill de-
firous, notwithstanding the Regent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they should be terminated in that
manner t.

SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the

firong refcntment, which calumniated innocence na-
turally feds; or with that eagerness to vindicate it-
self, which it always dilcovers. In Mary's fitua-
tion, an offer so ill-timed mu(t be confidered as a
confefion of the weaknefsofhercaule. The known

* Anderron, vol. iv. 133, 158.

lIbid. iv. 134. Cabbala, Ij7.

cha-

B o K charater of her commiflioners exempts them from

V. the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of treache-

8 ry. Sone secret conviction, that the conduct of
;568.

their Mistress could not bear so stria a scrutiny,
seems to be the most probable motive of this im-
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
Decemb. 4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for rejecting it. She told
Mary's commifioners, that, in the prefentjuncture,
nothing could be so diihonourable to their Mistress,
as an accommodation; and that the matter would
eiem to be huddled up in this manner, merely to
suppress discoveries, and to hide her hame; norwas
it possible that she could be admitted, with any de-
cency, into her presence, while (he lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
feerned now to be no further realbn for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's
lhe!emes were incomple.t; and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful as any he
hld hitherto employed. She commanded her com-
missioners to teffify her indignation and difplearure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far
the duty of a subjet, as to accuse his Sovereign of
such atrocious crimes. le, in order to regain the
good opinion of flch a powerful protecrefs, offered
to bew that his accusations were not malicious, nor

ill-

ill-grounded. Then were produced and delivered B o o K
to the Engliih commiflioners, the as of the Scot- V.
tilh Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au--
thority, and of the Queen's reignation; the con-.5
feflions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der; and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contracts, that have been already
mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her poffefion, Elizaheth

began to lay aide the expressions of friendlhip and ,"ats mal
refpedt which she had hitherto used in all her letters r rigur.
to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her in
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almost to certainty; she blamed her for
refuting to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanfvered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her character; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unless that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation *. She hoped that such
adilcovery of her sentiments would intimidate M.,ry,
who was scarce recovered from the shock of the Re-
gent's attackon her reputation, and force her to con-
firm her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to consent that both herlelf
and her son hould reside in England, under her
protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at
heart; he proposed it both to Mary and to her
commissioners, and negle&ed no argument, nor ar-
tifice, that could pofibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety.

* Andorfon, vcl. i. 179, 183. Good. vol. ii, 260.

SiC

B o o K She rejecEed it without hesitation. " Death, said

V. " he, is less dreadful than such an ignominious
贸"- 1' iftep. Rather than give away, with my own
1568. "hands, the Crown, which descended to me from

( my ancestors, I will part with life; but the last

words I utter, shall be those of a Queen of Scot-
" land *."

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible

how open her reputation lay to censure, while he
suffered such a public accusation to remain unan-
fwered; and though the conference was now dif-
solved, she impowered her commiflioners to present
a reply to the allegations of her enemies, in which
The denied, in the ftrongeit terms, the crimes im-
puted to her; and recriminated upon the Regent
prcm.4 4and his party, by accusing them of having devised

and executed the murder of the King --. The
Regent and his associates asserted their innocence
with great warmth. Mary continued to insist on
a personal interview, a condition which she knew
would never be granted [. Elizabeth urged her
to vindicate her own honour. But it is evident
from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to
which both Queens had recourse by turns, that
Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not dcfire to
make any further progress in the inquiry.

1569. THE Regent was now impatient to return into
Febr. Z. Scotland, where his adverfarits were endeavouring,
the Regent in his absence, to raise some commotions. Before
without ci- * H,
ther ap * Haynes, 497. See Appendix, No. XX.I. Good. vol.
proving or . 274, 301. t Goo. ii. S
. . Ibid. 283.

condemn- Cabbala, 157.

ing hi. con.
dud. lie

he set out, he was called into the Privy Council, B o o K
to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's senti- V.
ments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that '~
on one hand nothing had been obje&ed to his con-
duct, which ihe could reckon detrimental to his
honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had he,
on the other hand, produced any thing against his
Sovereign, on which she could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her ations; and for this reason, he
resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precifly
in the fame situation, in which she had found them,
at the beginning of the conference. The Queen's
commissioners were difmiffd much in the fa:e
manner *.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earneffly on this conference, upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
her future schemes. Notwithstanding her seeming But fecrctly
impartiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neu- fpPt s
ter; nor was he at any loss on whom to beaow her
protection. Before the Regent left London, she
supplied him with a confderable fulm of money, and
engaged to support the King's authority, to the ut-
molt of her power '1. Mary, by her own conduct,
fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which
he had discovered during the progrcfs of the con-
ference, and despairing of ever obtaining ;liiy luc-

Good. ii. 3'5, 333. t Id. :13. Carte, 3. 478.

C.olr

B o o K cour from her, he endeavoured to rouze her own

V. adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such
X"' designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not
569. fail to inspire every Scotchman with indigna-

tion. Murray, he pretended, had agreed to con,
vey the Prince her son into England; to furren-
der to Elizabeth the places of greatest strength in
the kingdom; and to acknowledge the dependance
of the Scottish upon the English nation. In return
for this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of
the Crown of Scotland ; and, at the fame time, the
question with regard to the Englith fuccefflon was
to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters.
An account of these wild and chimerical projects was
spread industriously among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was calculated of purpose to bring her
government into difreputation, laboured to destroy
its effets, by a counter-proclamation, and became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen *.

Efforts of THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
Mary's ad- in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
herents a-
gainft him. Qeen's adherents, which had been suspended in

expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break
out with all the violence of civil war. They were
encouraged, too, by the appearance of a leader,
whose high quality and pretensions intitled him to
great authority in the nation. This was the Duke
of Chaclheraulr, who had resided for fomc years in

* Ianes, 500, 503. Sec Append. No. XXVII.

France,

France, and was now sent over by that court, with B o o Kc
a small supply of money, in hopes that the presence V.
of the first nobleman in the kingdom would '
strengthen the Queen's faction. Elizabeth had de- 1569'
tained him in England, for ome months, under
various pretences, but was obliged at latr to susser
him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary invested him with the high dignity of
her Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with Feb. 25.
the fantastic title of her adopted father.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his His vigo-

party into any regular body. He aflembled an army, u ea;
with his usual expedition, and marched to Giafgow. her party.
The followers of Argyll and Huntly, who conm-
posed the chief part of the Queen's faction, lying
in very diRtant corners of the kingdom, and many
of the Duke's dependants having fallen, or having
been taken in the battle of Langfide, the fiirit and
strength of his adherents was totally broken, and
an accommodation with the Regent was the only
thing, which could prevent the deftruEion of his
efate and vassals. This was effeded without diffi-
culty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke
promised to acknowledge the authority both of the
King and of the Regent; and to claim no jurif-
dietion in consequence of the commificn, which
he had received from the Queen. The Regent
b:nund himfclf to repeal the aft which had passed
for attainting several of the Cueen's adherents; to
reflore all who would fibmit to the King's govern-
ment, to the poffcllon of their estates and honours;
and to hold a Conventioxn, wherein all the dilfcrcn-

6 ccs

B o o iK ces between the two parties Should be fettled by mu-

V. tualconfent. TheDukegave hoftagesforhis faithful
贸Y ~ performance of the treaty; and, in token oftheir fin.
569. cerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the Regent

to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Re-
gent set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide .

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negociation was carrying on,
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better alpeEt, and her return into her own kingdom
seemed to be an event not very ditlant. The French
King had lately obtained such advantages over the
Hugonots, that the extincion of that party appear-
ed to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented
from proteting her friends in Britain. These cir-
cumftances not only influenced Argyll and Huntly,
but made so deep an impreflion on the Duke, that
he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and
plainly discovered that he wilhed to evade the ac-
complihment of the treaty. The Regent saw the
danger of allowing the Duke to flake himself loose,
in this manner, from his engagements; and inflant-
ly formed a resolution equally bold, and politic.
He commanded his guards to seize Chatelherault in
his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and,
regardless either of his dignity as the first nobleman
in the kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of
the promiits of personal security, on which he had

* Cabbala, iI. Caws. Mem. io6.

relied,

felied, committed him ahd Lord Herreis, prifonersB o o K
to the castle of Edinburgh . A blow so fatal and V.
unexpeted, dispirited the party. Argyll submitted 569.
to the King's government, and made his peace with April 1.
the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, be-
ing left alone, was at last obliged to lay down his
arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, July ,.

and brought letters to the Regent, both from the A faou:
English and Scottish Queens. A Convention was of'Ma

w0~~~~ "ica^^" ~~~~reje:tcd#

held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-
beth's letter contained three different proposals with
regard to Mary; that hie should either be restored
to the full poffcion of her former authority; or be
admitted to reignjointlywith the King her son; o
least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in ibme decent
retirement, without anyfhare in the administration of
government. These overtures were extorted by the
importunity of Fenelon the French ambassador, and
have ome appearance of being favourable to the
captive Queen. They were, however, perfectly
suitable to Elizabeth's general fyitem with regard to
Scottish affairs. Among propositions so unequal
and disproportionate, she easily law where the choice
would fall. The two former were rcjected; and
long delays must neceflarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every circum-
(tance relative to the last could be finally adtjutied-.

. Cranf. Mern. in. Mv, ;:.
f[ pt'.v. 230.
VOL. 1. K k I';LR,

B o O K MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marri-

V. age with Bothwell should be reviewed by the proper
"5. judges, and if found invalid, hould be dissolved

by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal marriage
was the principal source of all the calamities he had
endured two years; a divorce was the only thing
which could repair the injuries, her reputation had
suffered by that ftep. It was her interest to have
proposed it early; and it is not easy to account for
her long silence with refpe&t to this point. Her

Norfolk's particular motive for proposing it, at this time,
scheme for began to be so well known, that the demand was
the Queen rejeced by the Convention of estates. They im-
of cots. puted it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell,

as to her eagerness to conclude a marriage with the
Duke of Norfolk.

Tvs marriage was the object of that secret ne-

gociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned; but, like all those concerted for the relief
of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically. The
fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bishop of Ro拢f. The former readily closed
with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The
latter confidered it as a probable device for restoring
his Mistress to liberty, and replacing her on her
throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held
a corrcfpondence, by means of his siser Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have
restored her to her kingdoll, with lb much fplen-

dor,

dor*. The sudden removal of the conference from B o K
York to Westminster fulpended, but did not break V.
off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were fill the x -
Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let- 5
ters and love tokens were exchanged between him
and the Queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an admi- Conceals it

niftration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue foab cli
could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance of openness and candors
an artifice which seldom fails of success. He men-
tioned to her the rumour, which was spread of his
marriage with the Scottish Queen; he complained
of it as a groundless calumny; and disclaimed all
thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full
of contempt, both for Mary's character, and domi-
nions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing re-
lative to the Queen of Scots, she seems to have cre-
dited these professions t. But instead of difconti-
nuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater
vigour, and admitted into it new afrociares. Among
these was the Regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfo!k, by his public ccuiation
of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which
he had entered at York. He was then ready to re-
turn into Scotland. The influence of ihe Duke, in
the North of England, was great. The Earls us
Northumberland and Weclmorland, the moit
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,

* C:rlnld. 49, H ayll 53. tnte'rril, 1.73.
t Haynes, j74. Stat; 'li.ild, ., ,, D

K Ik z2 ;ea:-

B o o K threatened to revenge upon the Regent, the injuries

V. which he had done his Sovereign. In order to fe-
69.c cure his safe retreat, he addrefled himself to Nor-

folk, and after ome apology for his past conduct,
he insinuated that the Duke's scheme of marrying
the Queen his filter was no less acceptable to him,
than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would
concur with the utmost ardour, in promoting so de-
firable an event*. Norfolk heard him with the cre-
dulity, natural to those, who are paflionately bent
upon any design. He wrote to the two Earls to de-
sift from any hostile attempt against Murray, and to
that he owed his passage through the Northern
counties, without disturbance.

Ca n, the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re-
confCct of
the Engliih gent, he next attempted to draw the Engliih nobles
nobles. tO approve his design. The nation began to delpair

of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept the
question with regard to the right of fucceflion un-
decided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the disputed titles of the houses of York
and Lancaster, was ill recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself
had been brought to the brink of deftrution, in
that unhappy contest. The Scottiff Queen, though
her right of fucceflion was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marry a foreign and a Popi(h Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.

* Andcrf. 3. 3.1.

But,

But, by marrying her to an Englilhman, a zealous B o o K
Protestant, the most powerful and most universally V.
beloved of all the nobles, an effetual remedyfeemed 5~
to be provided against all these evils. The greater 59
part of the Peers, either diretly, or tacitly, ap.
proved of it, as a salutary project. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley
subscribed a letter to the Scottilh Queen, written
with Leicester's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promire, that she hould at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the English Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to
her posterity; that ihe should consent to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms;
that he should confirm the present eftablilhment of
religion in Scotland; and receive into favour such
of her fubjeds as had appeared in arms against her.
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
these articles, they engaged that the English nobles
would not only concur in restoring her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
of England, in reversion. Mary readily conlnted
to all these proposals, except the second, with re-
gard to which he demanded ome time for coiillt-
ing her ancient ally the French King.

THE whole of this negociation was indutrioifly

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish Queen was well known, nor could it be ex-
peted, that he would willingly come into a mea-

Anders. vol. iii. . Camd. 42o.

K k 3 flre.

B o o K sure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation,

V. and to increase the power of her rival. But, in a

matter of so much consequence to the nation, the
5' taking a few fleps without her knowledge, could

scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every person
concerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, de-
clared that nothing should be concluded without ob-
taining her consent, the duty and allegiance of sub-
jets seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light.
Those who conducted the intrigue, had farther and
more dangerous views. They saw the advantages
which Mary procured by this treaty, to be present
and certain; and the execution of the promises
which he cawe under, to be distant and uncertain.
They had early communicated their scheme to the
Kings of France and Spain, and obtained their ap-
probation *. A treaty, concerning which they con-
fulted foreign Princes, while they concealed it from
their own Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent.
They hoped, however, that the union of so many
nobles would render it necefary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, that a combina-
tion so strong would be altogether irresistible; and
such was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted, in the North of England, for
rescuing Mary out cf the hands of her keepers,
Norfolk, who was afraid that if he recovered her
l:berty, her fcntiments in his favour might change,
uieid all his interest to dissuade the conspirators from
attempting it t.

A.;der. vol. iii. 63. t Camd. 420.

IN

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord B o o K

Boyd arrived from England; and, betides the let- V.
ters which he produced publicly, brought others 1569
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the
Regent, and to Maitland. There were full of the
moRft sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, said they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjulled; nor was it poflible
that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much
art, and supported both by power and by numbers,
could miscarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding ce-
remony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would
remove the only obstacle that flood in the way.
This was expeted of him, in consequence of his
promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would
not fail to fulfil these engagements *.

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumftances; from those which had formerly induced
him to asset& an approbation of Norfolk's chemes.
Hie saw that the downfal of his own power mull be
the first consequence of the Duke's success. And
if the Queen, who confidered him as the chief au-
thor of all her misfortunes, should recover her an-
cient authority, he could never expet favour, nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined
a ftep so fatal to himself, and which would have

* Haynes, 52c. Spotfw. 30. See Appendix, No. XXIX.

K k 4 efta-

B o o K eftablilhed the grandeur of another on the ruins of

V. his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But, as

every other circumstance was fettled, the Bishop of
Ross, in name of his Mistress, and the Duke, in
person, declared, in preence of the French Ambaf-
fador, their mutual consent to the marriage, and g
contrat to this purpose was signed, and entrusted
to the keeping of the Ambassador .

Auguf T . THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that
dircovrs it could not long remain a secret. It began to be
tihe Duke's whispered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Duke
defin, and .
defelt, it. into her presence, expressed the utmost indignation

at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside all
thoughts of prosecuting such a dangerous design.
Soon after, Leicester, who perhaps had counte-
nanced the project with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumitances of it to the Queen.
Pembroke, Arundel, Lumly, and Throgmorton
were confined and examined. Mary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl of
Huntingdon, who pretended to dispute with the
Scottish Queen, her right to the fucceflion, being
joined in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered her
imprionment more intolerable, by the excess of his
vigilance and rigour 1-. The Scottish Regent,
threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly be-
trayed the Duke., put his letters into herhands; and
furnished all the intelligence in his power :. The
Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and

* Carte, vol. iii. 486. t Hnynes, 52s, 526, 530, 532
t See Append. No. XXX.

then,

then, in contempt of the summons to appear before B o o ;
the Privy Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. In- V.
timidated by the imprisonment of his associates, 1 56
coldly received by his friends in that county; un-
prepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to
rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed
a second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was oa. 3,
first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then
lent to the Tower. After being confined there up-
wards of nine months, he was released upon his hum-
ble fubmilfion to Elizabeth, giving her a promise,
on his allegiance, t hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen . During the progress
of Norfolk's negociations, the Queen's partizans in
Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in
her restoration to the throne, with an increase of
authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland Maitl3nd
was the foul of that party, and the perlbn, whose by the'
activity and ability the Regent chiefly dreaded. s"t
He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He conti-
nued to foment the spirit of dilafietion in Scotland,
and had seduced from the Regent Lord -lomel,
Kirkaldy, and everal of his former associates.
While he ejoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power fccurc. For this rcalon, he
employed Captain Crawfurl, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being acccllbry to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
priboner to Edinburgh. lie would loon have been
brought to trial, but was fved by the friendlhip of

IIynr, 5 ;, 5'7.

B o o K Kirkaldy, governor of the castle, who, by pretend-

V. ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,
S6g. got him out of the hands of the person, to whose

care he was committed, and conducted him into the
cattle, which, from that time, was entirely under
Maitland's command. The los of a place of so
much importance, and the defecion of a man so
eminent for military ikill as Kirkaldy, brought the
Regent into ome difreputation, for which, how-
ever, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly
compensated.

A rebellion THE intrigue carried on for reforing the ScoCtifl

biet Eli-' Queen to liberty having been discovered, and dif-
Marys ad- appointed, an attempt was made, to the fame pur-

pose, by force of arms; but with no better success.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland,
though little diftinguilhed by their personal merit,
were two of the most ancient and powerful of the
English peers. Their estates in the northern coun-
ties were great, and they poffelled that influence
over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the
popular and martial families of Percy and of Nevil.
They were both attached to the Popish religion, and
discontented with the court, where new men, and a
new fyflem prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in
England, they had warmly espoused her interest,
and zeal for popery, opposition to the court, and
commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them
in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding
the vigilance of her keepers, they held a close cor-
refpondence with her, and communicated to her all

their

their deigns *. They were privy to Norfolk's B o o K
schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded V.
did not suit their ardour and impetuosity. The -'V-
liberty of the Scottish Queen was not their sole ob- 569
je&. They aimed at bringing about a change in
the religion, and a revolution in the government of
the kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the
aid of the King of Spain, the avowed and zealous
patron of i'opery in that age. Nothing could be
more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or
more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in
the Netherlands, than the involving England in the
confusion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his direcion, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, so soon as they either took the field
with their forces, or surprised any place of strength,
or rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup-
ply them both with money, and a strong body of
troops. La Mothe, the Governor of Dunkirk, in
the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports where it
would be most proper to land. And Chiapini
Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was dispatched
into England, on pretence of fettling ome com-
mercial differences between the two nations; but
in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a leader
of experience, as oon as they ventured to take
arms -.

THE conduct of this negociation occasioned many
meetings and meflages between the two Earls. Eli- Defeated.

ITaynes, 5;S5 Murdin, 44, 6z, &c.
t Carte, vl. iii. 489, 49o. Camd. 4z1.

zabeth

B o o K zabeth was informed of these; and though fle sus.

V. petted nothing of their real design, he concluded
569 that they were among the number of Norfolk's

confidents. They were summoned, for this reason,
to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and afraid
of discovery, they delayed giving obedience. A
second, and more peremptory order was ifued.
This they could not decline, without shaking off
their allegiance. And as no time was left for delibe-
ration, they initantly erected their standard against
Nov. 9. their Sovereign. The re-eftablilhing the catholic

religion; the fettling the order of succession to the
Crown; the defence of the ancient nobility; were
the motives they alledged tojuftify their rebellion t.
Many of the lower people flocked to them, with
such arms as they could procure; and had the ca-
pacity of the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the
enterprize, it must have soon grown to be extremely
formidable. Elizabeth a&ed with prudence and
vigour; and was served by her subjects with fidelity
and ardor. On the first rumour of an infurretion,
Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of strength,
which could not be taken without a regular siege;
a detachment of the rebels, which was ent to ref-
cue her, returned without success. Troops were as-
fembled in different parts of the kingdom; as they
advanced, the malecontents retired. In their re.
treat their numbers dwindled away, and their spirits
funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to direct
their flight, kept together for some time a finall
body of them, among the mountains of Northum-

+ Strype, vol. i. 547. berd

brland ,

berland; but they were at length obliged to dif- B o o K
perse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scot- V.
tifh borderers. The two Earls, together with the '

1569.

Countess of Northumberland, wandering for some Dec. !a.
days in the waftes of Liddifdale, were plundered by
the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the season,
and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weft-
morland was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and
Ker of Ferniherft, and afterwards conveyed into
the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized by
the Regent, who had marched with some troops
towards the borders, to prevent any impreflon the
rebels might make on those mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of Church

the church, for two years, have almost escaped our
notice. Its General Assemblies were held regularly;
but no business of much importance employed their
attention. As the number of the Protestant clergy
daily encreafed, the deficiency of the funds, et
apart for their subsistence, became greater. Many
efforts were made towards recovering the ancient
patrimony of the church, or at leaf so much of it,
as was pofeffed by the Popih incumbents, a race
of men, who were, now, not only useless, but bur-
denfome to the nation. But though the manner in
which the Regent received their addresses and com-
plaints, was very different from that to which they
had been accustomed, no effe6tual remedy was pro-
vided; and while they fuffcred intolerableoppreflion,
and groaned under extreme poverty, fair wrds,

Cabbala, 171. Camd. 42:.

.and

B o o and liberal promises were all they were able to ob-

V. tain .

1570. ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping
rolves to such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottifi Queen.
sMt to During the former year, the tranquillity of her go-
thelegent. vernment had been disturbed, first by a secret com-

bination of some of her nobles, then by the rebel-
lion of others; and fie often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the bidden cause of both.
Many of her own subjes favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the
continent were warmly interested in her cause. The
detaining her any longer in England, ihe foresaw,
would be made the pretext or occasion of perpetual
cabals and infurredions among the former, and
might expose her to the hofRile attempts of the lat-
ter. She resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into
the hands of the Regent, whose security, no less
than her own, depended on preventing her from re-
ascending the throne. The negociation for this
purpose was carried some length, when it was dif-
covered by the vigilance of the Bishop of Ross, who,
together with the French and Spanish Ambaflfdors,
remonstrated against the infamy of such an action,
and represented the surrendering the Queen to her
rebellious fubjels, to.be th fame thing, as if Eli-
zabedli hould, by her own authority, condemn her
to instant death. This procured a delay; and the
murder of thb Regent prevented the revival of that
dcfign t.

' Cald. vol. ii. 8o, &c. t Carte, vol. iii. 491. An-
dec. vol. i i. 84.

I.IA-

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the perfonB o o K

who committed this barbarous a&tion. He had been V.
condemned to death soon after the battle of Lang- -57

157o.

fide, as we have already related, and owed his life But he is
to the Regent's clemency. But part of his eate murdercd
had been betlowed upon one of the Regent's fa-
vourites, who seized his house, and turned out his
wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, ihe became furiously
mad. This injury made a deeper impreflion on him,
than the benefit he had received, and from that mo-
ment he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded
the enterprize. The maxims of that age juitified
the most desperate course he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow.
He resolved at last to wait till his enemy hould ar-
rive at Linlithgow, through which he was to pass
in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He took
his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window
towards the treet ; spread a feather-bed on the floor,
to hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung up a black cloth behind him, that his shadow
might not be observed from without; and after all
this preparation, calmly expected the Regent's ap-
proach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far distant. Some indiftin& information of the
danger which threatened him had been conveyed
to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he relblved to return by the famn gate through

which
a

B o o K which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round

V. the town. But as the croud about the gate wa

great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he
1570' proceeded dire&ly along the street; and the throng

of the people obliging him to move very lowly,
gave the affaflin time to take so true an aim, that
he shot him with a single bullet, through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentle-
man who rode on his other fide. His followers in-
ftantly endeavoured to break into the house whence
the blow had come, bt they found the door fcrong-
ly barricaded; and before it coUld be forced open,
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which stood
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound *.

Hiscitarac- THERE is no person, in that age, about whom
ter. historians have been more divided, orwhofecharafter

has been drawn with such opposite colours. Personal
intrepidity, military kill, iagacity and vigour in
the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which
even his enemies allow him to have pofleffed, in an
eminent degree. His moral qualities are more du-
bious, and ought neither to be praised, nor cenfur-
ed, without great reserve, and many diftindions.
In a fierce age, he was capable of using viaory
with humanity, and of treating the vanquished with
moderation. A patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguish-

* Buchan. T'S. Caws. Mem. 124.
9

ed him, even at a time, when professions of that B o o K
kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his V.
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe-.
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A z *
disinterested passion for the linerty of his countr,
prompted hin to oppose thepernicio,us ly tlm,which
the Princes of Lorrain had obliged t.e Qtce. n ilo-
ther to pursue. On Mary's return into, ,cot;a .d,
he served her with a zeal and aCErtion, to h!cl he
sacrificed the friendflip of thc'le who wtre rniof at-
tached to his person. Bur, on the other h;n:l, his
ambition was immoderate; and events appi-n d
that opened to him vatt projecs, which allured hts
enterprising genius, and led him to actions, incun-
fiftent with the duty of a fubje. His treatment
of the Queen, to whose bounty he was lo much in-
debted, was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The de-
pendance on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was dilgraceful to the nation. He de-
ceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness un-
worthy of a man of honour. His elevation to loch
unexpe ;ed dignity, inspired him with new passions,
witi hauiirlincis and relcrve ; and instead of his na-
tural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
secld the arts of dilliniulation and rleinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flatiery, .and
impatient of advice, his creatures, by fuothing his
vanity, ld him allray, while his ancient ric-ndi
flood at a d;l:ance, and predIt cd his ailpro,i. 'lin;
f.ll. B',r, anmidit the [U bulcnce and c ri;I':, r oi
.!i.:t factious periocl, he (ciletnlcd jLil:ii w, 'j lo
mnlch ir.il-;r!ivy, he repre'fl:d the licentious bor-

Vo;,. 1. I, I dcrcl

B o o derers with so much courage, and eftabliled such

V. uncommon order and tranquillity in the country,

'-"C that his administration was extremely popular,"and
3570. he was long and affe&ionately remembered among

the commons, by the name of the Good Regent.

-. EN D

, thF
. .V
The END of the FIRST VOL V ME

.!'.

.
,
