THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
S C T. L A N D

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MAR Y, and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssioN to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUME S.
By W I L L I A M ROBER T S O N, D. D

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

V O L U II.

THE TWELFTH EDITION,.
WITH ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

LONDO N:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRANDo.

bI DCC XC!.

# BOOK VI.

TH E
H I ST

Y

0 F
S C O T

L

AND.
BOOK

VI.
T X HE unexpeaed blow, by which the regent was cut off,

struck the king's party with the utmost conifernation.

Elizabeth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster which could
have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degree
that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if
now her restoration were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those who expressed such
indecent joy at the commission of it; and as the aflaffin made his
escape on a horse which belonged to lord Claud Hamilton, and
fled direcly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it was
concluded that the regent had fallen a sacrifice to the resentment
of the queen's party, rather than to the revenge of a private man.
On the day after the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of
Ferniherft, both zealous abettors of the queen's cause, entered

VOL. II. B England

0 R

BOOK

VI.

1570.

Disorders oc-
cafioned by
the regent's
death.
_ __

B OO K England in an hostile manner, and plundered and burnt the

VI.
.-- ,--- country, the inhabitants of which expected no such outrage. If

3570 ' the regent had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on

such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so
soon after his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THrI was not the only irregularity to which the anarchy that

followed the regent's death gave occasion. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impoflible to restrain thcfe

Step. taken without a fettled form of government, a convention of the nobles
towardseleci -
ing another was held, in order to deliberate concerning the election of a regent.
regen t.

"e'b. Z. The queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting, and

protested against its proceedings. The king's own party was
irresolute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy
had set at liberty, and who obtained fiom the nobles then as-
fembled a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been
laid to his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the
two parties, by proposing to admit the queen to the joint admini-
ftration of government with her son. Elizabeth, adhering to her
ancient system with regard to Scottifli affairs, laboured, notwith-
standing the solicitations of Mary's friends a, to multiply, and to
perpetuate the fations, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Ran-
dolph, whom she dispatched into Scotland on the firIt news of the
regent's death, and who was her usual agent for such services,
found all parties so exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of
irreconcilable rancour, that it cost him little trouble to inflame
their animosity. The convention broke up without coming to any

a See Appendix, No. I.

agreement;

agreement; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of all parties
were invited, was appointed on the first of May b.

3

VI.

5 70.
MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continued to A coalition of

parties at-
acknowledge the king's authority, were at the utmost pains to tempted in

vain.

restore some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They
procured for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
leaders of the two factions. But while the one demanded the
restoration of the queen, as the only thing which could re-establish
the public tranquillity; while the other esteemed the king's autho-
rity to be so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called in
question or impaired; and neither of them would recede in the
least point from their opinions, they separated without any profpecd
of concord. Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement,
by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with
promises of powerful succour to the queen's adherents; and as the
civil wars in that kingdom seemed to be on the point of termi-
nating in peace, it was expected that Charles would soon be at
liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the other hand, the carl
of Suffex was assembling a powerfil army on the borders, and
its operations could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the
king's party c

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the facions proved Queen's

ineffectual, it contributed somewhat to moderate or suspend their fearion of
rage; but they soon began to ad with their usual violence. Edinburgh.
Morton, the most vigilant and able leader on the king's fide,
solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for the safety of a
party so devoted to her interest, and which flood so much in need

' Crawf. Mem. 131. Calderw. ii. I57.

B 2

c Crawf. Mem. 134.

of

BE 0 0 of her assistance. The chiefs of the queen's faction, assembling

VI.

*-- -- ' at Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who
Apiil5 .0 was both governor of the castle and provost of the town, pre-

vailed on the citizens, though with some difficulty, to admit them
within the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the earl of Atholc,
and Maitland, acceded almost openly to their party; and the duke
and lord Herries, having recovered liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
refurned the places which they had formerly held in their councils.
Encouraged by the acquisition of persons so illustrious by their
birth, or so eminent for' their abilities, they published a procla-
mation, declaring their intention to support the queen's authority,
and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the meeting of
the approaching convention, in which, by their numbers and in-
fluence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices on

their fide d.

Endeavour AT the fame time they had formed a design of kindling war
to involve the
nation in a between the two kingdoms. If they could engage them in hoiti-
war with
England. lities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they

hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to the.
king's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to the queen, Eli-
zabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this view they
had, immediately after the murder of the regent, prompted Scott
and Ker to commence hostilities, and had since instigated them.
to continue and extend their depredations.. As Elizabeth foresaw,-
on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this a
national quarrel; and resolved, on the other,. not to susser such an.
insult on her government to pass with impunity; she issued a
proclamation, declaring that she imputed the outrages which had

Crawf. Mem. 137. Calderw. ii. 176.

beer
4

5
been committed on the borders not to the Scottifl nation, but to B O O I

VI.

a few desperate and ill-defigning persons; that, with the former, ,--.
she was resolved to maintain an inviolable friendship, whereas I'570'
the duty which the owed to her own subjects obliged her to
chatfife the licentiousness of the latter'. Sufllex and Scroop ac-
cordingly entered Scotland, the one on the east, the other on the
weft borders, and laid waste the adjacent countries with fire and
sword f. Fame magnified the number and progress of their troops,
and Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh,
the inhabitants whereof were ill affeEted to their cause, retired to
Linlithgow. There, by a public proclamation, they airerted the April 8,
queen's authority, and sorbad giving obedience to any but the
duke, or the earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom fie had confti-
tuted her lieutenants in the kingdom.

THE nobles who continued faithful to the king, though con- iing's party

fiderably weakened by the defection of so many of their friends, bunrgh.
assembled at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They isSued a My

M ,

counter-proclamation, declaring such as appeared for the queen
enemies of their country; and charging them with the murder
both of the late king and of the regent. They could not, how-
ever, presume so much on their own strength as to venture either
to elea a regent, or to take the field against the queen's party;
but the assistance which they received from Elizabeth, enabled
them to do both. By her order fir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot and three hundred horse; the
king's adherents joined him with a considerable body of troops,
and advancing towards Glasgow, where the adverse party had
already begun hostilities by attacking the castle, they forced them

c Calderw, ii. 18r.

'Cabala, x 74..

B13 0 0K to retire, plundered the neighbouring country, which belonged

VI.
'--.--.' to the Hamiltons, and, after seizing some of their cafiles, and

1570. rafing others, returned to Edinburgh.

Motives of UNDER Drury's protection, the earl of Lennox returned into
Elizabeth's
<condua Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the king-
with regard
to them. dom to him during the minority of his grandson. His illustrious

birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as
of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that honour. His resent-
ment against Mary being implacable, and his estate lying in Eng-
land, and his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him as
a man who, both from inclination and from interest, would aft
in concert with her, and ardently wifled that he might succeed
Murray in the office of regent. But, on many accounts, she did
not think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour
his pretensions too openly. The civil wars in France, which had
been excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with
a fierceness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the
point of coming to an issue; and after shedding the best blood,
and walling the richest provinces in the kingdom, both parties
desired peace with an ardour that facilitated the negotiations which
were carrying on for that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be
a paflionate admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour,
susser a queen of France, and the most ancient ally of his crown,
to languish in her present cruel situation, without attempt-
ing to procure her relief. He had hitherto been obliged to
satisfy himself with remonstrating, by his ambassadors, against
the indignity with which she had been treated. But if he
were once ,at full liberty to pursue his inclinations, Elizabeth
would have every thing to dread from the impetuosity of his
temper and the power of his arms. It therefore became necessary

for

7

for her to a& with some reserve, and not to appear avowedly to B O0O K
countenance the choice of a regent, in contempt of Mary's au- '---
thority. The jealousy and prejudices of the Scots required no 1570
less management. Had fle openly supported Lennox's claim;
had fie recommended him to the convention, as the candidate of
whom ihe approved; this might have routed the independent
spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her intention,
she might have defeated its success. For there reasons she hesitated
long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the meflages which
fle received from the king's party. A more explicit declaration
of her sentiments was at last obtained, and an event of an extra-
ordinary nature feetns to have been the occasion of it. Pope
PiusV. having issued a bull, whereby he excommunicated Eliza-
beth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved her fulbjcs from
their oath of allegiance, Felton, an Englishman, had the boldness
to fix it on the gates of the bifliop of London's palace. In former
ages a pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bigotry,
denounced this fatal sentence aganift the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now less regarded,
its proceedings were more cautious; and it was only when they
were roused by some powerful prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this ftcp,
which the pope had taken, to a combination of the Roman ca-
tholic princes against her, and tflpe(ted that some plot was formed
in favour of the Scottish queen. In that event, ihe knew that
the safety of her own kingdom depended on preserving her in-
fluence in Scotland; and in order to strengthen this, she renewed
her promises of protecing the king's adherents, encouraged them
to proceed to the election of a regent, and even ventured to point
out the earl of Lennox, as the person who had the best title.

I Ti' at

BOOK

VI.

1570.

-Lennox
cleaed re-
gent.

M ary's sd-
herents ne-
gotiate with
Spain.

;E.l;zabeth
proporcs a
treaty of ac-
commodation
lietwven
Mary and
.her futjctls.

g Spotfw. 240. Cald. ii. 186. See Append. No. II.
h Crawf. ,Mem. 159. Cald. ii. 198. i See Append. No. III.
-k Andcrf. iii. Iz2. Crawf. Mem. 153.

hugonots

That honour was accordingly conferred upon him, in a convention
of the whole party, held on the I 2th of July (.

THE regent's first care was, to prevent the meeting of the

parliament which the queen's party had summoned to convene at
Linlithgow. Having effeeted that, he marched against the earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the north, and forced the garrison
which he had placed in Brechin to surrender at discretion. Soon
after, he made himself master of some other castles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by
the appearance of a considerable army, with which the earl of
SufTcx hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed him, the duke, Huntly, and other
leaders of the queen's party, traitors and enemies of their country h.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the queen's adherents

had recourse to the king of Spain ', with whom Mary had held a
close correspondence ever since her confinement in England. They
prevailed on the duke of Alva to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coasts and har-
bours; and obtained from them a small supply of money and
arms, which were tent to the earl of Huntly k. But this aid,
so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have availed -them
little. They were indebted for their safety to a treaty, which
Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of refloring the captive
queen to her throne. The first fieps in this negotiation had been
taken in the month of May ; hut hitherto little progress was made
in it. The peace concluded between the Roman catholics and
'8

thugonots in France, and her apprehensions that Charles would B °0 K
interpose with vigour in behalf of his fitler-in-law, quickened _-----

1570.

Elizabeth's motions. She afsecled to treat her prisoner with more
indulgence, file listened more gracioully to the solicitations of
foreign ambailFldors in her fasour, and teemed fully determined to
replace her on the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her fin-
cerity, ihe laboured to procure a ceflation of arms between the two
contending factions in Scotland. Lennox, elated with the good
fortune which had hitherto attended his adminifiration, and flat-
tering himself with an easy triumph over enemies whose estates
were wafted, and their forces .dispirited, refused for some time to
come into this meaiure. It was not safe for him, however, to
dispute the will of his protetrefs. A ceflation of hoflilities
(luring two months, to commence on the third of September, was
agreed upon; and, being renewed from time to time, it conti-
nued till the first of April next year '.

SOON after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and fir Walter Mildmay

to the queen of Scots. The dignity of these ambassadors, the
former her prime minister, the latter chancellor of the exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that the
negotiation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty was
now approaching. The propositions which they made to her were
advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a prince in Mary's fitua-
tion had reason to expect. The ratification of the treaty of Edin-
burgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the Englifl crown, du-
ring Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the adhering to
the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning her fubjead
who had taken arms against her; and her promising to hold no

Spotfw. 243.

9
VOL. II.

C

corre-

B 0 K correspondence, and to countenance no enterprise, that might disturb

VI.
r_ Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By way
'1570. of security for the accomplifllment of these, they demanded, that

some persons of rank should be given as hostages, that the prince
her son should reside in England, anfl that a few castles on the
border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some of these pro-
positions Mary consented; some the endeavoured to mitigate; and:
others she attempted to evade. In the mean time, file transmitted
copies of them to the pope, to the kings of France and Spain, and'
to the duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without some timely
and vigorous interposition in her behalf, she would be obliged to
accept of these hard conditions, and to purchase liberty at any
price. But the pope was a distant and feeble ally, 'and by his great
efforts at this time againit the Turks, his treasury was entirely
exhausted. Charles had already begun to meditate that conspiracy
against the hugonots, which marks his reign with such infamy;.
and it required much leisure, and perfea tranquillity, to bring.
that execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed in fitting
out that fleet which acquired so much renown to the Christian
arms, by the victory over the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in
Spain threatened an infurredion; and his fubjedts in the Nether-
lands, provoked by much oppression and many indignities, were
breaking out into open rebellion. All of them, for these different
reasons, advised Mary, without depending on their aid, to con-
clude the treaty on the best terms she could procure m.

Elizabeth's MARY accordingly consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,.
artifites in
the condua and discovered a facility of disposition, which promised fiill further

conceflions. But no concession she could have made, would have

" Anders. vol. iii. xi9,. 12o.

satisfied
10

faitisllcd .lizanbeth, vwho, il spite of her repeated prof flions of B o0 1K

V1.
tincerity to foreign ainml.::fhdors, and nootw ithlandling the folemnlity .

itlh which e carried o il the treaty, had no other objct in t, t '"

than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time ". After having so
long treated a queen, who fled to her for refuge, in lb unge-
nerous a manner, file could not now difiniis her with safety.
Under all the difadvantiages of a rigorous confinement, M.Iary had
Iound means to excite commotions in Fngland, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate eifrcs of her just resentment
might be expeaced, if ile were set at liberty, and recovered her
former power? What engagements could bind her, not to re-
venge the wrongs which fle had suffered, nor to take advantage
of the favourable conjunctures that might present themselves?
kWas it possible for her to give such security for her behaviour, in
times to come, as might remove all filfpicions and fears ? And
was there not good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could
ever obliterate tlie memory of past injuries ? It was thus Eliza-
beth reasoned; though file continued to aa as if her views had
been entirely different. She appointed seven of her privy coun-
fellors to be coimmifioners for fettling the articles of the treaty;
and, as Mary had already named the bishops of Ross and Gal-
loway, and lord Levingfton, for her ambassadors, file required the
regent to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the king.
The earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot of Dunfermling, and fir James 1571.
Macgill, were the persons chosen by the regent. They prepared
for their journey as slowly as Elizabeth herself could have wished.
At length they arrived at London, and met the commissioners of
the two queens. Mary's ambassadors discovered the strongest in- Feb. 19.
clination to comply with every thing that would remove the ob-

Digges, Compl. Amb. 78.

C 2 flacles

B 0 0 K ifacles which stood in the way of their mistress's liberty. But

VI.
*.---' when Morton and his aflociates were called upon to vindicate their

'57- . conduCt, and to explain the sentiments of their party, they began,

in justification of their treatment of the queen, to advance such
maxims concerning the limited powers of princes, and the natural
tight of fubjeds to refill and to control them, as were extremely
shocking to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative, as has
been formerly observed, were very exalted. With regard to the
authority which the king now possessed, they declared that they
neither had, nor could possibly receive illtruCtions, to content to'
any treaty that tended to subvert, or even to impair it in the least
degree 0. Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, thair
such a reply from the commificoners of the king of Scots to the
queen of England. Hiss party depended absolutely on her pro-
tedion, her hand had feated him on the throne, and to her power
he owed the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease fle
could have brought them to hold very different language ; and&
whatever conditions she might have thought fit to prescribe, they
would have had io other choice but to fubinit. This declaration,

It proves however, she affeced to confider as an iifuperable difficulty; and
fruitless.

finding that there was no reason to dread any danger from the
French king, who had not difeovered that eagerness in support of
Mary, which was extpeaed; the reply made by Morton furnished
March 24. her with- a pretence for putting a flop to the negotiation, until the

regent fliould fend ambassadors with more ample powers. Thus,
after being amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty, the
unhappy queen of Scots remained under ftriCer custody than ever,
and without any profpet of escaping from it; while those sub-
jeats who Rtill adhered to her were exposed, without ally or pro-

Cald. ii. 234. Digges, 51. Haynes, 523, 524.

teaor,
X2

te&or, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in this nego- B O I K
tiation rendered still more insolent . -

1571.
ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been Dunbarton

caltle fur-

observed with little cxaCtnefs on either fide, captain Crawford of priedby the
Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a service regen,.
of great importance to the regent, by surprising the castle of
Dunbarton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom,
of which the queen had kept possession ever since the commence-
ment of the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and
al!loft inaccefflble rock, which riles in the middle of a plain, ren-
dered it cxtremely firong, and, in the opinion of that age, imn-
pregnable; as it commanded the river Clyde it was of great con-
fcqi:cnce, and was deemed the most proper place in the kingdom
for landing any foreign troops that might come to 1Mary's aid.
T'he flrength of the place rendered lord Fleming, the governor,
more fccure than he ought to have been, confidering its import-
ance. A foldicr vwio had served in the garrison, and had been
difguflcd by some ill usage, proposed the scheme to the regent,
endeavoured to demonfirate that it was praticable, and offered
himself to go the foremost man on the enterprise. It was thought
prudent to riflk any danger for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and
whatever else might be necessary, were prepared with the utmost
secrecy and dispatch. All the avenues to the castle were seized,
that no intelligence of the design might reach the governor. To-
wards evening Crawford marched from Glasgow with a small but
determined band. By midnight they arrived at the bottom of the
rock. The moon was set, and the fley, which hitherto had been
extremely clear, was covered with a thick fog. It was where the

P And. iii. 91, &c.

rock

----- in that place there were few centincls, and they hoped to find
'S7' them lealt alert. The firit ladder was scarcely fixed, when the

weight and eagcrnefs of those who mounted, brought it to the
ground. None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and none
of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their guide and Crawford
scrambled up the rock, and faflened the ladder to the roots of a
tree which grew in a cleft. This place they all reached with the
utmost difficulty, but were still at a great distance from the foot
of the wall. Their ladder was made fait a second time; but in
the middle of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty.
One of their companions was seized with some sudden fit, and
clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All were at a
stand. It was impossible to pass him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occafiona discovery. But Crawford's pre-
fence of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fait to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit
was over: and turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted
with cafe over his belly. Day now began to break, and there till
remained a high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many great
difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A sentry observed the
first man who appeared on the parapet, and had just time to
give the alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers
and soldiers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more
solicitous about their own safety, than capable of making resist-
ance. The assailants ruflled forwards, with repeated ihouts and
with the utmost fury; took pofleffion of the magazine; seized the
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. Lord Fleming
got into affmall boat, and fled all alone into Argylefhire. Craw-
ford, in reward of his valour and good conduc, remained mailer

8 of

T H F-H 1 S 0 R
14

of the castle; and as he did not lose a single man in the enterprise,
he enjoyed his success with unmixed pleasure. Lady Fleming,
Verac the French envoy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. An-
drew's, were the prisoners of greatest diftination q.

VERrAC'S charater proteEted him from the usage which he

merited by his aaivity in stirring up enemies against the king.
The regent treated the lady with great politeness and humanity.
But a very different fate awaited the archbishop; he was carried
under a strong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been
attainted by aa of parliament, he was, without any formal trial,
condemned to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was
taken, the sentence was executed. An attempt was made to con-
vict him of being accefinry to the murdcr both of the king and
regent, but these accusations were supported by no proof. Our
hiltorians observe, that lie was the first bilhop in Scotland who
died by the hands of the executioner. The high offices he had
enjoyed, both in church and state, ought to have exempted him
from a punishment inflieted only on the lowest criminals. But his
zeal for the queen, his abilities, and his profession, rendered him
odious and formidable to the king's adherents. Lennox hated
him as the person by whose counsels the reputation and power of
the house of Hamilton were supported. Party rage and personal
enmity dictated that indecent sentence, for which some colour was
fought, by imputing to him such odious crimes r.

IS
BOOK

VI.

1571.

Archbishop
ofSc. An-
drew's put to
death byhim.

THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment of the arch- Kirkaldy de.
bishop, perplexed no less than they enraged the queea's party; fends the

Edin burgh in
the queen's
1 Buch. 394. ' Spotfw. 252. name s

and

B 0
L K and hoffilities were renewed with all the fierceness wich difap-

VI.
~-----.. pointment and indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the

.157 x.

truce, had taken care to increase the numriber of his garriion, and to
provide every thing neceflary for his defence, iflued a proclamation
declaring Lennox's authority to be unlawful and usurped ; com-
manded all who favoured his cause to leave the town within fix
hours; seized the arms belonging to the citizens; planted a battery
on the steeple of St. Giles, repaired the walls, and fortified the
gates of the city; and, though the affcdtions of the inhabitants
leaned a different way, held out the metropolis against the regent.
The duke, I-Iuntly, Home, Herries, and other chiefs of that
faction, repaired to Edinburgh with their followers; and having
received a small film of money and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls. On the other
fide, Morton seized Leith and fortified it; and the regent joined
him with a confidcrable body of men. While the armies lay so
near each other, daily fkirmilhes happened, and with various fuc-
cess. The queen's party was not strong enough to take the field
against the regent, nor was his superiority so great as to undertake
the siege of the castle or of the town .

Both prties SOMEI time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,
hold parlia-
ments. the regent had fimmoned a parliament to meet in that place. In
A ay '14 order to prevent any objecfion against the lawfulness of the meet-

ing, the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as possible;
and aflembled in a houtc at the head of the Canongate, which,
though wvithout the walls, lies within the liberties of the city.
Kirkaldy exerted himself to the utmofit to interrupt their meeting;

Cald. ii. 233, &c. ' Crawf. Mem. 17,.

but
16

but they were so strongly guarded, that all efforts were vain. They
passed an at attainting Maitland and a few others, and then ad-
journed to the 28th of August'.

TI-E other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun-

tenanced by the fame flhew of legal authority, held a meeting of
parliament soon after. There was produced in this afTcmbly a
declaration by the queen, of the invalidity of that deed whereby
the had resigned the crown, and conrented to the coronation of
her son. Conformable to this declaration, an act was passed, pro-
nouncing the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null
in itself, and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fulb-
jets to acknowledge the queen alone to be their lawful sovereign,
and to support those who acted in her name. The present efta-
blifmment of the protestant religion was confirmed by another
statute; and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was
appointed on the 26th of August ".

MEANWHILE all the miseries of civil war desolated the king-

dom. Fellow-citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and
ranged themselves under the standards of the contending facions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's
men and 9,ieen's men were names of diftindion. Political hatred
dissolved all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good-will
and confidence which hold mankind together in society. Reli-
gious zeal mingled itself with these civil diftin&ions, and contri-
buted not a little to heighten and to inflame them.

' Crawf. Mem. 177.

u Id. ibid.
VOL. II.

17

BOOK
B 0 0 IK

Vt.

1571.

Miserable
condition of
the kingdom.
D

Tl E

B o o K TIE faCions which divided the kingdom were, in appearances

vI.
.- ' only two. But in both these there were persons with views and
1571.

State of sac- principles so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tions. tinguifhed. With some, considerations of religion were predo-

minant, and they either adhered to the queen, because they hoped
by her means to re-establish popery, or they defended the king's
authority, as the best support of the protestant faith. Among
these the opposition was violent and irreconcilable. Others were
influenced by political motives only, or allured by views of interest;
the regent aimed at uniting there, and did not despair of gaining
by gentle arts many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the
king's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame
design of a coalition, but on such terms that the queen might be
restored to some share in the government, and the kingdom shake
off its dependence upon England. Morton, the ableit, the most
ambitious, and the mofl powerful man of the king's party, held
a particular course; and moving only as he was prompted by the
court of England, thwarted every measure that tended towards a
reconcilement of the factions; and as he served Elizabeth with
much fidelity, he derived both power and credit from her avowed
protection.

THE time appointed by both parties for the meeting of their

parliaments now approached. Only three peers and two bishops
appeared in that which was held in the queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But, contemptible as their numbers were, they passed an
at for attainting upwards of two hundred of the adverse faction.
The meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid. The regent
had prevailed on the earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and lord
Boyd, to acknowledge the king's authority. The three earls were

among

among the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom, and had B 0 0 I

VI.
hitherto been zealous in the queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been '-----

1571.

one of Mary's commissioners at York and Weftninfter, and since
that time had been admitted into all her most secret councils. But,
during that turbulent period, the conduct of individuals, as well
as the principles of factions, varied so often, that the sense of ho-
nour, a chief preservative of .confitence in character, was entirely
loft; and, without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned
one party, and adopted all the violent passions of the other. The
defection, however, of so many persons of distinCtion not only
weakened the queen's party, but added reputation to her ad-
verfaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that at The king's

Stirling began with framing aCts against the opposite faction. But ed in Stir-
in the midst of all the security, which confidence in their own ling.
numbers or distance from danger could inspire, they were
awakened, early on the morning of September the third, by the Sept. 3.
shouts of the enemy in the heart of the town. in a moment the
houses of every person of diftin'tion were surrounded, and be-
fore they knew what to think of so strange an event, the regent,
the earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Mont-
rose, Buchan, the lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made
prisoners, and mounted behind troopers, who were ready to carry
them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en-
terprife; and if he had not been induced by the ill-timed solicitude
of his friends about his safety, not to hazard his own person in
conducting it, that day might have terminated the contest be-
tween the two factions, and have restored peace to his country.

D 2 By

EB 0or 1 By his direaion four hundred men, under the command of Huntlv,
* --- --- lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of Buccleugh, set out from E.Iin-

/5 burgh, and, the better to conceal their design, marched tovw-ards

the fbuth. But they soon wheeled to the right, and horles having
bccn provided for the infantry, rode straight to Stirling. By four
in the morning they arrived there; not one sentry was poRled
on the walls, not a single man was awake about the place. They
met with no refiflance from any person whom they attempted to
seize, except Morton. He defending his houife with olbfPinate
valour, they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not fur-
render till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this,
fronc time was consumcd; and the private men, unaccuPiomed to
regular discipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses
and flops of the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town
reached the castle. The earl of Mar sallied out with thirty fol-
diers; fired briskly upon the enemy, of whom almost none but
the officers. kept together in a body. The townsmen took arms
to afflt their governor; a sudden panic struck the assailants; some
fled, some surrendered themselves to their own prisoners; and had
not the borderers, who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by
carrying off all the horses within the place, not a man would
have escaped. If the regent had not unfortunately been killed,
the loss on the king's fide would have been as inconsiderable as

The regent the alarm was great. Think on the archbi/hop of St. Andrew's,
killed.

ill. was the word among the queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a

sacrifice to his memory. The officer to whom he surrendered,
endeavouring to protect him, loft his own life in his defence. He
was slain, according to the general opinion, by command of lord
Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concerting this plan
with great secrecy and prudence; but Morton's fortunate obfti-

nacy,

nacv, and the want of discipline among his own troops, deprived B o o0

VI.

him of success, the only thing wanting to render this equal to the --.--
mnofl applaudedl military enterprises of the kind x. 15

As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded Mar chofcn

regent,

without delay to the eledion of a regent. Argyll, Morton, and Sept. 6.
Mar, were candidates for the.office. Mar was chosen by a ma-
jority of voices. Amidst all the fierce diflenfions which had pre-
vailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself by his
moderation, his humanity, and his disinterestedness. As his power
was far inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Mor-
ton's, he was, for theef reasons, less formidable to the other nobles.
His merit too, in having so lately rescued the leaders of the party
from imminent defiru:ion, contributed not a little to his pre-
ferm ent.

WI-ILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranf- Proceedings

adions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and fill more agaigand
fatal to her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met Mary.
in April, passed an at, by which it was declared to be high treaobn
to claim any right to the crown during the life of the queen; to
affirm that the title of any other person was better than hers, or
to maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle and to
limit the order of succession. This remarkable statute was intended
not only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the
restless and intriguing spirit of the Scottish queen and her ad-
herents Y.

* Melv. 226. Crawf. Mem. 204. Y Camb. 436.

Ar

21

BOOK

VI.

1571.

MArriage ne-
gotiated be..
tween Eliza-
beth and the
duke of An-
jou.

Digges, 144. 148. Camb. 434.

dark

AT this time a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and the

duke of Anjou, the French king's brother, was well advanced.
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave out,
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of taking place.
Neither of them, however, wished it success; and they encouraged
it for no other end, but because it served to cover or to promote
their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of Me-
dicis was bent towards the accomplishment of her detestable pro-
jec for the deftrution of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carrying
on a negotiation for the marriage of her son with a princess who
was justly esteemed the protefCrefs of that party, by yielding some
things in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference
with regard to others, she hoped to amuse all the protestants in
Europe, and to lull asleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots
themselves. Elizabeth flattered herself with reaping advantages of
another kind. During the dependence of the negotiation, the
French could not with decency give any open aiftance to the
Scottish queen; if they conceived any hopes of success in the
treaty of marriage, they would of course interest themselves but
coldly in her concerns: Mary herself must be dejected at losing
an ally, whom she had hitherto reckoned her most powerful pro-
tector; and by interrupting her correspondence with France, one
source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which disturbed the
kingdom would be ftopt. Both queens succeeded in their schemes.
Catherine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and blinded the Hu-
gonots. The French discovered the utmost indifference about the
interest of the Scottish queen; and Mary, confidering that court
as already united with her rival, turned for protection with more
eagernef; than ever towards the king of Spain Z. Philip, whose
12

dark and thoughtful mind delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had B 0 0 K

VI.

held a secret correspondence with Mary for some time, by means -
of the bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herself and her ad- Norfolk's
herents in Scotland with finall fumns of money. Ridolphi, a Fl.- favourac in
rentine gentleman, who resided at London under the character of Mary;
a banker, and who acted privately as an agent for the pope, was
the person whom the bishop intrusted with this negotiation. Mary
thought it necessary likewise to communicate the secret to the
duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty,
upon his solemn promise to have no further intercourse with the
queen of Scots. This promise, however, he regarded so little,
that he continued to keep a constant correspondence with the
captive queen; while she laboured to nourish his ambitious hopes,
and to strengthen his amorous attachment by letters written in the
fondest caressing strain. Some of there he must have received at
the very time when he made that solemn promise of holding no
farther intercourse with her, in consequence of which Elizabeth
restored him to liberty. Mary, still confidering him as her future
hulband, took no ftep in any matter of moment without his ad-
vice. She early communicated to him her negotiations with Ri-
dolphi; and in a long letter, which she wrote to him in cyphers %
after complaining of the baseness with which the French court had
abandoned her interest, she declared her intention of imploring
the assistance of the Spaniflh monarch, which was now her only
resource; and recommended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a per-
son capable both of explaining and advancing the scheme. The
duke commanded Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then
to burn this letter; but whether he had been already gained by
the court, or resolved at that time to betray his master, he dif-

Haynes, 597, 598. Hardw. State Papers, i. 190, &c. Digges Compleat
Ambaf. 147.

obeyed:

23

24
BOOK

VI.
L--------i

1571.

discovered by
Elizabeth.
Augull.

obeyed the latter part of the order, and hid the letter, together
with other treasonable papers, under the duke's own bed.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of

those arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are
the usual incentives to rebellion. The pope, he told him, had a
great fum in readiness to bellow in so good a cause. The duke
of Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand men not far from
London. The catholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of
the nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half
the nation had turned their eyes towards him, and called on him
to revenge the unmerited injuries which he himself had suffered;
and to rescue an unfortunate queen, who offered him her hand
and her crown, as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved
of the design, and though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of
credit, allowed him to use his name in negotiating with the pope
and Alva b. The bishop of Ross, who, from the violence of his
temper, and impatience to procure relief ior his miflrefs, was apt
to run into rash and desperate designs, advised the duke to aflemble
secretly a few of his followers, and at once to seize Elizabeth's person.
But this the duke rejected as a scheme equally wild and hazardous.
Meanwhile, the English court had received rome imperfect inform-
ation of the plot, by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and
an accident happened, which brought to light all the circum-
stances of it. The duke had employed Hickford to transmit to
lord Herries some money, which was to be distributed among
Mary's friends in Scotland. A person not in the secret was in-
trusted with conveying it to the borders, and he, fufpeting it
from the weight to be gold, whereas he had been told that it was
silver, carried it direely to the privy council. The duke, his
domestics, and all who were privy, or could be fufpeaed of being

b Anders. iii. 161.

2 privy,

25

privy, to the design, were taken into custody. Never did the accom- B o o K
plices in a conspiracy discover less firmness, or servants betray an --
indulgent master with greater bafenels. Every one confessed the scet.'
whole of what lie knew. Hickford gave diretions how to find
the papers which he had hidden. The duke himself, relying at first
,on the fidelity of his associates, and believing all dangerous papers
to have been destroyed, confidently asserted his own innocence;
:but when their depositions and the papers thernfelves were pro-
duced, astonished at their treachery, he acknowledged his guilt,
and implored the queen's mercy. His offence was too heinous, and
too often repeated, to obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought it
aleceffary to deter her fubjets, by his puniflhment, from holding
correspondence with the queen of Scots, or her emissarics. Being
tried by his peers, he was found guilty of high treason, and, after
several delays, suffered death for the crime c.

THE diicovery of this conspiracy produced many effecs, ex-

tremely detrimental to Mary's interest. The bishop of Ross, who
appeared, by the confession of all concerned, to be the prime mover
in every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers
searched, himfelfcommitted to the Tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened withcapital punishment, and, after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he ihould leave the
kingdom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally emi-
·nent for his zeal and his- abilities, but was denied from that time
the privilege of having an ambassador at the English court. The
'Spanish ambassador, whom the power and dignity of the prince he
represented exempted from such insults as Ross had suffered, was
commanded to leave England '. As there was now the clearelf

Anders. iii. 149. State Trials, 185. d Digges, 163.
VOL. I.L E evidence

B OV K evidence that Mary, from resentment of the wrongs fle had

VI.

----.-- fuiffered, and impatience of the captivity in which she was held,
3 57 · would not scruple to engage in the most hostile and desperate enter-

prises against the eitablifhed government and religion, she began
to be regarded as a public enemy, and was kept under a ftriler
guard than formerly, the number of her domeflics abridged, and
no person permitted to fee her, but in presence of her keepers .

Elizabeth AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm which was
declares
openly gathering on the continent against her kingdom, began to with
againit the
queen's that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritated by
party. Mary's late attempt againit her government, Ihe determined to

ad, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the king's party.
This resolution she intimated to the leaders of both facions.
0o. 23. Mary, ihe told them, had held such a criminal correspondence

with her avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous con-
fpiracics both against her crown and her life, that she would hence-
forth confider her as unworthy of protetion, and would never
consent to restore her to liberty, far less to replace her on her
throne. She exhorted them, therefore, to unite in acknowledg-
ing the king's authority.. She promised to procure by her medi-
ation equitable terms for those who had hitherto opposed it.
But if they still continued refractory, ihe threatened to employ
her utmost power to compel them to submit f. Though this de-
claration did not produce an immediate effeR; though hostilities
continued in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh; though Huntly's
brother, fir Adam Gordon, by his bravery and good conduct,
had routed the king's adherents in the North in many encounters;
yet fuclb an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's sentiments contributed

$ Strype, Ann. ii. 50. f See Append. No. IV.

not

not a little to animate one party, and to depress the spirit and hopes n 10 K

Vi.
of the other. .

1572.
As Morton, who commanded the regent's forces, lay at Leith, Iloltilitics

carried on be-

and Kirkaldy flill held out the town and caftce of Edinburgh, twcenthem.
scarce a day passed without a fkirmill ; and while both avoided
any decisive action, they hafired each other by attacking finall
parties, beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. lTh fe
operations, though little memorable in thcmlflves, kept the pas-
sions of both fations in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at lafi, to a degree of fury, which rendered
them regardless not only of the laws of war, but of the principles
of humanity. Nor was it in the field alone, and during the heat
of combat, that this implacable rage appeared ; both parties hanged
the prisoners they took, of whatever rank or quality, without
mercy, and without trial. Great numbers suffered in this flock-
ing manner; the unhappy victims were led, by fifties at a time,
to execution; and it was not till both fides had finarted severely,
that they discontinued this barbarous praclice, so reproachful to
the character of the nation ". Meanwhile, those in the town and
castle, though they had received a supply of money from the
duke of Alva ', began to fiffcr for want of provisions. As Mor-
ton had destroyed all the mills in the neighbQurhood of the city,
and had planted finall garrisons in all the houses of strength around
it, scarcity daily increased. At last all the miseries of famine
were felt, and they must have been soon reduced to such extre-
mities, as would have forced them to capitulate, if the Englilh
and French ambassadors had not procured a suspension of hostilities
between the two parties .

c Cald. ii. 289. 294. Strype, ii. 76. Craw.f. Mem. zi8. 220.
Cald. ii. 345. k Ibid. 346.

E 2 THOUGhI

27

B Vi0 0; TIoucIIi the negotiation for a marriage between Elizabeth and

VI.

I--.--J the'duke of Anjou had been fruitless, both Charles and the were
Lenutl be- dcfirous, of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns.
lnnd aLd HIe conlidercd such a treaty, nct only as the best device for blind-
Francc. ing the protefiants, against whom the conspiracy was now almost

ripe for execution ; but as a good precaution, likewise, againfl the
dangerous confequcnces to which that atrocious measure might
expose him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a
Iingle ally, now law her kingdom so threatened with intestine
commotions, or expoled to invasions from abroad, that she was
extremely solicitous to secure the assistance of so powerful a neigh-
bour. The difficulties arising from the situation of the Scottish,
queen were the chief occasions of any delay. Charles demanded
some terms of advantage for Mary and her party. Elizabeth re-
fuIed to liften to any proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy
overcame the faint efforts of the French monarch. Mary's name
was not so much as mentioned in the treaty; and with regard to
Scotti(h affairs, a short article was inserted, in general and ambi-
April 11. guous terms, to this purpose, " That the parties contracting shall.

make no innovations in Scotland; nor susser any stranger to enter,
and to foment the faaions there ; but it fiall be lawful for the queen
of England to chastise, by force of arms, those Scots who shall con-
tinue to harbour the Englifl rebels now in Scotland '." In con-
seq,uence of this treaty, France and England affected to a&t in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Le Croc and fir William
Drury appeared there, in name of their refpe&ive sovereigns.
By their mediation, a truce for two months was agreed upon,.
and during that time conferences were to be held between
the leaaers of the opposite faCtions, in order to accommo-
date their differences and restore peace to the kingdom. This

' Digges, Ilo. 19i. Camd. 444;

truce
9

truce afforded a seasonable interval of tranquillity to the queen's B o° K
adherents in the South: but in the North it proved fatal to her -----
intcreli. Sir Adam Gordon:had still maintained his reputation and
superiority tliere. Several parties, under different officers, were
tent against him. Some of them he attacked in the field; agailfl
others he employed firatagem; and as his courage and conduct
were equal, none of his.enterprifes failed of fucccls. lie made
war too with the humanity which became to gallant a man, anit
gained ground by that, no less than by the terror of his arins.
If he had not been obliged by the truce to fulijcenLd his operations,
he would in all probability have brougllt thatt pare of the kinig-
dbm to fulbmit entirely to the queen's authority '.

NOTWITHSTANDING- Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's lrrcecding.-

'

'n * 1 -

1 l- l t ~in England

interest was on the decline,. not' only in her own kingdom, but againltMary.
among, the English. Nothing could be more offensive to that
nation, jealous of foreigners, and terrified, at the profpec of the
Spanish yoke, than her negotiations with the duke of Alva. The
parliament,, which met in May, proceeded against her as the most
dangerous enemy of the kingdom; and after a Tolemn conference
between the lords, and commons, both houses agreed in bringing
in a bill to declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive her
of all right of fuccefilon to the crown. This great. cats, as it
was then called, occupied them during the whole feiflon, and was
carried on with much unanimity. Elizabeth,. though she ap-
plauded their zeal, and approved greatly of the courle they were
taking,. was satisfied with shewing Mary what she might expec
from the resentment of the nation; but as she did not yet think it

"' Crawf. Mem.

time.

29

BOOK

VI.

1572.

The French
neglect her
in tre It.

'The mafracre
of Pars.

" D'Ewes, Journ. 206, &c.

° Jebb, ii. 512.

confidence.
30

time to proceed to the most violent extremity against her, ihe pro-
rogued the parliament'.

TIESE severe proceedings of the English parliament were not

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect of her
allies the French. The duke of Montmorency, indeed, who
came over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a liew of
interefling himself in favour of the Scottish queen; but, infiead
of soliciting for her liberty, or her restoration to her throne, all
that he demanded was a flight mitigation of the rigour of her
imprifonlmenit. Even this finall request, he urged with so little
warmth or importunity, that no regard was paid to it .

TIIE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfaaion,

and flie expected from it a great increase of security. She now
turned her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animo-
fities of the two factions were still so high, and so many inter-
iering interests to be adjusted, that a general pacification seemed to
be at a great distance. But while she laboured to bring them to
iome agreement, an event happened which filled a great part of
Europe with aftoniflment and with horror. This was the maf-
sacre of Paris; an attempt, to which there is no parallel in the
history of mankind, either for the long train of craft and diffimu-
lation with which it was contrived, or for the cruelty and bar-
barity with which it was carried into execution. By the moit
solemn promjfes of safety and of favour, the leaders of the pro-
teflants were drawn to court; and though doomed to defiruifon,
they were received with carefles, loaded with honours, and treated,
for seven months, with every possible mark of familiarity and of

confidence. In the midst of their security, the warrant for their
deftrufdion was issued by their sovereign, on whose word they
had relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their fellow-
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten
thousand protestants, without diflindion of age or sex, or con-
dition, werve murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous
orders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was at that time applauded in Spain;
and at Rome solemn thanksgivings were offered to God for its
fucceis. But among the protestants, it excited incredible horror;
a striking pi&ure of which is drawn by the French ambafnador at
the court of England, in his account of his first audience after the
inaffacre. " A gloomy sorrow," fays he, " fat on every face;
silence, as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
of the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on
each fide, all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them,
not one beflowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to
mIy salutes P."

BUT horror was not the only paflion with which this event

inspired the proteflants; it filled them with fear. They confidered
it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed, not withoutL
much probability, that all the popifn princes had conspired the
deftrudion of their feet. This opinion was of no finall disservice
to Mary's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were pro-
teflants; and, though they wished her refloration, were not will-
ing, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which they profefled.
They dreaded her attachment to a religion which allowed its vo-

P Carte, iii. 522..

tarics

3I
B 0 0 K

VI.

I

AUgt 5z.~

Dztrimentai
to lary's in.
tere U.

B 0 0 K taries to violate the most solemn engagements, and prompted thetr

VI.
'--'---.' to perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy

7 of the protestants seemed to them the only thing that could uphold

the Reformation against the league which was formed to overturn
it. Nor could the present establishment of religion be long main-
tained in Britain, but by a frin union with Elizabeth, and by the
concurrence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it. as a
common cause q

ENCOURAGED by this general disposition to place confidence

in her, Elizabeth resumed a scheme which fhle had formed during
the' regency of the earl -of Murray, of fending Mary as a pri-
soner into Scotland. But her sentiments and situation were now
very different from what they had been during her negotiation
with Murray. Her animosity against the queen of Scots was
greatly augmented, by recent experience of her inclination, as
well as power, not only to disturb the tranquillity of her reign,
but to wrest from her the crown; the party in Scotland favour-
able to Mary was almost entirely broken; there was no reason to
dread any danger from France, which still continued to court her
fiiendfhip. She aimed, accordingly, at something very different
from that which she had in view three years before. Then she
-discovered a laudable solicitude, not only for the safety of Mary's
life, but for securing to her, treatment suited to her rank. Now
.*he required, as an express condition, that, immediately after
Mary's arrival in Scotland, she ihould be brought to public trial;
and having no doubt that sentence would be passed according to
her deserts, she insisted that, for the good of both kingdoms, it
should ,be executed without delay r. No tranfadion, perhaps, in

9 Digges, 244. 26. ' Murdin, 224.

Elizabeth's
32

I.lizabeth's reign, merits more severe censure. Eager to cut lhort
the days of a rival, the object both of her hatred and dread, and
no less anxious to avoid the blame to which such a deed of vio-
lence might expose her, she laboured, with timid and ungenerous
artifice, to transfer the odium of it from herself to Mary's own
fubjeds. The earl of Mar, happily for the honour of his coun-
try, had more virtue than to liften to such an ignominious pro-
pofal ; and Elizabeth did not venture to renew it.

XV-ILE flie was engaged in pursuing this insidious measure,

the regent was more honourably employed in endeavouring to ne-
gotiate a general peace among his countrymen. As he laboured
for this purpose with the utmost zeal, and the adverse fation
placed entire confidence in his integrity, his endeavours could
hardly have failed of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy
came so near to an agreement with him, that scarce any thing
remained, except the formality of signing the treaty. But Mor-
ton hadl not forgotten the disappointment he met with in his pre-
tensions to the regency; his abilities, his wealth, and the patron-
age of the court of England, gave him greater sway with the
party, than even the regent himself; and he took pleasure in
thwarting every measure pursued by him. He was afraid that, if
Maitland and his associates recovered any flare in the admini-
ftration, his own influence would be considerably diminished; and
the regent, by their means, would regain that ascendant which
belonged to his station. With him concurred all those who were
in possession of the lands which belonged to any of the queen's
party. His' ambition, and their avarice, frustrated the regent's
pious intentions, and retarded a blessing so neceifary to the kin--
.dom, as the establishment of peace s.

' Melv. 233. Crawf. Merm. 237.
VoL. II. F STrrC

3
B 0 0 K.

VI.

The regent
cndeavours to
unite both
parties.
-----

V IL

34
B O O K SUCii a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition which reigned

vI.
----- among his party, made a deep impression on the regent, who
1572.
His death. loved his country, and wished for peace with much ardour. This

inward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees brought on a fettled
melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the
twenty-ninth of Oaober. He was, perhaps, the only person in
the kingdom who could have enjoyed the office of regent without
envy, and have left it without loss of reputation. Notwithitand-
ing their mutual animofities, both facions acknowledged his views
to be honourable, and his integrity to be uncorrupted '.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The queen of

England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithstanding the

Morton cho- fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleced
fen regent.
November. regent; the fourth who, in the space of five years, had held that

dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of January, this

gave him an opportunity of continuing the negotiations with the
opposite party, which had been set on foot by his predecessor.
They produced no effecs, however, till the beginning of the
next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hitherto untouched,
deserve our notice.

THE earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in

Lochlevin ever since his flight into Scotland in the year one thou-
land five hundred and fixty-nine, was given up to lord Hunfdon,
governor of Berwick; and being carried to York, suffered there
the punishment of his rebellion. The king's party were so sensible

t Crawf. Mem. 4.T.

of

of their dependence on Elizabeth's protetion, that it was scarcely
possible for them to refuse putting into her hands a person who
had taken up arms against her; but as a fum of money was paid
on that account, and lhared between Morton and Douglas of
Lochlevin, the former of whom, during his exile in England,
had been much indebted to Northumberland's fiicndflip, the aban-
doning this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to certain de-
ftruaion was universally condemned as a most ungrateful and
mercenary action ".

Tiis year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in tle

government of the church. Soon after the Reformation, the
popish biffhops had been confirmed by law in poffrflion of part of
their benefices; but the spiritual jurifdiaion, which belonged to
their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, though with more
moderate authority. On the death of the archbishop of St. An-
drews, Morton obtained from the crown a grant of the tempo-
ralities of that fee. But as it was thought indecent for a layman
to hold a benefice to which the cure of fouls was annexed, he
procured Douglas, reCtor of the university of St. Andrews, to be
chosen archbiihop; and, allotting him a small pension out of the
revenues of the fee, retained the remainder in his own hands.
The nobles, who saw the advantages they might reap from such a
pratice, supported him in the execution of his plan. It gave
great offence, however, to the clergy, who, instead of perpetu-
ating an order whose name and power was odious to them, wifled
that the revenues which had belonged to it might be employed in
supplying such parishes as were still unprovided with fettled patlors.
But, on the one hand, it would have been raflh in the clergy to

" Crawf. Mieem. 55. 222. Camd. 445.

SI 2 have

BOOK

VI.

*---_

Afftlirs of the
church.

35

B 0 0 Iv have irritated too much noblemen, on whom the very existence of

VI.

--- the protestant church in Scotland depended; and Morton, on the

other, conducted his scheme with such dexterity, and managed
them with so much art, that it was at last agreed, in a convention
composed of the leading men among the clergy, together with a
committee of privy council, " That the name and office of arch-
bishop and bishop should be continued during the king's minority,
and there dignities be conferred upon the best qualified among the
protestant ministers; but that, with regard to their spiritual jurif-
ditions, they flould be subjet to the general assembly of the
church.". The rules to be observed in their elecion; and the
persons who were to supply the place, and enjoy the privileges
which bclonged to the dean and chapter in times of popery, were
likewise particularly specified x. The whole being laid before the
general assembly, after some exceptions to the name of archbij/op,
dean, chapter, &c. and a protestation that it should be confidered
only as a temporary constitution, until one more perfect could be
introduced, it obtained the approbation of that court . Even
Knox, who was prevented from attending the assembly by the ill
state of his health, though he declaimed loudly against the fimo-
niacal pation to which Douglas owed his preferment, and blamed
the nomination of a person worn out with age and infirmities, to
an office which required unimpaired vigour both of body and
mind, seems not to have condemned the proceedings of the con-
vention; and, in a letter to the assembly, approved of rome of
their regulations. with refped to the election of bishops, as worthy
of being carefully observed ". In consequence of the assembly's'
consent to the plan agreed upon in the convention, Douglas was
installed in his office, and at the fame time an archbishop of Glaf-

-x Cald. ii. 305.. Y Id, 354- . See Appendix, No. V.

Gove>
36

gow, and a biflop of Dunkeld, were chosen from among the B 0v K
proteftalt clergy. They were all admitted to the place in parlia-
ment, which belonged to the ecclefafltical order. But, il imi- 17
tation of the example set by Morton, such bargains were made
with them by different noblemen, as gave them pofleffion only of
a very finall part of the revenues belonging to their fees a

SoON after the difmolution of this assembly, Knox, the prime Nov. z-.

Death and

instrument of spreading and establishing the reformed religion in charaacr of
Scotland, ended his life, in the fixty-feventh year of his age.
Zeal, intrepidity, dilintcreftednefs, were virtues which he pof-
sessed in an eminent degree. He was acquainted too with the
learning cultivated among divines in that age; and excelled in
that species of eloquence which is calculated to route and to in-
flame b. His maxims, however, were often too revere, and the

' Spots. 26r.
b A striking description of that species of eloquence for which Knox was

diflinguifhed, is given by one of his contemporaries, Mr. James Melville, mi-
nifter of Anftruther. " But of all the benefites I had that year [157I], was
the coming of that most notible prophet and apofle of our nation, Mr. John
Knox, to St. Andrews, who, by the faction of the queen occupying the cattle and
town of Edinburgh, was compelled to remove therefra with a number of the bes,
and chufed to come to St. Andrews. I heard him teach there the prophecies of
Daniel that summer and the winter following. I had my pen and little buik, and
took away sic things as I could comprehend. In the opening of his text, he was
moderat the space of half an hour; but when he entered to application, he made me
so to gruc [thrill] and tremble, that I could not hald the pen to write.--H-e was
very weak. I saw him every day of his doctrine go hulie [slowly] and fair, with a
furring of marticks about his neck, a fiaffin the one hand, and good godlie Richart
Ballanden holding him up by the oxter [under the arm], from the abbey to the parish
kirk; and he the said Richart and another servant lifted him up to the pulpit, where
he behoved to lean at his first entrie; but e're he was done with his sermon, he was
so aaive and vigorous, that he was like to dizg the pulpit in blads [beat the pulpit to
pieces], and fly out of it." MS. Life of Mr. James Melville, belonging to Mr.
Paton of tbhiCufom-houfe, Edinburgh, p. 14. 21.

impetuosity

37

B °VO K impetuosity of his temper excessive. Rigid and uncomplying
·-----' himself, he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.

Regardless of the diflintions of rank and characer, he uttered
his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to
irritate than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into indecent
and undutiful expressions with refped to the queen's person and
conduc. Those very qualities, however, which now render his
character less amiable, fitted him to be the instrument of Pro-
vidence for advancing the Reformation among a fierce people,
and enabled him to face dangers, and to surmount opposition,
from which a person of a more gentle spirit would have been apt
to shrink back. By an unwearied application to study and to
business, as well as by the frequency and fervour of his public
discourses, he had worn out a constitution naturally robust. During
a lingering illness hie discovered the utmost fortitude; and met
the approaches of death with a magnanimity inseparable from his
character. He was constantly employed in acts of devotion, and
comforted himself with those profpeas of immortality, which
not only preserve good men from desponding, but fill them with
exultation in their last moments. The earl of Morton, who was
present at his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words,
the more honourable for Knox as they came from one whom he
had often censured with peculiar severity: " There lies He, who
never feared the face of man b."

I,73. THOUGHI Morton did not desire peace from such generous

The regent
treats with motives as the former regent, he laboured, however, in good
the queen's earnest, to eftablilh it. The public confusions and calamities, to

which ,he owed his power and importance when he was only

b Spots. 266. Cald. ii. 273.
38

the
4

the second person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that he was raised to be the first. While so many of the
nobles continued in arms againit him, his authority as regent was
partial, feeble, and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of
extinguifling the flame which flhe had kindled and kept lb long
alive in Scotland '. She had discovered the alliance with France,
from which she had expected such advantages, to be no foundation
of fccurity. Though appearances of friendship fill subsisted be-
tween her and that court, and Charles daily renewed his protefta-
tions of inviolable adherence to the treaty, she was convinced, by
a fatal example, how little ihe ought to rely on the promises or
oaths of that perfidious monarch. Her ambassador warned her
that the French held secret corre'pondence with Mary's adherents
in Scotland, and encouraged them in their obstinacy d. The duke
of Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom with less disguise.
She was persuaded that they would embrace the first serene inter-
val, which the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land a body of men in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent their getting any
footing in the island, and to cut off all their hopes of finding any
assistance there by uniting the two parties.

TI-IE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the regent to carry

on his negotiations with them to great advantage. They were now
divided into two factions. At the head of the one were Chatel-
herault and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of
the other. Their high rank, their extensive property, and the
numbers of their followers, rendered the former considerable.
The latter were indebted for their importance to their personal

Digges, 299.

" Id. 296. 312.

abilities,

39
B 0 0 K

VI.

1573.

llis oveitnres
reje.ctd by
Mahitancl and
Kii-kaldy.

B 0 0 K abilities, and to the strength of the castle of Edinburgh, which

vs. .---.---' was in their pofeiflion. The regent had no intention to compre-

573' hend both in the fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the queen's

party, if it remained entire, would be able to thwart and embarrass
his administration, he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a fe-
parate negotiation. He made the first overture to Kirkaldy and
his aflbciates, and endeavoured to renew the negotiation with them,
which, during the life of his predecessor, had been broken off by
his own artifices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system
of government, to be very different from those of the former
regent. Maitland confidered him as a personal and implacable
enemy. They received repeated assurances of protection from
France; and though the siege of Rochelle employed the French
arms at that time, 'the fame hopes, which had so often deceived
the party, fill amiifed them, and they expecded that the obstinacy
of the hugonots would soon be subdued, and that Charles would
then be at liberty to aa with vigour in Scotland. Meanwhile, a
supply of money was sent, and if the castle could be held out till
-Whitfunday, effeaual aid was promised e. Maitland's genius de-
lighted in forming fclhemes that were dangerous; and Kirkaldy
poIfeffed the intrepidity necessary for putting them in execution.
The castle, they knew, was so situated, that it might defy all the
regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate the
treaty with France, by fending forces to his assistance; and if the
French should be able to land any considerable body of men, it
might be poflible to deliver the queen from captivity, or at leat to
balance the influence of France and England in such a manner, as
to rescue Scotland from the dishonourable dependance upon the
latter, under which it had fallen. This splendid but chimerical

Digges, 314.

project
40

project, they preferred to the friendship of Morton. They en- B 0 0 K

V1.

couraged the negotiation, however, because it served to gain time;
they proposed, for the fame purpose, that the whole of the queen's 57'
party should be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy should
retain the command of the catle fix months after the treaty was
signed. His interest prompted the regent to rejeEt the former;
his penetration discovered the danger of complying with the latter;
and all hopes of accommodation vaniihed'.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the

city of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom
he had expelled, was devoted as zealously as ever to the king's
cause. But as the regent had now set on foot a treaty with Cha-
telherault and Huntly, the cessation of arms still continued with
them.

TIIEY were less scrupulous than the other party, and listened Accepted by

Chatelhe-

eagerly to his overtures. The duke was naturally unsteady, and raultand
the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and aversion to Huntly.
acion. The miseries of civil discord had affliced Scotland alinoft
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had gained much ho-
nour; both had suffered great losses; and had exhaufled their
own estates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons
were in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace, which
might terminate this fruitless but deftrutive quarrel.

f Melv. 235, &c.
VOL. II.

G

A GRe'AT

BOOK

VI.
L -----#

L573.,

Articlcsofthe
treaty.
Feb. z3.

Siege of the
caftleofEdin-
burgh.

A GREAT ftep was taken towards this desirable event, by the

treaty concluded at Perth, between the regent on one hand, and
Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of
Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador g. The chief articles in it were
these-; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty ihould de-
clare their approbation of the reformed religion, now established
in the kingdom; that they should submit to the king's govern-
ment, and own Morton's authority as regent; that they should
acknowledge every thing done in opposition to the king, since his
coronation, to be illegal; that on both fides the prisoners who
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the estates which had
been forfeited should be restored to their proper owners; that the
act of attainder passed against the queen's adherents should be re-
pealed, and indemnity granted for all the crimes of which they
had been guilty flnce the fifteenth of June one thousand five
hundred and fixty-feven; and that the treaty should be ratified by
the common consent of both parties in parliament .

KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither

discovered solicitude nor made provision for his safety, did not lose
courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation '. Though all

Scotland

r See Append. No. VI. h Crawf. Mem. 251.
i Melvil, whose brother, fir Robert, was one of those who joined with Kirkaldy

in the defence of the cafile, and who was himself flrongly attached to their party,
aflerts that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offers were rejected by the regent. Melv. 240. But as Elizabeth was,
at that time, extremely desirous of restoring peace in Scotland, and her ambassador
Killegrew, as well as the earl of Rothes, used their utmost endeavours to persuade
Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more credible to impute the con-
tinuancq of hostilities to Kirkaldy's obfiinacy, his difirut of Morton, or his hope of
foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That
42

43

Scotland had now submitted to the king, he still resolved to defend B 00 K
the castle in the queen's name; and to wait the arrival of the pro- ----.-.
mifed succours. The regent was in want of every thing ineceffary 573
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who determined at any
rate to bring the diflenfions in Scotland to a period, before the
French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded
him fulTicient supplies. Sir .William Drury marched into Scotland
with fifteen hundred foot, and a considerable train of artillery.
The regent joined him with all his forces; and trenches were April 2z.
opened, and approaches regularly carried on against the castle.
Kil-kaldy, though discouraged by the loss of a great turn of money,
remitted to him from France, and which fell into the regent's
hands through the treachery of fir James Balfour, the most corrupt
man of that age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
despair. Three-and-thirty days he refifed all the efforts of the
Scotch and English, who pushed on their attacks with courage,
and with emulation. Nor did he demand a parley, till the forti-
fications were battered down, and one of the wells in the castle
dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish. Even then, his
spirit was unfubdued, and he determined rather to fall gloriously
behind the last intrenchment, than to yield to his inveterate
enemies. But his garrison was not animated with the fame heroic
or desperate resolution, and, rising in a mutiny, forced him to
capitulate. He surrendered himself to Drury, who promised, in May 29.
the name of his mistress, that he ihould be favourably treated.
Together with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, lord Home,
Maitland, fir Robert Melvil, a few citizens of Edinburgh, and
about one hundred and sixty soldiers, were made prisoners .

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive testimony of Spotfw.

269, 270. Camd. 448. Johnft. Hilt. 3, 4. Digges, 334. Crawford's ac-
count agrees, in the main, with theirs, Mem. 263.

k Cald. ii. 408. Melv. 240. Crawf. Mem. 265.

G 2 SEVERAL

BOOK

VI.
L-- ---J

1573.

Reviewofthe
charafterof
both parties.
44

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the States, added, by
their gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue,
which has always been the charaderiftic of the Scottish nation.

THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and the

surrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought
to a period. WVhen we review the state of the nation, and com-
pare the strength of the two factions, Mary's partisans among the
nobles appear, manifestly, to have been superior both in numbers
and in power. But these advantages were more than counter-
balanced by others, which their antagonifls enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents which times of afion
form, or call forth, appeared chiefly on the king's fide. Nor
could their enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepidity
of Murray, tempered with wiflome; the profound sagacity of
Morton; the fuiltle genius, and insinuating address, of Maitland;
or the successful valour of Kirkaldy; all of which were, at first,
employed in laying the foundations of the king's authority. On
the one fide, measures were concerted with prudence, and exe-
cuted with vigour; on the other, their resolutions were rash, and
their conduct feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion,
and prompted by indignation against the queen, warmly supported
"the king's caule. The clergy threw the whole weight of their
popularity into the fame scale. By means of there, as well as by
the powerful interposition of England, the king's government was
finally established. Mary loft even that shadow of sovereignty,
which, amidst all her sufferings, she had hitherto retained among
part of her own subjeCts. As she was no longer permitted to have
an ambaflador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity

which

which she had, for some time, enjoyed there, she must henceforth n °0O K
be confidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; -
guarded with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or
forgotten in the other.

KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Drury's custody, and Kirkaldy put

to death.

were treated by him with great humanity, until the queen of
England, whose prisoners they were, should determine their fate.
Morton inllted that they should fiiffer the punishment due to their
rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that, so long as they were
allowed to live, he did not reckon his own person or authority
secure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
promises in her name, gave them up to the regent's disposal. He
first confined them to separate prisons; and soon after, with Eli-
zabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be Auguf3.
hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not ex-
pe to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a
public execution, by a voluntary death, and " ended his days,"
fays Melvil, " after the old Roman fashion'."

WHILE the regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison.
At the fame time her health began to be much impaired by
confinement and want of exercise. At the entreaty of the French
ambassador, lord Shrewsbury, her keeper, was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her imprison-
ment. Cecil, who lately had been created baron of Burleigh, and
lord high treasurer of England, happened to be there at the fame

Melv. 242.

time.

45

BOOK

VI.
1573.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace,

many of the evils which accompany civil war were still felt. The
restraints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little
regarded even by civilized nations, were totally despised by a fierce
people, unaccustomed to a regular administration of justice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and, under the protection of the one or the other faction, crimes
of every kind were committed with impunity. The regent set
himself to redress these, and by his industry and vigour, order
and security were re-established in the kingdom. But he loft the
reputation due to this important service, by the avarice which he

» ~

m Strype, ii. 248. 288.

discovered

time. Though no minister ever entered more warmly into the
views of a sovereign, or gave stronger proofs of his fidelity and
attachment, than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust
of every person who approached the queen of Scots, that her
suspicions, in consequence of this-interview, seem to have extended
even to him ; and, while Maryjuftly reckoned him her most dan-
gerous enemy, he found some difficulty in persuading his own
mistress that he was not partial to that unhappy queen m.

THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppressive admiliftra-
tion routed a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhausted
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens,
who succeeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enter-
prifing genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual
disquietude, occasioned by Alva's negotiations with the Scottish
queen, and his zeal for her interest.

1574.

The regent's
adminiftra-
tion becomes
odious.
46

discovered in performing it; and his own exaaions became more B 0O K
pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities which he re- ---
strained . Spies and informers were every where employed; 574
the remembrance of old offences was revived; imaginary crimes
were invented; petty trefpafles were aggravated; and delinquents
were forced to compound for their lives, by the payment of exor-
bitant fines. At the fame time. the current coin was debated °;
licences were fold for carrying on prohibited branches of com-
merce; unusual taxes were imposed on commodities; and all the
refinements in oppression, from which nations so imperfetly po-
lifhed as the Scots are usually exempted, were put in practice.
None of there were complained of more loudly, or with greater
reason, than his injustice towards the church. The thirds of be-
nefices, out of which the clergy received their subsistence, had
always been slowly and irregularly paid to collectors appointed
by the general assembly; and, during the civil wars, no payment
could be obtained in several parts of the kingdom. Under colour
of redressing this grievance, and upon a promise of assigning every
minister a stipend within his own parish, the regent extorted from
the church the thirds to which they had right by law. But the
clergy, instead of reaping any advantage from this alteration,
found that payments became more irregular and dilatory than
ever. One minister was commonly burdened with the care of

See Append. No. VII.

o The corruption of the coin, during Morton's administration, was very great.

Although the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of bullion, was gra-
dually increased by former princes; the tfandard or fineness suffered tittle alteration,
and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame with what is now used. But Morton
mixed a south p rt of alloy with every pound of silver, and funk, by consequence,
the value of coin in proportion. In the year 1581, all the money coined by him
was called in, and appointed to be recoined. The tfandard was reflored to the fame
purity as formerly. Ruddim. Praef. to Anders. Diplom. p. 7+4

12 - four

47

B o0 K four or five pariflhes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the

VI.
- _c regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund ".
1574.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a

new misfortune to the Scottish queen. Henry III. who succeeded
him, had not the fame attachment to her person; and his jealousy
of the house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the queen mother,
greatly alienated him from her interest.

1575. THE death of the duke of Chatelherault mufft likewise be con-
Jan. 22.

fidered as tome lois to Mary. As the parliament had frequently
declared him next heir to the crown, this entitled him to great
refpea among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than
any other person in the kingdom, to counterbalance the regent's
power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scottish and English marches, a scuffle happened, in which
the English were worsted; a few killed on the spot; and fir James
Forrester, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the regent were too
sensible of the advantage which resulted from the good under-
itanding that subsisted between the two kingdoms, to allow this
flight accident to interrupt it.

Attempts of THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some danger
the clergy
againf the of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons raised
episcopal
order. to the dignity of bishops possessed very small revenues, and a

very moderate degree of power, the clergy, to whom the regent

' Crawf. Mem. 272.' Spots. 273. Cald. ii. 420. 427.

and
48

and all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be B V00 I;
jealous of that order. Knowing that corruptions steal into the ----

157i_

church gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pre-
tences, they were afraid that, from such small beginnings, the
hierarchy might grow in time to be as powerful and oppressive as
ever. The chief author of these Iufpicions was Mr. Andrew
Melvil, a man difinguilhed b.y his uncommon erudition, by the
feveriry of his manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But,
bred tip in the retirement of a college, he was unacquainted with
the arts of life; and being more attentive to the ends which he
pursued, than to the means which he employed for promoting
them, he often defeated laudable designs, by the iinpetuofity and
imprudence with which he carried them on. A queflion was
moved by him in the assembly, " whether the office of lilhop, as
now exercised in the kingdom, were agreeable to the word of
God ?" In the ecclesiastical judicatories, continual complaints were
made of the biflhops for neglccl of duty, many of which their
known remiffiefs too well justified. The bifiop of Dunkeld,
being accused of dilapidating his beneficeswas found guilty by
the assembly. The regent, inflead of checking, connived at tliefe
disputes about ecclesiastical government, as they diverted the zeal
of the clergy from attending to his daily encroachments on the
patrimony of the church q

THE weight of the regent's oppressive adminitration had, 5,/6.

He irritates

hitherto, fallen 'chiefly on those in the lower and middle rank; fomeof the
but h'e began now to take such steps as convinced the nobles, that "nhLes.
their dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effed-s
of his power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of dif-

q Cald. Assemblies, I574, &c. Johnft. Hist. 15.

fenfion
VOL. II.

H

B 0 0 K fenfion among the Scottish nobles, occasioned a difference between

Vl.
v.-- -. the earls of Argyll and Athol. A vaflal of the former had made

-ós/' some depredations on the lands of the latter. Athol took arms to

punish the offender; Argyll, to protect him; and this ignoble
quarrel they were ready to decide in the field, when the regent,
by interposing his authority, obliged them to disband their forces.
Both of them had been guilty of irregularities, which, though
common, were contrary to the letter of the law. Of these the
regent took advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge of
treason. This design was revealed to the two earls by one of
Morton's retainers. The common danger, to which they were
exposed, compelled them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a
close confederacy for their mutual defence. Their juntion ren-
dered them formidable; they despised the summons which the
regent gave them to appear before a court of justice; and he was
obliged to desist from any further prosecution. But the injury he
intended made a deep impression on their minds, and drew upon
him severe vengeance r

NOR was he more successful in an attempt which he made, to,

load lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracy against his life. Though those who were supposed to be
his accomplices, were seized and tortured, no evidence of any
thing criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circum-
stances discovered his innocence, as well as the regent's secret
views, in imputing to him such an odious design'.

They turn THE Scottish nobles, who were almost equal to their monarchs
their eyes to-

ardsthe in power, and treated by them with much diftincion, observed
king.

Craw£. Mem. 285. s Crawf. Mem. 28.7.

these

there arbitrary proceedings of a regent with the utmost indignation.
The people, who, under a form of government extremely simple,
had been little accustomed to the burden of taxes, complaincd
loudly of the regent's rapacity. And all began to turn their eyes
towards the young king, from whom they expeded the rcdrcfs of
all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle and more
equal administration.

JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. !'he queen,

soon after his birth, had committed him to the care of the earl of
Mar, and during the civil wars he liad resided lcurcly in the
castle of Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's brother,
had the chief direction of his education. Under him, the lamous
Buchanan aCted as preceptor, together with three other maftcrs,
the most eminent the nation afforded for skill in those fcicnces
which were deemed neceflary for a prince. As the young king
shewed an uncommon passion for learning, and made great pro-
grefs in it; the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him
all those virtues which the fondness or credulity of fubjeds usually
ascribe to princes during their minority. But as James was still
far from that age at which the law permitted him to assume the
reins of government, the regent did not sufficiently attend to the
sentiments of the people, nor reflect how naturally theCe pre-
judices in his favour might encourage the king to anticipate that
period. He not only negleced to secure the friendship of those
who were about the king's person, and who possessed his ear, but
had even exasperated some of them by personal injuries. Their
resentment concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing
into the king early suspicions of Morton's power and designs.
A king, they told him, had often reason to fear, seldom to love,
a regent. Prompted by ambition, and by intercft, lie would en-

H 2 deavour

B 0 0 K
BOOK

VI.

'577.

di L:ci oil.

i m is rurs;
cious of the
rc-ent's pow.
er.

BOOK

VI.

1577.

A plot formed
againlltherc-
gent.

with

9

deavour to keep the prince in perpetual infancy,- at a distance from
his fubjeas, and unacquainted with business. A small degree of
vigour, however, was sufficient to break the yoke. Subjecs natu-
rally reverence their sovereign, and become impatient of the tem-
porary and delegated jurifdiaion of a regent. Morton had
governed with rigour unknown to the ancient monarchs of Scot-
land. The nation groaned under his oppressions; and would
welcome the first prospect of a milder administration. At present
the king's name was hardly mentioned in Scotland, his friends
were without influence, and his favourites without honour. But
one effort would discover Morton's power to be as feeble as it was
arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himself in possession of
his just authority, and rescue the nation from intolerable tyranny,
If he did not regard his own rights as a king, let him liften, at
least, to the cries of. his people '.

THEiSE suggestions made a deep impreflion on the young king,

who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command.
His approbation of the design, however, was of small consequence,
without the concurrence of the nobles. The earls of Argyll and
Athol, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable resentment against the regent. To them the cabal
in Stirling-caftle communicated the plot which was on foot; and
they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who, since the
death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew, had
the command of that fort, and the custody of the king's person,
admitted them fccretly into the king's presence. They gave him
the fame account of the misery of his fubjets, under the regent's
arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the injustice

9~Mevil 249.

' Melvil, 249.
52

with which themselves had been treated, and besought the king, B O 0 I
as the only means for redrefling the grievances of the nation, --.---
to call a council of all the nobles. James consented, and letters
were issued in his name for that purpose ; but the two earls took
care that they flhould be sent only to such as were known to bear
no good will to Morton ".

TIIE number of there was, however, so conilccrable, that, on

the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles aflcmbled at
Stirling; and so highly were they incensed against 1\orton, that
although, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athol's interview
with the king, he had made a feint as if he would resign the regency, I7 s

March z4..

they advised the king, without regarding this offer, to deprive him
of his office, and to take the adminiltration of government into
his own hands. Lord Glamis the chancellor, and Herries, were
appointed to signify this resolution to Morton, who was at that
time in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. Nothing could lrcefignshi;

c fice, anlld re-

equal the joy with which this unexpected resolution filled the tires.
nation, but the surprise occasioned by the seeming alacrity with
which the regent dcecended from so high a station. IHe neither
wanted sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor inclination
to keep possession of an office, for the expiration of which the
law had fixed so distant a term. But all the sources, whence the
faaion of which he was head, derived their strength, had either
failed, or now supplied his adversaries with the means of humbling
him. The commons, the city of Edinburgh, the clergy, were all
totally alienated from him, by his multiplied opprefilons. Eliza-
beth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend a considerable
body of troops to the assistance of the inhabitants of the Nether-

Spots. 278.

lands,

53

B o° K lands, who were struggling for liberty, had little leisure to attend
'---.- to the affairs of Scotland; and as she had nothing to dread from

France, in whose councils the princes of Lorrain had not at that
time much influence, fie was not displeased, perhaps, at the birth
*of new fations in the kingdom. Even those nobles, who had
long been joined with Morton in faction, or whom he had at-
tached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pit-
cairn the secretary, Murray of Tillibardin comptroller, all deserted
his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling. So
many concurring circumstances convinced Morton of his own
weakness, and determined him to give way to a torrent, which
March 12. was too impetuous to be refilted. He attended the chancellor and

Herries to Edinburgh; was prcfent when the king's acceptance of
the government was proclaimed; and, in the presence of the
people, surrendered to the king all the authority to which he
had any claim in virtue of his office. This ceremony was accom-
panied with such exceflive joy and acclamations of the multitude,
as added, no doubt, to the anguish which an ambitious spirit muff
feel, when compelled to renounce supreme power; and convinced
Morton how entirely he had loft the affedions of his countrymen.
He obtained, however, from the king an act containing the ap-
probation of every thing done by him in the exercise of his office,
and a pardon, in the most ample form that his fear or caution
could devise, of all past offences, crimes, and treasons. The nobles,
who adhered to the king, bound themselves, under a great pe-
nalty, to procure the ratification of this at in the first par-
liament '.

Continues to A COUNCIL of twelve peers was appointed to assist the king
watch the
motions cf in tHe adminifiration of affairs. Morton, deserted by his own
the adverse
party. x Spots. 278. Crawf. Mem. 289. Cald. ii. 522.

party,
54

party, and unable to struggle with the facion which governed
absolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and teemed to en-
joy the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements of
a country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with
all the uneasy refletions which accompany disappointed ambition,
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even
in this retreat, which the people called the Lion's-den, his wealth
and abilities rendered him formidable; and the new counsellors were
so imprudent as to rouse him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to strip him of all the remains of power. They
required him to surrender the calle of Edinburgh, which was
still in his poffeflion. He refused at first to do so, and began to
prepare for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having
taken arms, and repulsed part of the garrison, which was sent out
to guard a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that
important fortress, without refitance. This encouraged his ad-
verfaries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to mul-
tiply their demands upon him, in such a manner, as convinced him
that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate'
hatred.

THEIR power and' popularity, however, began already to de-

cline. The chancellor, the ablest and most moderate man in the
party, having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter
between his followers and those of the earl of Crawford; Athol,
who was appointed his successor in that high office, the earls of
Eglinton, Caithness, and lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at
court, were either avowed papifis, or suspeCted of leaning to the
opinions of that set. In an age when the return of popery was
so much and so justly dreaded, this gave universal alarm. As
Morton had always treated the papists with- rigour, this unfeafon-

abler

S5
BOOK

VI.
1578.

B O K able favour to persons of that religion made all zealous protest-

VI.
.. -.,. ants remember that circumstance in his administration with great

57 praise Y.

Resumes his MORTON, to whom none of these particulars were unknown,
tholit),. thought this the proper junaure for setting to work the inftru-

ments which he had been preparing. Having gained the con-
fidence of the earl of Mar, and of the countess his mother, he
insinuated to them, that Alexander Erskine had formed a plot to
deprive his nephew of the government of Stirling-cafllc, and the
custody of the king's person; and easily induced an ambitious
woman, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent this
supposed injury. The earl repairing suddenly to Stirling, and
April 26. being admitted as ufial into the castle with his attendants, fcized

the gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who
dreaded no danger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison
submitted to him as their governor, and, with little danger and
no effusion of blood, he became master both of the king's person,
and of the fortress Z.

AN event so unexpected occasioned great consternation. Though

Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was univer-
sally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new coun-
fcllors saw it to be neceifary, for their own safety, to change their
measures, and, instead of pursuing him with such implacable rc-
fentment, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adversary,
tfill so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named, on
each fielc, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith; and when they had brought matters near a conclusion,

Y Spots. 283. z Cald. ii. 535.

Morton,

MIorton, who was too ingacious not to improve the advantage B 0 o

VI.
which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him, _ --i.

2 57g.

set out in the night-time for Stilaing, and having gained Murray Ma, .1..
of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted l)y him into the caPle;
and mnanaging matters there wilh Ins uliual dexterity, lie soon had
more entirely the command of tlhe fort, ih l1 thle earl liiinl:l&'.
l-Ie was likewitl ad mitted to a leat in the privy council, and ac-
quired as complete an asiccndant in it '

As the e appointed for the meeting of p:;rlii:mei at ai: Edin-

burgh noVe approached, this gave hin ibme anx'ict,,-, iTe v.as
afraid of condcluling the young king to a cit)y wi-ole inhal.iti,
vwere so much at the devotion of the advcr!b failion. le vI as no
less unwilling to leave James belind at Stirling. In order to avoid
this dilemmna, he ifiled a proclanation in the king':; name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh' to Stirling-catlle. 'his
Athol and his party rcprelsntcd as a Rfcp altogether unconflitu-
tional. The king, said they, is Il\orton's priobncr; the pre-
tended counsellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which l all
the nobles may repair "without fear, and where they may de-
liberate with freedom, is absolutely neccefary for fettling the na-
tion, after difordcrs of such long continuance. But in an assembly,
called contrary to all form, held within the walls of a garrison,
and overawed by armed men, lwhat ifafety could members cxpeC ?
what liberty could prevail in debate ? or what benefit result to the
public ? The parliament met, however, on the day appointed, July 25.
and, notwithstanding the proteflation of the earl of Montrose and
lord Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded to business. The
king's acceptance of the government was confirnmed; the act

o' Cald. ii. 536.
VOL. II. I granted

B ° K granted to Morton, for his security, ratified; some regulations,

VI.
t----- with regard to the numbers and authority of the privy council,

were agreed upon; and a pension for life granted to the counters
of Mar, who had been so instrumental in bringing about the late
revolution h

Argyll and MEANWHILE Argyll, Athol, and their followers, took arms,
Athol take
arms ngainR upon the specious pretence of rescuing the king from captivity,
]im.

and the kingdom from oppression. James himself, impatient of
the servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long
been taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprise; though, at
the fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in public,
but to levy forces againif them, and even to declare, by procla-
mation, that he was perfectly free from any constraint, either upon
Augua ix. his person or his will. Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll

and Athol were at the head of seven thousand men; the earl of
Angus, Morton's nephew, met them with an army five thousand
firong; neither party, however, was eager to engage. Morton
distrusted the fidelity of his own troops. The two earls were
sensible that a single victory, however complete, would not be
decisive; and as they were in no condition to undertake the
siege of Stirling-caftle, where the king was kept, their strength
would soon be exhausted, while Morton's own wealth, and the
patronage of the queen of England, might furnish him with end-

Elizabeth ne- less resources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eliza-
accommo- beth had sent into Scotland to negotiate an accommodation
daton be- between the two factions, a treaty was concluded, in consequence
ihem. of which, Argyll and Athol were admitted into the king's pre-

b Cald. ii. 547. Parl. 5 Jac. 6.

fence;

S9

fence; some of their party were added to the privy council; and B °V°
a convention of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining dif- -----
ferences to an amicable iffie c.

As soon as James assumed the government into his own

hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Eliza-
beth of that event; to offer to- renew the alliance between the
two kingdoms; and to demand poireffion of the eflate which had
lately fallen to him by the death of his grandmother the countess
of Lennox. That lady's second son had left one daughter, Ara-
bella Stewart, who was born in England. And as. the chief ob-
jection against the pretensions of the Scottish line to the crown of
England, was that maxim of Engliflh law, which excludes aliens
from any right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by
granting this demand, would have established a precedent in
James's favour, that might have been deemed decisive, with re-
gard to a point, which it had been her constant care to keep un-
decided. Without suffering this delicate question to be tried, or
allowing any new light to be thrown on that, which fle confidered
as the great mystery of her reign, fle commanded lord Burleigh,
matter of the wards, to fequefler the rents of the estate; and by
this method of proceeding, gave the Scottish king early warning
how neceflary it would be to court her favour, if ever he hoped
for success in claims of greater importance, but equally liable to
be controverted d

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending 1579.

nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement,

c Crawf. Mem. 307. d Camd. 46r.

I 2

having

B 0 0 K having invitcd the leaders of the opposite party to a great cnter-

VI. b
'----- tainment, Athol the chancellor was soon after taken ill, and died

1579.
April 24. within a few days. The symptoms and violence of the diceatli

ga've rife to strong suspicions of his being poisoned; and though
the physicians, iwho opened his body, dilfered in opinion as to the
cause of the dliitemper, the chancellor's relations publicly accuscd
Morton of that odious crime. The advantage which visibly ac-
crued to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and
averse from all his nicafures, was fuificient proof of his guilt to
the people, who are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent
persons to extraordinary causes '.

Morton's il- TIIE ofice of chancellor was bellowed upon Argyll, whom this
credinsg preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Morton's admini-
againet

the

againlft te fration. I he had now recovered all the authority he possescd
family of
Hamilton. during his regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power

and cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained
to be the objels of his jealousy or to obftrut his designs, but
that of Hamilton. The earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had
never recovered the shock which lie received from the ill iuccefs
of his palion for the queen, and had now altogether loft his
reason. Lord John, the fccond brother, was in poflei'ion of the
family estate. Lord Claud was commendator of Paisley; both of
them young men, ambitious and enterprising. Morton dreaded
their influence in the kingdom ; the courtiers hoped to share their
spoils among them; and as all princes naturally view their fuc-
ceffors with jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these pas-
sions into the mind of the young king. A pretence was at hand
to justify the most violent proceedings. The pardon, flipulated

Spotfw. 306.

in
6o

in the treaty of Perth, did not extend to such as were acceTEary B O°° V
to the murder of the regents Murray or Lennox. Lord John ----
and his brother were fuifpe'ed of being the authors of both thee 79
climecs, and had been included in a general asd of attainder on
that account. Without fumnioning them to trial, or examlling a
single witness to prove the charge, this attainder was now thought
fuflicient to fLlbjec them to all. the penalties which they would
have incurred by being formally convicced. The carls of Morton,.
Mar, and Eglinton, together with the lords Ruthven, Boyd, and'
Cathcart, received a commission to seize their persons and eflates,
On a few hours warning a conliderable body of troops was ready,
and marched towards Hamilton in hofiile array. Happiiy the
two brothers made their escape, though with great difliculty. But
their lands were confiscatcd ; the caflles of Hamilton and Dranln
besieged; those who defended them puniflicd. The earl of Arran,
though incapable, fromn his situation, of committing any crime,
was involved, by a ilanmeful albuf of law, in the coimmon ruin'
of his family; and as if he, too, could have been guilty of re-
bellion, he was conlined a close prifbner. Thclfe proceedings, Ito
contrary to the fundamental principles of juflice, were all ratificcd
in the lfbfccqicnt parliament .

AnOUT this time Mvlary fen;, by Naiu her fecrctary, a letter to

her son, together with bome jewels of value, and a vel: em-
broidered w eitl her own hands. But as flhe gavc him only the
titl' of prince of Scotland, the meflenger was difiniflcd, without
being admitted into his prelence g.

TIouciI Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason to
fear any attempt of the popilh princes in Mary's favour, the fill

Crawf.Mem. 311. Spotfw. 306 Crawf. Mem. 314.

continued

6I-

B 0 0 EI
BOOK

VI.

V--.-~_
'579.

Negotiations
foramarriage
between Eli-
zabeth and
the duke of
Alengon.

Two favou-
rites gain an
ascendant
over James.

continued to guard her with the fame anxious care. The acqul-
fition of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of the Ne-
therlands, on the other, fully employed the councils and arms of
Spain. France, torn in pieces by intestine commotions, and
under a weak and capricious prince, despised and distrusted by
his own fubjeas, was in no condition to ditfurb its neigh-
bours. Elizabeth had long amused that court by carrying on
a treaty of marriage with the duke of Alencon, the king's
brother. But whether, at the age of forty-five, the really intend-
ed to marry a prince of twenty? whether the pleasure of being
flattered and courted, made her liften to the addresses osso young a
lover, whom ihe allowed to visit her at two different times, and
treated with the most distinguishing refpet ? or whether confidera-
tions of interest predominated in this as well as in every other
tranfaaion of her teign, are problems in history which we are not
concerned to resolve. During the progress of this negotiation,
which was drawn out to an extraordinary length, Mary could expec
no assistance from the French court, and seems to have held little
correspondence with it; and there was no period in her reign,
wherein Elizabeth enjoyed more perfect security.

MORTON seems at this time to have been equally secure; but

his security was not so well founded. He had weathered out one
florm, had crushed his adversaries, and was again in possession of
the sole direction of affairs. But as the king was now of an age
when the characer and dispositions of the mind begin to unfold
themselves, and to become visible, the finalleft attention to these
might have convinced him, that there was reason to exped new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early discovered
that excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied him
through his whole life. This passion, which naturally arises from

inexpe-

inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his age, far B 00 K
from being culpable; nor could it well be expected that the choice
of the objets, on whom he placed his affeaions, should be made 79
with great skill. The most considerable of them was Efme Stewart,
a native of France, and son of a second brother of the earl of
Lennox. He was distinguished by the title of lord D'Aubigne,
an estate in France, which descended to him from his ancestors,
on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their valour and
services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland about this Sept. 8.
time, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Lennox, to
which he pretended a legal right. He was received at first by
the king with the refpet due to so near a relation. Tile grace-
fulness of his person, the elegance of his dress, and his courtly
behaviour, made a great impression on James, who, even in his
more mature years, was little able to refifi these fiivolous charms ;
and his affection flowed with its usual rapidity and prolusion.
Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he was
created lord Aberbrothock, soon after earl, and then duke of Len-
nox, governor of Dunbarton castle, captain of the guard, first
lord of the bed-chamber, and lord high chamberlain. At the fame
time, and without any of the envy or emulation which is tfual
among candidates for favour, captain James Stewart, the Iecond
son of lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But notwith-
htanding this union, Lennox and captain Stewart were pcrfons of
very opposite charaters. The former was naturally gentle, hu-
mane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of the country,
and milled or mifinformned by those whom he trusted; not un-
worthy to be the companion of the young king in his amulcmejnts,
but utterly disqualified for acing as a minister in directing his
affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices which render
a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious counsellor to

9 his.

63-

1B 0 0 K his prince; ncr did he possess any one virtue to counterbalance

VI.
k------ these vices, unless dexterity in conduting his own designs, and an

enterprising courage, superior to the sense of danger, may pass by
that name. Unrestrained by religion, regardless of decency, and
undismayed by opposition, he aimed at objeats seemingly unat-
tainable; but under a prince void of experience, and blind to all
the defeas of those who had gained his favour, his audacity
was ifccefsful; and honours, wealth, and power were the reward
of his crimes.

'They labour IOTII the favourites concurred in employing their whole address
to undermine
Morton's au- to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obftrucded their full
thority. porefiion of power. As James had been bred up with an aversion

for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the autho-
rity of a tutor, than to act with the obsequiousness of a minifler,
oaober 17. they found it no diflicult matter to accomplish their design. Mor-

ton, who could no longer keep the king flhut up willin the walls
of Stirling-cafile, having called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh,
brought him thither. James made his entry into the capital with
great solemnity; the citizens received him with the loudest accla-
mations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, according to
the Ircde of that age. After a long period of thirty-feven years,
during which Scotland lhad been fuljeCtcd to the delegated
power of regents, or to the feeble government of a woman; after
having suffered all the micfries of civil war, and felt the insolence
of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more
in the hands of a king. Fond even of that shadow of authority,
which a prince of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered themselves,
that union, order, and tranquillity would now be restored to the
kingdom. James opened the parliament with extraordinary pomp,
but nothing remarkable passed in it.

THESE
64

THESE. demonstrations, however, of the people's love and at- B OVI K
tachment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue ----

'580'

their insinuations againif Morton; and as the king now resided in
the palace of Holy-rood-houfe, to which all his fubjetls had ac-
cess, the cabal againfc the earl grew daily flronger, and the intrigue,
which occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavoured Morton en-

deavours to

to put a stop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by representing prevent
him as a formidable enemy to the reformed religion, a secret agent
in favour of popery, and a known cmiflary of the houfc of Guise.
The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind, spread the
alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of complaisance
to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some learned
divines, whom the king appointed to inftrua him in the principles
of the protestant religion, publicly renounced the errors of popery,
in the church of St. Giles, and declared himself a member of the
church of Scotland, by signing her Confession of Faith. This,
though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence some zeal-
ous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the. ac-
cufation .

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was pre-

paring to seize he king's person and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaining his power by any other means,
had driven him to make any overture of that kind to the English
court, or whether it was a calumny invented by his adversaries
to render him odious, cannot now be determined with cer-
tainty. As he declared at his death that fnch a design had never

h Crawf. Mem. 319. Spots. 308.
VOL. IL

K

entered

BOOK

VI.
c -------

1580.
lj$o.

Elizabeth in-
terpofes in his
behalf.

entered into his thoughts, the latter seems to be most probable.
It afforded a pretence, however, for reviving tie office of lord'
chamberlain, which had been for some time disused. That ho-
nour was conferred on Lennox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's
capital enemy, was his deputy; they had under them a band of
gentlemen, who were appointed constantly to attend the king, and
to guard his person '.

MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to

insinuate by such unusual precautions for the king's safety; and
as his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protection had
often flood him in stead in his greatest difficulties. In consequence
of this application, Bowes, her envoy, accused Lennox of prac-
tices against the peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in her
name, that he should inflantly be removed from the privy council.
Such an unprecedented demand was confidered by the counsellors
as an affront to the king, and an encroachment on the independ-
ence of the kingdom. They affeaed to call in question the en-
voy's powers, and upon that pretence refused him farther audi-
ence; and he retiring in disgust, and without taking leave, fir-
Alexander Home was sent to expostulate with Elizabeth on the
fubjeet. After the treatment which her envoy had received, Eliza-
beth thought it below her dignity to admit Home into her pre-
fence. Burleigh, to whom he was commanded to impart his
commission, reproached him with his master's ingratitude towards
a benefaarefs who had placed the crown. on his head, and re-
quired him to advise the king to beware of sacrificing the friend-
ship of so necessary an ally to the giddy humours of a young.
man, without experience, and itrongly fufpeded of principles,

* Crawf.. em. 320.

and
66

and attachments incompatible with the happiness of the Scottish B 0° K
nation.

1580.
TIIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, Mor- Mortonac-

cured of the

ton's fall. The aC of indemnity, which he had obtained when murderofthe
he religned the regency, was worded with such scrupulous exad- late king.
ness, as almost screened him from any legal prosecution. The
murder of the late king was the only crime which could not,
with decency, be inserted in a pardon granted by his son. Here
Morton fiill lay open to the penalties of the law, and captain
Stewart, who shunned no action, however desperate, if it led to
power or to favour, entered the council-chamber while the king
and nobles were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Decem. 3o.
Morton of being accessary, or, according to the language of the
Scottifl law, art and part, in the conspiracy againit the life of
his Majesty's father, and offered, under the usual penalties, to
verify this charge by legal evidence. Morton, who was present,
heard this accusation with firmness; and replied with a disdainful
smile, proceeding either from contempt of the infamous character
of his accuser, or from consciousness of his own innocence, " that
his known zeal in punishing those who were fufpeded of that dc-
testable crime, might well exempt himself from any suspicion of
being accessary to it; nevertheless, he would cheerfully 'submit to
a trial, either in that place or in any other court; and doubted
not but his own innocence, and the malice of his enemies, would
then appear in the clearest light." Stewart, who was flill on his
knees, began to inquire how he would reconcile his bestowing so
many honours on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew to
be one of the murderers, with his pretended zeal against that
crime. Morton was ready to answer. But the king commanded
both to be removed. The earl was confined, first of all to his 1581.

Kor*~~~ 2~ ownJanuary 2.
K 2 own

B 0 0 K own house, and then committed to the cafile of Edinburgh, of

VI.

A-----J which Alexander Erskine was governor; and as if it had not been
x58I.

a sufficient indignity to subjea him to the power of one of his-
enemies, he was soon after carried to Dunbarton, of which Len-
Jan. 18. nox had the command. A warrant was likewise iflued for appre-

hending Archibald Douglas; but he, having received timely in-
telligence of the approaching danger, fled into England L.

THEi earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceedings;

not to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity
between the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed
that a conspiracy was now formed for the destruCtion of all who
bore that name, was ready to take arms in order to rescue his
kinsman. But Morton absolutely sorbad any such attempt, and
declared that he w6uld rather susser ten thousand deaths, than
,bring an imputation upon his. own charaater by seeming to decline
a trial.'.

Elizabeth's
measures in
order to save
him.

ELIZABETH did' not fail to interpose, with warmth, in behalf

of a man who had contributed so much to preserve her influence
over Scotland. The late tranfations in that kingdom had given
her great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired
independent of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambaf-
fadors had met with differed greatly from the refpea with which
the Scots were in use to receive her ministers; and'the attack now
made on Morton fully convinced her'that there was an intentibn
to sow the feeds of discord between the two nations, and to seduce
James into a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with
some popish princess. Full of these apprehensions, she ordered a:

k Crawf. Mem. 323,

Jdhnft. 64. Spotfw. 311.

considerable
68

considerable body of troops to be assembled on the borders of B O : K:
Scotland, and dispatched Randolph as her ambassador into that ----
kingdom. He addressed himself not only to James, and to his
council, but to a convention of estates, met at that time. He
began with enumerating the extraordinary benefits which Eliza-
beth had conferred on the Scottish nation: that without demand-
ing a tingle foot of land for herself, without encroaching on the
liberties of the kingdom in the finalleft article, ihe had, at the
expence of the blood of her fubjeLts and the treasures of her
crown, rescued the Scots from the dominion of France, eftablifheld
among them true religion, and put them in poffeflion of their
ancient rights: that from the beginning of civil dissensions in the
kingdom, she had proteced those who espoused the king's cauft,
and by her assistance alone, the crown had been preserved on his
head, and all the attempts of the adverse faction baffled: that an
union, unknown to their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both-
kingdoms, had subsisted for a long period of years; and though
so many popish princes had combined to disturb this happy Rate
of things, her care, and their constancy, had hitherto defeated all
there efforts :. that she had observed of late an unusual coldness,.
distrust, and. estrangement in the Scottiih council, which she could
impute to none but to Lennox, a subjec: of France, a retainer
to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of popery, and frill
fufpe-ted of favouring that superstition. Not satisfied with having
mounted so fast to an uncommon height of power, which he
exercised with all the rafinefs of youth, and all the ignorance of
a firanger; nor thinking it enough to have deprived the earl of
Morton of .the authority due to his abilities and experience, he
had conspired the ruin of that nobleman, who had often exposed:
his: life in the king's cause,. who. had contributed more than. any

cthen-

.B O O K other subject to place him on the throne, to resist the encroach-
VI. ----- ments of popery, and to preserve the union between the two

81 kingdoms. If any zeal for religion remained among the nobles

in Scotland, if they wished for the continuance of amity with
England, if they valued the privileges of their own order, he
called upon them, in the name of his mistress, to remove such a
pernicious counsellor as Lennox from the presence of the young
king, to rescue Morton out of the hands of his avowed enemy,
and secure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial: and if
force were necessary towards accomplishing a design so salutary to
the king and kingdom, he promised them the protection of his
mistress in the enterprise, and whatever affiifance they Ihould de-
snand either of men or money m.

BUT there extraordinary remonstrances, accompanied with such

an unusual appeal from the king to his subjeCts, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth in favour of Morton, and against
Lennox. She persuaded the prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting James on ac-
count of the valour which many of his fubjeats had displayed in
the service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the restless
enterprises of the popish princes against the protestant religion; to
beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their dangerous
cabals; and, above all things, to distrust the insinuations of those
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the protestants in Europe beheld with
so much pleasure .
" C1ld. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 621. " Cald. iii. 9. See Append. No. VIII.

JAMES'S

'3
70

71
JAMES'S counsellors were too intent upon the deftruaion of B 0 0 K

VI.
their enemy to liften to these remonstrances. The officious inter- ------

158 1'
position of the prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's James deter-

s n_ ,, , * la^-

i * ,-> i i ' n. ni~~~mines to pro-

message, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjeas to rebel against ceed against
their sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on the him.
majesty and independence of a crowned head. A general and'
evasive answer was given to Randolph. James prepared. to assert
his own dignity with spirit. All those fiifpeaed' of favouring
Morton were turned out of office, some of them were required
to surrender themselves prisoners; the men capable of bearing.
arms throughout the kingdom were commanded to be in readiness
to take the field; and troops were levied and posted on the borders.
The English ambassador, finding that neither the public manifesto
which he had delivered to the convention, nor his private cabals
with the nobles, could excite them to arms, fled in the night-time
out of Scotland, where libels against him had been daily pub-
lifhed, and even attempts made upon his life.. In both kingdoms
every thing wore an hostile aspea.. But Elizabeth, though she
wished to have intimidated the Scottifl king by her preparations,
had no inclination to enter into a war with him, and the troops
on the borders,. which had given. such umbrage, were soon dif-
perfed °.

TIIE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's safety,,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deftruQion. Captain Stewart, his accuser, was first appointed
tutor to the earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate
of his unhappy ward, to which. he advanced some frivolous claim,
were conferred upon him. The new-made peer was commandedi

o Crawf. Mem..328. Strype, ii. App. 138..

B O o IK to conduct Morton from Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and by that

VI.
L-"---/-- choice the earl was not only warned what fate he might expet,

5 but had the cruel mortification of feeing his deadly enemy already

loaded with honours, in reward of the malice which he had con-
tributed to his ruin.

He is tried TIlE records of the court of jjilicia7ry at this period are loPi.
and con-
.demned. The account which our historians give of Morton's trial is inac-

curate and unfatisfaatory. The proceedings against him seem to
have been carried on with violence. During the trial, great bodies
of armed men were drawn up in different parts of the city. The
jury was composed of the earl's known enemies; and though he
challenged several of them, his objeCtions were over-ruled. After
a short consultation, his peers found him guilty of concealing, and
of being art and }part in the conspiracy against the life of the late
king. The first part of the verdiC did not surprise him, but he
twice repeated the words art and part with some vehemence, and
added, " God knows it is not so." The doom which the law
decrees against a traitor, was pronounced. The king, however,
remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the sentence, and
appointed that he ihould susser death next day, by being be-
headed P.
His death. DURING that awful interval, Morton pofleffed the utmofi com-

pofure of mind. He fupped cheerfully; slept a part of the night
in his usual manner, and employed the reit of his time in religious
conferences, and in acts of devotion, with some ministers of the
city. The clergyman who attended him, dealt freely with his con-
science, and pressed his crimes home upon him. What he confessed

P Spotfw. 3I4. Johnft. 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. iii. 45. Arnot's
Crimin. Trials, 388.

'with

with regard to the crime for which he suffered, is remarkable, and r 0 0

Or

supplies, in some measure, the imperfection of our records. Ie -~__,
ack-nowledged, that on his return from England after the death I
of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy against the
king, which the queen, as he told him, knew of and approved;
that he solicited him to concur in the execution of it, which at
that time he absolutely declined; that soon after, Bothwell him-
self, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, renewing their folicita-
tions to the fame purpose, he had required a warrant under the
queen's hand, authorising the attempt, and as that had never been
pioduced, he had refused to be any farther concerned in the matter.
" But," continued he, " as I neither consented to this treasonable
" ac, nor affilted in the committing of it, so it was impossible
' for me to reveal or to prevent it. To whom could I make the
c discovery? The queen was the author of the enterprise,
" Darnly was such a changeling, that no secret could be atfely
' communicated to him. Huntly and Bothwell, who bore .the
" chief sway in the kingdom, were themselves the perpetrators of
' the crime." These circumstances, it mufl be confessed, go
some length towards extenuating Morton's guilt; and though his
apology for the favour he had flewn to Archibald Douglas, whom
he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far less satisfaCtory, no
uneasy reflections seem to have disquieted his own mind on that
account q. When his keepers told him that the guards were at-
tending, and all things in readiness, " I praise my God," said he,

I am ready likewise." Arran commanded these guards; and

even in those moments, when the most implacable hatred is apt
to relent, the malice of his enemies could not forbear this insult.
On the feaffold, his behaviour was calm; his countenance and

q Crawf. Mem. App. iii.
VOL. II

L

voice

B o 0 K voice unaltered; and after some time spent in devotion, le sus-

VI.
A- _ fi~fered death with the intrepidity which became the name of

Douglas. His head was placed on the public gaol of Edinburgh;
and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, covered with
a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to the usual
burial-place of criminals. None of his friends durst accompany
it to the grave, or discover their gratitude and refped by any
symptoms of sorrow r.
Odious con- ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious in his

public conduct, soon after drew the attention of his countrymen,
by his infamous marriage with the counters of March. Before
he grew into favour at court, he had been often entertained in her
husband's house, and without regarding the laws of hospitality or
of gratitude, carried An a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
benefactor, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to the
defeription of a cotemporary historian, " intolerable in all the im-
" perfections incident to her sex." Impatient of any restraint upon
their mutual dcfires, they, with equal ardour, wished to avow
their union publicly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the off-
spring of their unlawful passion. The countess petitioned to be
divorced from her hufbarid, for a reason which no modest woman
will ever plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, passed sentence
July 6. without delay. This infamous scene was concluded by a mar-

riage, solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of men
with the utmost horror'.
Oaob. 24. A PARLIAMENT was held this year, at the opening of which

some disputes arose between Arran and the earl now created duke
of Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his

Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw. 314; 3 Spotfw. 315.
74

'wife's ambition, began to effect an equality with the duke, under B 0 I K
whose protection he had hitherto been contented to place himself. --
After various attempts to form a party in the council againit Lennox,
lie found him fixed so firmly in the king's affections, that it was
impossible to fiake him; and rather than lose all interest at court,
from which he was banished, he made the most humble fulbmiflions
to the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This
rupture contributed, however, to render the duke fill more odious
to the nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affetted to
court the clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the proteflant
religion, and laboured to confirm the fulpicions which were enter-
tained of his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a
favourer of popery. As he was filppofed to be acquainted with
the duke's most secret designs, his calumnies were listened to with
greater credit than was due to his charaCter. To this rivalflip
between Lennox and Arran, during the continuance of which
each endeavoured to conciliate the good-will of the clergy, we
mutt ascribe several aCs of this parliament uncommonly favour-
able to the church, particularly one which abolifled the practice
introduced by Morton, of appointing but one minister to several
parishes.

No notice hath been taken for several years of ecclesiastical EcclefiaRical

affairs. While the civil government underwent so many extra- a"ai
ordinary revolutions, the church was not free from convulsions.
Two objects chiefly engrossed the attention of the clergy. The
one was, the forming a system of discipline, or ecclesiastical
polity. After long labour, and many difficulties, this system was
at last brought to some degree of perfetion. The afemnbly so-
lemnly approved of it, and appointed it to be laid before the
privy council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in parlia-

L 2 Imcnt,

B OO K ment. But Morton, during his administration, and those who,

Vi.

after his fall, governed the king, were equally unwilling to fee it
5 carried into execution; and by flarting difficulties, and throw-

ing in objetions, prevented it from receiving a legal fandion.
The other point in view was, the abolition of the episcopal order.
The bishops were so devoted to the king, to whom they owed
their promotion, that the funcdion itself was by some reckoned
dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a feat in parliament,
and distinguished by titles of honour, these not only occasioned
many avocations fiom their spiritual employments, but soon ren-
dered their charac-cr and manners extremely different from those
of the clergy in that age. The nobles viewed their power with
jealousy ; the populace confidered their lives as profane; and both
wvifled tleir downfMl.with equal ardour. The personal emulation
between Melvil and Adamflbn, a man of learning, and eminent
for his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on the death of
Douglas, to be archbiflop of St. Andrews, mingled itself with the
paflions on each lide, and heightened them. Attacks were made
in every assembly on the order of bishops ; their privileges were
gradually circumscribed ; and at lall an ad was passed, declaring
the office of bishop, as it was then exercised within the realm, to
have neither foundation nor warrant in the word of God; and
requiring, under pain of excommunication, all who now pofefleed
that office, instantly to resign it, and to abstain from preaching or
adminitering the sacraments, until they fliould receive permission
from the general assembly. The court did not acquiesce in this.
decree. A vacancy happening soon after in the fee of Glasgow,
Montgomery minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle, prefump-
tuous, ahd more apt, by the blemilhes in his character, to have
alienated the people from an order already beloved, than to recon-
ile them to one which. was the object of their hatred, made an

8. infamous
76

infamous fimoniacal bargain with Lennox, and on his recommend- °°0 K

VI.
ation was chosen archbishop. The prefbytcry of Stirling, of which -----

1551.

he was a member, the presbytery of Glaftow, whither he was
to be tranilated, the general assembly, vied with each other in
prosecuting him on that account. In order to fcrecn Mlontgomery, 5s82.
James made trial botl of gentle and of rigorous me:tfres, and
both were equally ineficaual. The general aflmembly was just
realy to pronounce againfil hin the fentcnce of excommunication,
when an herald entered, and commanded them, in the king's
namc, and under pain of rebellion, to flop further proceedings.
Ivcn this injunulnioil they dclf)ilcl ; and tlough Montgomlery, by
his tcars and lecming penitencc, procured a short respite, the Icn-
tence was at lat iflucd by their appointment, and published in ail
the churches throughout the kingdom.

TuE firmncfs of the clergy in a colleiUvc body was not greater

thlan the boldneis of lone individuals, particularly of the minifrers
of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily againfl the corruptions in
the administration ; and, with the freedom of speech admitted into
the pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief
authors of the grievances under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained to the king of
the infllent and seditious spirit of the clergy. In order to check
the boldness of their discourses, James issued a proclamation, com-
manding Dury, one of the most popular miniflers, not only to
leave the town, but to abftairi fiom preaching in any other place.
Dury complained to the judicatories of this encroachment upon the
immunities of his office. They approved of the docrine which he
had delivered; and he determined to dilregard the royal procla-
mation. But the magistrates being determined to compel him to
leave the city, according to the king's orders; he was obliged to

abandon;

BO O o

K abandon his charge, after proteling publicly, at the cross of Edin-
u-- --' burgh, against the violence which was put upon him. The people

accompanied him to the gates with tears and lamentations; and
the clergy denounced the vengeance of Heaven against the
authors of this outrage .

IN this perilous situation flood the church, the authority of its

judicatories called in queflion, and the liberty of the pulpit re-
itrained, when a sudden revolution of the civil government pro-
cured them unexpecqed relief.

-is favour- THE two favourites, Ly their ascendant over the king, poffefled
tie lill igl uncontrolled power in the kingdom, and exercised it with the
unpoplarr utmost wantonness. James usually resided at Dalkeith, or Kinneil,

the feats of Lenndx and of Arran, and was attended by such com-
pany, and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his dig-
nity. The services of those who had contributed most to place
the crown on his head were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the re-
wards and honours to which the others were entitled. Ex-
alted notions of regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the
conflitution of Scotland, being instilled by his favourites into the
mind of the young monarch, unfortunately made, at that early
age, a deep impreflion there, and became the source of almost
all his subsequent errors in the government of both kingdoms ".
Courts of justice were held in almost every county, the pro-
prietors of land were called before them, and upon the slightest
neglet of any of the numerous forms which are peculiar to
feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual and intolerable
rigour. The lord chamberlain revived the obsolete jurifdition

* Cald. Affemb. 1576-1582. Spotfw. 277, &c. » Cald. iii, 152.

of

of Ills office over the boroughs, and they were fubjeded to ex-
ad-ions no less grievous. A dcfign feerned likewise to have been
formed to exafecrate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with
her, wvlich all good protetfants eftccmcd the chief security of their
rcligion in Scotland. A close corrcfpondence was carried on
between the king and his mother, and confidcrable progrels made
towards uniting their titles to the crown, by such a treaty of
anficiation as Maitland had projected ; whicl could not ftil of
endangering or diminishing his authority, and mufl have proved
fatal to thole who had ated against her with greatest vigour .

ALL these circuinfances irritated the impatient spirit of the

Scottifl nobles, who rcfolved to tolerate no longer the insolence
of the two minions, or to stand by, while their presumption and
inexperience ruined both the king and kingdom. Elizabeth,
who, during the administration of the four regents, had the en-
tire dirction of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of
all influence in that kingdom ever lince the death of Morton, and
was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the king out of
the hands of favourites who were leading him into meafiurs so
repugnant to all her views. The earls of Mar and Glencairn,
lord Ruthven, lately created earl of Gowrie, lord Lindsay, lord
Boyd, the tutor of Glamis, the eldest son of lord Oliphant, with
fevcral barons and gentlemen of diflintion, entered into a com-
bination for that purpole; and as changes in adminiflration,
which, among pclifhed nations, are brought about slowly and
silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that rude age effedted
suddenly and by violence, the king's situation, and the security

79,
B 0 0 II.

VI.

i18z.

The noblcs
conrpirie
againlt them.
X Cald. iii. i57.

of

BOOK
3 0 0 Is

VI.

1582.

Seize the
king's person
at Ruthlven.

of the favourites, encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

JAMES, after having resided for some time in Athol, where hle

enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returning
towards Edinburgh with a small train. He was invited to Ruth-
ven castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeted no danger,
he went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of
firangers whom he found there gave him some uncafinefs; and as
those who were in the fecrct arrived every moment fiom different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces increased his fears.
He concealed his uneasiness, however, with the utmost care ; and
next morning prepared for the field, expec:ing to find there some
opportunity of making his escape. But just as he was ready to
depart, the nobles entered his bedchamber in a body, and presented
a memorial against the illegal and oppressive ations of his two
favourites, whom they represented as most dangerous enemies to
the religion and liberties of the nation. James, though he re-
ceived this remonstrance with the complaisance which was ne-
ceffary in his present situation, was extremely impatient to be
gone; but as he approached the door of his apartment, the tutor
of Glamis rudely flopped him. The king complained, expoftu-
lated, threatened, and, finding all these without effect, burit into
tears: " No matter," said Glamis fiercely, " better children weep
" than bearded men." These words made a deep impression on the
king's mind, and were never forgotten. The conspirators, with-
out regarding his tears or indignation, dismissed such of his fol-
lowers as they fufpeaed; allowed none but persons of their own
party to have access to him; and, though they treated him with
great respeCt, guarded his person with the utmost care. This

enterprise
So

enterprise is usually called, by our historians, The raid of Ruth- B 0,0 K
ven,',

1 582.
LENNOX and Arran were afronifhed to the .las degree at an Commit Ar-

ran to pribfon.

event so unexpeted, and so fatal to their power. The former
endeavoured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of
Edinburgh to take arms in order to rescue their -fovereigat
from captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted
on horseback the moment he heard what had befallen the
king, and with a few followers rode towards Ruthven-caffle;
and as a considerable body of the conspirators, under the
command of the earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himself from his companions, and with two
attendants arrived at the gate of the castle. At the fight of a
man so odious to his country, the indignation of the confpiratore
rose, and initant death must have been the punishment of his
rashness, if the friendship .of Gowrie, or fome.othericaufe not ex-
plained by our historians, had not saved a life so pernicious to the
kingdom. He was confined, however, to the castle of Stirling,
without being admitted into the king's .prefeuce.

THE king, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeds, with Command

Lennox to

whose conduc he could not help discovering many symptoms of leave the
disgust, was obliged to publifl a proclamation, signifying his ap- kingdom"
probation of their enterprise, declaring that he was at full liberty,
without any restraint or violence offered to his person; and for-
bidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid of
Rutthven, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands,
At the fame time, he commanded Lennox to'leave Scotland before August zS.
the twentieth of September .

Y Cald. iii. 134. Spotfw. 320. iMelv. 357.
'VOL. II. M

S Cald. Iii. 3S3. 138.

SooN

B 0OO SooiN after, fir George Carey and Robert Bowes arrived as;

VI.
--- j ar ambafiadors from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embassy was

The confpi- to inquire after the- king's safety; to encourage and countenance
rators coon-
tenanced by the conspirators was the real motive of it.. By their intercession,
Elizabeth. the earl of Angus, who, ever since the death of his uncle Mor-

ton, had lived in exile, obtained leave to return. And the accef-
lion of a nobleman so powerful and:fo popular strengthened the.
fation I

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured

him many friends, and who received private assurances that
the king's favour towards him was in no degree abated,.
seemed resolved, at first, to pay no regard to a command ex-
torted by violence, and no less disagreeable to James, than it
was rigorous with regard to himself. But the power of his.
enemies,. who were masters of the king's person, who were
secretly supported by Elizabeth,. and openly applauded by the-
clergy, deterred him from any enterprise, the success of which
was dubious, and the danger certain, both to himself and to his
sovereign. IIe put off the time of his departure, however, by
various artifices,. in expecation either that James might make his
escape from the conspirators,. or that fortune might present some
more favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief..

Their con- ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous.
ed by a' as- not only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to.
enhly and ao obtain some legal fa"naion of their enterprise. For this purpose
estates. they published a long declaration, containing the motives whichy

had itduced them to venture on such an irregular ftep,. and en-

Cald. iii. 155.

deavoured,
82..

dcavoured to heighten the public indignation againfl the favour-
ites, by representing, in the strongest colours, their inexperience
and inollence, their contempt of the nobles, their violation of
the privileges of the church, and their oppreflion of the people.
They obliged the kirig, who could not with safety refuse any of
their demands, to grant them a remission in the most ample form;
and not satisfied with that, they.applied to the aflembly of the
church, and easily procured an aft, declaring, " that they had

done good and acceptable service to God, to their fovercign, and

" to their native country ;" and requiring all sincere protestants to
concur with them in carrying forward such a laudable enterprise.
In order to add the greater weight to this act, every minifler was
enjoined to read it in his own pulpit, and to inflic the censures
of the church on those who set themselves in opposition to so
good a cause. A convention of estates anfembled a few days
after passed an adc to the fame effect, and granted full indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done

JAMES was conduted by them, firfi to Stirling, and afterwards

to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; and though he was received
evety where with the external marks of refped due to his dignity,
his motions were carefully observed, and he was under a restraint
no less strict than at the first moment when he was seized by the
conspirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to depart
out of the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey. He
lingered, however, for some timein the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh, as if he had frill intended to make some effort towards re-
floring the king to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his
own disposition, averse to bloodshed and the disorders of civil war,

h Cald. iii. . 77. 7 200. Spotfw. 322.

M2

VI.

Oaoher 3.

Lennox's de-
parture from
Scotland.
or

BOOK

VI.
%.---..--,

1582.
Dec. 30.

TIE success of the conspiracy which deprived James of liberty

made great noise over all Europe, and at latf.reached the ears of Mary
in the prison to which she was confined.. As her own experience.
had taught her what injuries a captive prince is exposed to susser;
and as many of those who were now concerned in the enterprise
againfi her son, were the fame. persons whom she confidered as
the chief authors of her own misfortunes,. it was natural for the
tendernefs.of a mother to apprehend that the fame calamities were
ready to fall on his head; and. such a profpe&t did not fail of add-
ing to the distress and horror of her own situation. In- the an-
guiih of her heart, ihe wrote to Elizabeth, complaining. in the

Spotsw. 32+. Cald. iii. 172.

hitterefl

or from some other cause unknown to us, he abandoned the
design, and set out for France, by the way of England. The
king iflued the order for. his departure with no less relutance than
the duke obeyed it; and both mourned a. reparation, which
neither of them had power to prevent. Soon after his arrival
in France, the fatigue of the journey, or the anguish of his
mind,. threw him into a fever. In his last, moments he discovered
such a firm adherence to the protefiant faith, as fully vindicates
his memory from the imputation of an attachment to popery;
with which he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland . As he
was the earliest, and best beloved, he was, perhaps,, the moft.de-
serving, though not the most. able, of all James's favourites. The
warmth and tenderness of his mailer's affetion for him was not
abated by death itself. By many adts of kindness and generosity
towards his poiterityr, the king not only did great honour. to the
memory of Lennox,. but set his own characer in one of its most
favourable points of view.

Mary's anx-
iety bouther
son.
84

bktereft terms of the unprecedented rigour with which fhle her-
self had been treated, and beseeching her not to abandon, her son
to the mercy of his rebellious fubjeacs; nor permit him to be in-
volved in the fame misfortunes under which she had so long
groaned.. The peculiar vigour and acrimony of flyle, for whiclr
this letter is remarkable,. discover both the high spirit of the
Scottish queen, unfubdued by her sufferings,. and the violence of
her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and severity. But it was
ill adapted to gain the end she had in view, and accordingly it
neither procured any mitigation of the rigour of her own con-
finement, nor any interposition in favour of the kiing d.

BOOK

VI.

158C
-IENR.Y III. who,, though he feared and&hated' the princes of 's83.

Ambalfadors
Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed with arrive from

France and

warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party. England.
so intirely devoted to the Englifl interest. He commanded M. de
la Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the court of England, to
repair. to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmost endeavours
towards placing James in. a situation more suitable to his dignity.
As-Elizabeth could not, with decency, refuse him liberty to exe-
cute this commission, she appointed Davison to, attend him into~
Scotland as her envoy, under colour of concurring with, himn.in
the negotiation, but in reality to be. a spy upon his motions,..and
to obftrua his success. James, whose title to the crown had not,
hitherto been recognised by any of the princes on the continent,.
was extremely fond of fuch.anihonourable embassy from the French
monarch;, and,. on that account, as welL as- for the fake of the,
errand on which he came, received Fenelon with. great refpe&..
The nobles,, in whose. power the king was, did not relish this in- Jan. 7.

Camd. 489.,

terpofition

85

L-----' influence over the affairs of Scotland. The clergy were alarmed

1553.

at the danger to which religion would be exposed, if the princes
of Guise should recover any ascendant over the public councils.
Though the king tried every method for reifraining them within
the bounds of decency, they declaimed against the court of France,
against the princes of Guise, against the ambassador, againif en-
tering into any alliance with such notorious persecutors of the
church of God, with a vehemence which no regular government
would now tolerate, but which was then extremely common. The
ambasSador, watched by Davison, diflrufted by the nobles, and
exposed to the insults of the clergy and of the people, re-
turned into England without procuring any change in the king's
situation, or receiving any answer to a proposal which he made,
that the government ihould be carried on in the joint names of
James and the queen his mother .

JameseCcapes MEANWHILE James, though he dissembled with great art, be-
out of the
hands of the came every day more uneasy under his confinement; his uneasiness
conspirators. rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper opportunity

for making his escape; and to this attention he at last owed his
liberty, which the king of France was not able, nor the queen of
England willing, to procure for him. As the conspirators had
forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a distance
from court, they grew secure; and imagining that time had re-
conciled the king to them, and to his situation, they watched him
with little care. Some occasions of discord had arisen among
themselves; and the French ambassador, by fomenting these
during the time of his residence in Scotland, had weakened the

" Cald. iii. 207. Spotfw. 324. Murdin, 372, &c. See Appendix, No. IX.
86

T 1 E -I ST 0 R

union,
I 3

87
union, inl which alone their safety consisted . Colonel William B O O K

VI.

Stewart, the commander of the band of gentlemen who guarded --
the king's perlon, being gained by James, had the principal merit 5
in the fchcmc for restoring his master to liberty. Under pretence June 27.
of paying a visit to the earl of March, his grand uncle, James
was permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's. That he might
not create any ilfplicion, he lodged. at first in an open defericlefs
house in the town, but pretending a curiosity to fee the cafile, no
sooner was he entered with some of his attendants whom lie could
trust, than colonel Stewart commanded the gates to be fluit, and
excluded all the reft of his train. Next morning the earls of
Argyll, Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others to
whom the fccret had been communicated, entered the town with
their followers;. and though Mar, with several of the leaders of.
the faction, appeared in arms, they found themselves so far out-
numbered, that it was in vain to think of recovering possession of
the king's person, which had been in their power somewhat longer
than ten months. James was naturally of so soft and dutile a
temper, that those who were near his person commonly made a.
deep imprelion on his heart,, which was formed to be under the
sway of favourites. As he remained implacable and unreconciled
to the conspirators during so long a time, and at a period of life
when resentments are rather violent than lasting,. they must either.
have improved the opportunities of insinuating thenfelves into fa-
vour with little dexterity, or the indignation with which this
firfi insult to his person and authority filled him, must have been
very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He resolved, Resolves,
hiowever, by the advice of fir James Melvil, and his wisest coun- treaL them

with mode-
f Camd. 482, ration.

fellors,

BOOK

VI.
1-----

I-583.

·But Arran
regains his
ascendant
over him;

fellors, to aCt with the utmost moderation. Having called
into his presence the leaders of both facions, the neighbouring
gentry, the deputies of the adjacent boroughs, the ministers, and
the heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under refiraint for some time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, hbut, without remembering the irre-
gularities which had been so frequent during his minority, -would
pass a general aCt of oblivion, and govern all his fuljeds with
undiftinguifhing and equal affeaion. As an evidence of his
sincerity, he visited the earl of Gowrie at Ruthven-caftle, and
granted him a full pardon of any guilt he had contracted, by the
crime.committed in that very place e.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate

plan. His former favourite, the earl of Arran, had been permit-
ted for some time to reside at Kinneil, one of his country feats.
As soon as the king felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and he expressed a firong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the retrurn of a minion, whose insolent and
overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detested
his crimes. James, ,however, continued his importunity, and
promising that he should continue with him no longer than one
day, they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient
affetion; the king forgot his promise; Arran regained his ascend-
ant over him; and within a few days resumed the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all the
.rashness peculiar to himself h.

-. Ibid. 274.
I

i Melv. 27a.
88

THE sirs effea of his influence was a proclamation with regard

to those concerned in the Raid of Ruthve2. They were required
to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; and the king
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future con-
duct were such as did not oblige him to remember past mifcar-
riages. The tenour of this proclamation was extremely different
from the at of oblivion which the-contpirators had been encou-
raged to expet. Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on'
a promise clogged with such an equivocal condition, and granted
by a young prince under the dominion of a minister void of faith,
regardless of decency, and transported by the sdefire of revenge
even beyond the usual ferocity of his temper. Many of the
leaders, who had at fivft appeared openly at court, retired to their
own houses; and, foreseeing the dangerous storm which was
gathering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign countries '.

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected the conspirators,

was extremely disgusted with measures which tended so visibly to
their destruCtion, and wrote to the king a harfl and haughty
letter, reproaching him in a style very uncommon among princes,
with breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with im-
prudence in proceeding so rigorously against his best and most
faithful fubjets. James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that
promises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded out of fear,
were no longer binding, when there were removed; that it be-
longed to him alone to chute what ministers he would employ in
his service; and that though he resolved to treat the conspirators at
Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the .sup-

i Melv. 278. Spotfw. 326. Cald. iii. 330.

N

BOOK

VI.

1583.

and the king
purlues ano-
ther plan.

Elizabeth's
solicitations
in behalf of
the conlpira-
tors.
Augurt 7.
VOL. IL.

port:

B O r K port of his authority, that such an insult on his person should not

% --· - pass altogether uncenfured ".
1583.

Sept. . ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Walsingham her
Walfing-
ham's em- secretary, whom {he appointed her ambassador to James, and who
bafly into
Scotland. appeared at the Scottish court with a splendour and magnificence

well calculated to please and dazzle a young prince. Walsingham
was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in which
he insisted on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the king
repeated his former answers.

AFTER suffering several indignities from the arrogance of Arran

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any
new treaty with the king. Walsingham was, next to Burleigh,
the minister on whom the chief weight of the English admini-
firation refted; and when a person of his rank slept so far out of
the ordinary road of business, as to undertake a long journey in
his old age, and under a declining state of health, some affair of
consequence was supposed to be the cause, or some important
event was expeced to be the effet, of this measure. But as
nothing conspicuous either occasioned or followed this embassy, it
is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention in employing
this sagacious minister, than to discover, with exactness, the ca-
pacity and disposition of the Scottish king, who was now arrived
at a time of life when, with some degree of certainty, conjecures
might be formed concerning his charaeer and future condua.
As James possessed talents of that kind, which make a better
figure in conversation than in aaion, he gained a great deal by

k Melv. 279.

this
90

this interview with the English secretary, who, notwithstanding B 0° K.
the cold reception which he met with, gave such an advantageous ---
representation of his abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, 83.
henceforward, with greater decency and refpec .

ELIzABETI-I's eagerness to protect the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had
all refused to accept of pardon upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
themselves prisoners. The earl of Angus alone complied; the
reft either fled into England, or obtained the king's licence to
retire into foreign parts. A convention of estates was held, the
members of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran'si
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthvenz to have been
guilty of high treason; appointed the afa pased last year approving
of their conduct to beexpunged out of the records; and engaged
to support the king in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost
rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing that

was uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and
undler an unsettled state of government, must be acknowledged to
have been guilty of an at of treason against their sovereign; and
James, who confidered their conduct in this light, had good rea-
son to boast of his clemency, when he offered to pardon them
upon their confessing their crime. But, on the other hand, it
must be allowed that, after the king's voluntary promise of a
general oblivion, they had some reason to complain of breach of

Melv. 293. Cald. iii. 258. Jebb, ii. 536.

N 2 faith,

91

B O O K faith, and, without the most unpardonable imprudence, could not

VI.

-- -- have put their lives in Arran's power.
1583.

I8s-. THE interest of the church was considerably affected by these

'Tlir c:lrgy
favour th- contrary revolutions. While the conspirators kept poffeflion of'-
<.oillpinrtore,
and irriratc power, the clergy not only recovered, but extended, their privi-
the king. leges. As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlaw-

ful, they took some bold measures towards exterminating the
cpifcopal order out of the church; and it was owing. more to
Adamson's dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the pra-
cess for that purpose, than to their own want of zeal, that they
did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate, all the bishops in
Scotland. When the king recovered his liberty, things put on a
very different aspect. The favour beflowed upon Arran, the
enemy of every thing decent and sacred, and the rigorous pro-
fecution of those nobles who had been the most zealous defenders
of the protestant cause, were confidered as sure presages of the
approaching ruin of the church. The clergy could not conceal
their apprehensions, nor view this impending danger in silence.
Drury, who had been restored to his office as one of the ministers
of Edinburgh, openly applauded the Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit,
at which the king was so enraged, that notwithstanding some
symptoms of his submission, he commanded him to resign his
charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Melvil, being summoned before
the privy council, to answer for the doctrine which he had uttered
in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused of comparing the pre-
sent grievances of the nation with those under James III. and of
intimating obliquely that, they ought to be redressed in the fame
manners thought it incumbent on him to behave with great firm-
ness. He declined the jurisdiCtion of a civil court, in a cause

which

which he maintained to be purely ecclesiastical; the presbytery, B O V K
of which he. was a member, had, as he contended, the sole right l--.
to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither
the king nor council could judge, in the first instance, of the
doctrine delivered by preachers, without violating the iminunitics
of the church. This exemption from civil jurifdiaion was a pri-
vilege which the popish ecclesiastics,- admirable judges of whatever
contributed to increase the lustre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea
had now been admitted, the protestant clergy would have become
independent on the civil magistrate; and an order of men ex-
tremely useful to society while they inculcate those duties which
tend to promote its happiness and tranquillity, might have become
no less pernicious, by teaching, without fear or control, the most
dangerous principles, or by exciting their hearers to the most de-
fperate and lawless aations. The king, jealous to excess of his
prerogative, was alarmed at this daring encroachment on it; and
as Melvil, by his learning and zeal, had acquired the reputation
and authority of head of the party, he resolved to punish him with
the rigour which that pre-eminence rendered necessary, and to
discourage, by a timely severity, the revival of such a dangerous
claim. Melvil, however, avoided his rage, by flying into Eng-
land; and the pulpits resounded with complaints that the king
had extinguished the light of learning in the kingdom, and de-
prived the church of the ablest and most faithful guardian of its
liberties and discipline "

THESE violent declamations of the clergy againfl the measures
of the court were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-

Spotfw. 330. Cald. iii. 304.

fpirators,

B o o K fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still posSessed great

VI.
_-- --- influence there; and as they had every thing to fear from the re-

58 fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of

Arran, they never ceased soliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had
submitted to the king, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented
of a ftep which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining
the confidence of the other; and, after suffering many mortifi-
cations from the king's neglect and the haughtiness of Arran, he
was at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the earls of Angus, Mar, and the tutor of Glamis,
had concerted a scheme for surprising the castle of Stirling. In
his situation, little. persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts he put off his voyage, and
lay ready to take arms on the day fixed by the conspirators for
the execution of their enterprise. His lingering so long at Dun-
dee, without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the
court, proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the
conspiracy.' Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where
he lodged with a body of soldiers, and, in spite of his resistance,
took him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis
seized the castle of Stirling, and ereting their standard there,
published a manifesto, declaring that they took arms for no other
reason but to remove from the king's pretence a minion who had
acquired power by the most unworthy actions, and who exercised
it with the most intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's
imprisonment struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it
to treachery on his part, and fufpeced, that as he had formerly
deserted, he had now betrayed them. At the fame time Eliza-

2 beth

95

beth having neglected to supply them in due time with a fum of
money, which ihe had promised to them, and their friends and vassals
coming in slowly, they appeared irresolute and disheartened; and
as the king, who acted with great vigour, advanced towards them
at the head of twenty thousand men, they fled precipitately to-
wards England, and with difficulty made their escape". This
rash and feeble attempt produced such effets as usually follow dif-
appointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause for which
it was undertaken, but added strength and reputation to the
king; confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldness and greater success. Gowrie was
the first viedim of their resentment. After a very informal trial,
a jury of peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publicly
beheaded at Stirling.

To humble the church was the king's next flep. But as it

became necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legis-
lative authority, a parliament was hastily summoned: and while so
many of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or forbidden
to appear in the king's pretence; while Arran's haughtiness kept
some at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting confited
only of those who were absolutely at the devotion of the court. In
order to conceal the laws which were framing from the knowledge
of the clergy, the lords of the articles were sworn to secrecy; and
when some of the ministers, who either suspeCted or were informed
of the danger, deputed one of their number to declare their appre-
henfions to the king, he was seized at the palace-gate, and carried
to a distant prison. Others, attempting to enter the parliament-

May 22.
A parliament
held.

Severe laws
against the
church.
1 Home's Hist. of House of Dougl. 376, Spotfw. 330. Calderw. iii. 324, &c.

house,

BOOK

VI.
1584.

B o r IcK ouse, were refused admittance°; and such laws were passed, as
' ---- ·totally overturned the constitution and discipline of the church.

I584.
May zz. 'The refusing to acknowledge the jurifdition of the privy council;

.the pretending an exemption from the authority of the civil courts;
the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of any of the
three estates in parliament, were declared to be high treason. The
holding assemblies, whether civil or ecclesiastical, without the
king's permission or appointment; the uttering, either privately
or publicly, in sermons or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the king, his ancestors, or ministers, were
pronounced capital crimes P.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, miniPter of
St. Cuthbert's and one of the lords of session, solemnly protested
against them, in the name of his brethren, because they had been
passed without the knowledge or content of the church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories
had both been elteemed sacred. In the former, the clergy had
been accustomed to censure and admoniih with unbounded liberty.
In the latter, they exercised an uncontrolled and independent
jurifdiaion. The blow was now aimed at both these privileges.
These new statutes were calculated to render churchmen as incon-
fiderable as they were indigent: and as the avarice of the nobles
had stripped them of the wealth, the king's ambition was
about to deprive them of the power, which once belonged to
their order. No wonder the alarm was universal, and the com-
plaints loud. All the ministers of Edinburgh forsook their charge,

Cald. iii. 365. P Parl. 8 Jac. VI,

arid
96

and fled into England. The most eminent clergymen through- B 00 K
out the kingdom imitated their example. Desolation and astonish- ----
ment appeared in every part of the Scottish church; the people ,4
bewailed the loss of pastors whom they esteemed; and full of
consternation at an event so unexpeced, openly expressed their
rage against Arran, and began to fufped the king himself to be an
enemy to the reformed religion".

- Spotfw. 333.
VOL. II

97
0C

# BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T 0 R

0 .
S O

T L

A N D.
B OO K

VII.

HILE Scotland was torn by inteffine faCtions, Elizabeth
was alarmed with the rumour of a projec in agitation for

setting Mary at liberty.. Francis Throkmorton, a Cheshire gentle-
man, was fufpeced of being deeply concerned in the dcfign, and
on that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among his papers
were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in the kilng-
dom, with. an account of their situation, and of the depth of water
in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman catholics in Eng-
land. This circumstance confirmed the suspicion againfl him, and
some dark and desperate conspiracy was supposcd just ready to
break out.. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and declared
that the two papers.were forged by the queen's ministers, in order
to intimidate or ensnare him; and he even endured the rack with
the utmost fortitude. But being brought a iecond time to the place
of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not only acknovwlcedged-

0 2 - that

y

B 0 0 I

V11.

L#--- '-a

1'hrnkiilor-
ton's confpi-
racy againl
Elizabeli.
1191-

B 0 0 K that he had held a secret correspondence with the queen of Scots,

VII.
-. ---- but discovered a design that was formed to invade England. The

1584- duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnish troops, and to con-

du&t the enterprise. The pope and king of Spain were to supply
the money necessary for carrying it on; all the English exiles were
eager to take arms; many of the catholics at home would be ready
to join them at their landing; Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador,
who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting
the spirit of difaffetion among the English, or in hastening the
preparations on the continent; and by his command, he made the
two lifts, the copies whereof had been found in his possession.
This confession he retraced at his trial; returned to it again after
sentence was passed upon him; and retraced it once more at the
place of execution %

To us in the present age, who are aflifed in forming our

opinion of this matter by the light which time and history have
thrown upon the designs and characters of the princes of Guise,
many circumstances of Throkmorton's confession appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from probability. The
duke of Guise was, at that juncture, far from being in a situation
to undertake foreign conquests. Without either power or office at
court; hated by the king, and persecuted by the favourites; he
had no leisure for any thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neigh-
bouring states; his vast and ambitious mind was wholly occupied
in laying the foundation of that famous league which shook the
throne of France. But at the time when Elizabeth detected this
conspiracy, the close union between the house of Guise and Philip
was remarkable to all Europe; and as their great enterprise againlf

* Hollingfhcad, 137o0

Henry
100

Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to conceal B 00 K

VII.

that under their threatenings to invade England, Throkmorton's _----_
discovery appeared to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who 18
knew how ardently all the parties mentioned by him wished her
downfal, thought that she could not guard her kingdom with too
much care. The indiscreet zeal of the English exiles increased Defignsof
her fears. Not satisfied with incessant outcries against her severity Mrers againllt
towards the Scottish queen, and her cruel persecution of her ca- Elizabeth.
tholic fubjeas, not thinking it enough that one pope had threat-
ened her with the sentence of excommunication, and another had
actually pronounced it, they now began to disperse books and
writings, in which they endeavoured to persuade their disciples,
that it would be a meritorious aCion to take away her life; they
openly exhorted the maids of honour to treat her as Judith did
Holofernes, and, by such an illustrious deed, to render their own
names honourable and sacred in the church throughout all future
ages b. For all there reasons, Elizabeth not only inflited the
punishment of a traitor on Throkmorton, but commanded the
Spanish ambaflador instantly to leave England; and that the might
be in no danger of being attacked within the island, ihe de-
termined to use her utmost efforts, in order to recover that in-
fluence ever the Scottilh councils, which lhe had for some time
entirely loft.

THERE were three different methods by which Elizabeth might She endea-

hope to accomplish this; either by furnifling such effeaual aid vouslfto Tie
to the banished nobles, as would enable them to resume the chief influence in

Scotland, by
direcion of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Mary, gaining Ar.

ran.
as might intimidate her son, who being now accustomed to go-

b Camd. 497.

vern,

101

B o O K vern, would be apt to agree to any terms rather than resign the

VII.
h------' sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne; or by gaining the

1584- earl of Arran, to secure the diretion of the king his mailer. The

last was not only the eafielf and fpeedieft, but most likely to be
successful. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying
the other two altogether aside. With this view she sent Davison,
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and address, into
Scotland. A minister so venal as Arran, hated by his own country-
men, and holding his power by the most precarious of all tenures,.
the favour of a young prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers without
hesitation, and deemed the acquisition of her protection to be the
Atgul i?. nmolt solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after he con-

sented to an interview with lord Hunfdon, the governor of Ber-
wick, and being honoured with the pompous title of lieutenant
general for the king, he appeared at the place appointed with a
splendid train. In Hunfdon's presence he renewed his promises of
an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English interest, and
afiured him that James should enter into no negotiation which
might tend to interrupt the peace between the two kingdoms; and
as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies con-
cerning the king's marriage, which had formerly disquieted her
with regard to his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from
listening to any overture of that kind, until he had previously ob-
tained the queen of England's content .

Severe pro- TEE banished lords and their adherents soon felt the effeas of
ceedings
againt the Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
bani/hed
lords; them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her ministers

were of opinion that she ought to employ her arms in defence

Cald. iii. 491. Melv. 315. See Append. No.X.

of
5

of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing which restrained B o°° K
James and his favourite from proceeding to such extremities against u.----.-
them, as might have excited the pity or indignation of the Eng-
lifh, and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in
their behalf. But every apprehenfson of this kind being now re- August zz
moved, they ventured to call a parliament, in which an act was
passed, attainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of
their followers. Their estates devolved to the crown, and ac-
cording to the practice of the Scottish monarchs, who were obliged
to reward the faction which adhered to them, by dividing with it
the spoils of the vanquilhed, James dealt out the greater part of
these to Arran and his associates d

NOR was the treatment of the clergy less rigorous. All mi- againit the

clergy.

nifters, readers, and professors in colleges, were enjoined to sub-
scribe, within forty days, a paper testifying their approbation of
the laws concerning the church enated in last parliament. Many,
overawed or corrupted by the court, yielded obedience; others
flood out. The stipends of the latter were sequestered, some of
the more active committed to prison, and numbers compelled to
fly the kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the suspicion
of acting from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those who sus-
sered acquired high reputation, by giving such convincing evi-
dence of their firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of the
church were almost entirely suppressed. In some places scarce as
many ministers remained, as to perform the duties of religious
worship; they soon funk in reputation among the people, and
being prohibited not only from discoursing of public affairs, but
obliged, by the jealousy of the administration, to frame every

v Cald. iii. 527.

sentiment
p

xo3

B OO K sentiment and expreflion in such a manner as to give the court

VII.

_-.--.. no offence, their sermons were deemed languid, insipid, and
1584. contemptible; and it became the general opinion, that together

with the most virtuous of the nobles and the most faithful of the
clergy, the power and vigour of religion were now banished out
of the kingdom .

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitless

negotiations with the queen of Scots, which it had become almost
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to
amuse that unhappy princess with some profpet of liberty; but
furnished an apology for eluding the solicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by shewing
him that she could at any time set free a dangerous rival to dispute
his authority. These treaties she suffered to proceed to what
length she pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them
off, when they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on
foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it;
the reasons, however, which rendered it ineffectual were far from
being frivolous.

New confp- As Crichton, a jesuit, was failing from Slanders towards Scot-
lizabe'h. land, the ship on board of which he was a passenger happened to

be chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infested the narrow
seas. Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in
his custody, and threw them away; but, by a very extraordinary
accident, the wind blew them back into the ship, and they were
immediately taken up by some of the paflengers, who carried
them to Wade, the clerk of the privy council. He, with great

Cald. iii. 589.

industry

SCOTLAND;

industry and patience, joined them together, and they were found
to contain the account of a plot said to have been.formed by the
king of Spain and the duke of Guise, for invading, England.
The people were not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety oc-
oationed by the conspiracy in which Throkmorton had been en-
gaged, and as his discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by
additional evidence, not only all their former apprehensions re-
curred, but the conflernation became general and excessive. As
all the dangers, with which England had been threatened for
some years, flowed either immediately from Mary herself, or from
such as made use of her name to justify their infurreaions and
conf3iracies, this gradually diminished the compassion due to her
situation, and the English, instead of pitying, began to fear and
to hate her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and pacific reign the
English enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened sources of wealth
unknown to their ancestors, was extremely beloved by all her
people; and regard to her safety, not lets than to their own interest,
animated them against the Scottifli queen. In order to discourage
her adherents, it was thought necessary to convince them, by some
public deed, of the attachment of the English to their own fove-
reign, and that any attempt against her life would prove fatal to
her rival. With this view an Ajociation was framed, the sub-
scribers of which bound themselves by the most solemn oaths, " to
" defend the queen againit all her enemies, foreign and domeitic;
"and if violence should be offered to her life, in order to favour
" the title of any pretender to the crown, they not only engaged
"never to allow or acknowledge the person or persons by whom,

or for whom, such a detestable ad fliould be committed, but

" vowed, in the pretence of the eternal God, to prosecute such
"person or persons to the death, and to pursue them, with their

VOL. II. P utmofl

1.S5
B 0 0 !i

VII.

1584.

Occasions an'
aflbciation
in opposition
to Mary;
Oaober 19-

BOOK

VII.

1584.

which great-
ly alarnisher.

f State Trials, i. 122.
' Idem ibid.

t Camd. 499.
i See Appendix, No. XI.

" utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow and extirpation '.F
Persons of all ranks subscribed this combination with the greatest
eagerness and unanimity B.

MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed

dlefign to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the cer-
tain and immediate forerunner of her destruCtion. In order to
avert this, ihe made such feeble efforts as were fiill in her power,
and sent Naud, her secretary, to court, with offers of more entire
resignation to the will of Elizabeth, in every point, which had
been the occasion of their long enmity, than all her sufferings
hitherto had been able, to extort h. But whether Mary adhered
inflexibly to her privileges as an independent sovereign, or, yield-
ing to the necefity of her situation, endeavoured, by concessions,
to sooth her rival, fie was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was
imputed to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign assistance;
her concessions were either believed to be insincere, or to flow
from the fear of some imminent danger. Her present willing-
ness, however, to comply with any terms was so great, that Wal-
fingham warmly urged his mistress to come to a final agreement
with her '. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that it was the spirit raised
by the association which had rendered her so passive and com-
pliant. She always imagined that there was something mysterious
and deceitful in all Mary's altions, and fufpeded her of carrying
on a dangerous correspondence with the English catholics, both
within and without the kingdom. Nor were her suspicions alto-
gether void of foundation. Mary had, about this time, written
.a letter to fir Francis Inglefield, urging him to haflen the execution
1o6

of what fle calls the Great Plot or Deftgnment, without hesitating
on account of any danger in which it might involve her life,
which Ihe would most willingly part with, if, by that sacrifice, she
could procure relief for so great a number of the oppressed chil-
dren of the church . Instead, therefore, of hearkening to the
overtures which the Scottifih queen made, or granting any miti-
gation of the hardflips of which fle complained, Elizabeth re-
solved to take her out of the hands of the earl of Shrewsbury,
and to appoint fir Amias Paulet and fir Drue Drury to be her
keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust with great fidelity,
during fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary with
gentienefs and refpeat, and had always sweetened harfl commands
by the humanity with which he put them in execution. The fame
poiitencfs was not to be expected from men of an inferior rank,.
wxhofe revere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommendation
to that employment, and the only merit by which they could pre-
tend to gain favour or preferment'.

B 0 () K
BOOK

VII.

1584.

She is treated
with greater
rigour.

As James was no less eager than ever to deprive the banished Gray a new

nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he appointed the master of Gray ihvoerig's
his ambaflador to the court of England, and intruted him with
the conduct of a negotiation for that purpose. For this honour
he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the earl of Arran.
Gray poffefled all the talents of a courtier; a graceful person, an
insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and intriguing
spirit. During his residence in France, he had been admitted into
the most intimate familiarity with the duke of Guile, and, in
order to gain his favour, had renounced the protestant religion,
and profefted the utmost zeal for the captive queen, who carried

" Strype, iii. 246.

' Camd. 500.

01.

10o7

B o K on a secret correspondence with him, from which she expeced

VII.
A.--,- great advantages. On his return into Scotland, he paid court to

s584' James with extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplishments did

not fail to make their usual impression on the king's heart. Arran,
who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his growing fa-
vour; and flattering himself, that absence would efface any senti-
ments of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom for an embassy of such importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his fall. Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper
instruments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses,
and by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flat-
tered his vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profuse-
ness, which was still greater. He abandoned himself without re-
serve to Elizabeth's direaion, and not only undertook to retain
the king under the influence of England, but aded as a spy upon
the Scottish queen, and betrayed to her rival every secret that
he could draw from her by his high pretensions of zeal in her
service m.

His interest GRAY'S credit with the English court was extremely galling to
with the
courtofEng- the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing
land. her power to restore them; she found it easier to govern Scotland
Decem. 31. by corrupting the king's favourites; and, in compliance with

Gray's solicitations, she commanded the exiles to leave the north
of England, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This
rendered it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partisans i Scotland, and almost impossible to return thither with-

I Strype, iii. 302. Melv. 316.

out
108

out her lpemfifion. Gray, by gaining a point which James had so B 0 I Ki
much at heart, riveted himself more firmly than ever in his fa-----
vour; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of
fcrling Elizabeth with greater success ".

ARRAN had now poffcffed for some time all the power, the 158;.

Arran'h cor-

riches, and the honours, that his immolerate ambition could de- ruption nnd
lire, or the fondness of a prince, who set no limits to his libe- "inolence'
rality towards his favourites, could bellow. The office of lord
chancellor, the highest and most important in the kingdom, was
conferred upon him, even during the life of the earl of Argyll,
who succeeded Athol in that dignity 0; and the public beheld,
with aftoniflment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of
fortune, ignorant of law, and a contemner of justice, appointed
to preside in parliament, in the privy council, in the court of
session, and intrusted with the supreme disposal of the property of
his fellow-fubjeCts. He was, at the fame time, governor of the
catles of Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scot-
land; provost of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all these
accumulated dignities his merits were not sufficiently recompenfed,
he had been created lieutenant general over the whole kingdom.
No person was admitted into the king's presence without his per-
mission; no favour could be obtained but by his mediation.
James, occupied with youthful amusements, devolved upon him
the whole regal authority. Such unmerited elevation increased
his natural arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was no
longer content with the condition of a fubjeat, but pretended to
derive his pedigree from Murdo duke of Albany; and boasted
openly, that his title to the crown was preferable to that of the

d Crawf. Offic. of State, App. 447.

Io9
` Cald. iii. 643.

B O°1 K king himself. But, together with these thoughts of royalty, he
. ---.. retained the meanness fuitabte to his primitive indigence. His

'ASr " venality as a judge was scandalous, and was exceeded only by

that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made herself a
party in almost every question which came to be decided, em-
ployed her influence to corrupt or to overawe the judges, and
alnoft openly dicated their decisions P. His rapaciousness as a
minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so
many offices; with the estate and honours which belonged to the
family of Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands,
which had fallen to his share; he grasped at the possessions of
several of the nobles. He required lord Maxwell to exchange
part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil; and because
he was unwilling to quit an ancient inheritance for a possession so
precarious, he stirred up against him his hereditary rival, the laird
of Johnston, and involved that corner of the kingdom in a civil
war. He committed to prison the earl of Athol, lord Home, and
the master of Caffils; the firfi, because he would not divorce his
wife, the daughter of the earl of Gowrie, and entail his estate on
him; the second, because he was unwilling to part with tome
lands adjacent to one of Arran's estates; and the third, for re-
fusing to lend him money. His spies and informers filled the
whole country, and intruded themselves into every company.
The nearest neighbours diftrufled and feared each other. All fa-
miliar society was at an end. Even the common intercourses of
humanity were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to confide,
or where to utter his complaints. There is not perhaps in history
an example of a minister so universally detestable to a nation, or
who more justly deserved its detestation .
P Cald. iii. 331. Scotflarvet's Staggering State> 7. q Spotfw. 337, 338.

ARRAN,
I Ib

AR?. AN, noLwithfllanding, regardless of the sentiments, and B 0 0 K

defpiling the murmurs of the people, gave a loose to his natural
temper, and procceded to a(c-s frill more violent. David Home of
Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from one
of the banifled lords, about private business, were condemned
and put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cun-
ninghame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen
of honour and reputation, were accused of having conspired with
the exiled nobles to seize the king's person. A single witness
only appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence
was unanfwverable; their accuser himself not long after acknow-
ledged that he had been suborned by Arran; and all men be-
lieved the charge against them to be groundless: they were found Feb. 9.
guilty, notwithstanding, and suffered the death of traitors r,

ABOUT the fame time that there gentlemen were punished iarry's con-

fpiracy

for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was endangered by a againit Eli-
real one. Parry, a dotor of laws, and a member of the house of
commons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit, had
lately been reconciled to the church of Rome; and fraught with
the zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonflrate the sincerity
of his attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by kill-
ing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove
the murder of an excommunicated prince to be not only lawful,
but a meritorious aaion. The pope's nuncio at Venice, the jesuits
both there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the de-
sign. The pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and granted
him for his encouragement, a plenary indulgence, and reniffion
of his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote to him a letter to the fame

r Spotw. 338. Cald. iii. 791.

purpose.
7

I 1

B OOK purpose. But though lie often got acccfs to the queen, fear, or
I-,- foone remaining sense of duty, restrained him from perpetrating

Ss the crime. HIappily, his intention was at last discovered by Nevil,

the only person in England to whom he had communicated it;
March .z and having himself voluntarily confefied his guilt, he suffered

the punishment which it deserved .

A revere fta- TI-IESE repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened
tute, which
proved fatal the indignation of the English parliament, and produced a very
to Mary. extraordinary statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the queen

of Scots. By this law the association in defence of Elizabeth's life
was ratified, and it was further enacted, " That if any rebellion
" fiall be excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the
" hurt of her majesty's person, by orfor any person pretending a
" title to the crown, the'queen flall empower twenty-four persons,
" by a commission under the great feal, to examine into, and
" pass sentence upon such offences; and after judgment given, a
"proclamation shall be itfued, declaring the persons whom they
"find guilty, excluded from any right to the crown; and her

majesty's fubjets may lawfully pursue every one of them to

"the death, with all their aiders and abettors: and if any design
"against the life of the queen take effet, the persons by or for
' whom such a deteltable act is executed, and their Cies, being

in any wile assenting or privy to the fame, shall be disabled for

" ever from pretending to the crown, and be pursued to death
" in the like manner '." This ac was plainly levelled at the
queen of Scots; and whether we confider it as a voluntary ex-
prefilon of the zeal and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's
safety, or whether we impute it to the influence which that artful

' State Trials, vol. i. 103. t Ibid. 123.

princess
I 12

princcfs preserved over her parliaments, it is no cafy matter to B O O K
reconcile it with the general principles of juflice or humanity. ---,
Mary was thereby rendered accountable not only for her own
aCtions, but for those of others; in consequence of which, file
might forfeit her right of succession, and even her life itself.

MA-RY jul!y confidered this ac as a varning to prepare for tle The rigour

with which
vorft extremities. Elizabeth's minillers, it is probable, had re- ihe was

treated, ia-

solved by this time to take away her life and suffered books to cr ed.
be publifihed, in order to persuade the nation that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only neccflury, but just ". Even
that flort period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardlhip and indignity which it was in their
power to inflitl. Almnof all her Ifrvants were difiniffed, Ihe was
treated no longer with the rfciccj due to a queen; and, thouglh
the rigour of seventeen years imprilbnment had broken her con-
ftitution, flie was confined to two ruinous chambers, icarccly ha-
bitable, even in the middle of summer, by reason of cold. Not-
withstanding the scantiness of her revenue, flie had been accuf-
tomed to distribute regularly tome alms among the poor in the
village adjoining to the castle. Paulet now refused her liberty to
perform this pious and humane office, which had afforded her
great consolation amidst her own sufferings. The castle in which
ihe resided was converted into a common prison; and a young
man, fufpeded of popery, was confined there, and treated under
her eye with such rigour, that he died of the ill usage. She
often complained to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and
expoftulated as became a woman and a queen; but as no political
reason now obliged that princess to amuse her any longer with

" Strype, iii. 299.
VOL. II. Q,- fallacious

113

B O0 0 I fallacious hopes, far from granting her any redress, ihe did not

--.. even deign to give her any answer. The king of France, closely

allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for afllftance againfl
his rebellious fubjeEs, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause with
any warmth; and all his solicitations in her behalf were feeble,
formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French ambassador,
whose compafion and zeal for the unhappy queen supplied the
defets in his initrufions, remonstrated with such vigour against
the indignities to which she was exposed, that, by his importunity,
lie prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuthbury; though
Ihe was confined the greater part of another winter in her present
wretched habitation ".

A breach NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the neglet of. her
Maryeand friends, made such an impression on Mary, as the ingratitude of
ber son. her son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpet,

and had even entered into negotiations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that his good
correspondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with, the king greatly increased by the
success of his embalfy, persuaded him to write a harsh and un-
dutiful letter to his mother, in which he expressly refused to ac-
knowledge her to be queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs
as connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her
maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow and despair.
March 24. " Was it for this," said she, in a letter to the French ambassador,

" that I have endured so much, in order to preserve for him
" the inheritance to which I have a just right? I am far from
" envying his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there;

: Jebb, v. ii. 576-598.

- I;f- {M nor

IS

' nor wifit to set my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the B O K
" pleasure of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved I---
' with too tender affetion. VWhatevcr he either enjoys or expects,
" he derived it from me. From him I never received assistance,
' supply, or benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him
6 any longer as a king: he holds that dignity by my confcnt;
" and if a speedy repentance do not appease my just resentment,
" I will load him with a parent's curse, and surrender my crown,
' with all my pretensions, to one who will receive them with

gratitude, and defend them with vigour '." The love which

James bore to his mother, whom he had never known, and whom
he had been early taught to confider as one of the most abandoned
persons of her sex, cannot be supposed ever to have been ardent;
and he did not now take any pains to regain her favour. But
whether her indignation at his undutiful behaviour, added to her
bigoted attachment to popery, prompted Mary at any time to
think seriously of disinheriting her son; or whether these threat-
enings were uttered in a sudden sally of disappointed affecion, it
is now no easy matter to determine. Some papers which are still
extant seem to render the former riot improbable Z.

CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting, occupied Eli- Dangerous

situation of

zabeth's thoughts. The calm which she had long enjoyed, seemed Elizabeth;
now to be at an end; and such forms were gathering in every
quarter, as filled her with just alarm; All the neighbouring na-
tions had undergone revolutions extremely to her disadvantage.
The great qualities which Henry III. had displayed in his youth,
and which raised the expectations of his fubljeds so high, va-
nifhed on his ascending the throne; and his acquiring supreme

Y Murdin, 566. Jebb, ii. 57I. See Append. No. XII.
Z See Append. No. XIII.

QT,2

power

B 0 O I power seems not only to have corrupted his heart, but to have

impaired his understanding. He soon loft the esteem and assec-
'15s5 tion of the nation; and a life divided between the aufterities of

a superstitious devotion, and the extravagancies of the most difio-
lute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as he was odious
on account of his rapaciousness, his profusion, and the fondness
with which he doated on many unworthy minions. On the
death of his only brother, those sentiments of the people burst
out xwith violence. Henry had no children, and though but
thirty-two years of age, the fucceflion of the crown was already
confidered as open. The king of Navarre, a distant descendant
of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to the crown, was a

from the zealous protestant. The profpea of an event so fatal to their
progress of
the League; religion, as his ascending the throne of France, alarmed all the

catholics in Europe; and the duke of Guise, countenanced by the
pope, and aided by the king of Spain, appeared as the defender
of the Romiifi faill, and the asserter of the cardinal of Bourbon's
right to the crown. In order to unite the party, a bond of con-
federacy was formed, diftinguifled by the name of the Ho/y
Leagtte. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation. The
fjtirit ipread with the irresistible rapidity which was natural to reli-
gious paflions il that age. The deftru&Lion of the Reformation,
not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be the objec
and wish of the whole party;. and the duke of Guise, the head of
this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the kingdom',

from tne far superior to that which the king himself possessed. Philip 11.
power of
Philip 11. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the naval power

of Spain, and had at last reduced under his dominion all that
portion7of the continent which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun-
tains, and which nature seems to have defined to form one great
monarchy. William prince of Orange, who first encouraged

the
nI6

the inhabitants of the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and
whose wisdom and valour formed' and protectd the riling com-
monrwealth, had fallen by the hands of an afiaflin. The tfperior
genius of the prince of Parma had given an entire turn to the fate
of the war in the Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted
vith consummate Ikill, and executed with equal bravery, had
been attended with success; and the Dutch, reduced to the last ex-
tremity, were on the point of falling under the dominion of their
ancient master.

NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto

owed her security, existcd any longer. She could derive no ad-
vantage from the jealousy which had subsisted between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the duke of
Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms.
The hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the
league; and little could be expected from any diversion they might
create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could long em-
ploy the arms, or divide the ftrengcl, of Spain. In this situ-
ation of the affairs of Europe, it became neceflary for Elizabeth
to form a new plan of condut ; and her wisdom in forming it was
not greater than the vigour with which ile carried it on. The
measures most suitable to her natural temper, and which she had
hitherto purflcd, were cautious and safe; those which the now
adopted were enterprising and hazardous. She preferred peace,
but was not afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by
necessity, not only of defending herself with spirit, but of attack-
ing her enemies with a boldness which averted danger from her
own dominions. She immediately furnished the hugonots with a
considerable supply in money. She carried on a private negoti-

ation

1T7

VII.

158;.

I-er wife and
vigorous con-
dua.

BOOK

VII.

1585.

Resolves to
punifl Mary,
and to gain
the king.

ation with Henry III. who, though compelled to join the league,
hated the leaders of it, and wished for their deftruaion. She
openly undertook the protection of the Dutch commonwealth,
and sent a powerful army to its affiflance. She endeavoured to
form a general confederacy of the protestant princes, in oppo-
fition to the popish league. She determined to proceed with the
utmost rigour against the queen of Scots, whose sufferings and
rights afforded her enemies a specious pretence for invading her
dominions. She resolved to redouble her endeavours,'in order to
effect a closer union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
her influence over the councils of that nation.

SHyE found it no difficult matter to induce most of the Scottifl

courtiers to promote all her designs. Gray, fir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of secretary, which his
brother formerly held, fir Lewis Bellenden, the justice clerk, who
had succeeded Gray as the king's resident at London, were the
persons in whom ihe chiefly confided. In order to direct and
May o; quicken their motions, ihe dispatched fir Edward Wotton along

with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred,
and entertaining; he excelled in all the exercises for which James
had a passion, and amused the young king by relating the ad-
ventures which he had met with, and the observations he had
made, during a long residence in foreign countries; but under
the veil of these superficial qualities, he concealed a dangerous and
intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high favour with James,
and while he was seemingly -attentive only to pleasure and
diversions, he acquired influence over the public councils, to a de-
gree whichwas indecent for a stranger *;o possess a.

Melv. 3r7.

NOTHING,
v

NOTIIlNG, however, could be more acceptable to the nation, B 0 0 K
than the proposal he made of a firia alliance between the two »----

1585.
kingdoms, in defence of the reformed religion. The rapid and Propofesa

league with

alarming progress of the popish league seemed to call on all pro- Scotland.
tetla nt princes to unite for the preservation of their common faith.
James embraced the overture with warmth, and a convention of July 29.
estates empowered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliamentb. The alacrity with which James con-
curred in this measure must not be wholly ascribed either to his
own zeal, or to WVotton's address; it was owing in part to Eliza-
beth's liberality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the
young king, Ihe fettled on him an annual pension of five thou-
sand pounds; the fame umn which her father had allotted her be-
fore fie ascended the throne. This circumfiance, which she took
care to mention, rendered a fum, which in that age was far from
being inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to the king, whose
revenues, during a long minority, had been almost totally dif-
fipated c.

BUT the chief object of Wotton's intrigues was to ruin Arran.

While a minion so odious to the nation continued to govern the
king, his affiltance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdon, had ap-
peared extremely for her interest, ihe could place no great con-
fidence in a man whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,:
and who, notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary, still
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary and with the
duke of Guise. The banished lords were attached to England

Undermines
Arran's pow.
er.
Spotfw. 339,

! Cald. iii. 50o5

from
/

1B 0°V K from affiecion as well as principle, and were the only persons
-----. among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, she could

thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
summoned thither, under colour of vindicating themselves from
his accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most
proper measures for refloring them to their country. Wotton
pursued tins plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for execution; and
it was greatly facilitated by an event neither uncommon nor con-
fiderable. Sir John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the English
and Scottish wardens of the middle marches, having met, accord-
ing to the cuflom of the borders, about midsummer, a fray arose,
and lord Rufilel, the earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This 'cuflie was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to
confider it as a design formed by Ker, at the instigation of Arran,
to involve the two kingdoms in war. She insisted that both fliould
be delivered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he
was obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aber-

Afilfs the decn. During his absence from court, Wotton and his aflbciates
banifled no-
bles. carried on their intrigues without interruption. By their advice,

the banished nobles endeavoured to accommodate their differences
with lord John and lord Claud, the duke of Chatelherault's two
o&. 16. sons, whom Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom.

Their common sufferings, and common interest, induced both
parties to bury in oblivion the ancient discord which had fubiifted
between the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's
permission, they returned in a body to the borders of Scotland.
Arran, who had again recovered favour, insisted on putting the
kingdom in a posture of defence: but Gray, Bellenden, and
Maitland, secretly thwarted all his measures. Some necessary or-
ders they prevented from being issued; others they rendered inef-

feaual

fe&ual by the manner of execution; and all of them were obeyed B 00 K
slowly, and with reluctance d .

1' 85-

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize the
king, and to carry him by force into England. But the delign
was happily discovered; and, in order to avoid the punniflnient
his treachery merited, he departed without taking leave .

MEANWHILE the banished lords haflened the execution of their They return[

into Scot-
enterprise; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join land, and

are recon-

them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were ciled to the
welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the most fervent ki"ng
prayers were addressed to Heaven for the success of their arms.
They advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at
the head of ten thousand men. The king, though he had as-
fembled an army superior in number, could not venture to meet
them in the field, with troops whose loyalty was extremely du-
bious, and who at best were far from being hearty in the cause;
nor was either the town or castle provided for a siege. The
gates, however, of both were slut, and the nobles encamped at
St. Ninian's. That fame night they surprised the town, or more Nov. z.
probably it was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, whlo had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save hinfelf by a preci-
pitate flight. Next morning they invested the castle, in which
there were not provisions for twenty-four hours; and James was
necessitated immediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
They were not so elated with success as to urge extravagant de-
mands, nor was the king unwilling to make every reasonable con-

d Spotfw. 340. - Melv. 335.
- VOL. II.

I 1I
R

ceflion.

B 0 K ceeffion. They obtained a pardon, in the most ample form, of all

.-.-- the offences which they had committed; the principal forts in the
5 j85. kingdom were, by way of security, put into their hands; Craw-

ford, Montrose, and colonel Stewart, were removed from the king's
presence; and a parliament was called, in order to establish tran-
quillity in the nation .

A parlia- TIIou Gii a great majority in this parliament confiPted of the
nicnt.
Dec. Ao. confederate nobles and their adherents, they were far from dif-

covering a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an aQt, re-
storing them to their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying
the pardon granted by the king, they seemed willing to forget all
past errors in the administration, and spared James the mortifica-
tion of feeing his ministers branded with any public note of in-
famy. Arran alone, deprived of all his honours, stripped of his
borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his country by public
proclamation, funk back into obscurity, and must henceforth be
mentioned by his primitive title of captain James Stewart. As
he had been, during his unmerited prosperity, the o.bje& of the
hatred and indignation of his countrymen, they beheld his fall
without pity, nor did all his sufferings mitigate their resentment in.
the least degree.

Church as- THE clergy were the only body of men who obtained no re-
fairs.

dress of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate
nobles had all along affected to be confidered as guardians of the
privileges and discipline of the church. In all their manifetfos.
'they had declared their resolution to restore these, and by that
popular pretence had gained many friends. It was now natural

Cf ald.. iii.. 795.-

J.,t,
122

to expec some fruit of these promises, and rome returns of grati- o °0 K
tude towards many of the mofl eminent preachers who had fulf- ----
fcred in their cause, and who demanded the repeal of the laws
passed the preceding year. The king, however, was resolute to
maintain these laws in fuill authority; and as the nobles were ex-
tremely solicitous not to clifguft him, by insisting on any disagree-
able request, the claims of the church ill this, as well as in many
former inflances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity. The
ministers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and their
impatience under the difappointinent broke out in tome expreflions
extremely difrefpetful even towards the king himself '.

THE archbilhop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the effects of their r5s6,

anger. The provincial fynod of Fife summoned him to appear,
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former afemblies,
in prefiming to exercise the function of a bishop. Though he
refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the court, 'and appealed
from it to the king, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him. Adamson,
with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal excom-
munication against Melvil, and some other of his opponents.

SOON after, a general assembly was held, in which the king, April 13.

with some difficulty, obtained an act, permitting the name and
office of bishop still to continue in the church. The power of the
order, however, was considerably retrenched. The exercise of
discipline, and the inspection of the life and dotrine of the clergy,
were committed to prefbyteries, in which biflops ihould be al-
lowed no other pre-eminence but that of presiding as perpe-

g Spotfw. 343.

R 2

tual

BOOK

VII.

i586.

.A leigue
with E ngland
concluded.
July 5.

tual moderators. They themselves were declared to be fubje&, in
the fame manner as other pastors, to the jurifdiaion of the general
aftembly. As the discussion of the archbishop's appeal might have
kindled unusual heats in the assembly, that affair was terminated
by a compromise. He renounced any claim of supremacy over
the church, and promised to demean himself suitably to the cha-
ra&ter of a bifhlop, as described by St. Paul. The assembly, with-
out examining the foundations of the sentence of excommuni-
cation, declared that it should be held of no effect, and restored
him to all the privileges which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness shewn for the ho-
nour of the fynod, and the delicacy and refpe& with which its
jurifdiftion was treated, several members were so zealous as to pro-
test against this decision "

THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons so warmly

attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two kingdoms,
which had been proposed last year,. met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French envoy. James himself first offered to
renew the negotiation. Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable
opportunity to flip, and instantly dispatched Randolph to conclude
a treaty, which she so much desired. The danger to which the
protestant religion was exposed, by the late combination of the
popish powers for its destruction, and the necessity of a Itria con,
federacy among those who had embraced the Reformation, in order
to obftrut their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the found-
ation- of the league. The chief articles in- it were, that both
parties should bind themselves to defend the evangelic religion;
that the league should be offensive and, defensive against all who

Cald. iii. 894. SpDtfw. 346.

fliall'
124

shall endeavour to disturb the exercise of religion in either king- B o0 K
dom; that if one of the two parties be invaded, the other, not- ---,
withstanding any former alliance, ihould not, directly or indi-
rectly, assist the invader; that if England be invaded in any
part remote from Scotland, James should affiff the queen with two
thousand horse and five thousand foot; that if the enemy landed
or approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the king fiould
take the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner as he
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return,
undertook to aa in defence of Scotland, if it should be invaded.
At the fame time she assured the king that no ftep should be taken,
which might derogate in any degree from his pretensions to the
Englilf crown '. Elizabeth exprefled great fatisfacion with a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dan-
gerous ne;ghbour, and afforde. her a degree of security on that
fide, which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of them had
been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the blessings
of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable
period, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, thas
the king's condua was universally acceptable to his own people k

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time, exposed-

James to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply en-
gaged in the conlpiracy against the life of the king his father.
Both Morton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered
for that crime, had accnfcd him of being present at the murder
He had escaped punishment by flying into England,. and James
had often required Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of
her protecion. He now obtained a license, from the king him-

i Spotrv. 351. k Camd. 513.
1 Sec Append. No. XIV. Arnot, Crim; Trials, 7, &c.

self,

1 25

-B o00 K self, to return into Scotland; and' after undergoing a mock-trial,
'--.-- .-- calculated to conceal, rather than to detec his guilt, he was not

only taken into favour by the king, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable characer of his ambassador. James
-was now of such an age, that his youth and inexperience cannot
be pleaded in excuse for this indecent tranfadion. It must be
imputed to the excessive facility of his temper, which often led
him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of his own dignity
,and reputation '

lRite of Ba- NOT long after, the inconsiderate affecion of the English ca-
bington's oni'Piracy thclics towards Mary, and their implacable resentment against
againlt Eli-
zabeth. Elizabeth, gave rife to a conspiracy which proved fatal to the

one queen, left an indelible stain on the reputation of the other,
and presented a fpe&acle to Europe, of which there had been
hitherto no example in the history of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priests edu-

cated in the seminary at Rheims, had adopted an extravagant and
enthusiastic notion, that the bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was
dictated immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion they
instilled into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his
furious zeal and daring courage; and persuaded him that no service
could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an.
excommunicated heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the crown of
April 26. martyrdom, bound himself by a solemn vow to kill Elizabeth.

Ballard, a pragmatical priest of that seminary, had at that time
come over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador
there, t6 procure an invasion of England, while the affairs of the

Spotfw. 348. Cald. iii. 917.

league

6
2x0

League were so prosperous, and the kingdom left naked by fend- IB 0I K
ing so many of the queen's best troops into the Netherlands. *
Paget and the Englifli exiles demonfirated the fruitlessness of such
an attempt, unless Elizabeth were first cut off, or the invaders
fccured of a powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could
be hoped that either of these events would happen, effedual aid
was promised; and in the mean time Ballard was sent back to
renew his intrigues.

IrE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a young May 15-

gentleman in Derbyshire, of a large fortune, and many amiable
qualities, who having contracted, during his residence in France,
a familiarity with the archbishop of Glasgow, had been recom-
mended by him to the queen of Scots. He concurred with Paget,
in confidering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary
to any invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would soon
be put to her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was
now in London waiting for an opportunity to firike the blow.
But Babington thought the attempt of too much importance, to
rely on a tingle hand for the execution of it, and proposed that
five resolute gentl'emen flould be joined with Savage in an enter-
prise, the success of which was the foundation of all their hopes.
Hle offered to find out persons willing to undertake the service,
whose honour, secrecy, and courage they might safely trust. He
accordingly opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Sa-
lifbury, Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John
Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John
Jones, and Robert Polly; all of them, except Polly, whose buflling
forward zeal introduced him into their iociety, gentlemen of
good families, united together in the bonds of private friendship,.
strengthened by the more powerful tie of religious zeal. Many

confu!t-
3

127

BOOK

VII.

r586.
June.

The scheme
ofthe conlpi-
'ators.

Di covered
by Walfing-
ham.

econfultations were held ; their plan of operations was at last fettled;
and their different parts afligned. Babington himself was ap-
pointed to rescue the queen of Scots; Salisbury, with some others,
undertook to excite several counties to take arms; the murder of
the queen, the most dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. So totally had their
bigoted prejudices extinguished the principles of honour, and the
sentiments of humanity suitable to their rank, that, without Icruple
or compunction, they undertook an action which is viewed with
horror, even when committed by the meanest and most profligate
of mankind. This attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no
less honourable than it was desperate; and in order to perpetuate the
memory of it, they had a piCture drawn containing the portraits
of the fix affaflins, with that of Babington in the middle, and a
motto intimating that they were jointly embarked in some ha-
zardous design.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent

instance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarcely pof-
fible, and neither diftrufled the fidelity of their companions, nor
doubted the success of their undertaking. But while they believed
that their machinations were carried on with the most profound
and impenetrable secrecy, every ftep they took was fully known
to Walingham. Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into
the conspiracy with no other design than to betray his associates.
Gilbert Giflbrd too, having been sent over to England to quicken
the motions of the conspirators, had been gained by Walsingham,
and gave him sure intelligence of all their projects. That vigilant
minister immediately imparted the discoveries which he had made
to Elizabeth; and without communicating the matter to any other
of the counsellors, they agreed, in order to underRand the plot

more

more perfctly, to wait until it was ripened into some form, and B 0 o K
brought near the point of execution. -- "

5~86.
AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expose They lare

seized and
her own life, and to tempt Providence any farther. Ballard, the plninled.

Augult 4.

prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrested. I-is associates,
disconcerted and firuck with aftonifllment, endeavoured to save
themselves by flight. But within a few days, all of them, except
Windsor, were seized in different places of the kingdom and com-
mitted to the Tower. Though they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit, of aflhaffins; and, influenced
by fear or by hope, at once confesscd all that they knew. The
indignation of the people, and their impatience to revenge such an
execrable combination against the life of their fovercign, hastened
their trial, and all of them suffered the death of traitors . Sept. zo.

Tius far Elizabeth's condua may be pronounced both prudent Mry is ac-

cused of be.-

and laudable, nor can fle be accused of violating any law of hu- ing an ac-
manity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were neceflltry c"'pli" ia

the co. fpi-

for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard to racy.
which posterity will pass a very different judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts sufficiently

for all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But
this was not the light in which Elizabeth and her ministers chore
to place the conspiracy. They wished to persuade the nation, that
Babington and his associates should be confidered merely as inftru-
ments employed by the queen of Scots, the real though secret
author of so many attempts against the life of Elizabeth, and the

n Camd. 5i5. State Trials, vol. i. 10o.

X29
VOL. II.

S

peace

B 0 0 K peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters, which they
.------- ascribed to her, in support of this charge. These, as they gave

1556.

out, had come into their hands by the following singular and myf-
terious method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into Eng-
land, had been trusted by some of the exiles with letters to Mary;
but in order to make a trial of his fidelity and address, they were
only blank papers made up in that form. Thefc beir:: safely
delivered by him, he was afterwards employed without farther
scruple. Walsingham having found means to gain this man, he,
by the permiflion of that minister and the connivance of Paulet,
bribed a. tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whither
vlary had been conveyed, who deposited the letters in a hole in the
wall of the castle, covered with a loose stone. Thence they were
taken by the queen, and in the fame manner her answers re-
turned. All these were carried to Walsingham, opened by him,
decyphered, fealed again so dexterously that the fraud could not
be perceived, and then transmitted to the persons to whom they
were direaed. Two letters to Babington, with several to Men-
doza, Paget, Englefield, and the Englifia fugitives, were procured
by this artifice. It was given out, that in there letters Mary ap-
proved of the conspiracy, and even of the afaffination; that she
direSed them to proceed with the utmost circumfpeation, and not
to take arms until foreign auxiliaries were ready to join them;
that she recommended the earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the
young earl of Northumberland, as proper persons to conduct and
to add reputation to their enterprise; that she advised them, if
possible, to excite at the fame time some commotion in Ire-
land; and above all, besought them to concert with care the
means ofher own escape, suggesting to them several expedients
for that purpose.

ALL

ALL these circumftanccs were opened at the trial of the con- B 001 K

fpirators; and-while the nation was under the influence of thole t
terrors which the association had raised, and the late danger had 'he incig-

nation of the

augmented, they were bclieviel without hesitation or inquiry, and Enrglifh
frread a general alarm. Mlary's zeal for her r!ligion was well tIt avc'ount.
known; and in that age, examples of the violent and sanguinary
spirit which it inspircd were numerous.

. All the cabals agilint the

peace of the kingdom for many years had been carried on in her
name; and it now appears evidently, fid tile Engliflh, that the
safety of the one queen is incompatible with that of the other.
Why then, added they, fliould the tranquillity of England be fa-
crificed for the fake of a stranger? Why is a life lo dear to the
nation exposed to the repeated aflaults of an exasperated rival ?
The cafe supposed in the association has now happened, the
sacred person of our sovereign has been threatened, and why
should not an injured people cxecute that jift vengeance which
they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to Elizabeth Elizabeth re-

fohle to pro-

and her ministers. They themselves had at firlf propagated them ceed to tce
among the people, and they now served both as an apology and a Ul' a:Xti'li
motive for their proceeding to such extremities against the Scottish htr.
queen as they had long meditated. The more numerous the in-
juries were which Elizabeth had heaped on Mary, the more fle
feared and hated that unhappy queen, and came at last to be per-
fuaded that there could be no other security for her own life, but
the death of her rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted tb
zealously all her measures with regard to Scottifi affairs, and
had a*,led with so little reserve in opposition to Mary, that they
had rcafon to dread the most violent effeOs of her resentment, if
ever rfle flould mount tle throne of England. From this addi-

S 2 tional

I31

BOO K tional consideration they endeavoured, with the utmost earneflnef£,

VII.

o------ to hinder an event so fatal to themselves, by confirming their

5 miifrefs's fear and hatred of the Scottish queen.

ers domer- i MEANWl I LE, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and

tics, paper%,
&c. s:zcd. great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the

confjiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court to
acquaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which ihe was
loaded as acceflary td that crime; and he surprised her with the
account just as ihe had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers. She was struck with aftoniflment, and would have re-
turned to her apartment, but she was not permitted; and in her
absence, her private closet was broke open, her cabinet and papers
were seized, fealed, and sent up to court. Her principal domefics
too were arrested, and committed to different keepers. Nau and
Curie, her two £ecretaries, the one a native of France, the other
of Scotland, were carried prisoners to London. All the money
in her custody, amounting to little more than two thousand
pounds, was secured . And after leading her about for some
days, from one gentleman's house to another, she was conveyed
to Fotheringay, a strong castle in Northamptonshire P.

Deliberatcs No farther evidence could now be expeced against Mary, and
concerning
the method nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate. With
froceed- regard to this, Elizabeth, and those ministers in whom {he chiefly

confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was still
great variety of sentiments among her other counsellors. Some
thought it iuflicient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep
her under such close restraint, as would cut off all poflibility of

e See Appendix, No. XV. » Canid. 517.

corresponding
9

corresponding with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her conffi- B o o K
tution, broken by long confinement, and her spirit dejcted with I-- --

i 56.

so many cares, could not long support such an additional load, the
queen and nation would loon be delivered from all their fears.
But though it might be easy to secure Mary's own perils, it was
irnpoffible to diminillh the reverence which the Roman c:atholics
had for her name, or to extinguifli the compailion with whicht
they viewed her lufiLTrings ; while such' sentiments continued, in-
furre&lions and invalions would never be wanCtiing for lhcr relief,
and the only efietQ of any new rigour would be to render thetf
attempts more frequent and more dangerous. For this reason the
expedient was rejected.

A PUL3IIC and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was Determines

· i to try hr

judged the molt unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it publicly.
had, at the fame time, a semblance of juflice, accompanied with
an air of dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient records for
any statute or precedent to justify such an uncommon tep, as the
trial of a foreign prince, who had not entered the kingdom in'
arms, but had fled thither for refuge. The proceedings againit
her were founded on the acQ of last parliament, and by applying
it in this manner, the intention of those who had framed that
severe statute became more apparent ''

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumfiance of pomp or so-

Iemnity should be wanting, which could render this tranfacion
such as became the dignity of the person to be tried. She ap-
pointed, by a commifflon under the great feal, forty persons,
the most illuflrious in the kingdom by their birth or offices, to-

< Camsl. 519. Johnft. Hist. x 3.

*gether

133

B OOV K gether with five of the judges, to hear and decide this great cause.
- ..---,. Many difficulties were started by the lawyers about the name and

title by which Mary should he arraigned; and while the essentials
of justice were so grossly violated, the empty forms of it were
the objeas of their care. They at length agreed that she should
be styled " Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late king
"of Scots, commonly called queen of Scots and dowager of

F" rance r."

AFTER the many indignities which flhe had lately suffered,

Mlary could no longer doubt but that her deftrution was deter-
mined. She expeced every moment to end her days by poison,
or by some of those secret means usually employed against captive
princes. Left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time that
it deprived her of life, should endeavour likewise to blast her re-
putation, the wrote to the duke of Guise, and vindicated herself,
in the flrongeft terms, from the imputation of encouraging or of
being acceflary to the conspiracy for affaffnating Elizabeth'. In
the solitude of her prison, the strange resolution of bringing her
to a public trial had not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any
thing so unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal majefly, once
enter into her thoughts.

The trial at ON the eleventh of OClober, the commissioners appointed by
Fothetingay. Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered a

letter from their sovereign to Mary, in which, after the bitterest
reproaches and accusations, she informed her, that regard for
the happiness of the nation had at last rendered it necessary to
make a public inquiry into her conduct, and therefore required

Strype, iii. 362. ' Jebb, ii. 283.

her,

her, as fhc had lived so long under the proteion of the laws of
England, to submit now to the trial which they ordained to be
taken of her crimes. Mary, though fuirprifedl at this mclhge,
was neither appalled at tile danger, nor unmindful of her own dig-
nity. She protested, in the most solemn manner, that fle was
innocent of the crime laid to her charge, and had never counte-
nanced any attempt against the life of the queen of England;
but at the flme time rcfufed to acknowledge the jurifdi~dion of
her commillioners. " I came into the kingdom," said flHe, " an
"independent sovereign, to implore the queen's afiftance, not to
"fulbjeat myself to her authority. Nor is my spirit i l broken by
"its past misfortunes, or lo intimidated by present dangers, as to
"' stoop to any thing unbecoming the majcfty of a crowned head,
"or that will diigrace the ancestors from whom I am descended,
"and the son to whom I flmal leave my throne. If I must be
"tried, princes alone can be my peers. The queen of England's
" fubjeds, however noble their birth may be, are of a rank infc-
"rior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this kingdom I have
" been confined as a prisoner. Its laws never afforded me any
" protecLion. Let them not now be perverted, in order to take
"away my life."

Ti-ir commifloners employed arguments and intreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed accord-
ing to the forms of law, and to'pafs sentence againf: her on ac-
count of her contumacy in refuting to plead ; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline their jurifdition. An argument
used by Hatton, the vice-chamberlain, at last prevailed. He told
her, that, by avoiding a trial, she injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be more agreeable

to;

13 0 O K

V1I.
-----. ---<>

1586.

MVarv ri'tufre
at firlt to
plead.

i 35

B 0 K c to them, or more acceptable to the queen their mistress, than to
~-----' be convinced, by undoubted evidence, that the had been unjustly

loaded with foul aspersions.

Consents No wonder pretexts so plausible should impose on the unwary
however to
do so. queen, or that she, unaflifted at that time by any friend or coun-

fellor, should not be able to detea and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest ministers. In a situation equally melancholy,
and under circumfiances nearly similar, her grandson, Charles I.
refused, with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurped
jurifdidion of the high court of juflice; and posterity has ap-
proved his conduCf, as suitable to the dignity of a king. If Mary
was less conflant in her resolution, it must be imputed solely to her
anxious desire of vindicating her own honour.
Oa. 14. AT her appearance before the judges, who were feated in the

great hall of the castle, where they received her with much cere-
mony, she took care to protest, that, by condescending to hear and
to give an answer to the accusations which ihould be brought
against her, she neither acknowledged the jurifdidion of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and justice of those ats by which they
pretended to try her.

THE chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to

vindicate the authority of the cburt.

The accufa- THEN Elizabeth's attorney and solicitor opened the charge
tion againit
tr.agaiit against her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy.

Copies of Mary's letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield, and
Paget, were produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together with the declarations of

Nau

Nau and Curie, her secretaries, were read, and the whole ranged B 0°0 I
in the most specious order which the art of the lawyers could de- -86
vise, and heightened by every colour their eloquence could add.

\MARY lifened to their harangues attentively, and without

emotion. But at the mention of the earl of Arundel's nanie,
who was then confined in the Tower, flhe broke out into this
tender and generous exclamation: " Alas! how much has the

noble house of Howard suffered for my fake !"

WVHnN the queen's counsel had finished, Mary flood up, and ier defence.

with great magnanimity, and equal presence of mind, began her
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own situation, that
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which she had suffered
treatment no less cruel than unmerited, she was at last loaded with
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right of
succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranfinit her
name with infamy to future ages: That, without regarding the
sacred rights of sovereignty, she was now fubjeted to laws framed
against private persons; though an anointed queen, commanded to
appear before the tribunal of fubjeas; and, like a common criminal,
her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers, capable of
wresting her words, and of misrepresenting her ations: that, even
in this diflonourable situation, she was denied the privileges usually
granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her own defence,
without the presence of any friend with whom to advise, without
the aid of counsel, and without the use of her own papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accusation.

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington or Bal-
lard: copies only of her pretended letters to them were produced;

VOL. II. T though

B 0 0 K though nothing less than her hand-writing or subscription was

s--.--' sufficient to convi cher of such an odious crime: no proof could
1586. be brought that the letters were delivered into her hands, or that

any answer was returned by her direcion: the confessions of
wretches condemned and executed for such a detestable action,
were of little weight; fear or hope might extort from them many
things inconfiflent with truth, nor ought the honour of a queen
to be stained by such vile tefimony. The declaration of her fe-
cretaries was not more conclusive: proinifes and threats might
easily overcome the resolution of two firangers; in order to screen
themselves, they might throw the blame on her; but they could
discover nothing to her prejudice, without violating, in the first
place, the oath of fidelity which they had sworn to her; and their
perjury, in one inflance, rendered them unworthy of credit in
another: the letters to the Spanish ambassador were either nothing
more than copies, or contained only what was perfectly innocent:
"I have often," continued she, " made such efforts for the re-
" covery of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature.
"Convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it
"was vain to exped it from the justice or generosity of the
" queen of England, I have frequently solicited foreign princes,
" and called upon all my friends to employ their whole interest
" for- my relief. I have likewise endeavoured to procure for the
"English catholics some mitigation of the rigour with which
"they are now treated; and if I could hope, by my death, to
" deliver them from oppression, I am willing to die for their fake.

I wish, however, to imitate the example of Esther, not of

" Judith, and would rather make intercession for my people, than
" shed the blood of the meanest creature, in order to save them.
" I have often checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents,

" when
13J

"' when either the severity of their own persecutions, or indig- B o o K
'" nation at the unheard-of injuries which I have endured, were
" apt to precipitate them into violent councils. I have even 86
"warned the queen of dangers to which there harlh proceedings

exposed herself. And worn out, as I now am, with cares and
sufferings, the profpee of a crown is not so inviting, that I

" flould ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am no ftrangcr to
"the feelings of humanity, nor unacquainted with the duties of
"religion, and abhor the detestable crime of affafination, as
"equally repugnant to both. And, if ever I have given consent
"by my words, or even by my thoughts, to any attempt against
" the life of the queen of England, far from declining the judg-
" ment of men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of God'."

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and in

every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a queen,
tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

TH E commissioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourned, Sentence

aganint her.

without pronouncing any sentence, to the fiar-chamber in Weft- Oclob. z5.
minster. When aflembled in that place, Nau and Curie were
brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration upon
oath; and after reviewing all their proceedings, the commissioners
unanimously declared Mary " To be accessary to Babington's
" conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to
"the hurt, death, and deftrudion of Elizabeth, contrary to the
' express words of the statute made for the security of the queen's
" life"."

' Camd. 520, &c. Ibid. 525.

IT

139

BOOK

VII.

1586.

Irregularities
in the trial.

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial,

that the sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a
pretence to justify, but was not the cause of the violent steps taken
by Elizabeth and her ministers towards her deftrution; and was
employed to give some appearance of justice to what was the off-
spring ofjealoufy and fear. The nation, blinded with resentment
against Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of its own sovereign
from every danger, observed no irregularities in the proceedings,
and attended to no defects in the proof, but grasped at sus-
picions and probabilities, as if they had been irrefragable de-
monftrations.

TI E

IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injufiice in ap-

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conducing it, were greatef
and mofl flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim authority
over an independent queen ? Was Mary bound to comply with
the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could the fubjeas of ano-
ther prince become her judges? or if such an insult on royalty
were allowed, ought not the common forms of juffice to have
been observed? If the testimony of Babington and his afrociates
were so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a few
weeks, and by confronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with
the full conviction of her crimes ? Nau and Curie were both
alive, wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for
what reason were they produced in the ftar-chamber, where Mary
was not present to hear what they deposed ? Was this suspicious
evidence enough to condemn a queen? Ought the meanest cri-
minal to have been found guilty upon such feeble and inconclusive
proofs ?
140o

THE parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounced

against Mary. In that illustrious assembly more temper and dif-
cernment than are to be found among the people, might have been
expected. Both lords and commons, however, were equally un-
der the dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and the
fame excesses of zeal, or of fear, which prevailed in the nation,
are apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with impa-
tience upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the danger which
threatened the queen's life as well as the peace of the kingdom.
All the papers which had been produced at Fotheringay, were laid
before them; and after many violent invecives against the queen
of Scots, both houses unanimously ratified the proceedings of the
commiflioners by whom ifl had been tried, and declared the fen-
tence against her to be just and well founded. Not satisfied with
this, they presented a joint address to the queen, beseeching her,
as she regarded her own safety, the preservation of the protestant
religion, the welfare and wifles of her people, to publish the fen-
tence; and without farther delay to inflit on a rival, no less irre-
claimable than dangerous, the punifhmnnt which fle had merited
by so many crimes. This request, dietated by fears unworthy of
that great assembly, was enforced by reasons itill more unworthy.
They were drawn not from justice but from conveniency. The
most rigorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's
intriguing spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to
be an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers:
the severest penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who,
while they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any
danger to which themselves alone were exposed: several foreign
princes were ready to second their attempts, and waited only a
proper opportunity for invading the kingdom, and affrting the
Scottifl queen's title to the crown. I-Ier life, they contended,.

was,

141
BOOK

VII.

1586.

The parlia-
ment confirm
the sentence,

and demand
the execution
of it.

B 0 0 K was, for these reasons, incompatible with Elizabeth's safety; and

VII.
'------ if she were spared out of a false clemency, the queen's per-

1586.

son, the religion and liberties of the kingdom, could not be one
moment secure. Necessity required that she should be sacrificed
in order to preserve these; and to prove this sacrifice to be no less
just than neccffiary, several examples in history were produced, and
many texts of scripture quoted; but both the one and the other
were misapplied, and distorted from their true meaning.

Elizabtl,'s NOTIING, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth,
diflimula-
tion. than an address in this firain. It extricated her out of a situation

extremely embarrassing; and without depriving her of the power
of sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less appearance
of blame. If fle chose the former, the whole honour would re-
dound to her own cleinency. If she determined on the latter,
whatever was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the so-
licitations of her people, rather than to flow from her own incli-
nation. Her answer, however, was in a style which (he often
used, ambiguous and evasive, under the appearance of openness
and candour; full of such professions of regard for her people, as
served to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's
ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their indignation; and of
such insinuations that her own life was in danger, as could not fail
to keep alive their fears. In the end, she besought them to save
her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a queen, her nearest
kinswoman, to punifhlment; and to confider whether it might
not still be poflible to provide for the public security, without
forcing her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

TH-E true meaning of this reply was easily underflood. The
lords and commons renewed their former request with additional

I importunity,
142

importunity, which was far from being either unexpeced or of- B 0 IK
fenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit; and -----
having obtained fich a public fantion of her proceedings, there 86.
was no longer any reason for protracting this scene of diflimu-
lation; there was even some danger that her feigned difficulties
might at last be treated as real ones; fle therefore adjourned the
parliament, and reserved in her own hands the sole difpolal of her
rival's fate ".

ALL the princes in Europe obfcrved the proceedings against France inter-

polbs secbly

Mary with aftonifiment and horror; and even Henry III. not- in hllalfof
withftaliding his known aversion to the house of Guise, was obliged M ry.
to interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the common
rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident amlaffador, and Bellicvre,
who was sent with an extraordinary commission to the fame pur-
pose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of warmth. Nov. 21
They employed all the arguments which the cause naturally fiig-
gested; they pleaded from justice, from generosity, and humanity;
they intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all thefie Eli-
zabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and having received fonme
intimation of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scottish
queen, and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guilc, hie
trusted that these loud remonfirances would be followed by no
violent resentment Y.

SHE paid no greater regard to the solicitations of the Scottish Jamesendc:-

vours to save

king, which, as they were urged with greater sincerity, merited his meoler'a
more attention. Though her commiflioners had been extremely life.
careful to tooth James, by publishing a declaration that their fen-

Camd. 526. D'Ewes, 375. Y Canid. 531.

tence

I43

B o o I; :tence against Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour,
',,----J or invalidate any title which he formerly possessed; he beheld the

58 indignities to which his mother had been exposed with filial con-

-cern, and with the sentiments which became a king. The pride
,of the Scottish nation was roused, by the insult offered to the
blood of their monarchs, and called upon him to employ the most
vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to revenge the queen's
death.

AT firit, hecould hardly believe that Elizabeth would venture

upon an acion so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to ren-
der the persons of princes less sacred in the eyes of the people,
and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times,
she was so remarkably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary
steps which she took difcbvered her intention, he dispatched fir
William Keith to London; who, together with Douglas his am-
baffador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the itrongeft terms, againif
the injury done to an independent queen, in fubjeaing her to be
tried like a private person, and by laws to which she owed no
obedience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by
suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonourable to the
king of Scots, to be put into execution z.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remonstrances of his

ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand, complaining
in the bitterest terms of her condudc, not without threats that
both his duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her
friendship, and to aa as became a son when called to revenge his
mother's wrongs a At the fame time he assembled the nobles,

See Append. No. XVI. Murdin, 573, &c. Birch, Mem. i. 52.
Birch, Mern. i. 52.

who
I44

who promised to fiand by him in so good a caufc. He appointed
ambassadors to Francc, Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore
the aid of these courts; and took other fPeps towards executing
his threats with vigour. The high itrain of his letter enraged Eli-
za.eth to such a degree, that fle was ready to dismiss his ambaf-
facdors withlout any reply. But his preparations alarned and em-
barraficd her miniflers, and at their entrcaty flie returned a soft
and evasive aniwer, promiling to liften to any overture from the
kinp;, tlat tended to his mother's ll;ty ; and to fuuipend the exe-
cution of the tfntcncc, until the arrival of new ambafTldcrls fron
Scotland ''.

Ell ANvrIir :l , flie commalndcd the fclntCenc againfl Mary to

be publilhed, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was
extorted friom her by the repeated entreaty of both houses of par-
liament. At the fhnie time fhc dilipatchcd lord Buckhurft and
BIcale to acqlainit Mary with the sentence, and how importunately
the nation demanded the execution of it; and though Ihe had not
hitherto yielded to these solicitations, she advised her to prepare
for an event which might become necessary for securing the pro-
teftant religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary
received the melfage not only without symptoms of fear, but with ex-
pressions of triumph. " No wonder," said ihe, " the Englifli should
"now thirst for the blood of a foreign prince, they have often
"offered violence to their own monarchs. But after so many
" sufferings, death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am
"proud to think that my life is deemed of importance to the
"catholic religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing to
" die ."

b Spotfw. 251. Cald. iv. 5.
VOL. II.

c Camd. 528. Jebb, 291.

AFTER.
U

I4l5
DI 0 0 KC

VII.

i566.

Dec. 6.
The sentence
a~g~irdiltt Mmy

B o0 K AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was firipped of

VII.

A
-- -- every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of Ifate in her

1586.
She is treated apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and

ih thriego u. approached her person without any ceremony; and even appeared

covered in her presence. Shocked with these indignities, and
offended at this gross familiarity, to which ihe had never been ac-
Dec. 19. cuflomed, Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at the

fame time, as her last requefft, entreated that ile would permit her
servants to carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her
ancestors in hallowed ground; that some of her domestics might
be present at her death, to bear witnces of her innocence, and
firm adherence to the catholic faith ; that all her servants might
be suffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies
which she ihould bestow on them, as testimonics of her affecion;
and that, in the mean time, her almoner, or some other catholic
pries, might be allowed to attend her, and to assist her in pre-
paring for an eternal world. She besought her, in the name of
Jesus, by the foul and memory of Henry VII. their common
progenitor, by their near consanguinity, and the royal dignity
with which they were both invested, to gratify her in these parti-
culars, and to indulge her so far as to signify her compliance by a
letter under her own hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever de-
livered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returned, and
no regard paid to her requests. She was offered a protestant
bishop or dean to attend her. Them The rejected, and without
any clergyman to direc her devotions, she prepared, in great
tranquillity, for the approach of death, which she now believed to
be at no great distance d.

d Camd. 528. Jebb, ii. 295.

JAMES
I46

JAMES, without losing a moment, sent new ambassadors to B O1 K
London. These were the master of Gray, and fir Robert Melvil. ----

1587.
In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their master Jamnsrencws

his solicits-
would become bound that noconfpiracy should be undertakenagainit tions in her

behalf.

her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's content; January i.
and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver some of the
most considerable of the Scottish nobles as hoflages. If this were
not thought iuflicient, they proposed that Mary flould resign all
her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing in-
jurious to the protestant religion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's
safety, could be feared. The former propoial Elizabeth rcealed as in-
lecure; the latter, as dangerous. The ainbafladors were then inftrud-ed
to talk in a higher tone; and Melvil executed the cornmiilon with
fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual perfidy, de-
ceived his mafler, who trusted him writh a negotiation of lb much
importance, and betrayed the queen whom he was employed to
save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth to execute the fen-
tence against her rival. I-Ie often repeated the old proverbial
fentenece, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever flould hap-
pen, he undertook to pacify the king's rage, or at least to prevent
any violent effeds of his resentment c.

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the Elizabeth's

most violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She lhunned dinietyatio
society, Ihe was often found in a melancholy and musing posture,
and repeating with much erphafis there tentences which fie bor-
rowed from some of the devices then in vogue; A4t ser aut feri;
nle f2riare, fcri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness
must be imputed to dissimulation; it was impoflible, however,

' Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. See Append. No. XVII.

U 2 that

B ov0 I that a princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, flould venture
..-,---J on an action, which might expose her memory to infamy, and

her life and kingdom to danger, without reflecing deeply, and
hesitating long. The people waited her determination in suspense
and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal should subside,
rumours of danger were artfully invented, and propagated with
the utmost industry. Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was
accused of having suborned an afflain to murder the queen. The
Spanilf fleet was said by omre to be already arrived at Milford-
haven. Others affirmed that the duke of Guise had landed with a

firong army in Suffex. Now, it was reported that the northern
counties were up in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered
England with all their forces ; and a conspiracy, it was whispered,
was on foot for seizing the queen and burning the city. The
panic grew every day 'more violent; and the people, astonished
and enraged, called for the execution of the sentence against
Mary, as the only thing which could restore tranquillity to the
kingdom .

w.irr .nt for NVIILE thC!f sentiments prevailed among her fubjeats, Eliza-
cr, ti~;,- beth thought flle might flfcly venture to firike the blow, which
ed. fihe had so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the

secretaries of state, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her be-
haviour on that occasion plainly flewed, that it is not to humanity
that we must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very mo-
ment she was signing the writ which gave up a woman, a queen,
and her own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, fle
was capable of jesting. "Go," fays tie to Davison, "and tell
" Walingham what I have now done, though I am afraid he will

die for grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was how to

f Camd. 533, 534.

secure
148

secure the advantages which would arise from Mary's death, with- B ll K
out appearing to have given her content to a deed so odious.
She often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as to some other
courtiers, that now was the time to discover the sincerity of
their concern for her safety, and that flie expeacd their zeal would
extricate her out of her present perplexity. But they were wife
enough to seem not to understand her meaning. EIven after the
warrant was signcd, ihe commanded a letter to be written to Paulet,
in less ambiguous terms, complaining of his remiilnefs in lparing
so long the life of her capital enemy, and begging him to reeCm,-
ber at last what was incumbent ason himl as an aflcionatc llbjeCt,
as well as what he was bound to do by the oath of aflociation,
and to deliver his fovcreigt from continual fear and danger,
by shortening the days of his prifuncr. Pl'aut, though rigor-
ous and harill, and often brutal in the ifclharge of Iwht he
thought his duty, as Mary's k eeper, was ncvcrtllelcl- a man of
honour and integrity. -Ic rejeeued the proposal witlh dlilin;
and lamenting that he should ever have bccn deemed capable of
afting the part of an assassin, he declared that the queenl miight
dilpofe of his life at her pleaflure, but th;:t he would never fluin
lis own honour, nor leave an everlalling n-mark of infamy on his
posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate fb foul a crime. On
the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extremely pcevifhl;
and calling him a dainty and prcci fil/owi', whlo would promlife
much, but perform nothing, she propoicd to cmploy one WVing-
field, who had both courage and inclination to strike the blow i.
But Davison remonstrating againfl this, as a deed dillionourable
in itself, and of dangerous example, {he again declared her in-
tention that the sentence pronounced by the conmiflioners flould

g Biogr. Britan. article Da.fin,

be

149

B °0 K be executed according to law; and as she had already signed the

VII. .--.-._ warrant, she begged that no farther application might be made to

her on that head. 1 By this the privy counsellors thought themselves
sufficiently authorised to proceed; and prompted, as they pre-
tended, by zeal for the queen's safety, or inffigated, as is more
probable, by the apprehension of the danger to which they would
themselves be exposed, if the life of the queen of Scots were
spared, they assembled in the council chamber; and by a letter
under all their hands, empowered the earls of Shrewsbury and
Kent, together with the high flieriff of the county, to fee the
sentence put in execution ".

Mary's beha- ON Tuesday the seventh of February, the two earls arrived at
vIOur at her
death. Iotheringay, and demanded access to the queen, read in her pre-

fence the warrant for'execution, and required her to prepare to
die next morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion,
and crossing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghofi, " That foul," said she, " is not worthy
"the joys of Heaven, which repines because the body must en-
" dure the stroke of the executioner; and though I did not ex-
" peat that the queen of England would set the first example of
"violating the sacred person of a sovereign prince, I willingly
" submit to that which Providence has decreed to be my lot;" and
laying her hand on a Bible, which happened to be near her, ihe
solemnly protested that she was innocent of that conspiracy which
Babington had carried on against Elizabeth's life . She then
mentioned the requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but
obtained no fatisfadory answer. She entreated with particular

b Camd. 534. Strype, iii. 36I. 364. i Jebb, ii. 301.

earneftnef,
x50

earnestness, that now in her last moments her almoner might be B o o K

VII.

filffered to attend her, and that she might enjoy the consolation of ,---
those pious inflitutions prescribed by her religion. Even this fa- 1587.
vour, which is usually granted to the vilest criminal, was abfo-
lutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the pretence of the two earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their mistress, and burst out
into the most paflionate expressions of tenderness and sorrow.
Mary, however, not only retained perfet composure of mind
herself, but endeavoured to moderate their excessive grief; and
falling on her knees, with all her domestics round her, she thanked
Heaven that her sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed
that she might be enabled to endure what (till remained with de-
cency and with fortitude. The greater part of the evening Ihe
employed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote her testament
with her own hand. Her money, her jewels, and her clothes,
she distributed among her servants, according to their rank or
merit. She wrote a short letter to the king of France, and another
to the duke of Guise, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments,
and recommended her foul to their prayers, and her affliCted ser-
vants to their protection. At supper she ate temperately, as usual,
and converted not only with ease, but with cheerfulness; the
drank to every one of her servants, and asked their forgiveness,
if ever Ihe had failed in any part of her duty towards them. At
her wonted time ihe went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours.
Early in the morning she retired into her closet, and employed a
considerable time in devotion. At eight o'clock the high sheriss
and his officers entered her chamber, and found her fiill kneeling

I2 at

B3 0 0 K at the altar. She immnediately started up, and with a majestic mien,

.--.l-- and a countenance undifinayed, and even cheerful, advanced to-

w'5ards the place of execution, leaning on two of Paulet's attend-
ants. She was drcTed in a mourning habit, but with an elegance
and fplcndour which flhe had long laid aiide, except on a few- fcfiival
days. An /l(Nuus DLi hung by a pomander chain at her neck;
her beads at her girdlc; and in her hand she carried a crucifix of
ivory. At the bottom of the fPairs the two earls, attended by fe-
veral gemnlemen fromi the neighbouring counties, received her
ant there fir Andrew -Melvil, the master of her houlfciold, who
had been secluded for some weeks from her preience, was per-
initted to take his last farewel. At the fight of a mittrcfs whom
he tenderly loved, in fici a lftuation, he melted into tears; and as
he was bewailing her condition, and complaining of his own hard
fate, in beingl appointed to carry the account of such a mou.rnful
event into Scotland, Mlary replied, " \Veep not, good Melvil, there
"is at preICnlt gi eat caute for rejoicing. Thou shalt this day fee
" Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares, and such an end put
"to her tedious terings, as fie has long expected. Bear witnefi

that I die constant in my religion; firm in my fidelity towards

"Scotland; and unchanged in my affedlion to France. Corn-
" mend me to my son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious
"to his kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and God
"forgive all those who have thirfled, without caufc, for my
"blood."

VITHI much difficulty, and after many entreaties, {he prevailed

on the two earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was ere6ted in the fame hall where she had been tried, raised a little
above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion, and

block:,
15-

I53

block, wvith black cloth. Mary mounted the ftcps with alacrity, B °0
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance, ------
anld ignilg hcrfelf with the cross, flie fat down in the chair.
Beale read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which
ihe listened with a carclefs air, and like one occupied in other
thoughts. Then the dean of Peterborough began a devout dif-
course, suitable to her present condition, and oflcred up prayers
to Heaven in her behalf; but file declared that flic could not in
conf:ience hearken to the one, nor join with the other; and
kneeling down, repeated a Latin prayer. \Vhen the dean had
linifled his devotions, flhe, with an audible voice, and in the
Einglinl tongue, recommended unto God the afilicQed l ate of the
church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a long life
and peaceable reign to Elizabeth. She declared that she hoped for
mercy only through the death of Christ, at the foot of w-hoi
image fle now willingly shed her blood; and lifting up and lilling
the crucifix, she thus addrefled it: " As thy arms, O Jesus, were
"extended on the cross; so with the outstretchcd arms of thy
"mercy receive me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil and

upper garments; and one of the executioners rudely endeavour-
ing to assist, she gently checked him, and said, with a finile, that
flie had not been accustomed to undress before so many fpcctators,
nor to be served by such valets. With calm but undaunted for-
titude, she laid her neck on the block; and while one executioner
held her hands, the other, at the second stroke, cut off her head,
which falling out of its attire, discovered her hair already grown
quite grey with cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up
fill streaming with blood, and the dean crying out, " So perilfi
" all queen Elizabeth's enemies," the earl of Kent alone answered

VOL. II. X - Amen.

BOOK
B 0 OIC

VII.

1587.

Sentimeutsof
historians
concerning
her,

Amen. The reft of the fpedators continued silent, and drowned
in tears; being incapable, at that moment, of any other senti-
ments but those of pity or admiration k.

Sucri was the tragical death of Mary queen of Scots, after a

life of forty-four years and two months, almost nineteen years of
which she passed in captivity. The political parties which were
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsisted, under
various denominations, ever since that time. The rancour, with
which they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding
ages, and their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been per-
petuated, and even augmented. Among hiflorians, who were
under the dominion of all these passions, and who have either
ascribed to her every virtuous and amiable quality, or have im-
puted to her all the vices of which the human heart is susceptible,
we search in vain for Mary's real characer. She neither merited
the exaggerated praises of the one, nor the undiflinguithing cenfurc
of the other.
Her charac- To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of ex-

ternal form, the added those accomplishments which render their
impreflion irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments; because her
heart was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction ;
because she had been accuftonied from her infancy to be treated as
a queen. No firanger, on some occasions, to dissimulation; which,
in that perfidious court where she received her education, was
reckoned among the necessary arts of government. Not insensible

k Camd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jebb, ii. 300. Strype, iii. 383. See Appendix,
No. XVIIIL

of
S54

of flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure witl whicl almnofP B o i:.
every woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed ----

1537.

with the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we
admire: she was an agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious
queen. The vivacity of her spirit not sufficiently tempered witll
found judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not at
all times under the restraint of discretion, betrayed her both into
errors and into crimes. To fay that she was always unfortunate,
will not'account for that long and almost uninterrupted fucccflion
of calamities which besel her; we nuft likewise add, that aie was
often imprudent. Her paflion for Darnly was rafl, youthful,
and excessive; and though the sudden transition to the oppofitc
extreme was the natural effect of her ill-requited love, and of his
ingratitude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither these, nor Both-
well's artful address and important services, can justify her attach-
ment to that nobleman. Even the manners of the age, licentious
as they were, are no apology for this unhappy paflion; nor can
they induce us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which
followed upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil
over this part of her character which it cannot approve, and may,
perhaps, prompt some to impute some of her actions to her situ-
ation, more than to her dispositions; and to lament the unhap-
piness of the former, rather than accuse the pervcrfencfs of the
latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree and in duration,
those tragical distresses which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow
and commiseration; and while we survey them, we are apt alto-
getler to forget her frailties, we think of her faults with less in-
dignation, and approve of our tears, as if they were fhled for a
person who had attained much nearer to pure virtue.

WITH regard to the queen's person, a circumstance not to be
*omitted in writing the history of a f;exale reign, all contemporary

X 2 authors

B 0 0V K authors agree in ascribing to Mary the utmost beauty of counte-

VII.

_-.-..a nance, and elegance of shape, of which the human form is ca-
15£7. pable. HIcr Lair was black, though, according to the fashion of

that age, flle frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different'
colours. Her eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was ex-
quifitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both
as to ihapc and colour. Her feature was of an height that rose
to the mnjefic. She danced, file walked, and rode with equal'
grace. Iler taste for music was just, and flle botlh sung and played
upon the lute with uncommon flill. Towards the end of her
life, long confinement, and the coldncfs of the houses in which
fle had been imprifnned, brought on a rhcumlnllli, which often
deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays Brantome,
ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or will read
her history without sorrow.

NONE of her women were fulffred to come near her dead body,

which was carried into a room adjoining to the place of execution,
where it lay for some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from
a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the exe-
cutioners, and every thing stained with her blood, were reduced
to ashes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to be
buried in the cathedral of Peterborough with royal magnificence,
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pageantry of a
pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those injuries
which laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his accession to
the English throne, ordered her body to be removed to Westminster-
abbey, and to be deposited among the monarchs of England.

Elizabeth as- ELIZABETH affeaed to receive the accounts of Mary's death
fce s to la-
ment Mary's with the molt violent, emotions of surprise and of concern. Sighs,
death.

tears',.
I56

tears, lamentations, and n ourning, were all employed to display (''

V !i.

tile reality and greatnces of her sorrow. Evident marks of dif- . ------
finulation and artifice may be traced through every period of Eli-
zabeth's proceedings against the life of the Scottifl queen. The
commiflion for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly ex-
torted from her by the 'entreaties of her privy counfcllors. She
delayed publish-ing the fcntence against her till she was twice so-
licited by both houses of parliamcnt. Nor did the sign the war-
rant for execution vvithout the utmost apparent rclutance. One
fIene more of the boldclft and moic folemin deceit remained to be
exlibitcd. Slic undertook to make the world believe that Mary
had been put to death witlout her knowledge, and againfl her
will. Davison, who neither furfplccd her intention, nor his own
danger, was her instrument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a
vicliim to it.

IT was his duty, as secretary of state, to lay before her the

warrant for execution, in order to be signcd; and, by her com-
mand, he carried it to the great feal. She pretended, however,
that fle had charged him not to communicate what lhe ihad done
to any pcrfon, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands,
without her express permifllon; that, in contempt of this order,,
he had not only revealed the matter to several of her ministers,.
but had, in concert wkhi them, affcmbled her privy counsellors,.
by whom, without her consent or knowledge, the warrant was
iflued, and the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put
it in execution. Though Davison denied all this, and with cir-
cumflanccs which bear the strongest marks of truth and credi-
bility; though it-can scarcely be conceived that her privy council,.
composed of the persons in whom the most confided, of her
ministers and favourites, would afimble. within tile wall:, of her

alace,..

B o O K palace, and venture to tranfad a matter of so much importance

VII.
e__^- without her privity, and contrary to her inclination; yet so far

1587. did she carry her dissimulation, that with all the signs of difplea-

sure and of rage, she banihfied most of her counsellors out of her
pretence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harflly, and
with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself for loft, and
in the deepest afflicion wrote to the queen, begging leave to re-
sign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate. Davison
fle instantly deprived of his office, and committed him a clofc
March. prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a solemn

trial in the Star Chamber, condemned to pay a fine of ten thou-
sand pounds, and to be imprisoned during the queen's pleasure.
He langui'hed several years in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of
her condua, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the reputa-
tion and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in
her kingdom '.

Elizabethen- THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furnished
deavours to
sooth James. Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the king of Scots. As

the profped of his mother's danger had excited the king's filial
care and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His fubjeds felt the dishonour done to him and
to the nation. In order to tooth both, Elizabeth instantly dif-
patched Robert Carey, one of lord Hunfdon's sons, with a letter
expressing her extreme afflicion on account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as ihe pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment or intention. James would not permit her meffenecr

Camd. 536. Strype, iii. 370. See Append. No. XIX. Cabala, 229, &c.

to
s58

to cnter Scotland; and with some difficulty received a memorial B o o K

VII.

which he sent fiom Berwick. It contained the tale concerning -
Davison, dreficd up with all the circumstances which tended to 5
exculpate Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his rash-
ness or treachery-. Such a defence gave little fatisfaition, and was
confidered as mockery added to inftlt; and many of the nobles,
as well as the king, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was
extremely solicitous to pacify them, and she wanted neither able
intlrurencts, nor plausible reasons, in. order to accomplifil this.
Leiceetcr wrote to the king, and aValfingham to secretary Mait-
land. They rcprerented the certain dcelruCion to which James
would expose himielf, if, with the forces of Scotland alone, he
should venture to attack a kingdom so far filperior in power; that
the history of past ages, as well as his mother's fad experience,
might convince him, that nothing could be more dangerous, or
deceitful, than dependance on foreign aid ; that the king of
France would never wish to fee the Britilli kingdoms united under
one monarch, nor contribute to invest a prince bo nearly allied to
the house of Guise with such formidable power; that Philip imight
be a more adive ally, but would certainly prove a more dangerous
one, and, under pretence of aflilling him, would afTert his own riglt
to the Englifli crown, which he already began openly to claim; tha"
the fame statute, on which the ientcncc of death againfl his mo-
ther had been founded, would juflify the excluding him from the
succession to the crown ; that the Englifli, naturally avcrfe fiom the
dominion of strangers, would not ftil, if cxafperated by his hof-
tilities, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth was disposed to
repair the wrongs which them other had suffered, by her ten-
dernefs and affedion towards the son; and that, by engaging in
a fruitless war, he would deprive himself of a noble inheritance,
which, by cultivating her fiiendfhip, he mufR infallibly obtain.

5 Thefl

B 0 V K These reprcfentations, added to the confcioufinefs of his own weak-
L----- ness, to the finallncfs of his revenues, to the mutinous l)irit of

1$87.

some of tle nobles, to the dubious fidelity r f others, and to the
influence of that faction which w cas ent: y at Elizabeth's de-
vrotion, convinced James that a war with England, however just,
would in the present juncture he altogether impolitical. All these
considerations induced him to Rifle his resentment; to appear fa-
tisfied with the punishment inflided on Davison; and to prcferve
all the semblances of friendlhip with the Engli(hf court m. In this
manner did the cloud which threatened such a florin pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained una-
venged by any prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth might in-
cur, she was cxpofed to no new danger on that account.

.ifgracc of MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the master of Gray,
the mas1er of
Gray. and loft him the king's favour, which he had for tome time pof-

fefed. I-Ie was become as odious to the nation as favourites, who
acquire power without merit, and exercise it without discretion,
usually are. The treacherous part which he had acted during his
late cmbalfy, was no secret, and filled James, who at length came
to the knowledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers ob-
served the symptoms of disgust arising in the king's mind, his
enemies seized the opportunity, and fir \Villiam Stewart, in re-
venge of the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his brother
May o1. captain James, publicly accuscd him before a convention of

nobles, not only of having contributed, by his advice and fug-
geftions, to take away the life of the queen, but of holding cor-
refpondence with popish princes, in order to subvert the religion
cftablifhed in the kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the king, de-

" Spotfw. 362. Cald. iv. 13, 14. Strype, iii. 377.

fertcd
(G6.o

ferted by all, and conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble de- 1 0

o
fence. He was condemned to perpetual baniilment, a punish- -----

15S7.

ment very unequal to his crimes. But the king v'as unwilling to
abandon one whom he had oncefavoured so highly, to the rigour
of juflice; and lord Hamilton, his near relation, and the other
nobles who had lately, returned from exile, in gratitude for the
zeal with which he had served them, interceded wvarmly in his
behalf.

HAVING thus accomplished the defrruaion of one of his ene-

mies, captain James Stewart thought the junEture favourable for
prosecuting his revenge on them all. He singled out secretary
Maitland, the most eminent both for abilities and enmity to him;
and offered to prove that he was no less acceflary than Gray to the
queen's death, and had even formed a dcfign of delivering up
the king himself into the hands of the Englifli. But time and
absence had, in a great measure, extinguishcd the king's affection
for a minion who so little deserved it. All the courtiers combined
against him as a common enemy; and, instead of gaining his
point, he had the mortification to ice the office of chancellor con-
ferred upon Maitland, who, together with that dignity, enjoyed all
the power and influence of a prime minister.

IN the aftembly of the church, which met this year, the rnme

hatred to the order of bifhlops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the k;ing was now of full
age, and a parliament was iummoned on that occasion, the clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to rc-
present their grievances to that court, from which great things were
expeced.

VOL. II. Y PREVIOUS

BOOK

1587.

The king at-
tempts to
unite the no-
bles.

TniE first care of the parliament was the security of the pro-

teflant religion. All the laws pafred in its favour, since the Re-
formation, were ratified; and a new and severe one was ena&ed
against seminary priests and jesuits, whose restless industry in
t making proselytes, brought many of them into Scotland about

this time. Two ads of this parliament deserve more particular

Spotfw. I64. Cald. iv. i3.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a

work worthy of a king. The deadly feuds which fubfifled be-
tween many of the great families, and which were transmitted
from one generation to another, weakened the strength of the
kingdom; contributed, more than any other circumstance, to pre-
serve a fierce and barbarous spirit among the nobles; and proved
the occasion of many disasters to thcmfelvcs and to their country.
After many preparatory negotiations, he invited the contending
parties to a royal entertainment in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe;
and partly by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained their
promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion. From
thence he conduted them, in solemn proccffion, through the
streets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and sweetmeats was prepared at
the public cross, and there they drank to each other, with all the
signs of reciprocal forgiveness and of future friendship. The
people, who were present at a fpeetacle so unusual, conceived the
most sanguine hopes of feing concord and tranquillity established
in every part of the kingdom, and testified their fatisfation by
repeated acclamationsn. Unhappily, the effects of this reconcili-
ation were not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of
the king, or the fond wifles of the people.
162

notice,
7

notice, on account of tlhe confcqucnccs with which they were
followed.

THIE one refpeatcd the lands of the church. As the public

revenues were not fufficicnt for defraying the king's ordinary
charges; as the administration of the government became more
complicated and more expensive; as James was naturally profuse,
and a stranger to ceconorny; it was necessary, on all these ac-
counts, to provide some fund proportioned to his exigencies. But
no considerable fum could be levied on the commons, who did not
enjoy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The nobles were
unaccustomed to bear the burden of heavy taxes. The revenues
of the church were the only source whence a proper supply could
be drawn. Notwithflanding all the depredations of the laity since
the Reformation, and the various devices which they had em-
ployed to seize the church lands, some considerable portion of
them remained still unalienated, and were held either by the bishops
who poifeffed the benefices, or were granted to laymen during
pleafurc. All these lands were, in this parliament, annexed, by one
general law °, to the crown, and the king was empowered to apply
the rents of them to his own ufc. The tithes alone were reserved
for the maintenance of the persons who served the cure, and the
principal manfion-houfc, with a few acres of land, by way of
glebe, allotted for their refidencc. By this great accefilon of pro-
perty, it is natural to conclude that the king must have acquired a
vast increase of power, and the influence of the nobles have sus-
sered a proportional diminution. The very reverse of this seems,
however, to have been the cafe. Almost all grants of church-
lands, prior to this act, were thereby confirmed; and titles, which

Parl. I Jac. VI. c. 29.

Y 2 were

B 0 0 K

VII.
k----

1587.

General an-
nexation of
church lands;

163

B 00 oK were formerly reckoned precarious, derived from thence the fanc-

VII.
A -,_ tion of parliamentary authority. James was likewise authorised,

during a limited time, to make new alienations; and such was
the facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the solicitations
of his servants, and to gratify their mofl extravagant demands, that
not only during the time limited, but throughout his whole reign,
he was continually employed in bellowing, and his parliament in
ratifying, grants of this kind to his nobles; hence little advantage
accrued to the crown from that which might have been so valuable
an addition to its revenues. The bishops, however, were great
sufferers by the law. But at this junaure neither the king nor his
ministers were solicitous about the interests of an order of men,
odious to the people, and persecuted by the clergy. Their ene-
mies promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The profpec of
flaring in their spoils induced all parties to content to it; and after
a ftep so fatal to the wealth and power of the dignified clergy, it
was no difficult matter to introduce that change in the government
of the church which soon after took place P.

Lefler barons THE 'change which the other fiatute produced in the civil
admitted into
arliameint constitution was no less remarkable. Under the feudal system,
by their re- every freeholder or vaflal of the crown had a right to be present

in parliament. These freeholders were originally few in number,
but pofieffed of great and extensive property. By degrees, these
vast poi'effions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or par-
celled out by the prince, or split by other accidents. The number
of freeholders became greater, and their condition more unequal:
,besides the ancient barons, who preserved their estates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights w.ere

r Spotfw. 365.

the
164

the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior. But, B O o K
in rude ages, when the art of government was extremely imper- --

158 7.

feet, when parliaments were seldom aflcmbled, and deliberated on
matters little vidterelling to a martial people, few of the 4c72'r barons
took their ieats, and the wlhole parliamentary jurifdition was ex-
ercifed by the greater ba,;os, in conjuncion with the ecclefiafiical
order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of the Englifl con-
.ftitution, to which he had been long accustomed, and desirous of
providing a countcrpoife to the power of the great nobles, pro-
cured an aa in the year one thousand four hundred and twcnty-
seven, dispensing with the personal attendance of the leiter barons,
and empowering those in each county to chufe two commiflioners
to represent them in parliament. This law, like many other re-
gulations of that wife prince, produced little effec. All tlh
king's vafials continued, as formerly, pofesled of a right to be
prefcnt in parliament; but, unless in some extraordinary conjunc-
tures, the greater barons alone attended. But, by means of the
Reformation, the constitution had undergone a great change.
The ariftocratical power of the nobles had been much increased,
and the influence of the ecclesiastical order, which the crown
usually employed to check their usurpations, and to balance their
autl1rity, had diminiflcd in proportion. Many of the abbies
and priories had been erected into temporal peerages; and the
protestant bifliops, an indigent race of men, and odious to the
nation, were far from pofifcfing the weight and credit which their
predeccffors derived from their own exorbitant wealth, and the
superstitious reverence of the people. In this situation, the king
had recourse to the expedient employed by James I. and obtained
a law reviving the statute of one thousand four hundred and
twenty-feven; and from that time the commons of Scotland have
sent their representatives to parliament. An act, which tended li

visibly

165

B oV0 K visibly to abridge their authority, did not pass without opposition
'-- -- from many of the nobles. But as the king had a right to fum-

mon the lesser barons to attend in person, others were apprehensive
of feeing the house filled with a multitude of his dependants, and
consented the more willingly to a law which laid them under the
refiridion of appearing only by their representatives.

1588. THE year one thousnd five hundred and eighty-eight began

The ap- THE year one thousand five hundred and eighty-eight began
poach of with an universal expetation throughout all Europe, that it was
the Spanish
armado. to be distinguished by wonderful events and revolutions. Several

astrologers, according to the accounts of contemporary hifrorians,
had prediced this; and the situation of affairs in the two principal
kingdoms of Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, with-
out any supernatural intelligence, might have hazarded the pre-
dicion, and have foreseen the approach of some grand crisis. In
France, it was evident from the aflonifling progress of the league,
conducted by a leader whose ambition was restrained by no scruples,
and whose genius had hitherto surmounted all difficulties; as well
as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry III.
that either that monarch muff submit to abandon the throne, of
which he was unworthy, or by some sudden and daring blow cut
off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the beginning of the
year, the duke of Guise drove his master out of his capital city,
and forced him to conclude a peace, which left him only the
shadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he himself fell
a victim to the resentment and fear of Henry, and to his own
security. In Spain the operations were such as promised some-
thing fill more uncommon. During three years Philip had em-
ployed all the power of his European dominions, and exhausted
the treasures of the Indies, in vast preparations for war. A fleet,
the greatest that had ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to

fail
'i66

fail from Lisbon, and a numerous land army was assembled to
embark on board of it. Its destination was still unknown, though
many circumftanccs made it probable that the blow was aimed, in
the firfl place, against England. Elizabeth had long given secret
aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries, and now
openly afforded them her protetion. A numerous body of her
troops was in their service; the earl of Leiceftcr commanded their
armies; she had great sway in the civil government of the re-
public; and some of its most considerable towns were in her pof-
feflion. Her fleets had insulted the coasts of Spain, intercepted
the galleons fiom the W\eft Indies, and threatened the colonies
there. Roused by so many injuries, allured by views of ambition,
and animated by a fuperflitious zeal for propagating the Romilli
religion, Philip resolved not only to invade, but to conquer Eng-
land, to which his descent from the house of Lancaster, and the do-
nation of pope Sixtus V. gave him in his own opinion a double
title.

ELIZABETII fw the danger approach, and prepared to en-

counter it. The measures for the defence of her kingdom were
concerted and carried on with the wisdom and vigour which dif-
tinguifhed her reign. Her chief care was to secure the friendship
of the king of Scots. She had treated the queen his mother
with a rigour unknown among princes; the had often used him-
self harshly, and with contempt; and though he had hitherto
prudently suppressed his resentment of there injuries, she did not
believe it to be altogether extinguished, and was afraid that, in
her -present situation, it might burst out with a fatal violence.
Philip, sensible how much an alliance with Scotland would faci-
litate his enterprise, courted James with the utmost afliduity. He
excited him to revenge his mother's wrong; he flattered him with

the

B 0OOK

VI1.

15S3.

Conducl of
James on
thatoccafion.

I67

3 0 0 K the hopes of iharing his conquests; and offered him in marriage

-----J his daughter the infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland

.iwarmed with priests, his eminiaries, who reduced some of the

nobles to popery, and corrupted others with bribes and promises.
I-Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a facaion which
openly efpouted the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving
from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to take
arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In order to
counterbalance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest profeflions of
friendship to the king; and Afhby, her amballador, entertained
him with magnificent hopes and promises. He assured him, that
his right of succession to the crown should be publicly acknow-
ledged in England; that he should be created a duke in that king-
dom; that he should be admitted to some share in the govern-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he understood his own interest in
the present juncure, and pursued it with much steadiness. He
rejeced an alliance with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to ad-
mit into his presence an ambassador from the pope. He seized
colonel Semple, an agent of the prince of Parma. He drove
many of the seminary priests out of the kingdom. He marched
suddenly to Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took
him prisoner. In a convention of the nobles, he declared his re-
solution to adhere inviolably to the league with England; and,
without listening to the fuggetions of revenge, determined to act
in concert with Elizabeth, against the common enemy of the pro-
» teftant faith. He put the kingdom in a posture of defence, and

levied troops to obftrua the landing of the Spaniards. He offered
to fend an army to Elizabeth's ailitance, and told her ambassador,
that he expeted no other favour from the king of Spain, but that

which
i68

which Polyphemus had promired to Ulysses, that when he had B 0o K

V11.
devoured all his companions, he would make him his last morsel q. * --

1588.
THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior to A national

covenant i.

that of the king; and the extraordinary danger, with which they defence of
were threatened, suggested to them an extraordinary expedient for religion-
their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
religion, as well as the defence of the king's person and govern-
ment, in opposition to all enemies, foreign and domeflic. This
contained a confession of the protestant faith, a particular renun-
ciation of the errors of popery, and the most solemn promises, in
the name, and through the strength of God, of adhering to each
other in supporting the former, and contending against the latter,
to the utmost of their power r. The king, the nobles, the clergy,
and the people, subscribed with equal alacrity. Strange or uncom-
mon as fucll a combination may now appear, many circumstances
contributed at that time to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When routed by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel were ac-
customcd to bind themselves, by a solemn covenant, to adhere to
that religion which the Almighty had eftablihed among them;
this the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became
them to imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprise was under-
taken in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all
concerned reckoned neccifary for their security. The form of this
religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from those political ones,
of which so many instances have occurred; the articles, ftipu-
lations, and peculiar modes of cxpreffion, are exatly the fame
in both. Almost all the considerable popish princes were then

q Camd. 544. johnft. i39. Spotfw. 369.
r Dunlop's Collea. of Consef. vol. ii. xo8.

x69
ToL. II.

Z

joilned

ii 0 0 X

VII.

I SSS.

The Arm~do
defeated.

joined in a league for extirpating the reformed religion, and no-
thing could be more natural, or seemed more efficacious, than to
enter into a counter-affociation, in order to oppose the progress of
that formidable conspiracy. To these causes did the covenant,
which is become so famous in history, owe its origin. It was
renewed at different times during the reign of James '. It was
revived with great solemnity, though with considerable alterations,
in the year one thousand fix hundred and thirty-eight. It was
adopted by the English in the year one thousand fix hundred and
forty-three, and enforced by the civil and ecclesiastical authority
of both kingdoms. The political purposes to which it was then
made subservient, and the violent and unconstitutional measures
which it was then employed to promote, it is not our province to
explain. But at the juncure in which it was first introduced, we
may pronounce it to have been a prudent and laudable device for
the defence of the religion and liberties of the nation; nor were
the terms in which it was conceived, other than might have been
expected from men alarmed with the impending danger of popery,.
and threatened with an invasion by the most bigoted and most pow-
erful prince in Europe.

PIILtIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him

either with the vigour or dispatch necessary to ensure the success
of so mighty an enterprise. His fleet, which ought to have failed
in April, did not enter the English channel till the middle of
July. It hovered many days on the coast, in expeCation of being
joined by the prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports
of Slanders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters pursued
the Spaniards during that time; successive storms and battles,

CaldYiv. 129.

which
t7o

which are well known, conspired with their own ill conduct to B 0 o K

VII.

disappoint. their enterprise. And, by the blessing of Providence, ----
which watched with remarkable care over the protestant religion s
and the liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered and de-
firoy the Armado, on which Philip had arrogantly beflowed the
name of Invincible, After being driven out of the English seas,
their shattered ships were forced to ftecr their courfc toward Spain,
round Scotland and Ireland. Many of them luffered fliipwreck
on these dangerous and unknown coasts. Though James kept his
fubjeas under arms, to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and
to prevent their landing in an hostile manner, he received with
great humanity seven hundred who were forced ashore by a tem-
pest, and after supplying them with necessaries, permitted them to
return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambafllidor

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity he had discovered during a conjunaure so
dangerous. But none of Aflhby's promises were any longer re-
nmember.ed; that minister was even accused of having exceeded his
powers, by his too liberal offers; and conscious of his own false-
hood, or ashamed of being disowned by his court, he withdrew
secretly o'lt of Scotland .

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own raflinefs in i5s9,

l'hilip's in-

attempting the conquest of England, by a naval armament, trigucs in
equipped at so great a diflance, and fubjedteed, in all its operations, Scotland.
to the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising fiom seas

' Johnft. 134. Camd 548. M4urdin, 635. 7S3.

7 2.

a9nd

B 0 0 K and wilds, resolved to make his attack in another form, and to

VII.
'------' adopt the plan which the princes of Lorrain had long meditated,

of invading England through Scotland. A body of his troops,
he imagined, might be easily wafted over from the Low Countries
to that kingdom, and if they could once obtain footing, or pro-
cure assistance there, the frontier of England was open and de-
fenceless, and the northern counties full of Roman catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Meanwhile, a descent
might be threatened on the southern coast, which would divide
the English army, diftraa their councils, and throw the whole
kingdom into terrible convulsions. In order to prepare the way
for the execution of this design, he remitted a considerable fum
of money, to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scotland, and em-
ployed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottifil
jesuits, to gain over as many persons of diftinaion as possible to

Popimh nobles his interest. Zeal for popery, and the artful insinuations of tiefe
conspire
against the emissaries, induced several noblemen to favour a measure which

tended so manifestly to the deftrution of their country. Huntly,
though the king had lately given him in marriage the daughter of
his favourite the duke of Lennox, continued warmly attached to
the Romish church. Crawford and Errol were animated with the
zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a correspondence with
the prince of Parma, and, in their letters to him, offered their
service to the king of Spain, and undertook, with the aid of fix
thousand men, to render him master of Scotland, and to bring so
many of their valfals into the field, that he should be able to enter
England with a numerous army. Francis Stewart, grandson of
James V. ", whom the king had created earl of Bothwell, though

He was the son of John Prior of Coldingham, one of James's natural
children.

influenced,
172

influenced by no motive of religion, for he frill adhered to the B o0 K

VII.

protestant faith, was prompted merely by caprice, and the reft-
leffnefs of his nature, tojoin in this treasonable correspondence. 9

ALL there letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth,. Feb. 17.

alarmed at the danger.which threatened her own kingdom, sent
them immediately to the king, and, reproaching him with his former
lenity towards the popith party, called upon him to check this
formidable conspiracy by a proper severity. But James, though The king's

maxims with

firmly attached to the proteflant religion, though profoundly regard to
versed in the theological controversies between the Reformers and popery.
the church of Rome, though he had employed himself, at that
early period of life, in writing a commentary on the Revelations,
in which he laboured to prove the pope to be antichrist, had ne-
verthelefs adopted already those maxims concerning the treatment
of the Roman catholics, to which he adhered through the refl of
his life. The Roman catholics were at that time a powerful and
acive party in England; they were far from being an inconfidcr-
able faction in his own kingdom. The pope and king of Spain
were ready to take part in all their machinations, and to second
every effort of their bigotry. The opposition of such a body to
his succession to the crown of England, added to the averseness of
the English from the government of strangers, might create him
many difficulties. In order to avoid these, he thought it necefary
to sooth rather than to irritate the Roman catholics, and to re-
concile them to his succession, by the hopes of gentler treatment,
and some mitigation of the rigour of those laws, which were now
in force against them. This attempt to gain one party by pro-
mises of indulgence and ats of clemency, while lie adhered
with all the obstinacy of a disputant to the doarine, and tenets
of the other, has given an air of mystery, and even of contra-

dilion,

B 0 0 K dicaon, to this part of the king's character. The papists, with

VII.

·_

.-' the credulity of a sea firuggling to obtain power, believed his
5 i9 hart to be wholly theirs; and the protestants, with thejealoufy in-

separable from those who are already in poffeflion of power, viewed
every aat of lenity as a mark of indifference, or a symptom of
apoftacy. In order to please both, James often aimed at an
excessive refinement, mingled with diflimulation, in which he
imagined the perfeAion of government and of kingcraft to
consist.

Ills excef- HIS behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general
live lenity to
the confpi- maxims. Notwithstanding the solicitations of the queen of Eng-
xator(. land, enforced by the zealous remonstrances of his own clergy, a

short imprisonment was the only punishment he infliced upon
I-Iuntly and his aflociates. But he loon had reason to repent an
aa of clemency so inconsistent with the dignity of government.
The first use which the conspirators made of their liberty was, to
assemble their followers, and, under pretence of removing chan-
cellor Maitland, an able minister, but warmly devoted to the
Engliflh interest, from the king's councils and presence, they at-
tempted to seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly by .Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their own ill-con-
dut, they were forced to retire to the North, where they openly
ereCed the standard of rebellion. But as the king's government
was not generally unpopular, or his minifiers odious, their own
vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause.
The king, in person, advancing against them with such forces as
he could suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity
of the troops, which, though superior in number, followed them
with reluctance, as to hazard a battle; but suffering them to dif-
perle, they surrendered to the king, and threw themselves on his

mercy.

mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell, were all brought B O O K
to a public trial. Repeated aas of treason were easily proved ----
against them. The king, however, did not permit any sentence
to be pronounced; and, after keeping them a few months in
confinement, he took occasion, amidst the public festivity, and
rejoicings at the approach of his marriage, to set them at liberty x.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient monarchs of The king's

Scotland in the direCt line; as all hopes of uniting the crowns of uitI Anne
the two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the earl of of Denmall:
Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the king's
marriage was, on all these accounts, an event which the nation
wished for with the utmost ardour. HIc hinfelf was no Icfs dc--
firous of accomplifling it; and had made overtures for that pur-
pose to the eldest daughter of Frederick II. king of Denmark. But
Elizabeth, jealous of every thing that would render the acccflion of
the house of Stewart more acceptable to the Englifl, endeavoured
to perplex James, in the fame manner hie had done Mary; and
employed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his marriage. I-is
ministers, gained by bribes and promises, seconded her intention;
and though several different ambassadors were sent from Scotland
to Denmark, they produced powers so limited, or insisted on con-
ditions so extravagant, that Frederick could not believe the king
to be in earnest; and fufpeting that there was some design to
deceive or amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to the (duke
of Brunswick. Not discouraged by this difippointment, which
he imputed entirely to the conduct of his own ministers, James
made addresses to the princess Anne, Frederick's second daughter.
Though Elizabeth endeavoured to divert him from this by recom-

x Spotfw. 373. Cald. iv. 103-130.

13 mending

'T IE HISTORY
B °0° 0K nmending Catherine the king of Navarre's sifter, as a more advan-

VII.
L-., tageous match; though she prevailed on the privy council of

Scotland to declare against the alliance with Denmark, he persisted
in his choice; and despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of his
own ministers in any other manner, he secretly encouraged the citi-
zens of Edinburgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces
the chancellor, whom they accused as the person whose artifices
had hitherto disappointed the wishes of the king and the expet-
ations of his people. In consequence of this, the earl marifchal
was sent into Denmark at the head of a splendid embassy. He
received ample powers and inftrutions, drawn with the king's
own hand. The marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and
the young queen set fail towards Scotland. James made great
preparations for her reception, and waited her landing with all
the impatience of a lover; when the unwelcome account arrived,
that a violent tempest had arisen, which drove back her fleet to
Norway, in a condition so fiattered, that there was little hope of
its putting again to sea before .the spring. This unexpeced difap-
pointment he felt with the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted
-out some flips, and, without communicating his intention to
any of his council, failed in person, attended by the chancellor,
fcveral noblemen, and a train of three hundred persons, in quest

oft. -2. of his bride. He arrived safely in a small harbour near Upflo,
No0v. 24. where the queen then resided. There the marriage was folem-

nized; and as it would have been rash to trust those boisterous seas
in the winter season, James accepted the invitation of the court
of Denmark, and repairing to Copenhagen, passed several months
there, amidst continual feasting and amusements, in which both the
quueen and himself had great delight .

z Melvil, 352. Spotfw. 377. Murdin, 637.

No
<,. ·

No event in the king's life appears to be a wider deviation from B O O K

VI I.

his general charaAer, than this sudden sally. His ion Charles I.
was capable of that exceffilve admiration of the other sex, whichl
arises from great fenlibility of heart, heightened by elegance of
tafle; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain ifitcd fuich a
disposition. But Jamce was not ffhcclptible of any refined gal-
lantry, and alhvas exprcfled that contempt for the female charatcer

Iwhich a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politcncfs, is apt
to infiire. He was cxafperated, however, and rendered ilmpatient
by the many obstacles which had been laid in iis way. lie was
anxious to iccure the political advantages whicl lie expected fiom
marriage; and fearing tlat a dclay might afford L'lizabctl and
his own miniflcrs an opportunity of thwarting him by new izn-
trigues, he fuddcnly took the resolution of preventing tlcem, by a
voyage from which he expectcd to rcturn in a few weeks. Tl'lc
nation icemed to applaud his condiucltI, and to be pleased with this
appearance of amorous ardour in a younig prince. Notwithfla nd-
ing his ab)fncc so long beyonll the tinme h expe-d, tlhe nobles,
the clergy, and the people, vicc with one another in loyalty and
obedience ; and no period in the king's reign was more remlark-
able for tranquillity, or more free from any eruption of thofll
faaions which so often diflurbcd the kingdom.

VOL. IL

A a

77

# BOOK VIII.

T II E
H I S T O R Y

o F
SCOT L A N D.

B 0 0 K VIII.

N the first of May the king and queen arrived at Leith, and B o IK
were received by their fubjcs with every poflible cxpreffion Vill

of joy. The solemnity of the queen's coronation was conducted The 5.g
with great magnificence; but so low had the order of bishops and queen

arrive in

fallen in the opinion of the public, that none of them were present Scotland.
on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a presbyterian minister
of great reputation, set the crown on her head, adlniniftered the
sacred untion, and performed the other cuftornary ceremonies.

THE zeal and success with which many of the clergy had con-

tributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom,
during his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their
persons, and even to the presbyterian form of government. In August..
presence of an assembly, which met this year, he made high en-
comiums on the discipline as well as the doctrine of the church,

A a 2 pronifed

B 0 0 K promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the aflcmbly
-- ---. to frame such ats as gradually abolifllcd all the remains of epif-

5 copal jurifdition, and paved the way for a full and legal efta-

blifhment of the prefbytcrian model .
1591. AN event happened soon after, which afforded the clergy no

finall triumph. Archbilhop Adamson, their ancient opponent,
having fallen under the king's displeasure, having been deprived
of the revenues of his fee in coniequence of the ac of annexation,
and being oppreIecd with age, with poverty, and diseases, made
the meanest fubmiflion to the clergy, and delivered to the assembly
a formal recantation of all his opinions concerning church govern-
ment, which had been matter of offence to the prcibyterians.
Such a confeflion, from the most learned person of the episcopal
order, was confidered as a teltimony which the force of truth had
extorted from an adveralryb.

Disorders in MNIEANWHIIILE, the king's cxceflive clemency towards offenders
the kingdom. multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such adts of violence,

as brought his government under contempt, and proved fatal to
many of his fulbjcds. The hifIory of feve1al years, about this time,
is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between the great
families, and of murders and aflmllnations perpetrated in the moaf
audacious manner, and with circumstances of the utmost barbarity.
All the defects in the feudal aristocracy were now felt more sensibly,
perhaps, than at any other period in the hiflory of Scotland, and
universal license and anarchy prevailed to a degree scarce confitent
with the preservation of bociety: while the king, too gentle to
punish, or too feeble to adt with vigour, suffered all these enor-
mities to pa's with impunity.

a Cald. iv. 204.

12

} Spotfw. 385. Cakl. iv. 214.

BuT
I8o

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which

is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and thofl
fufpeaed of it felt the whole weight of his authority. Many per-
sons, neither extremely old nor wretchedly poor, which were
usually held to be certain indications of this crilne, but matlcrs of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
life, were cfized and tortured. Though their confefflons contained
the molft abihLrd and incredible circumliances, the king's prejudices,
those of the clergy and of the people, confilired in believing their
extravagancies, without hecltation, and in punishing their peribns
without mercy. Some of thelf uinhappy fufeirers accufied Both-
well of having consultcd themn, in order to know the time of the
king's death, and of having employed their art, to raise the storms
which had endangered the queen's life, and had detained James
ob long in Denmark. Upon this evidence that nobleman was
committed to prison. -Ils turbulent and haughty spirit could
neither submit to the restraint, nor brook luch an indignity.
Having gained his keepers, he made his cfcape, and imputing the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy the chanccllor, lie afllmblcd
his followers, under pretence of driving him from the king's coun-
cils. Being favoured by 'ome of the king's attendants, he was
admitted by a secret pafTagc, under cloud of night, into the court
of the palace of Holy-rood-houlc. lIe advanced directly towards
the royal apartment, but happily before he entered, the alarm was
taken, and the doors ihut. \Vhile he attempted to burit open
some of them, and to set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh
had time to run to their arms, and he escapcd with the utmost dif-
ficulty; owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and the
precipitancy with which he fled".

B 0 0 K

VIII.

'591.

An attempt
of Bothwe ll'.
again f the
king.

Dec. -.,
C Melv. 388. Spotfw. 386,

HE

B OCO XK HE retired towards the north, and the king having unadvisedly

VIII.
A--i. given a commission to the earl of Huntly to pursue him and his
192Z. followers with fire and sword, he, under colour of executing that

commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the
Feb. 8. house of the earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew

Murray himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such
promising virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the darling
of the people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of
Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were
refrained, by the care of the magistrates, from any a&t of vio-
lence, they threw aside all respect for the king and his ministers,
and openly insulted and threatened both. \Vhile this mutinous
spirit continued, James thought it prudent to withdraw from the
city, and fixed his residence for some time at Glasgow. There
I-Iuntly surrendered himself to justice; and, notwithifanding the
atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours of the people, the
power of the chancellor, with whom he was now closely confede-
rated, and the king's regard for the memory of the duke of Len-
nox, whose daughter he had married, not only protected him
from the sentence which such an odious acion merited, but ex-
empted him even from the formality of a public trial '.

Prcnvterian A STEP of much importance was taken soon after with regard to
church go-
vernment the government of the church. The clergy had long complained
eltablihed
by law. of the encroachments made upon their privileges and jurisdiction

by the ads of the parliament one thousand live hundred and
eighty-four, and though there laws had now loft much of their
force, they resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. The junCture for puflhiig such

" Spotfw. 387.

a measure
182

a measure was well chosen. The king had loft much of the B 0 0 K
public favour by his lenity towards the popish faction, and '------
fiill more by his remissness in pursuing the murderers of the
earl of Murray. The chancellor had not only a powerful
party of the courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, who imputed to him every false ftep in the
king's conduct. Bothwell fiill lurked in the kingdom, and being
secretly supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-
firation, was ready every moment to renew his audacious cntcr-
prises. James, for all these rcalbns, was extrcmcly willing to
indulge the clergy in their requcfl, and not only consented to a law,
whereby the ats of one thouland live hundred and eighty-four
were rescinded or explained, but he carried his complaisance still
further, and permitted the parliament to eflablifl the presbyterian
government, its general aincmblics, provincial synods, prefbytcrics,
and kirk sessions, with all the different branches of their dilcipline
and jurifdliaion, in the moll ample manner. All the zeal and
authority of the clergy, even under the administration of re-
gents, from whom they might have expected the moltl partial
favour, could not obtain the fanaion of law, in confirmation of
their mode of ecclesiastical governmelnt. No prince was ever lcls
disposed than James to approve a system, whol republican genius
inspired a passion for liberty, lo repugnant to his exalted notions
of royal prerogative. Nor could any averCfon be more inveterate
than his, to the austere and uncomplying characlcr of the plrfl)y-
terian clergy in that age; who, more eminent fir zeal than for
policy, often contradicted his opinions, and ceniured his conduc,
with a freedom equally offensive to his dogmatifin as a theologian,
and to his pride as a king. His situation, however, obliged himn
frequently to conceal, or to diflemble, his fentimnents; and as hle
often disgusted his fubjcts, by' indulging the popish fadiion
more than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for this b1.

conccflionIs

183

B o O K concenfons to the presbyterian clergy, more liberal than he him-

VIIrI.

·---^ self would otherwise have chosen to grant e.
159z.

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attainted.

But he soon made a new attempt to seize the king at Falkland;
and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly defended
by others, who wified well to Bothwell, as the chancellor's avowed
enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of fir Robert
Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's aflociatcs f.

A new con- SCARCELY was this danger over, when the nation was alarmed
fpiracy of the
popili lords. with the discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy.

George Ker, the lord Ncwbattllcs brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many fuftiicious papers were found in
his custody, and among these, several blanks signed by the earls
of Angus, I-Iuntly, and E'rrol. By this extraordinary precaution
they hoped to escape any danger of discovery. But Ker's refo-
lution shrinking when torture was threatened, he confessed that
he was employed by thcfe noblemen to carry on a negotiation
with the king of Spain; that the blanks subscribed with their
names were to be filled up by Cricliton and Tyrie; that they were
inftruaed to offer the faithful service of the three earls to that
monarch; and to solicit him to land a body of his troops, either
in Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with which they under-
took, in the firfi place, to eftablifli the Roman catholic religion in
Scotland, and then to invade England with the whole forces of the
kingdom. David Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland,
whom he accuscd of being privy to the conspiracy, were taken into
custody, and confirmed all the circumstances of his confeflion g.

Cald. iv. 248. 252. Spotfw. 388. M' lelv. 402. g Rymer, xvi. 190.

TIl E

TIE nation having been for foicm time in continual terror and B 0 K

agitation by so many iucceflive conspiracics, tile dilcovery of this -----
new danger completed the panic. All ranks of men, as if the z,:; of'Giie
enemy had already been at their gntcs, thought thcmfclve s called
upon to stand forth in defence of their country. The miniflers of
Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the king, who
happened at that time to be abfclt from the capitil, and without
having received any legal cominiflion, aflemblcd a considerable
number of peers and barons, in order to provide an inflant re-
medy against the impending danger. They seized the earl of
Angus, and committed him to the cafle ; they examined Ker;
and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the king, concern-
ing the state of the nation; and the neceflity of prosecuting the
conflirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous of ,nd prncFed.

isls of the

every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with fibjeCts, lki"g .g-iilt
who, instead of petitioning, feemred to prescribe to him, found
it neceflary, during the violence of the ferment, not only to
adopt their plan, but even to declare that no consideration should
ever induce him to pardon those who had been guilty of so odi-
ous a treason. He lummoned the earls of Hluntley and Errol to
surrender themselves to jufrice. Graham of Fintry, whom his Jan. s.
peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to be
publicly beheaded; and marching into the north at the head of
an army, the two earls, together with Angus, who had escaped
out of prison, retired to the mountains. He placed garrisons in
the castles which belonged to them ; compelled their vaflals, and
the barons in the adjacent countries, to subscribe a bond contain-
ing professions of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm
adherence to the protestant faith; and, the better to secure the

Vol, II. B b tranquillity

I8S

BOOK

Vlil.

1593.

March 18.
Elizabeth so-
licits him to
treat tlhemn
with rigcur.

tranquillity of that part of the kingdom, constituted the earls of
Athol and Marifchal his lieutenants there"

I-IAVING finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,

where he found lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a
conspiracy which flie confidered as no less formidable to her own
kingdom than to Scotland, reproached James with his former re-
miflnefs, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
protefant religion, or the dignity of his own crown, to punish
this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not apprehend
the persons, at lcaft to confiscate the estates, of such audacious
rebels. She weakened however the force of there requests, by
interceding at the fame time in behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac-
cording to her usual policy in nourishing a fatious spirit among
the Scottish nobles, she had taken under her protetion. James
absolutely refused to liften to any interceflion in favour of one
who had so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both his
government and his person. With regard to the popifi confpi-
rators, he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vigour;
but that he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a
small fum of money from Elizabeth, which flie, distrustful per-
haps of the manner in which he might apply it, shewed no inclin-
ation to grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his own
subje&s obliged him to call a parliament, in order to pass an aa
of attainder against the three earls. But before it met, Ker
made his escape out of prison, and, on pretence that legal evi-
'dence of their guilt could not be produced, nothing was concluded

* Spotfw. 301. Cald.iv. 2zr.

againfl
r86

against them. The king himself was universally fufpetedl of B ° 0 K.
having contrived this artifice, on purpofc to elude the requests of

1593.

the queen of England, and to disappoint the winses of his own
people; and therefore, in order to tooth the clergy, who ex-
claimed loudly against his conduclt, he gave way to the passing
of an ad, which ordained those who obstinately contemned the
censures of the church to be declared outlaws '.

WHxILE the terror excited by the popifli conspiracy pofeffed the BotlhwcT

f. lrprifcs the

nation, the court had been divided by two rival fadtions, which king.
contended for the chief dirccion of affairs. At the head of one
was the chancellor, in whom the king reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the
queen's difplcafure. The duke of Lennox, the earl of Athol,
lord Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart, efpouifed her quarrel,
and widened the breach. James, tond no less of domestic tran-
quillity than of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, for
iome time, in hopes that the queen's resentment would subside.
But as he flood in need, in the present junture, of the afliftance
of an able minister, he had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him from recovering his former power, the Stewarts had
recourse to an expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame name, they July 24.
brought him back secretly into Scotland; and seizing the gates of
the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with a nu-
merous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable of refifance, discovered more indig-
nation than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called

J Cald. iv. 34 . Spotfw. 393. Parl. 13Jac. VI. c. 164.

187
Bb 2

on

BO1 IK on the earl to finifl his treasons, by piercing his sovereign to the

VIII.

h- eart. But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon.
'593- The king was not in a condition to refute his demands. A few

days after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to
whom he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himself to
grant him a remiflion for all pail offences, and to procure the
ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean time to dismiss
the chancellor, the master of Glamis, lord Home, and fir George
Home, from his councils and pretence. Bothwell, on his part,
consented to remove from court, though he left there as many
of his associates as he thought fuflicient to prevent the return of
the adverse faction.

He recovers BUT it 'was now no easy matter to keep the king under the
his liberty.
Sept. 7. fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often fubjedt during

his minority. He discovered so much impatience to ihake off
his fetters, that those who had imposed, durst not continue, the
restraint. They permitted him to call a convention of the nobles
at Stirling, and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies,
and all who were desirous of gaining the king's favour by appear-
ing to be so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the intult
offered to the king's person and authority to be high treason,
and declared him absolved from any obligation to observe con-
ditions extorted by force, and which violated so essentially his
royal prerogative. James, however, still proffered him a pardon,
provided he would sue for it as an aat of mercy, and promise to
retire out of the kingdom. These conditions Bothwell rejected
with disdain, and betaking himself once more to arms, attempted
to surprise the king; but finding him on his guard, fled to the
borders k

k Cald. iv. 326. Spotfw. 395.

THi
I88,

THE king's ardour against Bothwell, compared with his flow B Vl° K
and evasive proceedings against the popilh lords, occasioned a -----

1593.
general disgust among his ulbjedts; and was imputed either to Sufpeted of

favouring the

an exceflive attachment to the perlons of those conspirators, or popilllords.
to a secret partiality towards their opinions; both which gave
rife to no unreasonable fears. The clergy, as the immediate i Sept. 2.
guardians of the protestant religion, thought themselves bound,
in such a juncture, to take extraordinary fleps for its preiervation.
The provinci:l fynod of Fife happening to meet at tlat time, a
motion was made to excomnunicate all concerned in the late con-
fpiracy, as obifinate and irrcclaimable papists; and though none
of the conspirators resided within the bounds of the fynod, or were
subjed to its jurifdi.tidon, such was the zeal of the members, that,
oveilooking this irregularity, they pronounced againfl them the
sentence of excommunication, to which the aa of last parlia-
ment added new terrors. Left this should be imputed to a few
men, and accounted the ac of a finall part of the church, deputies.
were appointed to attend the adjacent iynods, and to desire their
approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened a few weeks after which increased the

people's suspicions of the king. As he was marching on an expe-
dition against the borderers, the three popish earls coming fuddcnly
into his pretence, offered to ulbmit themselves to a legal trial;
and James, without committing them to custody, appointed a day
for that purpole. They prepared to appear with a formidable
train of their friends and vaflals. But in the mean time the
clergy, together with many peers and barons, assembling at Edin-
burgh, remonstrated against the king's extreme indulgence wish
great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the regular
course ofjuftice, to commit to sure custody persons charged with

the

Ihis lcnity to-
wvards thelm.
O't. 1 .

t89

B V0 K the highest aas of treason, who could not be brought to a legal trial,
------' until they were absolved from the censures of the church; and to

call a convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the method of
proceeding against them. At the fame time they offered to ac-
company him in arms to the place of trial, left such audacious and
powerful criminals should overawe justice, and dictate to the
judges to whom they pretended to submit. James, though ex-
trelnely offended, both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient to put
off the day of trial, and to call a convention of estates, in order
to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being hu-
moured in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate,
and the chancellor managed the convention so artfully, that he
himself, together with a few other members, was impowered to
Nov. z6. pronounce a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much

deliberation they ordained, that the three earls and their aflociates
should be exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on
account of their correspondence with Spain; that, before the
first day of February, they flhould either submit to the church,
and publicly renounce the errors of popery, or remove out of
the kingdom; that, before the first of January, they flhould de-
clare which of these alternatives they would embrace; that they
should find surety for their peaceable demeanor for the future;
and that if they failed to signify their choice in due time, they
should lose the benefit of this aa of abolition, and remain ex-
posed to all the pains of law'.
1594. BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the popish fu-

Cald. iv. 330. Spotfw. 397.

perftition,

perfiition, fubmiflive to all the dilates of their priests, and B V K
buoyed up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three earls ---
refuied to accept of the conditions, and continued their treafolt-
able correspondence with the court of Spain. A convention of Jan. i8S
estates pronounced them to have forfeited the benefit of the
articles which were oTfered; and the king required them, by pro-
clamation, to surrender themselves to justice. The presence of the
English ambassador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of thele
proceedings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and
imputing his reluaance to punifl the popifl lords to a fccret ap-
probation of their designs, had sent lord Zouche to reprefcnt, once
more, the danger to which he exposed himself, by this false mo-
deration; and to require him to exercise that rigour which their
crimes, as well as the posture of affairs, rendered necefflrv.
Though the steps now taken by the king silenced all complaints
on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful of his character as an am-
baffador, entered into private negotiations with such of the Scottish
nobles as disapproved of the king's measures, and held almoif an
open correspondence with Bothwcll, who, according to the ufial
artifice of malecontents, pretended much solicitude for reforming
the disorders of the commonwealth; and covered his own am-
bition with the specious veil of zeal against those counsellors
who restrained the king from pursuing the avowed enemies of the
protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the name of his
mistress, to take arms against his sovereign.

MEANWHILE, the king and the clergy were filled with mutual A newat;

distrust of each other. They were jealous, perhaps, to excess, Bothwtell'
that James's affections leaned too much towards the popish faction;,
he fufpetted them, without good reason, of prompting Bothwell to

R. rebellion,,

191

B 0 0 iK rebellion, and even of supplying him with money for that pur-

VIII.
_-.-..- . pose. Little instigation, indeed, was wanting to rouse such a

;594. turbulent spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprise. He ap-

peared suddenly within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of four
hundred horse. The pretences, by which he endeavoured to jus-
tify this infurretion, were extremely popular; zeal for religion,
enmity to popery, concern for the king's honour, and for the
liberties of the nation. James was totally unprovided for his own
defence; he had no infantry, and was accompanied only with a
few horsemen of lord Home's train. In this extremity, he im-
plored the aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to en-
courage them to aa with zeal, he promised to proceed against the
popish lords with the utmost rigour of law. Animated by their
ministers, the citizens ran cheerfully to their arms, and advanced,
with the king at their head, against Bothwell; but he, notwith-
fianding his success in putting to flight lord Home, who had
rashly charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry, retired
to Dalkeith without daring to attack the king. His followers
abandoned him soon after, and, discouraged by so many successive
disappointments, could never aftewards be brought to venture into
the field. He betook himself to his usual lurking-places in the
north of England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the king's
remonstrances, obliged him to quit his retreat m

Fresh dan- No sooner was the king delivered from one danger, than he
gers from tne was called to attend to another. The popish lords, in consequence
popifih lords.
April 3. of their negotiations with Spain, received in the spring a filpply

i of money from Philip. What bold designs this might inspire;

it was no easy matter to conjecture. From men under the do-

Spotfw. 403. Cald. iv. 359.

minion
193

minion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim, the CB 0 K
mol: desperate actions were to be dreaded. The aflembly of --/--.
the chulrch immediately took the alarm; remonstrated againift 1
them with more bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified
the sentence of excommunication pronounced by the fynod
of Fife. James himself; provoked by their obflinacy and in-
gratitude, and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be2 generally dif)leafing to his own fuibjeds, but givc rife to
unfavourable fu'l icions among the English, exerted himlflf with
unusual vigour. I-He called a parliament; laid before it all the Jne s'.
circumstances and aggravations of the conspiracy; and tliough
there were but few members present, and fcveral of these con-
neaed with the conspirators by blood or fricndfnip, he prevailed
on them, by his influence and importunity, to pronounce thl
most rigorous sentence which the law can inflit. cThey were de-
clared to be guilty of high trcafon, and their eflatcs and honours
forfeited. At the fame time, statutes, more severe than ever, were
enated against the profefbors of the popish rcligion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of great Battle of

difficulty. Three powerful barons, cantoned in a part of the
country of difficult access, surrounded with numerous valTals, and
supported by aid from a foreign prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottish monarch. No intrcaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the money necessary for defiaying the expcnccs
of an expedition against them. To attack them in person, witl
his own forces alone, might have exposcd James both to dligrace
and to danger. Hle had recourse to the only expedient which
remained in such a situation, for aiding the impotence of fovereigi
authority; he delegated his authority to the earl of Argyll and
lord Forbe., the leaders of two clans at enmity with the conflli-

VOL. II. C c rators;

190i

13. ° ° K rators; and gave them a commiflion to invade their lands, and
~.4-~-- to fcize the castles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwith-

1''' 9 flanding all his high pretensions of zeal for the protestant religion,

having now entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger
became every day more urging. Argyll, solicited by the king,
and routed by the clergy, took the field at the head of seven thou-
sand men. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army
far inferior in number, but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the-
low 'countries, mounted on horseback, and who brought along
oa. 3. with them a train of field-pieces. They encountered each other

with all the fury which hereditary enmity and ancient rivalihip
,^95. add to undisciplined courage. But the Highlanders, disconcerted

by the firfi discharge of the cannon, to which they were little
accustomed, and unable to refif the imprefflon of cavalry, were
soon put to flight; and Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen,
was carried by his friends out of the field, weeping with indig-
nation at their disgrace, and calling on them to stand, and to vin-
dicate the honour of their name ".

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged

to pawn his jewels in order to raise money °, aflembled a small
body of troops, and marched towards the north. He was joined
by the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and other clans at en-
mity with Huntly and Errol, who having loft several of their prin-
cipal followers at Glenlivat, and others refuting to bear arms against
the king in person, were obliged to retire to the mountains. James
walled their lands ; put garrisons in some of their castles; burnt
* others; and left the duke of Lennox as his lieutenant in that part

of the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to restrain them
from gathering to any head there, or from infesting the low

Cald, iv. 408. Birch, Mem. i. i86.

country.

I95

country. Reduced at last to extreme distress by the rigour of the B 0O K
season, and the desertion of their followers, they obtained the L------
king's permission to go beyond seas, and gave security that they Popi .Ord
should neither return without his liccnef, nor engage in any new driven out of

thekingdoni.

intrigues against the protestant religion, or the peace of the
kingdom '.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eflablifhed in the north of

Scotland; and the firmneis and vigour which James had displayed
in his last procccdings againff them, regained him, in a great
degree, the confidence of his protestant fulbjecas. But lie funk, T;, Rom-n
in the fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the cftecm of catholics il-
the Roman catholics. They had asserted his mother's right to the Igain't

James.

crown of England with so much warmth, that they could not,
with any decency, reject his; and the indulgence, with which he
affected to treat the professors of that religion, inspircd them with
such hopes, that they viewed his accession to the throne as no un-
desirable event. But the rigour with which the king had lately
pursued the conspirators, and the severe statutes against popery to
which he had given his content, convinced them that these hopes
were visionary; and they began to look about in quelt of some
new fuccefor, whose rights they might oppose to his. The pa-
pifls who resided in England turned their eyes towards the carl
of Effex, whose generous mind, though firmly eftabliflied in the
protestant faith, abhorred the severities inflided in that age on ac-
count of religious opinions. Those of the fame set, who were
in exile, formed a bolder scheme, and one more suitable to their
situation. They advanced the claim of the infanta of Spain; and
Parfdns the jesuit publifled a book, in which, by false quotations

' Spotfw. 404. Cald. 373, &c.

C c 2 from

B o o0 K from history, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd arguments, in-
* .-.--- termingled with bitter invetives againfl the king of Scots, lie en-

'59;" deavoured to prove the infanta's title to the Englifl crown to be

preferablc to his. Philip, though involved already in a war both
with France and England, and scarce able to defend the remains
of the Burgundian provinces againit the Dutch commonwealth,
eagerly gralfed at this airy project. The dread of a Spanish pre-
tender to the crown, and the opposition which the paplfis began
to form againif the king's fucceflion, contributed not a little to
remove the prejudices of the protcftants, and to prepare the way
for that event.

Bothwvell BOTIWEI.L, whose name has been so often mentioned as the
finto p aif d iflurber ds the king's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king.

dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the popish lords;
excommunicated by the church for the fame reason; and deserted
in his distress by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after renouncing
the protestant faith, he led many years an obscure and indigent
life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery. Tlh
king, though extremely ready to sacrifice the itrongeft resentment
to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be softened by his
submission, nor be induced to liften to any interceflion in his.
behalf .

THIS year the king loft chancellor Maitland, an able miniter,

on whom he had long devolved the whole weight of public affairs.
As James loved him while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-

q Winw. Mem. i. Spotfw. 410.

mory,

mory, a copy of vcrfs, whicl, when compared with the compo- - B 1° K
fitions of that age, are far from being inelegant r

'5935
SOON after his dcath, a considerable change was made in the A change in

the adminii-

adminirfration. At that time, the annual charges of government ltraici.
far exceeded the king's revcnucs. The queen was fond of ex-
pensive amusements. James himself was a flranger to (conom1y.
It became necetlary, for all thclc reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with r''catcr order and rigour, and to lhuffand tlhem with
more care. This important trulf was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law , wllo, from their number, were called OLCvi.LNs.
The powers vefled in them were ample, and alnioft unlimited.
The king bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their consent:
and knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alien-
ation of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the
treafIry, should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the iuib-
scription of five of the commiflioners; all their acds and deci-
sions were delared to be of equal force with the sentence of judgcs
in civil courts; and in confcquence of them, and without any
other warrant, any pcrfon might be arrefled, or their goods seized.
Such extensive jurifdlition, together with the ahfolnte disposal of
the public money, drew the whole executive part of the govern-
ment into their hands. United among themselves, they gradually
undermined the reft of the king's ministers, and fcized on cvery
lucrative or honourable office. The ancient servants of the crown
repined at being obliged to quit their flations to new men. The

r Spotfw. 411.
' Alexander Seaton president of the feflion, Walter Stewart commendator of

Blantyre lord privy feal, David Carnegy, John Lindsay, James Elphingfton, ''To..
mas Hamilton, John Skene clerk regifler, and Peter Young elemofynar.

favourites

1 97

B 0 0 K favourites and young courtiers murmured at feeing the king's

VIII.
t-----_ liberality itinted by their prescriptions. And the clergy exclaimed

a9 gainft some of them as known apostates to popery, and fufpeted
others of secretly favouring it. They retained their power, how-
ever, notwithstanding this general combination against them; and
they owed it entirely to the order and ceconomy which they intro-
duced into the administration of the finances, by which the ne-
ceffary expences of government were more easily defrayed than in
any other period of the king's reign t.

Violence of THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said to be
the nation
against the carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with
popish lords.

the dread.of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the
defence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
clergy, whose suspicions of the king's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished peers to levy
the rents of their estates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the ad of forfeiture ineffecual, by supporting
March 24. the avowed enemies of the protestant faith. The assembly of the

church took under consideration the Rate of the kingdom, and
having appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly renewed
the covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the
protestant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors. A com-
mittee, confifing of the most eminent clergymen, and of many
barons and gentlemen of diflinaion, waited on the king, and laid
before him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the pre-
servation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the estates
of the banished lords as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers;
to take the ftriefit precautions for preventing the return of such

' Spotw. 413. 435.

turbulent
198

turbulent fubjeds into the country; and to pursue all who were B °0 K

VIII.
fufpeded of being their adherents with the utmost rigour. --ó

1596.
NOTIING could be more repugnant to the king's schemes, or The king's

re m iflihels

more difagrecable to his inclination, than these propositions. with regard
Averse, through his whole life, to any course where he expected t hem
opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his ends with the
characer of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed
with concern the prejudices aglinft him which were growing among
the Roman catholics, and refllved to make some atonement for that
part of his conduCt which had drawn upon him their indigna-
tion. Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had
lately been in danger; if any popish competitor flhould arise to
dispute his right of succession, a fation so powerful as that of the
banished lords might be extremely formidable; and any division
among his own fubjets might prove fatal at a juncture which
would require their united and most vigorous efforts. Inflead,
therefore, of the additional severities which the aflembly proposed,
James had thoughts of mitigating the puniflment which they al-
ready suffered. And as they were surrounded, during their refc-
dence in foreign parts, by Philip's emissarics; as resentment might
dispose them to lissen more favourably than ever to their filg-
geftions; as despair might drive them to still more atrocious
actions; he relolved to recall them, under certain conditions,
into their native country. Encouraged by these fcntiments of the
king in their favour, of which they did not wantintelligence,
and wearied already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,
they ventured to return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they
presented a petition to the king, begging his permission to reside
at their own houses, and offering to-give security for their peacc-

7 able

199

3 0 0 KI able and dutiful behaviour. James called a convention of estates

VIII.
-----' to deliberate on a matter of such importance, and by their advice

59 e granted the petition.

Tlheranl pro. As soon as they were informed of this, the members of a com-
ceedings of
the clergy mittee, appointed by the last general assembly, met at Edinburgh,

d and with all the precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such re-

solutions as they thought neceflary for the safety of the kingdom.
They wrote circular letters to all the prefbyteries in Scotland;
they warned them of the approaching danger; they exhorted
them to stir up their people to the defence of their just rights;
they commanded them to publish, in all their pulpits, the ad:
excommunicating the popish lords; and enjoined them to lay all
those who were suspected of favouring popery under the fame
censure by a summary sentence, and without observing the usual
formalities of trial. As the danger seemed too pressing to wait
for the stated meetings of the judicatories of the church, they
made choice of the most eminent clergymen in different corners
of the kingdom, appointed them to reside constantly at Edinburgh,
and to meet every day with the ministers of that city, under the
name of the Standing Council of the Church, and vested in this
body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the
ancient Roman form, to take care that the church fllould receive
no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than unprece-

dented, were manifest encroachments on the royal prerogative,
· and bold steps towards open rebellion. The king's conduct, how-

ever, justified' in some degree such excesses. His lenity towards
the papists, so repugnant to the principles of that age; his par-
doning the conspirators, notwithstanding repeated promises to the

contrary;
2-00

contrary; the respect he paid to lady Huntly, who was attached B ° I K
to the Romifli religion no less than her husband; his committing
the care of his daughter, the princess Elizabeth, to lady Leving- 1396.
iton, who was infleded with the fame superstition; the contempt
with which he talked, on all occasions, both of the characer of
ministers, and of their fiunaion; were circumstances which might
have filled minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with tome fulpi-
cions; and might have precipitated into rafl counsels those who
were far removed from intemperate zeal. But, however power-
ful the motives might be which influenced the clergy, or however
laudable the end they had in view, they condu&ed their measures
with no address, and even with little prudence. James discovercd
a strong inclination to avoid a rupture with the church, and, jea-
lous as he was of his prerogative, would willingly have made
many conceflions for the iake of peace. By his command Come
of the privy counsellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the clergy, and inquired whether Huntly and his associates
might not, upon making proper acknowledgments, be again re-
ceived into the bosom of the church, and be exempted from any
further punifiment on account of their past apoftacy and trcafons.
They replied, that though the gate of mercy flood always open
for those who repented and returned, yet as there noblemen had
been guilty of idolatry, a crime deserving death both by the law
of God and of man, the civil magitrate could not legally grant
them a pardon; and even though the church should absolve them,
it was his duty to inflict punilhment upon them. This inflexibility
in those who were reckoned the most compliant of the order,
filled the king with indignation, which the imprudence and obfti-
nacy of a private clergyman heightened into rage.

VOL. II.

201
D d

SMR.

B O 0 K MR. DAVID BLACK, minister at St. Andrew's, discoursing in

VIII.

*

. * one of his sermons, according to custom, concerning the state of

Seditious the nation, affirmed that the king had permitted the popifl lords
taoght by to return into Scotland, and by that action had discovered the
Black. treachery of his own heart; that all kings were the devil's chil-

dren; that Satan had now the guidance of the court; that the
queen of England was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants
and bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the privy coun-
fellors cormorants, and men of no religion; and in his prayer for
the queen he used there words, we must pray for her for fashion-

Nor. lo. fake, but we have no cause, she will never do us good. James
The clergy
espouse his commanded him to be summoned before the privy council, to
defence. answer for such seditious expreflfons; and the clergy instead of

abandoning him to the punishment which such a petulant and
criminal attack on his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as to
espouse his cause, as if it had been the common one of the whole
order. The controversy concerning the immunities of the pulpit,
and the rights of the clergy to testify against vices of every kind,
which had been agitated in one thousand five hundred and eighty-
four, was now revived. It was pretended that, with regard to
their sacred function, ministers were subje&t to the church alone;
that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical superiors to judge of
the truth or falsehood of doctrines delivered in the pulpit; that if,
upon any pretence whatever, the king usurped this jurifdition,
the church would, from that moment, fink under servitude to the
civil magistrate; that, instead of reproving vice with that honest
boldness which had often been of advantage to individuals, and
salutary to the kingdom, the clergy would learn to flatter the
passions of the prince, and to connive at the vices of others; that
the king's eagerness to punish the indifcretien of a protestant mi-

nifter,
202

nifter, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of popish con-
1pirators, called on them to iland upon their guard, and that now
was the time to contend for their privileges, and to prevent any
encroachment on those rights, of which the church had been in
poffeifion ever since the Reformation. Influenced by these con-
fiderations, the council of the church enjoined Black to decline
the jurildiiion of the privy council. Proud of such an oppor-
tunity to display his zeal, he presented a paper to that purpose,
and with the utmofl firmness refused to plead, or to answer the
questions which were put to him. In order to add greater weight
to these proceedings, the council of the church tranfinitted the
declinature to all the preibyteries throughout the kingdom, and
enjoined every minifler to subscribe it, in testimony of his ap-
probation.

JAMrES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were

attacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority
must fall, if the clergy ihould be permitted publicly, and with
impunity, to calumniate his ministers, and even to censure him-
self; and knowing, by former examples, what unequal reparation
for such offences he might expea from the judicatories of the
church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and issued
a proclamation, commanding the members of the council-of the
church to leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own parishes.
Black, instead of submitting, renewed his declinature; and the
members of the council, in defiance of the proclamation, declared,
that as they met by the authority of the church, obedience to it
was a duty till more sacred than that which they owed to the king
himself. The privy council, notwithstanding Black's refuting to
plead, proceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pro-
nounced him guilty of the crimes of which he had been accused;

D d 2 but

203
BOOK

Vi.96
,596.

B 0
o K but referred it to the king to appoint what punilhment he should

VIII.
-.-_' susser.
1596.

MEANWHILE, many endeavours were used to bring matters to

accommodation. Almost every day produced some new scheme
of reconcilement; but through the king's fickleness, the obstinacy
of the clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all proved
ineffectual. Both parties appealed to the people, and by reci-
procal and exaggerated accusations endeavoured to render each
other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes with
which James charged the clergy; while they made the pulpits
resound with complaints of his excessive lenity towards papists,
and of the no less exceflive rigour with which he oppressed the
cftablifhed church. Exasperated by their bold invectives, he, at
last, sentenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to reside
there during his pleasure; and once more commanding the mem-
bers of the flanding council to depart from Edinburgh, he re-
quired all the ministers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond,
obliging themselves to submit, in the fame manner as other sub-
jeas, to the jurifdiaion of the civil courts in matters of a civil

nature.

A tumult in THIS decisive measure excited all the violent passions which
LEdinburgh.

possess disappointed factions; and deeds no less violent immedi-
ately followed. These muff be imputed in part to the artifices of
some courtiers, who expeted to reap advantage from the calamities
of their country, or who hoped to lessen the authority of the Oca-
vians, by engaging them in hostilities with the church. On one
hand, they informed the king that the citizens of Edinburgh were
under arms every night, and had planted a firong guard round
the houses of their ministers. James, in order to put a flop to

this
204

this imaginary insult on his government, issued a proclamation, B 0 0 K.

VilI.

commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave the i
town within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to the 1
ministers, advising them to look to their own safety, as Huntly
had been secretly admitted to an interview with the king, and had
been the author of the severe proclamation againfl the citizens of
Edinburgh ". They doubted no more of the truth of this intel-
ligence, than the king had done of that which he received, and
fell as blindly into the snare. The letter came to their hands just
as one of their number was going to mount the pulpit. They re-
solved that he should acquaint the people of their danger: and he Decem. 17,
painted it with all the strong colours which men naturally employ
in describing any dreadful and instant calamity. When the ser-
mon was over, he desired the nobles and gentlemen to afremble in
the Little Churrch. The whole multitude, terrified at what they
had heard, crowded thither; they promised and vowed to stand
by the clergy; they drew up a petition to the king, craving the
redress of those grievances, of which the church complained, and
beseeching him to deliver them from all future apprehensions of
danger, by removing such of his counsellors as were known to
be enemies of the protestant religion. Two peers, two gentlemen,
two burgesses, and two ministers, were appointed to present it.
The king happened to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where The king
the court of session was fitting. The manner in which the pe- in danger,
tition was delivered, as well as its contents, offended him. He

° Though matters were industriously aggravated by persons, who wished both

parties to pursue violent measures, neither of there reports was altogether deflitute
of foundation. As their ministers were supposed to be in danger, some of the more
zealous citizens had determined to defend them by force of arms. Birch. Mem. ii.
250. Huntly had been privately in Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not
with the king, at least with some of his ministers. Birch. Ibid. 230.

gave

o20s

B o K gave an haughty reply; the petitioners insisted with warmth; and

---- a promiscuous multitude pressing into the room, James retired
1595. abruptly into another apartment, and commanded the gates to be

shut behind him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who
were still assembled, and to whom a minister had been reading,
in their absence, the story of H-aman. When they reported that
the king had refused to liften to their petitions, the church was
filled in a moment with noise, threatenings, execrations, and all the
outrage and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their
arms, some to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, The
sword of the Lord and of Gideon; and, rushing out with the
most furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatening
the king himself, and demanding some of his counsellors, whom
they named, that they might tear them in pieces. The magi-
ftrates of the city, partly by authority, partly by force, endea-
voured to quell the tumult; the king attempted to soothe the male-
contents, by promising to receive their petitions, when presented
in a regular manner; the ministers, sensible of their own rashness
in kindling such a flame, seconded both; and the rage of the po-
pulace subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed,
and the king returned to the palace; happy in having eicaped
from an infurredtion, which, though the instantaneous and uncon-
certed effect of popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent
danger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable affront to
his authority .

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents affemrbled,

in order to prepare their petition. The punishment of the popish
lords; the removal of those counsellors who were fufpeted of

Spotfw. 417, &c. Cald. v. 54, &c. Birch Mem. ii. 235.

9 favouring
o06

favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late acts
of council, subversive of the authority of the church; together
with an a& approving the proceedings of the tanding council;
were the chief of their demands. But the king's indignation was
still so high, that the deputies, chosen for this purpose, durst not
venture that night to present requests, which could not fail of
kindling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all
his attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the feflion, and other
courts of justice, were required to leave a city where it was no
longer consistent either with their safety, or their dignity, to re-
main; and the noblemen and barons were commanded to return
to their own houses, and not to reassemble without the king's per-
mifion. The vigour with which the king aced,. struck a damp
upon the spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how
much they would susser by his absence, and the removal of the
courts of justice, repented already of their conduc. The mini-
fters alone resolved to maintain the contest. They endeavoured
to prevent the nobles from dispersing; they inflamed the people
by violent invectives against the king; they laboured to procure
subscriptions to. an association for their mutual defence; and con-
fcious what lustre and power the junction of some of the greater
nobles would add to their cause, the ministers of Edinburgh wrote
to lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the word of God, and
provoked by the injuries offered to the church, had taken arms;
that many of the nobles had determined to protea the protestant
religion, which owed its establishment to the piety and. valour of:
their ancestors; that they wanted only a leader to unite them, and.
to inspire them with vigour; that his zeal for the good cause,. no
less than his noble birth, entitled him to, that honour: They
conjured him, therefore, not to disappoint their hopes and wishes,
nor to refuse the suffering. church that aid which Ihe so much

needed.

BOOK

VIII.

z596.

He Ileaves
Edinburgh,
and proceeds
with severity
againit the
citizens.

B o o K needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of complying with their desire,
._ -I. carried the letter diretly to the king, whom this new insult irri-

1597. tated to such a degree, that he commanded the magistrates of

Edinburgh instantly to seize their ministers, as manifest incen-
diaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The magistrates, in order
to regain the king's favour, were preparing to obey: and the mi-
nifters, who saw no other hope of fafcty, fled towards Eng-
land Y.

The king TIIIS unsuccessful infurreieion, instead of overturning, efta-
huinbles the
power ofthe bliflied the king's authority. Those concerned in it were con-
church. founded and dispersed. The reft of James's fubjets, in order to

avoid suspicion, or to gain his favour, contended who should be
most forward to execute his vengeance. A convention of estates
being called, pronounced the late infurreaion to be high treason;
ordained every miniftcr to subscribe a declaration of his fubmiflion
to the king's jurifdiaion, in all matters civil and criminal; impow-
ered magistrates to commit, instantly, to prison any minister, who,
in' his sermons, should utter any indecent reflections on the king's
conduct; prohibited any ecclesiastical judicatory to meet without
the king's licence; commanded that no person should be elected
a magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the king's
approbation; and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
should either discover and infliC condign puniihment on the authors
of the late tumult, or the city itself should be fubjeCed to all the
penalties of that treasonable ation Z.

Abridges tie ARMED with the authority of these decrees, James resolved to
privileges of crush entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjeCs. As the clergy
the citizensg
of Edin-
burgh. Y Spotfw. 451. Cald. v. 126. s Cald. v. 347.

had,
2o8

hlad, hitherto, derived their chief credit and fireiigth from the B ° 0 K
favour and zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his firt care was _
to humble them. Though the magiflrates fubmittcel to him in 1597
the most abjecQ terms; though they vindicated themfellves, and
their fellow-citizens, from the most difianlt intention of violating
his royal perbon or authority.; though, after the flAiLelt scrutiny,
no circumnfances that could fix on them the fuliicion of pre-
.meditated rebellion had been discovered; though many of the
nobles, and such of tile clergy as Rill retained any degree of fiaour,
interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledgments nor inter-
ceirfons were of the lealf avail a. The king continued inexorable; peb. z,.
the city was declared to have forfeited its privileges as a corpo-
ration, and to be liable to all the penalties of treason. The ca-
pital of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted by its mi-
nifters, abandoned by the courts of juflice, and proscribed by the
king, remained in desolation and dcfpair. The courtiers even
threatened to rase the city to the foundation, and to crcl: a pillar
where it flood, as an everlasting monument of the king's vengc-
ance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At lafl, in compliance
with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour, and moved by
the continual solicitations of the nobles, James abfblved the citizens March 2z.
from the penalties of law, but at the fame time lie stripped them
of their most important privileges; they'were neither allowed to
ele& their own magistrates nor their own miniflers; many new
burdens were imposed on them; and a great fun of money was
exacted by way of peace-offering ".

JAMES was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, and no less success- New rrguLi-
ful, in circumscribing thejurifdistion of the church. Experience tors 'rithle

church.

a Caldv.. 149. b Spotfw. 434. 444.
TVOL. II. E e had

B o0 c) K had discovered that to attempt this, by a&s of parliament, and,
t_ -,-...i sentences of privy council, was both ineffetual and odious. He

;5 ;7' had recourse now to an expedient more artful, and better calcu-

lated for obtaining his end. The ecclesiastical judicatories were
composed of many members; the majority of the clergy were
extremely indigent, and unprovided of legal stipends; the ministers
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity
established by the presbyterian government, had assumed a leading
in the church, which filled their brethren with envy; every nu-
merous body of men is susceptible of sudden and firong imprei-
lions, and liable to be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. In-
duced by thfe considerations, James thought it possible to gain
the clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to subdue. Proper
agents were let to work all over the kingdom; promises, flattery,
and threats, were employed; the usurpations of the brethren near
the capital were aggravated; the jealousy of their power, which
was growing in the distant provinces, was augmented; and two
different general assemblies were held, in both which, notwith-
itanding the zeal and boldness wherewith a few leading clergymen.
defended the privileges of the church, a majority declared. in fa-
vour of those measures which were agreeable to the king. Many
practices, which continued since the Reformation, were con-
demned; many points of discipline, which had hitherto been rec-
koned sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the license,
with which ministers discoursed of political matters, was restrained;
the freedom with which they inveighed against particular persons,
censured; fentcnces of summary excommunication declared un-
lawful; the convoking a general assembly, without the king's per-
miiion, prohibited; and the right of nominating ministers to the
principal towns, veiled in the crown. Thus, the clergy them-
selves surrendered privileges, which it would have been dangerous

9 to
2 to

to-invade, and voluntarily submitted to a yoke more intolerable Bn 0 v.
than any James would have ventured to impose by force; while -----,
such as continued to oppose his neafures, instead of their former 5j
popular topic of the king's violent encroachments on a jurifdiLton
which did not belong to him, were obliged to turn their outcries
against the corruptions -of their own order .

BY the authority of there general assemblies, the popifl earls Poritll,;

were allowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were
absolved from the sentence of excommunication; and received
;into the bosom of the church. But, not many years after, tlhcy
relapsed into their former errors, were again reconciled to the churcl
,of Rome, and by their apoftacy juflified, in tome degree, the fears
·and scruples of the clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE ministers of Edinburgh owed to the intercession of thelc

assemblies the liberty of returning to their charges in -the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner as greatly abridged
their power. The city was divided into diflina parifles; the
number of ministers doubled-; persons on whose fidelity the king
could rely were fixed in the new parifles; and there circumstances,
added to the authority of the late decrees of the church, contri-
buted to confirm that absolute dominion in ecclesiastical affairs,
which James poffefled during the remaindcr of his reign.

THE king was so intent on new modelling the church, that the

other transaCtions of this period scarce deserve to be remembered.
The OCtavians, envied by the other courtiers, and splitting into
fations among themselves, resigned their commiflion; and the

cSpotfw. 433, Cald. v. 189. 233.

E e 2 admini-

B 0 0 Kl adminlilration of the revenue returning into its former channel;

---. both the king and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their.
;1 97. regular and frugal caconomy.
Dcc. 1. TOWARDS the end of the year a parliament was held, in order

to restore Huntly and his aflociates to their estates and honours,
by repealing the aCd of forfeiture passed against them. The autho-
rity of this supreme court was likewise employed to introduce a
farther innovation into the church; but, conformable to the
system which the king had now adopted, the motion for this pur-

Ecclefi.nics pole took its rife from the clergy themselves. As the ac of ge-
ielIored to a
feat in par- neral annexation, and that establishing the presbyterian govern-·

ment, had reduced the few bishops, who frill survived, to poverty
and contempt; as those who possessed the abbeys and priories were
mere laymen, and many of them temporal peers, few or none of
the ecclesiastical order remained to vote in parliament, and, by
means of that, the influence of the crown was considerably di-
minilhed there, and a proper balance to the power and number of
the nobles was wanting.. But the prejudices the nation had con-
ceived against the name and character of bishops were so violent,
that James was obliged, with the utroft care, to avoid the ap-
pcarance of a design to revive that order. H-e prevailed therefore
on the commission appointed by the las general assembly to com-
plain to the parliament, that the church was the only body in the
kingdom destitute of its representatives in that supreme court,..
where it so nearly concerned every order to have some, who were
bound to defend its rights; and to crave that a competent number
. of the clergy should be admitted, according to ancient custom,

to a feat there.. In compliance with this request, an ac was passed,
by which those ministers, on whom the king should confer the
vacant bishoprics and abbeys, were intitled:to a vote in Parliament;.

and

and that the clergy might conceive no jealousy of any encroach- B .

°

o

ment upon their privileges, it was remitted to the general assembly, ~ 9
to determine what spiritual jurifdidion or authority in the govern-
ment of the church there perfbns flould possess d

THE king, however,, found it no easy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the adt of par-
liament met with a fierce oppolition. Though the clergy per-
ceived how much lustre this new privilege would reflec upon.
their order; though they were not inlfnlible of the grcat accellion
of personal power and dignity, which nany of them would acquirc,
by being admitted into the fup)rcme council of the nation, their
abhorrence of epilcopacy was extreme; and to thnt they facrificcdl
every consideration of interest or ambition. All the king's pro-
feflons of regard for the present constitution of the church did
not convince them of his sincerity; all the devices that could be
invented for restraining and circumscribing the jurifdiaion of 'ilch
as were to be raised to this new honour, did not diminifi their
jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught them, with
what insinuating progress the hirarchy advances, and though.
admitted at iirft with nmoderate authority, and under specious prc-
tences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. Varnill over this
scheme, said one of the leading clergymen, with what colours you
please; deck the intruder with. the utmost art; under all this dif-
guise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The fame feltimctits pre-
vailed among many of his brethren, and induced them to rejce
power and honours, with as much zeal as ever those of their order
courted them. Many, however, were allured by the hopes of pre-
ferment; the king himself and his miniflers employed the Iaine

d Spotfw. 450. Parl. I5th Jac. VI. c. 235.

anl'a,

z1

B 0 o .IC arts, wliich they had tried so successfully last year; and after long
-.-- --' debates, and much opposition, the general assembly declared that
Marchi 7. it was lawful for ministers to accept of a feat in parliament; that

it would be highly beneficial to the church, to have its represent-
atives in that supreme court; and that fifty-one persons, a number
nearly equal to that of the ecclesiastics who were anciently called
to parliament, Thould be chosen from among the clergy fdr that
purpose. The manner of their election, together with the powers
to be vefled in t-hem, were left undecided for the present, and fur-
nilhed matter of future deliberation .

,j99. As the profped of fuccecding to the crown of England drew

'J meb cndea-
vours with nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it certain.
luccers to
gain a party As he was allied to many of the princes of Germany by his mar-
in Elland. riage, he sent ambafadors extraordinary to their several courts, in

order to explain the juflnefs of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their assistance, if any competitor 'flould arise to dif-
pute his undoubted rights. These princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid which they could afford him
was distant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce, abbot
of Kinlofs, his ambassador at the Englith court, solicited Eliza-
beth, with the utmoff warmth, to recognize his title by some
public deed, and to deliver her own fubjeds from the calamities
which are occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fucceflion. But
age had strengthened all the passions which had hitherto induced
Elizabeth to keep this great question obscure and undecided; and
a general and evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As
no impression could be made on the queen, the ambassador was
coinmanded to found the disposition of her fubjeas, and to try

Spotfw. 450. Cald, v. 278.

what

what progress he could make in gaining them. Bruce posses'ed B °O K
all the talents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite for con- .-..-.
duEing a negotiation no less delicate than important. A minister 5
of this character was intitled to the confidence of the English.
Many of the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him without
reserve, and gave hiri repeated assurances of their resolution to
assert his master's right, in opposition to every pretender f. As
several pamphlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, con-
taining objections to his title, James employed Some learned men
in his kingdom to answer there cavillers, and to explain the ad-
vantages which would result to both kingdoms by the union of
the crowns. These books were eagerly read, and contributed not
a little to reconcile the Englifli to that event. A book published
this year by the king himself, produced an effet still more favour-
able. It was intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained precepts con--
cerning the art of government, addressed to prince Henry his son.
Notwithstanding the great alterations and refinements in national
tafe since that time, we muff allow this to be no contemptible
performance, and not to be inferior to the works of mofl con-
temporary writers, either in purity of style or juftncfs of com-
position. Even the vain parade of erudition with which it abounds,
and which now disgusts us, raised the admiration of that age;
and, as it was filled with those general rules which Speculative
authors deliver for rendering a nation happy, and of which James
could discourse with great plausibility, though often incapable of
putting them in practice, the Englith conceived an high opinion.
of his abilities, and expected an increase of national honour and
prosperity, under a prince so profoundly skilled in politics, and

f Johnt,. 242.

2-1S

B OV ?` 'vwho gave such a specimen both of his wildoin and of his love

- ---.-~ to his people 6.

TIIE queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were

very different from those of her fulbjels. Iis cxceffive indulgence
towards the popilh lords; the facility withi which he pardoned
their repeated treasons; his restoring Beaten, the popish arch-
biflhop of Glasgo-w, who had fled out of Scotland at the time of
the reformation, to the polieflion of the temporalities of that be-
ncfice; the appointing him his ambassador at the court of France;
tthe applause he beflowed, in the Batilicon Doron, on those who
adhered to the qucen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many
indications of a mind alienated from the protestant religion; and
fii)ccteed thathe would soon revolt from the profession of it. These
suspicions teemed to be fully confirmed by a discovery which came

Accurfe him from the Mafler of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who,
(4 corre-
fponding rather than fuffcr his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself
al topc.e so far as to aa as a lpy for the English court. He conveyed to

Elizabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to pope Cle-
ment VIII. in which the king, after many exprefflios of regard
for that pontiff, and-of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm
resolution to treat the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and in
order to render the intercourse between the court of Rome and
Scotland more frequent and familiar, he solicited the pope to pro-
mote Drummond, biihop of Vaifon, a Scotsman, to the dignity
of a cardinal h. Elizabeth, who had received by another channel',
some imperfea intelligence of this correspondence, was filie' with
just surprise, and immediately dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to

z Camd. Spotfw. 457.. Cald. 333. Winw. Mem. vol. i. 37. 52.

inquire
2I6

inquire more fully into the truth of the matter, and to reproach B ° K
James for an action so unbecoming a protestant prince. He was---
aftonifled at the accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing
but the confcioufinfs of innocence could inipire, affirmed the
whole to be a mere calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by
his enemies, on purpose to bring his lincrity in religion to be ufi-
peded. Elphingfton the fecrctary of state denied the matter with
equal solemnity. It came to be known by a very singular accident,
which happened some years after, that tile information which Eli-
zabeth hiad received was well founded, though at the tame time
the king's declarations of his own innocence were perfedlly con-
fiftent with truth. Cardinal Bellarminc, in a reply lwhicl he
published to a controversial treatifc, of which the king was the
author, accused him of having abandoned the favourable senti-
ments which he had once entertained of the Roman catholic
religion, and, as a proof of this, quoted his letter to Clement VIII.
It was impoflible, any longer, to believe this to be a fiction; and
it was a matter too delicate to be passed over without Pfrict inquiry.
James immediately examined Elphingfton, and his confcfllon un-
ravelled the whole mystery. Hlc acknowlcdge-d that he had
ihuffled in this letter ailllog otllh papers, which lie laid before
the king to be signed, who, fufpeeing no such deceit, ifbfcribed it
together with the reft, and without knowing what it contained;
that he had no other motive, however, to this action, but zeal for
his majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman catholics with
hopes of indulgence under the king's government, he imagined
that he was paving the way for his more easy acceflion to the
English throne. The privy council of England entertained very
different sentiments of the secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the king's reputation had been exposed to reproach, but

VOL. II. F f his

217

B o O K his life to danger, by this rash imposture; they even imputed the

vii'.
A-v--i- gunpowder treason to the rage and disappointment of the papists,

99 pon finding that the hopes which this letter inspired were fruf-

trated. The secretary was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried
for high treason. His peers found him guilty, but, by the queen's
intercession, he obtained a pardon k.

AccoRDING to the account of other historians, James himself

was no stranger to this correspondence with the pope; and, if we
believe them, Elphingfton, being intimidated by the threats of the
Engliff council, and deceived by the artifices of the earl of Dun-
bar, concealed some circumstances in his narrative of this tranf-
action, and falsified others; and at the expence of his own fame,
and with tle danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil over
this part of his master's conduct'.

James at BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the
great pains
to gain the secretary's officious zeal, or to the king's command, it is certain,
Romnan catholics. that, about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the

friendship of the Roman catholic princes, as a necessary precaution
towards facilitating his accession to the English throne. Lord
Home, who was himself a papist, was entruited with a secret
commission to the pope m; the archbishop of Glasgow was an
active instrument with those of his own religion ". The pope ex-
pressed such favourable sentiments both of the king, and of his
right to the crown of England, that James thought himself bound,
some years after, to acknowledge the obligation in a public
manner °. Sir James Lindsay made great progress in gaining

k State, Trials, vol. i. 429. Spotfw. 456. 507. Johnft. 448.

Cakl. vol. v. 322. vi. 147. m Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57;
n Cald. vol. vi. 147. " Ibid. vol. v. 60..

the
218

the English papists to acknowledge his majesty's title. Of all these B 0o0 o
intrigues Elizabeth received obscure hints from different quarters. -.-
The more imperfetly the knew, the more violently hle fuipedted '599
the king's designs; and the natural jealousy of her temper in-
creasing with age, ihe observed his conduct with greater solicitude
than ever.

Tie qlucftions with regard to the election and power of the 160o.

March z2.
representatives of the church, were finally decided this year by His reguIa-

to0n)s with re-

the general afiembly, which met at Montrose. That place was gard to the
clofen as most convenient for the ministers of the North, among church.
whom the king's influence chiefly lay. Although great numbers
resorted from the northern provinces, and the king employed his
whole interefi, and the authority of his own prefcnce, to gain a
majority, the following regulations were with difficulty agreed on:
That the general assembly fliall recommend fix perions to every
vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in parliament, out of
whom the king fould nominate one; that the person so elected,
after obtaining his feat in parliament, shall neither propose nor
consent to any thing there, that may affecl the interest of the
church, without special inftrutions to that purpose; that he shall
be answerable for his conduac to every general allembly; and sub-
mit to its censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy and ex-
communication; that he shall discharge the duties of a pastor, in
a particular congregation; that he shall not usurp any ecclesiastical
jurifdi&ion, superior to that of his other brethren; that if the
church inflit on him the censure of deprivation, he liall thereby
forfeit his feat in parliament; that he ihall annually resign his com-
mission to the general aflembly, which may be reflored to him,
or not, as the assembly, with the king's approbation, shall judge

Fs 2 moif

219g

B 0 0 IC most expedient for the good of the church P. Nothing could be

VIII.
L---- -- more repugnant to the idea of episcopal government, than there

6c regulations. It was not in consequence of rights derived from

their office, but of powers conferred by a commission, that the
ecclesiastical persons were to be admitted to a feat in parliament ;
they were the representatives, not the superiors of the clergy.
Defiitute of all spiritual authority, even their civil jurifdidion was
temporary. James, however, flattered himself that they would-
soon be able to shake off these fetters, and gradually acquire all the
privileges which belonged to the episcopal order. The clergy
dreaded the fame thing; and of course he contended for the no-
mination of these commiflioncrs, and they opposed it, not so much
on account of the powers then vested in them, as of those to which
it was believed they would soon attain ".

Gowrie's DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tran-
conspiracy. quillity. The clergy, after many struggles, were brought under

great iubjetion; the popish earls were restored to their estates and
honours, by the authority of parliament, and with the consent of
the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this
security, the king's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a
conspiracy altogether unexpected, and almost inexplicable. The
authors of it were John Ruthven, earl of Gowrie, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that earl who was beheaded in the year
one thousand five hundred and eighty-four. Nature had adorned
both these young men, especially the elder brother, with many
accomplishments, to which education had added its most elegant
improvements. More learned than is usual among persons of their

P Spotfw. 453. 457. Cald. vol. v. 368. s Spotfw. 454.

rank;

rank; more religious than is common at their age of life; gene- B O o K
rous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far from thinking them
capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the mnoft sanguine hopes
of their early virtues. Notwithstanding all these noble qualities,
fonme unknown motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if
we adhere to the account conmonly received, must be tranfinitted
to posterity, as one of the molt wicked, as well as one of the worst
concerted, of which history makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the king, who resided during the

hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to his
sport early in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander
Ruthven, who, with an air of great importance, told the king,
that the evening before he had met an unklnown mlan, of a sus-
picious aspeQ, walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house
at Perth; and on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a
pot filled with a great quantity of foreign gold; that he had im-
mediately seized both him and his treasure, and, without commu-
nicating the matter to any person, had kept him confined and
bound in a solitary house; and that he thought it his duty to im-
part such a singular event, first of all to his majesty. James
immediately fufpeted this unknown person to be a seminary priest,
supplied with foreign coin, in order to excite new commotions in
the kingdom; and resolved to impower the magistrates of Perth
to call the person before them, and inquire into all the circum-
stances of the story. Ruthven violently opposed this resolution,
and with many arguments urged the king to ride direcly to Perth,
and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Meanwhile the chace
began; and James, notwithstanding his paflion for that amuse-
ment, could not help ruminating upon the ftrangencfs of the tale,
and on Ruthven's importunity. At last he called him, and pro-

mifcd,

221

B V0 K irised, when the sport was over, to set out for Perth. The chace,

VIII.
IL.----' however, continued long; and Ruthven, who all the while kept

1600,

close by the king, was itill urging him to make haste. At the
death of the buck he would not allow James to flay till a frefi
horse was brought him; and observing the duke of Lennox and
the earl of Mar preparing to accompany the king, he intreated
him to countermand them. This James refused; and though
Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent per-
turbation in his whole behaviour, raised forne fuipicions in his
mind; yet his own curiosity, and. Ruthven's solicitations, pre-
vailed on him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the
town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his brother' of the king's
arrival, though he had already dispatched two messengers for that
purpose. At a little distance from the town, the earl, attended by
several of the citizens, met the king, who had only twenty per-
sons in his train. No preparations were made for the king's enter-
tainment; the earl appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at
no pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare
with which he treated his guests. When the king's repast was
over, his attendants were led to dine in another room, and he
being left almost alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown person was kept.
James commanded him to bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with
them; but, instead of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow:
and conducting the king up a flair-cafe, and then through several
apartments, the doors of which he locked behind him, led him at
last into a small study, in which there flood a man clad in armour,
d with a sword and dagger by his fide. The king, who expeced

to have found one disarmed and bound, flarted at the fight, and
inquired if this was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger
from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding it to the king's

7 breast,
222

breaff, ".Remember," said he, " how unjufily my father suffered B O OK

VIII.

"by your command; you are now my prisoner; submit to my -
" disposal without refitance or outcry, or this dagger shall in-
" flantly avenge his blood." James expoftulated with Ruthven,
intreated, and flattered him. The man whom he found in the
study flood, all the while, trembling and dismayed, without courage
either to aid the king, or to second his aggrelTor. Ruthven pro-
tested, that if the king raised no outcry, his life should be safe;
and, moved by tome unknown reason, retired in order to call his
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care of the king, whom
he bound by oath not to make any noise during his absence.

WHILE the king was in this dangerous situation, his attendants

growing impatient to know whither he had retired, one of Gow-
rie's domeflics entered the room hastily, and told them that the
king had just rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed
out into the fireet; and the earl, in the utmost hurry, called for
their horses. But by this time his brother had returned to the
king, and swearing that now there was no remedy, he must die,
offered to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he scorned to
submit to that indignity; and closing with the afFaflin, a fierce
firuggle ensued. The man in armour flood, as formerly, amazed
and motionless; and the king dragging Ruthven towards a win-
dow, which, during his absence, he had persuaded the person with
whom he was left to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice,
" Treason ! Treason! Help! I am murdered !" His attendants
heard, and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand
which grasped the king's neck witl violence. They flew with
precipitation to his assistance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater
number, ran up the principal flair-cafe, where they found all the
doors Ihut, which they battered with the utmolt fury, endeavouring

to

B V0 K to burif them open. But Sir John Ramsey, entering by a back-

VIII. _------. flair, which led to the apartment where the king was, found the

door open; and ruflhing upon Ruthven, who was fill struggling
with the king, struck him twice with his dagger, and thrust him
towards the flair-cafe, where Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh
Herries met, and killed him; he crying with his last breath,
" Alas! I am not to blame for this action." During this scuffle,
the man who had been concealed in the study escaped unobserved.
Together with Ramfcy, Erskine, and Herries, one Wilson, a foot-
man, entered the room where the king was, and before they had
time to shut the door, Gowrie rufled in with a drawn sword in
each hand, followed by seven of his attendants well armed, and
with a loud voice threatened them all with inflant death. They
immediately thrust the king into the little frudy, and shutting the
door upon him, encountered the earl. Notwithitanding the in-
equality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced Gowrie through
the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his fol-
lowers, having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the king's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A
dreadful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many
persons laboured in vain to force a passage; and the king being
assured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was
opened on the inside. They ran to the king, whom ihey unex-
pectedly found safe, with transports of congratulation; and he,
falling on his knees, with all his attendants around him, offered
solemn thanks to God for such a wonderful deliverance. The
danger, however, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the town,
whose provost Gowrie was, and by whom he was extremely be-
loved, hearing the fate of the two brothers, ran to their arms,
and surrounded the house, threatening revenge, with many info-
lent and opprobrious speeches against the king. James endea-

voured
224

voured to pacify the enraged multitude, by speaking to them from B 0 o K

VIII.
the window; he admitted their magifirates into the house; related

16oo.

to them all the circumisances of the faRd; and their fury subsiding
by degrees, they dispersed. On searching the earl's pockets for
papers that might discover his designs and accomplices, nothing
was found but a finall parchment bag, full of magical characters
and words of enchantment; and if we may believe the account
of the conspiracy published by'the king, " while there were about
"him, the wound of which he died bled not; but as soon as
"they were taken away, the blood gushed out in great abun-
"dance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy day,
the king returned in the evening to Falkland, having committed
the dead bodies of the two brothers to the custody of the magi-
ftrates of Perth.

NOTWITISTAND1NG the minute detail which the king gave The motive

of the con-
of all the circumstances of this conspiracy against his life, the fpirators not

easily ex-

motives which induced the two brothers to attempt an adion so de- plained.
testable, the end they had in view, and the accomplices on whose
aid they depended, were altogether unknown. The words of
Ruthven to the king gave some grounds to think that the desire of
revenging their father's death had inffigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarcely pro-
bable that they could impute them to the king, whose youth, as
well as his fubjeaion at that time to the violence of a facQion, ex-
empted him from being the objec of resentment, on account of
adions which were not done by his command. James had even
endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the father had suffered,
by benefits to his children; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his
favour, had acknowledged it with the warmest expressions of gra-
titude. Three of the earl's attendants, being convicted of assist-

VOL. II. G g ing

225

B o o K ing him in this assault on the king's servants, were executed at

VIII.
A _-/-- Perth; but they could give no light into the motives which had

6 prompted their master to an ation so repugnant to these acknow-

ledgments. Diligent search was made for the person concealed in
the study, and from him great discoveries were expected. But
Andrew Henderson, the earl's steward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as much a firanger
to his master's design as the reft; and though placed in the study
by Gowrie's command, he did not even know for what end that
flation had been assigned him. The whole tranfaCion remained
as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two brothers, it was con-
cluded, had concerted their scheme without either confident or
accomplice, with unexampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

Sprot's dif- AN accident, no less strange than the other circumstances of the
coveries con-
cerning it. story, and which happened nine years after, discovered that this

opinion, however plausible, was ill-founded; and that the two
brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One
Sprot, a notary, having whispered among several persons, that he
knew some secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy
council thought the matter worthy their attention, and ordered
him to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary, and partly
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reftalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of difolute
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with Logan, in order to concert the plan of their operations; the
earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dead.
But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters written both by Gowrie

1 3 and
226

and Logan on that occasion; and, in confirmation of his tefti- B o o K
mony, several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to him- - --1
self had prompted Sprot to tleal from among Bour's papers, were
produced'. These were compared, by the privy council, with
papers of Logan's hand-writing, and the resemblance was mani-
fest. Persons of undoubted credit, and well qualified to judge
of the matter, examined them, and swore to their authenticity.
Death itself did not exempt Logan from prosecution; his bones
were dug up and tried for high treason, and by a fentencc, equally
odious and illegal ', his lands were forfeited, and his posterity

declared

r Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another to Gowrie, and

three of' them without any diretion; nor could Sprot discover the name of the
person to whom they were written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right
Honourable. It appears from this, however, and from other words in the letters
Crom. 95. that there were several perfoils privy to the conspiracy. The date of
the first letter is July 18th. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan
only five days before. Ibid. It appears from the original ftnrimons of foffaltturt
against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addreTed to him with re-
gard to a conspiracy equally. dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could
not read. " Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, di&i Georgii opera in le-
" gendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum missis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is
altogether ltrange; and nothing but the capricious character of Logan can account
for his chufing such a confident.

' By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of high treason might he tried

even after death. This practice was adopted by the Scots, without any limitation,
Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous ; and the crown was laid under proper refiriClions, by'an aEt A. D.
1542. which 'has never been printed. The words of it are, " And because the
said lords (i.e. the lords of articles) think the said act (viz. in 1540.) too ge-
neral, and prejudicial to the barons in the realm, therefore statutes and ordains that
the said ac shall have. no place in time coning, but againif the heirs of them that
notoriously commit, or shall commit lefe majesty against the king's person, againit
the realm for averting the fame, and againit them that shall happen to betray the
king's army allenarly, and being notourly known in their time; and the heirs of

G g there

227

B 0 0 K declared infamous. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for mif-

VIII.
-------' prifion of treason. He adhered to his confession to the last, and

having promised, on the scaffold, to give the fpeaators a sign in.
confirmation of the truth of what he had deposed, he thrice
clapped his hands after he was thrown off the ladder by the exe-
cutioner '. BUT

these perrons to be called and judged within five years after the decease of the said
persons committers of the said crimes; and the said time being bypait, the said
heirs never to be pursued for the fame."' The sentence against Logan violated this
statute in two particulars. He was not notourly known during his life to be an
accomplice in the crime for which he was tried; and his heir was called in question
more than five years after his death. It is remarkable that this flatute seems not to
have been attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular
circumstance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no person can be
tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms, and often
absurd in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that, in any process
against a dead person, his corpse or bones shall be presented at the bar. Examples
of this occur frequently in the Scottish history. After the battle of Corrichie, the
dead body of the earl of Huntly was presented in parliament, before sentence of
farfaulture was pronounced against him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie
and his brother were preserved, in order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz. Crime
Law, book i. tit. 6. § 22.

It appears that archbishop Spotfwood was present at the execution of Sprot,

Crom. 1I5. and yet he seems to have given no credit to his discoveries. The
manner in which he speaks of him is remarkable, " Whether or not 1 should men-
tion the arraignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at Edinburgh,
I am doubtful. His confeflion, though voluntary and conflant, carrying small
probability. The man deposed, &c.. It seemed to be a very ficion, and a mere
invention of the man's own brain, for neither did he ihew the letter, nor could
any wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so secretly, would
have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 508.
Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had been
tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He himself was
probably present in parliament at the trial. The earl of Dunbar, of whom he
always speaks with the highest refpea, was the person who directed the process

againfl
228

BUT tiough it be thus unexpecedly discovered that Gowrie

did not aEt without associates, little additional light is thrown, by
this difeovery on the motives and intention of his conduct. It
appears almost incredible that two young men of such diffin-
guifhed virtue should revolt all at once from their duty, and at-
tempt a crime so atrocious, as the murder of their fovcreign. It
appears still more improbable, that they ihould have concerted
their undertaking with. so little foresight and prudence. If they
intended that the deed flould have remained concealed, they could
not have chosen a more improper scene for executing it than their
own house. If they intended that Henderson thould have struck
the blow, they could not have pitched on a man more destitute
of the courage that muff diret the hand of an assassin; nor could
they expect that he, unsolicited, and unacquainted with their
purpose,. would venture on such a desperate action. If Ruthven
meant to flab the king with his own hand, why did he withdraw
the dagger, after it was pointed at his breast? How could he
leave the king, after such a plain declaration of his intention ?
Was it not preposterous to commit him to. the keeping of such a

againfI Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against the truth of Sprot's evi-
dence,.notwithftanding all these circumstances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Ha-
milton,. the king's advocate at that time, and afterwards earl of Hadington, repre-
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an ori-
ginal letter of his to the king, the 2zit of June 1609 (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.),
after mentioning the manner in which the trial had been conduaed, he thus
goes on:

- When the..probation of the summons was referred to the lords of articles votes,

they found uniformly,. all in one voice, the said summons to be so clearly proved,
that they seemed to- contend.who should be able most zealously to express the satis-
faction of his heart, .not only by the molf pithy words, but by tears of joy; diverse
of the best rank confefling, that that whereof they doubted at their entry into the
house was now so manifest, that they behoved to effeem them traitors who should
any longer refuse to declare their assured resolution of the truth of that treason."

timid:

2Z9
BOOK

VIII.
i oo

B o o K timid and false associate as Henderson ? For what purpose did he

VIII.

waste time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man, whom he
.might easily have dispatched with his sword ? Had Providence
permitted them to embrue their hands in the blood of their fove-
reign, what advantage could have accrued to them by his death ?
and what claims or pretensions could they have opposed to the
rights of his children ? Inevitable and inflant vengeance, toge-
ther with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences they could
expe&t to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impoflible to believe that the king had

formed any design against the life of the two brothers. They
had not incurred his indignation by any crime; and were in no
degree tlie objects of his jealousy or hatred"; nor was he of a

spirit

u It has been aflerted, that, in consequence of the king's death, the earl of

Gowrie might have pretended to the crown of England, as the Ton of Dorothea
Stewart, daughter of lord Methven by Margaret of England, who, after her
divorce from the earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third hulband. Burnet,
Hist. of his own Times. But this assertion is ill-founded. It appears, from un-
doubted evidence, that lord Methven had only one child by queen Margaret, which
died in its infancy, and Dorothea lady Ruthven was not the daughter' of queen
Margaret, but of Janet Stewart, lord Methven's second wife, a daughter of John
earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had really been descended
from the blood-royal of England, the king at that time had a Ton and a daughter;
and besides them, lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles earl of Lennox, had
a preferable title to the crown of England.

Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death of

the two brothers to a cause not mentioned by any of our hi{torians, "c Out of
Scotland we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence
betwixt the king and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery of Come
t affection between her and the earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him)

was the trues cause and motive of that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. i. 274.
Whether the following paflages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation *of that
suspicion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter, Sept. 22, i602. he mentions
-the return of Gowric's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, "The

coming
«

spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rash and desperate valour, as B 0 0 K

VIII.

to have attempted to murder them in their own house, where they
were surrounded with many domestics, he only with a slender 1600.
and unarmed train; where they could call to their assistance the
inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was
at a distance from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen
for his associates in such an enterprize, the earl of Mar and the
duke of Lennox, the former connected in close friendflip with
the house of Gowrie, and the latter married to one of the earl's
fiters.

VWHIICso EVER of these opposite systems we embrace; whe- A conjeture

ther we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie or to the tint'nton
king; insuperable dificulties arise, and we are involved in dark- rofthconrpi-
ness, mystery, and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the
whole conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by de-
riving it from a more remote cause, we may discover it to be less
criminal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great object of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, she sometimes
soothed him, and Sometimes bribed his ministers and favourites;

coming in of these two, and the queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending
away and furniffling Mrs. Beatrix [their fitter] with such information as Sir Tho-
mas Erskine has given, hath bred great suspicion in the king of Scots, that they
come not in but upon some dangerous plot." In another letter, January I, I603.
"' The day of writing my lafl, Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the lady
Paisley and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen, into the court in the
evening, and stowed in a chamber prepared for her by the queen's dirercion, where
the queen had much time and conference with her. Of this the king got notice,
and shewed his dislike thereof to the queen,. gently reproving her for it, and exa-
mining quietly of the queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters thereunto
belonging, with such discretion and secrecy as requires such a matter."

and

231

B 0 0 K and when she failed of attaining her end by there means, ihe en-

VIII.

couraged the clergy to render any administration which she dif-
i6oo. trusted unpopular, by -decrying it, or stirred up some faction of

the nobles to oppose and to-overturn it. -In that fierce age, men
little acquainted with the arts of undermining a .miniflry by in-
trigue, had recourse to the ruder practice of rendering themselves
masters of the king's person, that they might thereby obtain the
direcions of his councils. Those nobles, who seized the king
at the Raid of Ru/thven, were instigated and supported by Eliza-
beth. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her protection,
and when they miscarried, he was feeure of retreat in her do-
minions. The connexions which James had bcen forming of:late
with the Roman catholic princes, his secret negotiations in Eng-
land with her fubjeas, and the maxims by which he governed
his own kingdom, all contributed to excite her jealousy. She
dreaded some great revdlution in Scotland to be approaching, and
it was her.intereft to prevent it. The earl of Gowrie was one
of the most powerful of the Scottish nobles, and descended from
ancestors warmly attached to the English interest. He had adopted
the fame system, and believed the welfare of his country to be
inseparably conneaed with the subsistence of the alliance between
the two kingdoms. During his residence at Paris, he had con-
traced an intimate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the queen's
ambassador there, and was recommended'by him to'his court, as
a person of whom great use might be made Y. Elizabeth received
him, as he passed through England, with distinguished marks of
refpea and favour. From all there circumstances a suspicion may
- arise, that the plan of the conspiracy against the king was formed
.at that time, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevailed in

y Winw i. 156.

that
232

that age, and from the letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in B oO K
Scotland, it appears not to be destitute of foundation. An English -- -
ship was observed hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the i6
frith of Forth. The earl's two younger brothers fled into England
after the ill success of the conlpiracy, and were protedted by Eli-
zabeth. James himself, though he prudently conccaled it, took
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's
intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt the king's person, but only
to circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his Icicnles. His
life was the surest safeguard of her own, and restrained the popill
pretenders to her crown, and their abettors, from desperate at-
tempts, to which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise,
have urged them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder Iis
sovereign, would, on her part, have been an acd of the utmost
imprudence. Nor does this feern to have been the intention of
the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven, firit of all, endeavoured to de-
coy the king to Perth, without any attendants. When these
proved more numerous than was expeCted, the earl employed a
itratagem in order to separate them from the king, by pretending
that he had rode away towards Falkland, and by calling hastily
for their horses, that they might follow him. By their shutting
James up, meanwhile, in a distant corner of the house, and by
attempting to bind his hands, their design seems to have been
rather to seize than to afaffinate him. Though Gowrie had not
collected his followers in such numbers as to have been able to
detain him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom, by open
force, he might soon have been conveyed aboard the English ship,
which waited perhaps to receive him, and he might have been
landed at Fat-caftle, a house of Logan's, in which, according to
many obscure hints in his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi-
rators was to be held. Amidst the surprise and terror, into which

VOL. II. H h the

B O O K the king must have been thrown by the violence offered to him,

VIII.
~--, it was extremely natural for him to. conclude that his life was

fought. It was the interest of all his followers to confirm him in
this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add to the im-
portance and merit of their own services. Thus his fear, and
their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder which the con-
templation of any great and tragical event, when not fully under-
flood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole transaction. On the
other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circum-
fiances which were added, detrated from the credit of those which
really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling in quel-
tion the truth of the whole conspiracy.

Many difbe- THE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh
lieve the ac-.
count pub- next morning. The privy council commanded the ntinifters of
ki^ed by the that city inflantly to assemble their people; and after relating to

them the circumstances of the conspiracy formed against the king's
life, to return public thanks to God, for the protection which he
had so visibly afforded him. But as the first accounts tranfmiitted
to Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and while the circumstances of
the conspiracy were but imperfectly known, and the passions
which it excited strongly felt, were indiftint, exaggerated, and
contradicory, the ministers laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the king's safety, they
refused to enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from the
chair of truth, what appeared to be fill dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the king returned to Edinburgh, and though

Galloway, the minister of his own chapel, made an harangue to
the people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hear-

1 ing,
234

ing, confirmed his account; though he commanded a narrative
of the whole tranfahtion to be published; the ministers of that
city, as well as many of their brethren, still continued incredulous
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gowrie, their jealousy
of every part of the king's conduct, added to some false and many
improbable circumstances in the narrative, not only led them to
fufpet the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility.
But at length, the king, partly by arguments, partly by threats,
prevailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that
they were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He could
be brought no further than to declare, that he reverenced the
king's account of the tranfaaion, but could not fay that he him-
self was persuaded of the truth of it. The scruples or obstinacy
of a single man would have been little regarded; but as the fame
spirit of incredulity began to spread among the people, the ex-
ample of one in so high reputation for integrity and abilities, was
extremely dangerous. The king was at the utmost pains to con-
vince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impossible to remove his
doubts, he deprived him of his benefice, and after repeated de-
lays, and many attempts towards a reconcilement, baniflied him
the kingdom Z.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any

scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were
produced there, according to law; an indictment for high treason
was preferred against them; witnesses were examined; and, by
an unanimous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited;
the punishment due to traitors was inflicted on their dead bodies;
and, as if the punishment hitherto in use did not express sufficient

Spotfw. 461, &c. Cald, v. 389, &c.

1H h 2 detestation

2"3S

B 0 0 KV
BOOK

VIII.

16-o,

Proceedings
of Parliament
against the
conspirators.

B 0 0 K deteflation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that the fur-
-- ---- name of Ruthven should be abolished; and in order to preserve
16oo.

the memory of the king's miraculous escape, and to declare the
sense which the nation had of the divine goodness, to all future
ages, appointed the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a
day of public thanksgiving . THOUGH

A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the king published a difcoutfy

of their vile and unnatural conspiracy again/I his life. In the year 1713, George
earl of Cromartie published an " Hitforical account of the conspiracy by the earl of
Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig, against king James VI." He seems not
to have seen the account which the king himself had given of that matter, and
borrows the whole historical part from Spotfwood and other authors; but he has
extracted from the public records the depositions of the witnesses produced by the
king's council, in order to make good the charge againfl the two brothers, and
Logan their associate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the material
circumstances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which they contain,
one would expet to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fadt, frill recent,
published by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons examined
in pretence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a degree of evidence
seldom attained in historical relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt and un-
certainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfacaion is dark and problem-
atical, the king's account and the depositions of the witnefles not only vary, but
contradia each other in so many circumstances, that much room is still left for
hesitation and historical scepticism. The testimony of Henderson is the fullest
and most important ; but in several particulars the king's account and his are con-
tradiaory. I. According to the king's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding
the dagger at his breaff, " the fellow in the fludy flood quaking and trembling."
Disc. 17. But Henderson fays, that he himself wrefled the dagger out of Mr.
Ruthven's hands. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boasted to his wife,
that he had that day twice saved the king from being flabbed. Disc. 54. Crom. 53.
II. The king asserts, that Henderson opened the window during Mr. Ruthven's
absence. Disc. 23. Henderson deposes, that- he was only attempting to open it
when Mr. Ruthven returned, and that during the itruggle between the king and
him, he opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we may believe the king,
the fellow in the fludy flood, during the struggle, behind the king's back, inacive
and trembling all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderson affirms, that he snatched
away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the king; that he
pulled back Ruthven's band, while he was endeavouring to flop the king's mouth,

and

THOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a great
alarm, it was followed by no consequences of importance; and

having

and that he opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52. IV. By the king's ac
count, Mr. Ruthven left him in the study, and went away in order to meet with
his brother, and the earl came up the llairs for the fame purpose. Disc. 23. H-Ien-
derfon deposes, that when Mr. Ruthven left the king, " he believes that lie did not
pars from the door." Crom. 5 r. It is apparent, both from the situation of the house,
and from other circumflances, that there could not polribly have been any inter-
view between the brothers at this time. Dicr. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, firlt at Falkland before the privy council in

Augufl, and next at Edinburgh before the parliament in November. Not to men-
tion some Icifer variations between thele depositions, we flall point out two which
are remarkable. In his first deposition, Mr. Hlenderfon relates the most material
circumstance of the whole in there words: " Mr. Ruthven pulled out the de-
ponent's dagger, and held the fame to his majcfly's breafi, faying, " renmilr yit of
my father's murder ; you J/all now die fr it :" and pointing to his higlnflis's heart
with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr. I<uthven's hands, and
swore, that as God flhould judge his foul, that if Mr. Rutliven had retained the
dagger in his hand, the space a man may go fix steps, he would have stricken the
king to the hilts with it." Disc. 52. But at his second examination lie varied
from this in two material circumnflances. Firif, the words which he at that tinime
put in Mr. Ruthven's mouth while he held the dagger at the king's breast are,
" Sir, you mi/i be my prisoner; rem emiber on my father's death." Secondly, when he
threatened him with death, it was only to deter him from making any noise,
" Hold your tongue, or by ChLrt you J1all die." 2. In his first deposition, the words
of Mr. Ruthven, when he returned to the chamber where he had left the king, are,
"' There is no remedy, by God you m infl die." But in his second deposition, " By
God there is no remedy, and offered to bind his majefly's hands." Crom. 51.
The material words you mnit? die are omitted. The first deposition seems plainly
to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder the king. The second
would lead us to conclude that he had no other design than to detain him as a
prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradictions in the teflimonies of the other

witnefes. i. In the discourse published by authority, it is insinuated that the
tumult of the inhabitants was raised against the king, and that it required some art
to pacify them. Disc. 32. The duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition.

Crom.

237
BOOK

\ 111.

iol.

1601.

Eflex's con-
(piracy
agaii.ft Eli-
zabeth.

B 0 0 K having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any

V1II.
_ . associates, or with fitch as were unknown, and chore to remain

6 so, the danger was over, as Goon as discovered. But not long

after, a conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which,
though the first danger was inflantly dispelled, produced tragical
effets, that rendered the close of that queen's reign dismal and
unhappy. As James was deeply interested in that event, it merits
our particular notice.

TIIE court of England was at this time divided between two

powerful faaions, which contended for the supreme diretion of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux, earl of
Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of lord treasurer Burleigh, was at
the head of the other. The former was the most accomplished and
the most popular of all the Engliih nobles; brave, generous, as-
fable; though impetuous, yet willing to liflen to the counsels of
those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable enemy;
a friend no less constant than warm; incapable of disguising his
own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others; better
fitted for a camp than for a court; and of a genius that qualified

Crom. 44. An a& of privy council summoning the magiffrates of Perth to answer
for that riot is still extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies of the town,
deposes, that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in order to aflift
the king. Crom. 66. 2. Henderson deposes, that he gave an evasive answer to
Mr. John Moncrief, who inquired where he had been that morning, because the
earl had commanded [him not to let any man know that he had been at Falkland.
Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George
Hay, afterwards lord Kinnoul, and chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose,
that the earl, in their pretence, asked Henderson, " Whom he found with the
king at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which question seems to prove that he did
not aim at keeping that journey a secret. In the Collecion of Criminal Trials,
published by Mr. Arnot in 1785, the evidence against the two brothers has been
confidered with great attention. P. 20, &c.

him
238

him for the first place in the administration, with a spirit which B 0 O K

VIII.

scorned the second as below his merit. He was soon diftinguiflhed _
by the queen, who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest honours. Nor
did this diminish the effeem and affeaion of his countrymen; but,
by a rare felicity, he was at once the favourite of his tbvereign,
and the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand, educated'
in a court, and trained under a father deeply Ikilled in all its arts,
was crafty, insinuating, industrious; and though pofTeffed of ta-
lents which fitted him for the highest offices, he did not rely upon
his merit alone for attaining them, but availed hirnfelf of every
advantage, which his own address, or the mistakes of others,
afforded him. Two such men were formed to be rivals and ene-
mies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil as low and base. To Cecil,
the earl's magnanimity appeared to be presumption and folly. All
the military men, except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most of the
courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly resembled
their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle between these I;s corre-

fpondence

faaions became more violent. Effex, in order to llrengthen him- with the
self, had early courted the friendihip of the king of Scots, for Scottilhking.
whose right of succession he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him and with his principal mini-
fters. Cecil, devoted to the queen alone, rose daily to new honours
by the assiduity of his services, and the patience with which he
expeted the reward of them; while the earl's high spirit and
impetuosity Sometimes exposed him to checks from a mistress,
who, though partial in her affetion toward him, could not easily
bear contradiction, and who confeired favours often unwillingly,
and always slowly. His own solicitations, however, seconded

maliciously

239

B 0 0 K maliciously by his enemies, who wished to remove him at a dif-

VIII.
«--..-- tance from court, advanced him to the command of the army

employed in Ireland againit Tyronne, and to the office of lord
lieutenant-of that kingdom, with a commission almost unlimited.
His success in that expedition did not equal either his own pro-
mises, or the expectations of Elizabeth. The queen, peevish from
her disappointment, and exasperated against Effex by the artifices
of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accusations and
reproaches. These his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in
the first transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a
part of his army into England, and, by driving his enemies from
the queen's presence, to reinflate himself in favour and in power.
But, upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rash design,
and, setting fail with a few officers devoted to his person, landed
in England, and posted direftly to court. Elizabeth received him
without any symptom either of affetion or of difi)leafure. By
proper compliances and acknowledgments, he might have regained
his former ascendant over the queen. But he thought himself
too deeply injured to submit to there. Elizabeth, on the other
hand, determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her
severity drew from him the most humble letters, ihe confined
him to the lord keeper's house, and appointed commissioners to
try him, both for his conducE during his government of Ireland,
and for leaving that kingdom without her permission. By their
sentence, he was suspended from all his offices, except that of
master of the horse, and continued a prisoner during the queen's
pleasure. Satisfied with having mortified his pride thus far, Eli-
zabeth did not susser the sentence to be recorded, and soon after
allowed him to retire to his own house. During there tranfations,
which occupied several months, Eflex fluctuated between the
allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire of revenge; and

some-
240

sometimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other. In B 0o K
one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he sent a messenger
into Scotland, to encourage the king to assert his own right to the i6
succession by force of arms, and to promise that, betides the affill-
ance of the earl and all his fiiends in England, lord Mountjoy, now
lord lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with five thousand men
from that kingdom. But James did not chute to hazard the losing James, !

cautious

a kingdom, of which he was just about to obtain pollefion, by a conduct.
premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the en-
terprife, and Eflex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts of
ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effef of difgufl and The wild at-

tempts of

disappointment, was not of long continuance; and the queen, ffeCx.
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant which fie had
formerly bestowed, but even to admit him into her prefencc, that
new injury drove a temper naturally impatient, and now much
fretted, to absolute despair. His friends, instead of soothing his
rage, or restraining his impetuosity, added to both by their im-
prudent and interested zeal. After many anxious consultations,
he determined to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. But
being conscious how unpopular such an enterprise would be, if it
appeared to proceed from. motives of private revenge alone, he
endeavoured to give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the king of Scotland's interest with his own. He wrote to James,
that the faction which now predominated in the English court
had resolved to support the pretensions of the infanta of Spain to
the crown; that the places of the greatest importance in the king-
dom were put into the hands of his avowed enemies; and that
unless he sent ambassadors, without delay, to insist on the im-
mediate declaration of his right of fucceflion, their measures were

VOL II. I i so

24I

1B 0 0K so well concerted, that all his hopes would be desperate. James,

VIII.
*-- ---' who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would be to the queen

of England, was not willing rashly to expose himself to her dif-
pleasure. Effex, nevertheless, blinded by resentment, and im-
patient for revenge, abandoned himself to these passions, and a&ed
like a man guided by phrenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers incompletely armed, he attempted to assault a
throne the best established in Europe. Sallying at their head out
of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wished to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his
standard. He advanced towards the palace with an intention to
drive Cecil and his faQion out of the queen's presence, and to
obtain a declaration of the Scottish king's right of succession b.
But, though almost adored by the citizens, not a man would join
him in this wild enterprise. Dispirited by their indifference, de-
ferted by some of his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the
troops which marched against him under different leaders into the
city, he retreated to his own house; and without any bold effort,
suitable to his present condition, or worthy of his former reputa-
tion for courage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he appointed the

earl of Mar, and Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his am-
baffadors to the court of England. The former of there was the
person by whose means Efrex had carried on his correspondence
with the king. He was a passionate admirer of the earl's cha-
rader, and disposed to attempt every thing that could contribute
to his safety. Bruce, united in a close friendship with Mar, was

b Birch. Mem. ii. 477.

ready
242

ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the B O O K1

VIII.

embassy less friendly to Efiex, than the choice of his ambaffa-
dors; they were commanded to solicit, in the warmefl manner,
for the earl's life, and if they found that the king, by avowing his
friends, could either promote their designs or contribute to their
safety, they were impowered to lay aside all disguise, and to pro-
mise that he would put himself at their head, and claim what was
due to him by force of arms . But before the ambassadors could
reach London, Effex had suffered the punishment which he me- His death.
rited by his treason. Perhaps, the fear of their interposing, in
order to obtain his pardon, hastened his death. Elizabeth con-
tinued, for some time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could
not bring herself to consign into the hands of the executioner, a
man who had once pofiefied her favour so entirely, without a
painful struggle between her refentmcnt against his late mifcon-
du&, and her ancient affeaion towards him. The distress to
which he was now reduced, tended naturally to soften the former,
while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and the inter-
cession of one faithful friend, who had interest with the queen,
might perhaps have saved his life, and have procured him a re-
mission, which, of herself, she was ashamed to grant. But this
generous nobleman had at that time no such friend. Elizabeth,
solicited incessantly by her ministers, and offended with the haugh-
tiness of Effex, who, as she imagined, scorned to sue for pardon,
at last commanded the sentence to be put in execution. No
sooner was the blow struck, than she repented of her own rafl-
ness, and bewailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James
always confidered him as one who had fallen a martyr to his service,

Johnft. 289. Birch. Mem. ii. 510.

Ii 2 and,

B 0 0 K and, after his accefion to the English throne, restored his son to,

'VIII.

_-----. his honours, as well as all his associates in the conspiracy, and dii-

tinguifhed them with his favour d.

James con- TIE Scottish ambafladors, finding that they had arrived too
intrgulesin late to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not
England. only concealed that part of their infirudions with the utmost

care; but congratulated the queen, in their master's name, on her
happy escape from such an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth,
though no firanger to the king's correspondence with Effex, or
to that nobleman's intentions of aferting James's right to the
crown, was not willing that these should be known to the people,
and, for 'that reason, received the congratulations of the Scottish
ambafiadors with all possible marks of credit and good will; and
in order to sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union
between the two courts, increased the subsidy which ihe paid him
annually. The ambassadors resided for some time in England,
and were employed, with great success, in renewing and extending
the intrigues which Bruce had formerly entered into with the
Englill nobles. As Elizabeth advanced in years, the Englifi
turned their eyes more and more towards Scotland, and were eager
to prevent each other in courting the favour of their future mo-
narch. Assurances of attachment, professions of regard, and pro-
mises of support, were offered to James from every corner of the
kingdom. Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Eflex had founded
on the friendship of the Scottish king, and what advantages he
might have derived from it, thought it prudent to fland no longer
at a distance from a prince, who might so soon become his master.

a Camb. Spotfw. 464.

But being sensible at the fame time how dangerous such an inter- B I0 K

YIII.

course might prove, under a mifnrefs naturally jealous, and whose
jealousy grew fironger with old age; though he entered into a
correspondence with him, he carried it on with all the secrecy and
caution necessary in his situation, and peculiar to his characer d.
James having gained the man whose opposition and influence lhe
had hitherto chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfet security, till that
event should happen, which would open his way to the throne
of England'. It was with some difficulty that he restrained within'
proper bounds his adherents in that kingdom, who, labouring to
distinguish themselves by that officious zeal with which a prince,
who has a near profpet of mounting the throne, is always servcd,
urged him to allow a motion to be made in parliament for de-
claring his right of fucceflion to the crown. James prudently
discouraged that design; but it was with no finall fatisfadion that
he observed the ascendant he was acquiring in a court, the diaates
of which he had been so long obliged to obey; and which had
either prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had taken during the
whole course of his reign '.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent firuggles of the political 1602.

Attempts to
faaions which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions civilize the

Highlanders.

d See Append. No. XX.
c Dr. Birch, in his Life of Prince Henry, p. 232, has given some account of

the mysterious mode in which this correspondence was carried on, and how the
letters were conveyed from London to Dublin, and from thence to Scotland. Not-
withflanding the solicitude which Cecil repeatedly discovers, that his letters should
be destroyed as soon as the king had read them, a considerable number of them has
been preserved, and publilhed by Sir David Dalrymple in the year 1766. They
were written by lord Henry Howard, under the infpclion of Cecil, in.a style as-
fetedly obscure. The whole correspondence is more curious than inftrulive.

$ Spotfw. 467. 471. Birch. Mem. ii. T54.

which

245

246
BOOK

VIII.
160z.

g Basil. Dor. I39.

Wie

which had happened there, since the king first took the reins of
government into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual
tranquillity; being undisturbed by any foreign enemy, and free
from any intestine commotion of long continuance. During this
period, James endeavoured to civilize the Highlands and the Isles,
a part of his dominions too much neglected by former monarchs,
though the reformation of it was an objet highly worthy of their
care. The long peace with England had afforded an opportunity
of subduing the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of rcftrain-
ing their depredations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen
than to their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began,
gradually, to forget the use of arms, and to become attentive to
the arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their natural
fierceness, averse from labour, and inured to rapine, infested their
more industrious neighbours by their continual incursions. James,
being solicitous not only to repress their inroads, but to 'render
them useful fubjeeasg, had at different times enated many wife
laws extremely conducive to there ends. All landlords, or chiefs
of clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their
estates, who could not find fiufficient surety for their good beha-
viour; they were required to make a lift of all suspicious persons
under their jurisdiction, to bind themselves to deliver them to
justice, and to indemnify those who should susser by their rob-
beries; and, in order to ascertain the faithful performance of these
articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged to give hostages to the
king, or to put pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might
serve as a retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and
commerce, were appointed to be built in different parts of the High-
lands.; one in Cantire, another in Lochaber, and a third in the

247
isle of Lewis; and, in order to draw inhabitants thither, all the B o0 K

VIII.

privileges of royal boroughs were to be conferred upon them. -
Finding it, however, to be no easy matter to inspire the natives
of those countries with the love of industry, a resolution was
taken to plant among them colonies of people from the more in-
duftrious counties. The first experiment was made in the isle of
Lewis; and as it was advantageously situated for the filing trade,
a source from which Scotland ought naturally to derive great
wealth, the colony transported thither was drawn out of Fife, the
inhabitants of which were well skilled in that branch of commerce.
But before they had remained there long enough to manifest the
good effeCts of this institution, the islanders, enraged at iecing
their country occupied by those intruders, took arms, and fur-
prifing them in the night-time, murdered tome of them, and com-
pelled the reft to abandon the settlement. The king's attention.
being soon after turned to other objects, we hear no more of this
salutary projeCt. Though James did not pursue the design with
that feady application and perseverance, without which it is im-
possible to change the manners of a whole people, he had the
glory, however, not only of having first conceived the thoughts,.
but of having first pointed out the proper method of introducing
the civil arts of life into that part of the island h.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good slate of health, the effect. Elizabeth's

lalt illnefO,

es a found constitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and death.
and temperance, Elizabeth began this winter to feel her vigour de-
ereafe, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having re-
moved on a very stormy day from WetRminfter to Richmond, whi-
ther ihe was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She 16o3.

January 3 1.
h Par]. 1587. 1594. 1597. Spotfw. 468.

had
9

B 0 0 K had no formed fever; her pulse was good; but ihe eat little, and

VIII.
L---·-J could not sleep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep me-

6 lancholy, which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour.

She delighted in solitude, she fat conflantly in the dark; and was
often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the queen's indisposition known, than persons

of all ranks, and of all different feds and parties, redoubled their
applications to the king of Scots, and vied with each other in pro-
sessions of attachment to his person, and in promises of submission
to his government. Even some of Elizabeth's own servants, weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid
of the burthen of gratitude for past benefits, and expecting to
lhare in the liberality of a new prince, began to desert her: and
crowds of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the
favour of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying ho-
mage to him.

MEANWHILE, the queen's disease increased, and her melan-

choly appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjectures
were formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which ehe
seemed to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper.
Some imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination,
to pardon the earl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for many
years created her much trouble. Others imagined that it arose
from observing the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of
her people, who beheld her health declining with most indecent
* indifference, and looked forward to the acceflion of the Scottifl

king, with an impatience which they could not conceal. The
most common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the most pro-
balile, was, that it flowed from grief for the earl of Effex. She

retained

retained an extraordinary regard for tile memory of that unfor- B o o K
tunate nobleman; and though she often complained of his obfti- -----·
nacy, seldom mentioned his name without tears '. An accident 603
happened' soon after her retiring to Richmond, which revived her
affetion with new tcndernefs, and embittered her sorrows. The
counters of Nottingham, being on her death-bed, desired to fee
the queen, in order to reveal Something to her, without discover-
ing which, flie could not die in peace. When the queen came into
her chamber, ihe told her, that while ElTex lay under sentence
of death, he was desirous of imploring pardon in the manner
which the queen herself had prescribed, by returning a ring, which
during the height of his favour ihe had given him, with a pro-
mile that if, in any future distress, he sent that back to her as a
token, it should intitle. him to her protetion; that lady Scroop
was the person he intended to employ in order to present it; that,
by a mistake, it was put into her hands inflead of lady Scroop's;
and that she having communicated the matter to her husband, one
of Essex's most implacable enemies, he had forbid her either to
carry the ring to the queen, or to return it to the earl. The
counters, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the queen's for-
givenefs; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice of the
earl's enemies, and how unjuffly fihe had fufpeeed him of inflexible
obflinacy, replied, "God may forgive you, but I never can;"
and left the room in great emotion . From that moment, her

spirit

Birch. Mem. ii. 505.
k This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first published by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony of de Maurier, Mem. a60, and by the
traditional evidence of lady Elizabeth Spelman, publiflied by Dr. Birch, Negoc. xo6.
Camden mentions the queen's grief for Efrex's death as one of the causes of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain, which prove that this was commonly be-
lieved at the time. Birch. Mem. ii. 50b. Effex, however, had been beheaded

VOL. II. K k two

B v oI K spirit funk entirely;. she could Scarce taste food; she refused all

---- the medicines prescribed by her physicians; declaring that she

°603. wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could pre-

vail on her to go to bed; she fat on cushions, during ten days and
nights, pensive and silent, holding her finger almost continually
in her mouth, with. her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The
only thing to which she seemed to give any attention was the aEs of
devotion performed in her apartment by the archbishop of Canter-
bury; and in there she joined with great appearance of fervour.
Waited, at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long abfti-
ience, ihe expired, without a firuggle, on Thursday the twenty-
fourth day of March, in the seventieth year of her age, and in
the forty-fifth of her reign',

Her cha- FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indifference and dif-
rader.

refpeat towards their princes. But without reason; no people
are more grateful than they to those monarchs who merit their
gratitude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are men-
tioned by the English of this age with the fame warmth as they

two years before her death, and there seems to have been no other reason, but that
which we have assigned, why her sorrows should revive with so much violence at so
great a distance of time. As the death of the counters of Nottingham happened
about a fortnight before the queen's death, the coincidence of there events, together
with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much probability to the flory related by
Osborne, as will entitle it to a place in history. The only objection to the account
we have given of Elizabeth's attachment to Effex, arises from her great age. At
the age of 68, the amorous paflions are commonly abundantly cool, and the vio-
lence of all the paflions, except one, is much abated. But the force of this ob-
t jetion is entirely removed by an author who has illustrated many pafrages in the

English history, and adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors,
Article Eflex.

Camd. Birch. Mem. ii. 506. Birch. Negoc. 206. Strype, iv. 373.

were
250

were by those who shared in the bleflings and splendour of their BO 0o K

VIII.

reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is still adored in England. t-,-
The historians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her 1603.
people; her sagacity in discerning their true interest; her fteadi-
ness in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her miniflcrs;
the glory she acquired by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her
fuljeas; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all these; juRly rank her among the mofl
illustrious princes. Even the defects in her character, they ob-
serve, were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excessive
frugality was not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and
though it prevented some great undertakings, and rendered the
success of others incomplete, it introduced oeconomy into her ad-
ministration, and exempted the nation from many burdens, which
a monarch, more profuse or more enterprising, mufft have imposed.
Her slowness in rewarding her servants sometimes discouraged
useful merit; but it prevented the undeferving from acquiring power
and wealth, to which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy
of those princes who pretended to dispute her right to the crown,
led her to take such precautions, as tended no less to the public
safety, than to her owtl; and to court the affections of her people,
as the firmest support of her throne. Such is the picure which
the English draw of this great queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the history of Scotland, finds

himself obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different,
and in a less amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom,
during the greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that
which she possessed in her own. But this authority, acquired at
first by a service of great importance to the nation, she exercised
in a manner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By her in-

Kk 2 duftry

552
BOOK

1603-

James pro-
claimed kinE
of England.

duftry in fomenting the rage of the two contending faaions; by'
supplying the one with partial aid; by feeding the other with'
false hopes; by balancing their power so artfully, that each of
them was able to distress, and neither of them to subdue the other;
she rendered Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion, and
bloodshed: and her craft and intrigues, effecing what the valour
of her ancestors could not accomplish, reduced that kingdom to x
tfate of dependance on England. The maxims of policy, often
little consonant to those of morality, may, perhaps, justify this
conduct. But no apology can be offered for her behaviour to,
queen Mary; a scene of dissimulation without necessity; and of
severity beyond example. In almost all her other actions, Eliza-
beth is the object of our highest admiration; in this we must
allow that ihe not only laid aside the magnanimity which became
a queen, but the feelings natural to a woman.

THOUGH Elizabeth would never permit the question concerning

the right of fuccefilon to the crown to be determined in parlia-
ment; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point which
she wished to remain an impenetrable mystery; she had, however,.
formed no design of excluding the Scottish king from an inherit-
ance to which his title was undoubted. A short time before her
death, she broke the silence which she had so long preserved on
that subjeCt, and told Cecil and the lord admiral, " That her
throne was the throne of kings; that she would have no mean
person to ascend it, and that her cousin the king of Scots should
be her successor." This Ihe confirmed on her death-bed. As soon
as she breathed her last, the lords of the privy council proclaimed
James king of England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners
in favour of the infanta, all the cabals formed within the kingdom
to support the titles of lady Arabella and the earl of Hartford,

difap-

disappeared in a moment; the nobles and people, forgetting their B V ° K
ancient hostilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the do- t.-.--
minion of firangers, testified their fatisfation with louder accla- 603.
mations than were usual at the accefllon of their native princess.
Amidst this tumult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who
proposed to prescribe fbme conditions to the fuccefor, and to exaR
from him the redress of some grievances, before they called him
to the throne, was scarcely heard; and Cecil, by Rifling it, added-
to his flock of merit with his new mafler. Sir Charles Percy,
brother of the earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset, the
earl of WVorcefler's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter
to the king, signed by all the peers and privy counsellors then in'
London; informing him of the queen's death, of his accession to
the throne, of their care to recognize his title, and of the uni-
versal applause with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost haste to deliver this welcome
meflage; but were prevented by the zeal of fir Robert Carey,
lord Hunfdon's youngest son, who setting out a few hours after.
Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, jufR
as the king had gone to bed. He was immediately admitted into
the royal apartment, and kneeling, by the king's bed, acquainted
him with the death of Elizabeth, saluted him king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland; and as a token of the truth of the
intelligence which he brought, presented him a ring, which his
sifter lady Scroop had taken from the queen's finger after her deaths
James heard him with a decent composure. But as Carey was only
a private messenger, the information which he brought was not.
made public, and the king kept his apartment till the arrival of
Percy and Somerset. Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed;,
and his own subje&s expressed no less joy, than the English, at
this increase of his dignity. As his presence was absolutely ne-

ceffary.

253

254
B 0 0 K

1603.

Takes pof-
feflion of the
throne.

,ceiTary in England, where the people were extremely impatient to
fee their new sovereign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom
without delay. He appointed his queen to follow him within a
few weeks. He committed the government of Scotland to his
privy council. He intrusted the care of his children to different
noblemen. On the Sunday before his departure, he repaired to
the church of St. Giles, and after hearing a sermon, in which the
preacher displayed the greatness of the divine goodness in raising
him to the throne of such a powerful kingdom without opposition
or bloodshed, and exhorted him to express his gratitude, by pro-
moting, to the utmost, the happiness and prosperity of his sub-
jels; the king rose up, and addressing himself to the people,
made many profelfions of unalterable affecion towards them;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; assured them that his Scot-
tifh fubjets, notwithstanding his absence, should feel that he was
their native prince, no less than when he resided among them;
and might still trust that his ears ihould be always open to their
petitions, which he would answer with the alacrity and love of a
parent. His words were often interrupted by the tears of the
whole audience; who, though they exulted at the king's pro-
fperity, were melted into sorrow by there tender declarations ".

ON the fifth of April he began his journey, with a splendid,

but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.
Wherever he came, immense multitudes were assembled to wel-
come him; and the principal persons in the different counties
through which he pafled, displayed all their wealth and magnifi-
cence in entertainments prepared for him at their houses. Eliza-
beth had reigned so long in England, that most of her subje&s

Spotfw. 476.

remem-

remembered no other court but hers; and their notions of the B o

1 K

manners and' decorums suitable to a prince were formled upon --- »
what they had observed there; It was natural to apply this flandard
to the behaviour and actions of their new monarch, and to com-
pare him, at first fight, with the. queen,. on whose throne he was
to be. placed. James, whose manners were extremely different
from hers, suffered by the comparison. He had not that flowing
affability, by which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people;
and, though easy among a few whom he loved, his indolence
could not bear the fatigue of rendering liimfelf agreeable to a
mixed multitude. He was no less a firanger to that dignity with
which Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And, instead of that
well-judged frugality with which ihe conferred titles of honour,.
le bestowed them with an undiflinguifhing profusion, that ren-
dered them no longer marks of diftindion, or rewards of merit.
But these were the reflections of the few alone;. the multitude
continued their acclamations; and, amidst these, James entered
London on the 7th of May, and took peaceable poiFeffion of the
throne of England.

THUs were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac- Conclusion,

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one great
monarchy. By this jundtion of its whole native force, Great
hBritain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe, which,
England and Scotland could never have attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their monarchs as next heirs A viewof the

Revolutions

to the English throne, that they had full leisure- to-reflet on all in theConnli.
the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But, Ction of
dazzled with the glory of giving a sovereign to their powerful since the ac-

cefflon of
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native prince, and in full James VI.

7 expectation

B o O I expectation of iharing liberally in the wealth and honours which

VIII.
,v --... he would now be able to bestow, they attended little to the most

obvious consequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his ac-
-ceflon to the throne of England, as if it had been no less bene-
ficial to_ the kingdom, than honourable to the king. They soon
had reason, however, to adopt very different sentiments; and from
that period we may date a total alteration in the political confti-
tution of Scotland.

THE feudal aristocracy, which had been subverted in most na-

tions of Europe by the policy of their princes, or had been under-
mined by the progress of commerce, till subsisted with full force
in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually to augment
the power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Reformation, which,
in every other country where it prevailed, added to the authority
of the monarch, had increased their wealth and influence. A king
possessed of a small revenue, with a prerogative extremely limited,
and unsupported by a tfanding army, could not exercise much
authority over such potent fubjees. He was obliged to govern
by expedients; and the laws derived their force not from his power
to execute them, but from the voluntary submission of the nobles.
But though this produced a species of government extremely
feeble and irregular; though Scotland, under the name, and with
all the outward ensigns of a monarchy, was really subjea to an
aristocracy, the people were not altogether unhappy; and even
in this wild form of a constitution, there were principles, which
e, tended to their security and advantage. The king, checked and

overawed by the nobles,. durst venture upon no aa of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the king, whose claims.and
pretensions were many, though his power was small, were afraid
,of irritating their dependants by unreasonable exations, and tem-

pered
256

pered the rigour of ariflocratical tyranny, with a mnildnc(ic and B 0 0 K

VIII.

equality to which it is naturally a itranger. As long as the mi- -
litary genius of the feudal government remained in vigour, the
vasSals both of lle crown and of the barons were generally
not only free from oppreflion, but were courted by their fupcriors,
whose power and importance were founded on their attachment
and love.

BuT, by his acceflion to the throne of England, James ac-

quired such an immense accession of wealth, of power, and of
splendour, that the nobles, aftonifled and intimidated, thought it
vain to firuggle for privileges which they were now unable to de-
fend. Nor was it from fear alone that they submitted to the
yoke; James, partial to his countrymen, and willing that they
should partake in his good fortune, loaded them with riches and
honours; and the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of
his power, in taming their fierce and independent spirits. The
will of the prince became the supreme law in Scotland; and the
nobles strove, with emulation, who should most implicitly obey
commands, which they had formerly been accustomed to contemn.
Satisfied with having fubjeted the nobles to the crown, the king
left them in full poffeflion of their ancient jurifdition over their
own vassals. The extensive rights, vested in a feudal chief, be-
came in their hands dreadful instruments of oppression, and the
military ideas, on which these rights were founded, being gra-
dually loft .or disregarded, nothing remained to correc or to miti-
gate the rigour with which they were exercised. The nobles,
exhausting their fortunes by the expence of frequent attendance
upon the English court, and by attempts to imitate the manners
and luxury of their more wealthy neighbours, multiplied exations
upon the people, who durst hardly utter complaints which they

VOL. II. L 1 knew

B V0 K knew would never reach the ear of their sovereign, nor move him

VIII.
-- _--^I to grant them any redress. From the union of the crowns to the

revolution in I688, Scotland was placed in a political situation,
of all others the most singular and the most unhappy; fubje&edl
at once to the absolute will of a monarch, and to the oppressive
jurisdiction of an aristocracy, it suffered all the miseries peculiar
to both these forms of government. Its kings were despotic; its
nobles were slaves and tyrants; and the people groaned under the
rigorous domination of both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to.

shake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency.
Aftei the death of James, the Scottish nation was no longer viewed
by our monarchs with any partial affection. Charles I. educated
among the English, discovered no peculiar attachment to the king-
dom of which he was a native. The nobles, perceiving the
sceptre to be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a prince
with whom they had little connexion, and over whose councils
they had little influence, no longer submitted with the fame im-
plicit obedience. Provoked by some encroachments of the king
on their order, and apprehensive of others, the remains of their
ancient spirit began to appear. They complained and remon-
firated. The people being, at the fame time, violently disgusted
at the innovations in religion, the nobles secretly heightened this
disgust; and their artifices, together with the ill-condua of the
court, raised such a spirit, that the whole nation took arms against
their sovereign, with an union and animosity of which there had
formerly been no example. Charles brought against them the
forces of England, and notwithstanding their own union, and the
zeal of the people, the nobles must have funk in the struggle. But
the difaffetion which was growing among his English subjeCts,

prevented
5 58

prevented the king from ating with vigour. A civil war broke 1B ,0 K

VII14.

out in both kingdoms; and after many battles and revolutions, v
which are well known, the Scottilh nobles, who first began the
war, were involved in the fame ruin with the throne. At the'
restoration, Charles II. regained full pofieflion of the royal pre-
rogative in Scotland; and the nobles, whose estates were wafted,
or their spirit broken, by the calamities to which they had been
exposed, were less able and less willing than ever to resist the
power of the crown. During his reign, and that of James VII.
the dictates of the monarch were received in Scotland with most
abjet fubmiflion. The poverty to which many of the nobles
were reduced, rendered them meaner saves, and more intolerable
tyrants, than ever. The people, always neglected, were now
odious, and loaded with every injury, on account of their attach-
ment to religious and political principles, extremely repugnant to
those adopted by their princes.

THE revolution introduced other maxims into the government

of Scotland. To increase the authority of the prince, or to secure
the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole
objec of our laws. The rights of the people were hardly ever
mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention began,
henceforward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the
claim of right, their liberties were secured; and the number of
their representatives being increased, they gradually acquired new
weight and consideration in parliament. As they came to enjoy
more security and greater power, their minds began to open, and
to form more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and of
police. But the aritfocratical spirit, which still predominated,
together with many other accidents, retarded the improvement
and happiness of the nation.

L1 2

ANOTHER

B 0 0 K ANOTHER great event completed what the revolution had be-

VIII.
-. ..-v-- gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the

union of the two crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly, of
the supreme assembly of the nation, instead of bearing the moit
considerable sway there, the peers of Scotland are admitted into the
British parliament by their reprelentatives only, and form but an
inconsiderable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative
authority is vested. They themselves are excluded absolutely from
the house of commons, and even their eldcft sons are not per-
mitted to represent their countrymen in that august aflembly.
Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to compensate for this
extiiction of their political authority. As commerce advanced in
its progress, and government attained nearer to perfection, these
were insensibly circumscribed, and at last, by laws no less salutary
to the public, than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost
totally abolished. As the nobles were deprived of power, the
people acquired liberty. Exempted from burdens to which they
were formerly fubjeat; fcrecned from oppression, to which they
had been long exposed, and adopted into a constitution whose
genius and laws were more liberal than their own, they have ex-
tended their commerce, refined their manners, made improve-
ments in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts and
sciences.

THIS survey of the political state of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three aeras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration in one or other of the three different inem-
bers of which the supreme legislative assembly in our conftitutioa
is composed. At their accejion to the throne of England, the

kings.
26o

kings of Scotland, once the most limited, became, in an inflant, B 0 K.
the most absolute princes in Europe, and exerciled a despotic v-
authority, which their parliaments were unable to controul, or
their nobles to refit. At the itnioin of the two kingdoms, the
feudal aristocracy, which had iubfifled so many ages, and with
power so exorbi:int,.was overturned, and the Scottish nobles,
having surrendered rights and pre-eminences peculiar to their
order, reduced themfnelves to a condition which is no longer the
terror and envy of other fubjeas. Sinice the union, the commons,
anciently neglected by their kings, and icldom courted by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and, being admitted to a par-
ticipation of all the privileges which the Englifll had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, mull now be eftcemed a body not
less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been
in the other.

TiHE church felt the cffects of the absolute power which the

king acquired by his accession; and its revolutions, too, are
worthy of notice. James, during the latter years of his admini-
ftration in Scotland, had revived the name and office of biflhops.
But they possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdiOion or pre-eminence;
their revenues were inconsiderable, and they were fearcely diftin-
guifhed by any thing but by their feat in parliament, and by being
the objec of the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The
king, delighted with the splendour and authority which the Eng-
lifh bishops enjoyed, and eager to effect an union in the ecclefi-
aftical policy, which he had, in vain, attempted in the civil go-
vernment of the two, kingdoms, resolved to bring both churches to
an exac conformity with each other. Three Scotfnen were con-
fecrated bishops at London. From them, their brethren were com-
manded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were

imposed ;

B 0O IK imposed; and though the clergy, less obsequious than the nobles,

_--^~- boldly opposed these innovations, James, long pracifed and well-

skilled in the arts of managing them, obtained at length their com-
pliance. But Charles I. a superstitious prince, unacquainted with
the genius of the Scots, imprudent and precipitant in all the mea-
fures he pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly the recep-
tion of the English liturgy, and indiscreetly attempting a refump-
tion of church lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the
people being left at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the epif-
copal church was overturned, and the prelbyterian government
and discipline were re-eftablifled with new vigour. Together
with monarchy, episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A form of
government, so odious to the people, required force to uphold it;
and though not only the whole rigour of authority, but all the
barbarity of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was insurmountable, and it subsisted with difficulty.
At the revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought
worthy the attention of the legislature, the presbyterian govern-
ment was again eftablifled, and, being ratified by the union, is
still maintained in the kingdom.

NoR did the influence of the accession extend to the civil and

ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its taste
and spirit, things of a nature still more delicate, were sensibly
affeced by that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a state
equally barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even of
p ~perspicuity. No author thought of writing in languages so ill

adapted to express and embellish his sentiments, or of ereting a
work for immortality with such rude and perishable materials. As
the spirit, which prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any

original
262

original effort of the human mind, but was excited by admiration 1 o o K
of the ancients, their compositions were deemed not only the _
flandards of taste and of icntimcnt, but of ftylc; and cven the
languages in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar, and
almost consecrated to learning and the mufcs. Not only the man-
ner of the ancients was imitated, but their language copied : and,
extravagant as the attempt may appear to write in a dead tongue,
in which men were not accustomed to think, and which they could
not speak, or even pronounce, the fucccls of it was aftonifling.
As they formed their style upon the pureifl models; as they were
uninfeced with those barbarifins, which the inaccuracy of familiar
conversation, the affecation of courts, intercourse with strangers,
and a thousand other causes, introduce into living languages; many
moderns have attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin com-
positions, which the Romans themselves icarce poflefled beyond
the limits of the Auguflan age. \While this was almost the only
species of composition, and all authors, by using one common
language, could be brought to a nearer comparison, the Scottifli
writers were not inferior to thofc of any other nation. The happy
genius of Buchanan, equally formed to excel in prose and in verle,
more various, more original, and more elegant, than that of al-
most any other modern who writes in Latin, reflects, with rc-
gard to this particular, the greatest luflre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for their induflry which authors met
with, who could be read and admired only within the narrow
circle of the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of waifing
half their lives in learning the language of the Romans, began
to refine and to polish their own. The modern tongues were
found to be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal

9 to.

263

1 0 0 (
K to those of the ancient ones, were at least more attainable. The

VIII.
'--»-- ' Italians having first set the example, Latin was no longer used in

the works of tafe ; it was confined to books of science; and the
politer nations have baniflhed it even from these. The Scots, we
may presume, would have had no cause to regret this change in
the public taste, and would iill have been able to maintain some
equality with other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour.
The English and Scottifl languages, derived from the fame sources,
were, at the end of the sixteenth century, in a slate nearly similar,
differing from one another somewhat in orthography, though not
only the words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters
of several Scottish ifatefmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or hi purity, to those of the English ministers with whom they
correspondcd. James himself was master of a style far from con-
temptible; and, by his example and encouragement, the Scottilh
language might have kept pace with the English in refinement.
Scotland might have had a series of authors in its own, as well as
in the Latin language, to boast of; and the improvements in taste,
in the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the other po-
lifhed nations of Europe, would not have been unknown there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were beginning to

drop the use of Latin in works of tate, and to make trial of the
strength and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased
to be a kingdom. The transports of joy, which the acceflion at
first. oecafioned, were soon over: and the Scots, being at once
deprived of all the objets that refine or animate a people; of the
pretence of their prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the fplen-
dour and elegance of a court, an universal dejedion of spirit seems
to have seized the nation. The court being withdrawn, no do-
meftic standard of propriety and correanefs of speech remained;

the
264

the few compositions that Scotland produced were tried by the
English flandard, and every word or phrase that varied in the
least from that, was condemned as barbarous; whereas, if the two
nations had continued diftin&, each might have retained idionis
and forms of l ecch peculiar to itself; and these, rendered fafiion-
able by the example of a court, and supported by thl authority
of writers of reputation, might have been confidered in the anme
light with the varieties occasioned by the difTcrcnt dialects in the
Greek tongue; might have been confidercd as beauties; and, in
many cales, might have been ulcd promiicuoufly by the authors
of both nations. But, by the acceflion, tile Englill naturally be-
came the sole judges and lawgivers in language, and rjeaced as
folecifins, every form of speech to which their ear was not ac-
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourfl between the
two nations was inconsiderable", and ancient prejudices were
still lb violent as to prevent imitation, possess the means of re-
fining their own tongue according to the purity of the Englilh
standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from
every different source. The clergy of Scotland, in that age, were
more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there did
not arise many authors among them, yet being in pofeffcion of

" A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the Engliflh and Scots

before the union of the crowns, is to be found in two curious papers, one pub-
lifhed by -laynes, the other by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commanded
the bishop of London to take a furvcy of all the itrangers within the cities of Lon-
don and Weftminfier. By this report, which is very minute, it appears that the
whole number of Scots at that time was 58. Haynes, 455. A survey of the fame
kind was made by Sir Thomas Row, lord mayor, A. D. 1568. The number of
Scots had then increased to 88. Strype, iv. Supplement, No. I. On the acceflion
of James, a considerable number of Scots, especially of the higher rank, resorted
to England; but it was not till the union that the intercourse between the two
kingdoms became great.

VOL. II. M iu the

DOOK

VIII.

B o O IK the privilege of discoursing publicly to the people, and their ser-

- _-- tnons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty pro-

ducions could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profeflion having furnished more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many
of thoie vicious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotti-
cifrs, have been introduced by them into the language. Nor did
either the language or public taste receive any improvement in
parliament, where a more liberal and more corret eloquence
might have been expeced. All business was tranfaded there by
the lords 'of articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the
court, that few debates arose, and, prior to the revolution, none
were conduted with the spirit and vigour natural to a popular
assembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the English were

gradually refining their language and their taste; in Scotland the
former was much debated, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out of
barbarity; but the distance between them, which was then incon-
fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after
science had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be fink-
ing back into ignorance and obscurity; and, active and intelligent
as they naturally are, they continued, while other nations were
eager in the pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a slate of languor.
This, however, must be imputed to the unhappiness of their po-
litical situation, not to any defect of genius; for no sooner was
the one removed in any degree, than the -other began to display
itself. The act abolishing the power of the lords of articles, and

other
266

other salutary laws paflid at the revolution, having introduced B °0 K
freedom of debate into the Scottish parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perseet it, became immediate objets
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to ihew that the Scots were fill capable of generous fcnti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able to
express themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diftincions which had subsisted
for many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear;
the fame manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame
authors are read and admired; the fame entertainments are fre-
quented by the elegant and polite; and the fame standard of taste,
and of purity in language, is established. The Scots, after being
placed, during a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the
liberty than to the taste and genius of the nation, were at once
put in possession of privileges more valuable than those which their
ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and every obftrudion that had
retarded their purluit, or prevented their acquisition of literary
fame, was totally removed.

M Im 2

267

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
DI S S E R TAT ION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King I EI N R Y, and the Genuineness ofC

the Queen's Letters to Botlhwcll.

T is not my intention to engage in all the controversics to
which the murder of king I-Icnry, or the letters from queen

Mary to Bcthwell, have given rife; far lcfs to appeal as an adver-
fary to any particular author, who hath treated of them. To
repeat, and to expose all the ill-founded afrertions with regard to
thefi points, which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice,
from partiality, irom malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be
no let:s irksome to nyfelf, than unacceptable to moss of my readers.
All I propose,. is to aflfif others in forming iome judgment con-
cerning the sacs in diipute, by stating the proofs produced on each
fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the
fame attention and impartiality which I have cndeavoured to ex-
ercife in examining other controvertcd points in the Scottifl
lhiftory.

IN

IN order to account for the king's murder, two different systems

have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell to have contrived
and executed this crime. The other imputes it to the earls of
Murray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted facls in history, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They stand detached; and whatever
we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the story re-
mains untouched. But the fat under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion
which an historian adopts with regard to it, he must vary and
dispose the whole of his subsequent narration. An historical
fyfteni may be tried in two different ways, whether it be con-
fifent with probability, and whether it be supported by proper
evidence.

THOSE who charge the king's murder upon Bothwell, argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been
mentioned already in different places of the narrative, it is ne-
ceffary to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they,
was a sudden and youthful passion. The beauty of his person,
set off by rome external frivolous accomplishments, was his chief
merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the
conspiracy against Rizio, converted this difgufi into an antipathy,
which she was at no pains to conceal. This breach was, perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the king certainly wanted that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of
affetion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found upon it a scheme, which proved

fatal

fatal both to the queen and to himself. He had served Mary at
different times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself
into her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained
her heart. In order to gratify his love, or at Ieafi his ambition, it
was necessary to get rid of the king. Mary had rejcaed the pro-
pofal which, it is said, had been made to her for obtaining a
divorce. The king was equally hated by the partilans of the
house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the kingdom; by Mur-
ray, one of the most powerful and popular persons in his country;
by Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived, and whom
Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour. Among
the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. Bothwell
might expet for all these reasons, that the murder of the king
would pass without any inquiry, and might trust to Mary's love,
and to his own address and good fortune, for the accomplishment
of the reft of his withes. What Bothwell expeted really came
to pass. Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at
an action which rid her of a man whom she had such good reason
to detest. A few months after the murder of her hufhand, she
married the pcrfon who was both fufpeded and accused of having
perpetrated that odious crime.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason

in this manner: Murray, they fay, was a man of boundless am-
bition. Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early
formed a design of usurping the crown. On the queen's return
into Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and engrofled
the whole power into his own hands. He set himself against
every proposal of marriage which was made to her, left his own
chance of succeeding to the crown should be destroyed. He hated
Darnly, and was no less hated by him. In order to be revenged

7 on

.27

on him, he entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwell, his
ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to aflaffinate
HIenry, by giving him hopes of marrying the queen. All this
was done with a design to throw upon the queen herself the im-
putation of being acceflary to the murder, and, under that pre-
text, to deifroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, and to 'eize
the sceptre which he had wrested out of her hands.

TIIE former of these systems has an air of probability, is con-

fiflent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, tome
af`ertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and efleds
appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray, on
the clueen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity,
and by his prudent administration rendered her so popular, and
so powerful, as enabled her with ease to quash a formidable infur-
reQion raised by the party of which he was the leader in the year
i565. What motive could induce Murray to murder a prince
without capacity, without followers, without influenee over the
nobles, whom the queen, by her negle&, had reduced to the
lowest. Rate of contempt, and who, after a long disgrace, had
regained (according to the most favourable supposition) the pre-
carious pofeffion of her favour only a few days before his death ?
It is difficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from the king's
life. It is Rill a more difficult matter to guess what he could
gain by his death. If we suppose that the queen had no previous
attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical than
a scheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was till
alive, and who was not only fufpeded, but accused, of murder-
ing her former husband. But that such a scheme should really
succeed is till more extraordinary.-If Murray had infiigated
Bothwell t o commit the crime, or had himself been accessary to

the
27 2

the commiflion of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would
silently bear from a fellow-criminal all the persecutions which he
suffered, without ever retorting upon him the accusation, or re-
vealing the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud
had subsisted between Murray and Bothwell; the queen with dif-
ficulty had brought thdm to some terms of agreement. But is it
probable that Murray would chute an enemy, to whom he had
been so lately reconciled, for his confident in the commission of
such an atrocious crime ? Or, on the other hand, would it ever
enter into the imagination of a wife man, first to raise his rival
to fupremc power, in hopes that afterwards he should render him
odious, by accusing him of crimes which he had not committed,
and, in consequence of this unjust charge, should be enabled to
deprive him of that power ? The most adventurous politician never
hazarded such a dangerous experiment. The most credulous folly
never trusted such an uncertain chance.

How strong soever these general reasonings may appear to be,

it is not upon them alone that we must decide, but according to
the particular evidence that is produced. This we now proceed to
examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the king's murder, appears,

I. From the concurring testimony of all the contemporary his-
torians. 2. From the confession of those persons who fuffcred for
assisting at the commission of the crime, and who entered into a
minute detail of all its circumstances. Anders. ii. I65. 3. From
the acknowledgment of Mary's own commiflioners, who allow
Bothwell to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime.
Good. ii. 2I3. 4. From the express testimony of Lefly, bishop
of Ross, to the fame effect with the former. Def. of Q. Mary's

VOL. II. N n Hon.

273

274

Hon. And. i. 76. Id. iii. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, dew-
dared that Bothwell had solicited him, at different times, to con-
cur in the conspiracy formed against the life of the King; and
that he was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of the confpi-
rators, that Bothwell was present at the murder. Crawf. Meem.
App. 4. The letter from Douglas to the queen, which I have
published in the Appendix to Vol. II. No. 14. confirms Morton's
testimony. 6. Lord Herries promises, in his own name, and in
the name of the nobles who adhered to the queen, that they would
concur in punishing Bothwell as the murderer of the king. Ap-
pend. Vol. I. No. 24.

TIIE most direCl charge ever brought against Murray is in

these words of bishop Lefly: " Is it unknown," addressing him-
self to the earl of Murray, " what the lord Herries said to your
" face openly, even at your own table, a few days after the
" murder was committed ? Did he not charge you with the fore-

knowledge of the fame murder? did he not, nrlla circutione

" tits, flatly and plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and
"coming with one of your most assured and trusty servants the
"fame day whereon you departed from Edinburgh, said to him,
"among other talk, This night ere morning lord Darnly shall lose
" his life?" Defence of Q Mary, Anders. ii. 75. But the assertion
of a man so heated with faaion as Lefly, unless it were supported
by proper evidence, is of little weight. The servant to whom
Murray is said to have spoken these words, is not named; nor
the manner in which this secret conversation was brought to light
mentioned. Lord Herries was one of the most zealous advocates
for Mary, and it is remarkable that, in all his negociation at the
court of England, he never once repeated this accusation of
Murray. In answering the challenge given him by lord Lindsay,

I Herries

275

Herries had a fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's know-
ledge of the murder; but though he openly accuies of that crime
some of those who adhered to Murray, he induflrioufly avoids
.any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith, Prcf. xii. tMary
herself, in conversation with Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton
and Maitland of being privy to the murder, but does not mentioil
Murray. And. iv. 55. When the bifliop of Ross and lord Herries
appeared before the English council, January I i, I569, they de-
clared themselves ready, in obedience to the queen's command, to
accuse Murray and his aflociatcs of being accefbry to the murder,
but " they being also required, whether they, or any of them, as
c of themselves, would accuse the said earl in special, or any of his
"adherents, or thought them guilty thereof ;" they answered, that
" they took God to witness that none of them did ever know any
"thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or were in council and

foreknowledge thereof; neither who were devisers, inventors,

"and executors of the fame, till it was publicly discovered long
" thereafter by some of the assassins, who suffered death on that
"account." Good. ii. 308. These words are taken out of a re-
gifter kept by Ross and Herries themselves, and seem to be a direcd
confutation of the biflop's assertion.

THE earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their -Protejtzatio touchiing

the Murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
,at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, add, " So after there pre-
"mises, the murder of the king following, we judge in our con-
" sciences, and hold for certain and truth, that the earl of Murray
"and secretary Lethington were authors, inventors, counsellors,
" and causers of the fame murder, in what manner, or by what-
" fomever persons the fame was executed." Anderl iv. I88.
But, I. This is nothing more than the private opinion or per-

N n 2 fonal

fonal affirmation of these two noblemen. 2. The conclusion
which they make has no connexion with the premises on which
they found it: Because Murray proposed to obtain for the queen
a divorce from her huiband with her own content, it does not
follow that therefore he committed the murder without her know-
ledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll were at that time the leaders of
that party opposite to Murray, and animated with all the rage of
faction. 4. Both of them were Murray's personal enemies.
Huntly, on account of the treatment which his family and clan
had received from that nobleman. Argyll was desirous of being
divorced from his wife, with whom he lived on no good terms,
Knox, 328. and by whom he had no children. Crawf. Peer. 19.
She was Murray's fitler, and by his interest he had obftruted that
design. Keith, 55I. These circumstances would go far towards
invalidating a positive teflimony; they more than counterbalance
an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether
Huntly and Argyll ever ifbfcribed this protestation. A copy of
such a protestation as the queen thought would be of advantage
to her cause, was tranfmiitted to them by her. Anders. iv. b. ii. 180.
The protestation itself, published by Anderson, is taken from an
unfubfcribed copy with blanks for the date and place-of subscribing,
On the back of this copy, there is palsed, indeed, a paper, which
Cecil has marked " Answer of the earl of Murray to a writing of
", the earls of Huntly and Argyll." Anders. I94, i95. But it
can hardly be deemed a reply to the above-mentioned protestation.
Murray's answer bears date at London, January I9, I568. The
queen's letter, in which she inclosed the copy of the protestation,
bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5, I568. Now it is scarce to be sup-
posed that the copy could be sent into Scotland, be subscribed by
the two earls, and be seen and answered by Murray within so
ihort a time. Murray's reply seems intended only to prevent the

imprefion
276

inipreflion which the vague and uncertain accusations of his ene-
mies might make in his ablence. Cecil had got the original of
the queen's letter into his custody. Anderl' iv. i85. This na-
turally leads us to conjenure that the letter itself, together with
the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before they came to the
hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjecure alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the proteflation was inclosed, is
to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. c. I. fol. 280. and is an original sub-
fcribed by Mary, though not written by her own hand, because
she feldoml chole to write in the English language. The protest-
ation is in the faime volume, fol. 282. and is manlifcfly written
by the Lame person who wrote the queen's letter. This seems to
render it highly probable that both were intercepted. So that
much has been founded on a paper not subscribed by the two earls,
and probably never seen by them. Betides, this method which
the queen took of fending a copy to the two earls, of what was
proper for them to declare with regard to a conference held in
their own presence, appears somewhat suspicious. It would have
been more natural, and not so liable to any mifintcrpretation, to
have desired them to write the most exaEt account, which they
could recollect, of what had pafced at the conversation at Craig-
millar. 6. But even if all this reasoning should be iet aside, and
the authenticity of the protcjlation flhould be admitted in its full
extent, it may still be a question, what degree of credit should be
given to the assertion of the two earls, who were not only pre-
sent in the first parliament, held by Murray as regent in Decem-
ber I567, in which the one carried the cfeptre, and the other the
sword of slate, Spotfw. 2I4. but were both members of the com-
mittee of lords of articles, and in that capacity assisted in framing
all the acts by which the queen was deprived of the crown, and
her ibn feated on the throne; and in particular concurred in the

aCt

2177

at by which it was declared, that whatever had befallen the queen,
C was in her awin default, in fa far as, be divers hir previe let-
ters written halelie with hir awin hand, and fend by hir to James
fometyme erle of Bothwell, cheif executour of the said horribill
murthour, as weill befoir the committing thairof as thairaftir:
And be hir ungodlie and difhonourabill proceeding to ane pre-
tendit marriage with him, fuddaindlie and unprovifitlie thaireftir,
it is maift certane that fche was previe, airt and pairt, of the atual
devise and deid of the foirnamit murthour of the king her lauch-
ful husband, and thairfoir juftlie defirvis quhatfumever hes bene
done to hir in ony tyme bygaine, or that fal be ufit towards hir,
for the said cause." Anders. ii. 221.

THE queen's commifioners at the conferences in England ac-

cufed Murray and his associates of having murdered the king.
Good. ii. 28i. But this charge is to be confidered as a recrimina-
tion, extorted by the accusation preferred against the queen, and
contains nothing more than loose and general affirmations, with-
out descending to such particular circumstances as either ascertain
their truth, or discover their falsehood. The fame accusation is
repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton, Sept. I568.
Good. ii. 359. And the fame observation may be made concern-
ing it.

ALL the queen's advocates have endeavoured to account for

Murray's murdering of the king, by supposing that it was done
on purpose that he might have the pretence of disturbing the
queen's adminifiration, and thereby rendering ineffecual her ge-
neral revocation of crown lands, which would have deprived him
and his associates of the best part of their estates. Lefly Def. of
Mary's Hon. p. 73. Anders. iv. part ii. I30. But whoever con-

fiders

riders the limited powers of a Scottish monarch, will fee that such'
a revocation could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
king of Scotland began his reign with such a revocation; and as
often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles rendered it in-
effeEtual. The belt vindication of Murray and his party from this
accusation, is that which they presented to the queen of England,.
and which hath never hitherto been publihed.
Afizvers to the Oljec7ions and Alledgance of the ic 'cc, a./cg1ii/ Paper OTice.

the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton, Mar,
Glencairn, HIuhme, Ruthven, &c. to have been moved to armour,
for that they abhorred and mnight t ot abide her Revocation of the

4Aienation made of her Property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but [i. e. without] all appear-

ance, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance of all wit and
good remembrance, for thir reasons following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my lord regent, he never had occasion to grudge

thereat, in refpe&t the queen made him privy to the fame, and
took rebolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his
lordflip know she would assuredly in the famine except all things
she had given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament as
she did indeed; and for that cause wilhed my lord to leave be-
hind him master John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom
she declared, that als well in that as in all other her grants it
should be provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before
ever he demanded, as it came to pass without any lett or impedi-
ment; for all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at
the parliament, but [i. e. without]- any difficulty.

ITE E

279

ITEM as to my lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Lindsay.

ONLY my lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property

quilk alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to hirm, in the said
parliament preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of
miscontent of that revocation, far less to have put their lives and
heritage to so open and manifest ane danger as they did for fie ane
frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and show any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of parliament thairanents
to the queen herself, and did complain of the manifetP corruption
of ane ad of parliament past upon her majesty's return, and fa did
let any revocation at that time; but the armour for revenge of
the king's deid was not till twa months after, at quhat time
there was no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind
thereof.

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to inquire whether the queen herself was accessory to the murder
of her husband,

No

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than strong

suspicions arose, among some of her subje&s, that Mary had given
her consent to the commission of that crime. And. ii. I56. We
are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the archbiflop
of Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were
no less unfavourable to her. Keith, Pref. ix. Many of her nobles
loudly accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation,
by supporting them, seem to have allowed the accusation to be
well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature, that they hardly

admit of a positive or direct proof. Deeds of darkness can fel-
dom be brought perfelcly to light. Where persons are accused
not of beingprincipals, but only of being acceFaries in the com-
mission of a crime; not of having perpetrated it themselves, but
only of giving consent to the commission of it by others; the proof
becomes still more difficult: and unless when some accomplice
betrays the secret, a proof by circumstances, or presumptive evi-
dence, is all that can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is sometimes held to be sufficient for condemning cri-
minals. The degree of conviction which such evidence carries
along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises from po-
fitive testimony; and a concurring series of circumstances fa-
tisfies the understanding no less than the express declaration of
witnehIes.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been produced against Mary.

We Ihall first confider that which is founded upon circumfiances
alone.

VOL. II.

281
0 o

SOME

SOME of these suspicious circumstances preceded the king's

death; others were subsequent to it. With regard to the former,
we may observe that the queen's violent love of Darnly was soon
converted into an aversion to him no less violent; and that his
own ill conduC, and excesses of every kind, were such, that if
they did not justify, at least they account for this sudden change
of her disposition towards him. The rife and progress of this
domestic rupture, I have traced with great care in the history, and
to the proofs of it which may be found in papers published by
other authors, I have added those contained in App. No. XVI.
and XVII. Le Croc, the French ambatfador, who was an eye-
witness of what he describes, not only represents her aversion to
Darnly tb be extreme, but declares that there could be no hopes

Dec. 12. of a reconcilement between them. " The queen is in the hands of
1566. physicians, and I do assure you is not at all well; and do believe

the principal part of her disease to consist in deep grief and sorrow;
nor does it seem possible to make her forget the fame. Still ihe
repeats there words, I could wij7 to be dead. You know very
well that the injury she has received is exceeding great, and her
majesty will never forget it-To speak my mind freely to you, I
do not expeCt, upon several accounts, any good understanding
between them [i. e. the king and queen], unless God effectually
Dec. 23. put to his hand.-His bad deportment is incurable; nor can there

ever be any good expected from him, for several reasons, which I
might tell you was I present with you. I cannot pretend to foretell
how all may turn, but I will fay, that matters cannot subsist long as
they are, without being accompanied with sundry bad consequences."
Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural death at this juncture,
it must have been confidered as a very fortunate event to the queen,
and as a seasonable deliverance from a husband who had become

altogether

altogether odious to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few
weeks afterwards, and as nothing had happened to render the
queen's aversion to him less violent, the opinion of those who con-
fider MIary as the author of an event which was manifestly so
agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of our readers to
be neither unnatural nor over-refined. If we add to this, what
has been observed in the history, that in proportion to the increase
of Mary's hatred of her husband, Bothwell made progress in her
favour, and that he became the object not only of her confidence
but her attachment, that opinion acquires new ftrcngth. It is
easy to observe many advantages which might redound to Mary
as well as to Bothwell from the king's death; but excepting them,
no person, and no party in the kingdom, could derive the leat be-
nefit from that event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the king,
and it was, in that age, thought no unwarranted imputation on
Mary's character, to suppose that the had consented to the deed.

THE steps which the queen took after her hufland's death add

firength to that supposition. I. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh at
the time of the king's death, asserts, that " every body fufpeded
the earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others,
said plainly that it was He," p. I5.. 2. Mary having iflued a
proclamation, on the I2th of February, offering a reward to any
person who should discover those who had murdered her husband;
And. i. 36; a paper in consequence of this was affixed to the
gates of the Tolbooth, February 6, in which Bothwell was named
as the chief person guilty of that crime, and the queen herself
was accused of having given her content to it. And. ii. I56.
3. Soon after, February 20, the earl of Lennox, the king's father,
wrote to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prosecute the
murderers with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own

O o 2 suspicions

283

suspicions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding
against him, and for discovering the authors of that crime,
n6 less obvious than equitable. He advised her to seize, and
to commit to sure custody, Bothwell himself, and such as were
already named as his accomplices; to call an assembly of the
nobles; to issue a proclamation, inviting Bothwell's accusers
to appear; and if, on that encouragement, no person appeared
to accuse them, to hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
without farther trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbishop Beatoun, her
ambassador in France, in a letter to Mary, March 9th, em-
ploys arguments of the utmost weight to persuade her to prose-
cute the murderers with the greatest severity. " I can conclude
nathing '(fays he) by quhat zour majesty writes to me zourfelf,
that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to make a rigorous
vengeance thereof, that rather than it be not actually taine, it
appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life and
all. I ask your majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir
Imul nathing to zour prejudife, but I man conftraindly writ the famin,

that all may come to zour knawlege; for the better remed'e may
be put therto. Heir it is needfull that ze forth shaw now rather
than ever of before, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and con-
fiance that God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall
overcome this most heavy envie and difplefir of the committing
thereof, and conserve that reputation in all godliness, ze have
conquift of lang, quhich can appear na wayis mair clearlie, than
fib that zou dofick justice that the haill world may declare zour inno-

cence, and give testimony forever of their treason that has com-

without mitted (but fear of God or man) so cruel and ungodlie a mur-
much ther, quhairof there is fa meikle ill spoken, that I am conftrainit

to ask zou mercy, that neither can I or will I make the rehearsal
tlo thereof, which is o.wr odious. But alas 1 madame, all over Europe

this
284

this day, there is na purpose in head fa frequent as of zour majeflie,
and of the present slate of zour realm, quhilk is in the most part
interpretit sinisterly." Keith, Pref. ix. '. Elizabeth, as appears
from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the fame thing in itrong
terms. 6. The circumstances of the cafe itself, no less than these
solicitations and remonstrances, called for the utmost vigour in her
proceedings. Her husband had been murdered in a cruel manner,
almost in her own presence. Her fubjeds were filled with the
utmost horror at that crime. Bothwell, one of her principal fa-
vourites, had been publicly accuscd as the author of it. Reflec-
tions, extremely dishonourable to herself, had been thrown out.
If indignation, and the love of jullice, did not prompt ler to
pursue the murderers with ardour, decency, at least, and concern
for vindicating her own character, should have induced her to
avoid any appearance of remissness or want of zeal.

BUT instead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her

acions, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. On the i5th of
February, five days after the murder, the bestowed on him the
reversion of the fluperiority of the town of Leith, which, in the
year 1565, lie had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This
grant was of much importance, as it gave him not only the com-
mand of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who wished much to keep pof-
session of it . 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous to obtain the

command
a Copy from the original in the charter-hotrfe of the city of Edinbutrgh of an /4Jignation

to the reversion of the superiority of Lcith by queen Mary, to the earl of Bothwcll.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos pre-

sentes literac pervenerint faluterr. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
tiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam nofria chariilmae

matri

285

command of the castle of Edinburgh, the queen, in order to pre-
vail on the earl of Mar to surrender the government of it, offered
to commit the young prince to his custody. Mar consented; and
she instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the castle. And. i.
Pref. 64. Keith, 379. note (d). 3. The inquiry into the mur-
der, previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conducted
with the utmost remissness. Buchanan exclaims loudly against
this. And. ii. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as
is evident from a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,

matri Maria Reginae regni noftri pro tempore in nofira minoritate fa6um et im-
penfum, verum etiam nobifmet ipfis, tam intra partes Gallia quam intra hoc nostrum
regnum, ad extentionem noftri honoris et auaoritatis in punitione furum, malefaao-
rum, et'tranfgrefforum infra idem, per nostrum confifum confanguineum et con-
filiarium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Halis, Creighton, et Liddifdale,
magnum admirallum regni noftri, commiflionem et onerationem ad hunc effeólum
habentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam,
in performatione et extentione noftri didi fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fum-
mam viginti millium mercarum hujus nofiri regni, alienavit ac Iefit. Et nos co-
gitantes quod, ex nofira principali honore et devoria diótum nofirum confifum con-
sanguineum & confiliarium eum quodam accidente et gratitudine recompenfare et
gratificare incumbit quae nos commode fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis
habilis omnibus affuturis temporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in
omnibus caufis feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum premifforum, ac pro
diverfis aliis nofiris rationabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fe-
cinus, &c. diQum Jacobum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos haredes mafculos
quofcunque nofiros legittimos, &c. affignatos in et ad literas reverfionis faafas,
&c. per Symonem Preston de eodem militem, piapofitum, balivos, consules, et
communitatem hujus noftri burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus,
&c. nobis, noftrifque heredibus, fuccefforibus, et affignatis pro redemptione, &c.
fuperioritatis totius ville de Leith, &c. impignoratae per nos diAis prepofito, &c.
iub reverfione alienate continentis fummam decem millium mercarum monttae pre-
fcriptoe numerandum et calculandum in parochiali ecclesia de Edinburgh, super pre-
t monitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris eft, veluti in dilis reverfionis literis, &c.

de data 8vo Odob. 1565, &c. (The reft is form, and contains a clause of absolute
warrandice.) 'IN cuus REI rESTIMONIUM prefentibus magnum figillum nofrum
apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, decimo quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Do-
mini millefimo quingentefimo fexagefimo sexto, et regni noftri vicefimo quinto.

The great feal entire.
4

one

one of the king's servants, who was in the house when his maficr
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the ribbifih. Ilcinl
examined on the Monday after the kin-'s death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the ccllare, and the quccnis ser-
vandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Qhliilk the laird of Tillibardi-
hearing, said, Hald thaii, here is ane ground. Efter quiilk words
fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition."
And. iv. p. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to search into
the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of bt much importance
merited the moRl careful enquiry. 4. Notwithllanding Lcnnox's
repeated solicitations, notwithflanllilng the reafonablenicfi of his
demands, and the necessity of complying with them, in order to
encourage any accuser to appear againftl Bothwell, she not only
refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him froln
her presence and councils; And. i. 42. 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances, ditcovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bring-
ing Bothwell to a public trial; but Ihe permitted him to fit as a
member in that meeting of the privy council which directed his
own trial; and the trial itself was carried on with fiuch unneceflary
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumfianccs, as
render his accquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumstances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. I. p. 416, &c. and therefore are not repeated in
this place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof
of her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the sceptre
before her at the meeting of parliament. Keith, 378. 7. In that
parliament, she granted him a ratification of all the vast poffeflions
and honours which fie had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services he had per-
formed. And. i. 17. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her

attach'ment

:57
CJ

attachment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him,
warned her of the infamy and danger which would attend that
action, ihe not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but dif-
covered what had passed between them to Bothwell, which ex-
posed Melvil to his resentment. Melv. I56. 9. Bothwell seized
Mary as she returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done
this without her knowledge and consent, such an insult could not
have failed to have filled her with the most violent indignation.
But according to the account of an old MS. " The friendly love
was so highly contraCted between this great princess and her
enormous subjeS, that there was no end thereof (for it was con-
flantly esteemed by all men, that either of them loved other car-
nally), so that fle suffered patiently to be led where the lover lift,
and all the way neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour, or
refitance, as in such accidents use to be, or that the might have
done by her princely authority, being accompanied with the noble
earl of Huntly and secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith,
383. Melvil, who was present, confirms this account, and tells
us that the officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that
nothing was done without the queen's content. Melv. i58.
io. On the 12th of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary
declared that she was then at full liberty, and that though Both-
well had offended her by seizing her person, she was so much
satisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that time, and so indebted
to him for past services, that she not only forgave that offence,
but resolved to promote him to higher honours. And. i. 87.
I i. Even after the confederate nobles had driven Bothwell from
the queen's pretence, and though she saw that he was confidered
as the murderer of her former hutband by so great a part of her
fubjeas, her affection did not in the least abate, and she continued
to express the most unalterable attachment to him. " I can per-

ceive
288

ceive (fays Sir N. Throlkncrton) that tlic rigour with which
tle queen is kept, proceedcth by order fiom thcfi men, bccauft
that the queen wvill not by any meani s lbe induced to lend hcr au-
thority to proeccutc the murderer ; nor will not conient by any
peruiafion to abandon the lord BIotihwell for Lcr hullband, but
avowcth constantly tliat the will live and die with himr; and iith,
that if it were put to her choice to rclinquilih her crown and
kingdom, or the lord Botliwell, flc would leavc her kingdom
and dignity to go a finple damicl with him, and tllat tc will
never conlent that he flall farle worse, or have more harm than
herself." Append. to Vol. I. No. XXI . In all their inegocialions
i.itlh Throlinorton, tle confedcrates imcntion this unaltcrablc at-
tachment of the queen to B1otlwell, as a ftllicient realbn for re-
jecling his propolals of an accommiodation with their iovcrcin.
Keitl, 4 I9. 44-9. This afirtion they rcncewed in the conferences
at York. Anders. iv. part ii. p. 66. Murray, in his interview
with Mlary in Lnchlevin, charged her with pcrfiling in her inor-
dinate affcction to Bothwvell. Keitb, 446. All these, however,
may bc confidered merely as acculations brought by the confcdc-
iatcs, in order to vindicate their rigour towards the queen. But
Throkmorton, who, by his refidcnce in Edinburgh, and by Iiis
intcrcourlc with the queen's partizans, as well as with her enemies,
had many opportunities of discovering whether or not iMa\ry liad
exprefled herself in such terms, and who was diilolfed to view hler
actions in the molt favourable light, appears, by the palage whlich
I have quoted from his letter of the 4.th of July, to be pcrfuadcd
that the confederates had not mifieprecfnted her fentilncnts. I-ec
had soon an opportunity of being confirmed with greater cer-
tainty in this opinion. Although the confederates had refuled
him access to the captive queen, le found means of holdingl a
lecret correspondence with her, and endeavourcd to perluade her

VOL. II. P p to

S' 9

to give her content to have her marriage with Bothwell dissolved
by a sentence of divorce, as the most probable means of regaining
her liberty. She hath sent me word that she will in no wife con-
sent unto that, but rather die. Append. to Vol. I. No. XXII.
There is evidence of the continuance of Mary's attachment fill
more explicit. Lord Herries, in the Parliament held the Isth of
December 1567, acknowledged the queen's inordinate affection to
that wicked man, and that fle could not be induced by persuasion
to leave him; and that in sequestering her within Lochlevin, the
confederates had done the duty of noblemen. App. to Vol. I.
No. XXIV. In the year I57I, a conference was held by some
deputies from a convention of Clergy, with the duke of Chatel-
herault,- secretary Maitland, fir James Balfour, and Kirkaldy; and
an account of it written by Mr. Craig, one of the ministers of
Edinburgh, is extant in Calderwood MSS. Hist. ii. 244. In pre-
fence of all there persons, most of whom were in Edinburgh when
the queen was taken at Carberry, Maitland, who was now an
avowed partizan of Mary, declares, that on the fame night she
was brought to Edinburgh, he hinfelf had offered, that if she
would abandon Bothwell, ihe ihould have as thankful obedience
as ever she had since she came to Scotland. But no wife would
she content to leave Bothwell. According to fir James Melvil,
the queen found means of writing a letter to Lothwell on the
evening of that day, when she was conducted as a prisoner to
Edinburgh, in which she declared her affection to him in the most
tender expressions, and her resolution never to abandon him. This
letter, he fays, was intercepted by the confederates, and deter-
mined them to confine Mary in the castle of Lochlevin. But as
neither Buchanan nor Knox, both abundantly disposed to avail
themselves of every faa and report that could be employed in
order to represent Mary's conduct as improper and criminal,

2 mention
290

mention this letter; and as the confederates themnfelves, in their
negociations with Throkmorton, as well as in their accusations
of the queen before the English commifiioners at York and VWet-
minster, maintain the fame silence with regard to it, I am satisfied
that Melvil, who wrote his memoirs for the information of his
son in his old age, and long after the events which he records hap-
pened, has been mitfaken with regard to this particular. From
this long enumeration of circumfiances, we may, without vio-
lence, draw the following conclusion: Had Mary really been
accessary to the murder of her husband; had Bothwell perpetrated
the crime with her consent, or at her command; and had she
intended to fliflc the evidence against him, and to prevent the
discovery of his guilt, she could 'carcely have taken any other
fleps than those which ihe took, nor could her conduct have
been more repugnant to all the maxims of prudence and of
decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary may be clafied
under two heads.

i. TIE depositions of some persons who were employed in

committing the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who,
in the writings of that age, is called French Paris. This 'person,
who was Bothwell's servant, and much trufled by him, was twice
examined, and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy
of the other, are fill extant. It is pretended that both there are
notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
naivete which it is almost impossible to imitate; they abound with
a number of minute fats and particularities, which the most dex-
terous forger could not have easily aftembled and conneted to-
gether with any appearance of probability; and they are filled

P p 2 with

291

with circumstances, which can scarcely be supposed to have en-
tered the imagination of any man but one of Paris's rank and
charater. - 'But, at the fame time, it must be acknowledged, that
his depositions contain some improbable circumstances. He seems
to have been a foolish talkative fellow; the fear of death, the vio-
lence of torture, and the dcfire of pleating those in whose power
he was, tempted him, perhaps, to feign some circumstances, and
to exaggerate others. To fay that some circumstances in an affi-
davit are improbable or false, is very different from faying that the
whole is forged. I fufped the former to be the cafe here; but I
fee no appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some of the
most material fads in Paris's affidavits reft upon his single tefti-
mony ;' and for that reason, I have not in the History, nor shall I
in this place, lay any stress upon them.

2. TIIE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. These

have been frequently published. The accident by which the
queen's enemies got them into their pofleffion, is related Vol. I.
377. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or internal
evidence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters.

I. Murray, and the nobles who adhered to him, affirm upon their
word and honour, that the letters were written with the queen's
own hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. ii.
64. 92. 2. The letters were publicly produced in the parliament
of Scotland, December I567; and were so far considered as ge-
nuine, that they are mentioned in the aCt against Mary, as one chief
argument of her guilt. Good. ii. 66, 67. 3. They were shewn
privately to the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Suffex, and fir Ralph

Sadler,

Sadler, Elizabeth's commiflioners at York. In the account lwhich
they give of this matter to their miflrcfs, they ltem to coniider
the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion of any forgery;
they particularly observe, " that the matter contained in them is
such, that it could hardly be invented and devifcld by any other
than herself; for that they discourse of some tliings, which were
unknown to any other than to herself and Bothwcll; and as it is
hard to counterfeit so many, ib the matter of them, and the man-
ner how thelc men came bly them, is flich, as it fcemeth that
God, in whole fight murder and bloodlhed of the innocent is
abominable, would not permit the litme to be hid or concealed."
Good. ii. 142. They tfem to have made such an imprcflion on
the duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter to Pembroke,
Lcicefter, and Cecil, he has tliefe words: " If the matter flall be
thought as dcteftable and manifest to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemcth here to ns." CGood. ii. 154. Nor did Nor-
folk declare these to be his sentiments only in public official letters,
he expressed himself in the iname manner to his molt confidential
friends. In a secret conference with the )ifilop of Rols at York,
the duke informed him, that lie liad fecn the letters, &c. which the
regent had to produce againit the qlrccen, whereby there would be
such matter proved againtl her, as would diflhonour her for ever.
State Trials, Edition of Hargrave, i. 91. Murdin, 52. The
bishop of Rols, if he had known the letters to be a notorious
forgery, mult have been naturally led, in coniclqiicnce of this de-
claration, to undeceive the duke, and to cxpolc the impoftiure.
But, inilead of this, the duec, and he, and Lethington, after con-
fulting together, agreed, that the biihop Ihoull write to iMary,
then at Bolton, and infEruct her to make fuich a propoitl to iliza-
beth as might prevent the pulAic producion of the letters andi
other evidence. State Trials, i. 94. MIurdin, 45. Illdced, tlhe

wvhole

vwhole of this secret conference seems to imply, that Lethington,
Ross, and Norfolk, were conscious of some defea in Mary's cause,
and therefore exerted all their ingenuity in order to avoid a public
accusation. Murdin, 52, 53. To Banister, whom the duke seems
to have trusted more entirely than any other of his servants, he
expressed himself in similar terms with refpea to the queen of
Scots. State Trials, i. 98. The words of Banister's evidence are
remarkable: " I confers that I, waiting of my lord and master,
when the earl of Suffex and Mr. chancellor of the dutchy that now
is, were in commission at York, did hear his grace fay, that upon
examination of the matter of the murder, it did appear that the
queen of Scots was guilty and privy to the murder of lord Darnly,
whereby I verily thought that his grace would never join in mar-
riage with her." Murdin, 134. Elizabeth, in her inftruaions to
the earl of Shrewsbury and Beale in 1583, asSerts, that both
the duke and earl of Arundel did declare to herself, that the proof,
by the view of her letters, did fall out sufficient against the queen
of Scots; however, they were after drawn to cover her faults and
pronounce her innocency. MS. Advoc. Library. A. iii. 28. p. 314.
from Cot. Lib. Calig. 9. 4. A similar impression was made upon
other contemporaries of Mary by the production of the letters,
which implies a full belief of their being genuine. Cecil, in his
correspondence with fir Henry Norris, the English ambassador in
France, relates this tranfation in terms which leave no room to
doubt with refpea to his own private opinion. In his letter,
Decem. i4th, I568, the very day on which the letters, &c. were
laid before the meeting of privy counsellors and peers, he informs
him, " That the regent was driven, for his defence, to disclose a
full fardel of the naughty matter, tending to convince the queen
as deviser of the murther, and the earl of Bothwell as her exe-
cutour; and now the queen's party, so great, refute to make any

answer,
294

answer, and press that their miffrefs may come in person to an-
fwer the matter herself, before the queen's majefly, which is
thought not fit to be granted until the great blot of the marriage
with her husband's murtherer, and the evident charges, by letters
of her own, to be deviser of the murther, be somewhat razed out
or recovered; for thatas the matters are exhibited against her, it
is far unseemly for any prince, or for chafle ears, to be annoyed
with the filthy noise thereof; and yet, as being a commissioner,
I must and will forbear to pronounce any thing herein certainly,
though as a private person I cannot but with horror and trembling
think thereof." Cabala, I56. 5. From the correspondence of
Bowes, the Englilh rcfident in Scotland, with Walsingham in the
year I582, published towards the close of this dissertation, it is
manifest that both in England and Scotland, both by Elizabeth and
James, both by the duke of Lennox and earl of Gowrie, the
letters were deemed to be genuine. The eagerness, on one fide
to obtain, and on the other to keep, pofleffion of the casket and
letters, implies that this was the belief of both. These sentiments
of contemporaries, who were in a situation to be thoroughly in-
formed, and who had abilities to judge with discernment, will, in
the opinion of many of my readers, far outweigh theories, sup-
positions, and conjectures, formed at the diflance of two centuries..
6. The letters were fubjeaed to a solemn and judicial examina-
tion with relpeEt to their authenticity, as far as that could be
ascertained by resemblance of character and fashion of writing:
for after the conferences at York and Wefiminfter were finished,
Elizabeth, as I have related, aflembled her privy counsellors, and,
joining to them several of the most eminent noblemen in her
kingdom, laid before them all the proceedings against the Scottish
queen, and particularly ordered, that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the regent, as the queen of Scots' letters and writings,.

ihould

295'

should also be shewed, and conference [i. e. comparison] thcreof
made in their fight, with the letters of the said queen's, being
extant, and heretofore written with her own hand, and fcnt to
the queen's majefly; whereby may be searched and examined what
diflerence is betwixt tlhem." Good. ii. 252. They assembled
accordingly, at IHampton Court, December 14 and Is, I56S;
and, " The originals of the letters supposed to be written with the
queen of Scots' own hand, were then also presently produced and
peru-sed ; and, being read, were duly conferred and compared, for
the manner of writing, and faflion of orthography, with sundry
other letters long since heretofore written, and sent by the said
queen of Scots to the queen's majefly. In collation whereof no
difference was found." Good. ii. 256. 7. Mary having written
an apologctical letter for her condut to the countess of Lennox,
July 1o, 1570 "', flc tranfLuitted it to her husband then in Scot-

land ;

b Mary's letter has never been published, and ought to have a place here, where

evidence on all fides is fairly produced. " Madam, if the wrang and false reportis
of rehcllis, enemies wcill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alacc to muche trusted
of me by zoure advice, had not so far flurred you aganis my innocency (and I
mufi fay aganis all kyndnlef, that zou have not onilic as it were condempnit me
wrangfullic, but so hated me, as some wordis and opcne deideis hes tcitifeit to all
the warldc, a manyfefit mifliling in zow aganis zour awn blude), I wold not have
omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me of those untrew re-
portics made of me. But hoping wilh Godis grace and tyme to have my inno-
cency l:nawin to zow, as I tru(t it is already to the mai(t pairt of all indifferent
perfonis, I thocht it bcft not to trouble zou for a tyme till that such a matter is
moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure littil son, and my
orelie child in this countrey. 'Io the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be
glaid to have zoure advyfe therein, as in all other thingis tuiching him. I have
born him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him and me boith; and of zow
he is defcendit. So I meane not to forzct my dewtie to zow, in fehewin herein
any unkyndnefs to zow, how unkyndlie that ever ze have delt with me, hot will
Jove zow as my awnt, and refpc&l zow as my mcder in law. And gif ye ples to

knaw
296

land; and he returned to tile countcfs tlce following anfv.-cr
"Seeing you have rcmittit to me, to anfwvcr tlhe queen the king's
mother's letters sent to you, xlhat can I fay but tlhat I do not
marvell to fee hir writ the best can for hirfelf, to feaml. to purge
her of that, quhairof many bcirle nme are certainly pc1(:fuadit of
the contrary, and I not only afiurit by my awin knawiedge, but
by her hand writ, the confeffionis of men gone to the (a, th, and
uther infallibil experience. It wull be lange tyme that is hable to
put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black quuhyte, or
innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa wcill knawin. The
maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the cquite of tour and
my calle, and of the just occafioun of our mylliking. Hir richt
dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis interelt, were hir trew
confcffloun and unfeyned repentance of tlat lamentable fad, odi-
ous for hir to be reportit, and firrowftill for us to think of. God
is just, and will not in the end be abused; but as he has maii-
fested the trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lennox's
Orig. RegiJ/. of Letters. In their public papers, the queen's ene-
mies may be fufpeted of advancing what would be most sub-
servient to their cause; not what was agreeable to truth, or what
flowed from their own inward convidion. But in a private letter
to his own wife, Lennox had no occasion to dissemble; and it is
plain, that he not only thought the queen guilty, but believed the

knaw farther of my mynd in that and all uther thingis betwixt us, my ambafladol
the bishop of Ross fall be ready to confer with zou. And so after my hairtlie com-
mendationis, remitting me to my faide ambassador, and zour better confideratioun,
I commit zou to the protecion of Almighty God, quhom I pray to preserve zow
and my brother Charles, and caus zou to knaw my pairt better nor ze do, From
Chaitfworth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladie Lennox * Youre natural gude Nice

my moder in law. and lovinge dochter."
VOL. II. Qq authen-

A97

authenticity of her letters to Bothwell. 8. In opposition to all
these reasons for believing the letters, &c. to be authentic, the
conduc of the nobles confederated against Mary, in not producing
them direstly as evidence againfi her, has been represented as an
irrefragable proof of their being forged. According to the ac-
count of the confederates themselves, the casket containing the
letters was seized by them on the twentieth of June one thousand
five hundred and fixty-feven; but the first time that they were
judicially stated as evidence against the queen was in a meeting of
the regent's privy council, December fourth, and they afterwards
served as the foundation of the aCs made against her in the parlia-
ment held on the fifteenth of the fame month. If the letters had been
genuine, it is contended, that the obtaining possession of them muff
have afforded such matter of triumph to the confederates, that
they would instantly have proclaimed it to the whole world; and
in their negociations with the English and French ministers, or
with such of their fellow-fubjeds as condemned their proceedings,
they would have silenced, at once, every advocate for the queen,
by exhibiting this convincing proof of her guilt. But in this
reasoning sufficient attention is not paid to the delicate and perilous
situation of the confederates at that juncure. They had taken arms
against their sovereign, had seized her person at Carberry-hill, and
had confined her a prisoner in Lochlevin. A considerable num-
ber, however, of their fellow-fubjeas, headed by some of the
most powerful noblemen in the kingdom, was combined againfi
them. This combination, they, soon perceived, they could not
hope to break or to vanquish without aid either from France or
England. In the former kingdom, Mary's uncles, the duke of
Guise and cardinal of Lorrain, were, at that period, all powerful,
and the king himself was devotedly attached to her. If the con-
federates confined their views to the dissolution of the marriage of

2 the
298

the queen with Bothwell, and to the exclusion of him for ever
from her pretence, they might hope, perhaps, to be countenanced
by Charles IX. and his ministers, who had ient an envoy into
Scotland of purpose to difiuade Mary from that ill-fated match;
Append. No. XXII.; whereas the, loading her publicly with the
imputation of being accessary to the murder of her husband, would
be deemed such an inexpiable crime by the court of France, as
muff cut off every hope of countenance or aid from that quarter.
From England, with which the principal confederates had been
long and intimately connected, they had many reasons to expect
more effectual support; but, to their aftonilhnent, Elizabeth con-
demned their proceedings with asperity, warmly espoused the cause
of the captive queen, and was extremely follicitous to obtain her
release and restoration. Nor was this the only one of the artifices
which Elizabeth often employed in her tranfaations with Scotland.
Though her most sagacious ministers confidered it as the wisest
policy to support the confederate lords rather than the queen of
Scots, Elizabeth disregarded their counsel'. Her high notions of
royal authority, and of the submission due by subje&s, induced
her, on this occasion, to exert herself in behalf of Mary, not
only with sincerity but with zeal; she negociated, she follicited,

c This was the opinion of Throkmorton, as appears from an extraA of his letter

of July iith, published in the Append. No. XXII. The fame were the sentiments
of Cecil, in his letter of Aug. ixth, 1567, to Sir Henry Norris, Elizabeth's am-
baflador to France, " You shall perceive," fays he, " by the queen's letter to you,
at this present, how earnefily ihe is bent in favour of the queen of Scots, and truly
since the beginning she hath been greatly offended with the lords; and, howsoever her
rajefty might make her profit by bearing with the lords in this action, yet no counsel
can flay her majesty from manifesting her mifliking of them." Cabala, 140. And
in his letter of Sept. 3d, " The queen's majefly, our sovereign, remaineth still
offended with the lords for the queen; the example moveth her." lb. 141. Digges
Comp. Amb. 14.

299
<_q 2

/he

she threatened. Finding the confederates inflexible, ihe endeavoured
to procure Mary's release by means of that party in Scotland which
continued faithful to her, and inftruaed Throkmorton to corre-
fpond with the'leaders of it, and to make overtures to that effect.
Keith, 45i. App. No. XXII. She even went so far as to direct
her ambassador at Paris to concert measures with the French king
how they,. by their joint efforts, might persuade or compel the
Scots to " acknowledge the queen her good sifter to be their fove.
reign lady, and queen, and renounce their obedience to her son.'
Keith, 462, 3, 4. From all there circumflances, the confederates
had every reason to apprehend that Mary would soon obtain
liberty, and by some accommodation be rcftored to the whole, or
at least to a considerable portion of her authority as sovereign. In
that event they foresaw, that if they should venture to accuse her
publicly of a crime so atrocious as the murder of her husband,
they must not only be excluded for ever from power and favour,
but from any hope of personal lafety. On this account they long
confined themselves to that which was originally declared to be
the reason of their taking arms; the avenging the king's death,
the dissolving the marriage with Bothwell, the inflicing on him
condign punishment, or banishing him for ever from the queen's
pretence. It appears from the letters of Throkmorton, pub-
lifhed by bishop Keith, and in my Appendix, that his sagacity
early discovered that this would be the tenor of their condut..
In his letter from Edinburgh, dated July 14th, he observes,
that " they do not forget their own peril conjoined with the
danger of the prince, but, as far as I perceive, they intend not
to touch the queen either in surety or in honour; for they speak
of her with refpea and reverence, and do affirm, as I do learn,
that, the condition aforesaid accomplished [i. e. the reparation from.
Bothwell], they will both put her to liberty, and restore her to

hel:-
3oo0

her eflate." Append. No. XXH. His letter of August 22d, con-
tains a declaration made to him by Lethington, in name and in
presence of his associates, " that they never meant harm neither
to the queen's person nor to her honour-that they have been
contented hitherto to be condemned, as it were, of all princes,.
firangers, and, namely, of the queen of England, being charged
of grievous and infamous titles, as to be noted rebels, traitors,
seditious, ingrate, and cruel, all which they susser and bear upon
their backs, because they will not juflify themselves, nor proceed
in any thing that may touch their iovereign's honour. But in.
cafe they be with there defamations continually oppressed, or with
the force, aid, and pracices of other princes, and namely of the
queen of England, put in danger, or to an extremity, they ihall
be compelled to deal otherwise with the queen than they intend,
or than they desire; for, added he, you may be sure we will
not lose our lives, have our lands forfeited, and be reputed rebels
through the world, feeing we have the means to juflify ourlflves."
Keith, 448. From this view of the slippery ground on which
they flood at that time, their conduct in not producing the letters
for several months, appears not only to have been prudent, but es-
fential to their own iafety.

BUT, at a subsequent period, when the confederates found iL

necessary to have the form of government, which they had eila-
blilhed, confirmed by authority of parliament, a different mode
of proceeding became requisite. All that had hitherto been done
with refpea to the queen's difiniffion, the feating the young king
upon the throne, and the appointment of a regent, was in reality
nothing more than the deed of private men. It required tome
exhibition of some legal evidence'to procure a constitutional ad
giving the fasntion of its approbation to ifch violent measures,

and.

3ox

and to obtain " a perfect law and security for all them that either
by deed, counsel, or subscription, had entered into that cause
since the beginning." Haynes, 453. This prevailed with the
regent and his secret counsel, after long deliberation, to agree to
produce all the evidence of which they were possessed; and upon
that producion parliament passed the aas which were required.
Such a change had happened in the fIate of the kingdom as in-
duced the confederates to venture upon this change in their con-
dut. In June, a powerful combination was forming against
them, under the leading of the Hamiltons. In December, that
combination was broken; most of the members of it had acknow-
ledged the king as their lawful sovereign, and had submitted to
the regent's government. Huntly, Argyll, Herries, the most
powerful nobleman of that party, were present in the parliament,
and concurred in all its ats. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbarton,
and all the chief strong holds in the kingdom, were now in the
hands of the regent; the arms of France had full occupation in
its civil war with the Hugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's zeal
in behalf of the captive queen seems to have abated. A itep that
would have been followed with ruin to the confederates in June,
was attended with little danger in December. From this long
deducion it appears, that no proof of the letters being forged
can be drawn from the circumstance of their not having been
produced immediately after the twentieth of June; but though no
public accusation was brought instantly against the queen, in con-
,sequence of seizing the casket, hints were given by the confe-
derates, that they pofleffed evidence sufficient to convict her.
This is plainly implied in a letter of Throkmorton, July 2xft,
Keith, Pref. p. xii. and more clearly in the paflage which I have
quoted from his letter of August 22. In his letter of July 25,
the papers contained in the casket are fill more plainly pointed

out.
302

out. " They [i. e. the confederates] fay, that they have as ap-
parent proof against her as may be, as well by the testimony of
her own hand-writing, which they have recovered, as also by
sufficient witnesses." Keith, 426.

II. WITIH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of

the queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, i. That when-
ever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerners
of the forger to establish the point in view, his solicitude to cut
off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncer-
tainty, always prompt him to use expressions the most explicit
and full to his purpose. The passages foisted into ancient authors
by heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romish
faints; the supposititious deeds in their own favour produced by
monasteries; the false charters of homage mentioned, Vol. I.
p. 13. are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim seems to
be more certain than this, that a forger is often apt to prove too
much, but seldom falls into the error of proving too little. The
point which the queen's enemies had to establish was, " that as
the earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the horrible and un-
worthy murder perpetrated, &c. so was fie of the foreknowledge,
counsel, device, persuader, and commander of the said murder to
be done." Good. ii. 207. But of this there are only imperfect
hints, obscure intimations, and dark expressions in the letters,
which, however convincing evidence they might furnish if found
in real- letters, bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity
of evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All the advocates
for Mary's innocence in her own age, contend that there is no-
thing in the letters which can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly,
Blackwood, Turner, &c; abound with passages to this purpose;
nor are the sentiments of those in the prieent age different. " Yet

fill

303

till it might have been expeted (fays her latest defender) that some
one or other of the points or articles of the accusation should be
made out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that is to be seen
in the present cafe. There is nothing in the letters that could
plainly shew the writer to have been in the foreknowledge, coun-
fel, or device of any murder, far less to have persuaded or com-
manded it; and as little is there about maintaining or justifying
any murderers." Good. i. 76. How ill advised were Mary's ad-
verfaries, to contrac tb much guilt, and to prafcife so many arti-
sices, in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for
cftablifhing the conclusion they had in view ? Had they been so
base as to have recourse to forgery, is it not natural to think that
they would have produced something more explicit and decisive ?
It is almolf impoflible to invent a long narration of fiftitious events,
consisting of various minute particulars, and to conneE these in
such a manner with real sacs, that no mark of fraud fltall appear.
For this reason, skilful forgers avoid any long detail of circum-
flances, especially of foreign and superfluous ones, well knowing
that the more these are multiplied, the more are the chances of
detecaion increased. Now Mary's letters, especially the first, are
filled with a multiplicity of circumstances, extremely natural in a
real correspondence, but altogether foreign to the purpose of the
queen's enemies, and which it would have been extreme folly
to have inserted, if they had been altogether imaginary, and with-
out foundation. 3. The truth and reality of several circumstances
in the letters, and these, too, of no very public nature, are con-
firmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Lett. I. Good. ii. p. I.
The queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gentlemen, and
to have had some conversation with him. Thomas Crawford,
who was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commissioners,
and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumstance, He

likewise
3°4-

likewise declared, that during the queen's flay at Glasgow, the
king repeated to him, every night, whatever had passed through
the day, between her majcfty and him; and that the account
given of these conversations in the firit letter, is nearly the fame
with what the king communicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Ac-
cording to the fame lettcr thl:rc was much discourse between the
king and queen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and \Valcar. Good.
ii. 8. Io, I i. What this might be, was altogether unknown, until
a letter of Mary's, preservcd in the Scottish college at Paris, and
published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it to be an alair of lb mucl
importance as merited all the attention The paid to it at that tin c.
It appears by a letter from the French ambassador, that Mary was
subjet to a violent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circum-
france is mentioned, Lett. I. p. 30. in a manner lo natural as can
scarcely belong to any but a genuine produCtion. If we shall till
think it probable to suppose that so many real circumstances were
artfully introduced into the letters by the forgers, in order to give
an air of authenticity to their producion; it will hardly be pof-
fible to hold the fame opinion concerning the following particular.
Before the queen began her first letter to Bothwell, flhe, as usual
among those who write long letters containing a variety of sub-
jets, made notes or memorandums of the particulars flie wished to re-
member; but as she fat up writing during a great part of the night,
and after her attendants were asleep, her paper failed her, and file
continued her letter upon the fame sheet on which flie had for-
merly made her memorandums. This the herself takes notice of,
and makes an apology for it: " It is late; I desire never to cease
from writing unto you, yet now, after the kilifng of your hands, I
will end my letter. Excuse my evil writing, and read it twice over.
Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper zefterday,
quhen I wraite that of the memorial." Good. ii. 28. Thelb me-

VozL. II. R r inorandums

305

morandums fiill appear in the middle of the letter; and what weo
have said feemrs naturally to account for the manner how they
might find their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be supposed,
however, that any forger would think of placing memorandums
in the middle of a letter, where, at firfl fight, they make so absurd
and so unnatural an appearance. But if any fiall still carry their
refinement so far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as
to throw in this circumstance, in order to preserve the appearance
of genuincnefs, they muff at least allow that the queen's enemies,
who employed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design
and meaning of thele ihort notes and memorandums; but we find
them mistaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit
of the boarer, i. e. points concerning which the queen had given
him verbal inftrutions. Good. ii. 152. This they cannot pof-
sibly be; for the queen herself writes with so much exanefs con-
cerning the different points in the memorandums, that there was
no need of giving any credit or inftrudions to the bearer con-
cerning them. The memorandums are indeed the contents of the
letter. 5. Mary, mentioning her conversation with the king,
about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, " The morne,
[i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that point;" and then
adds, " As to the reft of Wille Hiegait's, he confeffit it; but it
was the morne [i. e. the morning] after my coming or he did
it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not have been made
till after the conversation happened, seems either to have been
inserted by the queen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps,
she having written it on the margin, it was taken thence into the
text. If we suppose the letter td be a real one, and written at
different times, as it plainly bears, this circumstance appears to be
very natural; but no reason could have induced a forger to have
ventured upon such an anachronism, for which there was no ne-

ceffity.
306

ceffity. An addition pcrfcaly fitiilar to this made to a genuine
paper, may be found, Good. ii. 28..

BUT, on the other hand, Mary lhcrl'lf, and tile advocates for

her innocence, have contended, that theie letters were forged by
her enemies, on purpose to blafl her reputation, and to justify
their own rebellion. It is not neccflary to take notice of the
arguments which were produced, in her own age, in support
of this opinion; the observations which we have already made,
contain a full reply to them. An author, who has inquired into
the affairs of that period with great indullry, and who has ac-
quired much knowledge of them, has publifled (as he affirms) a
demonstration of the forgery of Mary's letters. This demcnlh'a-
tion he founds upon evidence both internal and external. With
regard to the former, he observes, that the French copy of the
queen's letters is plainly a translation of BLchanan's Latin copy;
which Latin copy is only a translation of the Scottish copy ; and,
by consequence, the assertion of the queen's enemies, that fie
wrote them originally in French, is altogether groundless, and the
whole letters are gross forgeries. Heaccounts for this strange fuc-
cession of translations, by supposing that when the forgery was
projected, no person could be found capable of writing originally
in the French language letters which would pass for the queen's;
for that reason they were first composed in Scottish ; but unluckily
the French interpreter, as he conjectures, did not underftalid that
language; and therefore Buchanan translated them into Latin,
and from his Latin they were rendered into French. Good. i.
79, So.

IT is hardly neceflary to observe, that no proof whatever is
produced of any of these suppositions. The manners of the

R r 2 Scots,

3°7

Scots, in that age, when almost every man of rank spent a part
of his youth in France, and the intercourse between the two.
nations was great, render it altogether improbable that so many
complicated operations flould be necessary in order to procure a
few letters to be written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may observe, thas

all this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion.
will not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters,,
as we now have them, are a true copy of thole which were pro-
duced by Murray and his party in the Scottish parliament; and at
York and Westminster. But this he has not attempted; and if
we attend to the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is ob-
vious, must have been unsuccessful. The letters were first pub-
lifhed at the end of Buchanan's DeteSion. The filrt edition of
this treatise was in Latin, in which language three of the queen's
letters were Subjoined to it ; this Latin edition was printed A. D.
1571. Soon after, a Scottish translation of it was published, and
at the end of it were printed, likewise in Scottish, the three letters
which had formerly appeared in Latin, and five other letters in
Scottish, which were not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a
French translation of the Detetion, and of seven of the letters;
this bears to have been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem,
1572. The name of the place, as well as the printer, is allowed
by all parties to be a manifest imposture. Our author, from ob-
serving the day of the month, from which the printing is said to
have been finished, has asserted that this edition was printed at
London; but no stress can be laid upon a date found in a book,
where every other circumstance with regard to the printing is al-
lowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to Lefly) was the best
informed of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that the

French
308

Irench edition of the Dete&ion was publilhed in France: " II
[Buchanan] a depuis adjoufti a cefte declamation un petit libelle
du pretendu mariage du duc de Norfolk, et de la salon de son
proces, et la tout envoye aux freres a la Rochelle, leiliuels voyants
qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, I'ont traduit en Francois, et iccluy
fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'cft a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas
Waltem, nom apoftc et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jelb, ii.
256." The author of the Innocence de Marie goes farther, and
names the French translator of the Detecion. " Et icelui pre-
mierement compoeS (comine il femble) par George Buchanan
Efcoffoys, et depuis traduit cn langue Frans;oiie par un HIugonot,
Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, ibi dilant genLilhomine,
et un de plus remarqluez fediteuz de France. Jcbb, i. 425. 443."
The concurring teflimony of two contemporary authors, whose
residence in France afforded them fuficient means of information,
mufft outweigh a flight conjcaure. This French translator does
not pretend to publish the original French letters as written by
the queen herself; he expressly declares that he translated them
from the Latin. Good. i. 103. Had our author attended to all
these circumstances, he might have iaved himnfelf the labour of
so many criticisms to prove that the present French copy of the
letters is a translation from the Latin. The French editor him-
self acknowledges it, and, so far as I know, no person ever
denied it.

WE may observe, that the French translator was so ignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French,
partly in Scottish. Good. i. 103. Had this translation been pub-
lifhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his direction,
so gross an error would not have been admitted into it. This
error, however, was owing to an odd circumstance. In the Scot-

tifll

309

tifh translation of the Detecion, two or three sentences of the ori-
ginal French were prefixed to each letter, which breaking off with
with an &c. the Scottilh translation of the whole letter followed.
This method of printing translations was not uncommon in that
age. The French editor observing this, foolishly concluded that
the letters had been written partly in French, partly in Scottish.

IF we carefully confider those few French sentences of eacl

letter, which flill remain, and apply to them that species of cri-
ticism, by which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof
will arlfe, that there was a French copy not translated from the
Latin, but which was itself the original from which both the Latin
and Scottifl have been translated. This minute criticifin muff
necessarily be disagreeable to many readers; but luckily a few
sentences only are to be examined, which will render it ex-
tremely short.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

there. words, y faioit bon. It is plain this expression, veu cc que
peut un corps fans coeur, is by no means a translation of cum plane
perinde ejfem atque corpus Jine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor
Scottish have retained. utfqtes a la diime is not a translation of
toto prandii tempore; the Scottish translation, quhile denner-time,
expresses the sense of the French more properly; for anciently
qutbile signified until as well as during. ye n'ay pas tenu grand
propos is not juffly rendered neque contulerim firmonem cum quo-
quamn; the phrase used in the French copy is one peculiar to that
language, and gives a more probable account of her behaviour
than the other. 7tugeant bien qu'il n'y faifoit bon, is not a tranf-
lation of ut quijrudicarent id non je ex ufit. The French sentence

I prefixed
310

prefixed to lett. 2. ends with apprczndre. It is evident that both
the Latin and Scottifi translations have omitted altogether these
words, et toitefoisja nie puiS apprendre. The Erench sentence prc-
fixed to lett. 3. ends with pr-efentcr. 7'aye veill" plus lard la
bzhat is plainly no translation of diutius illic imorata Jiz?; the sense
of the French is better exprefTed by the Scottifl I have rwzla/it
later bherczup. Again, _Pour excifcr voJlr- al aire is very different
from ad excfa/dum7 noJilra nIegotia. The five remaining letters
never appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their being
ever translated into that language. Four of them, however, arc
publiflicd in French. This entircly overturns our author's hypo-
thesis concerning the necefcity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detcelion the whole foDiet is

printed in French as well as in Scottish. It is not poflible to
believe that this Scottish copy could be the original from which
the French was translated.' The French confifis of vcrfes which
have both measure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are
far from being inelegant. The Scottifl confils of an equal num-
ber of lines, but without measure or rhyme. Now no man could
ever think of a thing so absurd and impracticablc, as to require
one to translate a certain given number of lines in prose into an
equal number of verses, where both measure and rhyme were to
be observed. The Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifestly
to be a translation of the French; the phrases, the idioms, and
many of the words are French, and not Scottish. Besides, the
Scottish translator has, in several instances, mitfaken the sense of
the French, and in many more exprefies the sense imperfectly.
Had the sonnet been forged, this could not have happened. The
directors of the fraud would have-underftood their own worl-. I

shall

3"r

shall satisfy myself with one example, in which there is a proof of
both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour 1uy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all good fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attena in the first line is not a Scottiflh, but a French phrase;

the two other lines do not express the inile of the French, and
the last is absolute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It contains

much refined mysticism about devices, a folly of that age, of which
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumifanccs,
particularly from a letter concerning imnpreJas by Drummond of
Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they
were certainly employed very idly when they produced this.

FROM these observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottish
were only translations. Nothing now remains of this copy but
those few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish translation.
The French editor laid hold of these sentences, and tacked his own
translation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a servile
and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas, in
those introductory sentences, we have discovered strong marks of
their being originals, and certain proofs that they are not tranf-
lated from the Latin.

IT
312

IT is apparent, too, firom comparing the Latin and Scottilil

tranlations with these fentcnces, that the Scottish tranllator has
more perfetliy attained the sense and tIirit of tlie Frcnch than
the Latin. And as it appears, that the letters were very early
translated into Scottish, Good. ii. 76; it is probable that 13u-
chanan made his translation, not from the Frcrnch, libt from the
Scottish copy. 'Were it necefl'iry, flveral critical proofs of this
might be produced. One that has been alrcady mentioned tfems
decisive. Diul/iits ilie /mort rfa/i bears not the lcafl refmbihlance
to jy ' vcill; plus ltUfr la haut ; but if, inflead. of /iclV/kt [i.e.
watched] /litcr there up, we Lfupipoie that Buchanan read / zc'.a///,
&c. this mistake into which he might so cafily have fallen, ac-
counts for the error in his tranllation.

TIIESE criticilins, however minute, appear to be well founded.

But whatever opinion may be sorncd concerning them, tlc other
arguments, with regard to the internal evidence, remain in fuill force.

TIE extcrnal proofs of the forgery of the queen's letters, which

our author has produced, appear at firtl fight to be ficcious, but
are not more l!idl than that which we have already examine(l.
These proofs may be classid under two heads. i. The erroneous
and contradictory accounts which are said to be given of the
letters, upon the first judicial producLion of them. In the fccrce
council held Decem. 4, 1567, they are described " as her privie
letters written and fulbflrivit with her awin hand." Hayncs, 454.
Good. ii. 64. In the ac of parliament, palled on the 15th of the
fame month, they are described as " liher privie letters writlin
halelie with hir awin hand." Good. ib. 67. This diverlity of
description has been confidered as a flrong prefmllption of forgery.
The manner in which lMr. Hume accounts for this is nlatlral ;l u'

VOL. II. 8 f plaulible,

1T3

plausible, vol. v. p. 498. And several ingenious remarks, tending
to confirm his observations, are made in a pamphlet lately pub-
lifhed, intitlcd, Mifcclllzcous Remarks on the Enquiry into the Evi-
delce agailji AIary iteen of Scots. To what they have observed it
may be added, that the original aa of secret council does not
now exist; we have only a copy of it found among Cecil's pa-
pers, and the transcriber has been manifestly so ignorant, or so
careless, that an argument founded entirely upon the supposition
of his accuracy is of little force. Several errors into which he
has fallen, we are enabled to point out, by comparing his copy of
the aa of secret council with the aC of parliament passed in con-
sequence of it. The former contains a petition to parliament; in
the latter the real petition is refilmed verbatim, and converted into a
law. In the copy, the queen's marriage with Bothwell is called
" a priveit marriage," which it certainly was not; for it was ce-
lebrated, after proclamation of banns, in St. Giles's church three
several days, and with public solemnity; but in the aCt it is deno-
minated " ane pretendit marriage," which is the proper defcrip-
tion of it according to the ideas of the party. In the copy, the
queen is said " to be so thrall and bludy affetionat to the privat
appetite of that tyran," which is nonsense, but in the aat it is
" blindly affetionat." In the copy it is said, " all nobill and
virtuous men abhorring their traine and company." In the ad-,
" their tyrannic and companic," which is evidently the true read-
ing, as the other has either no meaning, or is a mere tautology.
2. The other proof of the forgery of the letters, is founded upon
the impofnibility of reconciling the account, given of the time
when, and the places from which, the letters are supposed to have
been written, with what is certainly known concerning the queen's
motions. According to the paper published, Anders. ii. 269.
which has been called Murray's Diary, and which is formed upon

the
3' 4

the authority of the letters, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glaf-
gow, January 21, I567; fle arrived there on the 23d ; left that
place on the 27th ; fle, together with the king, reaclecd Linlithl-
gow on the 28th, flayed in that town only one night, and re-
turned to Edinburgh before the end of the month. But, accord-
ing to Mlr. Goodal, tlie queen did not leave Edinburgh until
Friday January 24th; as she flayed a niglt at Callendarl , Ic
could not reach Glalfow ifoner than the evening of Saturday tl!e
nsth, and she returne to Linlithgow on Tucellay the 28thl. By
confequencc, the first letter, whic filppofes the queen to have
been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as the second letter,
which bears date at Glasgow Satulrday m1oronlin, xvlcreas tie did not
arrive there until the evening, must be forgeries. That the queen
did not set out from Edinburgh sooner than the 24th of January,
is evident (as lie contends) from the public records, which con-
tain a I'recept of a cofiSrmation of a life-rent by James Boyd to
Margaret Chalmers, granted by the queen, on the 24th of Ja-
nuary, at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of tlhe queen's dated
at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis taylor to
the prince her son. That the king and queen had returned to
Linlithgow on the 28th, appears from a deed, in which they ap-
point Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there, dated at Lin-
lithgow January 28. Good. i. I 18.

THIs has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by Mary;
but how far it falls short of this will appear from the following
considerations:

I. IT is evident, from a declaration or confession made by the
bishop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, lwhich were

S f 2 opened

31$

c

opened in the beginning of Otober I56S, Mary had, by an arti-
fice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her fnbijcecs accused ier of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
Trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31. 36. It is highly probable that
the bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote the de-
fence es quecn Mary's honour in the year i57o. They were
pul)lifhed to all the world, together with Buchanan's DLetc'lion,
A. D. I571. Now, if they had contained an error lo gross, and,
at that time, io obvious to discovery, as the supposing the queen
to have paiTcd Icvcral days at Glasgow, while fie was really at
E.dinburgh ; had they contained a letter datcd at Glasgow Satur-
day morning, though tie did not arrive there till the evening; is
it poflble that she herself, who knew her own motions, or the
able and zealous advocates who appeared for her in that age, fmould
not have published and expoled this contradiction, and, by so
doing, havc blaPled at once the credit of such an ilnpofture? In
dilqluifitions whilch arc naturally abstruse and intricate, the inge-
nuity of the latest author may dilcover many things which have
escaped the attention, or baffled the sagacity of those who have
formerly confidcred the fame fil)ujec. But when a matter of fa?:
lay lo obvious to vicw, this circumfiance of its being unobfcrvcd
by the queen herself, or by any of her adherents,, is almost a
demonstration that there is some miltake or fallacy in our author's
arguments. So far arc any, either of our hitlorians, or of Mary's
defenders, from calling in queflion the common account concern-
ing the time of the queen's setting out to Glasgow, and her re-
turning from it, that there is not the least appearance of any dif-
fercnce among them with regard to this point. But farther,

2. Ti-iosn papers in the public records, on which our author
refts the proof of his afertion concerning the queen's motions,

are
3.i6.

arc not the originals subscribcd by the queen, but copies only, or
translations of copies of thoic originals. It is not necessary, nor
would it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unac-
quainted with the forms of law in Scotland ; but every Scotfinan
convcriant in buliefs will unlerfland me when I t;y that tle pre-
cept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy
or note of a precept, whlich was fealed with the privy feal, on a
warrant fiom the lignct-olfice, proceeding on a lignature which
bore date at Edinburgh the 24.tlh of January; and tlat the deed
in favour of Jamcs Inglis is the copy of a letter, Icalcd with the
privy feal, proceeding on a lignatlure which bore (dite at Edin-
burgh January 2+. lFroin all this we may argue witlh iome de-
gree of reason, that a proof founded on papers whlichl are lo many
removes distant fromn the originals, cannot but be very lame and
uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were iflild in the name bcoth

of the king and queen ; by law, the king's lIlfblription was no
less requisite to any paper than tli queen's ; and therefore unless
the original signatures bc produced, in order to accer-tain the par-
ticular day when each of them signed, or to prove that it was
signed only by one of them, tlhe legal proof ariling from thcle
papers would be, that both the king and quccn signed tlhem at
Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts iflued by tile fove-

reign, in that age, seem to have been in a great measure arbitrary,
and affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of confcquence,
these dates were ieldom accurate, are often false, and can never be
relied upon. This abuse became'fo frequent, acid was found to

19

317

be so pernicious, that an aat of parliament, A. D. I592, declared
the fixing a false date to a signature to be high treason.

5. TIIulRE still remain, in the public records, a great number

of papers, which prove the neceflity of this law, as well as the
fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any particular
(late to be false, yet surprising instances of this kind shall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from history, than that the king
was at Glasgow 24th January I567; and yet the record of figna-
tures from i565 to 1582, fol. i6th, contains the copy of a fig-
nature to Archibald Edmonfton, said to have been subscribcd by
oiurfovcrcigns, i. e. the king and queen, at Edinburgh, January 24,
1567; so that if we were to rely implicitly upon the dates in the
records of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good,
it would prove that not only the queen, but the king too, was at
Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the bishop of Ross, that

on the 25th of Oetober I566, Mary lay at the point of death;
Keith, App. I34; and yet a deed is to be found in the public
records, which bears that it was signed by the queen that day.
Privy feal, lib. 35. fol. 89. Ozlchtcrlony d.

BOTHWELL seized the queen as she returned from Stirling,
April 24th, 1567, and (according to her own account) conduced

d N. B. In some of the early editions of this Dissertation, another instance of

the fame nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned; but that,
as has since been discovered, was founded on a mistake of the person employed to
search the records, and is therefore omitted in this edition. The reasoning, how-
ever, in the Diflertation stands still in force notwithstanding this omiiffon.
318

6

her

her to Dunbar with all diligence. And. i. 95. But our author,
relying on the dates of some papers which he found in the records,
supposes that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to
transact business there. Nothing can be more improbable than
this supposition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed
to l;right, Privy feal; lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned
by our author, vol. i. 124. among the inflances of the false
dates of papers which were issued in the ordinary course of
business in that age. Our author has miflaken the date of the
other paper to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April ltth, not April
24th.

Ir there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hiflory, it is, that

she remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her
thither, till she returned to Edinbiurgh along with him in the bc-
ginning of May. Our author himielf allows that flh rclidcd
twelve days there, vol. i. 367. Now though there are deeds in the
records which bear that they were signed by the queen at Dun-
bar during that time, yet there are others which bear that they
were signed at Edinburgh ; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April
27th, Privy feal, lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to be
signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524. 526.
Ib. lib. 32. No. I54. 157. There are fore signed at Dunbar
April 28th. Others at Edinburgh April 30th, lib. 32. Chart.
No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. IS8. These
different charters filppofe the queen to have made so many un-
known, improbable, and inconsistent journeys, that they afford
the clearest demonstration that the dates in these records ought
not be depended on.

TI s

319

THls becomes more evident from the date of the charter said

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of fedcrunt, then kept by the Lords of
Session.

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery

of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far
from amounting to demonstration.

ANOTIIER argument against the genuineness of these letters is

founded on the style and composition, which are said to be alto-
gether unworthy of the queen, and unlike her real productions.
It is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in mofi
of Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in
a fair hand, that fle valued herself on those accomplifhmcnts, and
was desirous of being eftecmed an elegant writer. But when she
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy ap-
pear. A remarkable intfance of this may be found in a paper
published Good. ii. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written
in the utmost hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of a tranf-
lation, they are not destitute either of spirit or of energy. The
manner in which she expresses her love to Bothwell has been pro-
nounced indecent, and even ihocking. But Mary's temper led
her to warm expressions of her regard ; those refinements of de-
licacy, which now appear in all the commerce between the sexes,
were, in that age, but little known, even among persons of the
highest rank. Among the carl of Hardwicke's papers there is a
series of letters, from Mary to the duke of Norfolk, copied from

the

the Harleian library, p. 37. b. 9. fol. 88. in which Mary de-
clares her love to that nobleman in language which would
now be reckoned extremely indelicate; I-lard. State Papers, i.
189, &c.

SOME of Mary's letters to Bothwell were written before the

murder of her husband; some of them after that event, and before
her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior to the death of her
husband abound with the fondest exprcffions of her love to Both-
well, and excite something more than a suspicion that their fami-
liarity had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, some
dark expreflions, which her enemies employed to prove that flie
was no stranger to.the schemes which were formed against her
husband's life. Of this kind are the following pafliges: " Alace!
I nevir diffavit ony body; bot I remit me altogidder to zour will.
Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhatfaever thing
come thereof, I fall obey zow. Advise to with zourfelf, gif ze
can find out ony mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld
tak medicine and the bath at Craigmillar." Good. ii. 22. " See
not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eftemit,
as the trew and faithfull travellis cLuhilk I fuftene for to merit hir
place. For obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis
thame that may impefche me. God forgive me," &c. Ibid. 27.
" I have walkit later thairup, than I wald have done, gif it had
not been to draw something out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity that can be offerit
to excuse zour affairis." Ibid. 32. From the letters posterior
to the death of her husband, it is evident that the scheme of
Bothwell's seizing Mary by force, and carrying her along with

VOL, II T-t him,

32L

him, was contrived' in concert with herself, and with her ap-
probation .

WITII

T THAT letters of so much importance as those of Mary to Bothwell thould

have been entirely loft, appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being
produced in England before Elizabeth's commiflioners, they were delivered back
by them to the earl of Murray. Good. ii. 235. He seems to have kept them in
his possession during life. After his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his
filcceffor, who restored them to the earl of Morton. Good. ii. 91. Though it be
jiot necessarily connected with any of the questions which gave occasion to this
DifTertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of rome of my readers to inform
them, that, after a very diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of
Mary's letters to Bothwell can be found in any of the public libraries in Great
Britain. The only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their
being delivered to Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador from queen Eliza-

beth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, secretary of
fate, from the original register book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from i5th of August
1582, to 28th' September 1583, in the poffeflion of Chriflopher Hunter, M. D.
of Durham.

1582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein were the originals

of letters between the Scottish queen and the earl of Bothwell, had been delivered
to sundry hands, and thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it refted,
yet I have learned certainly by the prior of Plufcardync's means, that both the
coffer and also the writings are come, and now remain with the earl of Gowrie,
who, I perceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her majesty according
to her majesty's desire.

THIS time past I have expended in searching where the coffer and writings were,

wherein, without the help of the prior I lhould have found great difficulty; now I
will essay Gowrie, and of my success you shall be shortly advertised.

r2th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAusE I had both learned, that the casket and letters mentioned in my last,
before these were come to the pofleffion of the earl of Gowrie, and also found that

no
3.22

WITH refpefc to the sonnets, Sir David Dalrylnple has proved'
clearly, that they mutf have been written after the murder of the

king,

no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own concent
and privity; in which behalf I had employed fit instruments, that nevertheless pro-
fited nothing; therefore I attempted to eflay himself, letting him know that the
said casket and letters lhould have been brought to her majefly by the offer and good
means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her majcfly before they
came into his hands and custody, and knowing that he did bear the like af'ci;ion, and
was ready to pleasure her majesty in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus
far tendered to her majesty, and which thereby fliould be well accepted, and with
princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentmentc; 1 moved
him that they might be a present to be lent to her majesty from him, and that I
might caufc the fame to be conveyed to her majesty, adding hereunto fich words
and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and also best c{'eFt the
purpose. At the first he was loth to agree that they were in his pofleflion; but I
let him plainly know that I was certainly informed that they were delivered to Ilim
by Sanders Jardin ; whereupon he preflcd to know who did lo inform me, cnquiring
whether the sons of the earl of Morton had done it or no. I did not otherwise in
plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but that lie might think that he had told me,
as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleased that I shall give him to be the
author thereof; after he had f.id [though] all thcle letters were in his keeping
(which he would neither grant nor deny) yet lie might notdeliver them to any per-
son without the consents and privities, as well of the kin-g, that had intcreft thercin,
as also of the reft of the noblemen cnterprilcrs of the adtion against the king's
mother, and that would have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good
that artion. And albeit I replied, that their adion in that part touching the afiTg-
nation of the crown to the king by his mother, had received such cfltblilhment,
confirmation, and flrength, by ads of parliament and other public authority and
instruments, as neither fliould that cafe be fuffcrcd to come in debate or question,
nor such scrolls and papers ought to be filewcd for the flrcngthciiing thereof, lo as
there might well be left and be rcnderc.l to the hands of her majesty, to. whom thcy
were destincd before they fell in his keeping; yet he would not be removed or
satisfied; concluding, after much reafonlings, that the earl of MIorton, nor any
other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durst at any time make delivery;
and bccaufc it was the first time that I had moved him therein, and that he would

T t z gladly

king, and prior to Mary's marriage with Bothwell. But as hardly
any part of my narrative is founded upon what is contained in

the

gladly both answer her majesty's good expetation in him, and also perform his
duty due to his sovereign and associates in the action aforesaid ; therefore he would
seek out the said casket and letters, at his return to his house, which he thought
should be within a ihort time; and upon finding of the fame, and better advice and
consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer. This resolution I
have received as to the thing; and for the present I could not better, leaving him
to give her majesty such testimony of his good will towards her, by his frank deal-
ing herein, as she may have cause to confirm her highnesses good opinion con-
ceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater goodness towards him. I
lhall still labour him both by myself and also by all other means; but I greatly
difiruft the desired success herein.

24th of November I 582, from Edinburgh.

FOR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the hands of the earl of

Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnestly therein, letting him know the purpore
of the Scottish queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her
rebels, and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or defaced, and that
the means which she will make in this behalf shall be so great and effectual, as
these writings cannot be safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him
that hath the custody thereof, neither shall he that is once known to have them be
suffered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils
likely to fall to that acion, and the parties'therein, and particularly to himself that
is now openly known to have the possession of these writings, and I have lettin him
fee what surety it shall bring to the said cause and all the parties therein, and to
himself, that these writings may be with secrecy and good order committed to the
keeping of'her majesty, that will have them ready whensoever any use shall be. for
them, and by her highneses countenance defend them and the parties from such
wrongful objecions as ihall be laid against them, offering at length to him, that
if he be not fully satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the associates shall not
like of the'delivery of them to her majesty in this good manner, and for the interest
rehearsed, that I shall readily, upon meeting and conference with them, procure
their assent in this part (a matter more easy to ofter than to perform); and lastly,
moving him that (for the secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her majesty's

5 good

the sonnets, and as in this dissertation I have been constrained to
dwell longer upon minute and verbal criticifins, than may be in-

terefling

good opinion towards himself may be firmly fettled and confirmed by his acceptable
forwardness herein) he would, without needlers scruple, frankly commit there
writings to her majesty's good custody for the good uses received. After long debate
he resolved, and said, that he would unfeignedly shew and do to her m.ijcfly all the
pleasure that he might without offence to the king his sovereign, and prejudice to the
aflociates in the a&tion, and therefore he would first make fcarch and view the said
letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and how far he might satisfy and
content her majesty; promising thereon to give more resolute answer and he con-
cluded flatly, that after he had found and seen the writings, that he might not make
delivery of them without the privity of the king. Albeit I flood long with him
against his resolution in this point, to acquaint the king with this matter before the
letters were in the hands of her majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should
admit great danger to the cause; yet I could not remove him from it. It may be
that he meaneth to put over the matter from himself to the king, upon fight whereof
I shall travel effectually to obtain the king's consent, that the letters may be com-
mitted to her majesty's keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the
king, in the present love and aff'etion that he beareth to her highness, than to win
anything at the hands of the aflociates in the action, whereof some principal of them
now come and remain at the devotion of the king's mother; in this I ihall still call
on Gowrie, to search out the coffer, according to his promise; and as I /hall find
him minded to do therein, so ihall I do my bell and whole endeavour to effet the
success to her majesty's belt contentment.

2d December I582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the earl of

Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I put him in
mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the duke of Lennox had fought earneltly
to have had those letters, and that the king did know where they were, so as they
could not be delivered to her majesty without the king's privity and consent, and he
pretended to be till willing to pleasure her majesty in the fame, so far as he may
with his duty to the king and to the reft of the aflociates in that ation; but I greatly
distrust to effea this to her majesty's pleasure, wherein nevertheless I shall do my
uttermost endeavours.

WHETHER

325

teresting or agreeable to many of my readers, I shall reft satis-
fled with referring, for information concerning every particular
relative to the sonnets, to Remarks on the HIlfory of Scotland,
Chap. XI.

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides; having examined

at so great a length the different systems with regard to the facts
in controversy; it may be expected that I Ihould now pronounce
sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
can be drawn from the faas which have been enumerated.

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, encou-

raged by the queen's known aversion to her husband, and presuming
on her attachment to himself, struck the blow without having con-
certed with her the manner or circumstances of perpetrating that
crime. That Mary, intfead of tefrifying much indignation at
the deed, or discovering any resentment against Bothwell, who
was accused of having committed it, continued to load him with
marks of her regard, conducted his trial in such a manner as ren-
dered it impoflible to discover his guilt,. and soon after, in oppo-
fition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, voluntarily
agreed to a marriage with him, which every confiderationfhould
have induced her to detest. By this verdiat, Mary is not pronounced
guilty of having contrived the murder of her husband, or even
of having previously given her content to his death; but she is

WHETHER James VI. who put the earl of Gowrie to death, A. D. I584, and

seized all his effcts, took care to destroy his mother's letters, for whole honour he
It was at that time extremely zealous; whether they have perished by some unknown

accident; or whether they may not still remain unobserved among the archives of
some of our great families, it is impossible to determine.

not
326

not acquitted of having discovered her approbation of the deed, by
her behaviour towards him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and llis adherents

laboured to establish, " That James, fornetymmc earl of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile king Henry of gude
memory, fader to our foveraine lord, and the qucenis laucllfull
husband; ia was she of the foreknowledge, couni all, devile, per-
fwuadar and command of the said murder to be done." Good. ii
207.

WrVHcH of these conclusions is most agreeable to the evidence
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

# APPENDIX.

A P

P E N

D

I X.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 180.)
A MEMORIAL of certain points meet for restoring the realm

of SCOTLAND to the antient weale.

MPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that Scotland can have,
is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one island,
divided from the reft of the world.

IF the firif is fought, that is, to be in perpetual peace with England, then muff

it necessarily be provided, that Scotland be not so fubjce- to the appointments of
France as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England, feeketh always
to make Scotland an infirument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England,
and to make a footfiool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland flall come into the hands of a mere Scottilf man

in blood, then may there be hope of such accord; but as long as it is at the com-
mandment of the French, there is no hope to have accord long betwixt these two
realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French king's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until file have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted; and, on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought
to force that the laws and the old customs of the realmn e not altered, neither that
the country be not impoveriflhed by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the man-
ner of France ; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French
king and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to fcek due reformation of such great ablufes as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the French grow too firong
and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the three effates of the land,

that the land may be free from all idolatry like as England is; for jufiification
whereof, if any free general council may be had where the pope of Rome have not
the feat of judgment, they may offer to shew their caufc to be nloft agreeable to
Christ's religion.

VOL. II. U u NEXT,

5th August
1559, Cot-
ton. Lib.
Cal. b.x.
fol. 17.
From a copy
in secretary
Cecil's hand.

NEXT, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules and offices, by

the antient blood of the realm, without either captains, lieutenants, or foldicrs, as
all other princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in
the hands of mere Scottifl men.

THIRDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars against
Eng:land, except England fiould give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That no nobleman of Scotland should receive pension of France,

except it were whilst he did serve in France, for otherwise thereby the French would
Shortly corrupt many to betray their own country.

FIFTIILY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
merc Scottish men, by the al-;tn of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTHLY, TIhat there be a council in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence,
to govcrn the whole realm, and in those cafes not to be direEted by the French.

SEVENaTHLY, That it be by the said three estates appointed how the queen's re-

venue of the realm liall be expended, how much the queen shall have for her portion
and eflate during her abfencc, how much shall be limited to the governance and
defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN there, and such like points, if the French king and the queen be found un-

willing, and vill withstand these provisions for the weale of the land, then hath
the three cftatcs of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to the said king and
queen their humble requests; and if the fame be not effectually granted, then
humbly they may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown,
binding the fame also to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen shall be unwilling to this, as it is likely (he will, in re-

fpeL of the greedy and tyrannous affctaion of France, then it is apparent that
Almighty God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale
of it, and this time mufft be used with great circumfpelion, to avoid the deccipts-
and tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made free, what

means may be (evifed by God's goodnelfs, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all
princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 188.)
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus direEted:

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

arth January I UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing with
1559-60. zour countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew to
L'ott. Lib. that realm hereafter, giff ze presently aflift ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre
Cal. b. ix. of the contrary advise, doubting that we fall not at length be found trusty friends,
From theori- nor mean to contynew in constant ametye, albeit wepromile, but only for avoyd-
ginal in his ing the present danger make zou to serve our turne, and after being delivered, becumr
own hand. enemies as of before. For prose quhareof, they allcdge things that have past be-

twixt ws heretofore, and a few prel'umptiones tending to the fam end, all grounded
upon mistrust; quhilks, at the first ficht, have'fome shewe of apparance, gif men
wey not the circumstances of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme pafl

with

.29'"
33°

withi the present, confider the nature of this caus, and estate of our contrve, I
doubt not but jugement fal be able to banlii mifltrufl. And fiirft, I vw.l wifi ze
flould examvne thecaufesoff'the ol inmitye bctwixt the realmsof Engl.ind and Scot-
land, and quhat moved our anceflouis to enter intoliiuc with the FrInchl ; qhlillks
by our storeys and rcgiflrcs off antiquitcys appear to be thicb. 'T'he princes of
England, some tyme, alledging a certain kynde of foverainiyxe over this realm;
some tyrne upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bordourarcs, and
femb!ablc occafiuns, mony. tymes cnterprifcd the conclUeft of ws, and tit far furth
preiit it by force off arlles, that we were dryvenl to great cxtyralniicys, by lots of
our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrLy, fa that explrience
taught ws that our owne flrength was fcaife fufilcient to witlifland the force of
]England. 'he Frenche zour auncient enemies, confidering well how nature had
fa placed ws in a island with zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye England
as we being enemyes, foucht to joine ws to thlcym in ligue, tending by thit meane
to detourne zour armyes from the invasion of France, and occupy zow in the de-
fence of zour country at hamc, offering for that ef'rel to beltowe some charges
upon ws, and for compafling off theyr purpos, chovledl a tvme to propone the
matter, quhen the frefche memory of injuris lately receavcd at zour hands, w.as la
depely prented on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how to be re-
venged, and arme ourselfes with the powar of a forayne prince againfl zour enter-
prises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At quhilk time, our

cronicles maks mention, that some off the wyleft forcfaw the pcrril, and fI-all frute
should redound to us thereof at length: zit had afici'ion fa blinded jugement, that
the advise of the maift part overcame the bell. The maift part of all querells be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at leafi quhen the provocation came on our fide, hcs
ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather than any one caus off our fclfes: and
quhenlhever we brack the peace, it conic partly by their iinty'bfeiets, partly to
eschew the conquest intended by that realm. But now lies God's providence ii
altered the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfchel taken
zour place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to have zou in thcyr rowme.
Our eyes are opened, we cfpy how uncareful they have been of our weile at a1ll
tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous
weys for theyre commodite, and nevertheless wad not flyck, oft tymes, against the
natour of the ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in wcyr. We fae that their ilup-
port, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection they bare to ws, for pytic they
had off our estate, for recompenfli of the lyke fiiendflip fchliwin to they)in in tynme
off theyr afflilioncs, but for ambition, and infaciable.cupiditie to rcygnc, and to
mak Scotland ane acceleary to the crown of France. This was na fri ntlly office,
but mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of theyr dellrving; a
hale realm for the defence of a part. We fee theym manifeftlxy attempt the tiing
we fufpecled off zow; we feared ze ment the conquicet off Scotland, and they ale
plancly fallen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we had ze icilt evill towards
ws, and fall we love theym, quhilks bearing the nanic off frends, go about to brini;
ws in maift vile servitude ? Gif by zour frcndly support at this tyme, ze fall de-
clare that not only seek ze not the ruyne of our country, but will prletrve tile
libertie thereof from conquelt by ftrangeares, fall not the occasion off all iniinite
with zow, and ligue with theym, be taken away ? The caufcs being remnoved,
how fall the effecIcs remane ? The fear of conquell made ius to hate zou aind
love theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee theym plancly attempt cunquleft,

U u 2 and

331

and zow fchaw ws friendship, fall we not hate theym, and favour zow? Gir'we
have fchawne fa great constance, continuing za mony zeares in amity with theym,
off quhome we had fa fma ll commodite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow,
that off all nations may do ws greatest pleafour ?

BUT ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled and then frends asoff before.

I think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we will be content to forgo the ametye
of England, nor do any thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes the
lofle off estimation and discrediting off ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
wcill to a maift manifest danger, and becum a prey to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
could we implore, being destitute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attempt
theyr formar enterprise ? Quhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff
they might ? And it is like eneuch, thay will not stick hereafter to tak theyr tyme
off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feeing am-
bition has fa impyrit ower theyr rcafon, that before we had ever done any thing
myght offend theym, but by the contrary pleated them by right and wrang,
they did not stick to attempte the subversion of our hale slate. I wald ze should
not efteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot foresee our awne perril;
or fa foolifcjie, that we will not fludy by all gode means to entertayne that thing
may be our fafetye ; quhilk confifles in all the relaying of zour friendships. I pray
zow confider in like cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble me-
mory king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened off
amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the difference of religion the
onley flay they were not embraced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power
of theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort ? But now has God off
his mercy removed that block furth off the way; now is not theyr pralcice lyke
to tak place any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity of doArine, and pro-
fes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to be the ftrayteft knot off amitye
can be dcvifed. Giff it may be alledged that some of our countrymen at ony
tyme, violated theyr promis ? giff ze lift to way the circumstances, ze fall find
the promis is rather brought on by neceflite, after a great overthraw off our men,
then comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and decay
off our haill state, at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libertie be inseparably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the violation off
our fayth cast ws in maift miserable servitude. So that giff neyther the fear off
God, reverence of man, religion, othe, promise, nor wardly honeftye wes fuffi-
cient to bynd ws, yet fall the zeale of our native countrey, the maintenance off
our own estate, the safety of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell ws
to kepe promise. I am aflured, it is trewly and sincerely ment on our part to
continew in perpetual ametye with zow; it.fall be uttered by our proceedings.
Giff ze be as defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfed, quharby all
partyes will be out of doubte. There be gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for
V the purpos, tyme serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realms wish it, God hes

wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties a certaine still agreement upon it,
never did, at any tyme, so mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the dif-
position of a few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I hope
he quha hes begun his work, and mainteyned it quhile now, by the expectation of
man, fall perfyte it.

I PRAY

I PRAY ZOW, let not zour men dryve tyme in consultation, quhether ze Call sup-

port ws or no. Seyng the mater fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the'
defence of our caus, giff ze have any refpea for zour awne weill. Their preparatives
in France, and levying of men in G(ermany (quheyroff I am lately advertised), arnot
altogidder ordcyned for us, ze ar the mark they (hote at; they feke our realme, but
for ane entrey to zours. Giff they should direcly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme, therefor they do, by indiredt meanes, to blind
zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to
th' end that having aflimbled theyr hayle forces fa nere zour bordours, they may
unlok it to attack zow: It is ane of their aid fetches, making a fchew to one place,
to lyght on ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne were
affaizeit, and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the enterprise of
Calais was fynely difflmbled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the
third, prevent theyr policy by prudence. Giffze fe not the lyke disposition pre-
fently in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all
nations planely fpeks off. Tak hede ze zay not hereafter, " Had I wist;" ane un-
comely fcntencc to procede off a wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced
on to zow, quhilk zow commonly willed, that this countrcy myght be divorfed
from the Frenfche, and is fa coinme to pass as was maift expedient for zow. For
giff by your intyfement we had taken the mater in hand, ze myght have fufpcAced
we would have been untrufty frends, and na langer continued ftcdfafte, then perril
had appeared. But now, quhen off our self, we have conceyved the hatered, pro-
voked by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing with ws hes deserved our
ininitye, let no man dobte but they fall fynde ws cnnemyes in erincft, that fa un-
gently hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands we can look for nathing
but all extremityc, giff ever they may get the upper hand. Let not this occa.
sion, fa happely offered, escape zow: Iiff ze do, nieglectig the preelnt opportunitie,
and hoping to have ever gode luk cornme Pfeaping upon zow, it is to be feared
zour enemye waxe so great, and Ca itrang, that aiecrwards quhen ze wald, ze fall
not be able to put him down; and then, to zour fniart, attor the tyme, ze will
acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harnie cometh of
oversight, and trusting to zour enemyes protnefle. We oiler zow the occasion,
quhevrby zour former lofles may be repayred. Qilhillk giff ze let over flyde, sus-
fering ws to be overrun, quha then, 1 pray zow, f1.l ftlay the Frenfche, that they
fall not invade zow'in zowr own boundes, lick it is their lult to reygne, that they
can neither be content with theyr fortune prelcnt, nor reft and be :atisfied when
they have gode luck, but will Itill follow on, having in theyr awne brayne con-
ceaved the image of fC great a conquest, quhat thilnk ye fall be the end ? Is ther
any of fa finall jugement, that he doth not foresee already, that theyr hail force fall
then be bent against zow ?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be presently. Theyr

estate is not always fa calm at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it wes not
theyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak this mater on hand, at this tyme,
but rather a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have found na refiflance,
their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes then now amafed. The estate3
off the empige (as I heare) has fited reflitution off th' imperial towns Metz, Tloull,
and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes ; and all thing is not a calme within
theyr awne countrey, the less fit they be presently for weyr, the mare opportune
efteme ye the time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were offered to the Frenfche

against

against zow, wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of
zour sleuth, to spare theym that hes already compafled zour deflrucion, giff theym
were able ? Confider with zour self quhilks is to be choyfed ? To weyr against
them out with zour realme or within ? GifF quhill ze fleape, we fal be over-
throwne, then fall they not fayle to fute zou in zour awne countrey, and use ws as
a fote stole to overloke zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It
is foly to think they wald not giff they wer able, quhen before hand they flick
not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe the flyle of zour crown. Then quhat differ-
ence there is to camp within zowr awne bounds or without, it is rmanifef. GifF
twa armyes /hould camp with in zowr country, but a moncth ; albeit ye receaved
na other harme, zit fihould zowr lofl be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede
to bestow on our support will draw to, befydes the dishonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for particular refpeas weill

affceled to the caus, move zow to subtract zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, unpoffible that'we may
receave conditiones of peace; but I fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws fik as will remove all mistrust, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws
rebelles, and diffames our juss querrell with the name of conspiracy agaiift our lo-
verayne. It is hir hyenes right we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realm we
fludy to preserve with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God knaweth) comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men impatient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
firangeares, feaking to defraude ws of lawful government. Giff we should susser
flrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the firenthes of our realme, fortify
the feyportes, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquefl, now
in the minoritie of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, thould we not be thought
oncareful off the common ucill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jeas to hir majetle ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might she not
justly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent ministeres ? Giff firangearcs
should be thus iuffcred to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr pleafour; myght not the people esteem our
noblemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na w)fe to fubtrak our
obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off her dew reverence, rents and
revenues off hir crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of
before, i fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ministeres borne men of the fan;
and that the fucceffil.n of the crown may rcmane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not ia lyttil effeme the friendship of Scotland, that ze

juged it not worthy to be embraced. It lall be na small commodite for zow to be
delivered off the anoyance of so ncir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more
trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs as puiflant, not lyeng dry marche
with zow. Befydes that fe fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackyng
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our land. Conlider quhat superfluous
charge ze bellowe on the fortification and keping of Barwick ; quhilk ze may re-
duce to a mean fowme, having ws to frendes The realme of Ireland being of na-
tour a gode and fertill countrey, by reason off the continewall unquietnes and lak
of policey, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advantage; and
giff it were peaceable may be very commodious. For pacification quhayroff, it is
'not onknowne to zow quhat service we are abill to do. Refuse not theyr corn-

. 2 nrod itcys,

moditeys, besides mony ma quhen they are offred. Quhilks albeit I study not to
amplify anddilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zou the lyke, and are the
rather to be embraced, for that zour aunceflors, by all meanes, mailt erneftly
futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes al-
maifl carried me beyond the boundes of alattre, quharfor I will leave to trouble
zow after I have gevcn you this note. 1 wald wiss that zc, and they that ar
learned, could rede the twa former orations of )emofthenes, called Olynthyacae,
and confidere quhat counfall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his country-
men, in a lyke cafe; quhilk hes tb great affinite with this cause of ours, that
every word thereof myght be applyed to our purpos. 'I'here may ze Icarne of
him quhat advise is to be followed, when zour nvghtbours hous is on fyre. 'Shus
I bid zow heartily fareweill. From Saint Andrews, the 2oth of January 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. I95.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, fiomn the

camp before Leith, 29th of April 1560.

WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the earl of Anoriginal
Huntly, who so defyreth to be recommended to you, as one, who, with all his in the PapeIr

heart, favoureth this cause, to the uttcrnioft of his power. Half the words'that office.
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced'man to fpcak farther
in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge of
him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will mylflf always meaffire my thoughts,
as he (hall deserve to be. spoken of. WVith much difficulty, and great perfualion,
he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this action ; what-
fomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to do
with solemn protestation and many words ; he trufleth to adjoin many to this
cause ; and faith surely that no man shall lie where he takcth part. He hath this
day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith, that there was
never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. o07.)

Randolph to Cecil, loth August i56o. From Edinburgh.
sINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last to your honour, I have An original

heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this prclcnt it may pleale you to in the Paper-

know, that the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your honour flall receive oflice.
their names in writing. The earl of Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his
leg. His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen speaker of the
parliament, or harangue-maker as these men term it. The first day of their fitting
in parliament will be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been present
of the lords have communed and devised of certain heads then to be propounded,
as, who fliall be sent into France, who into England. It is much easier to find then
than the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon that for England the
Mailer of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington. For France Pittarow and the
justice clerk. Also they have consulted whom they think meeteft to name for the

XXIV.

XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors muff be chosen. They intend very
ihortly to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those they
shall chute; and alto to require the king and queen's content unto this parliament.
They have devised how to have the contrat with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agreement between them and
their king and queen ratified. These things yet have only been had in communi.
cation. For the confirmation of the contrac with England I have lio doubt; for
that I hear many men very much like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of
Sutherland, the I. Glamis, who dined yesterday with 1. James. The lord James
requested me this present day to bring the contrac unto him. I intend, also, this
day, to speak unto the 1. Gray, in our 1. Gray's name, for that he promised in
my hearing to subscribe, and then presently would have done it, if the contract could
have been had. For the more assurance against all inconvenients, I would, betides
that, that I truss it lhall be ratified in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland
had put his hand and set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument,
tho' the aa of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, stand with
your advice, that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here present, to
that effect, or that I might receive from your honr. Come earnefi charge to travel
herein, I doubt not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known
with what fubflantial and effeclious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed,
I think no great difficulty would be made. The earl marshal has often been moved
to subscribe, he ufeth mo delays then men judged he would. His son told me yester-
day, that he would speak with me at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to
what purpose: 1 have caused 1. James to be the earneffer with the 1. marshal, for
his authority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between there two realms might be perpetual; and among
diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever
been granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to tlick unto that, that he
had promised, that it flould pass his power and all the crafty knaves of his counsel
(I am bold to use unto your h. his own words), to break so godly a purpose.
This talk liked well the aflifiers, howfomevcr it pleased him to whom it was spoken
unto. The barons, who in time palt have been of the parliament, had yesterday
a convention among themfelvcs in the church, in very honest and quiet fort; they
thought it good to require to be restored unto their ancient liberty, to have voice
in parliament. They presented that day a bill unto the lords to that effcEt, a copy
whereof shall be sent as soon as it can be had. It was answercd unto gently, and
taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they are
chosen, to resolve thereupon.-- Here follows a long paragraph concerning theforti-
fcations of Dunbar, &c. This present morning, viz. the 9th, I understood, that
the lords intended to be at the parliament, which caused me somewhat to flay my
letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your hon'. The
lords, at ten of the clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where the duke lieth ;
from whence they departed towards the Tolbooth, as they were in dignity. Each
one being set in his feat, in such order as your h. shall receive them in this scroll.
' he crown, the mace, the (word, were laid in the queen's feat. Silence being com-
manded, the 1. of Lidington began his oration. He excused his insufficiency to
occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of things past, and of what necef-
fity men were forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy and sup-

port
336

port it pleated God to fend them in the time of their necessity, how much he were
bound heartily to acknowlege it, and to requite it. He took away the persuasion
that was in many men's mind that lay back, that mifdecmed other things to be
meant than was attempted. He advised all efrates to lay all particulars apart, and
to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and of their country. He
willed them to remember in what state it had been of long time for lack of govern-
ment, and exercise of justice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and
hearty friendship, and to liye with one another as members all of one body.- He
prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially be-
twixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and To ended. The
clerk of register immediately flood up, and asked them to what matter they would
proceed : It was thought necelIary, that the articles of the peace flould be confirmed
with the common consent, for that it was thought necessary to fend them away with
speed into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might be.
The articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to
have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put their feals, to be £ent
away by a herald, who shall also bring the ratification again with him. The ba-
rons, of whom I have above written, required an answer to their request; some-
what was said unto the contrary. The barons alleged for them cuflom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the lords
of the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, should find it right andt
neceflary for the commonwealth, it should be ratified at this parliament for a perpe-
tual law. The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords
of the articles. The order is, that the lords Spiritual chufe the temporal, and the
temporal the Spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There were chosen as in this
other paper I have written. This being done, the lords departed and accom-
panied the duke, all as far as the Bow (which is the gate going out of the high
street), and many down into the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour,
the trumpets founding, and other music such as they have. Thus much I report
unto your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Other solemnitics have not
been used, saving in times long past the lords have had parliament robes, which are
now with them wholly out of ufc.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporals as are assembled at
this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.
Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Somerville. The bishop of the Isles.
Caflils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I know
Marshall. Hume. not how many.
Morton. Livingston.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Caithness. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Monteith. Glamis.
VOL. II. X x Gray

Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons eleefd to b1e of the

Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Isles. Argyll. Tillibardine.
Lord James. Marshall. Cunninghamhead.
Arbroath. Athole. Lochenvar.
Newbottle. Morton. Pitarow.
Lindoris. Glencairn. Lundy.
Cowpar. Ruthven. Ten Provosts of the chief
Kinross. Erskine. towns, which also are of
Kilwinning. Boyd. the Articles.

Lindsay.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affections of these men, that are at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it
satisfy your hon'. for this time to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftantialler or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen
in Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to ensue.
This present morning, viz. the ioth, the 1. of Lidington made me privy unto
your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France. He allegeth
many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that moveth him most, which is the
example of the last, that went on a more grateful merfage than he fliall carry, and
flood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth
what the whole world judgeth.

Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. i560.

Inclosed in Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and shows, we the barons and
Randolph's 1V freeholders of this realm, your brethren in Chrifi, That whereas the causes
e tcr to C-os true religion, and common well of this realm, are, in this present parliament,
Aiu. 1560. to be treated, ordered, and established, to the glory of God, and maintenance of

the commonwealth; and we being the greatest number in proportion, where the
said causes concern, and has been, and yet are ready to bear the greatest part of the
charges thereuntil, as well in peace as in war, both with our bodies and with our
goods ; and feeing there is no place where we may do better service now than in
general councils and parliaments, in giving our best advice and reason, vote and
councell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue and puniflment
of vice, as use and custom had been of old by ancient aCs of parliament observed in
this realm; and whereby we understand that we ought to be heard to reason and
vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parlia-
ments; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and fatutes be made con-

II cerning

339

ccrning us and our estate, we not bcin: required and f'lifr red to reafoun and vo! at
the making thereof, that the fatme should not oblige us to laind tlhc to. I hirel !or,
it will please your lordships to take confildration thereof, and of the charge birl,
and to be born by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the colmmon well of this
realm, after our eltate, that ye will, in this prcfrnt parliament, and all councills,
where the comnmon well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, counlll, and
vote, bo that, without the fame, your lordships would lb filcr iiothiii] to Ic pilacd
and concluded in parliamceit or councils aforesaid ; and thatil all s of pa'rlianicnt
made, in times plaf, concerning us for our place and ef-ate, and inl our favour, be
at this present parliament confirmed, approved, and ratifiedl, anld i of paiilament
made thereupon. And your lordships answer humbly lhI:ciches.

Of thr jfccefs cf this pelition, the foleowing accoent is given by Ra:ndilph ; Lctt. to

Cecill, J9 Aug. 1560. 'ihe matters conclude(l and pait by commtonll colllent on S-a.
turday lalt, in such folcmn fort as the firit day that they ailembled, are tliel : Firt,
that the barons according to an old ait of pailiament, made in the time of Jan.es I.
in the ycar of God 1427, hlall have free voice in parliament, this act palled with-
out any conltradiction.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englifl resident, to the riglht

worshipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to the queen's
m aj e ly.

I HAva received your honour's letters of the first of this month, written at Ofyes 9 Aug. 1 56 r.
I in Efcx; and allb a letter unto the lord James, from his kinfinan St. Come out Cott. l.ib.
of France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed B. io. so. 3'.
of her purpose in home coming. 1 aflure your honour that will be a flout adven-
ture for a sick crated woman, that may be doubted as well what may happen unto
her upon the seas, as also how heartily the may be received when fle cometh
to land of a great number, who are utterly persuaded that flie intendeth their utter
ruin, come when fle will ; the preparance is very small whenfoevcr that the arrive,
scarcely any man can be persuaded that she hath any such thought in her head. I
have shown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Lidington;
they wish, as your honour doth, that she might be flayed yet for a space, and if it
were not for their obedience fake, some of them care not tho' they never saw her
face. They travel what they can to prevent the wicked devices of these mif-
chievous purposes of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be found that
filij hujus feculi, they do what they can to stand with the religion, and to maintain
amity with their neighbours; they have also need to look unto themifelves, for their
hazard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor safety for themselves, but
to repose themselves upon the queen's majcfty, our iovcreign's favours and support.
Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they may trust at home. 'here
are in mind shortly to try what they may be assured at of the queen's majesty, and
what they may assuredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties. This
the queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this lhe feeketh by alt
means to prevent; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to

X x charge

charge him that no such things be attempted before her coming home; for that it
is said, that they too already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what
femblant fomever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their queen's
refusal, that cometh far from their hearts. They intend to expostulate with me
hereupon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If {he thrust all English-
men out of this country. I doubt not but there will be some of her own that
will bear us some kindness. Of me the shall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the
queen's majesty my mistress no longer to use my service in this place. By such
talk, as I have of late had with the lord James and lord of Lidington, I perceive
that they ale of mind that immediately of the next convention, I shall repair to-
wards you with their determinations, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein
your honour's advice is earnefsly required, and shortly looked for. Whatfomever I
desire myself, I know my will ought to be subjea6 unto the queen my sovereign's
pleasure, but to content myself, would God 1 were so happy as to serve her ma-
jefty in as mean a tfate as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not
that 1 do in my heart wax weary of her majefly's service, but because my time
and years require some place of more repose and quietness than I find in this
country. I doubt also my insufficience when other troubles in this country arise,
or ought shall be required of me to the advancement of her majesty's service,
that either my will is not able to compass, or my credit sufficient to work to
that effec, as perchance {hall be looked for at my hands. As your honour hath
been a means of my continuance in this room, so I trust that I shall find that con-
tinual favour at your hands, that so soon as it (hall fland with the queen's ma-
jefty's pleasure, 1 may give this place unto forie far worthier than I am myself,
and in the mean season, have my course direced by your good advice how I may
by my contrivance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her majesty's will
and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself. For the reft,

where that is withed that the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I
assure your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accustomed
manner of doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and
thould now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I doubt more her mo-

ney than I do her fair words; and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her own here I know there is
no sure or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this
time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy your desire, in knowledge
of the present state of things here. Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it
ever belt, that [he come not; but if (he do come, to let her know, at the first,
what she {hall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if the embrace
Christ, and desire to live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you have
last received, your honour somewhat underftandeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also
of others, what is determined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus together with what comfort
fomever it will please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth
not utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged
with by his own queen, that her majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt not
but it will be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others; his

daily

dcaily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with England, and that God will
never fuffcr men to be so ungrate, as by any pcrfuafion to run headlong unto the
deftruAion of them, that have saved their lives, and reffored their country to
liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble your honour, desiring God to
fend such an amity between there two reillms that God may be glorified to them
of this world.-At Edenburgh the 9th of August 156t.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 225.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary ,.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefl', our right dear and well-

beloved sifter and cousin the queen of Scotland.
RIG HT excellent, right high, and mighty princefi, our right dear and right i6th of Aug.

well-beloved sifter and cousin, we greet you well. The Lord of St. Coline 1561. Paper-

brought to us your letters, dated the ,th of this present at Abbevilc, whereby ye ossie, fiom a
signify, that although by the answer brought to you by monsieur Doyzell, ye ight COPY-
have had occalion to have entered into Come doubt of our amity, yet after certain
purposes pafled betwixt you and our ambaflidor, you would aflure us of your good
meaning to live with us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require us to give
credit to the said St. Cofme. We have thereunto thought good to answer as follow-
eth: The fame St. Cosine hath made like declaration unto us on your part, for your
excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as your'elf made to our ambhafidor, and we have
briefly answered to every the fame points, as he can shew you: and if he shall not
so do, yet least in the mean leafro you might be induced to think that your reasons
has satisfied us, fomnerally we aflure you, that to our requelfs your answer cannot be
reputed for a fatistacdion. For we require no benefit of you, but that you will
perform your promise whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the
refusal whereof we fee no reaoln alledged can serve. Neither covet we any thing,
but that which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in
words and speech doth confers, that which your late husband's our good brother's
ambassadors and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were
made privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea that,
without which no perfect amity can. continue betwixt us, as if it be indifferently
weighed, we doubt not but ye will perceive, allow, and accomplish. Neverthe-
less, perceiving by the report of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your
coming home, to follow herein the advice of your council in Scotland, we are con-
tent to suspend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do assure you that we be fully
resolved, upon this being performed, to unite a sure band of amity, and to live
in neighbourhood with you as quietly, friendly, yea as afluredly in the knot of
friendship, as we be in the knot of nature and blood. And herein we be so ear-
neftly determined, that the world mhould fee if the contrary should follow (which
God forbid), the very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the story witnefleth
the like of the king your father, our uncle, with whom our father fought to have

a This is the complete paper of which that indluftrious and impartial collclor, bilhop Keith, has publihied
a fragment, from what he ca Is his lhattered MS. 54. note (a) 18 1.

knit

A P P E N D I X,

knit a perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which matter
we know there remain with us, and we think with you, sundry witnefles of our
father's earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto divers evil councillors
induced your father; or finally where it ieemeth that report had been made unto
you, that we had fcnt our admiral to the leas with our navy to impeche your
pafitage, both your fcrvants do well understand how false that is, knowing tor a
truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon the seas, to
apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost compelled, by the
earnefi complaint of the ambafiador of our good brother the king of Spain, made
of certain Scottifhmen haunting our fcas as pirates, under pretence of letters of
mnarquc, of which matter also we earnestly require you, at your coming to your
rcalme, to have some good consideration, and the rather for refped that ought to
be betwixt your realme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of the
house of Burgundy. And so, right excellent, right high and mighty princels, we
recommend us to you with mofi earnest request, not to neglect thele our friendly
and fificrly offers of friendflip, which, befoei God, we mean and intend to ac-
compliflh. Given under our signet at Ieyningham the 16th of August, in the
third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. 1. p. 254.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable SirWilliam Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's mnajefly.

15th of Mlay -O F late, until the arrival of monsieur Le Croc, I had nothing worth the writing
1563. Paper- ' unto your honour.-Before his coming we had so little to think upon that a e
office, from did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, marking, and running at the
the originiI. ring, and such like. He biought with him such a number of letters, and such

abundance of news, that, for the fpacc of three days, we gave ourselves to no-
thing else but to reading of writings, and hearing of tales, many so truly repoitcd,
that they might be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narra-
tionibus. Among all his tidings, for the most aflured, I fend this unto your ho-
nour as an undoubted truth, which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being
with the emperor, moved a marriage between his youngcft son, the duke of
Afiruche, and this queen; wherein he hath so far travelled, that it hath already
come unto this point, that if she find it good, the said duke will out of hand fend
hither his ambassador, and farther proceed to the consummation hereof, with as
convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her mind may be the better known,
Le Croc is sent unto her with this meflage from the cardinal, who hath promised
unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of May ; and for this cause
Le Croc is ready for his departure, and his letters writing both day and night.
This queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many means hath fought
far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but would never so plainly
deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is, or how &he is bent. She
ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and afluredly until
the 1. of Lidington's return, she will do what she can to keep that fccret; and
because resolution in his absence cannot be taken, she will, for this time, return

Le

Le Croc with requeff, to have longer time to devize; and after, with the mofi
speed she can, flie tully purpoltth to advertize him, I mean, her uncle the car-
dinal, of her mind. Of this matter the 1. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had( before his departure, or since his ar-
rival in France, divers letters have palled between her grace and him, whereof as
much as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communiicated to tome, as
much as was written in ftpher is kept unto themselves. Whether also the 1. of
Lidington hath had conference with the Spanifi ambaflidor in England of this
matter, or any like, I leave It unto your honoui 's good means, to get trie know-
ledge thereof. Guelles or furmizes in To grave matters, I would be loath to write
for verities. Thi, alto your honour may take for truth, that Ihe emperor hatih
offered with his ton, for this queen's dovwr, the county of ''yroll, which is said to
be worth 30ooo franks by year. Of this nlatter allo the i hiingrave wirote a letter
unto this queen, out of France not long finice. 'his is all that pifcently I can
write unto your honour hereof; as 1 can come by farther knowledge, your honour
ihall be intormned.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottifl man that lafl came

into thele parts; he brought allo letters unto this que(pen Iroul the 1. of lidiligtonl ;
their date was old, and contained only the news ol F rance. I perceive divers ways,
thatNewhaven is forre closed, but I am not Ib ignorant of their na;ture, hut that I
know they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb dolh,
'' canis timidus foitius latrat.' From hence i do atliu.e themi, what means onicever
they make, or how pitiful lomever their nione lie they are like to recceive but finall
consort for all their long allie. \Ve Iland diily in doubt wlh.t r icied hip we fliall need
ourself,- except we put better order unto our miruled papifis, thanl yet we do, or
know how to bring to pals tlhat we m.iy be void ot their comber.

ITO-MORROW, the 1511 of this ililtlinr, the queen dep:rtcth of this town, to-

wards Edenburghi. It my hap le good, you Ihall thoroughly hear some merry
tidings of the lep. of St. Andrews; upon XVedniefday next he fliall be arraigned,
and five other prielts, for their n:aling at Eafler last. Thus most humbly I take
my leave; at St. Andrews the 15th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 262.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal lecretary to the queen's najeffy.
M AY it please your honour, the 7th of this inflant, Rowlet, this queen's fecre-

tary, arrived here; lie reporteth very honcfily of his good usage, he brought

with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of lamenta-
tion and sorrow. She received fiom the queen mother two letters, the one con-
tained only the rehearfil of her griefs, the other signify the state of Fr.alce as then
it was, as in what fort thilngs were accorkded, and what fartler was intended for the
appealing of the dilcords there, not midfruiting but that if reauln could not be had at
the queen of England's hands, but that the rcaln of France fliould find her ready
and willing to support and defend the rigl!t thereof, as by triendihip and old alli-
ance between the two realms (he is bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confider,
and by her writings in this fort unto this queen (which I allure your honour is

true),

343

loth of April
1563. l'iiper.
Ofiiie, from
the original
in his o nis
hand.

true), you may afluredly know, that nothing thall be left undone of her part,
that may move debate or controverfie between this queen and our Sovereign.

IT was much mused at by the queen herself, how this new kindness came about,

that at this time she received two long letters written all with her own -hand, faying,
all the time since her return she never received half so many lines as were in one of
the letters, which 1 can myself testify by the queen's own faying, and other good
assurance, where hitherto 1 have not been deceived. I can also farther assure your
honour, that this queen hath fayed that she knoweth now, that the friendship of
the queen's majesty my sovereign may itand her more in itead, than that of her good
mother in France, and as she is desirous of them both, so will she not lose the
one for the other. I may also farther assure your honour, that whatfomever the
occasion is, this queen hath somewhat in her heart that will burit out in time,
which will manifest that some unkindness hath pafled between them, that will not
be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, she faith that the queen mother
might have used the matter otherwise than she hath done, and doth much doubt what
ihall be the success of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her
will. Seeing then that presently they Rtand in such terms one with the other, I
tho't it better to confirm her in that mind (this queen I mean), than to speak any
word that might cause her to conceive better of the other. And yet i am assured
lhe {hall receive as friendly letters, and as many good words from this queen, as the
other did write unto her. Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto
the 1. of Lidington of that purpose (he did write unto this queen of, I know not;
but if The do, I think it hard if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his
return, or I perchance by some means here. It may perchance be written only by
that.queen, to try what answer this queen will give, or underfiand what mind she
beareth unto the queen's majesty our sovereign. The queen knoweth now that the
earl Bothwell is sent for to London. She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the
cause; I answered that I knew none other, but that his takers were in controversy
who took him, and that it {hould bejudged there. I know that the thinketh much
that he is not Cent into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he
would be reserved for an evil instrument. If the lord of Lidington have not been
plain with your honour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his friends
here, but most of all to himself. There comes a vulture in this realm, if ever that
man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 270.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger fe-

cretary for the time, in the parliament holden by our sovereign the
king's mother, queen of this realm for the time, the time of the
reititution of Umquile Matthew earl of Lenox.

' sY¥ lords, and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has pleated her majesty
'- most graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuffi-
ciently conceived the cause of this your present aflembly; yet having her majefly's
commandment to supply my lord chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee de-
ceased, I am willed to express the fame fopnewhat more at large.

NOTOUv
344

NOTO-UR it is, how in leir hi ilnnc';'s nil:.mity, a p. :ccfs of foir'firc. lr w I

decteld aigainft n;v l-od of)i !,clio, 11; ccrtai oilces

o '.I'|

l C L-'.l L

committeC by i)' ;

fpecitCed in tlhe dome anil cenlcmclnt of parliiament 'iciven th'lleti)oll; by r'.'abiil
whereof hit h.as this Ionilr time bhcn'! cxilued, alrd abfcnt f'lothl of i:is nativ'e cotiliry

ow grievolus the Lm

: e has bceen Cl 11 I Lill , it lhas well . .arcid by divers lhs l'uite-

fundi y

w, ys bro ight iito her mIaj:ly's nowiinlede, not onlv co. Itainin:~ niofl humble

and due fubmiflion, but alwaiis bearini' wjitnic,' ot hi, goud ev'tion nto ir majel:sl,
his n:'tirni pri" c Cfs, ;i earned '

c-l']os n hI had to her hi, 'nc\ ml' hirmbie

fcl'e ice, ii it ho°t id pSc;:t I'C; 1o'. fl': .

lort i ;'l:civt Ill r;ilkc !iim ab' to Ciljoy

tile befcilt of a

fiihj, ;lt maIlili'l t i',.'tS lli<i t

lll;tV ollo'' e'd r 'i Illiilcl , \'(ill

'i',

to incline t0o ;iS s

! ic ti -,

1 5 ;Is

the a'iinicv f hi:; lo l, a ld the i;

: 1 'c

lihl 1 c ar,.

the 1honllour has :o l-, iert in to h:r nIaijcfly b\v .liiit y, by r1e..l! (,f 1lie .:

i l:r !',; tilt lC' hi 'lil. n s ;n lul, ;, d (i v 'i!s o:0 l1 1 I

i - ( t,. co iiticri :tltl's , :IS :Il) d ith

ci'Oatilliis IcqI :( ( Il 'too-i lill the (picen's ;;ijci i,' of i, .'l:nu!, vl! Al . C:;'i'1it.1
commendal iloli \e.'Is lot C't I..lit 1( .on 'it, ild's thl.'t orl - r (O);'11 i i

hit;ll i.l i 111:c ' -

j!fl hl':'s a- Ccrlaiil in.clinationl to pity thl d(ic.'' tf' i n'lS , houlcs, :;ul ai s ;. c hcaltid,
I, hlr oven rcp rt, has

1 :1 ;rc.It ical! im. te plc.ilti; to h b til'c ili;ll u:i ici t )of thi: up-

i-, i]!~ n Illl !tc l rt'iililCe, al.d :,;;iliccericnt of th a l :c;iic t blood, tll;n ti) l;ave liiltC'
m i:;it'L=Cid of l .; <' !ec:y 01 ov Tihr>,)v\ (,i ;!ny ;ta.; l,cc. !Upc.

llr tl.;; O{ccai)tl'., I!,T

rilic V.' h ;!c i olrc IcIld(ci:y s ! :,! :po): liis ri,], t l, 11 (nd

i r

l ' co :I J ii'cr tlle tll( 1; 1

of' E,.i'l:ii Sl i's l.ol! ablc tl ter, wrI i1tt 1 1O' ItCComl'itll a titll ol his c' :slt', i;l c ':!-
iideration v.l:cr Cos not only li:I.s tlie C ratti d unto lii her lc tti ' o f rcflitutionl, by
way (-f irace, 7t;it ailfb licon'lit t

lil to pi;i'su, by \,y (1' ri tili' i'll, tile rcn;c' dics

provielcd by tile i:'w cfr l'jc.h ;s thitk tlrinilclves grieved by ;allny ji;l Oltlnt, Ui;o!.
derly led, and to have the proc. Is rcvcrl:ld ; for cvaltitlntiol wv cleotl, it h;l; k i(d
her mlijelty prurently to ;:fl n.itfe ou the thri'.' (l ates of this icLt' rIelsie', by \'. o
advice, del ti , adlibnrition, nd ldeeiion :it hIer lijci ', iii(l, to proccic'. i .lil l n,;
his complaints, as the imelits of tie eaulle, la:'s of tile rc,.ilh., a.il pl. ltic, ol'-
served in titci calis, will bealr out. 'i'l'e h ic l C ill )'your proi'edi' iti.' ;.t t,!'i tim,",
bciii. by talit we hlave harid, thus as it were poilnteCd out, 1 might lireC enli, il tl(.
matter we have inr hand glave mie not occalioii to lay :1 f;w nlor wviordis, oI tlr
difLr.lit i11'm1 tile lame (uj ' lic:Uill 1 woeltd extelnd tile cilcllilftanCLs lmo(re
lar,.;c'ly. If I feared nit to ,ofln' liher lvigiihns, voiol prefenice and imid'l.[ i.l-
tilre abIbors 11lr li|se:'.kizii and Idiul.ition, and (o will c(oill'el ime to spea:k ltich
thiiiigs as 11 i CLay 'Iem to tendl to any 'oodA a;d pcrleclt 1 pont; and 1li it flin.lld I.e
compted to l;c, as tihat I 1c'lc ol 0Iious, if' [ I!lould on1it to put vtlil ill rcilcillj-
brance, i:i what part we tmay tccit thils, ;11d1 l iiC cl 11:n, on(ititiolns of lier I '' -
till natulre; whole glaciouls hhiaviiir towaids all her I'il bjccl, ion eileral, may
lerve for a grod proof of tlait ilii,:it), we mani' look for under her h;aippy overin-
mllent lb lo;g i;S it fliall il.t abe ( o

d to g ', t ier unto tis for ai o tod ailrllolly to

be had ill tile Commila ol x'ei, the oflices betW'ccn the piince and tile fubjedts mili{f
lie reciprclttu- ; ias by her m..jCily's prudence we enjoy this prcl'Ciit peace with ;il
foreig,ii natio(ns, and qu etlels among yoturie!vcs, in luch finrt, that I think ju!ily
it mlny he afilh'ed Scotl.ild, ill no l.0.1's agC, thlat precitely lives, was ill gr.ater
tranquillity ; o is it the duty of all l;s her loving iuilujcits to ackinowelcdge thle llll
as a nioft highi benefit, proceeding from the good government of iher iajefcy, d;.-
claring our!elvcs thankful for the faine, and rendering to her in.ijety fitcil duc
obecdience, as a just prince may look for at the hands of faithful and obedient tib.-
jccts. I mean no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her natulre oe,:

VOL. II. Y y dctt'',

detest, but such as proceeds from the contemplation of her mcdeft kind of regi-
ment, will tcr love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof have
we all in general had of her maji-ly's benignity there three years, that the has
livled in the government over you, and nm:-ly of you have large-ly tafl'ed of her large
liberality a-nd frank dealing ; on the other part her highineis ias haJ larrge appear-
ance of your dutiful obedic'e, fTo it becomes you to continue, as we have begun,
in c(nfidcrationt of the many nota:,be examples of her cleniIeicy above others her
good qualities, and to abhor and d test all falle bruites and rumours, which are the
inoft pestilent evils that can be in any common weill, and the (owers and inventors
thereof, ' hen nmay we be well aflured to have of her an most gracious princelie,
:ind fie mull faithlul and livintl fiubjits s; and so both the head ancd the mInelbers
lein i encoulaged to mainitain the harnii:ocy and accord of the politic bodies, wi',ce-
of 1 made n:enttion befere, as the gloiy thcico(t fliall partly appeitain to her ma-
jellV, i), fh.dl no il;l!l praile anid unliicakable commodity redound therethrough to
you all univcrially her lubjc&ts.

No. X. (iVol. I. tp. 279.)
The perils and troulles that may presently ensue, and in time to come

follow, to the queen's inijtiiy of Lnglaiid, and state of this realm,
1upon thie Iarriage of the queen of Scots to the lord Darley.

T 1lk S'', the minds of fuich as be affre'ed to the queen of Scots, either for her-
1 fcif or for the opinion of her pretecee to this crown, or for the delire to have

change of the forme of religion in this realm, or lor the difcontentation they have
of tl c queec.'s majely, or hel Iuccellioii, or of the fucceflion of any other betide the
queen of Scots, fliall be, by this man iage, erected, comforted, and induced to
dcvife and labour how to bring their desires to pas ; and to make some eflimate
what perlins those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger mhay be weighed;
the fame may be compafled in those forts either within the realme or without.

1 HE firit are such as are specially devoted to the queen of Scotts, or to the lord

Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as firlt, all the houle of Lorrain and
Guise for her part, and the earl of l.ennox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be
ot their blood, and have received dilplcafures by the duke of Chatelherault and the
H-amiltons. The second are all manner of perlol-, both in this realme and other
countries that are devoted to the authority ot Rome, and mislike of the religion
now received; and in these two forts are the uibitance of them comprehended,
that fliall take comfort in this marriage.

NErXT therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles these kind of men shall
intend to this realm.

F1IRST, the general feope and mark of all their desires is, and always flall be,

to bring the queen of bcotts to have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
T though the dcvilers may vary amongfl themselves for the compafling hereof, accord-

ing to the accidents of the times, and accoiding to the impediments which they
ihall find by meains of the queen's majesty's adtions and governments, yet all their
purpoess, drifts, devises, and practices, shall wnolly and only tend to make the
queen of Scotts queen of this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and
in their proceedings, there are tvo manners to be confidcrcd, whereof the one is

far

far. worse than the other ; the on is intended by t1hem, that either from mnlici m.
blindncfs ini reli:ioln, or fotl natural afl-'etionl to tile quen of ScolttF, or the !,:id
)Darle , dto pcrirude tllcmfc cs that the s:lill altiien of Scrtts hath prcfb'ctl\nl Im-',I
right to the crown tihani our lovcrcirvi Ilady the lteeiu,

of which fort be all their

kindred on both fiies, and all ifch as are devoted to popery, either in Engnl.and,
Scotland, licla.nd, or ce\lh;re ; the other is mcant by th., which, with letis
malice aic peli ualled that the quee:n of Scotts h.tih o:;! riitelit to be thc nlex heir to
succeed the qiuein's majc ily. anid her Ilie, of whicih si rt f'cwv are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not fl manly as ale of the contrary, andl f'tris
ti:cl' two soris ihall tlh peril, dcvillf, ann pr cices procced. 1rom tile l!il,
which imagine the cqueen of Scotts to hi.ve pci-rptu.tlly liilt are to le lookled for
thflc perils. Firfl, is it to bc (loti)e(l the devil will infect lonie of them to ima-
gine the hurt of the life of our deatr I;)ecrcign l.id;', by fiucih nc:lts as tih d;. il
ihall iugg.fLit to thelm, alllthougi it is to bC ati;ledly hlopl!, th.it Alitiihty (,d
will, is he hath hitherto, gr.:ciotiflv protemt and pref!rve her from floch d liicrs ?
Secoindlc, there will lie attcielpte, by p|irl.ilionisi, h y

brui;s, y runiiours, anil

such li:ke, to alienate tihe ninJla of ginol i'uhj :its frol i tle (l'iicn's im;jelty, andl to
cosicili.itt th:eml to thli queel ofl' Sictts, anl on this hlhialti the frontiers andt the
nloth \viii be nimuel ilicitcd anid labored. ''iirdly, there will be attemlpted cauil's
of foine tuntults and rebellionis, cl'ecially in the north towards Scotlanld, lo as
thereupon may follow fbme e open ertelrprifc set by violence. Foulrtilvy, there will
be, by the liid qlueen's council and friendii, a new league made with Flrance,
or Spain, tihat iliail be oi'ellive to this realn, and a furtherance to their title.
Aitd as it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as many practices as they l.ll,
both upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occafiol the queen's majelty to iclreafiC
and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or potent, aln
for the attemnpting of all thele thlingls, mn uiy devises will be inmagined from title to
time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the fecund fort, which enlcan o other favour to the qucen of Scotts, but

that Ihe should succeed in title to the queen's imajefty, is not much to be feared,
but that they will content thtemfelves to fee not only the queen's nmaje!tly not to
marry, and bo to impeach it, but to hope, that the queen of Scotts sh.ill have iliue,
which they will think to be more plealfble to all men, bccaulie thereby the crowns
of England and Scotland shall be united ill oln, and thereby the occ.ilion of war
liall ceafi ; with which persu.asion nmany people may be seduced, and abuiLd to
incline thlemli1ves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies against thele perils.

A Duplicat.
A furnmary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and 4th of June

others of the privy council, -collected our of the sundry and levcral ,6;

: cotit.
fpecches of the said counsellors. i '. f' .

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller, 290.
Lord Treaufrer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
Ds erby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of - Bedford, - Cave,

Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

ctlCtiOllS
Yy 2

Qieflions propounded were these two.
Y. F R S T, what perils might ensue to the queen's maji fRy, or th's realm, of th'

nmarriage bttwixt the queen or Scotts, aind thie Irrd a])nr::;iy.
2. 7V\--AT-A' were meet to be done, to avcid or Iencdy thi f.line.

To the Filfr.

T'q. peril, bcing fiind y, and very many, wvere reduced by some counsellors into
onlly one.

i. !'irIs, ''h;'t by this mi.rri?.c, the q'icen of Scotts (heing not inarrie.), a

preat lliiliber in this rcal:ii ro oCf the woit:l if cc.:s nii' It be ali:ented it thiel
minds from their iatural duties to her r:-,jcl', to deptend upon tile f(iCcCs of tlii.
mnarri;--!- of Scct;i! sd, ;is a mc ;. to es) :.' lifhi ltL ticeccicl; of both the crrov.ns in
the ifll' of tIl't sa- :c

ni L I li. l L, .1i .f o

u 'a vL!lr ;,. Sdeivil es Li prBtl icL-, that flioul d
tend t to te ;;':,:.. ( n'u' nt ( I tle qllc.LI of Scott'-.

2. Se'.CO .NDLY, '! l' ..t c ii . tle c ti i ,ll!;:titl of themn, which firtilieret

ith niatriage of loild ..ril-y , 'wVa !ii upon the trul:t of luoch as were pa.plfis, ;a.;
the only nieans lel' to rcilo;e t!;e r'ligion of iRnic, it was pla.inly to be seen, th.,i
b( th in this rcalinl ;nd ''.cotl.d, thei papilts would moli falvour, n:.aiitiln, and s-o-
tily thi' n,;,ri:.',eoi tl.c]oid I.J:nlcy, and vwci !(d, for turtlleiance of l:i ioni in tcii-
gion, devise all means and pradiice s tha could be wvithini this t'ea;in, to diltu!h tl;:
cllate of the qeccil's n:jelty, and the peace of the realmi, and confequcntly to
at(hicve their pUlrpoI!s by tofcc, ra;ther th;lan faill. By iome other, thelc perils
havinig indeed na:lly bra:nches, Vcle reduced, though si lnewhat otherwise, into
two lorts, and thcle were in nature such as they could not be easily levered the
one from the other, but were knit and linciked together, naturally for mailntaiing
the one with the other. The filfi of thcle foit of perils was, that, by this mar-
riage with the lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further the pretended
title of the queen of Scotts, not only to succeed the queen's majesty, as in her
belt aliity fie had profefled, but that to occupy the queen's eflate, as when tihe

as in power, flie did maiiif'efly declare.
1THE second was, that hereby the loomifli religion flould be creced, and in-

creafld daily in this realm, and these two were thus knit together, that the fur-
therance and maintenance of the title staid, in furthering of the religion of Rome
within this realm ; and in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion tsood
by the title, for otherwise the title had no foundation.

PRooFs of the first.) And to prove that the intention to advance the title to

disturb the queen's ir.;jcflvt, mult needs enfuic, was confidered that always the in-
tention and ~ ill of any perlbn is molt marnifeft, when tlier power is greatest, and
contrary v hen power is finall, then the intention and will ot every person is covered
and lcfs een. So as when the queen of Scotts power was grcateft, by her marriage
vith the dauphin of France, being afterwards French king, it manifefllv appeared
of what mind Ihe and all her friends were, using then manifefily all the means that
could be deviled to impeach and difpoflicfs the queen's majefly, firfi by writing and
publiihingherlelf in all countries queen of ngland ; by granting charters, patents,
and commifions, with that ltyle, and with the arms of England, both the
French and Scotts, which charters remain still undefaced; and to piofecute it wsith
effelt, it is known what preparations of war were made, and sent into Scotland ; and
M'hat other forces were aflcnibled in foreign countries ; yea, in what manner a

8 ihamcful

fiameuril peace was matle by tle 1:rcnch with ktli iln.:I p lo eiiv all the force
of France to purcil all the m: tters by forcc ivihich by Gd's prn vidcneoe and
the qtiueen's majelry contrry po,.iV'),; were 'e. L' l .;

; a ,1 a'it.;rw.i!ds, by 1iher hiui-

b:hnd's deatl, her fortune atni po'.vr cinh ch. l' Ci , t;i e i:;tet:tio !l ie an to hild:
itfcelf and ,altnol:,h nb t!he bictttiil ueei's co:'.ni;s i:i S ;1n ici ori xvwa ti at
Edneibrou th, to clcio n 2ll

r tli; toitle , :ad c:lIi, m , :dil prettne.' ":, et lo ti s d.n ,

b y dcl )s a;id c vil :.ati i ,l thlr .lt1 llcl. ;l ot t

t trz::' r h.I t h1 _il ic

.l .:'. A

i\ 3

fne nove, as ';

g S 11.

s ill ilill 1 il pl 1'

I' . f, h .'!i !l: tile ft l

i. ;:. ;l ;,

c.:',; u;

by cotfi'_'rin,' otf ch crr, 'i .s : wciel t C<>:i1ni:ttt't i ,l tl1.' 1 t, cr ,l, ji l,; ;.m l .iri,. s

v.';l! :;'lic'd t'::: l iml , ;:til Itprt

c-( ( b;l i lti ,llv t,* . 11to pl ,' tl . li ,

I n ' it was

thought a.inlv, that the pclii w - t gIriter c t is ' i iri ,l'.: ith t! e l,; Irl D sinl, ,
bcit;g a fuiljelt o this ICre, l tilh:u wit i nl

-', pr c ab ;

,,r y tii';,

it, bcilt * 1 tlis re.

i.il, 'a.d

. l i 'l

iol i

t h ,ct-.if , it il ii iim , ;11,i otheilr . l ,:; n

, ';

a )pary tie -, )l<'id e IcrC.i,: , y i

lo;c with diiiiiiiitit! i oi ;li '

l I ol' tile rce.li: ;

in thi. t v.l tl otbcvtr ploriwc- } c(tiid ll;iake bv 1te: f'. i, ion i tl :

i[.i;

,

: , l {>[h,.r

dii'tr<tcentiel pctilons here, filnilld be as it \ ce dcdl :tci cut

c ut lfl pj

1 .x i t) I ,i:;

! cl!li ; alid by tlc mniri. iic oi , ll an'i cr, flih ctuld lnot bie iall;uiC ofl ;:i , p ii
here ; la as by thlis i uirrii ' li.: I ','oltd ih.1xc a )iti tionl t

o l h r OwV p wcV tt f.i'tL; l cr

turn, a:;d 1a

lu lll po!i '

t t

i (

ti rc i !

i e; - it

.lioln- ilI our o\nl b ..<1>, ;, ' s c 'l

more da'.- Crous thlan treble tihe like all'od, , e V'L'r tile CXlatlliis arl i; outlr O v
ilokries ni;;',;, that fOreiritn l)v.'crs nevcr prevaciled itn tils retalmi, hut ivh ti! !;;li
ot loinm at ihoie. It wats ;alt) tnt-inbercd, that I.cttig how befu; ti!> a!;.i iipt of
nairri:ic, it is liiil, ac i 1l

a n ,

m iit, lli y licn, that iln uve, \' coi cr o the Irl

-ii;l ,

I he

faction tlhat llotl

t i ,si l t il l ur iScotttil title, i-s rowi, t n1 1iit nt.l liol,', cja ic ,ll iiii-

fefily iil this coult, botn in iil ,, and cii ttnllr, it could nolt ie buti (; : .ct pt io.1l hlc
were isccdl' aidl n to

i t by

t his mIarl iig,, aind hy the pri. lice of' tIc li!tti-;

thelrcof, tile filllic tu tio) Wii .,uld liiortlx ( c-iie r'alfc, !til Irow I) C' t an.i Jt n,i ; ; oi;
as the rtidreli. t ile cos would be aimnoil di li'r:at. A\ d

i n this puit pi- it v.' is rcniit

bered, how t' of l e int pil .-l ;il[i oi thle ittti .c tilt -j fll c o, te

, e ,c , iln all

the cou ttiies fil the re.l ill, Ic.tLtily a thilrd tv;s soli utd l t!'i alfluled to h.; i
ill the iilatter of retlii io , ipitn whicli only f{1 in. tite itici 1 of :c,,tts titl! &, l
lha;li , and iolme doI:bt I ;I it 1-c thatl t tilc triclIs of thle carl of' .elC ni.,, ti lil: i '.d
mole kl,;o-,vld e

!( i cl ol th,.n was tlioughlt, and thereby n1.1de ad v it now il botl;ltd,

.nid thieir plilt wal )

wa l.'.,t illn P jlat d it s the (lc n

' e .' ilijetc' .liirll not tittl'i;;t

to contrary his nitrl i , . , 1: in t tilis t.) t, was the I' 111 o;t ,[i t lp

' i!s d i]

. I,,

bcing notwithl!tll (!inlig more lirl '':lv an:d pla nl l\Iet litl, lind illn i. 1I) apt,;lar.'i: i|v
imanty sure littllciatS, as 1Lo oli of tlhe council could deiny them to be bitc a ii,;
and very danierous.

Second Q2ueflion.

THE queflion of this confultati(,n wa' w.hat wvcie meect to be (dIce (ti avoidl l...

perils, or tehe to divert the forcc th ret fronl i lirtinti , the rL-alili? Ivcui

ii ' ;i.:.:

were ta grcat n umber of particular (divdics propoundeid ; and ) t. tit ul,orc 1, lt o;i lu. i.
was reduced by some into three leads.

. I'HE firit lthoulght necei'iry hy all perfn)i, as the only thling of thec i1.at

moment and efficacy, to remedy all thes5 per;ls, and nmaily otheri, anld luclh i
without it no other remedy could be found lufficient, and tl at wAis to obtail tiait
the queen's majcity would marry, and make therein no long dezily.

9.. '11 r

2. TriH second was to advance, eflablifh, and fortify indeed the profe.iorn of

religion, both in Scotlan.d and in England, aid to dimiiimlh, wraken, and feeble
tile contrary.

3. '1 I-I. third was, to proceed on filndrv things, either to difappnint and brtak

this intended marriace, or, at the le:.t, tlhei by to procure the lame not to be so
hurtful to this reilhn, .is (:ilmerv.le it wiil be.

TItE first ot ltefc three hath ino particular rights in it, but an earncil and un-

feigned delire ;id luite, with all hunblkelsic, by prayer to Alniil ght (God, ;:nd
advice and council to the qic-ni's majeftv, that flie wou.d defer no more imce froin
malriage, ht'lreby the gord luhj'cis .f the calm ilight ltay their lharft, to d.penl
upon her ni;:!jfy, arnd the itlc of her bedy, v ithuut which no surety can be de-
vistd to :ai crt;:in :IIy [Lr.l, of continu icc of their families or polleritics, to en-
joy that which othei wile flhould conme to them.

hFCOND, c(onclrcrling tile nmantils of religion, wherein both truth and policy
were joined together, Iind t!hefl pa:ticul:irs.

i' IRST, whi(re,' of late the adi cria is c.f rcliyion, in the realm, have taken

occalion to comfort aind increale their saiclion, both in I nuland, Scotland, and
abroad, wvi'h a rii:loutr andi exl.et:iti; i t:.at the religioin fillll ;e flioti!l changied
in this Icanmt, l.y 11n c.Ins thlt thle Lifl.ips, y tile Cleci's m.ijclly conin.ill(illi)ir,
have of late dealt Illightly with finc perlons of good religion, because they had
f(tr-lorn to v.ear certain aliL rel, and luch like things ; being more ol form and
accidents, tihan of itny fibfla;nce, tor that it is well known that her m:jcly had no
meaning to comfoit the advc lairics, but only to naintain an uniformity as well
in things external as in the fubilance, nor yet h.ith any intention to make any change
of the icligionl as it is efiabliihed by lav.s. It was thought by all men very ne-
cellhary lor the uplprefling of tlhe pride and arr-pgalncy of the .dverfarie, iindircectly
lhrebhy to notify, by her fpccial letters to the two archlbifhopc, that her fornier
commalndment w.s only to retain an uniformity, and not to give any occasion to
nnv perfln to misjudge of her m.jefly, in the change of any part of religion, but
that ihe did deteimine firmly to miaintain the form of her religion, as it was elta-
blilhied, and to punifll such as did therein violate her laws. And in these poinlts, some
allb wilthd that it might please her archbilhops, that if they flhuuld lee that the
adverlaiies continued in taking occasion to lortify their faction, that in that cafe
the)y hould ule a moderation therein, until the next parlian.ent, at which time,
fonme good, uniform, and decent order might be deviled, and cftabliflhcl, for (uch
ceremonies, so as both unifoimity and gravity might be retained amongit the
clergy.

IHE second means was, that the quondam bishops, and others, which had re-

fused to acknowledge the quecl 's majcllty's power over them, according to the law,
and were of late difperfiei in the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it
is known they cease not to advance tleir faction, might he returned to the Tower,
or tome other prison, where they might not have luch liberty to leduce and inveigle
the queen's m:jelly's fubjets, as they daily do. ,
T THE third means was, that where the bilhops do complain that they dare not

execute the ecclesiastical laws, to the furtherance of religion, for fear of the prc-
munirc wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not best affected in
religion, do threaten them, and in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface them,
that upon such cafes opened, lome convenient authority might be given them,
from the queen's majefly, to continue during her pleasure.

TnHE

THE fourth was, .that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful

books in Englifl brought from beond lf:is, and are bold!) received, rcad, and
kept, and cfpecially int the North, Itduiiing, of great nulmbers (f good flbjedts, the
lilke boldness wheicof WI.s nvcv luiffred in any other priniicel's tin.e, that imnic
flrcight ordl-r might be given to avoid the lamen, and that it mighlt 1e connridcied
by the judges, what n11.111 r of crime the fame is, to maintain fitch b,oks, Inade.
directly ;gaintt h r n;:je!v'. authority, and ma.itaiinig a furci a power, con-
trary to the laws of the ic.ain

T'HE fifth w.:s, tl.t w.v!,'1, a grcat number of nimnks, fry;r's, z!)d fic'h lc-,J

perfobn- aie fled oilt *t .Fc,,:la,,i', iand do (erve in 1Iniland, elecilv in thle N;itlh,
as curates of cihurclt's, .ind - i ucil ot thei.m :s are not found lioil[: ald co!ii.;rnl-
able, mav he b niiil d (ont oit tlhi realm, for tliit it appearic.ti thilev do .v i; ji-
tion in the realm, In nl i:y pllc s, and lnow will iniCrc.I tlheir doinull:.

'l'HE ' xili, whlere lui!i h)' ii \'1g ecclu;iatiic: ll ]vin:t , ;Cle o i the otlicr filet the

fca, and Irouil tlicc'e mainiain .d,ion in the ralil ; th.it livilns nim,, be bcttcr bc-
flowed, to the com .ni:lily eut thi' re:ill, iipon igood ftl illjci,.

'I HE |fveinth i', thale tihe judgs (ft tile icalm, Ihli ing no finall anithority in

thli. lc..i;l, in go\ X. rllln.c ot all p .,pLrtv of the re-ilin, miglit be Iwvoln to thil
quen's ,n'ajclt., ai coIt!iig lo) tlic ..w ,i thei relm, and si thereby thlie iliould
for conlicntcc sike mnailtainl the elutt's
c' ;ijct'fy's aitlhority.

TI i p:rt;culars of the third intention to break and avoid this annrriagc, r to
diver. the perils.

FiRSr to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force,

or fc.ir o to' c-. it is tlo..ulit by lomel that thlet means fll ollowing nilht Loccii.ton
the bre:ch of tlhe m. rri.g.lt

1. 'I H AT 1l ctJl l of lEedlord repair to his charge.
2. 'I' AT tlie works at Blerwick be niore advanced.
3. '! IIAT the c.,!1i1lon be therel c ilcrc:led.
4. 'FHATr all tle wardelns put their frontiers in order with fpced, to be ready at
anll iour's veirlning.

5. I'-lHAr lomec nioble perl;rn, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
fuhel oth(er, ,e lint into '1 orktilre, to be lietuelnatlt-gelicral in the Noith.

6. T'I-IATr 'prei.ir;liioln be nmade of a power, to be in rcadineis to firvc, cither
at lierwick, or to invade Scotlit(l.

7. I HAT IAprcfcillt l..dy Lennox be committed to fume place, where fle may
be kept Iromn giviing or receixing of intelligence.

9. 1 HAT the earl ol Leinnox and his lion may be feat for, and rcquirecl to he

sent lioinc by the queen ot Scots, accordling to th.: treaty; and if they flhall not
come, then to denlounce to tile qluten of Scots the breach of the treaty, aril there-
uponl to Clnte with hofitllity ; by which proccedig, hope is conceived (lo the ;nime
be done in deeds and not in hlew)s) tat thle imarli ge will he avoid.ci, (.r :t the
leI.lt that it may be qualified tium maIny p. ils ; aand awh . icvr is to ble d., :
herein. is to be executed with lpeed, whilst lilc lhas a p.irly in Scotland thlat falvonl..il
not the marriage, and before any league made by the queenl of Scuts with I ra.tce
or Spain.

SOME other allows well of all there proceedings, saving of proceeding to liofi-
lity, but all do agree in the reft, and also to thlee particularities lfllow'ig.

io. THAT the earl's lands upon his Iteffal, or his Ion's refuting, Iliould be fcized,
and bcftowed in gilt or cuitody, as ihall pcalc her majcfty, upoin good subjects.

11. ItHAIT

1I. THAT all manif,'rr favourer' of the carl, in the North, or c elfewlere, Lc in-
qu;'ed for, and that they be, by finidr, mneans, well looked to.

12. 'I HATr ciquiry be made in the Nortil, who have tie fite-ardfhip of the

queen's m:jij'cfly's lands there, and that no perlon, delervin t miftrnfil, he iufifrced
to h:lve c"oveinance or rule of alny of her fubjuds or land, in the North, hIt only
to retain
: their fees, and more truily perfcn have rule of the f:me pecple's lands.

i '. 'IHAT all frequelit p;lflaes into tlis realm, to and fiom Sctlaind, be re-

flraii:fd to all Scottihli mcn, iaving such as have laf'e-conduct, or be c!peci.lly re-
commended from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. 'I HAT lfonc intelligence be c{d vwJih f ich il Scotland, as fa:our not the
marriage, anl tilhte C(imf'rl.Ld from titme to time.

15. III AT the qu(Ien'ils lijcity's h:tlihold, chamber, and pcnfioncrs be better

fec'n unto, to avoid broad and uncomcly Ipech ulfd by sundry againlt the state of
the realln.

16. I'IIATt thl yoiintlcr frii of the cerl of Lennox, MIr. Charles, be remenmcered
to foum pll::ce V;lhc le tIi y bu folilt con inj r.

17. 'i IHATA coI,';.' :: i' ti:e s';cion andl tit'e of the queen of Scotts hat h now

<,f loe- tli c recci.t i-l reut s:v'i:or, a:ei (lntinuc.', hv the quthen's mauetly's .'-
v('eur l ci (, titon . i bc;ie. ;

i ;t. l'-(:l r nliiilcr 1, Iald t(le lady C.tlharinc,

'h!ion thei l:iild (;':cn iot Sct('s ;acconpt;d :i as competitor unto her in prctence of
title, it may p!e. lc ti'e tiCien''. mI;iftyV, by some exterior acS, to fhelw iolli re-
milhiiol of h1r dii'ili;lta'rj tl, l. dy, and to the earl of Ilartford, that the queen of
Scot!s tlcr!eby nmay find fonme chlnge, and her friends put in doubt of furLhrr pro-
cec'!ini: tilerciln.

I8. '; n:X\T wtihcfouvcr fliall be lieutieani in the North, Sir Ralph Sadlcr may
.ccor,.i;a y hiln.

9. 'I t 1AT with Itpced the ranlm of Ircland may be comrmitted to a new governor.
.0. o1 I"NAI.LY, thIat thet ;l( a\ices being conlidcred by her inajclly, it mnay plealb

]icr to clloo!a which (of them fle likcti, and to put them in execution in deeds,
ard not to pals them over in consultations and fpecchcs.

F1OR it is to -e aflired, that her adveiarics vwill ule all means to put their in-

tentini in execution. Some by praclticeor, c by orce, when time lhall fcrve, and
no tilme can serve lb well the queen's majefly to intLrrupt the perils, as now at the
firi}, before tlic queen of bcotts purpoles be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. z^9.)
Randlolplih to the earl of I.c.i(cfer-, f;oia Edinburgh the 31Ll of

Juiy i565.

Cott. Lil. 1M AY it please your lordfiip, I have received your lordfilip's letter by my ser-
C; l . i.i-. -' valt, Ifuiliciint ttelilnolly of your lorcdifip's tf:;vor towards me, whereof I
tol. 2-I(. think nmy lfeir alwaf inutid, that what ot!:cr mifnl'ap foevetr Ielal nme, 1 ih.:\
/ln original. cnlouth to comfort mniclf with; tlioul zh L li.vc not at this tiln received neither

accordin!" to the neced i flaind, nt r the necc lity (of the service thalt I aim cinployed
in, I vill r;.ther p.lis i, as I may with patience, than trouble your lordship to be
fur.thtr fitter sot Inle, wlin thnee is so little hope that any good wili be done for
me. I doul'.t nit bhut your lordidhip hath heard by such intornm'atioi as I have given
from hence, what the prfcint ftIte of this country is, how this queen is now become

a married

a married wife, and her husband, the self-same day of his marriage, made a king.
In their desires, hitherto, they have fould so much to their contentment, that if
the reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think themselves much happier,
than there is appearance that they shall he; fb many discontented minds, so much
mifliking of the fubjed's to have thece nmatters thus ordered, and in this fort to he
brought to pass I never heard of any marriage; so little hope, so little comfort
as men do talk, was never iben, at any time, when men should molt have fhcwed
themselves to rejoice, if that conlideration of her own honour and well of her
country had been had as appertained in lb weighty a care. This is now their tear,
the overthrow of religion, the breach of rnitie with the queen's majefiy, and the
deftruaion of as many of the nobility as file hath mifliking of, or that he lilceth
to pitch a quarrel unto. To fee all there inconveniencys approaching, there are a
good number that may sooner lament with themfllves, and complain to their
neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them, (bine attempt with all the
force they have, but are too weak to do any good, what is required otherways, or
what means there is made your lordship knoweth ; what will be answered, or what
will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your intent be never
so good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our ruin flall prevent
your support when council is once taken. Nothing so needful, as speedy cxc-
cution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly depend in her majefiy's hands it
fiandeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perifli ; greater honour her majesty
cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majefly's power to do for us; the
fums are not great, the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will
daily be found, tho' this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at
this time, I think her majesty shall loose but few; her friends here being once
taken away, where will her majesty find the like; I speak least of that which 1
think is most earnefily intended by this queen, and her husband, when by him it
was lately said, that he cared more for the papists in England, than he did for the
proteflants in Scotland ; if therefore, his hopes be so great in the papists of England
what may your lordship believe that he thinketh of the p-oteftants there ; for his
birth, for his nurritour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen my
mistress, if in preferring those that arc the queen's majesties worfl fubjeAs to
those that are her best, he declareth what mind he beareth to the queen's ma-
jefties self, any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, aind his duty evil for-
gotten; he would now Ieem to be indifferent. to both the religions, she to use
her mals, and he to come sometimes to the preaching ; they were married with
all the folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mars; his
speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world that
he were of some religion ; his words to all men, against whom he conceivetl
any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather he
feemeth a monarch of the world, than he that, not long since, we have seen and
known the lord Darnley; he looketh now for reverence of many that have little
will to give it him ; and some there are that do give it, that think him little
worth of it. All honour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it
wholly and fully; all praises that may be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself;
all dignities that ihe can indue him with, which are already given and granted ; no
man pleafetlh her that contenteth not him.; and what may I fay more, she hath
given over to him her whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself best liketh;
Ae can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is against his will, as your

VOL. II. Z .z lordlhip

lordllip may with me to persuade that I thould hang myself; this last dignity out of'
hand to have been proclaimed king, she would have it deferred untill it were agreed
by parliament, or he had been himself 2I years of age, that things done in his
name might have the better authority. He would, in no cafe,: have it deferred
one day, and either then or never ; whereupon this doubt is risen amongst our men
of law whether ihe being clad with a husband, and her husband not twenty-one
years, any thing without parliament can be of strength, that is done between them;
upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in debating. And before-
they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three heralds, at found
of the trumpet he was proclaimed king. This was the night before the marriage
this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were in the toun, were
present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man said so much as Amen,
saving, his father that cried out aloud God save his queen. The manner of the
marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, she was-
conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the great
mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto.
that, which she wore the doulfull day of the burial of her husband: she was led
into the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was she left untill her
husband came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the minister priests, two,.
do there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and an in[trument taken.
by a notour that no man said againfi them, or alledged any cause why the marriage
might.not proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three, the middle
a rich diamond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many prayers
said over them, she tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and leaveth her
there, and went to her chamber, whither within a space she followeth; and being
required, according to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those for-
rowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant life, after some pretty refufall,
more 1 believe for manner fake than grief of heart, she suffered them that flood by,.
every man that could approach, to take out a pin, and so being committed to her
ladies, changed her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that.
it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only the neceflity of her country,
not, if God will, long to leave it destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such
as are given of all things to make the words, would that it should be believed,
that they knew each other before that they came there; I would not your lord-
thip thould so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if it
were possible to fee such an aEt done, I would not believe it. After the marriage
followeth commonly great cheer and dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed
by the whole nobility: the trumpets found ;. a largess cried; mony thrown about
the house in great abundance, to such as were happy to get any part; they
dine both at one table, she upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Athole
fewer, Morton carver, Craufoord cup-bearer; these serve him in like offices,.
earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glencairn ; after dinner they danced a while, and
then retired themselves till the hour. of supper; and as they dined so do, they sup,.
ome dancing there was, and lb they go to bed; of all this I have written to your
lordship I am not oculatus testis, to this,. but of the verity your lordship shall not
need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was sent for to have been at the supper,
but like a currish or uncourtly carle I refused. to be there; and yet that which your
lordship may think might move me much, to have had the fight of my mistress,
of whom these eighteen. days by just account I got not a fight, I am my lord.

taken

taken by all that fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I do well allows
and like of myself the better, for vet can I not find either honefl or good that
{iketh their doings. I leave at this time further to trouble your lordflip, craving
pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I walk
now more abroad.by night than by day, and the day too little to discharge my(flf
of that which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your lordship, I am sure,
is partaker of such letters as 1 write to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he shall
be to this, to save me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I
take my leave at Edinburglh, the lait day of July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 292.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William Cecil knt.

her majesty's principal secretary, and one of helr highnels's privy
council.

FTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon captain Brickwell came 2z of Sept.
hither, who brought with him the queen's miajecty's letters, containing her full i5 ,. Paper.

resolution and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give infornation of, oflice, fi-om
saving that for the aid of the lords of the congregation there is nothing determined, tile original.
or at the least expreflcd in the fame letters, and for that purpole received I, this
morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and
others, craving to be holpen with 300 harquebufyers out of this garrilfn, for
their better defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause,
and the queen's majesty our sovereign's good will, and care towards them ; and
do also underhfand that it were very requisite to have them holpen, for that now
their cause is to be in this manner decided, and that it now flandcth upon their utter
overthrow and undoing, since the queen's party is at the leat: 500o, and they not
much above Iooo; besides, that the queen hath harquebufyers, and thev have
none, and do yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle flould bring to them,
who is not yet joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to pray you to
be a means to learn her rajctly's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I shall
answer them, or otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their extreme neceflity.
For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, and the
miserable subversion of religion there; and, on the other fide, to adventure so
great and weighty a matter as this is (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a fimall
.time), without good warraunte, and thercby to bring, peradventure, upon our
heads some wilful warrs, and in the mean time to leave the place unfurnished,
-(having in the whole but 800), without any grant of new supply for the fame;
and by that means also, to leave the marches here the more fubjcQ to invasion,
while in the mean season new helps are preparing; to this know not I what to fay
or how to do. And so much more I marvel thereof, as that having so many
times written touching this matter no resolute determination cometh. And lb
between the writing, and looking for answer, the occasion cannot pars, but
must needs proceed and have success. God turn it to his glory, but surely all
Tnens reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a pufli it is now come unto,
as this little supply would do much good to advance God's honour, to conti-
aue her majesty's great and careful memory of them, and to pieferve a great

Z z 2 many

iz Sept. UPON the advertisements lately received from you, with such other things as
t565. Paper- U came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole

ffie5 matter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed

that we can, fend to you 30001. to be thus used. If you shall certainly understand
that the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the impresting to him of
loool. might fland him in flead for the help to defend himself, you shall presently
let him secretly to understand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much,
and so we will that you let him have, in the most secret fort that you can, when
the said fum shall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
some part there beforehand.

THE other 2oool. you mhall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that

you shall fee necessary cause to imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of
the 600 footmen and 0oo horsemen; or to the catling out of wages of such work-
men, as by sickness, or otherwise, ought to be discharged. And where we per-
ceive, by your sundry letters, the earnefd request of the said earl of Murray and
his aflbciates, that they might have, at the leait, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them.
And that you also write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid,
yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempt-
ing such things, as you with the help of others should bring about, you doubt not
but things would do well; you shall underhand for a truth, that we have no in-
tention, for many refpecs, to maintain any other princes fubjeas, to take arms
against their sovereign; neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion
to make wars betwixt us and that prince, which has caused us to forbear,
hitherto, to give you any power to let them be aided with any men. But now,
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwithitanding their humble sub-
mission, and offer to be ordered and tried by law and juflice, which being re-
fused to them, they are retired to Dumfrefe, a place near our weft marches, as it
T feemeth there to defend themselves, and adding thereunto the good intention that

presently the French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to join with some one
of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and to induce her to forbear this
manner of violent and rigorous proceeding againit her fubjeas, for which purpose
the French ambafTador here with us has lately written to that queen, whereof
answer is daily looked for i to the intent in the mean time the said lords mhould not

be

A P P E N D I X.

many noblemen and gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever.
Your good will and affection that way I do nothing mistrust, and herein shall
take fnch good advice as by any means I can. I received from there lords two
papers inclosed, the effet whereof lhall appear unto you. For those matters that
captain Brickwell brought, I Shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you
two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day. By him you shall hear
that the protestants are retired from Edenborough, further off. So I hope your re-
solution for their aid shall come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will
not now so presently need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you to
God. From Berwick, this 2d of Sept. i565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 292.)
The queen to the earl of Bedford.

be oppressed and ruined for lack of some help to defend them, we are content and
do authorize, if you shall fee it neceflary for their defence, to let them (as of your
own adventure, and without notifying that you have any dircEtion therein from
us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to
be drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee cause. And to cover the matter
the better, you shall fend these numbers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison,
to defend that march, now in this time that such powers are on the other part
drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you lhall fee cause to dirce of,
the fame numbers, or any of them, may most covertly repair to the said lords,
when you shall expressly advertize, that you fend them that aid only for their de-
fence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any thing that
may offend her person, wherein you flall so precisely deal with them, that they
may perceive your care to he such as if it should otherwise appear, your danger
ihould he so great, as all the friends you have could not be able to save you towards
us. And so we aflire you our conlcience moveth us to charge you, so to proceed
with them; for otherwise than to prelcrve them from ruin, we do not yield to
give them aid of money or men : And yet we would not that either of these were
known to be our adt, but rather to be covered with your own desire and attempt,

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 301.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. I565-6.
M Y humble duty confidercd ; what to write of the present state of the country An origlnalr

I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it

maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there
was some good hope, that this queen would have fliewed some favour towards
the lords, and that Robert Melviin hould have returned unto them with comfort,
upon some conditions. Since that time, there are come out of France Clernau by
land, and Thorncton by sea ; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bi-
shop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor
appearance of any good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majesty our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England.
1 write of this nothing less than I know, that she hath spoken. And by all means
that she thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately
devised, in which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Sa-
voy, with divers princes of Italy, and the queen mother lufpeaed to be of the
fame confederacy to maintain papistry throughout Chriftiandom ; this band was
sent out of France by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof
remaining with her, and the principal to be returned very fhortlie, as I hear, by
Mr. Stephen Willfon, a fit minister for such a devilish devise; if the coppie hereof
may be gotten, that fball be sent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet
came to this toun upon Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and her husband,
but not long; the next day he held long conferences with them both, but nothing
came to the knowledge of any whereof they intreated. I cannot speak with any
that hath any hope that there will be any good done for the lords by him, though.
it is said that he hath very good will to do'fo to the uttermost of his power. He
is lodged near to the court, and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday,

4 tli

the order is given, whereat means made to many to be present that day at the mass.
Upon Candlemas day there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband,
the carl of Lennox, and earl Athol; divers other lords have been called together
and required to be at the maCs that day, Come have promised, as Caflels, Mon-
gomerie, Seton, Cathnefs. Othershave refused, as Fleming, Levingfon, Lind-
fay, Huntly and Bothel ; and of them all Bothel is the flouteft, but worst thought
of; it was moved in council that mass should have been in St. Giles church,
which 1 believe was rather to tempt men's minds, than intended indeed: She was
of late minded again to fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such as the truffeth
in amongst the queen's majesty's fubjecls, of whose good willis this way I trust
that the bruit is greater than the truth, but in there matters, her majesty is too
wile not in time to be ware, and provide for the woif ; some in that country arc
thought to be privie unto the bands and confederacie of which I have written,
where of 1 am sure there is some things, tho' perchance of all 1 have not heard
the truth; in this court divers quarles, contentions, and debates, nothing lb much
fought as to maintain mischief and dilorder. David yet retaincth still his pllce,
not without heart grief to many, that tee their sovereign guided chiefly by fucl
a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do any good to my lord of Argyl1,
and it iq said that shall be the first voyage that the will make after she is deli-
vered of being with child ; the bruit is common that file is, but hardly believed
of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there have of late appeared some to-
kens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 309.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph to

the lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th of Marchi
1566. An original in the Cotton Library, Caligula b. Io. fol. 372.

JLlay it please your Honozurs,

z7th March HE AR I NG of so maynie matters as we do, and fyndinge such varietic in the
1566. reports, we have myche ado to decerne the veritie: which maketh us the

flower and loother to put any thing in wryting, to the entente we wold not that
your honours, and by you the queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be
advertised but of the verie trothe as we can poflible. To this end we thought
good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edinbourge at the tyme of the lass
attemptatc, who spoke there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self and
her husband conforme to that, which we have learned by others, and know by
this reporte, we fend the fame, confirmed by the parties self, that vwerc there
present and affyfters unto there that were executors of the aae.

THIS we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband being entered into a

vehement suspicion of David, that by hym some thynge was committed, which
T was most agaynfte the queen's honour, and hot to he borne of his perte, fyrfte

communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding his sorrows so great
fought all the means he coulde to put tome remedie to his griefs; and communi-
cating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's commandment, no other waye
coulde be found then that David thould be taken out of the wayc. Wherein he,
was so earnest and daylye prefled the fame, that no refle coulde be had untyll it.

was

was put in execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton, and
lord Lindfaye hlould be made privie to th' intente that theie might have their
friends at hande, yf neade required ; which caused them to assemble To mayny, as
theic thought sufficient against the tyme, that this determination of theirs should
be put in exccutione which was determined the ixth of this inftante 3 daics afore
the parliament should begync, at which tyme the fayde lords were asured that the
cries Argyle, Morrayc, Rothes and their complyces fliolde have been forfeited, yf
the king could not be persuaded through this means to be their friends; who for
the defyre he had that this'intent should take effec- th' one waye, was content
to yeilde, without all difficultie to t'other, with this condition, that theie should
give their conlcnts, that he might have the crowne matrimonial. He was to
impatient to fee there things he saw, and were daylye brought to his cares, that
he daylye prefled the said lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer delay:
and to the intent that myght manifefte unto the world, that he approved the
aRc was content to be at the doing of that himself.

UPON Saturday at night neire unto vIii of the clock the king conveyeth

himself, the lord Ruthen, George Dugl.fs, and two others, throwe his own
chamber by the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to which there is
a cabinet about xii foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at
the which theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David with
his capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord
Ruthen, who willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The
queen said, that it was her will. Her howlbaind anwverede, that yt was againfte
her honour. The lord Ruthen said, that he fihould lerne better his deutie, and
offering to have taken him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes
of her gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him:
But the king having looted his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was thrust
out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of prefens, whar were
the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have reserved hym,
and the next day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore him evil will,
one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a great many others,
fb that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for certain that the
king's own dagger was left flicking in him. Wheather he fluck him or not
we cannot be here certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as was
laid, but going down the itayres out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE remayned a long tyme with the queen her howfband and the lord

Ruthen. She made, as we here, great intercession, that he shold have no haim.
She blamed greatlee her howfband that was the acor of so foul a deed. It is
said, that he did answer, that David had more companie of her boddie than
he for the space of two months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his consent that he ihould be taken away. ' It is not" (faythe
{he) " the woman's part to seek the husband," and therefore in that the fault
was his own. He said that when he came, flie either wold not or made her.
self sick. " Well," faythe she, " you have taken your last of me and your
" farewell." Then were pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majelty's
husband and mutt yield dutie to each other. "' Why may I not," faythe she,
*' leave him as well as your wife did her huiband ?" Other have done the like.
The lord Ruthen said that ihe was lawfully divorced from her husband, and for

.u<

no such cause as the king found himself greve. Befydes this man was mean, bardi,
enenlie to the nobility, shame to her, and deltrucion to herself and country.
"c Well," faith (he, " that shall be dear blude to some of you, yf his be fpylt."
G(od forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen: for the more your grace fhowe yourfclf of-
fended, the world will judge the worfc.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill at cafe and weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I mutl do
st with your majefiies pardon," and perfuadeth her in the befl fort he could, that
the would pacify herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacify which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell, and Atholl,
to quiet them, and to assure them from the king that nothing was intend againfl
them. Thcfe notwithflanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Murray
wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both get
out of a window and so depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores (who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne), to go where they
wold, and bring concorde out of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went
that night to such places where they thought themselves in moit fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen

The was content that he should lie with her that night. We know not how he ' *
himself, but came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so
fleepic, that he could not wake in due season.

THERE were in this companie two that came in with the king; the one An-

drewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would have ftroken her with a
dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who also her
grace fayth, offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We have been
earnefily in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitic; but he afloureth us
of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur
Arfkin, one or two others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord
Ruthven drawd his dagger and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen
in her prefens, as we are by this lord allured.

[THE letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dunbar cafile, whither

resorted the lords Huntley and Bothwell : That the earl of Morton and lord Ruth-
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fair proinifes, bonds, and fubfcrip-
tions. That he had protefRed before the council, that he was never consenting
to the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: i" That of the great
" substance David had there is much spoken, some fay in gold to the value of

s Ilm". His apparel was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose. His
" chamber well furnished, armour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebuses, 22 swords.
" Of all this nothing fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 daggers. He had the custody
" of all the queen's letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear
( of a jiill, that he had hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be
· heard of. He had upon his back,.when he was flayn, a night gown of da-
n m alk furred, with a fattenadoublet, a hose of ruffet velvet."]

'No. XVI.
360

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 317.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. i6, r565-6.
--I- CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been between her grace

and her husband, he preflcth earnestly for the matrimonial crown, which

she is loth hastily to grant;' but willing to keep Ibmcwhat in fiore, until fle know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a fovcreignty: and therefore it is thought that
the parliament for a time shall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.
'T'HE juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause than any dclrt, 4 April

and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worfi, for neither hath the (J'.- I'Jpr-

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was iglinfl her will, of icc, romi
nor the people that he hath denied Co manifefi a matter, being proved to be done originl.
by his commandment, and now himself to be the accuIcr and purfiter of them that
did as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was ycf-
terday arraigned, were both acculcd by him. It is written to me, for certain, by
one, that upon Monday lait spoke with the queen, that lhe is determined that the
house of Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The carl continucth
sick, fore troubled in mind; he ftaith in the abby, his son hath been once with
him, and he once with the queen, since flie came to thecaftle, The queen hath
now seen all the covenants and bands that pafeth between the king and the lords,
and now fidldeth that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocency
of the death of David was false; and grievously offended that, by their mec.IIIs,
he flould feck to come to the crown matrimonial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April

I566.
, T H IHERE is continually very much speech of the discord between the queen

and her husband, lo for that, that is commonly said and believed of

himself, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce between
them. It is very certain that Malevafier had not spoken with him within thlef
three days. He is neither accompanied nor looked upon of any nobleman: at-
tended upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or fcven of the guard; at
liberty to do, and go where and what he will, they have no hope yet among theni-
selves of quietness.

DAVID's brother named Joseph, who came this way with Malevafier, un-
known to any man here, is become fecrctary in his brother's place.

No. XVII.
. VOL. II.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 321.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August I566.
f H E queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather worec.

She eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with

him, norloveth'any such as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her
going out of the cafile of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof.
It cannot for modefly, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what she said
of him. One Hickman, an English merchant there, having a water spaniel
which was very good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the
pleasure, which he saw the king have in hich kind of dogs, gave him to the king.
The queen thereupon fell marvellously out with Melvill, and called him dissembler
and flatterer, and said she could not trust one, who would give any thing to such.
one as the loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8.
T H E disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rather

increafcth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards within twelve miles of Edin-

burgh, could not tell where to find the queen; sith which time {he is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nor
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company.
The king her husband is gone to Dunfermling, and paffeth his time as well as he
may; having at his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband heavy
at the heart.

Sir John Foriter to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

HE queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the earl of Lennox came
not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John ForfRer to Cecil, iith Dec.
'THE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambaflhdors, and all things

for the christening are at his lordship's appointment, and the fame is fearcely

well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is presently at Craig-
millar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all the while past.

c ~Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

Augui 1i566. rT HAT the king and the queen agreed well together two days, afterhercominog
Paper-office, A from - , and after my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new
from the oi- discord has happened. The queen had declared to my lord of Murray that the
ginal. king bears him evil will,, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him,

finding
36.

finding fault that fhc doth bear him so much company: and ill like manner hath
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere the king, which he did a few nights since ii:
the queen's pretence, and in the hearing of divers. The king confeclid, that re-
ports were made to him, that imy lord of IMurray was not his friend, which made
him speak that thing he repented ; and the queen affirmcd, that the king had
Ipoken such words unto her, and confcdied before the whole houfc, that flc could
not be content that either he or any other flould be ui.friend to my lord of M'urray.
hIly lord of M\urray enquired the lamce Itoutly, and uled his fpcech very nmo!dcfly,
in the mean time the krng departed very grieved; he cannot bear thi:t thi,
queen flou!d uife familiarity either with man or woman, and elpecially the la.iics of
Arguile, Murray, and Marrc, who keep moll company with her. My\ lord ol
Murray andt Bothwell have beenl at evil words for the 1. of ledin'toun, c forc the
queen, for he and Sir James B.ilfoure had new come from Lcdiniigtcn wvith his
answer upon such heads or articles as Both well and he fi2ou! agrn-; upoll, vwhici
being reported to the l'aid carl ill the queen's prelience, niade allv''CF, talit er he
parted with fich lands as was desired, he should part with his life. My lord of
iIurray fiidt stoutly to him, that twenty as honelt men as he il )ulti lole their li,.'
cre he reafte Ledlington. I 'lie queen fpal lk nothing, but hea.rd both; in the(c
terms they parted, and iincc, that I hear of, hai,. not met. 't'lie q uc.n after her
hunting canme to Edinburgh, and carrieth the pri!nce thence to htirling with her.
This last Saturday was executed a lIrvant of the lerd Ruthven's, who co;feiled
that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of the fa h

. The queen ihatil allo

opened to my lord of Mlurray, that money was fncit from the pop%, how nluch it
was, a;nd by whom, and for what purpole it was broulght.

No. XVIII. (Vol.. I. .334.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mlary, Feb. 2o, IrA6. A copy

interlined by Cecil. It contains an anl'ver to a coiplliniljr Icttcr
of Mary's upon the imprilonment of the bilhop of Rols.
-__A FTE R this [i. e. Mary's ladin ill Scotland] how patiently did I be;ir

with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your o:nv

commifioners, whereby I received no fnall unkindness, bcfides the manifold caulcs
of finfpicion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a
hard manner of dealing with me, to entice nmy subje&t and neir kin n;it, tlhe lord
Darnly, under colour of private suits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed
in treaty of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the fione
without my assent or liking. And how many unkind parts acco:npallied that tfial,
by receiving of my fubjecs that were bait runnegates and offnlders at home, and
enhancing them to places of credit against my will, with many iich like, 1 will
leave for that the remembrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you. And
yet all thcfe did I as it were fuppic:s and overcome with my natural inclination of
love towards you ; and did afterwards gladly, as you 0know, chrilleii your foll,
the child of my said kinfinan, that had before so unloyally oftcndcd me, botu; in
marriage of you, and in other undutiful uf.ges towards mie his overcign,. flow
friendly allo dealt 1 by messages to reconcile him, being your hufbanl, to you,
when others nourilhed discord betwixt you, who as it fcened had more power to

3 A 2 work

633

work their purposes, being evil to you both, than I had to. do you good, in refpea
of the evil I had received. Well I will overpass your hard accidents that followed
for lack (of following my council. And then in your molt extremity, when you
was a prifoler indeed, and in danger of your life from vour notorious evil willers,
how tar from my mind was the remembrance of any unkindness you had ihewed
I.c. Nay how void was I of refpe& to the designs which the world had seen at-
tempted by you to my crown, and the security that might have ensued to my slate
by your death, when I finding your calamity to be great, that you were at the
pit's brink to have miserably lull your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so
threatened some as vwere irritated against you, that I only may fay it, even I was.
the principal cause to lave your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 350.)
Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q of Scotts. Thus marked on the back

with Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarurn Rcgi e _/Iajejtatis ad Reginaml
Scotcrum. VIII. nprilis.
Paper-office. N/ A D A ME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de Crocq, je n'cuffe cu si peu de

consideration de vous farcher de cette lettrc, si les liens de charite vers ecs

ruincz, et les pricrcs des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je entens que urn edit
a ete divulguc de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons
eflc les meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire le
XlIme de cc mois. ],a quelle chore, comme c'eft plus honorable et necefsaire, qui
en tel cas fe pourra faire, ne y eflant cache quelque mifRere ou finesse, ainfi Ie
pere et amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe
de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoiflent que les iniques fe font combines
par force de faire ceque par droiL ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis
mais finon pour l"amour de vous mcme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la confo-
lation des innocens, de vous exhorter le leur conceder cette requefit, laquelle, si
elle cs feroit nic, vous tourncroit grandement en foupcon, de plus que j'efpere ne
pensez, ct que ne voudricz volontiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, ufcz
de telle finccrite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres, que tout le monde
aye raison, de vous livrer comme innocente d'ung crime si enorme, chore que si
ne siftes, feriez dignement efbloye hors de rancz de princesses, & non fans cause
faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une
sepulture honorable, qu'une vie maculee ; vous voiez madame, que je vous traite
comme ma fille, ct vous promets, que si j'en eufle, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulz,
que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me porte tcfmoignage, a qui je prie
de bon cceur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honneur, et a vos amis
plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles recommendations comme a icelle a
qui fe fouhaite Ie plus de bien, qui vous pourra en cc monde avenir. De Weft.
cc 8 jour de Janvier ben haste.

b A niftack in the date correted with Cecil's hand V1110. Aprilia.

No. XX..

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 362.)
Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and'

lady Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr.
David Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.
U POUN the 29 of Ap'yle r567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Maitland

dean of Abcrdene, Mr. Edward Henryson doaqor in the laws, two of the

senators of the college of juflicc, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alexander Syme
advocattis, commiflers of Edn' ; compeered Mkr. Henry KinrolTc, procurator for
Jean Gourdoune countes of Bothwell, confiitute be her for purfcwing of ane proces
of divorcement intendit by her contra James cric Bothwel her hufbaind for adultry,
committed be him with Bcffie Crawfurde the pursuers servant for the time; and
ficklyke, for the :aid erie, compcared AMr. Edmond Hay, who efter he had purfied
and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath dc c;ilumnia, if he ihadi jft caus to pur-
few the said aftion, and obtained it, denyed the libell, and the laidl Mr. IIarric took
the morne, the last day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhilk
day, having produced lbme witnefes, he took the next day, being the I of May,
to do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk i of Nlay, he produced some moe wit-
nefles, and renounced farther probatioune. After quhilk, he desired a tcrm to be
afligned to pronounce sentence. To whom the laid comiiflArs alligned Satterday
next, the 3 of May, to pronounce frencnce therein, fecundum allegata ct probata,
quilk accordingly was given that day in favour of the purfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl of Bothwell contra

his lady, for to have their marriage declared nul, as being contracted against the
canons without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within degrees defendand,
viz. ferdis a kin, and that wyfc for expeding of this proces, there was a com-
miffioune grantit to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognofce and determine it,
and Ro' bishop of Dunkeld, William bishop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd
chanon in Glasgow, and parson of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and
Mr. George Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne oManderftoune cha-
non in Dunbar and prebendar of Beltoune, or any ane of them. ''his commiflione
is datit 27 Aprile 1567, was presented to two of the saids commiflioners, viz.
Mr. And' Crawfurd and Mr. John Manderftoune on Satterday 3 May, by Mr.
Thomas Hepburne parson of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the crle of Bothwell,
who accepted the delegatioune, and gave out their citation by precept, directed,
Decano Chriflianitatis de Hadintone, nec non vicario feu curato eccle. parochir-:
de Creichtouney leu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debite requifitis, ser summoning at
the said erle's initance, both of the lady personally if fie could be had, or other-
ways at the parofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at her dwelling
place before witneflis, primo, fecundo, tertio et peremptorie, unico tamen con-
textu protuplice ediao. And likeways to be witnefies in the said matter, Alex.
bishop of Galloway, who did marry the said erle and his lady, in Halerud-
houle kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Auchnoule justice clerk, Mr.
Robert Creichtoun of Elliok the queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers provolt
of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael -- abbot of Melrofs, and to
sompear before the said judges or any one of them in St. Geils kirk in Edr

os.a

365

Two words
in the paren.
theGs ille-
gible.

A P P E N D IX.

on Monday the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators. Upon the said
5 day, Mr. John Manderltoun, one of the judges delegat only heing present, coin-
peared the aine procurators for both the palties that were in the former proces, AMr.
Edmund Hay ( articulatlie ) and iome of til, witnefibs fTrn-
mioned produced, and received for proving of the fame. The said procurator re-
nounced farder probatioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the 6ih of May, ad
publicandum producta, nempe depositiones ipforum teftium. The quhilk day, poil
publicatas depositiones prMedihtas, Mr. Hen. Kinrofli procurator for the lady in-
laniler objecit objectiones juris generaliter, contra produdta, infiuper renunci ait
ulteriori dcfenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenlu procuratortim hi ci inie caufa,
jud&x prediiStus ftituit craftinum diem pro termina, ad pronunciandani fuam f n-
tentiam definitivan, ex deductis coram eo, in prielcnti cauli et proctfil. Celi-
form hereunto, on Wednelday the 7th of May, the iaid judge gave out his len-
tence in favour of the erle, declaring the marriage to be, and to have been inill
from the beginning, in tcfpct of their contingence in blood, which hindered their
lawlul marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 366.)

A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry Darnley.

. of Mor- T AVIN G the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to write a few
ton's Ar- words unto you. 1 have rec'. fm(e writs from you; and some I have seen
cliives. lately sent to others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of the i6th of May.
luncle B. I have participat the contents there f to flich as 1 thought meet, this mickle I can
No. z. aflure you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was

not one papiftl nor prottflant which did not content that justice flould be done, be
the queen my fov'5. aid and lupport, against fiuch as had committed that abominable
ill murder in your country; but to fay truth, the lack and coldness did not rife from
luch as were called to council, but from such as fliould give life and execution there-
unto. And further, 1 assure you, I never knew no matter of eflate proponed
which had so many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, 1 can fay
unto )ou, no man promoted the matter with greater affcdtion, than the Spalifil
an bafidor. And lure I am that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but
to affim that whofoevcr is guilty of this murder handfafled with advoutrc, is un-
worthy to live. I filall not need to tell you, which be our letts, and stayes firon
all good things here. You are acquainted with thenm as well as I. Needs I muff
confess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, honour, and surety; it be-
hoveth your whole nobility, and namely such as before and alter the murder were
deemed to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and justice the punifliment of
those abominable aits, though we lend you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and
divers others, both honourable and honest, be well known to me, and sundry others
here, to be justifiable in all their aclions and doings; yet think not the contrary
but your whole nation is blemished and infamit by these doings which lately pafied
among you. What we Ihall do I know not, neither do I write unto you as-
furedly, for we be fubjecA unto many mutations, and yet I think we shall either aid
you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so as it appear to us
that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune of France, which

3 will

will be your own deltruaion if you be unadvised. I know not one, no not one of
any quality or estate in this country, which does allow of the queen your fove-
reign, but would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame were done with-
out farther slander, that is to fay by ordinaryjuftice. This 1 fend the 23d of May.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 367.)
Part of a letter from Sir.Nicolas Throkmorton to Cecil, i th of July

I567, from Berwick.
-- SI R, your letter of the 6th of July, I received the roth at Berwick. I am An originl.

sorry to fee that the queen's majetfy's dilpofition altereth not towards the paper otlice,

lords, for when all is done, it is they which mult (land hcr more in fead, than the
queen her cousin, and will be better inftrunents to work Come benefite and quiet-
ness to her majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of
good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throkmorton to Cecil, from Faftcaftle,

12th of July 1567.
SIR, as you might perceive by my letter of the r ith July, I lodged at Fast- Paper-office.

catle that night, accompanyed with the lord Humc, the lord of Lcdington, and

James Melvin, where i was intreated very well, according to the state of that place,
which is fitter to lodge prilbncrs than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is
very strong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I find the
lords his altociatcs and he hath left nothing unthouight of, which may be either to
thir danger, or work them surety, wherein thev do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and lIkewise they confider the fame of England; but as farr
as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto them
through the queen's ir.ajelty's dealing than either they do by the IFrclhcl, or by any
contrary faction amongeft themselves, for they allire themfllves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of 1l ngl;nd by her maj;ety's doings at I.eith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the re.dlis have received great
fruit: yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they have ohfcrved (ucli
things in her n:ajecty's doings, as have ended to the danger of such as she hath
dealt withal, to the overthrow of your own dcfignments, and little to the surety
of any panty: and upon these conliderations and difcourlfs at length, methinketh
I find a dilpolition in tnem, that either they mind to make their bargain with France,
or elCe to deal neither with France nor yovw, but to do what they lhall think meet
for their itite and surety, and to ife their remedy as occalions (hall move tl;em;
meaning neither to irritate Frmnce n,.r England, untill such time as they have made
their bargain afflredly with one of yow ; for they think' it convenient to proceed
with yow both for a while pari p.flii, for that was my lord of Ledington's terms.
I do perceave they take the matter very unkindly, that no better answer is made to
the letter, which the lords did fend to ier majesty, and likewise that they hear
nothing from yow to their fatisfation, I have answercd as well as I can, and have

allcdged

367

atledged their own proceedings so obscurely with the queen, and their uncertainty
hath occasioned this that is yet happened, and therefore her majesty hath font me
to the end I may inform her throughly of the state of the matters, and upon the
declaration of their minds and intents to such purposes as shall be by me proposed
on her majesty's behalf unto them, they fliall be reasonably and resolutely answered.
At thtfe things the lord of Ledington frmiled and shook his head, and said it were
better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do us nor yourf:lves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; S' if there be any truth in Ledington, Ic
Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man of like quality,
and to deliver them of their queen for ever, who shall lead her life in France, in
a abbey reclufed, the prince at the French devotion, the realm governed by a
council of their elcion of the Scottish nation, the forts committed to the cullody
of such as flhall be chosen amongst themselves, as yet I find no great likelihood
that I flall have access to the queen, it is objected they may not Ib displease the
French king, unless they were sure to find the queen of England a good friend;
and when they once by my access to the queen have offended the French, then
they f.y yow will make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queen's
liberty, which was the first head that I proposed, they said that thereby they did
perceive that the queen wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
was but foljy to talk of them, the liberty going before; but said they, if you will
do us no good, do us no harm, and we will provide for our selves. In the end
they said, we flould refuse our own commodity, before they concluded with any
other, which I should hear of at my coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to
fend you the band concluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that fatlion, not
lo much to the prejudice of the lords of Edin', as that which was sent into France;
thus having no more leasure, but compelled to leap on horseback with the lords to
go to Edin', I humbly take my leave of from Faficaftle the izth of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throkmorton being in Scotland. By the queen, the

i4th July i567.
T RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think that the

caures will often change upon variety of accidents, yet we think for sundry

refpeas, not amil, that as yow shall deal with the loids having charge of the young
prince for the committing of him into our realm, so ihall yow also do well in
treaty with the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be fubjeca
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son can-
not be free, if she flall be contented that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness,
within this our realm, being so near as fle knows it is; we shall not faill to yield
her :s good fuerty therein for her child, as can be devised for any that might be
oui child born of cur own body, and shall be glad to flew to her therein the trew
cfleiSt of nature; and herein she may be by yow remembered how much good may
ensue to her son to be nourished and acquainted with our country; and therefore
all things confidered, this occasion for her child, were rather to be fought by her
and the friends of him, than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
fiall so deal with her, both to flay her indeed from inclining to the French pracice,
which is to us notorious, to convey her and the prince into France, and also to
avoid any just offence, that she might hereafter conceive, if she flould hear that
wue should deal with the lords for the prince.

Sir
368

Sir Nicolas Throkmorton to queen Elizabeth, I4th July 1567, from

Edinburgh.
IT may please your majcfty to be advertiscd, I did fignifie unto Mr. Secretary by An olnrinal.

my letters of the i th and I2th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, Pap-r-ullice.

the causes of my stay, my lodging at Faftcaftle, a place of tle lord Humn's,
where I was met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had paflcd
in conference betwixt us, whilefi I was at the said F'aficaftle. Since which time,
accompanycd with the lords aforclaid, and with 400 horlfs lby thiir appl)ui)ntilncnt for
my better conduct, 1 came to Edinr the 12th of this present. Tle 3t being bun-
day appointed for a folcnine communion in this towIn, and alfb a filecnc f ilt hb..
ing published, I could not have conference with the lords which he atliinbled within
this town as I dcfired, that is to fay, the carls of Atholc, and Morton, the lord
Hume, the lord of Lidington, Sir James Lalfour captain of the cattle, Mr. James
M'Gill, and the president of the feflion.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would ufc no

protraae of time in mine audience, so did I likewise to the carle of IMorton, whoin
I met by chance; I was anlfwred by them both, that albeit tile day were deilined
to sacred exercises, such as were there of the council would confilt upon any mo)ycn
touching my access unto them and my conference with them, and said allo, tlait in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I (hould hear from them. About
4 of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th lay, the lord of Lidington came to
my lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others, that
they required me to have patience, though they had dfecrrcd my conference with
them, which was grounded principally upon the absence of the carles of 1Mar alld
Glencairn, the lords Semple, Crighton, and others of the council, f. yinlr al,
that they did confider the matters which I was on your behalsi to icatc witil
them of, were of great importance, as they could not ;ltisfy nor convenienitly trcate
with me, nor give me answer without the advice of the lords, andi others their
associates; the lord of Lidington alio said unto me, that where he perceived, by
his private conference with me in my journey hitherwards, that I prcflsd greatly
to have speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and
others which were here, that ini that matter there was great difficulty for many rc-
fpeats, but specially bccaufe they had refused to the French ambafilidor the like acccfs,
which being granted unto me, might greatly offend the French, a matter which
they desired and intended to efchcw ; for they did not find by your najeliy's deal-
ings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate tlih French king ald to
lore his favour and good intelligence with hin : I anfwcrcd, that as to their relufal
made unto the French ambassador, monficur de Ville Royc was dilpatcied forth of
France before these accidents here happened, and his special errand was to impeach
the queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel (for io indeed fimce my coming hither
I learned his commifiion tended to that end, and to make oficr to the queenl of an-
other marriage), and as to monficur de Crocq, he could have no order forth of
France concerning there matters, since they happened ; and therefore they migii,
very well hold them fuf)peed to have conference with the queen, leafl: they might
treate of matters in this time without inftruaions, and so rather do harm then pood
but your majcfty being advertized of all things which had chanced, ih;d ltcii me
hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm, for the conservation of tl;hir

VOL. II. 3 B honors

honors and credit, and for their surety ; and I might boldly fay unto him, that
your majesty had better deserved than the French had. He said, for his own part,
he was much bound unto your majesty, and had always found great favour and
courtesy in England; but to be plain with you, fir, fayed' he, there is not many
of this aflcmibly that have found so great obligation at the queen your fovercign's
hands, as at the French kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only
persons which took benefit by the queen's majefly's aid at Leith, the reft of the
noblemen were not in the a&ion ; and we think, faiid he, the queen's majesty your
fovercign, by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took as great
benefit by that charge as the rc:lm of Scotland, or any particular pcrfon; and not
to talk with yw as an ambaflatdor, but with fir Nicolas Throkmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davic, found but cold favour of
the queen's majesty's hands, when they were banished forth of their own country;
but 1 would all our whole company were as well willing to accomplish the queen
your sovereign intents and desires as I am; for mine own part, I am but one, and
that of the nieaneft fort, and they be many noblemen and such as have great in-
terest in the matter, mary yow (hall be assured I will knploy myself to imploy
my credit, and all that I may do, to fatisfic the queen your miltrefs, as much
as lyeth in me, and for your own part you have a great many friends in this as-
lemibly, with many other good words. But for conclufton I mufr take this for an
answer to flay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon 1 thought meet to
advertize your majesty what hath passed, and how far forth I have proceeded ; your
expectation being great to hear from hence.

AN)D now to advertize your majcfly of the state of all things, as I have learned
since my coming hither, it may pleafc your majeflty to understand as followeth.

T'IIl queen of Scotland icmaineth in good health in the caslle of Lochleven,

guarded by the lord Linlay and Lochleven the owner of the house; for the lord
Ruthven is imployed in another commiflion, because he began to show great favour
to the queen, and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys,
4 or 5 gentlewomen, and 2 chanmberrs, whereof one is a French woman. The
carle of Buchan, the earle of Murray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her
at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, doe keep her very
liraitly, and as fpr as I can perceive, their rigour proccedeth by their order from
thele men, because that the queen will not by any means be induced to lend her
;.utlih:ity to prosecute the murder, nor will not consent by any perfwafion to
abandion the lord Bothell for her husband, but avoweth constantly that she will
live anid die with him ; and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquish her
crown and kingdom, or the lord Bothel), she would leave her kingdom and dig-
nity, to go as a simple damlell with him, and that lhe will never consent that he
Ihall fare worle or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her detention is, for that

there lords do lee the queen being of to fervent affection towards the carle Bothell
as file is, and being put at, as they should be compelled to be in continuall arms,
and to have occasion of many battles, he being with manifest evidence notoriously
deiedied to be the princ;pall murderer, and the lords meaning protscution of jus-
tice agali.11 him according to his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as a marriage not to

be fuff'crd for many relipeas, which separation cannot take place if the queen be
at liberty, and have power in her handS..

THEY

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoined with the danger of the

prince, but as far as I can perceave, they intend not either to touch the quein inl
fuerty or in honor, for they do spe'ak of her with refpeS and reverelnc, : red do
affirm, as I do learn, that the conditions aforelaid accompliflicd, they will both put
her to liberty, and rcflore her to her eflate.

THESE lords have for the guird of their town 450 harqulbufiers which Ib in

every good order, for the entertainment of which companys, untinl :11 ni attlrs be
compounded, they did fie unto your majc'ty, to a;id thein with fiech 'lium of moncy
as hath been mentioc·id tb) I.r. Secretary by the lord of l .vdington's writine,
amounting as I perceive to ten or twelve thouiiflnd crowns of tie

ITHTEY were lately advertized that the French king doth mind to f id hithelr

monsieur de la Chapell des Urfinc, a knight of the French u

'rcl , ard alw:a)s ve il

affe&ionate to the lionli of (;uylei, and llowfocvcr la F'olcf, Villlarov, and (ii
Crocq have used langiuge in tlhe quccn's favour and to thelio lors ditl'ldva:t.v!c
there, to your majesty ; la Crocq duth carry with him such matter as fhil1 be lit tl
to the queen's advantagc; so as it is thought the French kig-, upon his cornlili
to his preclnce, will rather fatisfie thelords, thail pleafiire the (l.i'un ; for tie v have
their party lo well made, as the French vill r ather make their profli by tl,cii, thlin
any other way.

HEREVWITH I fend your majcfty the lad bolnd agreed on, and lfined by the Ila-
miltons, the earl of Argyll, -luntly, and sundry others at Dunibarton.

NEVERTI-HELESS, since my coming to this town, the I-lamiltunis have lcnt unto

me a gentleman of their furitname named Robert HIamnilton, with a letter from the
biflhop of St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy wlin;rcof I fcnd your
majesty and mine answer unto them, relerring to the bearer tile declaration of Comi;
things, as these did by him unto me.

'1 HE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me wvi;!t a letter

and credit, I have used him as 1 did the others, the copy of both lwhich letters 1
fend your majesty alfb. The lord Harrys hath dllb Ifet uito me hut not 'irittci,
and I have returned unto him in like fort.

AGAINST the 2oth day of this month there is a gcncril;l aftlclbly of all tlie

churches, flires, and boroughs towns of this realm, narmely of fiCch as be con-
tented to repair to thfee lords to this town, where it is thought the whole tlate of
this matter will be handeled, and I fear me much to the queen's diladva;ltage and
danger; unless the lord of Lidington and some others which be heft alffclted unto
her do provide some remedy ; for I perceave the great number, and in mlnnclr alT,
but chiefly the common people, which have aflfied in thele idoings, do grcatly dif-
honour the queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation, o(r er defrtrutlion ; I
used the heft means I can (confidering the furic of the world here) to prorogue
this assembly, for that appeareth to me to be the bcft remedy : I may not (peak of
diflblution of it, for that may not be abiden, and I should thereby bring nmyf)ilf
into great hatred and peril. The chiefcft of the lords which be here prelent at
this time dare not show tb much lenity to the queen as I think they could be con-
tented, for fear of the rage of the people. 'lIhe women he inuot furious and im-
pudent against the queen, and yet the men be mad enough; tb as a Itrangcr over
bufie may loon be made a sacrifice amongst them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their adherents wouid put

their force into the fields against the 24th of this month, but I do not find tl.at
intent so true, as the common bruit goeth.

3 B 2 T

THE earle of Argyll is in the Highlands, where there is trouble among his own
countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by there lords much desired here, and I do believe your

majesty m-y so ufc him, and dirce him, as he hiall be able to promote your pur-
pole with thecF men.

THE earle of Argvll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible---I do find

amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two strange and sundry
humoturs.

HAMILTONS do make show of the liberty of the queen, and prosecute that with

great cirnitiicefs, because they would have there lords deltroy her, rather than she
ihould be recovered from them by violence; another time they leem to desire her
liberty and Bothweli's deflruCtion, because they would compali a marriage betwixt
the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

'1 HE calle of Argyll doth affect her liberty, and Bothwell's deftruLion, because
he would marry the queen to his brother.

AND )et neither of them, notwithstanding their open concurance (as appear-

cth by their bond), doth discover their minds to each other, nor mind one end;
Knox is not here, but in the welt parts, he and the reit of the miniftcrs will be
here at the great alcmbly, whos austerity against the queen I fear as much as any
man's.

BY forne conference which I had with some of this councill, me thinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland to leave
this realm, and to retire herself into either England or into France, but noft
willingly into England, for such -- and miflikeings as she knoweth hath been,
and is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of per-
sons deleagued, and authorized by her, or to Come one or more.

AND it plale your majcfly, I think it not amiss to put yow in remembrance,

that in cafe the said queen come into England by your allowance, without the
French king's concnt, flhe shall loose her dowery in France, and have little or
nothing from hence to entertain her; and in care she do go into France with the
king's contentment, she may be'an instrument (if file can recover favour, as time
will help to cancell her disgrace) either by matching with some husband of good
quality, or by some other devise, to work new unquietness to her own contry, and
lo conlequently to your majesty's.

'IHEREFORE it may please your majetfy to confider of this matter, and to let

me know your pleasure with convenient speed, how I ihall answer the fame, if it
be propounded unto me, either by the queen or by the councill, as a piece of the
end and composition. For I am sure, of late, ile hath seemed very desirous to have
the matter brought to pass that she might go into England, retaining her estate
and jurifdition in herself, though The do not exercise it; and likewise I understand
that some of this council which be least asseted to her safety do think there is no
other way to save er. Thus Almighty God preserve your majesty in health,, ho-
nour, and all felicity ; at Edin' the 14th July 1567.

Sir
372

o/3
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to queen Elizabeth, the i8th of July i567,

from Edinburgh.

T may please your majefly, yow might perceave by my letters of the i6th, how An original.
far I had proceeded with thcfe lords, and what was their altfwcr; since which l'ape'-oliKc.

time I have fpokcn particularly with the e.ile IMorton, the lord of Lidinglton, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this castle, at whose hands I cannot perceav. that as
vet acccrs to the queen to Lochlevcn will be granted me, tlaying theml'lves still
by the absence of the lords and others their afliciates, which (they lay) they look
for within two days; and for that I find, by likcliho)od and apparent prelumpttons,
that mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have thought good not to
defer this dispatch untill [ have a relolute anlver in that matter.

MAY it therefore pleale your m.ijetty, to uldJcrfland [lobcrt Melvin returned from

the queen in Lochlevin, to this town the 6th of July, anld lrought a letter fron
her written of her own hand to thelb lords, which duloh contain, as 1 underltand,
matter as followeth-A rcqueft unto them to have conlidecration of her healtl, and
if they will not put her to liberty, to chinge the place of restraint to the cattle of
Stirling, to the end lhe might have the comfort and company of her fbl;, and if
they will not change her from Lochilvcn, ihe required to have tome other gentle-
women about her, naming none.

To have her apothecary, to have some modlet miniftcr.---To have an im..

broiderer to draw forth such work as file would be occupied about, and to haove a
varlet of the chambcr.--'Touching the government of the realm the maketh two
oflers, which arc but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not fpc-
cified, but referred to lobert elviii's credit, the one is to commit it only and
wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the lords whose names cnfuc, allitled
with such others as they shall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattcl-
rault, the earls of Morton, Murray, Marr-, and Glencairn.

SHE hath written unto them thit I might have access unto her. --She requireth

further, that 'if they will not treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to uft
her as the king their sovereign's daughter (whom many of them knew) and as
their prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her hus-
band, nor relinquifl him; which matter will do her molt harm of all, and har-
deneth there lords to great severity against her.

SHE yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the murder.
I HAVE the means to let her know that your majesty hath sent me hither for her
relief.

I HAVE also persuaded her to conform herself to renounce Bothell for her husband

and to be contented to fulffr a divorce to pal's betwixt them; flhe hath i.1t me
word that (he will in no ways content unto that, but rather die; grounding herlelf
upon this realon taking herself to be Ieven weeks gone with child; by renouncing
Bothell, flhe flouid acknowledge herself to be with child of a battard, and to have
forfeited her honour, which the will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to
save her own life and her child, to choose the le:it hard condition.

MR. KNOX airived here in this town the 6th of this montn, with whom I have
had some conference, and with Mr. Creig also, the other minifler of this town.

1 IIA\VE

I HAVE perfwadcd with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I find them both

very austere in this conference, what they ihall do hereafter 1 know not, they are
furnished with many arguments, some forth of the scripture, some forth of his-
tories, foim grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon
practices used in this realm, and some upon the conditions and oath made by their
prince at her coronation.

ITHn biflop of Galloway, uncle to the earle of Huntlcy, hath sent hither to

these lords, that his nephew the earle and some others of that fide may, at Lin-
lithgow or at Stirling, have some communication with some appointed on this fide,
assuring them that there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to con-
curre with these, assuring further that they will not diflent for triffles or unnecefiary
things, and (as I ami given to underfnmdl) they can be pleased the queen's re-
ilraint be continued until the murder be pursued in all perfbns, whereby the fepa-
ration of the queen and Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the le-
curity for all men, and a good order taken for the governance of the realm int
tranquillity.

CAPTAIN Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark and served at New-

haven, did the 16th of this month (accompanied with one of his soldiers, or ra-
ther the soldier as the greater fame goeth) kill one WVilTon a seaman, and such a
one as had great cflimaticn with thelc lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, ho-
nefty, and willingnets in this action ; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself; their
quarrel was about the flip which took Blacketer, which flip was appointed by
thele lords to go to the north of Scotland to impeach the paflage of the carle Bo-
thell, in cafe he went either to the isles, or to any other place; by the death of
this man this enteciprize was dashed.

THE bishop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth dcfire to speak with
the lord of Lidington.

T'HE abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for fir James Balfour, captain of the caftlc,
to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majefly in my lafl, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

dilever these lords and them ailindcr, but would concur in all things (yea in any
extiemity against the queen) so as that they might be aflured the prince of Scotland
were crouned king, and should die without ifuc, that the earle of Lenox's son
living fbould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverently, mildly, and charitably

of their queen, so as 1 cannot gather by their speech anv intention to cruelty or
violence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her
life, by reafbn that the people aflcmbled at this convention do mind vehemently the
destruSlion of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongst all cftates (saving of

the counsellors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor privilcdge to commit
murder nor adultery, thaii any other private person, neither by God's laws, nor by
the laws of the realm.
T THE earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and associates, be put to the horn

by the ordinary justice of this town, named the lords of the session; and com-
mandment given to all flhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all
other his followers and icceiptors.-The earl of Bothell's porter, and one of his
other lervitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confefled such sundry cir-
cumftances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said earl was one of the prin-

I I cipal

cipal executors of the murder, in his own person accompanved with sundry others,
of which number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three of them,
that is to fay, two of the ()rmiflons of Tivotdall anld one Havbnrn of Biolton
the Imcds would be glad that none of the murderis thould halve any f;avur or
receipt in England, and hereof their desire is, that the oflicers upon tlhe) ho Ier ray
be warned; Bothell doth still remain in the north parts, but th- lord Scaton and
Fleming, which have been there, have utterly abandoned him, anid do repair
hitherwards.-The intelligence dloth grow daily betwixt thtile lords, and thore
which held of; and notwitli.fnrii rg theft lords have fcnt an hundred and JiJ'tv har-
qubutflers to Stiiling, to keep the town and pafltire from furp-i.e ; and to have
they done in like manner to St. Johnston, which be the two pa:lin s from the north,
and weft to -this town, I do unders:tand the captain of lDunbar is rnurch r uolled in
fortifying that place, I do mervile the carriages be not impeached othli wcil than
they be.

OF late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the said cafilc, which

hath been furprized ; and thereby matter is dilcfvcred which maicth little to the
queen's advantage.

THUS, having none other matier worthy your rnaicfty's ktrnwcldge, I hcrecch

God to piofper your majelly with long life, perfer . hialth, and profpecrous filicitv.
At Edinburgh the 8ith of July 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throkmrorton to the rihlt honourable the earl

of Lcicrtecr, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her ma-
jery's molf honourable privy council.

BY my former dispatches tent to her majcfy, and Mr. Secretary, since the 12tlh 2'ti' of Joy

Jos July, vour lordlihip might h:lve perceivedl the itate of this cotirtry, arnd to '7'

what end thef matters be like to comeu: so as not to trouble your lorlihip with iper-i
many words ; this quteni is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal eflate, her si l0 tieon
son to be crow.ned king, and flhe detaincd in prison within this realm, and tlhe flume
to be govern-ld, in tih young king's name, by a counccl, confitting of ccrtaiin of
the nobility, and other wife men of this realm ; o as it is easy to be fern th-it the
power and ability to do anly tiling to the commlodity of the queen's najecly, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in mainer whilly, rcit in the hands of tIhecl
lords, and others their aflbciates, alfembled at 1 dinburglh. Now if the qlueln's
majeity will fill perfilt in her former opinion towards thi queen of Scotland (unlto
whom she flhall be able to do no good), then I do plainly fee th.t there lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the Flrcnch king can wish, to all
intents and purposes. Andi as for the Hanliltons, the earls of Arguile, Huintlyc,
and that faction, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the P'rench devotion. Then this is the dtate of things so
come to pats of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjolined
unto them, to all purpolcs, as ever it was; and what an inllrutlelnt, thec yung
prince will prove, to unqiiet England, I report me to your lordfhlipi wifilom;, and
therefore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circurnitanes, i truill
your lordShips will well bethink you in time (for 'tis high time), how to adtvili
her mnjeftv, to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be
in her pofliclionr, or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And amoingIt other

things,

A P P E N D I X.

things, that I can imagine, for the firfi degree nothing is more meet to bring this
to effcLl, than to allure this company here afhembled, to bear her majesty their
favour. Some talk hath pafled between the lord of Liddington and me, in certain
conferences, about this matter. By him I find, that when her majesty (hall have
won thefi men to her devotion, the principal point that will make them con-
formable to deliver their prince into England, will reft upon the queen, and the
realms enabling him to the succession of the crown of England, for fault of iflue
of the queen's majesty's body, some other things will also be required, as the
charge of the said prince and his train to be at the charge of England. I do well
perceive that these men will never be brought to deliver their prince into England,
without the former condition, for the succession of England; for (faith Lidding-
ton) that taking place, the prince shall be as dear to the people of England as to
the people of Scotland; and the one will be as careful of his preservation as the
other. Otherwise, he faith, all things confidered, it will be reported that the
Scottiflmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as those which commit
the sheep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion, your lordships may per-
ceive here will be the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering of him upon
hostages, he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of the succession not be-
ing accomplished, the nobility and the gentry will never content to leave them-
selves deftiture of their sovereign, upon any hostages, neither upon any promises,
nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were not good for yourselves
(faith he) that the matter were so handled; for then you (hould adventure all your
goods in one ihip, which might have a dangerous effeCt, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to consent to cftablifhing any successor to the
crown. And then, how unmcte were it, that her majeity having in her pofleffion
already all such persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her custody. For so there might follow, without good capitula-
tions, a firange and dangerous iflue, tho' the queen your niftrefs do think that such
imaginations could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us
on her behalf. What is come to pass since my last dispatch, and how far forth
things are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed by my letters sent unto
her majesty, at this time. And so I pray Almighty God, prelerve your lordship
in much honour and felicity. At Edinburgh this 24th of July 1567.

IT may please your good lordship to make my lord Stuard partner of this letter.

The queen to fir Nicholas Throkmorton.

By the queen.

6th August TRUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as much as we do
1567. Aconfider that you have now a long time remained in those parts without expe-

dition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet, feeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that state,
which good rcalbn would have required, that you should continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therifore, is, that you ihall, immediately upon the receipt hereof,
fend your servant Middlemore unto the lords and estates of that realm, that are
assembled together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but seem

very

·very firanae unto us, that you lavii l. L.Clel feit fionl us, of filch :oo.tl :itnt(, to
deal with them, in matters tntid i;:, i n.:clh to their ov,,n qi

e t, and La tie i

of tl;e vhole eiate of their counti , rncy hav'e f() t '.r tfi:')ttecn themfclvce, ail; d Io
slightly regarded us and our good i:'.ni;:;g, not oly in

i .l,:'in: to he..! '.;, ai

deferringl your acclcf; to the qu cen th !ir - lovcreinc , b:t ;:iio , \Wr .h i is il'.iiiei of
all, in n ot vouchliln to mlake :iny a;! 'w,: r

i t unt u. And altho' t(lte dc'liL s be

f'ich, indeed, as were not to be looked ir' ;;L thilir hn:Ids, )ct do we find theit ul;igi -
and proceeding towards their lovcr.aign alid tjucln, to overpass all the rci il i)
frange a degree, as we for (fur part, a.ld we luppoul the wihoe world hceidts, c:n-
1not but think them to have therein gone l f:b r biyond the duty o( subi e ts, as nuHf
needs renain to their perpetual taucihe l r e'.er. Anid therleore vc ihall 'li\y, tlhat
we have tho't good, without conlfuniiig anlly longer time: in vain, to revcoke vot to
our prefi)tncc, lequiring them to gralnt you liience anld pi)llor't 1; to do, which
when you fihall have obtained, we will that you make your repair hither, unto us,
with as convenient speed as you may. Givecn, &:c.

Indorfed 6th August, 1567.
Throkmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil knilgt, one

of her majefly's privy council and principal secretary, give thellb.

S I R,
w AHIAT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of I\urray, and Mons. de

Linnerol, you liall understand by my letter to her majelty, at this time.

I'he French do, in their negotiations, as tcey do in their drink, put water to their
wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart
how the queen sleep, whether file live or (lie, whether fie be at Iblerty or in prizon.
The mark they sloot at, is, to renew their old league ; and can he as well con-
tented to take it of this little king (howlb'oer his title be), and the anme by the
order of these lords, as othcrwilc. Lyneroll came but yeticrday, and niethink-
eth he will not tarry long ; you may guces how the French will feck to difplealf
these lords, when they chaiiged the coming of La Chapelle des Ourfins for this
man, because they doubted that di la Clhapelle thould not be grateful to them,
being a papist. Sir, to fpleak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwil;f, Ime
thinkeththe call of Murray will run the course that thole men do, and be partlaker
of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly against the tragedy, and the
players therein, than he, fb little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear al inkling
that Ledington is to go into Fralcec, whiich do as nmuch miflilke, as any thiii:,
for our purpofi. I canl afiire you the whole protcltlLts ot I'ranc will live ald ml di
in thcl men's quarrels; and, where there is bruit amoin ft you, that aid fhlouild
be sent to theadverfa party, and that a.r tigues Ihould come hi ther with obme furcc;
Mlonf. Boudelot hath allurcd me of his honour, that inltleid of .Iartigics
coming againit them, he will come with as good a force to fiiccour them: and if
that be (ent under menier conduct, lRoibert Stuart si all coma' with ias many to
fortify thcm. But the conitable h.iti a.fiircd thelic lords, that the king meanlletl no
way to of;ind them. Sir, 1 pray you find Iny revocation convenient, and peced
you to further it, for I am here noiv to no piurpofe, unless it be to kindle thlei
lords more againlt us. 'Ihus I do humbly take my leave of you, fronm ldeCburgh
the Iith of August, 1567.

Yours to uif e and conImand.
VOL. II. q C The

) 7

izIll Aug.
I5567.
Paper office.
Front the ori-
ginal.
___ __

-'

AFTER my good commendations to your good lordships, this flall be to a.l-

vertize you, that the queen's majefly my sovereign having sent me hither !er

ambafl.Tdor to the queen her lifter your sovereign, to communicate unto her such
matter as she thought meet, confidering the good amity :nd intelligence betwixt
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordfiiips know) contrary to the
duty of all good 1ubjeds, for the enlargement of whose person, and the reftitutiun
of her to her dignity, her majesty gave me in charge to treat with there lords as-
fembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as mi!h:
be, for the safeguard of the young prince, the punishment of the' late horrible
murder, the diflblution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell,
and laflly for their own sureties. In the negociation of which matters I have
(as your lordfliips well know) fpcnt a long time to no purpose, not being ab!e to

5 pievail
A P P E N D IX.

The queen to Nicholas Throkmorton.
TRUSTY and well-beloved, we greet you well. We have, within these two

days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d, of

this month, having not before those received any seven days before; and do find,
by there your letters, that you have very diligently and largely advertired us of all
the hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we nothing like, fowe trust
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive some reformation. For we cannot
perceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the doubts moved by the
Hamiltons, who howsoever they may be carried for their private respects, yet those
things which they move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For if they
may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their fove-
reign declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as
keep her in captivity, how should they believe the reports, or obey them, which
do report it ? and therefore our meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly
underfland, that we do well allow of their proceedings (as far forth as the fame
doth concern the queen their sovereign for her relief), and in such things as shall
appear reasonable for us therein to do, for the queen our filler, we will be ready
to perform the fame. And where it is so required, that upon your coming thence,
the lord Scroope (hould deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings to us,
and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize
the lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him to shew himself favourable
to them in their ations, that may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen,
and maintenanr'e of her authority. And as we willed our secretary to write unto
you, that upon your meflage done to the earl of Murray, you might return, so
our meaning is you shall. And if there our letters mhall meet you on the way,
yet we will have you advertise both the lord Scroope and the Hamiltons, of our
meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 381.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmnorton to the archbiflop of St. Andrew's and

the abbot of Arbrothe.

13th Aug.
1567. Paper-office,
from a copy
which fir
Nichola sfent
to the queen.

prevail in any thing with those lords, to tlic qucen my lbvcreign's fatisfaion. Of
which firange proceedings ton. zds her majeiy, and undutiful behaviour towvards
their sovereign, I have advertili(d the queen's majety; file (not being minded to
bear this indignity) hath given me in charge to declare her further pic;alure unto
them, in such fort as they may well perceive her niaj.t- fv doth disallow of their
proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked me. Aid further hath given ie iu
charge to communicate the fame unto your lordships, requiring you to let me
know, before my departure hence (which liall be, God willing, as soon as I have
received anfiver from you') lhat you and vour confederates will afi;uredl-Iv d, to
set the queen your filvercign at liberty, antl to rcltore her to icr formne;dignity
by force or otherwie ; feeing thele lotds haive rcful'd all other mediation, to the
end the queen's majcfty my bovereigil may concur with your lor.lihips in this ho-
nourable enterprizc.

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your afociates, your lordfcips can neither

commulnicate this matter amongst you, nor receive rclolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so imany of you as may confer
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your anlfwcr here in this
town by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthelt, being the Igth of this Au1gul;
for 1 intend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon XVcdnefday folloving.
Thus 1 most humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the I 3th
of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord H-errys.
yOUR good lordship's letter of the 13th of August I have received tlc igth 2.th Aug.

of the fame. For answer whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, 1567.

that I will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already thoroughly in- Plpcr-oflice,
flructed of the queen's majesty my sovereign's pleasure concerning the detention of from a copy
the queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief. vkici fir

To the first her majetfy hath given in charge, to ule all kinds of perfuafiol in Nicholas Cent

her name, to move there lords aflembled at Edenburgh to deflit from this violent to f'rr'eary
and undutiful behaviour, which they used toward their sovereign. And in this part, Cecil.
besides the shew of many reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with
them, her majesty hath willed me to use some plain and severe fpecch unto them,
tending so far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform thetf
their outrageous proceedings exercised against their fovercign, that then they nmi.,ht
be allured her majesty neither would nor could indure such an indignity to be done
to the queen, her good coutfin and neighbour.

AND notwithltanding thefc my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby; for as yet neither will they conlent to the enlargement,
neither susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to
treat any more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have advertised the
queen's majesty my sovereign, expecting daily her majesty's further order; and as
1 shall be advertised thereof, ib will not fail to signify the fame to your good lord-
ihip; and'in the mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordllip hath
written unto me. Thus with my due commendations to your good lordlhip, I

3 C 2 commit

commit the fame to almighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and service
that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th August 1567.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 39I.)
Account of lord -lerreis's behaviour in the parliament held De-

cember I5, 567.
Paper-office. H-E lord Ilerrys made a notable haranguc, in the name of the duke and him-

lfelf, their friends and adherents (the dii;e iimfiel, the 1c.l of CaliTlles, and

the abbot of Kilwinning being also prcfent) to pcrfuade the union of the whore
realm in one mind. Whicrcin hle did not spare to fLt forth solemnly the great praise
that part of this nobility did defervc, which in the beginning took n'eanes for
punifhmcnt of the earl Bothlicll, as alio sccing thl queen's inordinat affecition to
that wicked man, and that f;e could not be irnduced by their perliafion to leave
him, that in fcquef'ring her perfo v.within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noble-
men. That their honourable doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives
and lands, to'avenge their native country from the f.:nd(lrous reports that were
spoken of it among other nations, had well deserved that all their brethren fIhould
join with them in so good a cause. That he and they, in whose names he did
speak, would willingly, and without any compulsion, enter themselves in the falme
yoke, and put their lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen hertelf were in Scotland, accompanied with 20.CCO
men, they will be of the fame n:ind, and fight in our quarrel. He ho:ed thIe c-
mainder noblemen of their party, Huntly, Aiguile, and others, which had not as
yet acknowledged the king, would come to the fain:e conformity, whercunto he
would also earncflly move them. And if they will remain obllinate, and refuse to
qualify themfelvcs, then will the duke, he and their fiiends, join with us to corre":
them, that othciveife will not reform themfclves. So plausible an oration, and
more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves could have made. lie did not
forget to term my lord regent, by the name of regent (there was no mention at all
of the earl of Murray), and to call him grace at every word, when his fptcches
were direcled to him, accompanying all his words with low courtesies alter this
manner.

No. XXV. (Vol. 1. p. 409.),

QjcCen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

M A DAM,

C iot. Lib. v A LT HO UI ( H the neceflity of my cause (which niakrth nmc to be importuna
Cal. i. to you) do make you to judge that I am out cos the :wa'; yet fich as h lve
A copy, and not my paflion, nor the respects whereof you are persuaded, ; h

ill think that I do

probably a as my cause doth require. Madam, 1 have not accucd you!, neither in vord'.,
tranilation. nor in thought, to have used yourfilf evil towards me. And I believe, ithat you

have no want of good underffanding, to keep you from perfwafion againllit (Ul;

nat! ;l

natural good inclination. ELti ill the mcan time I cain't cihlic (having my fcnfis)
but perceive very evil slurthc.rice iln m1y n rmaiters, since tiy' colini g hiilhr. 1 tI ouIhit
that I h:rd fnliiicitiltiv dilrouilcl unto you the .!ileo:uminoditi es, which this dcl:ay
bringtr! I!:.;th o ni. A.nd cfpccialy that they tiink in this Inr:;t onth ofAt ,ugilit,
to hld .1 i;:rli.iaclt a!:ainfl me and all my servants. And in ti.e mcan timn', I un
flayed herc, anl )Ce' will you, that 1 i 'slhirl put mySelf further into your couintry
(withrout fcinr n you), and remotve nie f;rther frl'o I ine; ':l.l there do me this
difliionoiiur at tilc' I';i 'c of mly rci ls, as to !end conmnifiolicrs to h:'r themn againil
me, as yil v- ,' l do to ;1 nll'c liibj;t, ;1dl r h1e:; m: by niout'. IN ovw, imadl ;:i,
I hilv 'C plrOlnrilL'd you) to C()iome to yotl, an l having (terc M:l lle 11) llrl i;llt cor
plaint of tlicf r: bel- , and they colll g thither, l)ot '.s p!)..i.!i.ir<, rliot is lu!'j2ct:',
to ;iiii\'l r. I wvr!.d !h-ivc bcl'oi ilt yoti t) lh.eir m)', j ',itiit

.i ) (i tlr. t which ti'v

h:vc ive lfi ' l rti'.:tl .a: .iniit ile, and if I co'lil iint :lreC i'ii iLi:[thccrc.;, l;u ) 'LI lit:
theiln d:!;l :'.

r l orl h i:ids of my ciiul .nind let It0 ; or (clih Ils I ar:. laiu: tr I'o

as you i',', if iv , rc culp b! e 1 i.'o;'d b' 1h.'ter a.l' Ii.l; ibut b'nig no)t (l, ci:,l'
accept ti'q d( honour at their hailndl, Ilt bcliit in lp' 'i ;I tl) V '.vii! .;. ;i id
accuL; ni- bciorc y>iur comtiiliilonic5, wlhereof I c:In't i._';: AiInd I'lL' ii yi; thiri
it to bi ;iar.iinft youir iil irur ind co,il

o i,::'._c to d

.tiii.r v iic. , I

: :' L yi)'- I;'.,t

you wvill not bc nrinc tnirn;'., untili yotu i1.iy I'c low I ca. dillci rr' my/:f t ivjrv
way, and to fufi'er mie go inlo I'rancc, whe'rc I ha;ve a dowry to maintilin mi; tor at
least to go into Scotland, with afil'lrincc til.lt if there come lany i1.r:'i ,'!lr tiitiiCr, [
will bind mfb li for their return witliout iay Ip, :jrdlice to vyot, ori 1t 'is y 'uIr no1
to do thus, i protcil thait I will not inmputec it to f.llthood. i, 1 I-cc. ivr fir nl clis i:i vn
counttr, withiiot nmaking you ainy oLhcir (ilichi:rc for it. D)o with mny h),), :,s \'ir
will, tihe hono'ir or lilanic shall be youris. FIor l had r.itlecr d:c' lil'. , and ti.llt iV liUth-
fUl fel.va.nts mill:l b) ficcoured (tiho' you v;-ullJ not no) by I:.iigeciF taii: to .aii:.r
them to be utterly uindoil!, upl)on hope to ICCoiVC, iii tilmeC to CI, ip.l ti:!lir
commodity. 'I'here be many things to nove nmc to :e.ir that I ihill h.iivi to d(i,
in this country, with others th.in with you. But ;)raiirltli ais ;isr iiiil' i.ith lii-
lowcd upon my l:ft Imo;an, I hoild my peace, hi'.1).jn \ i.tt mllay Il.ip.. I hc ;:s
lecf to t eli' } ll)y fortune, as to fcek it, and not l:lnd it. ['itlrh:e, it pl.:d

y ii

to gri.vc !ic"nlfe to mIx' flib! jeSts t o g :o and cone. This hals .-' n 'itl , iv l',rl
Scmroop :ind M.r. KInor'!s (::s tihey ' !iy) by yoar coini:iin;liiiinc, ii. le, i. xi wcul
not depart hl:;jce to v .U'

cll;l r; , r.nti!l I h.d a.i s.ver of this l, ' i (!i ;,ed
them tilt vou ricquirci ny)' rili.vr'l, ' .i). il li Lxw'O poinis, cC ntiinilcd illn (oU Ii'l .I.

T'I iE n:' . , t

t'

ii. tii i :'Ou.' i y (ii

id. innd : , I :a;n c<>ir c r, ) vI .i t [) I ,.t::

ii :v , ') in

to i'or,, t'l ' ii hi : i'.,i''.' ;r!.:.!, 1

i; ::i.l d:'.iie Lit.' .i

, Ili ine i .iI' .L:.'/, r;id

thi--. rcl j! rc 'i;;lr alid, .:;:,l o'

i,.ck til:.i :,I, i-.1ii' ! 1'/ i :: , ,l-

pli.int t.) i.¢ ' ,i t'.tc I ;i ;o i cata ill 'il) i' .

( :;

:1 .' i o ::li '".d t r

plinccs t(o h ,.'e : c:.;cct thereunto, as ll)y c:.ij.: i;t: -,Z.] ; ..;: ,io )'iii, l

::i

,.,.n I l .t

of ail, wh n \ ou i .i ii ave cx rnii..d

ior| ciinf lL r

1'.,'1

C :.I

!P , a

;.,i i

'li m

I 1 i..'r

,itlncsl:.- - A\ n..l l tlc (tl;::r , v !; '- ,

is to c .tic iL'itl-ir in,) y,:r Cii L

co r ,

1.;,i rliot

to cor.e to '..ulr p1ie lnicc, I will citul.i; thlat :, no ii .;;r, l)lit :11 ti.!:

- it I.: !:!

Colltrally , ol -,.:'i:';r: it i's a thing fol.' I d. il li., l l!. ':

p. i, , :l, t. ;(.'t!]: l rt,)

li;e m v'lord l- i [; icr, I.' L cLan't bi V.'ilio hli! lii.':, lt.vi, ', ln{n:: '.i r.,; ac(aIr.,:,Ii

i'.l':

an:d ain", to 'rit(:cr ie, if it plcalb you, v,,tior t lnr.Jtr C

c .;, L,' t .'I. .;-* l,,i),-

wlhilihcrsicvcr it ic ou0t of this country. * i1 ilI lu eI'e : .'l'l tii l denl)'

ii; thl:s

limi0 c re.!iucil: ir youtr honouui's f'ik', (Li-:Z it dathll i:,ii p!.;- you
'o r:eL yrr)r

l. !. ll ,l

am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And if God permit my caules
to fiucceed well, I shall be bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet [
can't blame you. As for my lord Fleeming, secing that upon my credit you have
suffered him to go home to his house, I warrant you he shall pals no further, hut
flall return when it shall please you. In that you trust me, 1 will not (to die for
Perhapsfor. it) deceive you. But from Dumbarton I answ'er not, when my 1. Fleeming shall

he in the Tower. For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive fuc-
cour, if I don't assure them of yours; no, tho' you would charge ine withal, for
I have left them in charge, to have more refpe'1 to my fervints and to my eltate,
than to my life. Good filler, be of another mind, win tihe heart, and al! shall be
yours, and at your commandment. 1 thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might
have sien you. Alas ! do not as the serpent, that floppeth his hearing, for I am
no enchanter, but your sifter, and natural cousin. If Cal'ar had not disdained to
hear or read the complaint of an advertiser, he had not so died; why fluould
princes ears be tlopped, feeing that they are painted so long? meaning that they
should hear all and be well adviled, before they anfwcr. I am nut of the nature
of the basilisk, and less of the chamelion, to turn you to my likeness, and tho' I
fhlould be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you are sufficiently arm'd with
confiancy and with justice, which I require of God, who give you grace to ufi
it well with long and happy life. From Carlife, the 5th of July 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. 1. p. 411.)
Part of a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. i563,

from Bolton.

An original. - T surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form,
l'apcr-cliice. but also the chief article of the religion of the gospel, namely juflification

by faith only: and she heareth the faults of papistry revealed, by preaching or
otherwise, with contented cars, and with gentle and weak replys, and file doth not
fecm to like the wolfe of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, I2 Sept. 1568,

from Bolton.
--- I T came to this queen's ears of late that {he was bruited to be lately turned

to the religion of the gofpell, to the great difiking of the papitis here-

abouts, which thing ihe herself confefled unto me, and yellerday, openly in the
great chamber, when the afienmbly was full, and some papists present, (he took oc-
cafion to speak of religion, and then openly she professed herself to be of the papit
religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame, more earnefily than she had
done a great while afore, altho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that
the effect of her speech was only to shew her zeal; and afterwards to me alone,
when I mifliked to fee her become so confidently backward in religion, Why, said
ihe, would you have me to lose France and Spain, and all my friends in other

places,
582

A P P E N DI X..

places, by seeming to change my religon, and yet I am not afflured the queen my
good sifter will be my aflured friend, to the fatisfaRion of my honour and cx-
pcetation.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 412.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop and fir F. Knollys,

September 3(1, 1568.
M Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordships, I am informecd bv James Borth- Cot Lib

wick, lately come from the qucen's maijelty your fovcranc, that is (chawin to Cal. C.

her highnels, I fhuld have ridden in Crafuridinure, fen my lalt cuming into this An oli in;l
realm, upon the carl of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld h:ive cautfi, or in his, own
been of counfrll to Scottifinen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her hand.
majelty's fubjecls.

MY lords, 1 thought it right needful because your lordships is, by your fove-

rane, commanded to attend upon the queen's majeily my miitrcfs, io havinLg
daily access in thir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbily defriing tih.t your
lordships will, for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither conrented, nor any wife li.id knowledge of any

Scottifman's riding in England, to do the fulhjecs thereof hurt il hodics or goods,
fenc the siege of Leith ; and as I understand it Thill be fund true, that giif ony
fie open hurt be done, it is by the queen my fovcreign's dilobicnts, and that I
have not ridden nor hurt no Scottifim.ni, nor colmmlainded no hult to be done
to them, fen my coming froin the queen's majcfty of England, it is will lcknd, for
that never ane will complain of me.

I HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmurc nor ever the earl of MIturray iha

done, and will be loather to do them any harm than he will. Except the queen's
majelly your fovercign, commianld sic false reports to be tryit, quhereof this is
.]togidder an inventit leafing, her grace f1ll be trublit, and tyne the hearits of true
men here, quhom of sic report tfll be made, that baicth would fcrve hir, and nmav,
better than they unworthy liars.

MY lords, I understand the que n's m:!jc,--y your fovcrcign i; not cortented of

tilis bruite, that there ihould oniy F renchman comic ill this re.ilh, with the duke of
Cha.ttelherault. 'I 'rth it is, I am no mainneilr of way tlhe co.iifall of their cutm-
ing, nor has no sic certainty threo'o, as I h her v Irortliwick's report from the
qiuecn's nijcIltv your ifver'ei n. And if I migi't ;s we ll I'.l it, as it is; lt;: in-
deed, her gr:ac 's !;,-l is ai; ti.ie tt, and thc C il:liiltl th.t will never let ;.ic take
order with my maiflrcf citic. i("or that o ur1 fIve lci'l x iv.; ii Cr ,ajell,; po-
mile, be v'riinr, oi li}.', fri' lhii p, aln aillt...nce gi i-l i i';Il Ia )

;leLqilriL, cin-

terit that realm, ltupon tie 1) dai, of May, t1,i thl.t ti: t!he tqui:cns mil;l:jc lv is
conmmanticd me diveis timnes t:, c 'Clre iite would .':eLept lhr caul;, !ild do t,:'r hcr,
and to put her in peaceable ponl ;iio:

of thiis rlc::lm, and w\lietl rCqllircd if Iher

inajeliv, in my t maiilrls n:ile c, til At lher hii,l 'tls wi;'. dl e ithlxer dio for I 'rt ( .:. 'r

fpccali trult wa.s nfil wold) according to hir -l

inl:r promlil's, or otlirwiL ..i ;

hjer counfal, ,,weld not conlient (;:s I {Low liher mcr.;c l[.mIti diveri.; r: 'p'.im.l.lilt
than tlhat ile wv.ou'd perm-it hcrt to ali: iii i rlie, or to Ilne olther pllilc to Ici
support, or fi.ilir:g hereof (quhilk was ailins all r;e .',li) tli.lt tlie would periI ii

hc.'

1her to return in her awin ccimtrie, in fie fempil manner as flie came out of it,
and said to her majefiy ane of thir, for hcr honour, would not be rcitfut, t;irend
that (he was conled in her realm upon her writings and prom iles cf frienlfilip.
IAnd fickhlke, I said to her l.ighncfs, iif my ni:iftrefs had the like prconifc oft her

:nobility and cflt.tcs, as she had of herficlf, flhould have reprovit them hi hly, gif
Ithey hadi not condefecnd(it to one of thir three, and so I fay, aiin ti I write, that
in the warld it shall be maift reprehendable, gif this promise taketh not other good
cesTci, nor yet it does. Notwithstanding I get gtd answer of thir p:-onifcs of
fricndflip made to my fovercign, and to put her grace il this her awin ccuntrie
peaceably, we have fund the contrary weIking bly . i\ iilh;;lr.;Ce, dirccdit tro(l
hL(r hithncfs to flay the army that cuifi down Oui hct fe. And al

:a, il the pro-

cccdlin of this late prctelidit palliarnent, promiled tv.,'nty d ays b f:re gc tie ti to
n)fellt to have caused it been difchargit. A:.d yct contrary to ti'.is piominc', have
they made their prendit manner of for'iulture o! 3- neii ot guid repuitation,b l:hops,
;ilmuttis, alnd bairolii , obedient futjecQs to our l<ov-rcin, only for her cau'l'-.

'IT-iiiY have alo dilponit, fen our sovereign's caule was taken up n hand be th

qucen's mnajefty of that realm, an hundreid thoul..nd pound Scots worth .f lier awi-.'i
true ful)jdcs geir, under the color of the law, groundit upon their false tieaolnable,
flowill, authority.

T''iE. murders, the oppreflions, the burnings, the raviflhing of v.omcn, the de-

flruition of policy, both ecclefiatlical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my
former writings I (aid it was lamentable to ony chriflian man to hear of, excepc
God gif grace, the profckflon of the evangile of Jesus Christ prof( flit beyour prince,
counfall and realme, be nair myndit, nor the auld inamity that has fland betwixt
the realms, many of my countrymnen will doubt in this aiticle, and their pro-
ccdings puttis my self in Sanct Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majefly of that realm, upon quhais promilie

and honour my maiftiefs came there, as I have fhid, will leave all the French
writings, and French phrases (f writings, qu'ilks amcngis them is over meikle on
baith the fides unlit, aiid plainly, according to the auld true custom of Ingland
and Scotland, cquherein be a word promift truth was obferv'd, promise, in the
n.i; of the eternal God, and upon the high honour of that nobill and princely
b!uelc of the Ikings (of Ingland, quhereif fie is defcendit, and prefelitly wears the
adiadem, th.it ibe will put niy imaiitrcfs in hcr awin country, and cause her as queen
thereof in her autholity and {trcength to be oheyit, and to do the fame will appoint
an certain day within two months at the farthest-, as we understand tisl to be our
veil, fua will we, or the maift part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the French-
men, and their evil French phirafes togidder. And therelore, and for the true per-
petual firindlhip of that realm, will condition, and for our part, with tile grace
of Almighty (God, keep lic heads an:id coii(!iioins of agreetment, as noble and wife
men can ctndelccnid upon, for the weill ct this haill island. As I have been part-
lings declariing to the qIteeii your fox ilcignl,'quhilk I flew to your lordthips
elftis both in religioln, in the punilhlient of the earl B,,thwile, for the queen's
lafi hit;band's slaughter, and for a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain
amnangis u:..

IDOUBI .'r. ss ,

m rd ithouit that, we may find sic time and friendly work-

ing, as may gif us occasion haith to forgette I\'lidJlemo-e and his late pretcndit
parliament, vWe will ruin the le.t, leavinl: our fovercign agains our will to reft
where ihc is, under the promifie of fltiendihip. As I have baith laid, and will ever

afliri ,

.ffirm, made by your fomcreign,, quhilk was onlh rauCe of her eracc's coming in
that realme, and leck the help and mooyen of French, or Spanilil, till expulic this
treasonable and fillb pretendit authority, qubhilk means to reign above us.

MIY lords, I dcrrce your lordl1hips conlider, that it is he, that mnailt desires the

amity betwixt Inglanid and Scotland to continue, and of a poor man bcft cause
has, that writ this.

AMY brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lordlhips coim un.

ing with him, it appearit to him, your mind was we flold fu!cer thi earl of lMur-
ray to woik, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the quccn's
majesty, and her highnels wald fee it reformit. '4y lords, her majeily will be
over meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit alrea:dy. For I am
sure, gif realbn and jultice may have place, our maiftlels, and we her fubjecis,
have received express wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds iterlingi,
in the time of this unhappy government, secing the reformation of fa great causes,
comes, now a days, so flowlie and the ungodly law of oblivion in tic Im.utters so
meikle pracSis'd, I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your
lordships would fua mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ve
will give your fovcreign sic advertisement thereof, as your good wildoms fiall find
in this cause meet. It will be true and frindful wot king for us, indeed, and now-
ther French phrases, nor boasting, and finding little other eftfct, that will caufi
us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written, and I desire your lord-
ihip's plain answer, for in truth and plailnnefs langeft continues gud friendflip,
quhilk in this matter I pray God may lang continue, and have your lordships in
his keeping. OffDlumfreis, the 3d day of September 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

IIERRIS.

Queen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.
m A DAI E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refccu de vos lettres, d'une mefine dete; i16S.

l'unc, ou vous faites mention de l'cxcufe de Monfr. de A/lurra pour tenir son Cott. l.ib.

pretendu parlement, qui me femble bicn froid, pour obtenir plus de tollcrance que Cal. i. An
je m'eflois perfuadec n'avoir par voflrc promefic, quant a n'oflbr'donncr commnilion criginal.
de venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de noinbre de noblefle alors, je vous re-
fpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois on quatre d'avantage, qui cuicent aufli bicn dit leur
opinion hors de parlement, qui n'a cfti tenu tant pour cette eflec;, mais pour faire
ce qu'expreffement nous avions requis cflre empefchlcs, qui eft la forfalturc de mcs
fubjeds pour m'avoir eftcs fidlles, cc que je m'afliurois, jufques a heir, avoir en
en promelle de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup c Maiftre Knoleis vous
induire a ire contre eulx, voirc, a les enfayre refentir; toutefois je vois quc je l'ay
mal pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montieront, ct
leur parole, je l'ay ft divulgucmcnt aluray que pour vengeance que j'cn defirailc,
si non mettre difference entre Icur faux dcportemens, et les miens fincercs. Dans
voftre lettre aufli datce du o "" d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots, " I think your
" adverse party, upon my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament at all;
" and if they do, it shall be only in form of an aflembly, to accord whom to
" fend into this realm, and in what fort; for otherwise, if they shall proceed in
4' manner of a parliament, with any aA of judgment againfI any person, 1 lhall

VOL. II. 3 D " not

APPEND

I X.
" not, in any wife, allow thereof; and if they fliall be so overseen, then you may

think the fame to be of no other moment, than the former procedurcs; and by

" such their rath manner of proceeding, they shall most prejudice themrfelves;
" and be aflured to find me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur quov,
j'ay contremandc mres ferviteurs, les faiflant retirer, fouftrant felon voitre com-

ani.'.cment d'ctre fauflement nommes traitres, par ceub:, qui le font de vray; et
encore d'etre provoques par efcarmons dies, et par prinfie de ines gens ct lettrcs,
et au contraire vous etes informne que mes fubjccts ont evahis ics voltres, Madame,
rqi 'a fait ce rapport n'est pas homme de bien, car laird de Scsford ct son fili font
et ont eetcs nes rcbelles depuis Ic commencement; elqt.iics vou%, s'ils i'cftoicut
a Donfris avequcs culx, j'avois offri refpondre de fa fronticre, cc qui mefut refus(,
ce qui m'-n devloit .dles defcharger, neanmoins, pour vous faire prcuve de ma,
fidelit6, ct de lcur falfit6, s'il vous me fayte donner le noin des coulpables, et me
fortifier, je conimandcray mes fubjccts les pour fuivre, ou si vous voules que cc
foit les voftrcs, les miens leur ayderont ; je vous prie m'en mander voftre volont6,
au refte mes fubjets fidelles fcront relponfables a tout cc que leur sera mis fu les
contre vous, ni les vo'tres, ni les rebellcs, defpuis que me confeillates les faire re-
tirer. Quait aux Francois, j'efcrivis quc l'on m'eu fit nrulic pourfuite, car j'efpe-
rois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois bcfoign,-je ne fceu si le dil aura en mcs
lettrcs, mais je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fcay chole da monde de leur venue,
que ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'cn ai oui de France mot du mondc, et ne le puis
croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils si font, c'cft fans mon fccu ni conlfentemcnlt,
Pourquoy je vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis prest de tenir
tout cc que j'ay offert a Mester Knoleis, et vous aflure que voftre ani:6, qu'il vous
pleft m'offrir, sera rescue avant toutcs les choses du mnondc, quant France fervit la
pour prcfcer leur retour a cclte condition, que prenies mes affaircs en mcin, en
foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma France eft en vous; mais unc chore feuie me
rcnde confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre orcille, la quelle ne pouvant avoir
par parolle, toutes mes actions vous font defguifes, et falfimcent raportees, par
quoi il m'eft impofiible de m'afnurcr de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fair,
pour deitruire vofire bonne volonte de moy; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce
bicn vous faire entenlie ma sincere et bonne affection, laquelle je ne puis si bicn
defcrire, que mes cnecnis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagnes moy;
envoys moy querir, n'cntrcs en jalousie pour faulx raports dc celle que ne dcfire
que votre bonne grace; je me remcttray fur Melier IKnoleis a qui je me fuis libre-
ment defcouverte, et apres vous avoir bailee les mains, je pricrai Dicu vous donner
en sant6, longue et heureufe vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, jc n'efpere
pertir, qu'aveques vofire bonne grace, quoyque les mcnteurs nientent. Ce 26
d'Aouft.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 412.)

(,t ~Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Paper-office, RIGHT trufly and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well. V/here we
from a copy hear fay, that certain reports are made in iundry parts of Scotland, that what-
correfted by soever should fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any
secretary proof to convince or to acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her
Cecil. late husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and

government,.

govcrnlmcnt, we do so much mini!e h:'crro, ; e c;in not i;dl!rc tihe 1' n,. to Ie-
ceive any credit: and the;ief; n e

he, c, toi .']

,, lt.it

t,: _ ml'.:

is untruly !cvi(cd hby the authors to cur diiihonour. l1r ; we l,1c b.en ;' vvs
ccrtified from our Iiid sifter, both by hcr lettcrs ::d ntlil' , th it he is by n'
neans guilty o' participant of th.at nlid.'r, which we wCill] to l t:c, si i'nil.'
if (he should be fa'.;i jullly to 1e -tuiltrs t!heccf a;i l]:; ii b, iji rcp,;,:te:l (f' -h:'!,
vwhcreof wv wvouldi be very sorry, thei, il .!ctl, it flhoI.il cl:.i,: ii tou conii.:!
othervwir of hlcrcanui th;ln to l:tisf'i her dle! re in rcllittliution i:' r ri the go e rn-
ment of that kirn3d(om. - And io we vwcmid have you and 1:l (i otir t!:in!;, t.hat
!Ilould be dilj)ofcd to conceive honoura.bly ui us and our aitionls.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 15681.

No. XXIX. (Vol. 1. p. 413.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, the 9th of O o-1Lcr 563, fi'oli York.

_ /t Y lord's grace of Norf'o!I Iilnding for mle to Bolton, to atrcndi ulponlil n

hi r;.
n;

here T'hursd.ay lafl, 1 i;ade niy repair ithr ccr - lin;iilv, nie.'.ii.l to l'apri chice.

flay here until Monday next; as touclinl t

in e mattrs of th. conliilio;i, til;it hli

grace and the reft have from her hihifcts, his grace lhath imp.altcd unto mei of all
things thereunto appertaiining, and what hatlh hithelrto p;lnil, and altho' thc mit-
tcrs be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter an' opinion of milln
own thereof, yet I fee that my lord I lrris, for his parte labourctil a recotnciliatiou,
to be had without the extremity of odious acculations ; my lor.l of Letlin.tton lahl(
faith to me, that he could wifl these matters to be ended(l in tduilce mnilacr, thit
it might be done with safety; of the relt you canl conccive, by the ahdvc! tifmllcits
and writings, fcnt up by our conmmifionicrs.
A letter from the bifliop of Ross to the queen of Scots, frc;m York,

O&ober 156S.
pLEIS your majcfly I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, ( t. I'.

who afltrit me that he had rcafoncd with B. this Saturday C. (il the li!J, C'!. '.

who detcrminate to him that it was the D. detcrminit purpose not to end yitLr a j<u;''.
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in furpencc, and did what was in her power,
to make the E. purfuc the extremity, to the cft(cdt IF. and his adherents mi':ht utt-r
all they could to your difhonoir, to the effied to ciaufe you come in dil.l'i v.it!1
the hail fubjeas of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to att:mpt nmV
thing to her disadvantage. And to this eflecdt is all her intention, and h:l;en tlhey
have produced all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter iinfilntil,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there till she think time to
shew you favour, which is not likely to be haflily, bccaufe of your uncles in lrancl ,
and the fear flie has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their cou:in/'1 t,
that ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your s'ubjects
which has offendit you.-This is in cffect that your majesty hearing the citeat of your
affairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majefly was informed of

3 D 2 you,

you, that you could not gudely remit your fubjeAs in such fort as they might
credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the Rtay of this controversy to be
ended. And therefore persuading her D. effectually not to trust any who had
made any such narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most
tender to you of any living, so prayit her take na opinion of you, but that ye wauld
ufc her counfell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to all others, as
well uncles as others, and asSure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your
fubjeas by her advice. And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her
in that point be removing within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her
G. pleated, until the time her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit
removed from her. So that in the mean time your realm were holden in quictnefs,
and your true fubjeas restored and maintained in their own crtatc, and fie other
things tending to this cffec. And affirms that they believe that this may be occa-
sion to cause her credit you that ye offer so far ; and it m;ay come that within two
or three months she may become better-minded to your grace, for now she is not
well-minded, and will not shew you any pleasure for the caufcs foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following key is added in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England,
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 429.)

Deliberation of secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 21, 1568.
Paper-ofEce. T H E best way for England, but not the eafiefl, that the queen of Scots might

remain deprived of her crown, and the state continue as it is.

THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard.- That the queen of

Scotts might be induced, by Ifme perfwafions, to agree that her son might con-
tinue king, because he is crowned, and herself to remain also queen; and that the
government of the realm might he committed to such persons as the queen of Eng-
land should name, so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered, that a
convenient number of perlons of Scotland should be first named to the queen of
England, indifferently for the queen of Scots, and for her foil, that is to fay, the
one half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the earle of Lenr.ox and lady
Lennox, parents to the child; and out of thole, the queen's majesty of England
to make choice for all the officers of the realm, that aie, by the laws of Scotland,
disposable by the king or queen of the land.

THAT until this may be done by the queen's majefiy, the government remain

in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is, providing he fiall not dispose of any
offices or perpetuals to continue any longer but to there offered of the premises.

THAT a parliament be fuinmoned in Scotland by several commandments, both
of the queen of Scots and of the young king..

c-THAT.

- THAT hoftagcs be delivered unto England on the young king's behalf, to

the llimbcr of twelve persons of the carlc of Murray's part as the queen of Scots
ilall name ; and likcwife on the qucenr's behalf to the like number as the earle of
tAurray flall name; the fame not to be any that have by inheritance or office caulfe
to be in this parliament, to remain from the beginning of the fummoins of that
parliament, until three months after that parliament ; which hoflages fihall be
pledges, that the friends of either part flall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this
pailiament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England (hall
devils for the government of the realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scot-
land, nor contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame
was before the parliament at Eldin' the Decem' 1567) fl(all be cltabliflhcd to be
kept and obeyed, under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

--I'HA'r by the fame parliament alfl be efabhlifiued all executions and judg-
nients given :ag:aiinf any person for the death of the late king.

-- I'HAXT by the lame parliament, a remiflion be made univcrfally from the

queen of S-:ots to any her contrarvs, and also from every one fubjetl to another,
saving that reflitution be made of lands and houles, and all other things heritable,
that have been by either fide taken from thlic which were the owners thereof at
the committing of the queen of Scotts to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fime parliament it be declared who shall be successors to the crown

next after the q. of Scots and her ifluc; or elle, that such right of the d. of Clia-
tclherault had, at the marriage of the q. of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be
conserved and not prejudiced.

i HAT the q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's m.ajclly of England, twelve

months after the said parliament, and that (he (hall not depart out of England,
without special licence of the queen's majelty.

THAT the young king shall be nourilhd and brought up in England, till he
be years of age.

IT is to be coi:fidered, that in this cause the composition between t!he qlueen and

her fubjctts may be made with certain articles, outwardly to bt itcn to t the world
for her honour, as though all the parts flould comei of her, and yet lor the fi'crty
of contrar)s, that certain betwixt her and the quecn's majClty are to be concladed,

No. XXXI. (Vol. Ip.p 431.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, n2 Jan. I568-9.
W, E greet voul well, we mean not, at th;s point, by ;niy writil, to renew P.ipr.(!lice.

that whlich it hath pllea.fu (;ood to imake gi icvous to us and forl\ 1tl to ya'<;w

but forbearing the famiie as unmeet at this point, It\villeg oca lion to comlr:indl y)o
in our lirvice, and yow ;lib while!! you arc to Icrve us. \We rclquile ow t.) col!-
fider of this that followeth witn like contideratioll anld ciiii, ccc, as liitlietto \')v
have accultumate in our fitvice; at the tine oft ur l.il ltlters written to yow' th
fourteenth of this month f. r removing oi the queen of S .ot , we had unldel lianidil
out of Scotland of certain writtings icnt by her ilmrn thence into Scotland, aion.rgit
the which one is found to contain grea:t .idl in. nl.tli[ untruthh touching us mi ,i l!c i3
allb, as shall and may plainly appear unto yov by the copy of the ii;l:, w\:'hitl
likewise we fend yow, and beca u: at the lle i we were

;ad vc tiledt, th:it It llhuld
be liortly proclaimed in Scotland, thluugh then it was not, we thoul!ght g(d iii it to.

o'.L .
:

·remove tie qicen, before we would difelofe the fame, and then expcc' the ifi:,
thereof; and now, this day, by letters from our cousin of Huinfdon we :;re afeer-
tained, that since that time the fame matters contained in the writing, are pui -
li(hcd in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet,
for the discharge of our honor, and to confound the falfchood contained in th.it
writing, not only to have the tlme reproved by open proclamation upon our
frontiers, the copy whereof we do h-rcwith fend yew, but also in convenient ,'i t
to charge that queen therewith, so as ihe may be moved to declare the authors t'iiec-
of, aind persuaders of her to write in such flanderculs f)rt fiitc untruths of us; and
inl the mean season, we have here stayed her commifiionerl, knowing no other
whom we more probably prefunme to be p.l tics hereunto, than they, until the
queen fli,.ll name tome other, and acquit them ; whi being generally charged,
without expricffin to them any particul:a-;ty, do life all manner of fpeechcs to
discharge theinfelves; wherefore our plcafure is, that ye fiall, after ye have wel!
pcrufed tihe ccpy of this writinig ftent to vow, fpccdily declare unto her, that we have
good underflanding given us of (iverfe letters and writtings sent by her into Scot-
land, fignedi by her own hand, amontft which one such writing is sent witlh 1cr
commandmicnt exprefly as now it is already publiihed, as we are much troubled in
mindi that a prinecfs as ihe is having a caule in our hands so in-plicated with dif-
iicultys and'calamitys, fliould either conceave in her own mind, or allow of them
that flould devise such fal'c, untrue, and improbable matters :gainfit us, and our
honor, and specially to have the aventure to have the fame being known to untrue
to be publishld ; and you ihall alHb fay, because vie will not think so ill cf her, as
that it should proceed of her self, but rather file hath been counselled thereunto, (or
by abulf made to think some part thereof to be true, we require her, even as Ihe
may look for ony favour at cur hands, that she will disburden hercelf as much as
truly flc may herein, and name them which have been the authors and perfvwaders
thereof, and so she fhnll make as great amends to us as the cafe may require; after
you have thus far proceeded, and some answer . f her, whether she shall deny the
writing abfolutcly, or name any that have been the advisers thereof, you shall fay
unto her that we have flayed her commiffioncrs here, untill we may have foine
anfwcr hereof, because we cannot but impute to them some part of this evil deal-
ing, untill by her anfwcr the authors may be known ; andl as T,on as you can iiha'.
dirca answers from her, we pray you to return us the amec ; for as the cafe flandecth,
we canlnot but be much dilqkuited with it, having our honour so deeply touched
contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we know in our judgment the
earl of Murray and others named in the fame writing void of thought for the
matters, to them therein impulted; you may im part to the queen of Scots either the
contents of the slanderous letter, or shew her the copy to read it, and you may
also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to join with you there as you shall
think meet.
T Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, fromn Wetherby, the S8th

January 568.

An originrl. - T WILL suppress my own griefss, and pass them over with silence, for the
Paper-office. present learning of your majeflty--and for this queen's ansiver to the coppie

of her supposed letter sent unto Scotland, I must add this unto my brother's letter,
sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late ; in ,rocefs of time fle did not deny but

that

t that t! suit lines contaired in the sTime copie wns agrceab!e to a Ictter thiat rhe
had 1Lt unto Sc:.iind, \hiich touclhcd mvl lord ot iMurr;ay's prc.mife to diiive. r her
ibn into your Si:jli\ 's hanis, a to

a vod that thel .l c

l IhcOLld not he clone with-

out her cmll:ti, nr:ad her, file Iith, to write inl that belial ; ime saithi aifo that
Ihe wrote tl:t t!.' y flioild c:ufe a proclamn. io: l to he made to fir hIc: people to
defend my lord ol1 Iul ry's intent and prrp)ole, soir dliverine; of her sl:id Ibi, :iadl
iinpunl i e

his rciblliotus oveirlicilnt, ai flie termed it, but inlC uLtc.liv dcolctl to

havc vri tcn ;.ny of the oil:cr llndcrons pi;rt of thlc ilid Icttc ttiuchin i your mia-
jefly ; ie

fil id i:ll-, that Ilhe C liret;d'i tii:lt : lrenc iinin,' now in Scon:lind, mignht

be thl autllor oi; ii ic Scot:h Ictt:.rs dcvilc-d in her i1niae, but filc would not allovw
rme to write this lor any p.irt of her anlsi'er.

No. X'X" Ii. (Vol. I. p. ,138.)
Sir Nicliolas Throit.:nortun to ithe 'iiht ho;loulralibl tle lord of Lid-c

di :arton.
y OUR. letter of the 3,t of July, I h:ive received the r5th of tlie f.mc. For za h July

anfwv.r wilcreunto (ou si illl ulndrlii':ld, thait 'iiends here to nly lord reg'-'nt ',it

and you do wifli flich a conciirrrnce iln all doings, as in mnttcr :!d l circullinli cs l'rom th¢eor:-
there arilc no dili fioon, or aIt tit licaft, no more nor oti.:lr t.l ii tlhe dililrclice of tial.
countrecs (liith niccell.rily rtqiirc. \'e here do think convenient thliit is t'c.' de-
lays be u!fd as nmay be, for the confumination oi the matter iln lind, wlhichl prin-
cipally to advance, your allowance, profecucioln, and fprcedy promotion in Scot-
land, is molt reqiiifi.te, for you arc Ib wilt, land well acquainited v.ith the {late
of the world, and with all our hllumours, as you lcnow that f(line do allow aild dilf-
allow for rea:lnn, sone for refipcdt of multitude, imonCe fr rcli'p.l of pcrflils, aind so,
the caule is to go forward as men do li.e to fct it forward. Y'ou :I:re not to fblc
that fonme will ufc cautions, some ncutrality, some delays, and fOilIc will plainly
impningec it. And yet all and cvcrv of thcle forts will alter their doings, when
they fl ill fee the rcenlit and Ihis f.voulrcrs accord with the lhet aid grcatclt i p:rt
there, and agrce with thie xvifcl ;aiid ftrontc'ge p;lrty here. 'Tio' tlie i.iti-r hia
taken its becinninll here uipo11 de(:p and weighty conifiderations, fnr the wcil .If hol
the princes .Ind their rc.ilms, as well prefcntly, as in tiic to co-'c, yet it is llou it
moil expedient, that the regent and realm of Scotl;tid ,

by y iO i ih.l.l pi ri-nf

the matter to the qiueen o!ir lovcresC , if you like to ulI c(iveilleicc, r<ld i.odr'r,
or be disposcd to leave but ;a cfar, aid no wound of the hiurts pail. I xt;!d be
glad that this my letter should con:l- to )our liallds befc;re the conlveltioll, wvlcl'at
it seems your lqucen's rcttior.aliou and Inarri.ite to the duke o Niioulil 111hioul be
propounded, either to wxi;ni in thein both allowance or iejection. To iwich
proceedings, because you p:ray me to WlitC franllly, I {ly and rcalfnl thus, me
thinkcth you u(s a prcpoferotus older, to den:maid the content of fuchi pcrfit, inl
fuelh matters, as their minds to a gt)od cld iath

; ,ti llr bchen felt or ]rtrp ;t-l, ,;d

theretore there nmufi needs follow either a univcriii rcfuf.il, or fatltious divitiot
amongti you, whereby a blouilcri!ng intelligciece mult needs come t> quccin Jl.i-
zabeth of the intended marriage from thence, xvhitic oulght to have been i{:ci'tl
and advisedly propounded unto her hightlilc ; hereby you ce:e then Ihe incanin ig<,
by this dealing, her majesty fliall be made incxorable, and lb bring thie lmatter t>

,~~~~5~~~~~~~~~~~~ such

A P P E N DIX.

such passe, as this which should have wrought surety, quietness, and a flay to both
queens and their realms, (hall augment your calamity, and throw us your belt
friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy divisions amongst ourselves; for
you may not conjcAure that the matter is now in deliberation, but expeceth good
occaflon for executing ; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of the managing
this matter, as to think we have not cafl the worst, or to enter therein so far with-
out the affillancc of the nobility, the ablefi, the wisest, and the mightiest of this
realm, except queen Eliz.abeth : from whom it hath been concealed untill you, as
the fittest minister, might propoundl it to her, on the behalf of the regent and the
nobility of Scotland. H-ow far master .Voddes defamations do carry them of
queen Elizabeth's affefions, and mafler fccretary's, to assist the regent and to
suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it not material; but 1 do aflurcdiv
think, that her majefly will prefer her fuirety, the tranquillity of her reign, and
the conservation of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vain
discourse, or imperfections of passions, anid inconsiderate aff'eiicns. And as fur
Ar. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fast afore, ob
he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and specially when the reliques be of no
great value or power. If I could as well afiure you of his niagnanimity, and
confiancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may repole
as well of hilr in this matter, as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel,
Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the nobility; all which
do embrace and protefle the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to
your advice, written presently to my lord regent, with the fime zeal and care of
his well doing that I owe to him, whom I love and honour. MIr. Secretary hath
allured unto him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he
feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, as I trust, ha{ten your coming-
hither, for it is very neccflary that you were here presently. Q Elizabeth both
doth write to my lord regent in such fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's dif-
courses of her majesty's affedtion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than
he conjedureth of him, the effeca of which her majcefy's letter you shall under-
stand, by my lord Leicester's letter unto you at this dispatch. At the court,
20 July 1569.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 440.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. probably lord Bulleigh.

1569. E ECAUS E I fee that great advantage is taken on fmalloccafions, and that

Harl.Lib.37. B the mention of the marriage betwixt the queen my foveregn's mother,
B. 9. so. 43. and the d. of Norfolk hath this while palt been very frequent in both the realmn,

and then I myself to be spoken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the lait
v come to her majefly's ears; I will, for fatisfaition of her highne.s, and the dif-

charge of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interest, and mcd-
ling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatfoev.r is prcjudicial to
her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm, andl
me. What conferrences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
-were with me within the realm of England, 1 am not able to declare; but I am
no wife forgetful of any thing that palled betwixt him and me, either at that time,

or

or since. And to the end her majesty may underhiand how I have been dealt with,
in this matter, I am compelled to touch some circumfiances, before there was anv
mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commiflioners, I
found very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and other her highness's commis-
fioners in the beginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed
sincerely, and so furth. During which time I entered into general fpecch, flick-
ing at our just defence in the matters that were objeced against us, by the ilid
queen's commiflioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cog-
nition in the cause of controversy, with a final declaration to have followed. Upon
a certain day the lord Lithington secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what
purpose they had I cannot fay, but that night Lithington returning, and enter-
ing in conferrence with me upon the state of our action, I was advised by him
to pass to the duke, and require familiar conferrence, by the which I might ha.ve
some feeling to what iflue our matters would tend. According to which advice,
having gotten time and place convenient in the gallery of the house where the duke
was lodged, after renewing of our first acquaintance made at Berwick, the time
before the assize of Leith, and some speeches panlid betwixt us; he began to fly to
me, how he in England had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and
friendship of many, it was to be thought there could be none more fit inftrumccts,
to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt the realms than we two. And
so that discourse upon the present slate of both, and how I was entered in that action
tending bs far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by him to confider how mat-
ters flood in this, what honour I had received of the queen, and what inconve-
niences her defamation in the matters laid to her charge might breed to her po-
flerity. Her rcfpe&t was not little to the crown of England, there was but one
heir. The Hamiltons my unfriends had the next refpccr, and that I should ellecmi
the ilfue of her body would be the more aftectionate to me and mine, than any
other that could attain to that crown. And so it should be meeteft, that she
affirmed her dimiffion made in Lochlevin, and we to abflran the letters of her
hand write, that she should not be defamed in England. My reply to that was,
how the matter had passed in parliament, and the letters seen of many, so that the
abflranting of the fame could not then secure her to any purpose, and yet should wc,
in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majefly of England was not made privy
to the matter as flhe ought to be, in refpet we were purposely come in England
for that end, and for the-of the grants of our cause. The duke's anivcr was,
he would take in hand to handle matters well enough at the court. After this,
on the occasion of certain articles, that were required to be resolved on, before
we entered on the declaration of the very ground of our ation, we came up to
the court; where some new commissioners were adjoined to the former, and the
hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament house at Weftminfler in
presence of which commiflioners of the laid queen, and--through the--
rebuking of the queen of England's own commiflioncrs, we uttered the whole of
the aEtion, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations, as we had, which
might move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause. Whercupon expc.ting
her highness declaration, and teeing no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly
given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said queen, our
matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean fealbn, standing in hazard and danger,
we were put to the uttermost point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the matters

VOL. 1. 3 E would

AP P EN D I X.

would tend, tho albeit we had left nothing undone for justification of our causes,
yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to some accord with
the queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no other anfwcr to
give them, but that I should neither do againfi conscience or honour in that mat-
ter. Notwithilanding feeing this my plain alnfwer wrought no end, nor dispatch
to us, and that I was informed that the duke began to mislike of me, and to speak

Probably of me, as that I had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her
adult,,rer. and murderer, I was advised to pass to him, and give him good words and to purge

myself of the things objected to me, that I should not open the sudden entry of his
evil grace, nor have him to our enemy--confidering his greatness. It being
therewithal whispered, and shewed to me, that if 1 departed, he flanding difcon-
tented and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble in my way, as
my throat might be cut before I came to Berrick. And therefore since it might
well enough appear to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair, that my
good will could not be had therein. So few days before my departing 1 came to
the park in Hampton Court, where the duke and I met together, and there I de-
clared unto him that it was come to my ears, how some misreport should be made
of me to him, as that I Should speak irreverently and rafhlv of the said queen my

Probably fovercign's mother, such words as before exprefled that he might -- thereby
fufpeca. my affetdion to be so alienate from her, as that I could not love her, nor be con-

tent of her preferment, howbeit he might perfwade himfclf of the contrary, for as
she once was the peroln in the world that I loved best, having that honour to be
so near unto her, and having received such advancement and honour by her, I was
not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wish her body harm, or to speak of her as
was untruly reported of me (howsoever the truth was in the self), and as to the
preservation of her son, now my sovereign, had moved me to enter into this cause,

Probably and that her own pressing was the occasion of that was uttered to her -- when-
diflionour. soever God should move her heart to repent of her bypast behaviour and life, and

after her known repentance, that she should be separate from that ungodly and un-
lawful marriage that ihe was entered in, and then after were joined with such a
godly and honourable a personage, as were affecioned to the true religion, and
whom we might trust, 1 could find in my heart to love her, and to shew her as
great pleasure, favour, and good will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe he
should be that personage, there was none whom I could better like of, the queen
-- in -- of England being made privy to the matter, and she allowing there-
of, which being done, 1 should labour in all things that I could, to her honour
and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the king my sovereign's estate, and
prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my affection was rather buried and
hidden within me, awaiting until God should direct her to know herself, than
utterly alienated and abfirated from her; which he seemed to accept in very good
part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing, whereunto I will snake
none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's life in thy hands. So.
departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way and all night, I was in continual
thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in that weighty matter, firfl,
imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempted without the queen's
majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm, and I myself in par-
ticular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's hands, and this
whole isle such peace and quietness, since God pofleffed her majesty with her
crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me, pro-

testing,

testing, none other wete or flould be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not find
in my heart to utter any thing that might endanger him; moved to the uttermost
with these cogitations, anld all desire of sleep then removed, 1 prayed God to fend
me some good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfaaiol of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicefler, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find strange with me, that in the matter I made so dif-
ficult to him, standing so precifily on conferrence, and how when I had in my com-
munication with the dukes come so far -- and there he made some difcourle with Plobth!,
me, about that which was talke betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had -- {/i'
the matter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby dischargcd at the
duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in every point to my
lord of Leicefler, who desired me to shew the fame to the queen's majesty, which r
refuscd to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
he as one -- by her majesty, and for many benefits reccived at her highnefl's
hands is obliged to wiflh her well, should make declaration of the fame to her ma-
jefty, as I understand by some fpecch of her highliifs to me, he did. ''his my
declaration to the duke was the only cause, that Itaid the violence and trouble pre-
pared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways understood. The fame declara-
tion I was obliged to renew since in writings of -- sent to my servant Johli
Wood. The umr whereof, I trust, he shewed the duke, and something also I
wrote to himself, for it was tho't this should redeem fume time, that the duke lhould
not suddenly declare him our enemy, for his grcatnefs was oft laid before me, and
what friendship he had of the chief of the nobility in England, so that it might
appear to the queen's majesty of England-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing
publickly that might feern favourable for us, we had some cause to fiufpect that her
highness should not be contrarious to the marriage when it should be propoled to
her. The sharp meftage sent by her majesty with the lord Boyd, who had the
like commiflion from the duke tending fu far to the said queen's preferment, as it
were proposing one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that her
highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that flie might be induced to
allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised in England, that the lord of Lethington
should come as from me, and break the matter to her highness, as her majesty in
a letter declared that she looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of
me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife accord to his fending, nor
allow of the matter motioned, but altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame
great inconveniencies to the surety and quietness of this whole isle; fur our pro-
'ceedings have declared our mifliking and dilallowance of the purpose from the be-
ginning, and if we had pleased he was ready for the journey. And in likcwife it
was devised to give content, that the -- between the said queen and Bothwell, Probably
should be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd, divorce.
by reason we could not understand what was the queen's majesty's pleasure, and
allowance in that behalf -- And whereas ye mean, that her highness was not
made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in Inc. The first motion be-
ing declared, as 1 have written, to my lord of Leicester, and by him imparted to her
majesty, so far as I could perceive by some speech of her highness's to me, before
my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been dealt withal for
this marriage, and how just necessity moved me not to require diredly that which
the duke appeared so -- unto. And for my threatnings, to aflent to the fame,

3E2 I
ahave

I have expressed the manner; the persons that laid the matter before me, were of
my own company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was his writing which
Caved my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her majesty, that
the let no speeches nor any other thing passed and objeaed to my prejudice, move
her majesty to alter her favour-towards me, or any ways to doubt of my assured
constancy towards her highness; for in any thing which may tend to her honour
and surety, I will, while I live, beflow myself, and all that will do for me, not-
withstanding my hazard or danger, as proof should declare, when her majesty finds
time to employ me.

APPENDIX

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

APP E N DIX

TO THE
SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicester, March 20th,

1570, from Ledington.

HE great desolation threatened to this whole realm, be the divisions thereof An original.
in dangerous faEtions, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordship, in

other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other rcipei, but only to
maintain my private credit; therefore I am driven to furnish them with matter,
which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by misconstruing my meaning, some
there may take occasion of offence, thinking that I rather utter my own paflions,
than go about to inform your lordship truly of the flatc ; but I trust my plain deal-
ing shall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of this country; which first is di-
vided into two factions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign,
the other alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly dc-
deprived of her state ; the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentle-
men, and principal burroughs of the realne, who fllall have, as Mr. Randolph
beareth us in hand, the queen's majefly your fovcrcign's allowance and protection;
the other hath in it some mofl principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good
numbers of the inferior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look afluredly
that all kings do allow their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What confcquence
this division will draw after it, 1 leave it to your lordflip's consideration ; there
is fallen out another division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death, which is
like to change the (late of the other two faAions, to cncrcalf the one, and dimi-
nilh the other, which is grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Sounl ni.nicr
of noblemen aspire to the government, pretending right thereto by re.lon of the
qlueen's demission of the croun, and her cominilion granted at th;t time fur the

regiment

regiment during the king's minority; another faóion doth altogether repine againnt
that division, thinking it neither fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meancft
fort amongst the earls, shall presume to challenge to themselves a rule over the
whole realme, the next of the blood, the first in rank, the greatest alway both for
the antientry of their houses, degree, and forces, being negleckted; this order
they think preposterous, that the meaner fort shall be placed in public function to
command, and the greater flall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commission had in the beginning been valewable (which the moRi part
,will not grant) yet can it not be extended to the present, for that the conditions
thereunto annexed are ceased, and so the effet of the whole void; the latter part
of this division hath many pretences, for besides the queen's faEtion, which is
wholly on that fide, a great number of these that have heretofore profcfled the
king's obedience do favour the fame, and will not yield to the government of the
other, whose preferment for refpeds they mislike, when the queen's faCfion ihall
be increased, with a part of tle king's, and these not of least fubfance, and yow
may judge what is like to ensue ; an other incident is like to move men to enter
in further discourses, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's majesty is
setting forth Tome torces towards the border, which shall enter this realm, to coun-
tenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the contrary faction, and
bruits are spread, that the fame ihall be here out of hand; these that think them-
felvcs of equal force with their contrary faflion at home, are rather an overmatch
to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another prince, rather than
yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advice of necefity, and evil council-
lors, and seek also the maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby her majesty
(altho' no further inconvenient were to be feared) must be driven to exceflive
charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at one
time to set us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived at
Dumbarton, a galzeon with a messenger sent exprefly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility that favours the queen, to learn the state of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for
their own fafcty; afluredly this message will be well received, and suffered accord-
ingly, this is the present itate of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also
know my opinion, how to choice the best, as the cafe itandetl ; I will in that
also fatisfie your lordship, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lord-
ship shall judge whether I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply
utter my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents. I trust the queen's
majeity hath a desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which she
hath gone about to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and the loss of rome
of her people; this desire is honourable for her highness, profitable for both the
countrys, and of none to be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the
amity of the whole realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn,
nor will it prove commodious for her to suit the friendship of a faction of Scotland,
for in so doing, in gaining the best, she may lore the more, and the fame would
bring all her actions with us in suspicion, if she should go about to nourish factions
amongst us, which meaning I am sure never entered into her majefly's heart; then
if it he the friendship of the whole The doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
part, go about to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifable, as some
may give her to underitand; but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to

7 pacify

pacify the whole ifate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means
to an uniformity, o fliall ihe give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that
file tendeth our wealth, and provokes us universally to wish unto her majesty a
most prorperous continuance; by the contrary, if, for the pleasure of a few, fihe
will fend forces to suppress these whom they mislike, and so consequently offend
many; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage to provide for their own
safety, and not only will embrace the means partly offered, but will also procure
further, at the hand of other princes. This for mine own part, I do abhor, and
protest I desire never to fee forces of firangers to set foot within this land, yet I
know not what point necessity may drive men into, as if men in the middle of
the sea were in a ship, which suddenly flould be set on fire, the fear of burning
would make them leap into the sea, and soon after the fear of the water would
drive them to cleive again to the fired ship, so for avoiding present evil, men will
many times be inforced to have recourse to another no less dangerous. Truss
me forces will not bring forth any good fruit to her majesty's behove, it must bc
some way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein by my former letters your lord-
ship doth know already what is my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write,
without consideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet my hope is that
such as will favourably interpret them, shall think that I mean as well to her ma-
jefty, and that realme, as these that will utter other language. 1 wifl the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two countrys, without other refpl)c, and will
not conceal from her majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the pre-
judice thereof; if I shall perceave her majesty taking frank dealings in evil part,
I shall from thenceforth forbear; in the mean season I will not cease to trowble
your lordship, as I shall have occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your
lordship.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

Letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks, July 2d, 1570.
RIGHT trusty and well beloved coufim we greet you well, this day we have Calderw.

received your letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters, fcnt from Scot- MS. Iliftory,

land, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is desired to be given be- vol. .p. 189.
fore the tenth of this month; which is a very short time, the weightiness of the
matters, and the diffance of the places confidered; nevcrthelefs we have, as the
shortness could susser it, resolved to give this answer following, which we will that
yow, by warrand hereof shall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Len-
nox and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him. Where it is by them,
in their letters, and writings alledged, that for lack of our resolute answer, con-
cerning the establishing of the regiment of the realm, under their young king, great
inconveniencies have happened, and therefore they have deferred now at their last
convention to determine of the famine, who flall have the place of governour,
until the 2Ift this month, before which time they require to have our advise, in
what person or persons the government of that realm shall be established, we accept
very thankfully the goodwill and reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly
to require and follow.our advise in a matter that toucheth the state of their king,
theirfelves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former for-

bearing

tearing to intermeddle therein, they have taken some discomfort, as though that
we would not have regard to their state and surety, so on the other part, they of
their wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the whole world evil interpreted
in us to appoint them a form of government, or a governour by name, for that
howsoever we ihould mean well if we flould do so, yet it could not be without
some jealousy in the heads of the estate, nobility, and community of that realm,
that the government thereof should be by me specially named, and ordained; so
as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking most that they Should take
any discomfort by our forbearing to {how our mind therein, we have thought
this fort for to proceed, confidering with ourselves how now that realm had been
a good space of time ruled in the name of their king, and by reason of his
base age, governed heretofore by a very careful and honourable person, the earle of
Murray, untill that by a mischievous person (an evil example), he was murdered,
whereby great disorder and confusion of necessity had, and will more follow, if
determination be not made of some other special person, or persons, to take the
charge of governor, or superior ruler, fpeciall for administration of law and jus-
tice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of there lords to have some special
governor to be chosen; and therefore being well assured, that their own under-
standing of all others is belt to confider the fiate of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we
shall better fatisfie ourselves, whom they by their common content fhlall first choose,
and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named,
and that because they shall perceave that we have care of the person of their king,
who by nearness of blood, and in refpet of his so young years, ought to be very
tender.and dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they shall
all accord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox to be governor
alone, or jointly with others (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their
common content appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be chosen in that whole realm, that shall more desire the preservation of the
king, and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being next to him
in blood of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet hereby, we do not
mean to prefcrive to them this choice, except they {hall of themselves fully and freely
allow thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured, that whatsoever re-
ports of devises, are, or shall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded
our mind to alter the state of the king or government of that realm, the fame are
without just cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertized them,
that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refute, what
the queen of Scots on her part shall fay and offer, not only for her own assurance,
but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that (hall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and justice, by advancing her
cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we ihall deliberately and assuredly fee,
upon the hearing of the whole, some place necessary, and just cause to do; and
therefore finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that
T realm, and therefore invested by coronation and other folemnities used and requisite

and generally so received be the whole estates, we mean not by yielding to hear
the complaints or informations of the queen against her ton, to do any aft whereby
to make conclusion of governments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame
to continue, yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we may impefhe,
as to our honour it doth belong, as by your late actions hath manifestly appeared,

untill

401I

untill by some jultice, and clear caufc, we flall he dirctllv inidlucid oticrvwif ta
declarc our opinion ; and this we wvou!id have tlih'il to know to be our detlr noin,-
tion and corurfl that we nic:ir to hold, whereon we trull they fir their kixlgl nia'
fee how plainily and hlonourably we nme;an to lproceed, anlld iihon ittle cai they
have to doubt of us, whatloevcr to the contrary they have or fl ill 1) .n.; an:1 l ot1 l
other part, vwe pray them of their v.;:'.)nis to think how iinilioouoni! , ;i .i cintl.rv
to all human order it were fur us, hen the qllreen ol Scotl.mi! i, lt I nlm.!v \wM.;
require to hear her caule, and doth of-er to be ordered be un in the f.in :, ;s v'll
for matters betwixt ourfi-lves and her, as betwixt herlcil aind her fun and lli paitlr
of that realm, an:aint which otflrs no re:ifon could nmove us to retfle to ;,ive c.r,
tl:it we Ihould aforchlind openly and tiirectly, before the c;anuls be h ieard a;:d Coln-
idulred, as it were, give a judtlment or lcntciice cither for onuriclves or ftr tihen
whom- file mi.lkellih to be her contraries. Finll' ye i :ll1 adinunil tle n, that

they

do not, by misconceiving our good mcaning towiards thlenm, or 1-\ ii lire.tl ;l:lrcio,:;
of their adverfilry groun!ded on untruths, hinder or weaken tii;'; o wn c:ulif, ill
i'uch fort, th.it our good meininri towards them fh.tll not take fiichi Lh.;[t i ,: .,;;'-
them, as they fliall delire, or tlhcifivlelcs have need o!'. All this our anlf.' .'c ye .'
cause be given them, and let them knov', that for tile ilo tnLc (if' tiiii, thi, bacin:"
tile end of the fccond of this month, wie neither could make any lIneCr d'irCiratior
of our mind, nor yet mwitz any ilvcral lettcrs, as ii' time Ili nIi lr ia've I iv'd v,
would have done. 2 July 157o.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. .)

The bishop of RoI s to secretary Lidington froln Cllattiiwortil.
I HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Cllattifwortil, thle ;ilh June

IO of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you at lcn th, lil;e j,

as the qtieiic did with nmy lord lecvingtolln, by tlhe whicih you will be crlblvcd (o
many points contained in your said letter. I writ to yonr tliat received your
letter and credit from Thomas Cowy at London, and ulit to .I eccfieC to kno w
the queen of England's mind whether you ltiould comne here or not. lie fenit mc
word, that feic will no ways have you come as one of tl;e coniniillioincs, be-
caulf file is yet offended with you ; and therefore it appears '(oid that ,ye come
n)t hither, but renain whiere you are, to uife your wi;loml alnd tilieirnce, ais Ilay
hclt advanlce the queen's aflitrs, for cciv yr pill and

lu ifcty deidrdiriis theIe-

on, in ref(;icS of the grreat feid and cnlnimlity born a;r;intl you by your Scots peo-
ple, and the great hcillilhp taken of your f.ithicr's lan lis ; bo,'t \.r1-e lie dcn.ion-
jtrations of tlieir niilice. Yet I amn encouraged by your Itr'lt ad dc!ibcr.,tl
niind. Afl'ure yourie!'f no diligence Ihall be omitted to procure liqiliorts forth ci;i
all parts where it may he had. ce will not refutt the aid neither of I'; pill, Jeiv,
nor Gentil, after my advice; and to tils crnd, during this treaty, let all thiings lat
well prep:red. And secing my lord Seaton is deihorus to go ilto Flaindlks, the
queen thinks it very neceffiary that he so do, for the duke D)'Alva h;ls gotten cx-
prces command of the king of Spain to give filpport, and 1 amn lure that there le
shall have aid both of ISlanders and the pope, for it abides only on rthe comiig of
some men of countenance, to procure arnd receive the I'imc. I- mull. needs ta.rry
there, on the preparations thereof, during the treatv, whlicih ill b- a great fur-

VOL. 11. 3 ther;rnce

therance to the fame here. The queen has already written to the duke D'Alva for
this effeAc, advcrtizing of his coming; there is certain films of money coming
for support of the Englifhnlm n, as 1 wrote to you before from the pope. Where-
upon I would he had a general commission to deal for them, and receive such fums
as shall be given. The means shall be found to cause you be anfucrit of the fums
ycu writ for, to be difpoifit upon the furnishing of the castle of EIdenburgh, so
being some honest and true man were sent to Slanders to receive it, as said is,
which I would you prepared and sent. Orders shall be taken for the metals as you
writ of. We have proponit your avyce in entering to treat with the queen of Eng-
land, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the
Engliflmcn are tho't very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hliands,
in that care, cftote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may take experience with the
hard dealing with me, how ye would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not
forth of danger, being in medio nationis pravx,; always no fear, with God's grace,
fllall make me flrink from her majefly's Iervice. Since the queen of England has
refused that you come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft fedata malitia
amorreorum, &.c. and therefore if Athol or Cathencs might by any means be pro-
cured to come, they were the most fit for the purpose, Rothcs were also meet, if
he and I were not both of one firname; so the treaty would get the lets credit
either in Scotland or here. Thcrefore avys, and fend the best may serve the turn,
and fail not Robert Melvil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the queen's
pleasure; in my last packet, with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May,
I fcnt a letter of the queen's own handwriting to him, which I trust ye received.
I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to have had by your presence,
for you could well have handled the queen of England, after her humour, as you
were wont to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying God to fend
you health. From Chattifworth the 15th of January.

No. IV. (Vol. 11. p. 26.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Lethington

zoungare upon the 8th day of O:. 1571.
W ItEFREA S you desire to know the queen's majelty's pleasure, what flie will

do for appeasing of these controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves

to be at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole isle,
and the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye flould leave
off the maintenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom
lhe will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and the king's party, to

receive you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for security of life and
.i ving!.

ALSO fle f ays that the queen of Scotts, for that flie has praRifcd with the

pope and other princes, and alao with her own fibjccts in England, great and
dangerous treasons againlft the state of her own country, and allb to the deltruc-
tion of her own person, that ihe filall never bear authority, nor have liberty while
ihe lives.

IF
402

TF ye reftie these gentle offers, now ofriered unto you, fle will lpreferntly ai

the king's party, with men, amnmuiiition, and all nccefllry things, to be' had
igainft you.

WVHERnEUONN her majcfly requires your answer with fpcc, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 36.)

Articles font by Kndx to the General AfLrcnbly, Auigutl: th!, 1572.
i I R S T, dclfring a new adl to be made ratifying all things concerniing tile king C.rc i.

and his obedience that were enaced of before without any clanme, ;u,;l that the M.i ti lly,
ministers who have contraveened the former aicts be corrciccd as accordeth. vol. . 350.

lTH}T fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintailing tile king's

cause, that whatfocvcr procedeth in this treaty of peace thev be milniiul the kirk
be not prcjudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they cli'ecially of the ininillcls, th.tr
have been robbed of their poflieffions withlin the kil k dduring the timec of the troublcs,
orothcrwifcl dung and injured, may be r(clored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any billioprick or other benefice be giveri

to any pcrfon, contrary to the tenor of the acts made in the time of the lirit reglent
of good memory, and they that are given contrar the lfaid aiss, or to any un-
qualified perbon, may be revoked and made null be an aCt of Icicrt council, and
that all bifhopricks, to vacand may be preflnted, and qualiied pIclcfos niomilint
thereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof, according to the order taken
in Leith be the conmmifioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of Ja-
nuary las-, and in ti)ccial to complill upon the giving of bifioprick of Ross to tile
lord Methven.

THATr no pentions of benefices, great or small, be given be simple donation of

any lord regent, without contnlt of tihe poficflor of the Laid benefices lhvin g tittle
thereto, and the adminflon of tile firclrintenideni or commillioners of the province
vhere this b-ncfice lyeth, or of tle bifliops lawfJlly elclced according to the Ls:id
order taken at L,eith; and desire an act of council to be made tlhereuporn, until the.
next parli.lenit, wherein the faminlie nmay be specially iniaccil, with inihibition to
the lords of fUllionl to aive any letters or decrects, upon such limple gifts of beneficcs
or pentions not beinLr gviven in manner above rchnearfel, and t ihat e kirk plrclently
all' milled declare all such gifts nill lo far as lycth in thieir plwer.

'THAT the firrt form (of prcelbntation to bec icics, whVich vwere in: the firl-f and

second regeit's time, be not changed as lnow it is conm.il )l)y ; butt thit tlii; c!.ul
be con)taiincd in tiie i nlil'ltation, that if tihe perlbns prelented miake rnl t rL'ledance,
or be fl.anterius or foulnd un ):worthy either in life or doctiine be tile jlJgirniilt of
tile Iirk (to whichl alwif hie thie ll be lubjcet) or meet to be tranilpoirtcd to another
room at the i'!lt of thl- kirk, thi llid prclcirt.ition and all that fliall fall tiereupon
shall be null andI of no force nor eftcct: and this to ia;ve place alib in the nomi-
natiorn of the bifilops.

THATr .1 an t be made in this aflilmbly that all things done in preju.lice of tie

kirk's atlillunpior of the third, either by papilts or others, by giving of iewvs, lite-
lents, or taks, or any otherwise difpolning the laid aflumed thirds, be declared null
:;th a foleril protcftation the whole kirk difafentith thereto.

3 F 2 T1AzT

-«^~ ~ ~ ~~~Tm'

TRAT an acl be made decerning and ordaining all bifliops, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromissions
therewith once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk
may easily confider the fame to be most expedient and necellir.

ANENT the juri'didtion of the kirk, that the famc be determined in this assembly,

becaufc this article hatih been long poitponed to make fuce to the regent and council
for remedy againfl mcftkngers and excoimuniciri::tC p::rlfns.

LAST, T'hat orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who procure

against miniftcrs and ministry, and for futting of juflice of the kirk's acions in
the fellion.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 42.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

23d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by there presents, that I Henry Killegrewe, Efq;- am-
baflador for the queen's mnajefty of England, Forasmuch as, at the earnest

motion and folicithtion being made to me, on her highicfts's behalf, there is accord
and pacification of the public troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland
agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honour-
able George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenuch, and the lord John Ha-
milton, foil to the duke's grace of Chaflellarault, and commendatour of the abby
of Abirbrothock, for the surety of their lives, livings, honours, and goods of
them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending
on them ; in treating of the which slid pacification, the murders of the late carl
of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levcnax grandfather, late regent to the king's
majcJy of Scotland his realm and lieges, as also an article touching the dilchiarge
for the fructis or moveable goods, which the said perlons have taken fra perfonis
professing the king's cbedience, before the damages done or committed hb them,
fincc the i5th day of Junij 1567, and before the penult day of July last by pAifled,
by reason of the conmon caule or any thing depending thereupon, being thought
by the king's commiraiics mattcris of such wecht and imprltance, as the king's pre-
lent regent could not conveniently, of himself, remit or discharge the fame. Yet
in rcfpecSt of the neceflity of the picfent pacification, and for the weil of the kinr,
and common quictnces of this realm and lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of
remiflion of the said murder crs, and of the dilcharge of the said frtufts, moveable
goods, and other damages, be mvced by the .erloris dcliring the said rcmiflions
and dicllharge to the queen's rmajefly my Lovereign, as to the princess nearcft both
in blood alnd habitation to the king of Scots. And u h..tficver her m.jelly flhall
advise and counsel touching the said tcmiflion and diftharge, the said lord reent,
'or the wcil of the king and univcrlal quietrcls of the realm of Scotland, fil,1ll
pcefolmn, obfcrve, and fulfil the fame. And in likewiis, the said earl Hun'ly, and
comimendatour of Abirbrothock, being urged to have dclivered pledges and hloftacs
for obflrvation of the conditions of the laid accord and pacification, hath rcquiied
nie in place thercof, in her majelly's name, by virtue of nmy commiiflion, to pro-
milc for them, that they liall utlry nld faithfully oblcrve and keep the Jhid paci-

fication,
404

fication, and all articles and conditions thereof, for t/eir parts, and that it would
p'.:le her majerry to intcrlpoe herliClf, as furcty and cautio;;(:r for them to that
efF;ct, to the king's majcfty of scotland their fovercigin and his hiid rcl Iglet, which
.1 have (1.me)1 and promilC to dtc, by virtue of her n':j.:ily's commiltiOln, ias by the
honorable iand plain ldaling of the laid .irl iand lord, tllhir inr:ction to peace well
ail-p!c;u'; the fame be'ng mos t agreeal le to the mi;nd of the (uccn's rii .ijefly my
b'verl-cign, vwhich lb long by her mlni'ncrls hatli tral lled lor 1le fd p.I clic.ttioll,
andll in the end, at her mll tiOI ani d il!icitatiron, thile (lille is ahccwde.', kli ', wii.'l herl
nllaj; ty's desire, thar the i;nime mi:;1y continueL' ui;loi:t, :iind ti.it the iioblcireiic
and others now rcturnlilg to the ki ir's obctdience {hill .ave flniiciclit fili:tV (or
their lives, livings, honours, and g ,ods. 'IiLerefore in icr m ij I 's nilnec, and
by virtue of my commitlion, I promill to the atfrclaid carl tijIt;l', andil clin-

encndator of Abirbrothock, tl)ht bv her m.jeit's good niLa;ii1 the llild r'uill:.ii

and discharge lhali he purchascd and oblta:ineid c tho ji, their I ifolltciss if'iclus, (iC'-
vants, and parta:kers, nowv properly de) pnding upon them (thie p:.rili: fl)iciliud in
the firit al)itiicnice always excepted), as allo thiat tlhe llild pacili..itiul i hill be
truly obl(frved to them, ald th it her tn.ljct I- i11 ill inte)roll- herfe] as Cilli.c'rvatri:.
thereof, and endeavour herefif to cale the fineic to be truly a;id Iniccrly kept in.
all points and articles thereof accordingl . In witiiels wlcreof, I Ih.ave to ii p|rc-
sent fublcribed with my hand, and teale e la1ic wvith milie ow;i fIal the 1 !th
day of Feb. Anno Doiniiii 1572. iAml this to be ipcrfoirmie by nie, cbtwvixt tile
dite hereof, and the parliamnclit which hliall ibe atppointted for their rcllitutiol, or
at the furthest before the cnd of the l:lid parliaient. Sic liblcr'ibitir.
The biflop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's

dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her idowrry, hefides other 157ó.

pofiiclliois, the dulkedom of Turene, which vws llcnilily colntra!lted illd Cort. Lib.

given to her by the king and estates of parliamn'int; which dlukedom Ihe pofli 'l'd Calig. 1B. .
peacefully till 1567, and then;, upon the pacilication betwixt the king and Mllof.
his brother, to augmeni t whiofe appenage this dutchy was rivCn, to which the
qtecen of Scotland yielded upon1 accounit of princes, who were her r na relations,
provided the cqulivalcnt which as lipromilcd hier hiliild be tilithl'll]'y pCi'OIICed.
So that ye.tr, after a great many filicitations, ill lieu of tlhat dutchlI, Ihe had
granted her the county of Vcrnmandaile with tihe l;ailds ad liiliwicks ui ;uley
an(l Vetry ; tho' 'tis known that county and the otlher lands were not of equlal va-
lue witl I'irelne, but was promised to have 11 atdditio of lands il th( nicihilbour-
hood to an equll value. Upon this letters pte it weIe ranld, whihi weV'' (:c1-
iirmcd in the courts of parli;lmeiit, clhamber of accounlts, court of ai'., ci..;:I Cr
of the trcafury, and others ncccflary ; upon which tih entecred into u)olClliin of
that counit)', &c. Afterwards, by a valuation of the ciilniliioners r) the Cllaiul-
bcr of accuuOtts, it was found that the revenlle of thlit co0illt)y, ;c. did nut alnioutuil
to tholoe of L'urene, by 3000 livres. B3ut inr.lad of mlakig uil this d cliciency
accord: i u to jultice, some of tle privy counicil, viz . . dc Cheverniey, tlie Iprc-
iidletts of 3cellicvre, Nicocholav, :alid S.. :uinct, in the namec of the king, not-
withlt.iniing of her ;lforel cid loilcs, did Iell and: . alicnate tie lainds of bhenlis,
and the lutlihy of Efl-Aimpcs, to madamn de lotpitlcniicr , from whom tiln king

re, c *ved

A P P PE NDIX.

received money; of which file the counfcllors aforesaid obliged themselves to be
guarantees, which hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have juflice done her. So
that madam de Montpenfier hath been put in pofflfion of there lands of Senlis,
contrary to all the declaration, protellation, and aflirances of the king of France
to queen Mary's ambafladors. So that the queen of Scotland is difpofliflcd of her
dowry, contrary to all equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 47.)

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

3d March I T will plcafe your grace, I received your grace's letter, and has confidered the
1577. E. of - fame. The parlon of Camsey was here at me before the reccit thereof, directed
Mortoun's fra my lord of Mar, and the master anent my last written, which was the answer
Archives. of the writing that the master fcnt to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring me
i ind. B. to come to Sterling to confer vith tlem. I had given my answer before the rccit
-o. '9' of your grace's letter, that I behuifit to be bcf d Sanct Androis, at ane friends

tryfi, which I-might not omit: I underitand by my said cousin, that the king's
majeity is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent your lordship's
trial, and that he.had written before his departure to my lord Monthrois. 1 un-
derfland, likcwifc, he will write to your grace to come there for the fame effecL,
which I tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace,
for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the best, and not to sleep in security,
but to turn you with untligned l;eart to God, and to confider with yourself, tha-t
when the king's mrajefy was very young, God made him the instrument to divest
his mother from her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of his Divine
vlajcfty , and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as largely in you,
except that your grace condescended not to the deftrulion of your wife. For as
to harlotry and ambition, 1 think your grace has as far offended God, and far
more in avaritioufiefs, which vycis God never left unplagued, except speedy re-
pentance, which I pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can
never have the love of God nor rran. 1 pray your grace flatter not yourself; for
if your grace believes that ye have the good will of them that are the king's
good willcrs ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfectly that your own palti-
culars aie not contented, lat be the reft, and that mroft ptincipally for your hard
dealing. I pray your grace, beir with me that 1 am thus hamlie, for cerrainly it
proceeds from no grudge, but from the very afl-eStion of my heart towards your
grace, which has continued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
the niatter itands in your gr:ce's handling with the king's majefly, for certainly,
if your grace l.1l forth with him now, I fee not how ye fltll meet hereafter;
pr:iy I your glace to call to God, and look on the best, and calt from your grace
T both your vi Cs, to wit, anibition ;nd avaiitioulnlels. I am riding this day to SanCt

Androis, and trust to return on \Vedncfday at the farthcft. If your grace will
.command me in any offices that are honefi, that I may do your grace pleafilre in at
Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind, and shall do to my power and knowledge,
and this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To

To our trufly cotfin tlhe lord locllcven.
0T RUSTY cousin, after our moif hcarts conincindations, we rcceived yourl FIron thelori.

letter of the 3d of March, and as we take )our plillilcl'es th 'Tcin ill good part, ,;in"l.

as proceeding from a friend and kinfmian, in whol oodl aft'fctli, towards us wec 1'. of Mor-
never doubted, so ye may not think it lange
l thait we !purge our!'clf f1) fir of your t'"'" A\r-

chives, ]Brind.
accufatioil, as in confcicnce we find not ourlciff to h.ivc oflr'inled il. As touc hing c,

. GB. No. 3 I.

our offcnce to God, we intcld not to cxcule it, but to fblmit us to his mercy ; so'
ambition surely we think none can juflly accule us; for in our private cf.tte we
could, and can live as well contented, as any of our t(hrcce in Scotland, without
further aspiring. The bearing too the charge of tile govcrnientl of the re;lin,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that s1hall occupy thit pl:icc, nut fimplly to re-
Jpeci' ourself, but his majcefy's rowme, which iw fiup,)A', and thercin iot tr;ili-
cending the bounds of mcaftire, as, we truift, it fillli not be founid we iive thole,
it ought not to be attributed to any amnbition in us. For as bo(ll as ever ii: na-
jelly Ihall think hinifelf ready and able for his own governnentl, noin, fihall Imore
willingly agree and advance the fin-e nor I, since I think never to lit my face
against Iim, whose honour, fifct)y, and preflrvation has been si dear unto me,
nor I will never believe to find othervwil' at his hand than favour, although all
the unfriends I have in the earth were abhtot himn, to perfuiade himn to the contrary.
As we write unto you, our friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar
is not thankfully acquit; as we trull yourfclf confiders ; ut hecau!i the anibai-
fadors of England, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, trcafurer, and bnme noble-
men rides weft this day to Iee the king, we pray you heartily aiddrclf yourlelf to
be there as soon as ye can, and as ye scall find the likelihood of all things, let us
be advertized thereof, with your own advice, by Alcx'. Ilay, whom we have
thought good to lend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Stciling rides to )ou-
glas. And to we commit you in the protcCtion of God. At liolylood houlf, the
4th of March 1577.

SoIR the avaritioufiefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in uis b liberally to

deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers, nor never (hall any fbvcreign and
native born prince, let be any officer, efclhew the dilllains of ficl, as thinks tlihc
judges to their own reward ; in many cauies I doubt not to find the alliltance of
my friends, but where my ationls ;iall appear unhoncft, I will not crave their
afiiance, but let me bear my own buithen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 70.)

Letter of W\alsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, 15°o-i.

S I R,

II A V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter of the 25th. of Cott. I.ii.
the lal: directed unto his lordship, containing a report of your ncgotiationl with ('ali. tC. .

the king and his council, in your second audieice, wherewith having made hier
miajefty acquainted, ihe reemned somewhat to rniift'hL, that you fliould it long (li;/-
to dcaljfr t/e cnlargemert of Empedocles. B1ut I made anfivcr in your ble:dl, that

1 thought

407

I thought you were direted by the advice of the said Empedocles f-iiazis, inl tl
ioliciting of that caufc, who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal
therein, with most effecr, and best fucccs, with which answer, her majelty did in
the end reft very well ftisfind, touching that point.

YoUR putting of us in hope that d'Aubigny miiht easily be won at her ma-

jefly's devotion, was at first interpreted to h.ve been ironie fpole by you. But
since it feemeth you insist upon it, I could with you were othcrwie perluaded of
the man, or at lealt kept that opinion to yourself, for confidcring the c;-u and pur-
pose of his coming intto Scotland, as may be many ways u/fiEcicntly proved, was
onlv to advance the queen's liberty, and rcccption into that government, to over-
throw religion, and to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the in-
closed copy, which you may ule to good purpofi there, fl(all partly give you
some light; there is no man here can be persuaded that he will change his purpose,
for so fmhall advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you (hall do well
to forbear to harp any more upon that slring, as I have already written to you.
The prince of (range fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do any good;
for belides that thcle people are in thenflelves .sow in their resolutions, their own
.ilairs are, at pretent, so great, their state lo confused, and the prince's authority
so small, that he cannot so soon take order in it ; and yet for mine own l:art, I have
not been negligent or caeclcfs in the matter, having, more than three weeks palt,
sent one about it, from whom nevertheleis I do yet hear nothing. The letters,
you defirc fliould be written thither by the French ministers, 1 have given order to
Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will careully perform it, so that,
I hope, I sh;ill have them to fend you by the next. And so I commit you to God,
At Whitchall, the 3d of February i 5o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
This letter is an original, anl in jfone parts of it wrote in cyphers and explained by

another hand. By Empedocles is znderclsood Morton. By /illenarius the king of
Scots, D'ldubigney is marked thus o I o

3 Feb. i52o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to be

better manifcfted, being now thought meet to be in convenient fort
used, and laid againit D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the king,
the nobility, and that (late.

.Cott. Liib. F1 RS r, it hath been inforimrd, by credible means, that D'Aubigney was
C ihg. C.1 Iprivy and acqua:nted with la Navc' the king's mother's secretary, coming into
An origita. Scotland, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think

and elteem it an evil prefieiint for princes, that fubjccts might have power to de-
prive their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded, by any
mean, to defeat him, either of the prefcnt government of that realm, or yet of
the pofleflion of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to afluie the fame to
him: and that for the accomplishment of that affurancc, the king [hould have

8 Lct n

been advised and drawn to lave governed, f or fomne finort time, as pri'.-, caling
I)'AtI'Lhiiziny to rule as governor of the pi inc, by colilllioili'I froml tile q].;e; is
mother, until the kini s cnrimi cs were fiup,;:Li:d ; after which time, D'Aiubi y
ihould have power given to elltablifi and reliun that kiigdrml to the king, by iii
mother's voluntary concint, wherebly all filh, , ;s ihd before been in oatlion ai:iil!:
the queen or her authority, niigl.t be brought to flan:d in the king's nercy. ^
for that the king might live il more lulretv, I)'Ai.bi' nv ilould be decliarl ho[lt
fccond person in fucccefion of that crown, and; aifo liniutcini:iin general of 'cotl.io(!
and that l)''Aubigny, bft,re his departure out of l rance, r ccivcd comn)ifi r'i fr-.rii
the king's mother to the cfilcits remcinbcrcd, or near the fi.ie. T hat in th!is l -
half he had conference with the bilhops of GCl!aow, :ind 1Ro:;, and with fir l .m.s
Btaiford, with which perldrins, and with th te duke of c uife, ie had and hath fieqlu':tl
intelligencc, and by fir J:unes IBaford he was advised to conier with the lord . ,ilu
I-Iamilton before his repair into Scotland, whereunto he alreeld anl vet a:Cl'-
warrds he Cent one John l-Iamilton to the did loid lJihn to exccufe himn in this pal t,
illedtgiug, that he did forbear to come to himii, left thereby lie illould marror hiinder
greater cfr'eats to be executed by him ill Scotland.

TIHAT befcrre his coming into that realnll, the nobility and country were well

quieted and united in got d concoid, with gre at love betwixt the kin;! and nnibility,
anld amongst the noblelle, but he hath both dr:lwn the kinl againlll lundly f' the
chicflt: of his nobility, that ihave been niol. ic. dv, and have expenpiidcd their blood
a:nd pollefiions to preserve religion, and deflnd thl k:ing's person, his governiment and
efcate, and also hath give ni occalion of great tli:'icions alnd ofilnc to b1e Cegcnidercd
betwixt the king and his nobility, and cfpecially witlh filch as have beeni in acliiot
against tle king's mother, and her authority, who by force and means of tlie siid
conmiflien and praaticc, fliould have been Ibrolght into motC dangerous con-
dition ; and who also may find thenfclves in no finall perill while he pofisiles the
king's car, alburetli his prfclbnce, and holdeth such of the principal keys andl ports
of his realm, as lie prefl ntly enjoyeth.

T-A, 'r hle hath diawn the king not only to forget the great benefits done to him

and his realmc, by lhie ,Utcen's m!je lvy of l':ngland, but allo to requite the l: ihm
with sundry signs of great uiithaniktuliiels, and wounding therewith the honour of
her majesty, and thereby hath adventured to shake the happy amity long time con-
tinuedi betvwit tlole princes.

AND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good offers,

to have pafclid, and been done betwixt them: In which rcfpecCt the kiing and coun-
cil having resolvcd to wiite to her majefly, for her highnecfs better fatisfi;aion in
the late negotiation of MIr. Alexander Humne of Nortlibcrwick, had given order
to the king's secretary to frame that letter : IIec ninldii:g to break the bond of amlity
in lunder, willed the secretary to be flre that nothing ihould be inserted in that
letter, whereby the king ihould crave any thiing at her hands, seeking thereby to
cut off all loving courtelies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the said secretary
may be better learned, and thereupon further aplrovcd.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Abiligny's protection, Alexander

King prefurned with that boldness to ma.ke his lewd harangue, anld by his means
laath hitherto escaped chastisement and correc'tioii due for his offence.

TIHAT fir Janes Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the king's father, hath

been called into the reaiill by Icnrnoie, without the privity of the king. And
whereas the said fir [aminc focnd in a :rcren velvet dcfk, late the carl of Both-

VOL. II.t well's,

well's, and saw and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in
that murder, and can bcft declare and witness who were authors and executors or'
of the fame ; he is drawn by Lcnnox to fupprcfs the truth, and to accuse such as
he himself kn we th to be innocent ; and as by order of law, will be so found, if they
may have due trial, v. hich, contrary to all juilice, is by Lennox means denied.

7Iis is the charg;re agaiN/I D'.<ftign'v, nm7nticLed in the frrcgcing letter by WIalyi7g-

ham ; tut /,y .1fo)r,-d thry mc.;?% /'r
.ames Bal/fur.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 86.)
The copy of the king of France his direftions ifet to Scotland with

Scincur de la Motte Fcnelon. Translated out of the French.
T IRRS -, on their noof chli .ian majefy's part, he fiall make the n-of honour...

able ft:!ui:iticii a;nd vifitill to the ioilf fcrene king of Scotilnd, their good
brother and litt;z son, that in him is poflable.

To give him theil Itters that are clolkd, such and such like as they have written

to him with their hn:(iS, aind to filow cxprefsly the perfect friendlhiip and singular
affi'lion, that licir m: jcfiys bear to him, and to bring back the anfwcr.

To take hecd to the things which touch near the molt serene king, to the c.citt
that his perfoin may be in no danger, but that it may be nmoft uirelv prelerved.

AND that iC e

h not hindered in the honest liberty tlhat he ought to have, and that
no greater, or firaiter guards be about him than lie hid before.

AN3D ILch l;ke, that he be not impeached in the authority, that God hath givcn

to him of king and prince iovcrcign above his fubjets, to the cftehe he nm;y as;
freely ordain and conmmand in his affairs, and in the affairs of his countr)y, with
his ordinary council, as he was uscd to do of before.

TlAtr his nobility, barons, and commonality of his country may have their free

liberty to rlef;rt to his feitine majefly without fufficion. of greater gualds or more
arnmed men a!out his perlon than the use was, that they be not afrraid and hindered
to reort ; and further that the fegnicur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely
speak to the laid serene king and council, requiring the re-elablifiling of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

Ar.D that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of

good behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are
content with the ftrm of government presently with the slid icrele king, to the
end that if there be any micfontent he may travaile to agree themi togelther, and
that lie return not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have not ured them so reve--

rently towards the said serene king their fovcrcign lord, as the duty of their obe-
cdence required, that he may pray on this behalf of his majelty molt chriffian the
said serene king his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame,
anid exhorting them to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all
refpedts with the obedience and true itibjection they ought him.

AND if the said seigneur de la Motte perceves the laid cfrene king to be in any

manner constrained of his perfori, authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs,
than he used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the lovercignty

of

410

Caldeiw.x
IVI S. lr ,

,(.31. p.
C2 c tl)n.

of a prince does require, that he use all nmoecn lawful and honefl to place liihi i' :
the lfmine, and that he imploy as muich as the credit of his moil chrillian iaicitl
may do toward tieh nobility, and fubjccts of that contri, and as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he loves
and conli'les in as much as they were proper Irenchmen.

AND that he wittnelf to the said lfren.c king, anld his estate%, of his content, nn,

to all the no!'ility and prilicipall perlOnages of the contrv, that his nmolt k hii{ill
majeflie will continue on his part in the nmoft ancient alliance and confcdcit:.,
wh!ich he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his io:u*ii
and coitry, with his principall subj'es, to perlvere ic te fm ine, in :il (r,,,i
underftanldinig and friendlhip with him; the which, on his part, he (hall do, ob-
cerving the (amine most inviolable.

F' UtrHER lhis moPl chriltian majesty ulderflanling that the Iereine kiin: lis n oul

brother was contented witi the duke of Lenox, and his fcrvi l the I;lii iiinict'
De la Motte had ciarge to pra.y his fcrene onlajelty that he night reinailn b1,:ile
him to his cotentnment, believing that he Ihouid noeic williinilv intertain tile paints
of love and collnidcrlaciie, betwixt tlheir im:leflys and their coitrys,. becanui lie
wais a gooLd iubjct to them both; and if hle might not remain, withouit inme aliter-
ation of the tr.iiitqiiil!ity of his filate, that lie mihlL letirc hili to his owi ioilcle
in tihe slid country, in liuiercie, or if lie plca.ld to return to France that hlie i :li
surely--- and if it picalIs his fIrclce injcit)y, to catlle cca(e and ftly the in-
peachiments, that are made of I ew upon tlie fronticrs, to tile cfl't.c that tile Iltural
Frenchmen may entel as freely into the coiuntry, as they were wont to do
of before.

ANn that there may be no purpoer of diflntiation, nor no speech but honour.

able of the molt christian king, il that cointry, but such like as is fpokcn ofi .u
honourably of tlie lfrene king of Scotland in 'ranice.

HI had another head to propoine, which lie conce:led till a little before his de-

parture, to wit, that the c:I(evIn, the king's mother, was contecit to receive her fojr
in afibciatiou of tile kingdom.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. I02.)
Lord H-Iunfdon to Sir lrancis WVilfinghalm, tlhe I4th of Augufl I584,

from B1erwick.

S I R,
A CC) O DING to my former letters, touching my meetitng with the earl of Caldernv.

Arran upon Wredelcl y lall, there camie hilher to me from the carle, the MS. liflory,

justice clerk, and fir \Villiam Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's voI3. P 374.
privie council, to treat with me about the order of o:r meeting, referring wholly
to me to appoint the hour, and the numrber we fliould meet withal ; lb as we con-
cluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with
ourselves to be 13 of a fide; and the reft of our troops to fland each of them a
mile from the town ; the one on th- one fide, tle: other on the other fidc, lb :s our
troops were two miles asunder; I was not many hnorfecmn, but I fipplied it with
footmen, where I had loo (hot on horse, but they were very near 500o Ilorl well
appointed: According to which appoinit tmnlt, we met yclcrdai.. ai;d iter to:ne

- (; cotratat-

con2ratulations, the eric fell in the like proteflations of his good will and readiness
to serve the queen's majelty, before any prince in the world, next his oIvereign, as
he had done heretofore by his.lcttcr,, and rather more ; wi;h fiucl earnest vowr-
as unlel's he be worse than a devil, her majesty may dispose cf him iat her plcafure ;.
this being ended, I entered with him touching the caule I had to deal with him,
and so near as I could, last not'inig unrehcarl-d, that I had to charge the king or
him with any unkind dealing toward her maneily, according to my infty u-tionF
which without any delay he anfwcred prefcntly, as ye shall perceive by the faii
anfwcrs sent herewith ; but T repls'iig unto him, he amplified them with manv moc
circumliances, but to this eC.I't. 'I hn I dealt with lhim touching the point of
her majcfty's httisfalion, for the uttering fiich pradtices as ha;s been lately set on
foot for the diqituictilnl of her m:ljflly aind her estate, wi:o thereof made sundry
dilcouirfes, what marriages-have been offcred to his majctiie by fundrie princes, and
by what means the earle has fouglht to divert them, and for what caufcs ; the onec
for that be marriage with Spain or France, he mu!t allbo alter his religion, which as
lie is lure the king will never doe, lo will he never Iunier hin to hear i:n unto it, so
long as he has any credit with him ; he denys nit but the king has been tlaca
withal be practiccs to deal againpt her majctly, which he has so far denied and rc-
fufcid to enter into, as thev have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or
lhe knoweth therein there fliall be nothing hidden from her majeity, as her majefly
ihall knrow vlciy shortly ; firely it fecms by lhis fpeechcs, that if the king would
have yielded thereunto there had been no finall company cf French in Scotland ere
now to dil'huiet her majesty--- This being ended, 1 dealt with him earnelily for
the stay of this parliament, which now apl;roacheth; or at the least that there may
he nothing done therein, to tile prejudice of thcfk noblemen and others now in
England, for the forfaulting of their livings and goods; hereupon he made a Iont
dilcourfe to me, first of the eall of Angus dealing about the earl of ilorton, then
of his going out, notwithltanding of fundric gracious of'ers the king had made
him, then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they had the king's
majesty in their hands, they impriflned himself, dealt with the king for putting of
the duke out of the realmc, the king refused so to do, they told him plainly that if
he would not he should have the earl of Arran's head in a dish; the king asked
what offence the earl had made ? and they answered it must be fb, and should be
so; hereupon, for the safeguard of Arran's life, the king was consent to fend away
the duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie times in danger of his life; I alledgcd
unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and his als in council, that
they had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good liking and contentment,.
who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not do any thing but that
which pleaed' them, with such a number of other their dealings with the king
whileft he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if they
were true; 1 said the king might have let the queen's majesty's ambassador have
known his mind secretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he answered,
. that the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded

from Mr. Bow's practice, and thereby durfl not impart so much to him, and yet
the king was content, and did give remiflion to as many as would acknow-
ledge their faults, and ask remiflion, and such as would not, he thought fit to
banilh, to try their further loyalty,, in which time they conspired the king's fe-
cond apprehension, and the killing of the earle, and others, and seduced the mini-
tiers to their faition, and yet. not. satisfied with there conspiracies and treafonabic

dealings-
4.13

tdealings (as he teins them), are entered i:to a tir:il, beingr in I nalanid lJuder her
mnjellv's protection, to diihnouiir hr

he ,injcfly as far as in them Ivcti, or at le.:,t

to ca;use the kiing co ncc.ive hime unkid ;lt s in her ml,,jIly, for

t i.lrhi,!uiirii7g (f`

them ; 1 wv rote to yow wl'.V:t the conilpiracy was, the taking of tic , the

ki', the killii-

of the ear!e of Ar;':it, andl Itone lstels, the taking of the ( atlj f, t Idin'. lnn
h) inng:ing home the ear!es, to take the ch:irge of the kinl-; ill \which (yivs I,c) is
by Lrulninllndt conlflled, alnd by the pli '.{ll ot o ( (;ctic ddcii 11inl rietl denied, ;:id
the coiltable of the ca;itle thereupon ftld; the earl blougllt l)rumnlind with himl
as filr as Jan ton, lhere lie lay, to have con fetli' the conlsi iracv hetore me, but
havinra at his I!gtiig r-eccivel a l !ow oil his lie' wirli h rie, to ;is he couli borio"r
lhim ino furthtr, I r iPlied that I tioiilit vt ily they would not wolc iltv l'luc
praiicci s in rcil pc et of t-.c (utii.ns tn:ijctll, elbid ig within lter re.!lil , aniid it thee:
be iany li'leh practice , tl'ey have pr.c.rcd.d tfromi olhCirs, ald they nlt pri vieU liit
them ; and th.t if it be not ;a!pp)arently provedi :s:t;iiflt tliim, thalt it will be thlI!ilt
to be iomen pr:,.ciice to ;iri'ra '.ice the fault, and to male tliem tile more ldiiis to
the kin.. l'-u :;n!i\ erel mni, thait it f uldu lie provced ; liin:icieilitl:, tl;it tlih:
Iioltid not be ahle with truth tu ! ns' it, tr their io ha,!' is to 1 _ ;!;(;e ti
part of it, antd thereore concluded, thiat if her na;ti'Ity flioui ii) pre the kinlr for
them .lt this timie, that wvntld r:.ther lintcdr tlis Inl;tter' of the aimitty, nor hilti :er
it, and that ill:ce they ftck chiefly his life, he could noti, in nv reci 1, I'c to d
them anyC . od rx; nd b ei'des Ihe aft red ntle, tht ii hle would, lie d.ire nor, tlii
l;: lt :,.ttc l i:g ,il'.,iln out -tt it is; : id liurcly if this ni:ler h d

ll. t . 1o'.i n out, [

w'c.:ld not lia:. doubted teic restoring of the ca:l ol' M\! .r viy ifitorly, if h. -
niajcliy wvould have lemiloyed me ther-in, but for the carl of Aingus, I perceivec
the Iilug is perfiuadtil ti:hat b ,

th he, and tile 'til of the Dou:l.l fs, lhve coinccive(l

so mortall an Iauiei. ia" titfl lhimn and the earl of .,erran, ab.ut tie; death otl tLi:
call of M\orton, as if theys were at home, to-nlourowv next, they would not le;'..:
to p'racice and collipire tice death of them both, and therefore a hard Imatter to do
any tliirig for him : nlll, h le concluded and required me to afl;reC lier nia:;(:;i
fromn thie kitg, tilht there lliihl nothing be hid from her, nor any til: left ulltidloni
that may fatisfie iher m.njel)y wvith re.oni, arnd that the kiig fhiall lnever do any
thing, nor con:ent to have any thing done in her plicjudicc, ib long as he h.id aly
credit with him, or autihority under him. -laving this far proceeded, lie dcltired
to rhew me his commiiclin, wvhich is unider the great leal, to liinielf only, hliich is
as large as may be, and yet fundrie of the privic council there witlih him, but not
one in conmmiiflion, nor prelent, nor near us all thi:i time, having lSip)t iahinolt live
hours in these matters; he presented to me the master of Gray, wlho delivercd to
me a lettcr from the king in his commendation, whomn I perceive the king means to
lcnd to her majelty, and therefore requires i litfe-conduCt for his pafl:ge, which I pray
yow procure, and to fend it as toon as you may. 1 let hin undcritaind of the lord1
Seaton's ncgociation with the French king. He swore to tme, tlhat Seaton was
but a knave, and that it was partly againlt his will, that he lhould he tent thither.
1ut his commission and iniirua'ion being of no great importance, he yielded the
sooner; and if Scaton has gone beyond his instructions, which Arran drew himtilf,
he will make Seaton finart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Miark Gol-
gan, he protested he never heard of any such ;. he fays there was a little poor Iful,
with a black beard, come thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Dcf-
mnnd, to whom he gave a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots

mail.

man going into Ireland, he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may
be fomin few rafkals that he knows not of; and touching the cotling ol any Jcfuits
into Scotland, he fays it is but the slanderous devise of the king's cnemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who
the world shall well fee will continue as constant therein, as what prince foevcr
profeflid it most; and the earl himself dos protest to me, that to his knowledge,
he never a saw a Jesuit in his life, and did afiure inc if there was any in Scotland,
they should not do so much harm in Scotland, as their miniRers would do, if they
preach such dodrine as they'did in Scotl.and; and touching one liallcnden, of
whom 1 wrote to yow, I heard from Mlr. Colvill, the eirle avows conftanltly that
he knows not, nor hath not heard of any fuchl man, but he would inquire at the
juflice clerk, and would inform ni me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
yow as ilort a difcourle as 1 can of so many matters, to long difcourled upon, but
these are the principal points of all uur talk, so near as I can remember it, and
for this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick the i4th of Augult.
1584.

The king is very desirous to have

mvy son Robert Ci y to come to hiim.
I pray yow kno l\ hr majcily's pliafd/re.
Arran's Anfwcrs to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord lHunfdon,

let ldown in another form.
A s to the itrait and fevcre pcrfecution of all such, as have been noted to have

been well affetted to the queen's majelly, it cannot appear they were either

for that caule puniihcd, or hardly dealt with, ince his majetly of late has been so
careful and diligent to choice out good inflruments to deal betwixt her majelly and
him, as his majelly has done in electing of your lordship and me; betides that in
all their accusations, their good will and affection born to her majeity was, at no
time, laid to their charge, but capital aclions of trcafon many way tried now be
the whole three estates, and niol c hnn maiiifcfl to the world.

As for his majefly inhibiting, by publick proclamation, luch as were banifled,

not to repair in England; the bruits and whilperings that came to his majefiy's
cars, of their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn they accomplished, so far
as in them lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near
his majesty's realm, left they should have attempted these things which shortly
they did attempt, being farther ofF, and more distant both by tea and land.

As for reception of Jesuits, and others, her majesty's fugitives, and not deliver-

ing them according to his promise, as your lordfllip propones, his majesty would
be most glad that tb it might fall out by your lordihip's travilcs, that no fugitive of
,ceither realme ihould be received of either, and l hen ob shall be, it ihall not fail
on his majelty's part, albeit in very deed this time bygone his majesty has been
constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good
,naturall, since her majesty hath receipt, in effect, the whole and grcateft rebells
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his
majelty's mother anent their aflbciation, his majelty has comnianded me, in pre-

fence

feirce of your lordfhii)'s ftrvant, to aflilre her ninjcflv and your lorilflip, in his
m;ajely's iamrne, that it is altogetther lalic, anid ll untruthl, nor .nlly such like matter
done yet.

His llmajefly hlns aill coinmanded me to afllire your lordfh;p, thi:it it is alo faalie

and untrue, that his majecfty has, by any means ditcct or itndirec, fIent any niel-
itige to the pope, or received any from hi m; or that his n:ineily has dealt: vith
Spain or any foreigneis, to harm her rnajcfty or her re.ilii, l"which his m:ijcly
could have no honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as 1 hope in Good
it fliall.

As coccernigin the contemptuous tif'.re of her majcfy's minitfers, sent unto

his majefly, his maiij:'y uled none of themil o ; andt if his majcll had, I'ulliricil
cauiFe \'.-s given hb them, as so le of their own writs do yet teitifv; as I inoit
p.riticuilai})ly ioavcd ytou'r 1-rdiiiip at i.ou!ldcn atl our late lietting,.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. io6.)
The Scottiil queen's ofitcrs upon the ell;tct of her libe:rty piopouiaire.

by hcrie cretary Naw, November 158.t
r' TIE1, c!ien nmv i mifr:'cfs bc.;ng once well afritrcd of your mn:jcfly's anlit%, Cott. i.i.

I. V'K ILL d-C.i': . ' t;L 1 v

Li til,.t ihc v, ill (as it is i)it'tcr'.'ly or

.ii',::;li! ) t,';!i '

..

:fir.itly to joiu uto eour mn.:j, 'v, ilnd to th!e (ame to yield and bL.r tile chiCi 1.- A c ;:' .
iaCur l.nti rcl'pect, bicorc: .l oti.r kinrinces d in Clritc(dunil.

2.. Si.E wvill fwvc:t', a.;.: , rotcft tfolmmil, a i ncereC lorgctfiliicls of a:ll \ rol s

vliichi f(le mav plc:t:id to h.n:.c been don(1 unito her in this rcanli, :ani will n'1';.'i, ,
any fort or in..aintr that[f:'cr, flicw ofttice (or the fi'mne.

3. SI :! ill aivow and ackinovledg(g-, s well inl her ownv pnrticulair n:lmvc, an, :!'!;

for lh' t !si: ::l otl:rs dt entding of her iur ever, your m:jcfr-y, ftr j tif, trui, ;and
lawful queeln of LEnaland.

4A AND coniltn-q;Ltl, will renounce, as well for herself, as rr her lSid h l icir',

all rights and pretencets which ihe may claim to tihe crolwn of Enilan.d, dii-iri:
-your -najcftv's life, a:l other prejudice.

5. $Sl-r! ill revnl!:c aI acts ainl flcws, by ier helcrtofore made, of prcl.ncc to

thls l.ild cdown to thl piejldice of yourr mi:ijefly, as may I.e tlhe takiln of (ihe t rr!
and1 fle of (quecn of Englianl by the cumniandnient of king Francis her iat:
lord and hufh.lid.

6. SoiE will renounce the pope's bull for so muich as may be expounded to tiuri

inll her favour, or for her behoof, toucling the depriv.ltion ot her Iajeitly, a;ld will
dccl.re that he wiill never help and lcrve ilerilf with it.

7. SIn. wvill not proFccute, during your majefiy's life, by open force or t!icr-

ways, any publick declaration of her rilht in the fucceflion of this realmln, ,) as
secret alliriance be given unto her, or at the Icafl publick promie, that no decidin"g
thereof shall be made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, dui ino )yuir
majefly's life, not after your decca:lc, until such time as they have be'in hn:rd
thereupon, in publick, free, and general aflcmbly of the parliament ot the ilid
realmi.

8. SI-E will not prac'tire, dircctly or indirectly, with any of your nmajcny's si .
je~ts, neither within nor out of your rcaim, alny thing tending to war, ci:il or

X ', :'Cci:,

foreign, againf your majefly and your cftate, be it under pretext ofreligon, or for
civil and politick government.

9. S-H will not maintain or support any of your fu!,jets declared rebels, and
convicfed of treason against you.

10. SHE will enter into the aflociation, which was flewed her at Wingfield for

the surety of your majesty's life, so as there be mended or right explicated some
clauses, which 1 will shew to your majesty, when 1 ihall have the copy thereof, as
I have before time required.

11. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any war or trouble

against this state, and will Jenounce, froin this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that rel'pcet.

FURTH-F.IERMORE, this realm being afil ied by any civil or foreign war, (ihe will

-take part with your mn.ajefly, and will alift you in your defence with all her forces
and means, dep)ending of herflelf and with all her fsiends of Chriflendom.

13. AND to that cficct, for the mutual defence and maintenance of your mra.

jefly, and the two realms of this isle, file will enter with your majesty in a league
delenlive, as lihall be n( re particularly advised, and will pcrfwade, as much as in
her, the king her ion to do the like.

'THE leagues with all parts abroad rcmaiinin firm, and especially the antient

league bctu cen' l rance and Scotl.nd, in that which shall not be against this
plrfent.

14. SiHE will enter into a league offensive, having good aflurance, or fecrct de-

claration and acknowlcdgmcnt of her right in the fuccefiTon of this crown, and
pron'ife, that haplpening any hreach betwixt France and this realm (which file
prayeth God never to happeni, the jult alue of her dowry flall be placed for
her in lands of the levenue of the crown.

15. SoiR aflurance of her promiles and covenants, fie doth offer to abide her-

self in this realm for a certain time (better hofage can lthe not give than her own
perfbn), which, bo as fle be kept in the liberty here before propoundeud, is not in
cafe to elicape fccretly out of this country, in the sickly fiate file is in, and with
the good order which your majesty can take therein.

16. AND in cale your majefly do agree to her full and whole deliverance, to re-

tire heifelf at her will out ot this reanlm, the said queen of Scots the will give sus-
ficicnt hoflage tor such time as will be advilJed.

17. IF file abide in this realm, ihe will promire not to depart out of it, with-

out your licence, so as it be promised unto her that her f1ate, in such libertyas shall
be accorded unto her, shall not be in any fort altered, uutill atter tryall to have at-
tempted against your life, or other trouble of your etate.

18. IF tfe go into Scotland, she will promile to alter nothing there in the re-

ligion which is now used there, Ihe being suffered to have free excrcife of hers,
for her and her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France ; and further, to
pull out every root of new division between the fubjelcs, that none of the fubjecs
of Scotland shall be sifted for his conlcience, nor confirained to go to the service of
the contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done against her in Scot-

land, and things shall remain there as they are at this present, for the refpea, saving
that which hath been done against her honour, which (he meaneth to have revoked
and annulled.

20. SHE

20. SHE will travel to fettle a Cure and general reconciliation between the nobility

of the country, and to cause to be appointed about the king her son, and in his
council, such as shall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the
country, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty, in favour of the Scots lords

banished and refuged hither, upon their due fubmillion to their princes, and your
majeity's promire to aflift the said queen and king of Scotland aigainif them, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with the advice and
good council of your majcfiy.

23. As flie will pass nothing without the king her son, so doth flhe dclire that

he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, for the greater and ptrlt'e'lr as-
furance thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be eftablifihcd to be found and
continue.

24. THE said Scotch queen trufleth, that the French king, her good brother,

according to the good affection which he hath always shewcd her, and h1aIh been
afrcfh teltified unto me by Mvonfr. de IIanniiliere for this said treaty, will very
willingly intervene, and will afiill her for the surety of her promires.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following the will of the
said king, will bind themselves thercunto.

26. FoR other kings and princes of Chriftcndom, he will aftty to obtain the

like of them, if for greater solemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to
be ncceiary.

27. SHE doth desire a fpecdy anfwver, and final conclusion of the premises, to the
end to meet in time with all inconvenicncics.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to flrcngthen the said treaty, as made by

her of a pure and frank will, flie defircthi that duconfiration be made of some re-
leafcment of her captivity.
Objeaions against the Scottifi queen, under secretary Walsinghame's

hand, November 1584.
TI'HE queen of Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ill affected to her majcfty, and

therefore it cannot be but that her liberty flould. bring peril unto her
majesty.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and other ill affcLqed sub-
jecEs, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as fucceflor.

THAT as long as file flall be continued in her majelty's pofiflion, she may

serve as it were a gage of her majefiy's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the
danger lhe may be thrown in:o, in cafe any thing flould be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in offence of her majetsy.

3 VE

Novembcr
VOL. II.

41i

X.
November) \What coture were fit to be taken with the queen of Scots,

I 584. either to be enlarged or not.

Cott. I.ib. T i E course to be taken withthe said queen may be confdered of in three dc-
Cal. G. grees; cither,

I. To continue her under cuflodv in that slate file now is.
2. To restrain her of the prelcnt liberty file now hath.
3' OR to let her at liberty upon caution.
1. ToUCHING the firfi, to continue her under custody in that slate she now is;

it is to be confidered, that the princes that favour that que:e, upon the complaint
she maketh of hard nfage, are greatly moved with comnmiferation towards her,
and promise to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose her miniiters
solicit them daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, (he acquainted them with her of-

sers made to her majefly, which appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable for
her majesty, so as the refusal and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cause to
think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground and rea-
fbn, attempt fonmewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

Ir is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding her cafe defpe-

rate, will continue her !rn,.ice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only
lor her delivery, but to attain to the present pofleffion of this crown upon her pre-
tended title, as {he had hitherto doenc, as appearcth, and is moll manifest by
letters and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland which
hath procecOcd altogether by her direcion, whereby a gap is laid open for the
malice of all her majefly's ceemies, lb as it appearcth that this manner of keeping
her, with fIch number of persons as she now hath, and with liberty to write and
receive letters (being duly confidered), is ollenfive to the princes the fuid queen's
friend s; rather chargeable, than profitable to her majcfy ; and fibject to all such
practices as may peril her majcfly's lecrfon or fRate, without any provision for her
nmajelly's safety, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUCHING the second, to relfrain her in a more firaighter degree of the
liberty she hath hitherto enjoyed.

1r may at first fight.be thought a remedy very apt to flop the course of the dan-

gerous pratices foflered heretofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy might
prove very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to her
majesty, as few years past it did; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as well for the release of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre-
tended titles, to attempt somewhat againfl this realm and her majefly, wherein he
lhould neither lack foreign afliftance, nor a party here within this realm : But the
king and that realm ilanding affected as they do, this restraint, inllead of reme-
dying, is likely to breed thcfe inconveniencies following:

FIRST, It will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft of the princes
her friends that mifliked of her reffraint.

SECONDLY, It will give them just cause to take some way of redress.
LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke some desperate ill-difpofed
person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt somewhat against her majesty's

1 2 OW1

own perlbii (a matter alovec all others to be weighed), which inconvenieicy being
duly confidered, it will appear maniefftly, that he reflraint, iin a llraighter de-
grce, is likely to prove a remedy iubjeca to ver) hard events.

THE lattcr degrec, whether it were fit to frt the ':i.l iqueen at liberty, mini-

frcth fbme cause of doubt, touching the manner of the liberty, in what soi-r the
fame is to be performed, whether to be continlucd here with!in the realm, or to bi
restorcd into her own country.

BuTr first, this propolition, before the particularities be weiihd, is to be cuU:i-
fidercd in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well-afWtclced filbjelt, that tcndercih lher m:iajlL;'s filrcty,

and wcigheth cither the nature of the Scottifli queen, being inclinted t,) niiii i
and revenge, or her former actions, wlat pr.itices lhe htilh iet onl lort mull: dil
gerous for her majefly and this realni, to allow of her liberty, bciii; nut made ac-
quainted with such causes, as time liath wrought, to make it les, periloun tlhan it
hath been, nor with fuich cautions as mlay', in (me l ort, be devilid to prevlent both
her ambition and malice ; and thereore, to mnike this app.:rent,

Ir is to be confidered, that the danger tliat was in the mother, is now gro'wn

to be in the foil. He pretendeth the fleic title the dotih: Siuch as do ati't l her,
both at home and abroad, do aflec himi (and he is the morei d.iicrous for that
he is unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune; and tliat he is a manl,
whereby he may enter into acion ill his own perlon) ; wihere file is rellrained, he is
at liberty; his own realm is now altogethel at his devotion, anid tie party aileiled
to this crown abaied ; so as the matter duly contidcrcd, neither her liberty nor re-
ftraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her imn.ijiy, uinlies by licli
promises as may be made by wav of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow
from the king her son to be provided for.

Bu r in this behalf it may be ohijctlcd, that so long as the mother rcmains

ill her majcity's hands, tila king will .atULte ll)z ot:ig ftr r .of hiis mother's
pcril.

'1'o this objcclion it may be anlwcred, firfl' , That they hope that her majcfty,

being a prince of justice, and inclmined to mercy, will not punlilli tile niother ir
the obn's oflence, unlels ilhe lilall be tfund, b good proof,1 culpable. Second-
arily, That men will not be over-hally, conllidering in what prediclament the kin;-
itandeth touching his expeitation of this crown, to a'viie any thing that ill
time future may be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach to his
mother's peril.

AND lastly, the taking away of his mother, lie being firong in the field throiugh

both foreign afl(tlancc, and a party here within the realm, will appear lo weak
a remedy (which may rather cxafperate both him, and her pa;rty, to proceed witl
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard nicmaure Ihould be ollered unto
her), as they will fuppolc for the reason above fpccified, that no such extremity
will be uscd.

IT may also be objeaed, that the setting of her at liberty will grcatly cncouratr

the papists both at home and abroad; but herein, if the provilion be duly con-
fidered, that may be made by parliament both here and there, they lhall rather find
cause of discomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the mother ap-

pearing most manifcfily to be seen in the ion accompanied with more danger, witil
due consideration had also of such remedies as may be provided tor the preventing

3 11 2 of

of the dangers, that her liberty may minister jufi cause to doubt of; there will be
good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than perils.

Now it refleth, in what fort the said liberty shall be performed; if it shall be

thought meet she shall be continued within the realm with rome limitation, efpe-
cially in that place where The now refideth, the country round about being so in-
seced in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much increase
the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. ecfides, ihe should have com-
modity, with much more cafe and speed, to entertain pracices within this realm,
than by being in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France, then shall her

majefly lose the gages of her safety, then (hall ihe be at hand to give advice in
furtherance of ilch practices, as have bc6n laid for to lir trouble in this realm,
wherein (he hath been a principal party.

FOR the firif, it is answered before, that the reftpe of any perils that may befal

unto her, will in no fort refirain her son. For the other, if it be confidered what
harm her advice will work unto herself, in refpe& of the violation of the treatyr,
and the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought, that
she will then be well advised, before (he attempt any such matter, which now she
may do without perill. Betides such princes, as have interposed their faith and
promise for her, cannot with honour aflift her, wherein the French king will not
be found very forward, who, in most friendly Ibrt, hath lately rejected all such
requefis, propounded either by her or her ion's miniftcrs, that might any way offend
her majesty. And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief shall be taken
away; the French king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike,
that, by any Spanish practice, she should be drawn to violate her faith, that the
reft of the princes {hall have no just cause of offence, but rather to think honour-
ably of her majesty confidering the Scottish queen's carriage towards her, which
hath defirved no way any such favour; the noblemen of Scotland flall be rcRfored,
who will be a good flay of fuich counfclls as may tend to the troubling of this
realm, cfpecially having so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to fland
unto; the charges and perills which her practices might have bred to this realm
lhall be avoided; and lastly, the hope of the papists shall be taken away, by such
good provisions, as in both the realms may be made, whereby the perills that might
fall into her majefly's own person (a matter of all others to be weighed), shall be
avoided, when by the change that may grow by any such wicked and ungodly
pracice, they lhall fee their cafe no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the treaty under secretary

Walsingham's hand.

Cott. Lib. T HAT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to the raising of
Cal. C. 8. v trouble within this realm) have grown from the Scots queen's ministers, and

favourers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear

to the said plots, is principally grounded upon some commiseration had of their
restraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath pro-

ceeded, for that the said princes have, for the most part, been entertained with
home and domeftick troubles.

THAT

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

IHAT it is also to be doubted, that Ibmewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the pcrill of her majesty.

THAT for the prelervation thereof, it shall be convenient for her majesty to

proceed to the finilhing of the treaty, not long fithence begu bebeteen her and
the said queen.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. ITS.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Scur,
m 'Affeurant que vous avez en commnnication d'unc lettre de Gray que voftre Cott. Lib,

hommei Semer me livra hicr fbuobz Il noin de Inon filz y rcconigioifiit quali Col. B. V'II.

de mot a la mot less mefcmes raisons quc Il dit Gray im'cfcrivit en chitare eilant der- 1l. i47.
nierement pres de vous dlcflontrant la1 fuffiflnce & bonne intention do perfoia c je Au original.
vous pricray feulement fuivant cc (que si dcvant je vous ay tant inlfantcment im-
portune que vous me perncttiez defclaircir librcment &5 ouvcrtcment cc point de
]'aflbciation d'entre moy & mon filz & me defiler Ics mains pour proceder avcc lui
cornmme e jugeray eftre requis pour soln bien & Ic mien. Et j'ciitcrprcnilz quoi
que l'on vous die & puifte en rapporter de faire mentir cc petit bruillon qui perfuad(
par aucuns de vos miniltres a cnterpris cette separation entre moy ct nmol cnflant,
& pour y commencer je vous fupplie ni'odtroycr qui je puifie parlcr a cc jultice
clerk qui vous a cfce nouvellement cnvoyc pour mander par luy a mon filz mon in-
tention fur cela, cequi je me promis quc ne ma rcfulfcrcz, quant cc Ii fcroit que pour
demontrer en eftedt la bonne intention que vous m'avez aflilercc avoir a l'accord &s
cntreticn de naturel devoir entre la mere & I'ce.ifant clqi dit en boiines ternmes clre
cmpcfchc pour vous me teniant Captive c n ull dlclrt cc quc vols lie pourrcz inicu.
defineitir & faire paroitre voftrc bon defir a notre union que I me dtIinant les Imoy-
ens d'y proceder, & non m'eni retenir & empcrcher comme aucune de vos miliftres
prctendent a fin de lailler toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiltres praCliiues entre
nous. La lettre porte que l'ailbciation n'cft pas paflie, aufli ie luy ai je jamais
dit, bienque mon filz avoit acccpt ; & que nous en avions convenu cnecmble,
comme l'a1e figtn de fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, quc en France en font
soy, ayant donne ce meme temoignage de fa bouche propre a piuficurs amb:aladeurs
& perfonnes de credit, s'excufant de le l'oser faire publicr par craint de vous fcsulc-
ment, demandant forces pour vous refiftcr d'avant de cc declarer si ouvcrtemcnt
eftant journellcment perluade au contraire par vos miniflrcs qui luy prometoycnt
avecque une entreire a Yorck le filre declarer votre heretier. Au lurplus Madame
quand mon enfant feroit si malheureux que de s'opiniaftrcr en cette extreme impiete
& ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis penlfr que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince
de la Chretiente Ie voulifliez eu cela applaudir ou mcintenir pour luy fayre acqucrir
ma malediAion ainli que plutos iitroviendlrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la railof
trop julie & evidant devant Dicu & les lhomnes. Helas & encores ncluy vouloier
j'en ofter, mays donner avec droit cc qu'il tient par usurpation. Je nic fiis du
tout commife a vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleit que je ni cel foye pis
qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale delvant la vcrite vcrs vous,

pour

pour bien recevant mal, & la plus grande afflicion que me fcaurroit arriver a fca-
voir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas qu'il pcrfifte cn
cette m'efconnoilnance de foil devoir, que de luy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer
pour legittinle roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, & ii vous aves agreable de pourfuivre avec
moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoy jc vouts requiers fans plus at-
tendre de response de ce mal gouvernc enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d'as-
feeion que je fens mon cceur opprefei d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouuvcnez vous dc la
promefle que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre proteticn me raportant de tout
a vous, & fur cc prian. Dieu qu'il vous viucille prefcrver de touts vos ciinemys
& diflimulez amys, comme je le desire de me confolcr & dc me vcncer dc ceulz qui
pourchaffent untel malheur entre la mere & 1'enfant. Je cefi ray dc vous troubler,
mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quclque consolation de vous & de Dicu
encore un coup je le tupplic de vous gardcr de tout peril. Futhbery xII \lars.

Votre fidelement vouce fccur

& obeifiant coufine,

A la rcyne d'Angletterre

madame ma bonne ficur
& coufine.

MARIE Qt
No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 11S.)

A Testament by Q Mary.
N. B. The following paper was transcribcd by the revd. Mr. Crawford, late

regius profcflbr of church history in the univerlity of Edinburgh. Part of this
paper, according to him, is written by Nauc, Mary's secretary, the reft with
the queen's own hand. WV hat is marked " is in the queen's hand.
COnfiderant par ma condition prcfente I'eftat de vie humaine, si incertain, que

perfonne ne s'en pueft, ou doibt afleurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie

misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et
accidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivite, mefmes a
cause dcs grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenu6 jufques a present; j'ay
advise tandis que j'ay la commodit6, ou raison en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma
niort la falut de mon ame, enterrement de mon corps et disposition de mon bien,
eftat, & affaires, par ce present mon teflament et ordonnance de mon dernier vo-
lonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoite S'. Esprit. Premierement, me re-

congnoiflant indigne pecherefie avec plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de satis-
fation par toutes Ics adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa bonte. Et
m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recom-
mende mon ame a la benoifte et individue Trinite, et aux prieres de la glorieufe
Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges faines & fainó'es de paradis, efperant par leur
merites et intercession, eftre aydee a obtenir de eftre faiEte participante avec eulx de
felicite eternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et entier defpouillant
des a present tout reflentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses,

qui

422

Cott. Lib.
vec spa f.
L. ió. p. i 5.

qui me pourroient avoir cfid faces durant ma vie, par mcs fubjcts rcbcllcs ct altrcs
cnnemis; J'en retrict la vengeance a Dieu, & le fipplie leur parldonner, de nmeline
affetcion, quc je luy requiers pardons a mes faultes, ct a tous cculs et ccl!es quc je
puis avoir offciil( de faic's ou de parolecs. Je vculx ct ordonne, &c. [7Tch troJa/l-
lowing paragrtiphs cotlain d.niccl.;ns concornling ithI place and circum/lliancs of Cihe
burial. ]

Pour lie contrcvenir a la gloire, honncur, ct conservation de l'iEglife catholique,

apoftolique ct Romaine, cn la quclle jc vculx vivre ct mourir, ii Ic prince d'lfcolle
nion filz y pucft ctre rcduict contre ]a mauvaib nourriturc, qu'il a prise a mnon trcs
grand rcgrct en I'hcrcfie de Calvin cntre mcs rcbclles, jc lI liifb fLul ct Iuniiqu
heritier de mon royauime d'Ef'cole,l de d roi(,t quc je prctcndc julllnent en a la cou-
ronnc d'' iigletcrre ct pays qui en dpcilculent ct gcncrallictnenlt i tous ct chacIul
mies mcublcs et inlnieublcs qui reftclron aprcs nl; moi t, eL cxucution de cc prfl'ent
testament.

Si non, et quc moll dit filz continue a vive en :Il 1'

(l ,r

i e ic,, Je ccdI, tratif-

porte, ct t;iitlc don "d dc touts ct ch.lcu!ls nics dioicts, qtic jC lI Uctcii Ic L; Iuis prC-
' tcndre a 1l couronne d'Anngi teli,', ct . uitrcs dr(ui.l, IcililC;i.:n oin r'.nlincs
" en depcndanlz, au roy ctllholiqlti, ,Ui aultitre d iins q'l'il luy pIlirai, .av CI(cs
" alvis, conflcintcent dte La a1inttc; t.;nt p ):,r Ic \vor a ujuurUli) Ie IcIl tCurs ap-
-- pui de la religion catliolicluc, quc pour rLconwoillancc dC gratU:itc> faivu:s qo u nl(ty,
" et Ies miens icconimanilrid par mon , ont avO1ns irecCCUi ti luy en ma lpius gr;i;Li;d
" ncccfiiti ; cc rcl^irlld :u;iui ;ti dioict que I1uv incme p:ut pirtcieidre : ccs li:'
" royaulincs ct pay's, je c iillpplice (u' 'cn re;co)npcc il prein ailli:icc, tic l.
" Inainl-i de I orrai ne, et si il cc pl.it dc ccilc d- ( uil:, pouir I,,Unloic di I.l race
" d.2 laquelle jc luis tortie an colLe lcre, n'a tayant de cclui ij monlo perc, qip:
' mion fcul cnlan t, Icqucl elLint Catholiquie j'aiy tousjeors vi,)i ' pour unc dles lbs
" fillcC, i il lu)' plaii'it dc l'acci)ptr,c ou tiillallt liU de i:C n._!)_cs n.uiti CucIIIIli
" . fi!le.

" Je layfl-: mon fiz a la protcelion du roy, de prince, ct iais ii:- :,o;:ra;C t de

" CGui e, ct du .i yi.ie, aux qliCel jC recomin

: nde ct ion cil

t ii coll cit mo

(' (doict Cn Anilcterre, si il cit cath iliqu:, ct qucll e ).il;cp (1 c :ltC roynic."

je ltitz dn n dn

lt e'

C lt i,.c" dI; COiU de

lJll x t! l11 i.lr feCu

s!ii pC'rc,

et commande nion filtz, commin mon hcretier ct iucccllur,, d'otc)' r t: c ct eln droit
a mon voolnitc.

Je veulx et ord .nne toutes Ics fommles ct (denicrs, qili fe trovcront par moys deues,

tien mis catuli de (Iroict cetre faits " a Lohliven'' ctrc proipLcpinent payee ct acquit-
tes, et tout tor t t griefs rcp.ir-c per icldits cxecitcurs dcfqliciz J'en ch.uie la con-
science. Oultrc, &c. [Follow two or three paragraphs c'ocniCnl pmtoi:lr lracics,
and then is added] FaifS au manoir de ShefFi'd en Anglctcrre Ic jour de -a -il
cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

iCftcr a large blank page follows in the queen's hand:

cc Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lcnox, au Claude Hamilton lequcl Fe mon-

c trera le plus fiddle vers moy, ct plus conttant en religion, au jigement de -
" liucs de Lorrainc et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce(le ceulx a lque j'auray don-
c nay le charge de trayter avefque cux de par moy et ceulx, a condition dct ce mar-
c rier ou allier en la dite mayfon ou par-lcur advis."'

I X.

Follow near two pages of particular legacies.

" Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droiti quelle peut pretendre a la contc

" d'Angous avant l'acort fait par mon commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox
" et le comte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,
" fur la promefle de fa fidelle assistance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et befoing
" d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu'
" attemtprient contre fa vie, et pour celt effect pris les armes, et ont port6 les ban-
" nieres defploiees, contre nous, je revoque auffi toute autre don que je luy ay
" fait de conte de Morton fur promefles de fcs bons services a advenir, et entends
c que la dite Cont6 foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y partcnir, comme
" fes trahifons tant en la mort dc mon feu Mary, que en mon banifcment, ct
" pourfuit de la mien ne l'ont meritc. Et defends a mon filz de ce jamays ser-
" vire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes parents, la quelle je crains
" ne s'eftcnde jufques a luy, le connoiflant du tout afftefionni aux ennemis de mon
" droite en ce royaumc, du quel il eft penconnaire.

" Je rccommcnde mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et luy commando

" detenir pres de luy ct s'enfervit, ct jc luy laiffe le bien du conte de Boduel son
" oncle, en refpec qu'il eft de mon fang, mon filleul, et ma eft: laifle en lutclle
" par son pere.

" Je declare que mon frcrc baflard Robert Abb6 de St. Croix n'a en que par

" circonvention Orkenay, et que le nc fut jamays mon intention, comme il apret
" par la revocation quej'ay fayte depuys, et etc auffi faite d'avant la afge de xxv.
" ans, ce que j'amois deliberer si il ne m'euffent prcnner par prison de fe de dc-
" fayre aulx eftats jc vculx done que Orkenay foit reune a la couronne comme
" une de plus neccifaires pour mon filz, & fans mayfon ne pourra etre bien

t tenue.
" Le filles de Morra ne parvicnt accefli heriter, ains revient la contZ a la

" Couronne, si il luy pleft luy donner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome
" l'cn fienne ligne."

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 125.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scots.
p LEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the date the I2th of Nov.

and in like manner has seen some part of the contents of one other of the fame

date, directed to Mons. de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty the most Christian
king, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your high-
ness desires to know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me all fa-
vour if I should be innocent of the heinous fats committed in the person of your
lHfband of good memory, so by the other the said ambassador is willed to de-
clare unto me, if your husband's murder could be laid justly against me, that you
could not follicit in my cause, neither yet for any person that was participant of
that execrable fa&, but would seek the revenge thereof, when you should have any
means to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most fa-
vourable, and your desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and

therefore

424

April -
IHarl. Lib.37.
B. 9. so. 1z6.

t(icirFore tlh.t I flc;uld wit'h al! my simplicity, finrccity annd truth a!i'wvcr tlic:cunto
is molfl- reaaiabh, to the end that youlr prinelv ii lnity miv; be nly help, if' 1i
innocence sOill.1 ffliiiciently appear, aind procuie nly cOIdemnailtiton, if I be culpabli
in any matter, Ceccpt in the knowledge of tlie evil ci'irofed n:inils of the mnoft p:rt
of your nibi lithill your il:fsaid hfbalnd, and lnot revcalilg of' it ; which 1 :iln
alliured il : fii'cient;y known to hinif'll', and to ;.ll that lih.: ju(,li.;cit never It
little in that rea;;! ; which alfl I w\' c'ntl'rained to Ilid'rli..l , as hl, ti; t was
lcci::l!y ClirplI:'.d bCetwixt tlhe eCrl orol , il'i a

nd (ood ni;i cr (f

voi0ul :I .!.:il.

tli.:t they miihlit with all h0.nilitv interceuoe at your mnie iy':; ihndil so hia 1 clii, il
fuchl mlatters as alc Inore ilpccilly comr:ta:inc i en th! ccl: 'eltioin foillowin', \hicli
I am ccoinirairnel fcr niv owvn iulaliication, by this lettLr t) call ti your "ljciy' 's
rcneilnbr.lt ce. NotwtitLlaini that 1 al aliurcd, to my grief, the r.idi ;
therecotf ill not fmilill t oIiltnl your pri mdcely oliid. it Inll l) rclt:

y ei' r Ill, tL lit to

rclmel'nm r, that iia the year o, (Coi s156, th!e Ilid crlf ih ( uolrto), vih 'i;viers
other niloilt' and ge.Ct. v.':e . d.ecl.:rd tli!ls to vour i:iucllt', and b.hiln'dl Virou

rel:lnl tor i:i')'nllt )Uri';'.r

ccn:litti lI i;l Villou -injlv's o'-in ( .lll' ,mber, which they

alled(: d was done2 by C;)olt:imanll <c'i' \ '!r lti;t!'tl, V',,') Ivlv'it!h ;t l,; i:ii ati neilre thl:'
11he was cor)peCled by tlhein to f-:lc ribc the w:' lrl,! t i'n for ilt cfl clc, hlo.vlio-
ever the truth of that matter rlln;ilis :;:; on1i!l ti'i.,, it :,pp,:lrtains not to ne .it
this time to 1be curious ; true it is that I was on: ofi

that

1 s br,

of t hat t heavily

ofl'cended ag'aillnt your m.jeley, iand palil:d into l'ranlil the tie cif oul-r bltliliihait,
at the defte of the rift, to humbly pray your brother the injlit Chrifiian k ing to
intercede that our oiflenc.s mini:htl bie paid, id, andl your riiijcfly's clelcncy c:.-
tended tow.ards us, albeit di;crs of no finall reputation, in that reahn, wa.s <ul thl
opinion, that the (fid faci l merited ncitl:cr to be' requilitoe for, nor yet pardoled.
Always such .vas the carefull mind of his nlaje ly towards the quictnuets of that
realm, that tlCe deainlll ill tihat ca'iu v.as con(llitted to Monsll'. de I'oviir, \io \15as
dirchcd at that timeC ; t nto

i Scitland, t(i conll.ratulate tie lhappy birhll ol yui-

fonl, whom Almiiity CGccd of lhis -ood lll; may lonii l)refirve iln h:!ppy ctlate and
perpetual filizityr; til calrc I:1 tiraail of te: f1ticd dte \Ioviiir was 1, c(l. tu:il, andi
your niajiity's milnd io inclined to mn:lcv\, that within 1iloit fpa'-c thlreatllCr, i was
permitted to repair iu Scotland, to da.l vwitlh calls AMurray, Athol, 'lo.le!, Ar-
guilc, and tlcrctary Lcdintou:, , in tile l !a'ic and behalf of the laid e.il ilortoui,
lords Ieven, Liindl:!y, anti renlaiclt ccinplltis, that thve mli!'ht Im:llc (.frcr inl the
iiames, of the i siid ea l, of any matter ithat mnii .t latisly )our majelly's vr.tlh, anll
-)rocure your cleency to be extelIdel in tiecir lavours; at my ctilmi ti to them,
a.ftcr I had opened the cil'r-t of nly nillEgc, thev declaredi that tle nl.lrri.l[le be-
twixt you and your lhutband li(ad bCen til, occallonl already of great cvil iii th:it
.calm, and if your hu(band fliould be itfi'ered to lollow the alppetit and n1'::d o;
such as was aout hini, that kind of delliiniL mi rd1ht produce w\ith timic worse cf-
sets ; for helping of fitch inconvenience that mil ht fall out by that kind of deal-
ing, they hlad thought it convenient to join themlelivcs in leagrue and b.ilnd w ith
fonie other noblemienr, rcbolved to obey your majclty as their Ilaturall loverci.ln, aln
have nothing to do witil your hulbanld's conmm-and whaitfoevcr, if the said carl would
for himself enter into that band and confcderacy with theml, they coull be content
to humbly requcft and travel by all means with your majcfty for his pa.rdomn, but
before they could any farther proceed, they desired to know the (aid e.irl's niid,
herein ; when I had answercd, that lie nor his friends, at my dcparture, couldl nlo
.know that any such like matter would be preponit, and thceefore wis not inllruittci

VOL. II. 3 I wlhat

Vwhat to anwecr tlherein, they desired that I filould return fufliciently iniifllted ill
this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of your lon, whom G(;d might pre-
fi.rve ; this niefile vwas faithfully delivered to me at Newcaftie in IEngland, where
the said call then renmaied, in prefencc of his friends and company, wheic they
all condlcfcended to have no farther dealing with your hiufoand, and to enter into
the said band. With this deliberation I returned to Sterling, where at the rcqueft
of the mofi Chriflian king and the qucen's majcfty of England by their ambaf-
jiidors present, your najetly's gracious pardon was granted unto them all, under
conditio)n always that the'' fliou!id remain banifiecd forth of the realm, thie space of
two ycars, and fartlhcr during your majc')y's plialure, which limiit.tion w:.s '.l'tc
mitigated at the humble rcqi'(c'ft (1 your own nobility, fol that immediately after
the said carl of 1iorton repaired into Scotland to Qiluittingairic, where the ea:!
of Blodvcll and secretary l.cdingtol con-e to him; what fpeechl pasnd there amonit.f
them, as God shall be my judge, I knew nothing at thatha tiime bu t it their d-
parture I was rcquefied( by the ftid carl Morton to accompany the carl IBodvell
and fecrctary to ldcLnburih, and to return with Luch anftvcr as they fihould obtain
of your majefly, wh:ich being givcn to me hy the laid persons, as God ifhall be
my judge, was no other than the'l words, ' Schaw to the earl ,' 1orton that the
" queen will hear no speech of that matter appointed unto him :" when I crafit
that the answer rnighl be made more fenfiblc, secretary Lcdington said, that the earl
would sufficiently undcrfland it, .lbeit few or none at that time understand what
palled amonglft them.n It is known to all men, als vcill be railling lettcrs pafncd
betwixt the said earl and Ledington when they become in divers fa.tions, as also
ane buck set furtht by the niniflcrs wherein they affirm that the carl of Morton
has confefied to them, before his death, that the c.rl Bodvell come to Qihitting-
aime to prepon the calling away off the king your husband, to the which propo-
fition the said carl of Miorton affirms that he could give no answer unto such
time he might know your majefly's mind therein, which he never received. As
to the abominable n:urder, it is known too by the depositions of many perfolns
that were executed to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was ex-
ecuted by them, and at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit
band for that effc:te; by this unpleasant declaration, the most part thereof known
to yourself, and the remainder may be underflood by the aforesaid witnutfiis that
was examined in torture, and that are extant in the custody of the ordinary judges
in Scotland, my innocency, so far as may concern any fact, does appear flriciently
to your majefly. And as for my dealing aforelaid, I can be no otherwile charlged
therein, but as what would accule the vcflcl that preserves the vine from harm, for
the intempcrancy of such as immolderately use the fame. As for the special caule
of my banifihment, I think the faime has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived,
that I was able to accuse the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge
himself to have confessld before he died, and would not be induced, for lots of
reputation, to perform any part thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble,
as.i fuippofe it is, what puniflimehit 1 lhculd defervc, I remit me to your inajelty's
better judgment, who well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman fhoulld be of his
fame, reputation, and honour, and how far ever ilk man i(hould abhor the naime of
a pultroun, and how indecent it would have been to me to accuse the earl of Mlor-
ton, being so near of his kin, nrotwithftanlding all the injuries I was conitraincd
to receive at his hand all the time of his governenit, and for no other cause, but
for fihewing of particular fricicdfiip to particular friends ill the time of the lalt:

cruel

cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to acccfe hil in any ml' tcr cilIni deal.,
and more ifrry that being on i f1l; be flitc kil;:i i'

i c.:.iil ohltiInced thlit In.llnc ol

Ingrate. Always for my own part I have bcen balilnilhcl my native countli thefc;
three years and tour m.onilths, living in anxiety of miind!, ny ll *'11gus ill otlaii.l
which were not finall, interniltit and diipofit utprn, a:d has . ^iitinallv oince L':,
time i was relieved out of my last troubles at the (!d'ir of mnns'.

cd o.'vi;ir, :;-

tended to know ,v iir majelty's plcafi:c, and to v wait ip:rl v.at frv ice it lion!ld
,'1ca;, your nljcflty so:- to commandil . Lpo:l tile S h of April init. .youir ooi il iclid
Icccr)'ary \r.dliilltlhatn;c li hs declared unto me, th:at her hliglincli thlo't it c:.j;;dicnt
that I fihruld reIire niiyfcl whlere I plcalbd, I d, cl'.u'j! a!:to liini I had no mlie.ins
whercby 1 might perfoi l tihat defiie, till luch tin; ;:'s I licul! receive it froinm oe"i
majesty. Nceitlher kinew 1 where it would plc;l'j vo,ur hililhnis to dirc&t In', ;litil
i'uch time as I fhlould have received furthe-r irio',rinatio); fromi yo. Ulpon this oc-
cafion, and partly by premitlion, have ta! cc t!ie liariclus to write tiis prclcl:
letter, v whereby your inl..jclty mnly uiiindrfl., i i any part of ni,' troublecs ipa;l, and
Itrait prfl'nt. As to my intunltion ftulit'ic, I will never dieny lhat I ali fully rc-
solvcd to fpcnd the reft ol my days in your im l :j! vy's lrvici, :ild the king votir
son's, whclreibcvcr I fliall be dircdled by your i.nj lly, and 1or1 the bhtt'r pjirlorii-
ing thereof, if so hliall be her inl jcelt's Ilc ple rc, to r colt:iLtiend thle try:dl of my
innocency, and examination of the verity of the prccllinl., niarrationi, to the kin,
your son, with rcquelt that I may be pardlonlcl for fiich ollfnces s co:iccrn'd youi-
majesty's iUrvice, and var comnion to all imri the time of his les aige and pcildonii
to all, except to hmi, 1 fhniuld be the lhe:Iare; theroe miylfclf, and be dircdllcd in
whatsoever i'crvice it shotld picafe your nliajclty for to comiln:ld. MIolt hluinble 1
bcecch votir majcflv to confider hereof, and to be flb raciou:; as to give order, thal:
1 may hlave means to serve your nmajeily according to the iincerity of my mciinlg,
and so cxpe{ting your maljclty's anlfwvr) aftcr the kliflung your hanld with all hu.-
mility, I t:-.:c leave from London.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 132.)

A lc':tcr froln Sir Amiais Pawlct.

S I R,

I[ DIi) forbear, accordlin; to yourll dircilon gfignifed in your letters of the fourth Ori,;n.1 Cal.
of thlis prfcnrt, to prociel t toh tc e

.' c onteints of M\r. \Vaade's C. j.

letters unto you, for til lieperlin o; tili lady's unLLcei.liry tCrv.uutl ;illd for tle
'feafnll o: her siollety, vi'el' j ill I ws; bold to xviite u1tlt yout) mly thniiplj opilion
(althouigh in v:ainl as it l:ov fa lleth out), by my letters of the 7th of this infla.it,
vh.rich I doubt not are withi yiut before this tiue ; but upon the receipt of your
letters of the 5th, wvhichl came nolt nto mIy halnds Iuntill tlhe 8th in tlle eveCnii,
by reason, as did appear by indoribncient, thait they had bcecn miltaken, and wVCi-
sent back to \inlldfor, after theyv were entered into the way towards nie, I con-
fitcrled, thiat beingc ccominanied only by my owni lervains, it Inight be tlihoul'.
that they would be intcrea;ed to Lily as 1. viould coimmand them, and thriefo.lc ;
thought good, for my better diflicargc in thlief money matters, to crave the :;iil -
ance of Mr. Richard Baggot, who -repaciring unto me the next morning. wv.

3 1 2 Ihll

had access to this queen, whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old man-
ner witli a defiuxion, which was fallen down into the fide of her neck, and had
bcreft her of the use of one of her hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occa-
lion of her former practises, doubting leit file would perfilf therein by corrupting
unlderhand foine bad meimbers of this flatc, I was exprefly comnanded to take her
money into my hands, and to reit anl\verable for it, when it flall be required:
adviiing her to deliver the said money unto me with quietness. After many denials,
many exclamations, and many bitter words against you (I fay nothing of her rail-
ling agaiiil n)yfelf ), with flat afirmation that her majesty might have her body,
but her heart {lie should nevc r havc, refuling to deliver the key of the cabinet, I
called my servants, and fcnt for barrs to break open the door, whereupoln she
yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found there in the cofFers, mentioned
in Mr. WVaadc's remembrance, five rolls of canvas, containing five thuurfand
French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had, in gold, one hundred
.nrd four pounds two fhillin s, and the other had three pounds in filvcr, which ba;
of silver was left with her, afirming that she had no more money in this houf,
and that she was indebted to her servants for their wages. IMIr. VWaade's note
maketh mention of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was
mifrcckoncd, which is evident, as well by the tefCimonies and oaths of divcrfe
persons, as also by4)robable conje'tures; so as in truth we found only two rolls,
every of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by eflimation one hundred pounds, and in money,. in one bag nine
hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
shillings. All the foresaid parcels of money are bestowed in bags and fealcd by
-Ir. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I relerve
in my hands, for the use of this houfilold, and may be rcpayed at London, where
her majesty shall appoint, out of the money, received lately by one of my fcr-
vants, out of the Lxchcquer. I feared left the people might have diifpcrfed this
money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in some secret corners; for doubt
whereof; I had caused all this queen's family, from the highest to the lowelt, to
be guarded in the cfveral places where I found them, so as yff I had not found the
money with quictnefs, I had been forced to have search first all their lodgings,
and then their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a lngular
blessing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success- might have
moved some hard conceits in her majesty.

TOUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I have done so much,

as may fuflice to satisfy her majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any
absolute course, until I heard again from you, partly because her majesty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return such as shall be dischargcd
to their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten
to deliver your opinion ; partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from
you, of your resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, what
peflbns you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have done, I have bellowed all
such as are mentioned in this bill incloscd in three or four several rooms as the
fame may suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink shall be brought
unto them by my servants. It may please you, to advertire me by your next letters,
in what fort, and for what course, I shall make their paflports, as also, if they

ihall

428

Curlecnn tell
you the truth
ofthis matter.

illall fay that thcv are unpaid of their vwacs, what I flall ilo therein. Yt is fii(l T is dy
that thcy have bceni accufiomcd to he paid of thllir wavcs at Chriitilis, soir the 1iti o*o
whole year, Her ma jclty's charge will b': lomIwh1i:t 'li liificd liv thle lepartlure iloC of 1110-
of this people, and miy charge by this occa.fioi wiil hbi tile :oti c..i\ . lut tl e: iiy.i prIefent
pcrfons, all f.Ivc Blaftian, are such filly aid li;lnl fils, ;iS :s l;-IC w 0so r0 L in thl Frenclh
cause to fear their l)racices, and upon this rioiind, 1 w.Is or opinion, il my han: uhridor's
fbrmer Ictterr, that all this diliniiflcd train i ;nild hlave I'ollolwc! lth ir nili'cl; until lanl
tile next remove, anid there to have l:.Le n di ii'chaln c up 111i lic 1iddlln, for J.dbt
that the laitd remoIlve might be delayed, yf lhe did lear, or c'. p.L a;ny hArd
mncafure.

()OTERS il.ll cxciifc tllcirl fooli tl pit y i;i lly iiy; bt:t for nmy piit, i reminllce

my part of the joys of heavenl, yf' in thini( tliat I live flidi, vrittc, or done,
I li.ve hadil any otlih r rcf}i)ct than the flur-thera!lc( 0o' l r ill Ijjm t','" tci'ice,; :nild t
I fl;all nioft l . rneltly pr.y ' you to o :ali!m for m1 , :.s iit:cwi,, ioir thle nl:t {- . le:i!-
of the nionel by y1Ir. \M:nncrs, the othier counlilli.onls, and .l.l!l. I t 'u?: Mr.
\\raade hatli anlivhred, in all hi n liIle dtis, for the wvhole coni;.in,', tia:t in) o:1
of us did lo miuch as think that o.ir cinnlilolln re.iclhiui onl ,' to hl p .i:rs, \v"
miliht be bold to touch the moneiy, so as there was lio Ic.:c ch oft Ilat all to lily
knowledge, and as you know 1 was nol commifliilne in thii Lf.-arc, hutL l.lid my
hlands full at Tyxall, discreet fiervant, are not h.iftily to de il in C Iat ll itttcr;,
without warrant, and cliecially where the cauli: is ifuci as the dl.ay of it carrieda
no langer.

YouR advcrtifcncim t of that happy remove hath bceen greatly colmfortable unlto

me. 1 will not lay, in rclfpcet of myfelfl bccaufc my private interclt liatlh no
measure of comparison with her majesty's faftty, and with tile quict of this
realm. God grant a happy and fpccdy yfliL to these gocd and: godly coinci.ls
and lb I commit you to his merciful protection. From Char.rlcy thc loth o!
September 1586.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. 144-.)
Letter fromn the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his ambaC-

fador in lEngland,, Odober I5SG.
RESERVE up yourself na langer in the carnlnef dealinig) flr my mother, for ye Co't. T.i;.

L~. have done it too long ; anld tiiin- not that any yourl I alvcilis c:iti do gode if Calig. C. ,

hir life be taken, for then adiie with lly dealing withi taiInc that areC te licci;l Aie < i:ip,.il
instruments thairof; and theirfore, gif ye 'oolke for the conlil:euance of'1 v i'.o ir '1i i , lS
towartis you, fpair na p.ins nor plaimnins ill this c.te, but redde mily letter vwrcttil hlanld
to Williame Keith, and conform yourf.lf qilhollic to the contCliis th.ti rof, and ill
this requeift let me reap the frui lii of your great credit there, ather now or never.
Fairwcll,. - OLtober 1586.

Letter

A P P E N D I
Letter to fir W¥illiam Keith, ambi:afTador in England, probably frolnm

secretary Maitland. Nov. 27, 1568.

Y your letters lent by this bearcr (albeit concerning no pleasant subject), his
-majesty conceives (well of your eairnelfiefs and iiility in your I. otiations,

as allb of .Mr. Archibald's aitivity and diligence, wahom you so greatly praile and
rcconmlimcnd.. I wish the iflie correfplond to his ir.ajcfly's opinion, rcur (are and
travell, and -is great diligence as you write. 1-iis niajeity take tis is ligorous pro-
ceeding againlf his moiher deeply in hcarr, as a matter oreatly cooi.ccriil him
both in hcnour and otherwise. hiis hiigl's t iis actions and behai i.ur it;tr plainly
lnot only how far nature prevails, but a!lb how he apprehends of the fcquel of that
procecf, and of what momenllt he clcctns it. There is an ambafilade fliortly to be
dircAc d, vherein will be employed an earl ;,nd two coun)lllors, on whofc ;answer
will depcnd the continuance or diflblution of the amity and good intelligence be-
tween the princes of this iflc. In the mean season, if farther extremity be uscd,
and his majefly's suit and rcquefl dildained, his highncfs will think himlelf dif-
honoured and contemned far besides his cxpectation and dcferts. Ye may perceive
his majesty's disposition by his letter to you, which you shall impart to Mr. Archi-
bald, and both deal according thereto. I need not to recommend to your care,
concerning your master's service both in weill and in honour. As you and your
colleague shall behave yourlelf in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret
your affcEion to your malter. I am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully
credit that you wlite of AMr. Archibald, whole friends here make great account of
his profefled devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majefly
her (bn. Farther I am conlirained to remit to next occasion, havini scarce time to
scribble these few lines (which of themlelvcs may bear witncfs of my haste). VV ifll-
ing you a prolperous iliue of your negociation, I commit you, &c. Halyrud-
houfc, Novr. 27th, 1586.

' HI people, and all estates here are so far moved by the rigorous procecdings

againit the qucll, that his liajety,, anld all that have credit are importuned, and
may not go abroad for exclamations againit them, and imprecations against the
queen of England.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 147.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.
pT LEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the date tile 28th of Scptcm-

ber, the 5th of October, which was the fanme day that I directed \V"'. Alurray

towards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and others of fevcral dates,
your inajefly may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might
reach unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained the said letter
befor the receit thereof, which by thele prel nts I must repeat for anfweriing of the
faidis. As to the firit, so far as may concern the interceding for the queen your

7 majesty's

A copy in the
collc't. rc fir
A. Dick. vo1.
A. fbl. 2 1.

i60 t. 586.
From the ori-
ginal in the
colle&. of fir
A. Dick. vol.
B. fol. 324.
43'

rnajefly's mother her lifc, I l;ave di\vers timnes, nd in every atudl nce, travCel'1
wvithl this queen in that matter, I;.ci::ilv to ki;ow wvh:lt her 1fll lictcrmiination m:,il1
be in that point, and could lnovel brln her to any ftur,.r ail\wer, but that thl;3
proceedingl aainf1 her by oider i itli!ce was no l 'f.il IILI niit d,

'hh a

ha iil'L

their v'ill that loved her bel : ;;s t ,oards Ir lit i he <:dld ! i'.: 11 lo 1.Lfw thcle-
unto, tnitill fucil time ;:s the law hath dCel.i:cd v'hictll'r lit; Wv.:s iinocentt or
guilty. IHerewvithal it was her pl iafui. thus fill t i!l'tl1 mt, t':; iit wis al niltllil l
of the afi;)cilants thi t e. n f

i' lly pr cild hi r t' t the l.\vw Uiii;,.it l . t i-'d a: lilt her,

'ivinlg re libois that ut lI.n:' s illhe Cio

ihsii Ltd to dcel in mt.I Iit , ) 1t Im,' \i. nil]

lever this realm b1 e in quiet, inl itler her tlicl, :I:ith r tilis :.itr- in

:l r.lii.'c ai':

in the e d

t hic ne fe tlis protillaion that it i .'ot!d n1.t in t'.i li:...l 'ti i)llovl

their advice, that thi iy ltoul!d lc:llain v, itiio t all 1bl:llmlC \ atit:. .' silt d lI 1.ll ou t;
evhcret:p'lm fil had granted them li'l.'ri to 'roe( id. l.i

!!ic' :I 1..( lii:d nI tihe

requclc mIllight lerealter have chargeld herl:it wli incun' Ciie'-ia i s

any loliod
h.ai,p:n.

.A\!x l,? mylblf I kna:; i t71s 5 :or fp.ecch to b.: t:';ui , l).:- l!;is b,;t'l I' !il". - ;':; I pr:;'-

teol.ant hai: lb ih_..Vtd tthemI, ;is it hal lt cir l u ,c,: 'urc t,. [.oci i ', i:.. ll ,i: !ii r.:c-.
relpeets, tlhe one to avoid lt

t ic,)11 thl, ';

OlCCjil V l . ..i:l{ tu! n, tie-

other upon zeal, and ca

r e tiht tlh'.v wi',l L: knowvt to 'a.: or i-i:r v.!: in .i i l.'zi:

fovereignl's life and slate iln tIli perillo tilil Up, coi' d v .. , 1 ih IVc

been coinftainedit to enter into 1)iitc 1d.li

v'itl bolh. w

hi.L

t .vii t I n.l.ri. lilr ni:a-

jefty acqtiaintcd ; the protclti.ii, ao d Ic li :Ila in othlr il.itu.; vl will bc lbLn)iln to
bear no mic . ll favour unto your n ljc i,'s irvice, hatil rayed th

I it til iy be:

exctilcd froim liny dea:lin;it inll t oe ctL.y of

th Cil\ of t, whith by thi:i- (i . ll, t'i i.v

avowed, and by their tpieech to their idverci n recqu ll--d tor, a:nl ti t

hbcs o t msy

coming ill is C this coutry f thould now otilrwil. dC., it v.- uld pro.lace nit
better elt:ctl but to ma:ke thlIm lu'jcef to the accufationl ol t'cir l;.)vri, ws let.
it ihoulld pleafle her to do it, of their ineoillanme in givin. countell \shere't' they
Dn it incuetr the danger of ill councellors, and be coitieclttc!qnet W tly oft lpniilientr.
Sucn of the papilts, as I did deal with, went iiilmedi.ittel, ali. told Il ir- in:ij til
whlat 1 h d It'pken to them, who albeit

i fle underiltood thie matlter o' belfob:, .lnt

for icl and declared to me my own f(jiccch tliat [ had uttered to thein, Wil!iii mI
for the wveil of my maiit're's letvice to abliait Irttni le.tling with lclch, as V.er nol
vet sufficiently movsed to tlink of llmy mailer as the did. I cracId Icatie of her ma-
jeftLy, that I Inight inlotlil tlecm olf your m.1jelty's late beltavioir towi.rds hler, aln
thle tfate of tlis reahlin, wtnerctliiuto vith me di fictlt)yr he e ve lier cojnfcnt. At
my late departure from court, which was upon the 5th <i' thi ititl.llt, a:1: thI day
after that the lords of tilis grtiid jtury ihad talkel their leavc: ; of her iniii:l; L to go
northward to lFthtinghtam, it lvt,. bet ps!elture to proliitf to lih.v ft.lltie lticcl
in this nittler at the retuirliiing of the ;ftid lot)ds, anil to :,iv'e Itll: aivcr according
to your m.ielty's contenltillet ti tho e ret. inder nl.atter., ta:it I had priopolit it.
nanme of youir ni. tjclly. As to tLhe 2d part concerning the :.l jc i,'tiotU, ai dulirc
that tie proniife niadc to thle mailer ot' G.,ay concernciing yoir t;.ljelty's title may
be fulfilled ; it appears by tihe tlid lett er that thile ery pitol, v.'hercupon the
qlueilion tli.it may bring your m:ijcliy 's titiC in doubt, hatlit nir u11 tc rihttly at th.e
writing of the laid letter confide red, which 1 take to have p occtcdut d for lacki of
rc.adixii of the ad of parliament, wherein is fulfilled all th,: promnie maide by the
C.uccn to tlhc lid mailler, and nothing .may now cau!e any (doubt to arilt a .ai!t
y;ur said title, except that an opinion fhoeuld be concleied by tlhelf lords of tllis

pa:i liametntit

parliamecrt that are so vehement at this time against the queen your majecfy's
inothcr, that your m;ij!-Ly is, or may be proved hereafter aflenting to her proceed-
ings, and fomei that love your n:ijelly's firvice were of that opilnion tat to earnel:
rcqucfit might move a grounld, whereupon suspicions might grow in men bs ill
ail'coted in that matter, which 1 tho't might be helped by obtaining of a tdec!aration
in parliament of your ma jefly's innocence at this time, and by rc;fuon that gocod
Ilture and public honclty would coiitrain you to intercede for the queen your
niother, which would carry with itlblf, without any further, fume fii'pici)on that
nli iht move ill afl'cted men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly craved of
-,ur majefly that foine learnled men in the laws, mig ht be moved to advifl with
tile words of the allociation, and( the nitigation contained in the ac of p;i!;amcnt,
l;d vwithall to advilb what liffpiciosi cflt'cis your imjety's reque(l miight work
in thef choleric nicen at this time, and hvow their minds mieht be Lcit moved to
icciv reason ; and upon all thlef conliderations they might h:ivc formed the words
si a'd(lcclarator of your l'i jcfiv's iiinoccnce to be obtained in this parliamelnt, and
failin; thereof, the very vt)rds of a protefation for the fame cf-ehc:t that might
befl serve for your najefty's fervicc, and ior my better information. Albeit this
was my simple opinion, I fliall be contented to follow any diirecion it flall please
your najefly to give ; I have already opened the fubfiance hereof to the queen of
this realm, who ibcms not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to
deal therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind.
T'his being the fum of my proceedings in this matter, besides the remainder, con-
tained in other lettcis of several dates, I am confiatincd to lay the whole open be-
fore your mnjcRfy, and to humbly pray that full information may be sent unto me
what further to do herein ; in this middle time, while I shall receive more ample
direction I fliall proceed and be doing according to such dirciAion as I have al-
ready received. And so, most gracious fovercign, wifling unto your majesty all
happy success in your aftlirs, I humbly take my leave from London, i6th of Oct'.
this 1586. Your majefly's mofl humble subjet ;nid obed' servant.

A memorial for his majefly by the master of Gray.

i 2Jan. 586. 1 T will plcafe your majesty, I have tho't meetcr to set down all things as they
An original occur, and all advertifrcmcits as they come to my cais, then jointly in a
in his own lettre.
hand in the I CAME to Vare the 24th of Dcc-, and sent to WV'. Keith and Mr. Archibald
collecl. of fir Douglas to advertise the queen of it, lik as they did at their audience. She pro-
.. Dick.
Vol. . mifed the queen your majcfly's mother's life should be spared till we were heard.
fol. Az. The 27th they came to Vare to me, the which day Sir Rob', came to Vare,

where they flewed us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but
for that the discourse of it is set down in our general letter, I remit me to it, only
tlis far I will teflify unto your majefly that WI". Keith hath used himself right
honefily and wi(cly till our coming, refpectiiig all circuiftanices, and chiefly
his colleague his dealing, which indeed is not better than your majesty knows
already.

THE 29th day of Decr. we came to London, where we were no ways friendly

received, nor after the honeit fort it has pleased your majesty use her ambafladors;
nlever man sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we understood of Mr.

de
432

te Bcllievre his leave t:liiir, and for thai; the cuiiio: perllitted not we sent our
cxcufes by Mr. (-,)orce: 'L,,,!t.

'E. I ft lday of J., ;. \ '"'. . till a.ld his colle;uec according to the cufloit

sent t. crave our anilicihc . \Ve received t;:e a.nfCr coim:lin;il in the general
lctier, and could n it hlv;e anlv.wr till the 6Ith day, wvht; was donu thac day your
mn;j-fity h:1s it in the cc

ai.ll, )ct we was not out of eli)cratce at that timle, albeit

\ c recc'i(dl haid ali;vn'r.

' aiE 8.:) .lay we ies..!; w'ith thl ciri of Leicefrer, where our conference was, as

is fIt d,,vn in thec cnc-r.al. I lei, kked this, that he that day l. I plainly the de-
tailinig of tile queei of Scotiland priloner was for that she preltended a flccelli in to
th s clown. Judge tLhcnl by this, wh1at is tho't of your mi.jelt), as yc fl1all hear
a little after.

'l'HE 9:h day we sip cii with the F11rench ambrnlidor, whom we foi(nd very plain

in ma.king to u, a \vil; dick:lr:i i o! all his proceedings, and AIr. de liellievrc we
th inked hi n in y)',r r ijcelty's ni1', and op)leiicd uctl th;in s as we hiad to treat
with this Cquitln, aivc e tlah I poin, ,L more largely fbt down by our gcneral.

IT is tho't here, and rfoml riendi1 of your m a.ljcty's advili'd mie, that Bell ievre

hiS negoci.ation vas not e ietual, :lili that the relidenlt was not privy to it, as in-
deed I think is true, fur since 3 I i :vre his pcrtinl, there is a talk of this Clhaf-
tcauullef his fLrvalnts t.lcn with hi vi, s a:d p:acqirets which he

was

;i nd-

ing in !'raucc, for that they chl gie hinm with a coniil)iracy of late againll the
queen here hel life. It is ;:!i'..elc his Ifrvlnt has contflel d the matter, but whom
I fliall trilt I know not, bti till I ll. T oof I ifiall accaunt hini an honefl: man,
for indeed lb he apelar%, au.I one (without doubt) who lhath been very inilant
in this matter. 1 fihew hin that tlhe t(ueen; anId carl of Leicester had delired to
speak with me in private, alln craved his opinion ; hc gave it freely that he tho't
it meeteft, I shew him the reac;fi> why I communicate that to him, for that I hld
been fufpl)ced by some of her miajelty's friends in Irance to have done evil offices
in her service, that he should be my witneli that my e.rnest dealing in this ihould
be a sufficient teftimolny that all was lyes, and that this knave Naue whlo nowY
had betrayed her, had in that done evil offices; lie d-lircld ne, feeing l he f.iw
only with other folks eyes, that i flhould no ways impulte it to hel, lor the like she
had done to himself by Naud his perlualion. 1 anfwcrd lie (hhould be my witnels
in that.

THE Qth day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got the loth day;

at the first, she said a thing long looked for Ihould be welcome when it comes, 1
would now fee your master's ofcrs. I aliwercd, no man makes offers but for
fonle cause; we would, and like.your majcliy, first know the cauifa to be extant
for which we offer, and likewise that it be extant till your majafty has heard us.
I think it be extant yet, but I will not promile for an hour, hbut you think to thilt
in that fort. I answered we mind not to shift, but to oller from our lovercigii all
things that with reason nmay be; and in spec i d, we ofl'ered as is fit down in our
general, all was refused and tho't nothing. She called on the three that were ia
the house, the carl of Leicester, my lord adiiral, and chamberlalin, ;and very de-
spitefully repeated all our offlers in prreence of tilhe all. I opencl tile 1.lt part,
and said, Madam, for what refpcct is it that men deal againlt your perlbn or ct ite
for her cause ? She answered, beciaule they think nthi liall succecd to me, anld for
that the is a papist; appearingly said I both the cau'i.;s may be r.:moved, fli-h said
fle would be glad to underitand it. fs, madam, laid I, all-that the hias of righr

VOL. 11. 3 K of

I X.

of fuccefiion were in the king our sovereign's person, were not all hope of papifls
removed ? She aniwered, i hope fb. -T'hen, madam, I think the queen his mother
ihall willingly denmit all her rights in his perlon. She anfwcred file hath no right,
for file is declared unhahil. Then 1 said, if she have no right, appearingly the
hope ceanis already, so that it is not to be feared that any man attempt for her.
The queen anf.vered, but the papirts allow not our declaration; then let it fall,
Iays I, in the king's perlon by her assignation. The earl of Lcicefier answered,
file is a prisoner, how can flie demit ? I answered the demiflion is to her son, by
the advice of all the friends fle has in Eurepe, and in calc, as God forbid, that
a;y attempt cutis the qtlccn here away, who ilall party with her to prove the de-
miiiion or afliination to he ineffcclual, her son being opposite party and having all
the princes he: friends for hini, having bonded for the eilicacy of it with his majesty
of before. The queen inm(i,: as (he could not comprehend my meaning, and fir

'oh'. opened the matter again, the yet mtade as tho' she underflood not. So the

earl of Leiceflcr answered that our meaniiin was, that the king fliould be put it
his mother's place. Is it so, the queen anf'.icrcd, then I put myself in a worle
calib than of befor ; by God's pation, that were to cut my own throat, and for a
dutchy or an carldoin to yourself you or such as you would cau(l lorne of your
(dcpcirate knaves kill me. No, by God, he shall never be in that place. I an-
fverced, he craves nothing of your mailefvy, but only of his mother. The earl of
Leicefler anfwvered that were to make him party to the queen my mistress. I said,
he will be far more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She would
flay no longcr, but siid ihe should not have a worse in his mother's place.
And laid, tell your king what good I have done for him in holding the crown
on his head since le was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now flands
between us, and if he break it shall be a double fault, and with this minded to
have bidden us a farcwll; but we achcvit [i. e. finified arguing upon this point].
And I spake craving of her that her life may be spared for 15 days; she refused.
Fir Rob'. craved for only eight days, she said not for an hour; and bo geid her
away. Your majesty fees we have delivered all we had for offers, but all is for
nothing, for fle and her councel has laid a determination that they mind to follow
forth, and I fee it comes rather of her councel than herself, which I like the
worse; for without doubt, fir, it shall cut off all friendflip ye had here. Altho'
it were that once they had moaned well to your majelty, yet remembering them-
selves, that they have riedlcd with your mother's blood, good taith they cannot
hope great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your ma-
jefly may perceive by this last discourse of that I proponit, if they had meaned well
to your majesty, they had used it otherwise than they have done, for reason has
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something to speak in this matter,
because we look flurly our letters shall be truffit by the way.

FoR that I ice private credit nor no means can alter their determination, althos

the queen again and the earl of Leicefier has desired to speak with me in parti-
cular; I mind not to speak, nor flall not; but assuredly shall let all men fee that I
in particular was no ways tycd to England, but for the refpest of your majei{y's
service. So albeit, at this time, 1 could not eff'ecuate that I desired, yet my up-
right dealing in it fiall be nianifefted to the world. Wre are, God willing, then
to crave audience, where we mind to use sharply our inltructions, which hitherto
we have used very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for
your majesty, than the French ambafllador has said for his master.

So
43+

So 1 pray your ln:!j':V cn::fidc- yIn ulprihlit dealint in your service, and not the

efr'c.t. for had it ;,11 d'l., ji.i' 'i. e. potible to be doicej by ally ir li'g t have h(ere
had cr..dit, but :n; i ca.ne;u ,nly for that cautfc I will not lly,' credit illall eirvc
bere to anll in;;_i'r U :',),':. I) pr.; (lGd precf:rve your m v;.i' andl fend you a true
and lirccre ftii':!ihip. 1'

,- I. n:don this
i1th o'f Jan. I58i'.

I U'NDi:;s. i.A;;l) tile i,! :11n is to lend one of her own to your mnajcfty.
To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and secretary to his majeity,

from the marllr of Gray.
Mi Y lord, I fend you thrfe lines with this incloscd to his majeRy, whereby your i-th Jan.

lordship fl.illi uidcrtlild how mi ittcrs goes here. And before ;ll thlings 1 pray i 6. .\n

your lorlfliip mnove his majcfty to Iec.fi c my diligence, and not the el-cct in this original in
negociation, for I swear if it had lbcn for the crown of '.ngland to mylelf [ could the Collect.
do no more, and let not tinflrinds hIvc advantage of me, for the world lhall fee offir A.
that I loved iEnland for his mljc{lly. '- rvicc only. 1 lohk shortly to find your iick. \ol.
lordship friend as ve niaide pro:it;e, and by God ' fhtall be to you if I can. XV:'. A' fol. 7
Keith and I devyblt, tf inmatters had gonei well, to lhave run a courle that your
lordship inight have here leeii in credit and others difhlpp:,inted, but now I will do
for you as for mvlflf; which is to c,:rc i;or no credit here, for in conlcincie they
mean not honelily to the kin our oveicigln, and if they may, he will go the
get his mother is gone or fhliorly to go, therefore, my lord, without all kind of
scruple 1 pray you to advifc him the belt is not this way. They fay here, that it
has been said by one who heard it fromn ynu, that ye desired lot the king and
England to agiec, becaule it would rack the noblemen, and gave an example
of it by king James the our, erein our name that I was afiired you
never had spoken it. Mr. Archibald is the fr:laker of it, who I allriie vour lord-
lhip has been a poison in this mitcer, for they lean very nicklc to his opinlion.
He cares not, he liays, tor at length tih kings will be fain to deal this way, either
by fair means or neccflity, so that whe'in he deals this courlc hie is allbired to be wel-
come; to set down all that is pall of the like purposes, it would confumc more paper
than I have here, lo I defer it to meeting. There is a new colifiracy alledgcd
againit the queen to have been intended, lor th..: French ainbai.l:dor resident three
of his men taken, but I think in the end it (hall prove nothing. MIr. Stafford,
who is ambafltdor for this queen in lFrauce, is touched with it, his brother is
taken here, always it has done this harm in our negociiation, that all this council
would not i,)vc this queen to meddle with the queen ro Scotlal's blood, till this
invention was found forth. I remit all other thin :?s to the inclolid,. We miinded
to have sent to his mnjcfty a dilcourlf, which we have set tdown of a!l our pro-
ceedinigs since our hither coiinng, but we are surely advvctizad tiiat. the icarer is to
be trulled by the way for our pacqu ts, lo that we delcr it till our owv: coming;
this I have put in a privy part betide the pacquct. We shall I think take leave on
:Fryday the I3th day, where we mind exactly to fillow the riour oft ur inltruc-
tions, for it cannot itand with the king's honour ttal we Ify icl:s tlhan the French
ambaftador, which was, le roy mon mailtre ne peult moins faire (que rcc;ntir. So
that about the 24th I think we shall, God willing, he at home, except that lome
itay come which we look not for. 'l1.s queen and tlle carl of JIeicclrli has delircd

3 K 2 to

to speak with me. I refused save in prcfence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a
determination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave no credit but for
that caule. It will please your lordihip retire the inclosed from his majcfy and
keep it. So after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I commit
you to God. From London the 12th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvil.

mT mny please vour miiefv, since the direalion of our former letters, we had

f audience, and her n;:je!;vy appeared to take our overtures in good part in pre-
fence of her council ; albeit no offers could take place with them, having taken
refolutipn to proceed with extremity, not the lets it pleased her riajefly to decire
us to stay for two days on taking our leave, until file had adviled upon our propo-
fiti{cns; since v hich time, her nmajclly is become more hard by fboe letters (as
we are informed) has come from bcotland, making Ibime hope to believe that your
majesty takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in eflc't, and
had of before removed the like opinion out of her majesty's mind, which by fini-
flcr information was credited, thir reports has hindeied our commission, and
abused this queen, fearing in like manner we flhall Ie flayed until answer come
from Scotland by such perlbn as they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will
be well enough known to all men how heavily your majefiy takes this proceeding
to heart, the truth is, that they have by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that
it is like to hinder our negotiation. As also Alchinder (i. e. Alexander) Steward is
to he direted in their party, by our knowledge, who has awantyt more of his
ciedit, than I believe he may perform, and we wreat him to defit from this deal-
ing, laying it does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting to your
majcfty's good dilcretion to take order herein as we ihall be answerable to your
majefly not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth is, the malter of
Grhaye has behaved himlelf very uprightly and discreetly in this charge, and evil
tayne with be divers in thele parts who were of before his friends. We have been
behalding to the menftrals who has burn us best company, but has not been troubled
with others. Wylzeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he hath in charge.
As for mailer Archibald he has prumiied at all times to do his dewoyr, wherein
he shall find true report made to your majefly, craving pardon of your majesty
that I have been to tedious, after 1 have kifled your majesty's hand I humbly
take my leave. Praying God to grant your majefly many good days and
happy, in whole protection I commit your majesty at London, the 26th of Jan.
1586.

S IR,

ALBEIT Mafler George has not been in commifllon he is not inferior

in his service to any of us, as well by his good advice and diligent care he
taktes for the advancement of your service, wherein we have not been a little
furthered.

To

436

2zo '. n.

5 ,'' . n

( 1 if , (:1.1 til ll S
o{wi h nd, in
theCo( lca.. of
fir A. Dick.
Vol. A. fol.
181.

To the king's majesty, from the malfer of Gray and fir Robert

Melvil.
pLEA SE it your majesty in the last audience we had, fitnc our lafl advertire- 21;t a n.

ment by W"'. Murray, we find iher nm jecity at the reslumiiiLg our ofers 1Ihe- 1.%i. XAn

thing mitigated, andi inclined to conli Icr nioie deeply of themi, beore w - o(t our oli: n:l in
leave, at our rea!oninig, certainl of tile council, nIaely, my lord of Leicelter, fir t!'e C ,'llct.
Chril-opher I[aton, mv lord ilunidon, and my lor

d
y l a.wart being pl-refl ill the o lir.-.li c_.

chaniber, gave little fi(ow of anly great colltnteilltel to he:ar her fl'hom her forlmer I \ Pl.
refliluuionI, now callin in perplexitie wnlat tihe fhtuild do, alw.i ys we lerf her in tlhat 1
state, and fl ice we have daily prcfllcd c(inlfrctcic with the whole counclil, whiici
to this hour we have not yet olbilined. ' 'his d.iv we h.iave tfiit down to crave our
leave. The grcatelt hindler which our Itnegtlitiin hais tfolunl Ilithe to is a perlla-
lion they ha)c here that either your in.ijelcy hdeals flupi)Cici.illy 111 this mianr, or
that with time ye may be moved to digest it, which whlrn withi gra.l dlillicuitv we
hlad expu nlr, we find ianlw thlat certaini lctteit wiitten to thein of late iron Scot..
land has fouind lome place of ctcdit with thiem in our coltrare. S, that rtl!'vi !i
now to clear them of that doul)t by a fIpcial inisl lie, tlihy h.le in ade cihoice of ir
Alexander Stewart to try your highiincl's meaning il it, .ind to pc iladl: i'ir ma-
je ty to like of thleir )proceedings, where froim no teiror we c.n lI:v 'out unlo hiil is
able to divert hil, lie h l.s given out'that h:t his credit with )lu' 1n. j l\, ad tlhat
he doubts not to help this matter at youIr i hrhncli.s' i.id. If li coi oie ithlce that
errand, we think your inajetlly will nit overl.-e tie gre.it dil'i raci th.it its attepints
fliall give us here, it le he noot talle oider with bfc lre that he be fiutilcr l.'Irdl, aild
if so be that any o.ther he ldnl-ctd (.is our iIte!!!_.(ce tives us there hll ) our
humble suit is to your mil;,jelty, that it mally p)l.:;e }our li. 1n F; to hlear of us what
we find hcre, and i:t what point we le.,ve thils i1ltter w tilh L.] n.. ji!!', tefojc
that the) find .ic,:dcelce, the calies wv.it.iof rcnitilu to 01

i ivai it lti';. \ e

commit yur niajetfv lor the prelelt to Gud's eternal pruteitciin. 1 Ilu LorIluit
this 2zlt of Jan. 1586.

No. XVIII. (Vol. IT. p. 5i..)
Copy of a letter fromn the earls us Silrewlbui-y andl K.-nt, &,-c. toticliinr

their pro..eclingi,s with iegard to the Ide-:t ut t te S-uot!ll (Ituccn, to
her imajctty's council.

T may please your holnl'' gorod i. rdflnips to be ailvertlcd, tlhat on S:lurdl.y tle
- th of this prelelit, I .,h-c!'t !;cale i ,c t t t c ulce of mt i thie call of' irlnt

in the coUnty, of --- to wiom yllii' lr,lin 'p' ltter and nl!it:'g was delilvcd,
and ier majelty's connmii n hce.v; ,

ne ,-.n I lte etI tforthwith lsit

prec. pts

for the Itaying of fu ch if.s and rie 4 i., tru e1d tle colunry, req.iritg the
officers to make flay or all futli p' *; iiuld h:ri: ,.v l'u.h walrants with,-
out namies, as before had teeni J ,. , id to brig tliem

to . uext j iltti ( , p,.!c. ,

to the intent that, upoll their ex III.ttnl, the occdoio .*:d ., l!es 0t lucih iC(i-
tious bruitcs miiht be bolted out and kalOn'l. It was aliu xclbived thl.t I th!e ('id.

c c~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,:rlt

earl of Kent should on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmcs, to
be the nearer and readier to confer with my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at niiht,
I Robert Beale came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the corn.
mission, &c. unto us fir Amice Pawlct and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A.
Pawlct was but late recovered, and not able to repair to the carl of Shrewsbury,
being then at Orton, fix miles off; it was thought good that we fir Drue Drury
and Robert Beale (hould go unto him, which we did on - morning; and to-
gether with the delivery of her majelty's commission, and your lordship's letter
imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent and we thought meet to be done in
the cause, praying his lordship hither the day following, to confer with me the
said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordship promised. And for the better
colouring of the matter, I the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. B1eale, a justice
of peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to whom 1 communicated
that wairant, which Robert Bcale had under your lordship's hands, for the flay-
ing of the hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to the town of Pe-
terborough, and especially unto the jultices of peace of Huntingdonshire, anid to
cause the purluers and bringers of such warrants to be flayed, and brought to the
next juflice of peace; and to bring us word to Fotheringay castle on lt'ednciitay
morning what he had done, and what he should in the mean time underfiand of the
authors of such bruites. XVhich like order, I also fir Amnias Pawlet had taken on
Monday morning in this town, and other places adjoining. The fame night, the
fherifY of the county of Northampton upon the receit of your loidfhip's letter
came to Auindcl, and letters were sent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of
Shicwfbury's intention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other letters
were also sent with their lordships aflent to fir Edward M/ontagu, fir Richard
Knightly, Mr. The. Brudeliell, &;c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought meet that the execution should
be. So upon Ti'uefday, we the earls came hither, where the sheriss met us; and
upon conference between us it was resolved, that the care for the fending for the
surgeons, and other neceflary provision should be committed unto him againlt the
time. And we forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the presence of herself
andl her folks, to the intent that they might fee and report hereafter that file was
not otherwise proceeded with than according to law, and the form of the flatute
made in the 27th year of her majesty's reign, it was thought convenient that her
majesty's commiflion ihould be read unto her, and afterwards she was by sundry
speeches willed to prepare herself ngainfi the next morning. She was also put in
remembrance of her fault, the honourable manner of proceeding with her, and the
neceflity that was imposed upon her majesty to proceed to execution, for that other-
wife it was found that they could not both fland together; and however, fithence
the lord Buckhurfl's his being here new contpiracys were attempted, and so would
be ttill; wherelore since she had now a good while since warning, by the said
lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare herself to die, we doubted not
but that the was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept this meflhge in
good part. And to the effeL that no chriflian duty might be said to be omitted,
that might be for her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body and foul
in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would please her to confer
with the bishop and dean of Peterborough, she might; which dean we had, for
that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Hereto she
replied, crofling herself in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,

3 faying

lfavin~ that ihe was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, vhich! hcr anceflors
had profciiied, from which ihe would not be renoved. And allicit we uled t, :i.v
pcrfuafions to the contrary, yet we prevailed nothillg ; and therci',re, when lli
demianlded the adiniti.lnce of her priefl, we utterly denied that unto her. IIcre-
upoin, fie clemain.led to undeflland what a.nfw.r we had touchlin; her lormer pe-
ttitiio to her mnajifty, c(oncerniing her papers of accounts, and ;he bCel ow ini r her
body. ''o the firit we iial none other allnwer to nmake, lit thit we thiiouht if
they were not fcnt be!ore, the illloc nii. t be in \Mr. %Vaailc'. c ll odv, 'i:v) \as
now in Irance, and feeing h er p.liers could not any wilt lileftre hter nr.lcllv,
we doubted not but that the 'f.nm would be delivered untio fic:h as (ihe (hou;Id ap-
point For, lor our own pai t,, we ulndoubted)v th,)lu. , ht t:;t h:r mai: liv w\. ild
not mAke any profit of her things, and therfore (in o pr pnillonsl ) llt' n'l4ht let
down what file would have done, ;and the l'ame {liild be iinipartcd lilto iers ma-.
je!ly, ol whom both the and others ,iiihlt expeclt all courtcfv. ''ouchini her
body, we knew not her m:tjelly's p!ejlire, :, l thlrC.)i;'e c.i'l.l mitliLr :ly tllit
her pc ition should be den)edl or ,ranii-l. 1 or thec pr.cicice of I.tlbini ttoi, ilie uttt rly
denied it, and woull have inferred it, that her dcath vw.t; for her eligion ; wlihcre-
unto it was cft'oolls by us replied, that tor niallnv cas fle

i w.s i;ti to.ll uc!d for'

religiou, nor thould have been now, butt tht this preeccding :agii:.l lher .\.is for
trealoni, in that (he w is culpable of that horribile coinit-ir:iay lor dicltroyi) ieur ii:,-
jefty's perion ; which (he ag lin denied, addiig I. iherl, that albeit (lihe Ir li. l I;f
foirgave themr that were the procurers of lihr di tih, Vet 1!lie d ui)tc t not bulL th it
CGod would take veige;tince thereof. And b inu cli.hird.l \ithi the .'eiioitis,, (o
Naue and Curie to prove it anainilt her, fih rcpl.c.l, it it Il lle !Ui.d nontIe, buit
that hereafter when fle fh ill be deald, and thty rcnmini alive, it lhi! ib: li:'I liuhv
indifferently (he had been deilt with, and iwht mnl aliure h.dl been uied u11to l: r;
and asked whether it h i I been heard IbLefore thii', tliat lervants li.h been pi li, ildl tii
accuse th.iir mifircis, and hercupoi allo req i-irel wvh.lt was hbcoune of tliein, 1and
where they recnained.

UPON 01ro dcparture from her, for that it I[ilencd by tlihe conlniilioln, th: t tic

charge of her vr., in the difpotiti, of us tile eaIls, wet lr.tlI-d :;. Anlii.i l)',iit
and S. Drue Iorurie, to receive, for that nigh', the chli: ' , :.. ih i;i. i h.d li,i.-",
and to caul: the whole number of loldlers to watch tliht ni 't1 , an;id thl.t h. l l o!s
should be put up, and take order that only four of themn lioi lld lie ;t th: cx c i-
tion, remna.iiiii aloof of and guarded with certain perions io asi tli)t hIt'ld ioc-
come near unto her, which were Melvil her tlcward, the ph)iyicln, liirgeilL, and
apoithec;arv

WEDNIESnAY morl ig, after that we the earls were rtp:aireld ithto thie ctfall,

and tile hlicri lFlad prci'.ed alll this t hllr thie tc xcl·i'tl, lie ws .0cor -
manded to go into her chiamber, and to Irig ler down to t ile pil.- vbhr ;;teii
prefenr, we whichi have iIgneu this lettr, ir r. !-hlnry 'I' lbot, el(]; fir l. v.id
Montague, kl t. his f(nt and iheir app.ircnt, anl \Villitam onit lieac his lt.oticr,
fir Richa.t'd nicltl;, knlt. Mr. Tlhomas lru c:e!, M.r. 1.udl]

MIr-. t.ob. t ;::z

John \i inefi. l , Mr. Forreft, and Rayncr, Blenjm.in ltii gti , Iriii. )tc.I ot It'..
telli(,ougli, and otherh.

AT the fitairfold, ihe paused to speak to rMt:vil in our hearing, which wa;s to

this ctfiFA, " Melvil, as tiou haft heen an lhoit;it lervant to ne, i) .i iry thee
continue to my Ion, and conmmend me uilo hitiu. 1 have ntot imp, l-(i

h Is re-
ligion, nor the religion of others, but v/ilh him well. And as 1 luitivc all that

lli! ixu

have offended me in Scotland, so I would that he should also; and befecli God,
that he would fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." M-Ielvili's answer was,
that he would so do, and at that instant he would beseech God to aflfit him with
his spirit. 'Ihen flie demanded to fpealc with h-r prielf, which was denied Unto
her, the rather for that she came with a fiuperflitious pair of beads ard a cruciiix.
She then desired to have her women to help her, and upon her earnelt request, and
f.ying that when other gentlewomen were executed fle had read in chronicles, that
·they had women allowed unto them, it was permitted that she should have two
named by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After (he came to the
scafFold, fitfl, in presence of them all, her mrajeflies commiflion was openly read;
and after wards Mr. ])can of Peterborough, according to a direction which he had
received, the night beftre, from us the earls, wou'd have nade a goily admoni-
tion to her, to repent and dye well in the fear of God and charity to the world.
But at the lirft entry, she utterly refused it, faying that she was catholiquc, and
that it were a folly to move her, being so resolutely minded, and that our prayers
would little avail her. ,V hereupon, to the intent it might appear that we, and the
whole illtlmbly, had a chriflian desire to have her die well, a godly prayer, con-
ceived by Mlr. )e.an, was lead and pronounced by us all. 1' '1 hat it would pleale
Almighty God to felnd her his Holy Spirit and grace, and also if it were his will,
to pard(n all her ofleuces, and of his mercy to receive her into his heavenly and
everlasting kingdom, and finally to bless her majefly, and confound all her ene-
mies ;" whelcof Mr. Dean, minding to repair up shortly, can shew your lordihips
a copy.

TI-iis done, (he pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effecr, " to be-

feech God to fend her his Holy Spirit, and that file trufled to receive her salvation
in his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, belbught God to
forgive her enemies, as (he forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this land,
to bless the queen's majettic, that Ihe might ecrve him. Likewise to be mercitul
to her son, to have colpalion of his church, and altho' she was not worthy to
be heard, yet she had a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning towards her servants) she
desired them to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then upon pe-
tition made by the executioners, she pardoned them; and said, she was glad that
the end of all her sorrows was lo near. 1 hen The disliked the whinning and weep-
ing of her women, faying, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution,
and killing them, willed them to depart from the scaffold and farewell. And lo
resolutely kneeled down and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incontinently
removed, and order taken that none flould approach unto her corps, but that it
ihould be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And further, her crosse, apparel,
and other things are retained here, are not yielded unto the executioner for incon-
veniences that might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such as fcnt
him hither.

¶TI-IS hath been the manner of our dealings in this service, whereof we have

thought good to advertise your lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time,
and further have thought good to lignify unto your lordships betides, that for the
avoiding of all finiiter and slanderous reports that may be raised to the contrary,
we have cauled a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effee in writing, which
.we the said lords have subscribed, with the hands of such other there the knights

and

and gentlemen above named that were precfnt at the na'tion. And so beccching
Almighty God long to blcls her majesty with a most prosperous reign, and to con-
found all his and her enemies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-caltle, the
Sth of February 1586, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix, is taken from a

colleSdion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drumfiy, hifto-iograplher to queen Anne,
now in the library of-thc facultv of advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber
has omitted to mention the book ill the Cott. Lib. where it is to be found.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. I58.)
The objcaions againfl Mr. Davilbn, in the cause of tle late Scottish

queen, must concern things lone either, i. Before her trial at So-
theringay. 2. During that Icflion. 3. After the fame.
I. gEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand Cott. Lib.

at all in the caiul of the siid queen, or done any thing whatCoevcr con- Calig. C. i.
cerning the fame, directly or indirclly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where the only interest he had

therein, was as her majcfty's fecrctary, to receive the letters from the commiillon.
ers, impart them to her highnels, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commissioners, it is well known to all
her council,

i. THAT he never was at any deliberation or'meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

or council, concerning the caufc of the said queen, till the fending down of her
majesty's warrant unto the commifnioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence passed againlt her.
3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation publilhing the fame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the
fame. And,

THAT the only thing which can be specially and truly imputed to him, is the

carrying up the said warrant unto her majesty to be signed. She fiendin, a great
counsellor unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great fcal
of England, by her own special diretion and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trealurer, was delivered by him

unto Mr. Davison, with her majefiy's own privity, to be ready for to lign, when
fle should be pleased to call for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix weeks un-

presented, nor once ofFeriJng to carry it up, till file sent a great counsellor unto him
for the fame, and was Ihaiply reproved therefor by a great peer in her majelty's
own presence.

3. THAT having signed it, she gave him an express commandment to carry it
to the feal, and being fealed to fend it immediately away unto the commiflioners,

VOL. II. 3 L accordin

441

according to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringay for the place
of execution, mifliking the court-yard, in divers refpcas, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her hear any more hereof, till
it was done. She, for her part, having (as file said) performed all that, in law
or reason, could be required of her.

4. \VHICH directions notwithPranding, he kept the warrant fealed all that night,

and the greatest part of the next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majelty withal, and finding her majetfy resolved to proceed
therein, according to her former directions, and yet desirous to carry t'e matter so,
as she might throw the burden from herfclf, he abfolutLcy rcfolvcd to quit his hands
thereof.

5. AND hereupon went over unto the lord treafiurer's chamber, together with

Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence reitored the fame into the hands
of the said lord trcafurer, of whom he had before received it, who from henceforth
kept it, till himielf and the refl of the council sent it away.

WHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had
in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the

general aE of her majesty's council (as is before mentioned) and not any private
ac of his, may appear by,

i. THEIR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent down therewith to the

commiflioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and others to whom they were
directed. As also, 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her
majesty's first commiflion for their calling to the flar-chamber for the fame, and
private appearance and fubmiflion afterward inflead thereof, before the lord chan-
cellor Bromley. 6. The confession of Mr. Attorney-general in open court con-
firmed. 7. By the sentence itself upon record. 8. Besides a common a&t of
council, containing an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottifll ambaflador
then remaining here, avowing and justifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some extraordinary furtherance
thereunto, the contrary may evidently appear by,

I. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of aflociation, being earnestly
prefled thereunto by her majesty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commiflioner, in the examina-

tion of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the
Bath.

3. His being a mean to flay the commiflioners from pronouncing the sentence
at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they ihould return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefented, without once
offering to carry it up, till her majefly sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed unto the commiflioners, as

he was specially commanded, flaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the
next day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the lord treasurer, of

whom he had before received the fame.
44-z

X.

WHICH are clear and cvident proofs, that the fhiid Davison did nothing in this

eaufe whatfoevcr, contrary to the duty of the place he then held in her majelly's
service.

Cal. C. 9.
THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,

THE innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scottifll queen.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p. 245.)

Letter from o, to his majesty king James b.

S T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affeiSionates have been From theori-
such as hath inforced filencc in him, who is faithfully devoted to your per- ginal. Uibl.

son, and in due time of trial will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main- Sac. J r.
tenance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, lFdin. A. .
is inverted in your royal pcrlon. Fall not then, mol: noble and renowned prince, 3' No.
from him wholie providence hath in many dangers prefcrved you, no doubt, to be an
initrument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some lecrcts, I find, have
been revealed to your prejudice, which mull proceed fiom Lome ambitious violent
spirited person near your majefly in council and favour : no man in particular will
I accuse, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom, for your
service, I have held correspondence ; otherwise, I had, long lincc, been disabled
from performance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart cndeavourcth;
being only known to this worthy nobleman, bearer hereof, one noted in all parts
of Christendom for his fidelity to your person ;nrd ftatc, and to Mr. David Fowlis
your most loyal fcrvant, my firif and faithful correspondent; and unto James
Hudfone, whom I have found in all things that concern you, most lecret and
aifured. It may, therefore, please your majelty, at the humble notion of O9, which
jargon I desire to be the indorfcment of your commalnds unto me, that, by foinc
token of your favour, he may underfland in what terms you regard his fidelity,
secrecy, and service. bMly palfonate affctlion to your person (not as you arle ;
king, but as you are a good king, and have just title, after my sovereign, to be a
great king) doth transport me to prcfumption. Condemn not, molt noble prince,
the motives of care and love, altho' mixed with defecs in judgment.

1. I, THEREFORE, first bcfeech your majesty, that toi the good of those whom

God, by divine Providence, hath destined to your charge, that you will be pleala-d
to have an extraordinary care of all pracliccrs or practhces, againtl your perfoil;
for it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition,
faction, or fear, there are many that dcfire to have their sovereign in minority,
whereby the sovereignty and state might be swayed by partiality of subalternate
persons, rather than by true rule of power and jufiice. Preserve your person, and
fear not the praotices of maan upon the point of your right, which will be pre-

b In the firmer cditions, I printce this .s a letter from Sir Robert Cecil, hut nm now fitisfied that I w:1

miftali:cl in frmning this (or ini , . See Sir D. 1)D.ll) lni c' Kr: 1. onl the [ ilt. of Sc,'t. 1. .333. .4s t!. t Ic:t..r
i, curious, I republiih it, though I ca:llnnt pictend tu i.ly to which ,of tile kilii' numerous correqlndents il
ngl.and it should ' be ascribcd.

lervcd
3 L 2

served and maintained against all aflaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave
.the protetion of your person, and royal poftcrity, to the Almighty God ot
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to his
glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the convcrfation and secret

keeping of your councells, which, as I have said, are often betrayed and disco-
vered, either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faEtion, or base con-
ception, the which your majesty is to regard with all circumfpeAion, as a matter
most dangerous to your person and state, and the only means to ruin and destroy
all those that stand faithfully devoted to your majesty's service. Some particulars,
and persons of this nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endea-
vours of this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty may be further
informed.

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majesty, by all means possible,

secure yourself of the good affeation of the French king and states, by the nego-
tiation of some faithful secret confident; the French naturally diftaiting the union
of the Britifl islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you
have many allies and friends, but by reason of their remote itate, they do not ib
nuch importe this affair, which must be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. W\HEN God, byswhofc Providence, the period of all persons and times is

determined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her majesty (although I do assuredly
.hope that there will not be any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not
fitting to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature), I do humbly
beseech your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident servant
of yours, being of an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here re-
sident, whose negociation, it were convenient your majefly should fortifie, with
such secret trust and powers, as there may not need 14 days respite, to post for
authority, in a cause, that cannot endure lo hours respite, without varieties of
danger. In the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend least good to
your eflablifhment, will not in public oppugn your title, but out of their cunning
ambition will seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of common good to
the ilate, in propounding of good conditions for difburthening the common weale,
of divers hard laws, heavy impositions, corruptions, oppreflions, &c. which is a
main point to lead the popular, who are much disgusted with many particulars of
this nature. It were therefore convenient, that these motives, out of your ma-
jefly's providence, should be prevented, by your free offer in there points fol-
lowing, viz.

I. THAT your majefly would be pleated to abolish purveyors and purveyance,

being a matter infinitely offc.nfive to the common people, and the whole kingdom,
and not profitable to the prince.

2. That your majesty would be pleated to dissolve the court of wards, being

the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this realm, by base matches, and
evil education of their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be de-
frayedc.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally repined against by

the fubjeEl, in regard of their uncertainty, being many times altered from their
true meaning, by variety of interpretations.

4. THAT your majesty will be pleated to admit free outport of the native com-
modities of this kingdom, now often restrained by subalternate persons for private

profit,
444-

profit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plAin
deftrulion to the true industry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the
profit of the crown.

THESE, being by your rajefly's confidents in the point of time propounded, will

affuredlv confirm unto your Inajeftie the hearts and aiFcctions of the whole kingdom,
and absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designcd patriots, that, out
of pretext of common good, would seek to patronize theinfelves in popular opinion
and power, and thereby to derogate front your majelfy's bounty and free favour,
by princely merit of your moderation, judgment, and justice.

YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the subjea, will no way impeach the

profits of the crown but advance them. The difproportionable gain of some chequer
officers, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle and unnecelaFry clerks and
attendants, will only susser some detriment; but infinite will be the good unto the
kingdom, which will confirm unto your inajefty the universal love and affcttion of
the people, and establish your renown in the highcft cftccm to all posterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you triumphant over all your
enemies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pars in this pacquet, and will die before

he leave to be yours, ihall be no less than of mine own life, and in like efteein I
will hold all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will hold myself rclervcd
from being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affcCions unto your
majesty, only this extraordinary worthy man, whose aflbciate I am in his misfor-
tune, doth know my heart, and we both will pray for you, and if we live you fliall
find us together.

I BESEECH your majesty, burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted,

and humble fcrvant,

0.

445

# INDEX.

N

D

E

X.
N. B. Thle Numerical Letters refer to the Volume, and the Figurcs to the

Pages.

A
>]DAMSON, Archbishop of St. An-

drews, is excommunicated by the fynod

of Fife, ii. 123. He excommunicated his
opponents, ib. is reltored by the general
,ffembly upon conditions, 124, his mean
fubmiflion to the general assembly I80
'albaiy, Alexander Duke of, cabals with his

nobles againit his brother K. James III. i.
48. is made prisoner, but escapes toFrance,
ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of
England, ib. procures afiftance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ib. returns to
Scotland, and isreftored to favour, 49. ca-
bals again, but is forced to fly to France, 50
---- Duke of, made Regent during the

minority of K. James V. i. 30. 53. after
several unsuccessful itruggles with the no-
bility, he is forced to retire to France ib.
dlenfon, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long anmufcs

the court of France by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him - ii. 6z
Allen, cardinal, publiflicd a book proving

the lawfulness of killing excommunicated
Princes - - ii. I I s
Al/va, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of

Q. Mary, ii. 24. 27. 39. is recalled from
his government of the Netherlands s(i

A.tmbajfdors, their office - . 7 ;
.dndretus, St. the Archbilhop of, remarkably

cured ofa dangerous distemper, i. I 14. the
motives of his opposition to the Q Regent,
134. hisgreat influence on the bench of Bi-
thops and weight in Parliament, 139. govern -
ed the church with great moderation, 1.p.
persecutes the Reformers, ib. is imprisoned
for celebrating Mass, 259. ruins Q_ Ma-
ry's affairs by his imprudent conduct. 397.

11

is taken prisoner in Dumbarton Cafle,
and hanged - - ii.
A.:drc-.sr, the castle of, dcmolilhcd by the

French - - i. 9g
- the prior of, promotes a treaty be-

tween the Q. Regent and the Reformers,
i. 151. is provoked to leave the court, 153.
is one of the chief promoters of the re-
formation, 166. some account, and a cha-
rafter of him, ibid. 167. artful endel-
vours used to undermine him, ibid. pre-
fumption of his innocence of the designs
charged on him, ibid. is sent by the con-
vention to invite the (Qjeecn to Scotland,
216. is received by her with confide;ice
and affcRion, 217. refrains the turbulcnt
spirit of the people againll popery, 231.
is sent to reCtrain the licentious praaices
of the borderers, 235. executes his com-
million with vigour and prudence, 236. a
conspiracy againfl him dierovered, 243. is
created Earl of Mar, 2 0. becomes ob-
noxious to the earl of lluntlcy, ib. See
Mlar and 1lurray.
.,ngus, Gilbert de Umfraville, FIarl of, was

the only man who aflcrted the indepen-
dency of his country - i. to
--- Douglas, arl of, affumles the Re-

gency during the minority of K. James V.
i. 31. 54. is unable to gain his afft'cions,
ibid. is attainted and Hies intoEngland, ib.
obtains leave to return into Scotland, ii.
82. surrenders himself to KI. James V'.
91. he with several others seize the caila
of Stirling to oppose Arran, 99. they are
forced to fly into England at the approach
of the King with an army, 95. he is at-
tainted and his eflate forfeited, 103. is
concerned in a plot in favour of Spain,

1e.t.
I_- --·C

184. is seized and committed prisoner to
the callle of Edinburgh, 185. escapes and
flies to the mountains, ib. offersto fibmit
to a trial, 189. sentence is pronounced
againit him, 19o. he refufestofubmit 19L
Anj0u, Duke of, a marriage proposed be-

tween him and Q. Elizabeth ii. 2Z
.4nne, a Princess of Denmark, married to

K. James VI. ii. 176. her arrival in Scot-
land and coronation, 179. heads a party
that oppofcs the chancellor - s1 8
.rchbifZo/sp, BJliop, Deans and Chapite's re-

vived in Scotland during the King's mi-
nority, ii. 35, 36. this gives great offence
to many of the clergy, ibid. an as of as-
fembly againit thele offices, 76, 77. Bi-
shops made subjea to prefbyteries and as-
femblies, 123. a great stroke given to their
authority, 16z, 163. none of them prefect
at the Queen's coronation - ;79
Argyll, Earl of, is appointed to carry the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of
France,. i. t39. uses his anterel with the
Reformers to make a treaty with the Queen
Regent, 151. leaves her court in relent-
mcnt of her treachery, 153. refuses to
accede to a treaty with Murray the Regent,
432. is loon after forced to submit, 433.
* ats as lieutenant to the Queen after the
Regent's murder, ii. 5. is prevailed on
to join the King's party, 18. quarrels with
Athole, 50. confederates with him against
Morton, the Regent, for their mutual de-
fence, ibid. they remonltrate againfi him to
the King, 52. they raise forces against him,
57. nrgociate a treaty with him by the
mediation of Q.Elizabeth,58. is promoted
to the office of chancellor, 60. the King's
authority delegated to him and Lord For-
bes againlt the popilh Lords, 193. his
forces are defeated in an engagement with
them - - ibid. 194

.friiocrary, predominant in Scotland i. 228.
Armada, Spanish, preparations for it, ii.

166, 167. it is defeated - 170
Arran, Earl, is appointed Regent during the

minority of Q._Nary, i. 81. his character,
82. contents to the schemes of England,
which'difgults the public, 83. becomes
suspicious of the Earl of Lennox. 86. is
forced to renounce the friendlhip with
England and declare for France, 87. and
to persecute the Reformers, 89. publicly
abjures the docrines of the Reformers,
ibid. is contemned by one half and little
trufled by the other part of the nation, 9o.

heads the partisans of France and de-
fenders of popery, ib. attempts in vain
to seize the murderers of cardinal Bea-
toun, 96. is forced to make a, truce with
the conspirators, ib. his eldest Ton is
conditionally excluded all right of fuc-
cession, 98. his mean conceflion to the
court of France, oj5. gets the title of
Chatelherault, ib. is undermined by the
Q. Dowager, ilJ, 112. proposals and
arguments for his resignation, 113. he con-
sents to it, 114. retracts by the influence
of the Archbilhop of St. Andrews, il5.
is at last prevailed on and gets advanta-
geous terms, 116. See Chatelherault.
4rran, eldest son of the Dukeof Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an aflociation with the Re-
formers, i. 165. narrowly escapes intend-
ed ruin at the court of France, 166. is full
of refenmnent againll the French on that
account, ibid. the Congregation solicit
Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 209. his great
imprudence with regard to Q. Mary, 237.
discovers a conspiracy againlt the Q.ueen's
favourite, 243. loses his reason, ii. 60,
61. is imprisoned by Morton - ibid.
- late Captain Stewart, gets that title

and ellate, ii. 71. is appointed to condut
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
72. his infamous marriage with the Coun-
tefs of March, 74. his variance with Len-
nox, ibid. is frustrated in an attempt to
rescue the King at Ruthven, 81. is con-
fined prisoner to the caltle of Stirling, ib.
regains his liberty and the King's regard,
88. resumes his power and arrogance, ib.
gets the Ruthven conspirators declared
guilty of high treason, j1. is detelted as
author of a persecution againlt the clergy,
96. is gained over to Q. Elizabeth's in..
terest, o10. gets several forfeited estates,
103. his corruption and insolence, 109.
is made chancellor and has unlimited
power, ibid. his venality is exceeded by
that of his wife, i lo. his monstrous ty-
ranny and oppression, ib. his power un-
dermined by Wotton the English envoy,
119. is confined in the castle of St. An-
drews, but Coon recovers favour, 121. his
interelt finks much, Iz2. is itripped of his
honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original station - - ibid.
Articles, Lords of, their origin and business,

i. 69. by whom chosen, 70. the subsequent
variations and political use made of this
inititution - - 71

.iruunddl,
9zi:a6~

Yii

.f, ;a;.i:/, 1arl of, is appointed a commnfiioner

to the celferilnce at 'Vciliin!lcer i.. 1
..jlZr li'.iiihai '.dotlr Ifietn Qt Elizabeth to

;Sctll;li , ii . 1( . hIis glet t prolli' s 5 to

King J;inma, ild. his promilcs ale fuon
foriot, 17 . lie is al:iined andl wiithldrl s
privately Sctland - ibid.
ff/i/j/iiit/in, the frequency of it in Scoti,.ld,

hovw accuounted frr, i. 31.1. lcver:l ili-
ilances of it in :l ance,. 3 . a 1iop pF!t
to it there and- in Scotland, ibid. i:cer.l
gicat nmcn approve of it, 310. prevail-
ed greatly afterwards ii. i;o
i.'i;lf :y of the church of Scotland, the iillt
but Iceble ;ind irregular, i. zl-, anotli r
afnimbly, their demsnds from teile coiin-
tion, 237, z38. two o!her illi'mblies in
vain solicit an augnmicination of tli.ir i,-
venues, 253. they ailircits Q . l.ily ill
high llrains of conplaintF, );. an as-
lembly proceeds at Glasgow nocwitilland-
ing the King's interdiction, ii. 77. two
allemblies yield many of tlhe privileges of
the church to the King, 210, z I. declare
it l.svflul for minillers to fit in Parliament,
214. See CI,rgy.
.ffciautio:, sornld in defence of Q_ ll.iza-
beth againil Q. Mary ii. ioe
Athole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the IEarl of Argyll, ii. c5. joins \iili
him in opposing Morton the Regent, ibid.
dies soon after an cntertainment at I,'r-
ton's, 6o. suspicions of his being poisoned,

ibid.
Asibigne, Lord de, second son of the Lord Len-

nox, arrives in Scotland from :rance, ii.
63. becomes loon a great f.vourite of
K. Jamci, ibid. high titles and pellb be-
llowed on him, ibid. notes againll him,
Appendix, 4oS. See Lc;nox.
4ujilriai family, their origin and power

1. 74, 75

B

.[i,'ti;gic, Anthony, some account of him,
ii. 123. the riie ofliis conipiracy againli
Q. Llizalsbth, 1z6, 127. the names and
scheme of operations of Ihis aflbciates,
ibid. i zS.they are betrayed, feizcd,sanid cxe-
cuted -- izS, 129
l'arcc, Sir Iicholas, appointed one of the

commilioners to the confederates at VClt-
miniter -- i. 423

L'aliol, John, his claim to the crown of Scot-
VoL.. 11.

lInd, i. S. is preferre b1 1. I. ii . cl soo

,n'ccd br iims 10 re',] ii ,l.
]?..s', i tsisici-:iitg pricll, fli :it al ir:v ioII

o( l' l". 'i froml S':pa , ii. 1.(, j':il, il
a i 1 l';l-.r, Lyr to ll tnlder Q . l!' , i,i ;li ,

i .:-.

i, d il.vered :ani talken in'o cult id), 1').
:ins c.r uted - iid..
',irens, their julrif 'iction \ey extensive, i.

13. the (liffTrcrit bets eeln tie greaer a.1sd
Icl'er, siwhence, ( v. thiee Ihuill.d of' tlhir
riteno:ilr.te ag;lii:lt tile cuniudt ui of the (.
Dowager, l j). :.i lilii.'r a lilited lby
tlheir rprercnsatives in i'.,rli.imrnt, i.
10. petition of

thc lefl'er l.lson. to lPa li:t-

n]'nt, \p}'nd. ,3;3. S.r P,'',.,
,ri 7l;:,( D,:.. -,

;i book puDlillic' by King
janmes V1. llrcnigthiins hia inierell in IEnsg-
lalnd -- ii. 2 1
Bi',:.'oi:a,. C'ardilnnl, imade uf'c of bv K. i J: l.c

\. to inlltilv tiic noble,. i. ,!. hio pre-
tenciisfn to thse Regency (o thie dceah of
that I'lince, So. forgc> a t ei:;ni;

:I of the

late Iing, ib. his views liodifitppointiid,
ibid. his chliracler, SI. oprpols the l;arl
of' lrran, Klegent, S4,. 'exiti o

moll of

tile nation a:;ainll the lniilli, i5i. s.izes
the soung ()iueCni and her mother, ibid.
eajols the airl of Lennox, ibid. obliges
tle Regent to renounce L.ngland and de-
clare for France, 87. and to perfercule the

-tbrmncrs, S,. Cngrol(bs thle cliief dircc-

tion of aii'.ir-, (5o. hii dobl)ie dcaling
wi ili the Eiarl of Lensnox eIcintcd, ibid.
is murdered, 95. Iis death fatil to the
Catholics, ibid. a vain attempt to r ctnge:
it, ibid. scandalous repol ts concerning iiin

124.

Elalfcrdd, Earl cf, comes as alnbafl;dor fromi

( E_ li;zabeth to witness the baptiliS of
Jinmes VI. i. 333. Iis inltruttioli,, ,3;
his letters to Sir \V. Cecil, . ,p n i.:

3,5. .j .' 3('
Lc/ll./i,,oz, Sir Lewis, jiulice icli, KI.J ): c's

relident at london, ii. i S8. j('i.l in pro-
msting Q. l.'liz-abcth's inteicll in .S:st-
land, ibid. is icnt with hler e:voy into tht.i
country ibid.
Bllsck, i Mr. David, missil',r ;st St. A:ldrews,

his ridiculous and f d itious ex.preflion.s ill
the pulpit, ii. 20. being fupplor:r by
the clergy, he declilne: the ciil jilil-
di(iton, 203. is con ilerlnld by the pri' y
council, ibid. is fentcnccd by tile KIii
to refiuie beyontd Spey - 20,l

L''/c/ar'rl/,/r, c;:lptain, and three others, cx\-
cuted for the ilurdcr of')arnly i. 377

A IvM Bsct:s.,

.oetiius, IHecor, hit hirory of Scotland,

some account of - i. 4
Solton Cafile, Q Mary confined a prisoner

there -i. 410
.onltc, a foreigner, made governorof Ork-

ney --. 127
.Borterers, an attempt to restrain their li-

centious pracices, i. 235. Q Mary visits
them, 3z5. a scuffle there, in which the
Englilh warden, &c. were made prisoners

ii. .3
.EZrlhbick, Lord, aflili the Q Regent in

dt.fending Leith - i. 183
.SCihecl/, James Hepburn, Earl of, intercepts

a fum of money from England to the Con-
gregation, i; 181. favours the Queen Re-
gent, but resides at his own houfc, 183.
is by the Earl of Murray summoned to
a public trial, 28I. prevents it by leaving
the kingdom,' ibid. a sentence of out-
lawry againllt hi, prevented by the
Queen, ibid. is permitted ,to return,
z8o. escapes with her after the murder
of Rizio, 310. some account of his former
behaviour, 318, 319. commences a fa-
vourite of the Q2een, 319. she reconciles
hiim to several Lords, with whom he was
nt variance, 320. he increases in favour
with her, 321. circumstances concurring
in this, 322. he is wounded in attempting
to seize one of the borderers, 329. the
Queen's extraordinary regard for him on
this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents he
obtains a pardon for Morton and his afro-
ciates, 336. proposes the retloration of
the popilh ecclefiafiical jurifdiAion, 338.
his views in this, ibid. is suspected the
author of Darnly's murder, 344. is charg-
ed with it by Lcnnox, 345. but fill fa-
voured by the Queen, 347. appointed go-
vernor of Edinburgh Castle, ibid. his trial
is hurried on, 348. remarkable partiality
in his favour, 349. Lennox accuses him
openly, 350. comes to his trial with a
great retinue, 351. isacquited by a jury,
ibid. the trial universally censured, ibid.
352. challenges any that would accuse
h'm, ibid. everal aAs of Parliament pas-
fed in his favour, ibid. 353. he procures
an at in favour of the reformation, ibid.
354 prevails on several of the nobles to
recommend him as a hulband to the
Queen, 357. seizes the Queen on a journey
from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
360. his view in this, 361. obtains a par-
don under the great feal, ibid. procures
a divorce from his wife, ibid. carries the

Queen to the calfl of Edinburgh, 363.
is created Duke of Orkney, ibid. and
married to the Q~Pen, ibid. is not allow-
ed the title of Ksing, 364. he watches
the Queen very closely, ibid. endeavours
to get the Prince into his custody, 365,
366. is alarmed with an association of the
nobles againlt the Q.2een and him, 366,
367. carries the _Q.een to the castle
of Borthwick, 360. raises forces ngainfl
the confederate Lords, 36 6. he marches
against them, ibid. propoiss a firgec cotn-
bat, 371. this how presented, ibid. takes
his last farewell of the Quc n, and is forced
to fly, ibid. fends for a cafect of letters
from Q. Mary to him, 3-7. they are in-
tercepted by the Earl of Morton, ibid. his
miserable tat:, 388, 389. reflections" oar
his condua, 3S9. copy of his divorce from
Lady Jcean Gordon, Appendix 365
0ot/I.-'cll, Francis Stewarc, created Earl of
Bothwcll, ii .

1 i. is iprilbned fur con-

fulting witches, IS1. cfcapes and attempts
to break into the King's pretence, ibid,
retires to the north, 18S. He and his ad-
herents are attainted, 18... fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken
under protction of ( tElizabeth, who so-
licits fir him, 186. seizes the King's per-
son, 187. forces him to difmiis the chan-
cellor, and his other favou'rites, 188. and
to grant him a remiflion, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, ibid.
is encouraged by the Englifi amballador,
191. makes another attempt to come at
the King, ibid. is repul!ed and obliged to
fly to the north of England, 192. is
abandoned by Q. Elizabeth, and forced to
fly into Spain and Italy, 196. remains in
indigent obscurity, and is never after re-
conciled to the King ibid.
- Adam, Bifhlop of Orkney, performs
the ceremony of marriage of Q_ Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell - i. 363

Bothv.,ell/haugh,. See Hamilton.
Boulogne, wrelled by the French out of the

hands of the English, i. 105. they con-
sent to restore it and its dependencies to
the French - - io6
Boeves, Envoy from Q_ Elizlbeth, accu.es

Lennox of disturbing the peace, ii. 66. is
refused an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 82. to
inquire about King James's correspondence
with the Pope 27

z
Beoyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the tine

of K. James 111. fruitrated - i. 30

Bo)d

?s.;.' i.- pPrevailed on to juin tile King's party

agd.iit! i. Mary, ii. i . joins thcie utilrh l
con firi-tors - 79
Bi,'c.. ,, Count de, comes an anilb:a(lil, r

flton ti:l.nce to \,itncfs the bapiflin of ii.
Junes \ . i. 332
.Drcc, Robert, his claim to the croisn of

SL(o ilanli, i. S. his grandlon aftrit; his
right, and vindicates the honour of his
cuuntl', II. he attem'pts wo redicc the
power of the nobles - ,
-- a prict, employed by the King of
Spain to seduce the Scotch nobles

ii. 172
- Mr. Robert, a Prrefbytcrian mniltr,

performs theceremony of the corulntiiun
of K. JaIncs's Qucen - ii. 1,9
_- . iwi\ward, abbot of Kin£lofs, acjuits
hirnfelf with addrcfs and repurttion as
ambassador at tle court of Flngland

ii. " '-

- Mr. Robert, a minister, his rcfolutiun

in refusing to publifil the King's account
of Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 235. is dc-
prived and banished on that account

ibi !.
Biuchanan, George, his hilfory of Scotland,

some account of, i. +. remarks on his
dialoguc Dc Jure Regis, 155. alone accuses
Q. Mary of a criminal correfpondcnce
with Rizio, 306. approved of afillination,
315. attends the Regent into lEngland
when called on to accul'e Q_ Mary, .41-3.
was one of the preceptors of K. James
VI. ii. 5 . commended for his gicat genius

-63

Burleigh. See Cecil.
Boroughs, when firlt reprcfentcd in parliament

ii. i65

C
CillS, John, a declaration of his in name

of (Q Elizabeth to the ,ords of Giange
at Lethington, Apptnedix ..0o2
Caithncs, Earl of, his prottell at the trial of

Botiiwell for the murder of Darnly

1. 352
Cal.vin, the patron and restorer of prcibyte-

rian church government i. 1z3

Camdenn, tome riitales of his i. 334. 358
CanoIgate, near Edinburgh, a I'arlia.menc

held there - ii. 5
Cardan, lome account of him, i. 11 I, 115.

his remarkable cute of the Bifiop of Sr.
Andrews ibid.

Cari', Sir George, f.lt anl,:.fi'. from
_

liiz.ibcth to encourage r: col.' ;:,. i,: :
Iluthven - ji. .
..-- .-- lbrert, sent by Q. Eliz l eth to i. :.:h

K. I:ltics after the dcati; of his m,)t'llr, ii.
i >;. is not pciliitced to cnier Sco:l.iiind
ii,jd. was tile ii:it that i; l uci t

i . J.l: i

iritclligencc of the death of Q. lilizabeth
C.,/s ct of lettcrs fi'ien Q \!aryv to lothln ill

icized by th:c !'.:il c t Morton, i. 37.
her encmies avail them ciiclcs much of the i

ibiJ.

C.!7i,, :Earl of, joins the King's part ii. 1i
Cii,'c!.5.,;, the Fi'enis am blll):xitior, ii tei-

ployed to proculc the co:lnlllt oi his ceit
to (Qicen Miary's marri.lg' witi l)arnly,
i. z7-. be cnticavour to malce up tile dif-
iirenccs between the Qjern and him, 'iz.
Iis intcrccilion in behalf of Q. ;M.iry

ii. 1 1.1
Ctrti'rir e of Medicis, aflnlmes the govern-

menit after thle death ofl'rancis II. her fuon,
i. 211. her lharlh treatment of Qr M1ary,
ibid. iher vie;ws in bchaving more friendly
to lir, z6z, 2z3. bends her whole en-
deaivours to detroy the Protetlants, ii. z2.
her artful conduct with that view ibid.
Crcil, his great capacity as a minillcr, i. i98.

2 9. is emnployed to negotiate a peace with
'rancc, ibid. ovcr-reaches the French ann-
b1iii'ldor in the treaty of l'dirbur;ihi, ibid.
a letter of Iis cited to hewv that ( I..lisa-
beth had no intention to interccpt Q.
Mary, in her return to Scotland, zz6. is
appointed a commiflioner to the con frence
at Welminiler, -423. is sent by Q lliza-
beth wsith proposals to Q M iry, ii. 9. has
an interview with her, which excites Q.
Elizalbcth's jealouly, 46. is treated halrfi-
ly by (. Elizabeth for confciising to (.
lMary's death -
-- - Sir Roblert, son to the fermer, h:l.ds

the party againll Eflex, ii. 23 . his cili-
railer, ibid. 239. his great afhiduity, y i!.
clters into a private corrcepollence v .ilr
]. James 21,
C(:h.i/.y, of the popifli clcrigy, a chief engiinc

ct titeir policy - i. 1'.-. 1 /
C/anics \'. E'mperor, his great power, i. 7-1.

and unlimited ambition,7., 7; . is cllckc-
ed by Francis 1. -- 7:
- K. of France makes a league withl

Q. Elizabeth - ii. 2g, z.o
C/.arlehrrault, Dulke of, liat title conferrcd

on the Earl of Arran, lLe.cnt of Scotland,
i, 105. Iis right of fucc.clon to the crown

3 Mz 0o

of Scotland maintained, 134. enters a
protetation to saVe his rigilt, 137. joins
the Reformers, in endeavouring to expel
the Frerich.army,' 162. joins in association
with them, 165. is looked on as the head
of the congregation, t66. Elis pufillani-
mity, 180. becomes obnoxious to Q.
lMary, 236. deprived of his French pcn-
sion, 262. is alarmed at the Earl of Len-
nox's' return to Scotland, 269. an accom-
mod .tion brought about by the Queen's in-
flurrcc, ib. adheres to Murray in opposing
the Queen's mairiage, 29i. is pardoned on
his humble application, but frced to re-
lide in France, 293. his par;ihans grumble
it Iiurray's being advs;sccd to the Re-
rency, 3';2, 393. returns flom France and
,eads hie Qieen's adherents, 4z. ismade
her lieutenant-general, ibid. Ilis refolu-
tion wavering, the Iegent commits him
prilonei to the Cai!ec of lidinburgh, 433.
is sett at iberty by lirl;aldy, a'd joins the
Queen's party, ii. 4. is proclilim',d traitor
by Lennox the ncve Regent, S. ,is recon-
ciled to lIMorton the Regent, .1z. articles
of a treaty between the nl, ibid. Llis death

-.is
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after

the union of the crowns, ii. 2z)l, 262.
See If7mb/ly, Clergy.
Chbrc4 Lands annexed to the crown by Par-

liament ii. 163

Clans, the inltitution and nature of i. 23, 24
Clergy, popish, their great richesand power,

i. 56. 119. were made use ofby K. James
V. to suppress the nobles, 58. made a
conliderable body in Parliament, 12o.
their great influence over the laity, l.zI.
they ingrofled learning, ibid. and held
many of the chief employments, ibid.
their power increased by celibacy, I-zz.
they seized the ellates of the intellate, ibid.
and tried all matrimonial and testamentary
causes, 123. become obnoxious to the
laity, ibid. their great corruptions,whence,
124. thole of Scotland particularly dif-
solute, ibid. their weak defence of their
tenets, tz'. try in vain to impole false
miracles, Iz6. their impolitic condua to
the Reformers 141
- reformed, try in vain to recover
the revenues of the church, i. zl6, 217.
procure a demolition of all relics of po-
pery, 218. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 237, 241, they are no
gainers by it, 242. their stipends, what in

those days, ibid. are offended at the ro-
deration of their leaders, 26o. occasion a
tumult among the people, ibid. 261. more
complaints of their poverty, 270. 336.
are jealous of Q Mary, 337. the small
allowances appointed to support them all,
ibid. their application for payment of
their ttipends of little cftec', 392. frell
complaints of the deficiency of the funds
for their maintenance, 444. are put off
with f.ir words and promiles, ibid. q45.
archbishops, &c. introduced among tiem
by Morton, ii.35. their grievances under
his adminiltration, 47. they approve of
the Ruthven conspirators, Sz. by favour-
ing them they provoke the King, 9z. fe-
vere laws made againlt them, st;, 96.
they of EJdinburgh fly into England, 07.
as do fevcral others that were mollt cii-
nent, ibid. more vigorous mnealuites againll
them, 103. they obta:n no redrte! on the
relloration of the exiled Lords, z12. re-
prefcit their grievances to Pailia'r:ctnt,
161. a maintenanice provided for thein by
Pl.rliament, 163, 164. they pre'. il to grc
l'rclbvtcrian governimcnt ciliblitlhed by
law, l> z. their zeal againll. the Popifhi
Lords, iS , 189. 198. their ralh pro-
ceedings, 193, 199. they erect a Ilanding
Council of the Church, zoo. vindicate.one
of their number who declined the civil
julifdidion, 202, 203. their standing
Council ordered to leave Edinburgh, 203.
this occasions a violent tumult there, zo0,
zos. they ufc their utmoll efforts to spirit
the people, 207. are deserted and fly to
I(ngland, ibid. 208. their power greatly
rreduced, ibid. are prevailed on to give up
many of their privileges, zL2. are re-
florcd to a feat in parliament, t21. this
violently opposed by many of them, 213.
but carried in their general Aflcmbly,
214. those entitled to this privilege a:-e
laid under many regulations and reltric-
tions, 219. they are brought under great
fubjeaion,, 220. the revolutions among
them since the Union of the Crowns

261, 26z
Clinton, Lord, appointed a comniffioner at

the conference at Wrftmiiller i. 423

Cockburn, of Ormifton, receives a supply of

money from the Englilh to the congrega-
tion, i. 18i. is intercepted and robbed of
it - ibid.
Coin in Scotland, some account of

i. 175. ii. 47

Cam -
E X.

Ci:7mir7aries appointed to try caufti in piare

of the Spiritual Couct, i. 20. ihy L.:.
deprived of all authority - 3;1
Cocnfj^iJ of faith by the clcformers, coll'eni-

ed to by l'alliainint - i. 25
Congtegation, the P'rotellants dilin otit'ied by

that name, i. 1 3S. thlir IcadetLs cntcr
into an afbriation, ibid. are involved inl
difficulties, 19. apply to Q l}liz. beltt
for anillance, 12o. money flint them by
her, intercepted, I1t. make a ra;!'P and
desper.ate attempt on Lcith, and are re-
pulscd, iSz. are no Icls ui:frtunaec in a
Iecond fkirmiil, ibid.i are qt;i:e dilii itsel
nid ret;eat to Stirling, IS ,. are jinced
by the bodv of t!le nobll, ibi!. their
a'mv dwindle's aw,'iy, iS.;. ;lie ;in;lat.'J
liv IKnox, ibid. theLy apply ai .in to ().
I'lilbcth, t2;. ;hecir p'.:rti'. lh r

,!' s tihe

Fr.ench, IS9, aur alli!lid by a ns t i i, t
F. ngl nd, I )t . conclude a ira'y at Ber-
Vieck, v.i ith the 1. of No f.;, ibid. the
dcti'n and IuLI bhlinCe of tlii ticatv, I )Z.
ne;uctiate a peace wsti l'rince, I. sar-
ticles of the treaty, zr2:. ti' v I]c.. ai-
vanta ecs fr', l it. 2c C. C .: /.':, i,, .
C6venaetimt, national, fraa,:d ilcn lie i lih

King and Goveinment, ii. 1,,. tlie na-
ture and rcaeonabllcncis ofit, ili l. 17. the
progrcfs of it lince i'i.

C.wt,/ iiO of Sctl,iln, \vhat 1. 1 ;
CL'ri'-, a minitier, boldly tclif .s agaoinl <(

.vlar,'s marriage with Bothivill i. -

'
Craqt'fcr,, Capt. of lordai llill, fiuprplis

I) imbarton Ci..tll-, ii. 13. thec iliculiics
of that enttrprife ilii.
-- 1iarl of, one of the heads of the

Spanifil faftion, ii. 1(i. 172. ofifrs h's
fcrvice to the K. of Spain, ibid, joins in
rebellion againll the King, 17,1, is tbrced
to fubbmit to hin, ibid. and iijn riloncd a
short time --
Cric;htoi, Regent during the minority of K.

James 11. his barbarous policy i 1

aeuit, a

Jefit, a plot again: Q Ilia-

bcth discovered by his means ii 1o4
Criminzals, a remaikable initmnce of the dif.

ficulty of bringing them t) jlItice i. 17
Crcr, du, the French ambla!ladior, rcfufcd to

countenance Q. Mary's marriage with
Bothwell, i. 364. attempts in vain are-
conciliation between the Que(en and the
confederate Lords, 370. mediates a truce
between the King and Queen's party in
Scotland - i. 2

Cr''-.cn ml.na:riml',rin of Scotl..n., ri'dlt; cen-

v)ce,! hv tile rantof, i. i ;. is arntedil
lby i li.'.l al to tlie jil.up,

1 t lI V1 mct ,

1.i). deiptiti'sn apptoinitd to carry i. bh.t
are prevcntted, 1 3;. is demanded Iby .rn ly

30;
CutNliiim^hNI, Robert, appear; at tlce trial (,

Botihwel! in the ::lnce of the El.a I of I,cn-
U'0\, i. 351. de ands a delay, whilhi i;
rcftllid -ibid.
Ciir', one of Q. \l.wiry's ferrctarics, is ftizi d

and carlied pileit'r to I,,ndoe, ii. 13j.
is produced an c viCnce agoaintl lher 1 ..o
_ .3. !:.1 ii n:>, r, rd propoCed a, a l.

,l o .

t \i.: , i. 2: :. 1li.; 11 ' ,ilt

Ifu Ct:'II . ii it lt, ibi...'' i p 'iuit:

to vitit tlle colurt if Scotl id, Is :. 'si-

eclart , 273. hi . hlitat'", .:; . ,i,.{1'ts
/(:ver.di oi ta; l ,,',l.'s, ; ,

[i u l.u-lyi\l/ .i; r;C.y,

i'id. cuiiti\' t'; a ! |miliaiity \widh Dl avidl
l'izio, G:7 is d.'pil'3 i on la:a 't:count, ib.
gr,;s,, i;>tolcl..', ' ini)lelnt ; 1hii . tl

l iltyp

203. Itclieoic ail' l llinote Mr

1t iy, - S j.

a plot to frLiz': .I. lIentd lisil t'- I.niglaud.
prevented 1)' t!i,' (.).cl, ibid. e, idttees
of' this, ibid. ;!(. i .i; ir. ri'twg : witlh tile
(t)ccn cclii)ratci, :: ;;. i:, lioiioutcdt w;iti
the titlt; of Kinis(f ( ol tii , ibid. i ii'l-
placitl'l, wit'ih t t
i l,'(t to tliI exiled not iLe,

ll,;. loiil' the: Q cn'S :i) t .tion by his un--

toward Ilclh ieav , ; l3. diaon.ils tlte hlown
matrimonial, 0.1.

b iLOIImCe S fnli'lciou, oi sKi-

'zio's ill ofilices with tile (ICicn,I ibid. hi rLe-
lolutiol to be avcnlced of hiim cncour.igr. l
by the noilcj, 3 (. artic'tl:s agreed on
between themn f,,r that purp ,le, 3U7. heaIis
the conspirators v.ho pct.i trateo ti:t niur-
der, 3'03. cuo;iinCe t.ie Q(cIen after it is
cotini.it.ed,, 3o,). pi;olibit, tlie Imeeting of
the i'arlianment, ilidl. Ill iis his crcap.a
\vwit the Qc esl , 310. her I.htreil to hinl
increales, 317. is n:gi.eted by lirt anjd
tre.tcd with little re!s'pet by the nobllts,
37 1. reiolve' to leave Scotland, 323. Iis
wayw:tidL and capricious behaviour, iiil.
he \vrites the r:elfons of his conduit to
tlle (leen, 32z. this Ilrange behaviollr :it
the ha:lil'in ol tihe Prince, 333. a .flie
reason aillg-cl fLr this confuted, 334. re-
tires to his father at Glasgow, 336. fails

fid;.

sick there, 33S. conjcucres concerning
his dilt'mper, 339. is ntglected by the
Qj2en, ibid. she afterwards vifies and
expreflfs afieftion for him, 341. heis pre-
vailed on by her to come to Edinburgh,
343. is lodged in a separate houle, ibid.
he is murdered there, ibid. his characler,
344. a proclamation iflied for discovering
the murderers, 3 ;5. a remiss enquiry
made into it, ib. 352. Capt. Blackadder
and three others executed on that account,
377. the confefiion of Morton the Re-
gent at his death concerning the murder,
ii. 73. a diffeitation concerning his mur-
der, 270. paper of objecions of the Court
of England againi his marriage with Q.
Mary, App. - 347
Daiiid 1. King of Scotland, his profusion to

the church -i. 119

-- I. troubles during his minority

i. z8
DaviJfo, sent into Scotland by Q. Eliza-

beth, as a spy on the French ambafladur,
ii. 85. is lent to gain Arran's interest to
Q Elizabeth, tot. this he loon accom-
plifles, ioz. brings the warrant for Q.
Mary's death at Q Elizabeth's defirc,
148. is charged by her with disobeying
her orders, 157. is imprisoned, tried, and
fined, and loles all favour, 158. objecti-
ons againIt him in the cause of the late
Scottiflh Q.ueen - App. 441
De.', Monficur, is sent with a supply of

forces to alilt the French against the En-
glilh in Scotland, i. io4. his success there

105
Di/fipline in the Church, the first book of,

composed, i. 215. why objeced against in
a convention of the States, 216. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline
friftrated ii. 75
Douglas, the power and property of that fa-

mily, i. 29. they aspire to independency,
ibid. Will. Erl of, murdered by K.
James II. 45. his son endeavours to resent
it, ibid. is forced to fly into England

ibid.

- William, QMary committed a pri-
soner to his castle of Lochleven i. 376
--- George, brother to the above, affiils

the Queen in making her escape

i. 393, 394-
---Ar chibald, one of Darnly's murderers,

ii. 125. undergoes a mock trial for that
crime and is acquitted, 126. is sent am-

7

basiTdor to England, ibid. letter from him,
to thie Q.ofScots, Appendix, 361. to the
King - - 424
Drury, Sir William, enters Scotland with an

army to support the King's party, ii. q.
they join him and drive elf the Queen's,
ibid. he procures a truce cttween the King
and Qeen's parties, 28. comes with forces
to aftit Morton in beficging the callle of
Edinburgh, 43. which isforced tofurreldccr

hid..
- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q_ Mary's

keepers -- i. 107
Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by Q(

Elizabeth as a husband to Q. Mary, i.
263. why a favourite of Q Llizabeth's,
ibid. is highly promoted by her, ihid. his
si uation extremely delicate, 265. becomes
furpicious of Cecil - ibid.
Dunmbarton Cafle, surprised and taken in

the King's name by the Regent

ii. 13, 14
Dury, a miniter of Edinburgh, banified

from his charge by K. James for his free
invectives against the courtiers, ii. 77.
after bleing retfored, he is driven from it
a second time for approving the Raid of
l.uthven - - 92

E
£ Dinbuirgh, is taken and burnt by the

Englilh, i. 91. a great fray there be-
tween the French and Scots, lo8. is feiz-
ed by the Reformers, 157. its inhabitants
are terribly alarmed by the French, 181.
a treaty there with the French and English,
199. a loan demand'd of it by Q_ Mary,
294. which is granted for the fupermority of
Leith, ibid. the treaty of, infilled on by
Q, Elizabeth, 334, 335. is pofiefled by
the Queen's party, ii. 3. and fortified by
them, 16. the City and Caltie hold out
againll the King's forces, 27. are reduced
to great straits by famine, ibid. are re-
lieved by a truce, zS. the citizens take
up arms to promote the King's marriage,
176. they rife again and insult the King
and his ininillerson the murder of the Earl
of Murray, 181, 182. aflilt the Kinr
against Huntley, 192. a violent tumult
there on account of the Clergy, 204. zo6.
they are severely punithed for it by the
King, 207. 209. their minilters return to

their

their charges, 21o. divided into pariles,
and number of mini!lers increared, 21 1.
they decline puihlifhing the acccunt of
Gowrie's conspiracy, 23.-.. all c.ct i; . ne,
who is banilled, are persuaded by theKcrng
to do it - - ibid. z-,
EdiLvard 1. of England, def:royed tlec public

archives of Scotland, i. 3. is made umpire
between Uruce and IBaliol, 9. his art to
acquire the fuiFeriority of Sc.tiand, ibid.
his wars with the Scots under l'1ol:crt ] u e

it. 3)
Eglinron, Earl of, is prevailed en to join the

Kig's party - i. I
El-..ibcth, heir peaccalilc aceC, nion to tle

Crown of Fnra, .d, i. i'1. fupl,) rts
thl congrcationu in ScotladJS, iSo, IS[
i f,:iring in her fipilies, i;:!. rot'.lves
to iuppoitt l'cin on a tcc:u:d npplica
toun, sI;. lier gond co!nduct inl Inat-
ttits ol init olt' ice, I'. molis( l th:a t d-
tirmtincd her to aittil lrm, il). iS7, iS-, .
her deliberate and relo'!ut condu:c, 1(;o,
i13. lends a litong ,c'. i to thcir :Iii:!nce,
i:,id. cuncludes a tr(.i sy, vi:, l r , is.
litr light to the Crosan if I'gll,:,' :;:! t.
bv Francis and Mary, in I 'rtnc, .oo. (I)-
ttins advanta; eous tt rl's ! -(r L!he Scots, iit.
is solicited ly the 'alliticlent of;oentilaii .
marry the carl of lan, zo209. thisfil c d-c
clitcs, ib. the i- cdb of her diiliontent ivitl
(. Marv. 219, Z -. hier jeallouly of th lltc-
ceilion, 221. ;-3. her excefiive vanity Ind
icaloulfv of Mary's bcany, 2 z... her dillin u-
':aion to her, 25. rcfulcs he r a l;s cniulr,
ibid. cvidencis that ihle h d no intcnlion
to molefn Mary in her p..flage to Scotland,
zzCi. fendi to congratulate her arrival in
Scotland, 231. rclulls a conccflion mi1ade
by Q.Mary, 233. hcrjealoui'yorherriglit
betrayed her into niean actions, ib. her re-
fenmblance to I-let . 2\II. 23 a 1crCo1,::1
incterviewv with Q.: 'i\ary prepoled, 2:..
The artfully dcc!incs it, 2z3 licr

view3 in

rcgard to Q. Mary's mailiiage, =56, 2;-.
afrumes a di!iigrecalh!e natnhority, ibid.
names one for a hufland to Q(. Mary,
263. tle difierent qualifications of her nii-
niitcrs and favourites, ib. din'flmlles with
Q(iL May about htr marriage, z6.. 20(i.
and likewise with regard to L. Darnly,
sbS. affronts Q. Mary by her insinuation
conccrning Lenno:, ib. is perplexed aliut
the marriage of the Scottilhl Q2ccn, 27. .
permits Darnly to visit lhe couot of Sco-
land, ib. tffects to declare againll Q0i a-

ry's marliage to ilin, 278, 279. her rea..
lons for tihis conidutl, z-9, 2,0o. her preat
Iitliimul.tion in that lEair, aeq.. hier h.,slhf
and deceitiful belaviour to iMurray and hia
naliciatIs wvho had lied to her, '.. i:;
tlruck at healing of the birth of James VI.
320. cont sets to landl CGodmother to hin,
ibid. the Parliament addircls her to feit!t
thc fuccclion, 3;-. this greatly cnbar-
ralles her, ibl 3zj. Ith. e fiot'lis nd gains
her Parliament, .-)2. endteavouis to ac-
commodate her dihi- rc)eces with Mi trv, -; .
writes to her to d!.lav use ti.il ol IJ' itu-
It's mtrdcrers, ,1,o. itintrpol'cs in ler 1cr)-
hlalf v.iheli a pril''er, -79. her an;li :-
d(cr is ref'iffbd :!C<'1.; t ) i\l:;rV, So. I'o l
c£;frs ::l!i li: e to the

ot l

t e n, obe t.,

t ;'e.

]!-r d hil, i't atihit s ce:nctr]i'r ': t! I'l : ;,:'i
<f () Ms .itrv (,n hI r ari ii: in ! .I i l',.!' ,
1.\ c , ..'I .

t l c

il\ , tl> dc t'ic hii r tl :l; , l b.

.-! -) .eilCr ill V1tio ' t) thlin c ',cluc!, it% . 1o;,
fleuds lJ I r l eti eri f con:el:; t', : '.1 v

;'

vgladly :;cI tp' t 'e olice t o i;:lii; I,; : ' I n
Ilc, andI ILr 1lI . .b : ;' . t c .i ;

, a ;l \v :

pt'rci,'i, lctt~r !:.1'n '). M ,;v,, '.'--'. h.r
l'ract ion ::g.,i,;il'g t t ,

.jt ht , a :tipp(intS

comminlionct; t0 it ,it Q( .iv antl hier
accUl;er, .1 It. , it

:r i ptiri an. liit aS,,Sin oi

tll at occasicn, C ,l . her \li.l' i' ill l i,

a ll'

: \ ',

.tti. roceceive!t s t lt !'-Celt'J di(l,)'tld!., 11

.t

remiloves tlle conle(l ice to \'V

. li

,it: lr,

4.' e. her in tant ar tiliics to clt lIte Ic i-
dene of C( [ '.!L:'' ::uilt fli :n t!. , l I'A t

c n,

427. tre';iise he r \',;t ;i r .r it io r, ibit!.
writes a hI til I.t:r t i (. M:ry ,

i 'e.

t lli

dil'nmil s t! Il'-ge-nt wviliti:ut apprmi];i, or
cts:denI in;i j i hi , st79. ut f(;ctIcly (Ip-
porIs hi.;: p)1 rtV, .-'(. t'ls.kc; pri ,mls

l !; to

the lR .-t I in clr fsivur ,

. . N rfiolk'

prOjec't conlcetal(d frtm lier, t|m7. dii oicral
aind dcit.s. a

c ' cl lit( t il ( i l: try ' itk-

v¢,ur, ,.1 refI'.'cs to dclvc Iter up to

thle \ ,!nr, .14;. her I'tclt t tmccrn at hsi;
deitl;, ii. I . contin uttes ti) Cnett ur 'ge facttiona
it S,'dtl;tid, 2. ther polit :cl ;sc liust sith.
regar-.I to eicnno:-:, 6-S. i c ei(sinmiti-
cared, :.nd deprived of her kii;dhom, &c.
by the Pope, '. supports tlhe King's party
in Slotlar. d, and iatnes Lesniic to be Nc-
grnt, g. proposes a traty of acconjrtoc-
dation betwreen (.I. Mai;y and her 'usij.cl.,
il) prrwt' e; a ccl'atlion of hoflilitic%, 9.
fends p ri;ol.is to (Q. Mary, ib. Iher artti-
sices inl the conduct of thlils i.tl/ir, ic.
appo:'ts conmsni!iio:crs to frame a trecty,

lI .

-l. finds a pretence to render their meet-
ing fruitless, iz. a marriage proposed be-
tween her and the I). of Anjou, 22. de-
clares openly againll the Qceen's party,
z6. concludes a treaty with France, 28.
her motives for negotiating a peace be-
tween the two parties in Scotland, 39.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q_
Mary, 46. negotiates a ticaty between Mor-
ton and his adversaries, 58. her answer to
K. J.imes's demand of a poflfflion of an
elate in England, 59. a marriage between
her and the D. of Alencon propoled, 62.
interpoles in behalff of Mrton, 66. ler
mcafures in order to save him, 6S, 69.
countynances the conspirators at Ruthven,
82. is alarmed at a conspiracy against her,
99, coo. the deligns of Q. Mary's adhe-
rents againli her, lot. end-avours to re-
cover her interect in Scotland, and gains
Arran to her interelt, ibid. amuses Qt\la-.
ry with a fruitless negotiation, 104. a new
conspiracy againll her, ibid! an aflociation
formed for her defence, to5, Io6. her
suspicions of Q. Mary, ibid. her life en-
dangered by a conspiracy, 1i . this how
discovered and prevented, 112. occasions
an extraordinary statute for her preferva-
tion, ib. is in a dangerous situation from
the progress of the holy league, 16. en-
deavours to form a confederacy of the
Protestant Princes, ibid. 117. and to pro-
ceed with rigour against Q. Mary, 118.
advances her interell in Scotland, and pro-
poses a league with it, ibid. 119. fettlcs
a pension upon K. James, ibid. concludes
a trea:y with Scotland, 124. account of
Babington's conspiracy againlt her, 126-
129. her dissimulation after Q. Mary's
conviction, 142, 141. her answer to K.
James's interceflion for her, 145. her far-
ther dissimulation and anxiety, 147. signs
the warrant for her execution, 148. her
speech to Davilon on that occasion, ibid.
affeats to l,.ment QM.ry's death, 156.
several marks of her artifice in that as-
fair, 157 158. flie enceavours to sooth
K. James, ibid. provocations given by her
to Spaitn, 166. prepares to meet its re-
fentment, 167, 168. endeavours to fe-
cure Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K.
James's marriage, 175. solicits him to treat
conspirators againllt him with rigour, 186.
evades the decision of K. James's right of
fuccellion to the Crown of England, 214,
z;i. is disgusted at several of his proceed-

ing%, 216, 217. dircovers his correspond-
ence with the Pope, ibid. frefl grounds
of her suspicion, 238. her conduct with
iegard to the Earl of Eilcx, ibid. 243.
her irresolution concerning his death, ibld.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives
Ambafladors from K. James with regard,
and increases his fuibidy, 244. her last ill-
ness, z. 7. conjeflures concerning the
caulcs of her melancholy, 248-250. her
death, 25o. and charater, ii:id. . t. de-
clared the IK. of Scot. her fucccfli)', zS2.
fomc of her letters, 2ppendix, 3-.1-. 350.
-63. 364. 3{8. 376. 378. 3S6. 39',
Elpl/.iniJo, secretary to K. James VI. de-

ceives him into a correipondence with the
Pope, ii. 217. is tried and found guilty
of high trealbn, ib. and pardoned en the
Queen's interceltfon, ib.
Egla,:d, the Englilli seize and detain King

Jamnes I. of Scotland long a prisoner, i.
29. the nobles th.:re humbled, 32. had
early two houses of Parliament, 67. they
invade Scotland, 9t. their depredations
there, 92. a peace between England,
France, and Scotland, 93. invade Scot-
land again, 99. gain a great victory, too,
loi. it proves of little advantage to them,
102. they force the Scots into a clofcr
union with France, to3. conclude a peace,
Io6. an Englifl fleet arrives in Scotland
to afift the congregation, 19o. a peace
concluded between them, 191. they enter
Scotland and besiege the Frcnch in Leith,
192. arefeveral tiniesrepulfcd, 194.. caufca
of their bad fuccels, ib. articles of a
treaty of peace, 201. they quit Scotland,
202. reflctions on the right of fuccelfio!i
to their Crown, zz2--zz3. the Parlia-
ment favours QrVMary's right of succession,
325. a league between England and France,
ii. z8. between England and Scoiland,
14+. the national covenant adopted ini
England - - 170

Entails, with what view introduced i. 19, 20
Episcopal government in the Church, torne

account of it, i. 212. an atte.npt to re-
vive it, ii. 35. it is aboiifllea by the Ait
fembly, 76. jurifdicion ablliflied 18 :.
See /lrchbiihops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Sp:a-

nifh faction, ii. 163. his ollers of icrvi e
to the K. of Spain, 172. appears in re-
bellion, 203. is forced to lubnit to tle
King, 174. imprisoned for a fliort tinm,
ibid. joins in another conspiracy, iS4. is

iumnmoned

furmoned by the King to surrender, 18;.
offers to fubmir 'ti a trial, 189. fcitence
pronounced aainlt him - 190
Erjklne of Dut:, is employed by the QOcen

Regent to deceive the Protcilants, i. 148.
his resentment of this usage - ibid.
----- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Cafile,

acts a neutral part between the Qseen Re-
gent and the conzegation, i. Ir:;. re-
ceives the Queen Regent into the Callle,
193. is created Earl of Mar, 24y. See
Alar.

Alexander, has the chief diretions

of the Education of K. James VI. ii. 5 1.
admits some of the nobles to make com-
plaints to him againit Morton the Regent,
52. is turned out of Stirling Catle by his
nephew the Earl of Mar 56
./5ewval, tlhe Fench envoy, endeavours to

obitru. a treaty between England and
Scotland - - ii. 12..
E-ex, Earl of, sot up by the English 'apills

as a candidate for the Crown, ii. 19;.
heads a party in England, 238. his cha-
rater, ibid. is greatly diltinguiflhed by the
Queen, 239. favours the K. of Scots, ib.
obtains the cilices of Lord Lieutenant and
Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is
unfuccefstul in that expedition, ibid. re-
ceives a harsh letter fiom the Queen, 240.
returns to England and is confined, ibid.
is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to
spirit up King James, 241. his rafli and
frantic conduc, z42. is again taken into
custody, ibid. his death, 243. his son and
aflociates are refiored to their honours
after the acceflion of K. James 244
Europe, the llate of, at the beginning of the

sixteenth century. - . 71
Excomminsiciaoion, a terrible engine of the

Popish Clergy - - i. 122

F
.FElton, an Englishman, fixes the-Pope's

excommunication of Q Elizabeth on the
gates of the Bishop of London's palace

iil 7
,Fenclon, M. de la Motte, sent by the French

King to interpose for K. James when con-
fined by the Ruthven conlpirators, ii. 85.
is forced to return without success ibid.
teudal (Government, its origin and ariflocra-

tical genius, i. 13, 14, IS. causes which
VOL. II.

liniitel the power of feud ii lonarchs, 1,.
fetudai vallila liable to fews taxr . ; . .,
rem arkable inliance of the feeblenecs s;
feudal government, 17, 18. the molt per-
sect idea of the feudal system, how attailn
ed, 37. Hate of it in England, 6s-',,7.
and in Scotland - 61, t
jS,', apopulous and powerful country, i:uc!

devoted to the congregation, i. to,;. i
dcltroyed and plundered by the IFr-nch.
ibid. the fynod of, excoinmunicates the
Archbilllop of St. Andrews tor contumacy.
ii. 1z3. they excommunicate the Popitii
Lords - - '

Flotirtrn, the bittle of, i. i
foriLs, Lord, with the l;s- I of Argyl, i.

sent againit the Popith Lords, ii. 193. are
defeated by them - 19
Fordui,, John de, his hillory of Scotlandk

when wrote - - i.
Sorier, Sir John, warden of thA lnglit h

border, a lcutHe betwvcin him and tlhc :;co.

ii. 1 :z
Fotherirgay Calile, Q. Mary's imprifo:-

nent, trial, and dc:tii there ii. 1 3z--1
Fran:e, the confcquences of the fubverfiol;

of the feudal government there, i. 7Z. a
body of French arrive in Scotland to l'i-
port the Catholics, 97. they reduce tii«
caltle of St. Andrews, ibid. another party
of them arrive there, 1o.4. their tranfac
tions there, 1oS. 107. conclude a peacc
with England, o'). their politic condue/,
107. they leave Scotland, ib. their arti-
sices in a treaty of marriage between the
Dauphin and the Q of Scots, 133, 13 .
The l'roteltants endcavour to expel the
French army out of Scotland, 161. ano-
ther party of them arrive there and fortify
Leith, s6S. they exasperate the people
by their insolence, 169. they are lent
against the congregation, 18S. they de-
firoy and plunder Fife, and are much ha-
raflcd by parties of the congregation, 189,
19o. are greatly alarmed by the arrival of
the English fleet, 19o. they return to Leith
greatly harassed and exhaullted, 191. are
besieged there by the Englilh and the con-
gregation, 193. they gain several advan-
tages, 194. their motives for concluding a
peace, 197. negotiations for that purpofl,
198. articles of the treaty, 199, 200. they
leave Scotland, o20. the French advise
Q MIary to moderate measures, 217. their
proposals by an ambaflador rejeacd, 218.

3 N they

they agree to Q.Mary's marriage with
Lord Darnly, 275. the licentiousness of
their morals - - 342
France, King of, a copy of his direaions lent

to Scotland, App. - 507
Francis I. gives a check to the ambitious

proje&s of Charles V. i. 75. his fidelity
to the Scots, 94. his death, 97

I- . comes to the crown of France,

i. 164. his character, ibid. 210. is guided
by the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, ibid. hetreats the Protestants with
greatrigour, 197. his death - 210

G
GlItords, Doctor and Gilbert, their notion

concerning the lawfulness of killing
heretical excommunicated Princes, ii. z6.
they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by Wal-
fiogham betrays his aflbciates, 128, z29 is
employed to carry on a foreign correlpond-
ence with Q Mary 130
Gl.inis, Lady, is condemned to be burned

for witchcraft - - i.58
--- Lord, chancellor, intimates the
King's order to Morton to surrender the
Regency, ii. 53. is killed in a rencounter
at Stirling - - 55

the tutor of, joins the conspirators of

Ruthven, ii. 79. his bold speech to K.
James, So. he, with the other conspirators,
icize the Castle of Stirling and eret their
tlandard, 9 . he is attainted, and hiseRlate
forfeited - - 103
Gila/gvw. Bifhoap of, a note of his concern-

ing the queen of Scotland's dowry, Ap-
pendix - - 405
Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven con-

fpirators - - i-79

Gle/Ilivat, the battle of - ii. 194.
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the lfreets of

Edinburgh between him and Lord Ogilvy,
i. 246. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, 247. when ordered by the
Queen to birrender himself, he takes up
arms againlt her, ib. 48. is defeated, and
together with his brother, made prisoner,
250. he is beheaded and his brother par-
doned - - 1

- Lord, set at liberty i. 289
....- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen's interest in the north, ii. z7. his

characer and good condut as a soldier

2-9-
Gowrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to

seize the King at Ruthven, ii. 79. is vi-
fited and pardoned by the King after his
escape, 88. becomes fufpeced, and is or-
dered for France, 94. delays his voyage,-
and is taken into cuflody, ibid. he is tried
and executed - - 95
_-- John and Alexander, sons of the
above, their characer and conspiracy, ii.
220. the surprising circumstances of that
remarkable tranfation, zz2-z25. several
different conjeaures concerning it, 225-
235. their dead bodies brought into Par-
liament and condemned, 235. their efates
and honours forfeited, and name abolished
for ever, 236. different accounts of this
affair published, but not fatisfaEtory, 23&
-238. See Ruthwen.
Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accused ofa

conspiracy with the popifl Lords in favour
of Spain, ii. 18+. is convicted and behead-
ed - -85
Gray, makler of, some account of him, ii.

107. he becomes a favourite of K.
James VI. 108. is gained to Q_Elizabeth's
interell, ibid. betrays Q_Mary, ibid. per-
fuades K. James to write a harsh and un-
dutiful letter to her, 14. joins with others
in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in
Scotland, 18. his treachery when sent to
intercede for Q.Mary, 147. his baseness
discovered, he is disgraced, i60. his vain
attempt against secretary Maitland, 161.
ats in Italy as a spy from the court of Eng-
land, 216. a memorial of his for his Ma-
jerty, Appendix, 432-436. to the fecre-r
tary of ltate - - 435
Guijf, Duke of, his violent counsels with re-

gard to the Scots, i. 163, 164. is mur-
dered at the siege of Orleans z56

- his intrigues against Q_ Elizabeth,
ii. too, loi. is a principal promoter of
the 'holy league, 116. 166. drives the
French King out of his capital ibid,

H
-JilAdingtoun, seized and fortified by the

Englilh, i. M13. is relieved. by the French

104.
Ilanjilion, the rife of that family, i. 31. at-

bitrary proceedings of Morton the Re-

gent

?rnt ag:tinl it, ii. 6o, 6i. See C/e.tl-
heraul.'
sla.o't:n, of ''rhwelihaugh, taken prisoner

at the batt!c ot La.n ,di, i. 4o0). is tried
and condesrned for :ecl!ion, ibid. ob-
tair. s n. pardon from P.'Iurray the Rcgcnt,
by the ij.tercceiion of Knox, ibid. an ac-
counct of !ii urderirg Murray, 4 ;5, - 16.
makes his eftape, .%7' is

reccrive in tli-

umph at lir.milton, - ii. I

~----- Mr. I'atrick, the firt* who rfufle'red
in Scotiaiid for the Protcllant religion

i. 140
Htart/frd, Earl of, invades Scotland with an

Eg glifi army, i. 91. burns Edinburgh
and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and proteclor of England, 99. See
SmoErJt.
latton, vice-chamberlain of England, the

argument by which he prevailed on Q~
M. ry to plead at her trial - ii. 1 5
.lIlenty 11. of France, fends forces to afilft the

Scots, i. 97. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the young Q.
of Scots, lo4, loj. excites the Scots to
invade England, t29. his infamous im-
position on Q( MIary in the treaty of
marriage, 133, 134-. persuades his son and
(). Mary io aliume the titles of King and
Queen of England, .1-I. his death 197
--- 111. degenerates greatly on his ac-

ceflion to the crown of France, ii. ,lr.
enters into a private negotiation with Q:
Elizabeth, i8S. interposes feebly in behalf
of Q: Mary - - 143
--- V11I. of England, by his system of

reformation becomes formidable both to
Papilts and Proteltants, i. 58. proposes an
interview with King James V. 59. is dif-
appointed by him and declares war againlt
Scotland, 6o. invades it, but is forced to
retreat, 61. his importance as to the ba-
lance of power in Europe, 75. his influ-
ence in Scotland how obtained, 77. his
schemes with regard to it on the death of
James V. 82. were ill conduted by him-
self, and odious to the Scots, ib. his trea-
cherous seizure of Scots Ihips that took
fielter in his ports, 8,. attempts to gain
the Regency by great promises, 86. invades
i3cotland, 91. this being ill.conduaed,
turns to no account, gz. receives and re-
wards the Earl of Lennox, ib. encourages
the murderers of Cardinal Beatoun, 96.
$ii death and charater, 97. his inconlitt-

cnt conduct, 143. .ecluded the S.otcKl
line by his tellamslit - ibid.
lieri s, Lord, joins Chatelherault in op-

poling the Regent, i. 43z. com0i- t0o .1
treaty with hitm, ibid. he and the i)uke
are committed ptifoners to the calsle of
E'dinburgh, 433. intimates the king's o:-
dl-r to Morton to retign the Ileg,:y. n.
53. account of his behaviour 11 l'.!i;-
inent, Appendix, .30. a letter from hiai
to Lord Scroop and Sir 1I. Kinolis 3 ;
l:'cy'brd,, I:creialy to the Duke of Norfolk,

betrays hiin by dilcovering hii ilntrigue,
wiih (Q. Mary ii. 23, -4
tIg'liran:s a:,.J /JIs, an atte mp to civili:e

tlhcm by 1!tnu J:m; \'V!. it. z4 . regul;a-
to(is for lh;: t ip ,;u . , .'5 . tilre t[own
endued vitih the p:ivilcge., eft' royal ho.
toughs ordered to iie built there i bil.
lZiLo .on. a prielt of Rheilms, maintained ti c

lawfilncls of killing h,:retical exco:ilnu-
nicated l'rinces - - ii.
Ilome, Alexander Lord, thliarts the mealure,

of the Duke of Albany, Kegcnt i. 31
--- Lord, sent by King James VI. with

a secret cinbafty to ihe l'op : ii. z1g

IIoavard. Sec lN'oik.
llunjdon, Lord, governor of Berwicl-, hii

interview with Arran - ii. o
Iuntl'y, Earl, though a catholic, joins thi

reformers in opposing thle French army,
i. tO1. alfilts them only withl fair promises,
183. his further concurrence with them,
19;. some account of that family, z.l,
Z45. his enmity againit the young Qeen's
minillers, ibid. his resentment inllaicd by
an accident, 246. appears in an open re-
bellion againlf the (leen, 249. his plot
against her minitiers disappointed, ibid.
breaks out into open rebellion, z;o. is
trodden to death in a battle, 25z. his fa-
mily prosecuted with the utmolt rigour, ib.
several anecdotes and conjecLures concern-
ing his plot, ibid. z52. is attainted by
Parliament, 259. the attainder repealed,
and the family rellored to cllate and ho-
nours - - 353

his attachment to Bothwell, i. 3.49.

357. refutes to submit to the regent, 432.
is forced to do it, ib. adts as lieutenant to
the queen after the Regent's murder, ii. .
is proclaimed a traitor by Lennox the neiv
Regent, S. receives some money and pru-
mises of afliftance from Spain, ibid. agrees
to a treaty with Mviorton the Regent, 42.

3 N

is one of the heads of the Spanish faction,
i68. engages to the Prince of Parma to
serve the king of Spain, 172. is impri-
soned for a short time, 174-. ereEts a
tlandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to
submit to the King, ibid. is again im-
prisoned, 175. is soon set at liberty, ibid.
receives a commission from the King, 18z.
his bnrbarous murder of the Earl of Mur-
ray, ibid. is summoned to surrender to
jultice, ibid. flies to the mountains, 185.
ofers to submit to a trial, 189. sentence
pronounced againfl him, igo. refutes to
fubmiit, 191. makes another desperate at-
tempt, but is forced to fly - 193

I

jiAMES I. was detained long a prisoner
J in England, i. 29. troubles in Scotland

during that time, ibid. 30. was much im-
proved by an English education, 40, 41.
his policy on his return to Scotland, ibid.
his charaAer, ibid. 42. fupprefles the pow-
er of the nobles, ibid. they being exaf-
perated, conspire againit, and murder him

43
J7ames 11. troubles in Scotland during his

minority, i. 30. his attempts against the
nobles, ,4. murders the Earl of Dou-
glas, 45. procures several good laws to be
passed, 45, 46. reduces the power of the
nobles, ib. his death - 47
.---- IlI. the flare of Scotland during his

minority, i. 30. his impolitic condu&t, 47,
48. kills one of his brothers, and is invad-
ed by another, ib. is greatly insulted by
his nobles, 49. his despicable minions, ib.
ivas the firit that appointed a flanding
guard to his person, 50. the nobles are
provoked to take arms against him, 51. is
killed in a battle against them, ibid. his
chara&er - - ibid. 5z
--- IV. his character, i. 52. is killed in

a battle against the English at Flowden 53
-- V. his minority long and turbulent,

i. 31. tranfaisons during that time, 53,
54. assumes the government while very
young, 55. his character, ibid. his scheme
for humbling the nobles, 55-58. is di-
verted from it by the clergy, 60, 61. takes
arms for the defence of his kingdom, ibid.
his nobles refusing to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 6z, 63. which
* is increased by a surprising defeat of his

'3

forces, ib. his death, ib. reflections on his
condut, ibid. 64. he refused an alliance
with Charles V. Emperor - 77
rames VI. his birth, i. 320. his baptifin,

333. the care of him committed to the
Earl of Mar, 347. is by him preserved
from falling into the hands of Bot;ivcll,
365. is crowned, 384. the nobles op-
prefled by Morton the Regent, turn their
eyes to him for redress, ii. 50. his educa-
tion and dispositions, ibid. he becomes
suspicious of the Regent's power, ibid.
discovers early a great attachment to fa-
vourites, 6z. adopts two of different dif-
positions, 63. enters Edinburgh with great
solemnity, 64. is by his favourites en-
gaged in unpopular measures, 78, 79. is
seized by a party of nobles atRuthven, 80.
and forced to receive complaints against
his favourites. ib. diflembles with them,
and banishes Lennox, 81. is brought to
Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 83. his con-
cern for Lennox's death, and regard for
his memory, 84. receives the French am-
bafiador with great refpe&, 85. makes his
escape from the conspirators, 86. resolves
to treat them with moderation, 87. vifts
Gowrie and grants him a pardon, S8. re-
news his fondnets for Arran, ibid. is by
him persuaded to violent measures against
the conspirators, 89. his answer to a
haughty letter from Q Elizabeth on their
behalf, ib. is by her interposition rendered
more violent againlt them, 91. is pro-
voked by the clergy, gz. his steps to
humble them, 95. his profusion to Arran,
103. fends a new favourite to England
against the banished lords, 107. devolves
the whole regal authority on Arran, lo9.
writes an undutiful letter to his mother,
114. is threatened to be disinherited by
her, 1S5. receives a pension from Q Eli-
zabeth, 1 19. is reconciled to the exiled
lords, z11. becomes popular by conclud-
ing a treaty with England, 124. his scan-
dalous behaviour with regard to Archd
Douglas, 125. his endeavours to save his
mother's life after her condemnation, 143,
144. is greatly incensed at her death, 158.
arguments used by the English ministers to
pacify him, ibid. is forced to fifle his re-
fentment, 160. attempts to unite the
nobles, 162. is courted both by Spain and.
England, 167, 168. resolves vigorously to
adhere to the latter, 168. takes several
Reps with that view, ibid. his Skill in the

'popifi

popish controverry, 173. wrote a com-
mentary on the Revelations, ibid. his
maxims with regard to popery, ibid. 174.
his excessive lenity to conspirators againit
him, ibid. resolves to marry the Princess
ofDenmark, 175. arts used to prevent it,
ibid. the marriage is confunimated in Nor-
way, 176. passes several months in Den-
mark, ibid. reflections on his conduct
there, 177. his arrival in Scotland with
his QCeen, 179. indulges the l'relbyteri-
ans, ibid. 180. the ill consequences of
his lenity, ibid. his zeal againtl witch-
craft, iS . is I ,licited by Q.Elizabeth to
treat the conlpirators againlt him with
rigour, 186. is fufpeted of conniving
with them, 187. is surprised and seized
by Bothwell, ibid. and forced to comply
with his terms, 188. his lenity to Both-
well abused, 190. is fufpetted of favour-
ing the poj0ilh Lords, 191. is in new dan-
ger from them, ibid. delegates his autho-
rity to Argyle and Sorbes againlt them,
193. goes in person againit them, 19.l.
waftes their land, and garrisons their
caftles,ib. his right of the succession to the
crown of England oppoeld by the papils,
195. his lenity to them inceciles the clergy
and people, 199. is much provoked by
the obitina y of the clergv, zoz. gives or-
ders againfl them, 204 is nmuh insulted,
and in great danger at Edinburgh, 204
-206. leaves Edinbulgh and proceeds
with severity againlt the citizens, 207-

9og. acquires absolute dominion in eccle-

fialtical affairs, zio, 211. firengthens his
interest in parliament, by restoring the feats
of the ecclefiatics, 212, 213 endeavours
with success to gain a party in England,
214. increases his reputation by publifll-
iig his Bafilicon Doron, 215. is acc.ifed
by Q. Llizabeth ofcorrefponding with the
lope, 217. this he denies, and how ac-
counted for, ibid. other reports concern-
ing this, 218. is at great pains to gain the
Roman catholics, ibid. his regulations
with regard to the church, 219, 22o. the
mylterious affair of Gowrie's conspiracy,
22c-238. his cautious behaviour in re-
gard to the Earl of Effex, 242. fends am-
baffadors to save him, ibid. they arrive
too late, 243. he restores his son and afro-
ciates to their honours after his acceflion,
ibid. continues his intrigues in Englanl,
ibid. 244, 245. his interest greatly
strengthened there, ibid. endeavours to

civilize the highlands and isles, 2.16, 247.
is proclaimed King in ',ngland, after the
death of Q. Elizabeth, 252. is proclaimed
likewise in Scotland, 253. prepares for his
journey to England, 24. enters London
and takes poffeflion of the throne, 255.
his charafcr, how different from that of
Q. Elizabeth, ihid. a letter from him to
Mr. Archibald Douglas, Appendix, 429-.
curious letter to him from an unknown
Englifli correspondent - '143
In.verness caltle, refuses to surrender to Qd'

Mary, i. 249. it is forced, and the go-
vernor punilhed - ibid.

Italy, the liberty of, how prefcrved i. 73
I-E 17'H, Sir William, sent to intercede

for Q_ Mary vlwhen under fcntencc, ii.
144. letter from him to secretary Mait-
land, Appendix -,.30
K-'nt, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence

againll Q. Mtary executed ii. 150
Khr of 'eirniierlt, ravages England on the

murder of Murray the Regent, ii. 2. his
design, 4. has a fcuflle with the Engliti

120

Gco. brother to L. Ncwhottle, is dif-

covered sl:en ready to fail to promote a
plot in Spain, ii. . his Iciieme upened,
i8;. escape out oft plifon 186
KiH/lgrero, Henry, his declaration on the

peace, Apf'-ndix - 497
Kings, feudal, thie molt limited of all Princes,

i. 13. general caules of this, 14. their
revenues were but small, ibid. 15. had no
ilanding armies, 16. and jurildidion limit-
ed, 17. means used to extend the royal
authority, ;3. their jurifilidtion enlarged,
;. the extraordinary influcnce of the Scot-
tiih Kingi in l'arliament, 6 .. the reifon of
thi - ibid. 68
Ki,'kldy of Grange, one of the murderers

of Bentoun, is recalled by the Q Dowvager,
i. 131. his attainder revcried in Parlia.
ment, 259. offers to fight Bothwell in
single combat, 371. his interiiew with
(Q. Mary, in name of the confederate
Lu.rds, ibid. rescues Mailland from con-
finement, 4,to. labours to support hie
King's authority, and rellore harmony
afier the iurdicr of the Itcgent, ii. 3. ac-
cedes to the QOeen's party, 4. provides
fur a liege by ilcreafing his garrison and

folc;f illg

fortifying Edinburgh, v5. proclaims Len-
nox's authority unlawful and usurped, 16.
attempts in vain to prevent a meeting
of the Parliament, 17. forms a Icheme
for surprising the King's party, 19. is at
first fuccefbful, but afterwards defeated,
20. comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regert, 33. a treaty with Morton
breaks it off, 40-4z. fires upon Edinburgh
from the calfle, 41. is bcficged by the Re-
gent, affilled by the Englinl forces, 4-3. is
forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitu-
late, ibid. furrcndcrs to Drury the Englilh
general, ibid. is by order of Q. Elizabeth
delivered up to the Regent, 45. he and
his brother are executed - ibid.
'ndlhys, Sir Francis, sent by Q_ Elizabeth
with letters of condolence to Q. Mary on
her arrival in England, i. 403. fmne of
his letters, Appendix 382. 387. 390
Knox, John, a famous reformer, his cha-

racter, i. log. after being fonme time
abroad, he is recalled by the persecuted
Protestants, 149. inflames the multitude
at Perth with rage againI the Papills, ib. his
notion concerning the government of wo-
men whence, 155. his residence fixed in
Edinburgh, 159 complains of the luke-
warmncfs of the reformers, 172. his opt.
nion to the convention of the reformers
that it is lawful to relill and deprive tyran-
nical princes, 174. animates and revives the
desponding Congregation, 184, 185. com.
plains of the neglect of the reformers in
providing maintenance for their preachers,
207. recommends the Geneva model of
Church Government, 214. proposes super-
intendants in the church, ibid. composes
the first book of discipline, z 5. renounces
friendihip with the Earl of Murray for his
moderation, 260. is tried for encourag-
ing a mutiny among the people, and ac-
quitted, z6 . popish judges concur in this
decision, 262. is publicly accused by
Maitland of preaching seditious docrine
concerning refitance, ,71. characters of
the two disputants, ib. approved of several
instances of afaffination, 316. agrees to
fame regulations concerning the election
of Bishops, ii. 36. his death and charac-
ter, 37, 38. specimen of his eloquence,
ibid. his eulogium by Morton the Regent,
,8. articles lent by him to the general as-
ieinbly, Appendix - 403

L
LAng/fde, the battle of _ . 39Y

Laureau, cardinal, is sent as a nuncio

from the Pope with a present to Q. Mary
ot Scotland, i. 330. is flopped at Parcs

331
League, holy, a confederacy of Roman ca-

tuolics so called, ii. l6. was univcrfally
agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.
Learning, the revival of, promotes the re-

formation i. 117
Leice/ter, Earl of, appointed a commiflioner

to the conference at Wcltminftce i. 4Z3
Leith burnt by the English, i. 92. fortified

by the French, I68. belieged by the En-
glifh, 192. Q_ Mary lands there fiorn
France, 227. the fupcriority of it granted
by her to Edinburgh, 294. is seized and
fortified by Morton the legent ii. 16
Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland front

France, i. 86. is much courted by car-
dinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to
the succession, how founded, 89. resents
Beatoun's deceitfulness to him, 90. heads
the reformers and the advocates for the
English alliance, ibid. surprises the Re-
gent and cardinal, ibid. is outwitted by
the cardinal, 91. continues alone in the
interelt of England, 92. is forced to fly
to that court, where he is rewarded, ib. is
married to a neice of K. Henry's, by which
he became father to a race of Kings, ib.-
his claim to the fucceflion,z66.is imprisoned
for a fecretcorrefpondence with Q. Mary,
267. is invited secretly by her to return
toScotland, ib. arrives in Scotland, and is
received with great familiarity by her, 269.
his forfeiture is repealed, and he is reftor-
ed to his eflate and honours by the Parlia-
ment, 270. his lady sent prisoner to the
TowerofLondon, 280. and treated with
rigour, 284. he infifis on the prosecution
of his son Darnly's murderers, 346.
charges Bothwell with it, ibid. the prose-
cution is hurried, 348. he craves a delay.
which is refused, 349. he is left alone in
it, ibid. solicits Q_ Elizabeth's interest to
obtain a delay, 350. infils on it by proxy
at the trial, but is over-ruled, 351. being
apprchcnfive of danger he flies towards
England, 353. his countess accuses .Q
Mary ofthe murder to Q' Elizabeth, 405.
he appears at the conference at Weftmin-
lter, and accuses Q Mary of the murder

upon
·,

upon oath, 425. returns to Scotland pro-
teted by an English army, ii. 5. is elec-
ed Regent, 8. his progress againfl the
Queen's party, ibid. appoints commifli-
oners to frame a treaty with those of the
Queen, i. i. surprises Dumbarton calle,
13, 14. joins the Earl of Morton at Leith,
16. holds a Parliament in the Canongate,
ibid. another at Sterling, 18. he is fur-
prifcd and killed there - 20
Ltnox, Lord Aubigny, his chaacaer, ii. 63.

join, with the King's other new favourite
to undermine Morton, 64. renounccs Po-
pery, 65. Q_ Elizabeth demands him to
be removed from the privy council, 66.
is accuCed -" her ambafrador, 69. Arran
tries in vait ,j lupplant him, 74. is com-
manded by K James at the requefl of tlhe
nobles to le.ave the kingdom, St puts
oft his departure on various pretences, 8z.
returns unwillingly to France, where he
foondies, 8.t his memory vindicated and
much regarded by the King, ibid. died a
Protcetant ibid.
--- lEarl of, left as the King's lieutenant

in the north after difperling the popill
Lords - ii. 19,I
Le/7ie, Norman, murders Carlinal Iea-

tonn, i. 95. he and his .'flbciatec keep pof-
session of the cattle of St. Andrews, 96.
makes a truce with the Regent, ibid. are
encouraged by lien VIII. ibid.

-- iihop of Ross, is sent hy the Catholics
in Scotland to engage . Mary in theirin-
terest, i. 216 his' propofalb to her rejet-
ed, ibid. 217. his negotiations in England
in favour of Q. Mary, ii. 23. is coEfined
long in the l'ower, and afterwards is
banilned England --- 25
Lindsay, Lord, carries the proposal from the

confderates to Q_ Mary, that fle thould
resign the goveriment, i 383. joins the
Ruthvenl confpira;ors - ii. 79
Lcchkvin caltle, Q_ Mary committed a pri-

soner there, i. 3;b. her escape from thence

393

---- Lord, letters to and from him, Ap-
pendix 406
Logan of Reflalrig, an alleged accomplice in

Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. zz6, 227. is tried,
and his ellate forfeited long after his death

ibid. 228
L rds confederate, afociate against Bothwell

and QO Mary, i. 366. raile forces againll
them, 368. publilh the motives of their
conduct, ibid, prevail on the Queen to

surrender to them, 372. aflTme the title
of Lords of the secret council, and the
royal authority - 376
Lords,popifh,confpire againftK.J ames, ii.1 7 2.

are treated by him with great lenity, 174.
form a newv conspiracy, 184. the King pro-
ceeds again t thiem, 85. more of his lenity
to them, Sg9. frefi daangers from theni,
192. they receive money from Spain, ibid.
zeal of the cl.rgy again f them, 193. are
declared guilty of treason and their eltates
forfeited, ibid. defeat the King's army,
194. are dispersed on the King's approach,
195. go abroad and give security to kep
the peace, ibid. return to Scotland, and
petition for leave to reside in their own
houses, 199. this granted by a convention
of ellates, zoo. recant their errors and arc
abfolvedi from excommunication, zl . re-
laple, and are again reconcilcd to the
church of Rome, ibid. arc retlored totilcir
ellates and honours - 21
Lorraii, Cardinal, gets some of the bell b:-

nelices in Scotland - i. 138
- - Princes of, their ambitious viewxr, i.

143. inlligate the Dauphin and Q Mary
to take the titles of King and Qieen of
Engiand, 14. . resolve to invade 'lngl.nd,
145. and to check the Reformation in
bcotland, ibid. the Cardinal's great influ-
c:ce over the young King, i14- driveJ
tile Qicen Regent of Scotland to violent
menal' es, 7-o. ti,.ir violences oceca:ion a
confpiraicy igainlt them, 19 s. are forced
to n ithdrlaw tllhir trorp, Irotm Scotland,
ibid. they infllt thli Sco:titli ainlaliidor,
208. have great power o cr th ) younrg,
King and Qeein, 21o. are forced to con-
trast their views on the death of the Kin!

zl!
Luther, a bo!d acd principal promoter of the

Reform.ition, i. 117. the rapid piogreli of
his doctrine - I '1
f1Tj7OR,, J.hin, his hi: ory cf Scoti.lli(

'otle accounst (.f -- i '
Mlait/lat:d of l.ctlini;tci. secretary to M;,ly

.Ccen Ilegcnr, la:-e- icr fcrvice an,! j',is
tie Coigiegdtiti. , i. i:;3. ii. chli.n ,c r,
1.84-. is Lent by thcin linbafl:dor to _)
Elizabeth, ia5. leins thtlm a:liiranc's nt
her protlAion, ISS. is sent l,y Q. N'iM;y
to the court of lnigand, z3j. niakes a

cOrt-

*concellion to Q.Elizabeth, ibid. 233. ac-
compJnies Q. Mary in a progress to the
north, 247. he is employed by Q. Mary
to desire a personal interview with Q_
Elizabeth, 252. publicly accufesKnox of
preaching seditious docrine concerning re-
fillance, 271. intimates to Q. Elizabeth
the intention of Q. Mary to marryDarn-
ly, 278. prudently conceals her resent-
ment from Q. Elizabeth, 280. proposes
moderate measures with regard to Q.
Mary when imprisoned, 381. attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in
England, 413. he disapproves of this
neafurc, ibid. his intrigue with the Duke
of Norfolk, 417. 434, 435. isimprifoned
by the Regent, 44o. is relieved by Kirk-
aldy, and secured in the castle, ihid. pro-
poles a coalition of the two parties after
the murder of the Regent, ii. 3. accedes.
to the Queen's party, 4. is deprived of his
office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor,
8. is attainted in a Parliament of the
King's party, 17. agrees with Mar, 33.
his views in refusing a reconciliation with
Morton the Regent, 40. reje&s overtures
of a treaty with him, ibid. is besieged
by him in the castle of Edinburgh, 43. is
forced to capitulate and furrcnder to the
English general, ibid. to avoid the Re-
gent's resentment he dispatches himself,
45. several of his letters, Appendix

ii 397. 430
Maitland, Sir John, is made secretary for

Scotland, ii. 118. concurs with others in
promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest there,
ibid. attempts againrf him by Capt. James
Stewart, late of Arran, 161. they prove
abortive, and he is advanced to be chan-
cellor, ibid. an attempt to remove him
from that office, frutlrated, 174. his death,
196. a copy of verses in honour of him
wrote by the King - ibid.
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the

Prior of St. Andrews, i. 246. accompanies
the Queen in a progress to the north, 247.
he and his associates narrowly escape as-
faflination, 2.8. is cleated Earl of Murray,
249. See Murray.

the title is conferred on L. Erskine,

i. 249. the person of the young Prince
put into his hands, 347. his resolution of
preserving him from Bothwell, 365. is
chosen Regent, ii. z1. labours to bring
about a general peace, 32. is thwarted by
Morton and his associates, 33. dies of

melancholy, 34. his characer, ibid. his
merit and integrity were acknowledged by
both parties ibid.
Mar, the young Eali, being imposed on

by Morton, turns out his uncle from the
cartle of Stirling, ii. 56. joins the Ruthven
conspirators, 79. he with the others seize
Stirling castle, and erect their ltandard,
94. is attainted and his cllate forfeited,
103. is pardoned, and retlored to his eflate
and honours - 12
Alarch, counters of, her infamous marriage

with the Earl of Arran - ii. 74
Mary of Guile, Q.: Dowager of Scotland,

takes a considerable share in the govern-
ment, i. 103. is much addiaed to the
French interest, ibid. projeEts a marriage
of her daughter to the Dauphin of France,
104. becomes infirumental in promoting
the Reformation, I . aspires to the of-
fice of Regent, ibid. Iz2. promotes dif-
affecion to the present one, and favours
the reformers, ibid. 113. visits the court
of France, ibid. returns to Scotland to
take poffeflion of the Regency, 114. after
some opposition she obtains it, 116. con-
sers several offices of trust upon strangers,
127. proposes to lay a tai upon land, 129.
is forced to drop it, ibid. tries in vain to
excite a war with England,ibid. the nobles
vigorously oppose her measures, 131. treats
the reformers with great refpet, 132. ob-
tains a concession from the Parliament in
favour of the Dauphin, 137, her artful
management of the reformers, ibid. 138.
betlows the vacant benefices on foreigners,
ibid. the alters her conduct to the reform-
ers, 142. remonstrances against the violent
measures of the Princes of Lorrain, 146.
is persuaded by them to persecute the re.
formers, 147. her ralh answer to their re-
monstrance, ibid. 148. summons their
preachers to appear before her, ibid.
breaks a promise the had made them, 149.
marches with an army against them, 150.
concludes a treaty with them, 15i. this
she again breaks, 152. her severity at
Perth, ibid. her scheme discovered, ibid.
153. the goes to attack them, ibid. has
again recourse to negotiation, 154. the is
startled at their demands and gets time to
answer them, 156. violates another treaty,
ibid. loses Perth, and forced to abandon
Stirling and Edinburgh, she retires with
precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 157. marches
to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 160.

ga.ins

gains time by her artifice, ibid. makes
another treaty with them, ibid. 161. her
artifices to undermine the Prior of St. An-
drews, 167. the absurdity of her fcleme,
ibid. 168. gets a reinforcement of French
troops, who fortify Leith, ibid. she dif-
regards a remonltrance of the reformers,
170. is influenced by French counsellors,
and persuaded to violent measures, ibid.
retires to Leith on the approach of the re-
formers army, 171. her prudent and art-
ful condut there, ibid. her haughty and
imperious answer to a frelh remonltrance
from them, 172. is, by a convention of
them, deprived of her office of Regent,
174. the foundation of this sentence, 175.
foments differences among them, 179. is
deserted by her principal secretary Mait-
land of Lethington, 183. fends French
troops againtl the reformers, 188. retires
into the castle of Edinburgh on the ap-
proach of the Englifi, 193. her death and
charatfer, 195. repented of her violent
measures, 196. lillened to the inllrucions
of a reformed preacher - 197
Mary Queen of England, her persecuting

reign, i. 116. her death - 139
-- Queen of Scots, born, i. 79. a pro-

pofal to marry her to Ed. VI. Sz. she is
demanded by Henry VIII. 83. her mar-
riage to the Dauphin of France proposed,
lo4. a treaty for that purpose concluded,
1o;. The is sent to be educated in France,
ibid. the fatal confequenee of this, to6.
is imposed on by the artifices of the
French in the treaty of marriage, 133.
her marriage celebrated with great pomp,
334. they take the title of King and Qeen
England, 14+. she makes conceflions to the
Congregation, 199. declares Q Eliza-
beth's right to the crown of England, 200.
the acquires an entire arcendant over her
hulband, 210. fiCe is overwhelmed with
great afflic&ion on his death, and retires to
Rheims, 211. fheis invited by the con-
vention to return to Scotland, zi6. an
emissary from the catholics in Scotland
proposed violent measures to her, 26. she
is determined to moderation by the French
and the Prior of St. Andrews, ib. z17. is
prevailed on to prepare for her return to
Scotland, 219. the origin of the discord
between her and Q Elizabeth, ibid. her
pretensions to the crown of England, 220o.
is envied on account of her beauty, 224.
demands afafe condua from Q. Elizabeth,
VOL. 1I.

which is refused, zz;. leaves France with
great relutance, ib. zz6. lands at Leith,
227. is much affected by the change of
her situation, ib. several disadvantages at-
tending her acceflion, ib. 228. some cir-
cumftances to her advantage, ib. 229. her
accomplilhments of body and mind, ib.
the servants of her chapel insulted, 30o.
procures the free exercise of her religion,
ibid. issues a proclamation in favour of the
ProteRtants, 3 1. employs them solely in
the adminiRlration, 232. attempts to gain
Q Elizabeth's favour, ibid. makes a con-
cellion to her, z33. which is rejected, 2z4..
fie makes her public entry into Edin-
burgh, ib. an insult offered to her religion
on that occalion, ib. discourages the at-
tempts of the papilts to gain her favour,
236. her averfton to the family of Hamil-
ton, ibid. makes a progress into the north,
247, 248. her minillers narrowly escape
a;flafilnation, ibid. is refused access to the
catlle of Invcrncls, 2.19. when in the ut-
molt conflernation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and( other clans, ibid. her forces de-
feat Huntley's rebellion, z2o. the desires
an interview with Q- Elizabeth, z25. ne-
gotiations concerning her marriage, 25 .
is solicited by different Princes, z2., z2,;
her deliberations concerning it, ibid. is
forced to bear the authoritative behaviour
of (_ Elizabeth, 257, 258. to pleale her
subjects, determines againit a foreign al-
liance, ib. determines not to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh, 259. further negoti-
ations for her marriage, z62. dircovcrs the
views of Catiarine of Medicis, ibid. 263.
Lord Robert Dudley recommended to her
as a husband by Q( Elizabeth, ibid. flhe
is highly offended at this, 264. diflembles
with Q.Elizabeth, 266. entertains thoughts
of marrying Lord Darnly, ibid. The re-
calls Lennox, 267. is affronted at a letter
of Q. Elizabeth's, 268. her prejudice
againit the reformed, and zeal for the ca-
tholic religion, 270. is taken with Darnly
at firit fight, 273. is greatly moved at Q-
Elizabeth's intulting craftiness, ib. 274.
negotrites with the court of Rome for a
dilpenfation to marry Darnly, ibid. and
the consent of the court of France, ibid.
imposes on Randolph, but applies to Q.
Elizabeth for consent to her marriage,
278. which she affels to refuse, ibid. in
reCentment The proposes to fend an angry.
meflage to Elizabeth, which Maitland

3 0 prevents,

prevents, 280. juflifies her condu& to the
English ambassador, ibid. endeavours to
get Murray's conaent, 28t. courts the
pope's prote&ion, and receives a fubtidy
from him, 282. her great address in gain-
ing the consent of her fubjets, 283, 284.
prevents a plot against Darnly, 285. fum-
mons her vassals to take arms against Mur-
ray, 2t6. and him to appear before her,
287. her marriage with Darnly celebrated,
e88. she confers the title of King of Scots
upon him, ib. this ftep censured, ib. her
resentment against the malecontents, 289.
fie marches against them, 290. reje&s the
interceafion of Q.Elizabeth in their behalf,
ib. continues her march against the rebels,
291. her conduc and courage on that occa-
sion, ib. drives them out of Scotland, 292.
her further resentment againit them, ibid.
293. has recourse to several devices to raise
money, 294. her prosperity promotes her
religion, z95. her deliberations concern-
ing the exiled Lords, 297. determines to
treat them with lenity, 299. is diverted
from this by her religion and French in-
fluence, ibid. 300. this the source of her
after-misfortunes, 301. her intention to
restore popery, 30z. is difgulled with Darn-
ly's insolent behaviour,303. her familiarity
with Rizio offends the King, 305. vindi-
cated from any criminal correspondence
with Rizio, 306, 307. uses her utmot en-
deavours to prevent his murder, 309. she
is confined by the conspirators, ibid. Ihe
gains the King, and escapes from them,
310. is reconciled to the exiled nobles,
311. her hatred toDarnly increases, 317,
318. and favour for Bothwell commences,
ibid. cxtinguifles some domestic feuds
among the nobles, 319. is delivered of
her son James VI. in the Castle of Edin-
burgh, 320. invites several foreign princes
to his baptism, 3Z1. continues to treat
Darnly with negleEt, ibid. her attachment
to Bothwell increases, ibid. prevents Darn-
]y's intended flight, 324. visits the borders,
3z;. an instance of her regard for Both-
well on that occasion, ibid. how fie rival-
led QL Elizailtth, 326. her right of fuc-
cession favoured by the English parliament,
327. She endeavours to avail herself of
that opportunity, 328, 329. She takes an
extraordinary flop in favour of popery,
330. receives a present from the pope, but
iiops his nuncio at Paris, 331. endeavours
.to procure a better fubfiltence for the re-

formed clergy, ibid. her aversion to the King
exceflive, becomes melancholy, 33z. goes
to Stirling to celebrate her son's baptifin,
333. is greatly offended at the King's be-
haviouron that occasion, ibid. restores the
popiSh ecclesiastical jurifdiaion, 338. her
negleft of the king during his sickness,
339. the breach between them becomes
irreparable, ibid. 340, fie visits him at
Glalgow, ibid. the motives of her difii-
mulation on that occasion, 341, 342. pre-
vails on him to come to Edinburgh, 343.
her suspicious behaviour to him there, ib.
ifiues a proclamation for dilcovcring his
murderers, 345. is supposed to have been
accefflry to it, ibid. 346. is charged with
it abroad, as well as at home, ibid. goes
to visit her son at Stirling, 360. is met
on her return by Bothwell, who seizes and
carries her to Dunbar, ibid. this supposed
with her consent, '361. is conducted to
Edinburgh, 363. and married to Both-
well, ibid. fends an apology to the courts
of France and England, 364. her conduct
causes a general indignation againit her
abroad, 366. is alarmed at a combination
of the nobles against her, ibid. she pub-
lilhes a manifesto to vindicate her condu&,
367. is con lued to the callle of Borth-
wick, 368. marches with Bothwell's forces
againll the confederate Lords, 369. an at-
tempt of an accommodation proves vain,
370. is forced to surrender to the confe-
derates, 372. is insulted by the soldiers
and mob, ibid. is carried to Edinburgh,
where many abuses are offerd her, ibid. is
sent a prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 376.
Q Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 379.
the English ambaflhdor is refuted accels to
her, 380. various proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 381, 382.
they oblige her to resign the government,
ibid. different reasonings on this measure,
384-387. is much moved with the free
dom of the Earl of Murray, 388. her
party among the nobles become dispirited,
395. her relignation of the Crown accept-
ed by the parliament, and her imprison-
ment declared lawful, 391. her letters to
Bothwell read, and the declared accefTary
to the King's murder, ib. escapes from
Lochlevin, 393, 394. arrives at Hamilton,
ibid. is attended by many nobles and a
numerous army, ibid. an aflbciation signed
in her defence, 395. her imprudence in
hazarding a battle, 397. her army de-

feated

feted by the confederates, ibid. her pre.
cipitate flight into Galloway, 398. ranhly
determines to retire to England, 399. goes
thither against the advice of her attend-
ants, ib. 400. arrives at Carlisle, ibid.
writes to Q Elizabeth, imploring her good
offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence
fiom her, and deniands admittance into her
presence, 403, 40-. this refused, and why,
ibid. offers to fubnit her caufi to Q. Elli-
zabeth, ibid. is much deceived in her ex-
pecation from this, 407. and offended on
difcovcring the artifices of Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. earnelily (flicits to be admitted into
her prefencee, ibid. file is carried to Ilolton
Caille, 409. chagrined at finding herself
a prisoner, 410. agrees to an inquiry into
her conduct. ibid. her dilinmtuniltion with
regard to religion, 4' . cormilioners ap-
pointed to appear in her namn, 13. her
chief view in this affair, 414. contents to
moving the conference to Weitminlcr,
420. the is carried to Tuthbury in Staf-
fordlhire, 422. is much offended at the
regard shewn the Regent, and recalls her
consent to the conference, 423. the accu-
fations againit her produced by the lRecent,
ibid. is accured likewise by the Earl of
Lennox, 425. her commiflioners refuse to
ann\ver, and demand a perfionl iinterview,
ibid. they protelt againt future proceed-
ings, 426. a suspicious circumliance againlt
her, ib. hercomnmillioners withdraw front
the meeting, 427. her relolutc an fver to
a harsh propolal of Q Elizyabeth, 429.
avoids any farther progress in the inq uiry,
ibid. is enraged at the proceedings, and
proposes delperate nieasltirs, 430, 431.
ipreads chimerical conjcaures with that
view, ibid. proposes a divorce from Both-
well, 4-t4. is influenced by the 1). of Nor-
folk's ichemes, ibid. exchanges man y let-
ters and love-tokens with him, 4,;. con-
sents to proposals from the linglilh nobles,
437. their views in this tranf.ction, 4.;6--
438. a rebellion by her adherents againlt
(* Elizabeth, 441. is removed to Co-
ventry, 443. (. Elizabeth thi in:s of <e-
livering her up to the egent, 4.4.p. this
project how disappointed, 4 1. acceilion
if several to llcr patty after tlhe murder of
the Regent, ii. 1, ;. they endeavour to
foment a war with lingland, ibiJ. her au-
thority proclaimed at Linlithgow, ibid.
her parties defeated by the new Regent, S.
·ie answers proposals by Q.Elizabeth, io.

attempts in vain to get foreign aftillance,
ibid. appoints commillioners to frame a
treaty for her liberation, i . this proving
fruitless, file is more Itrictly confined, i .
the invalidity of her resignation declared
in a parliament held by her adherents, -7.
aa of parliament in England toi curb her
and her party, 2 . lhe looks for prot.dCion
from the King of Spain, z2. is denied
the privilege of ln ambal'idor at the Court
of England, 2;. is more close confined
and watched, ib. proceedings agiinfl her
in England, 29. lI-r intercll neglected by
the French, 3o. is hirt by the nilafl re at
Paris, 31, 32. her adherents divided in:o
tao faCtioons, 39. one of them joins witil
Morton the cRegent, 42. review of tin:
ciaralt' r. of her aiLs hercents ani opponents,
41, 45. her foiiorn lituationn, ilil. is car-
ried to luxton W ells, ibid. lil;>s s vi.',!-l
of her fiicads by death, i7. fenids a i'tcr
and prICetcts to her lon, () . her mclllnge',
why dil;li.old wi;thout Ilci;:g hil, ibid.
her uncalincfs at his coifiiiicnlict by thl
Rl.nti'en conlpirators, 8.1.. coiplaiius to (_)
Eli:.:ibetli of her hard ulhfge, ib. 85. and
bigs her intercfliion for the IKin; lher Ton,
ibid. .hhliroumortoans confpir cy in her fa-
vour, 1)1)--ioi. a fruillei, ngo'tiation witi.
(. l.liizablth, 104. is :ilarncl at an illb-
ci:imion in dciciccc of l_ E:li.zibeth , lo,.
is commnitted to more fcvcre keepers, o7.
betrayed by Iord (;ray the Scotch ambaf-
fador, loS. a llatute fir the pileervation of

El;liz ibeth proves fatal to her, l12. is

more rigroufly treated, 1 13. her com-
plitints to (Q Elizabeth disregarded, t--.
is, by the French anmhaldor's interelt,
removed to' Tuthlbury, ibid. is undutifullv
treated by the King lier son, ibid. l;.
her piflionate complaint to the French
amibafhldoron that occasion, ibid. threcitens
to dliinilerit hi;n, ibid. {cvcr.tl dilcoveries
alleged againlt her, 130. Ile is guarded
with unusual vigilance, i;z. her do-
nmllic., papers, &c. are fcizcd, ibid. file
is conveyed to Fotheringay Caille, ibid.
deliberation concerning the method of
proceeding againtl her, 133, 134. is fil-
picious of poilon or private murder, ibid.
vindicates lerfelf to the D. of Guile, ibid.
the commillioners for trying her arrive at
Fotheringay Castle, ibid. her tpiriced
speech when refuting to plead, 135. is at
enigth prevailed on, ibid. lie protells
againil the authority cf the court, 136,

0 2 tlhe

The accusation againfi her, 136. her de-
fence, ibid. 138. her sentence, 139. ir-
regularities in her trial, 140. her sentence
is confirmed by parliament, 141. who de-
mand the execution of it, ibid. France
interposes feebly in her behalf, 143. the
sentence against her published, 145. she is
treated with the utmost rigour, 146. her
last request to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. refuses
the afifRance of a Protestant Bishop or
Dean, ibid. artifices used to inflame the
people against her, 148. her behaviour at
her death, 150-154. sentiments of his-
torians concerning her, 154. her character,
ibid. 155. her person described, 156. is
buried fir! at Peterborough, and after-
wards in WcfeminfRer-Abbey, 182. ibid.
letters from her, Append. 380. 385. 421.
her will, App. 422. objecions against her
by Walsingham, App. 417. what course
to be taken with her, 418. a Diflertation
on the genuineness of her lettcrso Both-
well. End of Vol. ii.
.IMaxvwell, Lord, arrives from Spain, and pre-

pares forces to join the Spaniards, ii. 16X.
his followers dispersed, he is taken prisoner

ibid.
Mvlelvil is sent by the French King to observe

the motions of the Queen Regent and her
adversaries, i. 163. ient to make up a dif-
ference between Elizabeth and Mary, 269.
brings about an appearance of friendship
between them, ibid. is lent to inform Q.
Elizabeth of the birth of K. James Vl.
320. puts a letter into the Queen's hand
against her marriage with Bothwell, 359.
is forced to fly from court, ib. advises K.
James to moderate meaufres upon hisefcape
from the Ruthven conspirators ii. 87
c--- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his cha-
rater, ii. 49. zealously opposes episcopacy,
ibid. declines the civil jurifdiaion in ec-
.lefialtical matters, 92. is forced to fly into
England to avoid persecution - 93
Melville, Mr. James, minilter of Anftruther,

his encomium on the eloquence of Knox
the reformer - - ii. 37
---- Sir Rober, sent by K. James to inter-

cede with Q. Elizabeth for Q Mary while
under sentence, ii. 147. executes hiscom-
million with fidelity and zeal, ibid. a me-
morial of his to the King, Appendix 436
---- MaRer of the houlhold to Q Mary,

takes his lat farewel of her, ii. 152. her
parting speech to him - ibid.
MIildmay, Sir Walter, sent by Q Elizabeth

with proposals to Q. Mary ii. 9

3

Mlonlur, Bilhop of Valence, employed by

the French to conclude a peace with Eng-
land and Scotland, i. 198. terms agreed
to by him - - 199-20
IMontgomery appointed Archbishop of Glaf-

go, ii. 77. is refused and excommunicated
by the General Assembly for his immoral
life - - ibid.
Montmorency, Con Rable of France, endea-

vours to prevent the Dauphin's marriage
with Q Mary, i. 132. his prudent advice
to Henry 1i. ib. makes a slender appear-
ance, in favour of Q Mary ii. 30
Morton, Earl of, his irresolute conduct as to

the Reformation, i. 183. accompanies Q.
Mary in a progress to the North, 247.
inRigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio,
306. takes the direAion of that enterprise,
308. is admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence, who promises him a pardon, 310.
is forced to fly into England, 31 1. obtains
his pardon on Bothwell's intercession, 336.
seizes a caket with letters from Q Mary
to Bothwcll, 377. he is, by Q.Elizabeth's
interposition, in favour with the King's
party, after the murder of the Regent,
ii. 3. appointed one of the commiffloners
to treat with the Queen's party, 1i. his
demands frustrate the meeting, ibid. x2.
is entirely influenced by the court of Eng-
land, 18. commands the King's forces at
Leith, 27. has several ikirmilhes with the
Queen's forces, ib. closely besieges Edin-
burgh, and commits great cruelties, ib. a
suspension procured by the Englifl and
French ambassadors, 28. a coalition of
parties prevented by him, 33. he is chosen
Regent, 34. his mercenary ingratitude to
the Earl of Northumberland, 35. obtains
the temporalities of the Archbishopric of
St. Andrews, ibid. labours to procure a
peace between the two parties, 38. at-
tempts in vain to gain Maitland and Kirk-
aldy, 40. makes a treaty with Chatelhe-
rault and Huntly, 41. gets poffeflion of the
Castle of Edinburgh, 43. his severity to
Kirkaldy and his brother, 45. his admini.
firation becomes odious, 46. his various
methods of gratifying his avarice, 47. con-
nives at the dispute of the clergy, 48.
he irritates the nobles, 49. Argyll and
Athol refuse to answer his summons, ibid.
makes a vain attempt against Lord Claud
Hamilton, 50. discovers the designs of the
nobles against him, and proposes to resign
his office, 52, 53. his resignation accepted
by the King gives universal joy, 53, 54.

obtains

obtains an approbation of his condui, and
a pardon in ample form, 5+. continues to
wvatch the motions of his adversaries, 55.
is forced to surrender the castle of Edin-
burgh, ib. resumes his authority, 57. gains
the Calile of Stirling, and a feat in the
Privy Council, ibid. procures a meeting
of the parliament at Stirling, ibid. his
security ratified in it, ibid. forces are raised
for and against him, 53. he is reconciled
to his adversaries by the interceflion of Q.
Elizabeth, ib. is fufpeaed of foul play at
an entertainment at his own house, 60.
his illegal proceedings againlt the family
of Hamilton, ibid. the King's new fa-
vourites undermine him, 63, 64. he en-
deavours to prevent them, 65. Q. Eliza-
beth interposes in his favour, 66. is charged
with being accessary to the late King's
death, 67. he is confined in different pri-
sons, 68. discourages an attempt to rescue
him, ibid. all his friends are turned out of
office, 71. he is tried and condemned, 72.
his resolute calm behaviour and confeflion
before and at his death, 72, 73. his body
is treated with ignominy - ibid.
ilurray, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrews,

goes with a handful of men againlt Hunt-
ly, i. 2o0. by his great skill and courage
lhe gains a complete victory, ib. his grant
is confirmed by parliament, 259. cabals
againfl him by Lennox and Darnly, 275.
his aversion to Darnly and other Court fa-
vourites, 281. calls Bothwell to land a
trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly's marriage with the Queen, ibid. he
and his aflbciates are made the dupes of
Q. Elizabeth's policy, 284. concerts to
seize Darnly and carry him to England,
255. this prevented by the Queen, ibid.
avoids afltflination intended him by Darn-
ly, 286, 287. evidences of these plots,
ibid. the Queen's vaflals are called to arms
against him, 286. he is summoned to ap-
pear before her, 287. is again summoned
and outlawed on his non-appearance, 289.
is forced to fly with his associates into Ar-
gylrfhire, 290. they are interceded for by
Q Elizabeth, ibid. are pursued by the
Queen, and obliged to fly into England,
291. they meet with unexpeced ill. treat-
ment from QElizabeth, 292. courts Ri-
zio to intercede with the Queen for him,
298. many of his old friends solicit. for

him, ibid. the Queen's favour how inter-
cepted, 299, 300. a parliament is called
to attaint them, 302. this how prevented,
303. he and his aficiates arrive at Edin-
burgh, 310. are graciously received by
the King and QOeen, ib. are alarmed at
the Queen's escape, !'t foont reconciled to
her, 3 1. he is appointed Regent during
the minority of K1. James VI. ;7. his
haris behaviour in a vilit to the QLecn,
388. the fuccels of his wife admrnirtlr.-
tion, 3Y9. procures many of the (2ceen's
party to join him, 390. gets the places of
ilrength into his hands, ibid. his olice of
Regentconfirmed by parliament, g t. his
feverc and haughty behaviour dilgulls fc-
vcral, 392. his adherents in great con-
fiernation at the Queen's escape from
Lochlevin, 391' . lii prudent conduct on
that occaiion, 395. defeats the Qjeen's
army at Langfidc, 397. he improves this
vitory, 0oo. his lenity to the prisoners,
ibid. he calls a parliament, o09. is called
upon by Q Elizabeth to vindicate his
condu&, 4 12. he arrives at York, 414.
his views in this affair, 415. complaints of
the Queen's comminlioners againit him,
4t6. he behaves with great rcferve on this
occasion, ibid. this part of his conduct
accounted for, ibid. 417. intrigues with
the Duke of Norfolk, ibid his demands
from the Englifl commiliioners, S48, 419.
anivers to the complaints of the Qjjuen's
cornmillioners without touching on the
murder, 2zo. agrees to have the confer-
ence moved to Wcllminlter, 4z1. is aftec-
tionatcly received by Q. Elizabeth, which
offends Q:Mary, 422. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder,
424. produces his evidences, 427. is dif-
niffcd by (. Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his conduct, 429, 430. his
party is secretly fiupported by her, 430. re-
turns to Scotland, and by his vigorous
conduct breaks the Q.ueen's party, l31 ,
he receives proposals both from _ Eliza-
beth and Q Mary, 433. he disappoints
Norfolk, 439. an account of his murder,
4.15, 4-6. his character, ibid. his death
much lamented by Q. Elizabeth and the
King's party, ii. I. much anarchy the con-
sequence of it, 2. part of a letter of his.
App. 392. his heir murdered by the Earl
of' lluntly -i. Sz

' A 'V.

N
7. AU, Secretary to Q.Mary, is sent by

Ther with a letter and presents to her son,

ii. 61. why dismissed without feeing him,
ibid. is sent with offers of humble refig-
nation to Q Elizabeth, io6. is seized and
sent prisoner to London, 132. is produced
an evidence against her - 140
ANevil discovers and prevents Parry's design

to murder Q. Elizabeth - ii. 112

NAoblcs, their extensive power, i. 18, 19. be-

come turbulent and formidable, 20. their
power greater in Scotland than in any
other kingdom, 1z. the causes of this,
21-28. their power of long duration,
-2, 33. it becomes intolerable to the
Princes, ibid. they are humbled in France
and England, ibid. but continue vigorous
in Scotland, ibid. difeords among them
encouraged, ibid. their jurifdicion cir-
cumfcrihed, 35. greatly mortified'by King
James V. 55-58. are disappointed in a
tcheme to shew their resentment, 60. re-
fuse to attend the King into England, 61.
they seize the revenuesof the church, 206.
refute to part with them to the reformed
clergy, 207. 216. diflenfions among them,
242, 243. a convention of them approve
the Queen's marriage to Darnly, 282. fe-
veral of them recommend Bothwell as a
husband to her, 357. a firange combina-
tion of them on this occasion, 358. a body
of them associate against her and Bothwell,
366. their different views in this, 367. a
party of them favours the Queen, 377.
they are much dispirited by the good con-
tdud of Murray, 390. they are much pro-
voked by Morton the Regent, ii. 49. think
of redress from the King, 51. infuse sus-
picion of the Regent's power into him,
ibid. a meeting of them by him, 53. a
party of them conspire againfr the King's
favourites, 79. they seize his person and
drive them off, 80. their neglect of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 122. the King
attempts to reconcile their feuds and unite
Shc-m, 162. See Lords.
YoGfo/l, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner

to hear the cause between Queen Mary and
her accusers, i. 414. forms a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 417.
intrigues wrth the Regent and Maitland

with that view, ibid. 418. he represents
the demands of the Scots to Q Elizabeth,
419, 420. his farther negotiations with
refpeC to Q. Mary, 434, 435- endeavours
to conceal his design from Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. is imposed on by the artifice of the
Regent, ibid. 436. gets the consent of
many of the English nobles, ibid. his
projeEt approved at foreign courts, 438.
is discovered and defeated by Q. Eliza-
beth, 439, 440. flies to Norfolk, 440. he
surrenders on a second summons, and is
sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid. is set at
liberty, and continues his intrigues with
Q Mary, ii. 23. is betrayed by his fecre-
tary, ibid. is leized with his dependants,
and accused by them 24. is executed 25
Norjthumberland, Earl of, attempts a rebel-

lion in favour of Q_ Mary, i. 441. his
scheme defeated, 442. he is seized by
the Regent, 443. is delivered up to the
governor of Berwicc, and put to death at
York - - ii. 31
Nottinghavm, Countess of, some account of

the tranfadlion concerning the Earl of
Essex's ring - - ii. 249

0
OCtavians, their inflitution and extensive

powers, ii. 197. they undermine the
King's ministers, ibid. become odious, and
a combination is formed against them,
198. being split into factions, and envied
by the courtiers, they resign their com-
mission - - 211
Ogilvie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John

Gordon in the streets of Edinburgh

i. 246
Oliphant, Mailer of, joins the Ruthven con-

Ipirators - i. 79
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scot-

land, ii. 7o. his inflrucions, ibid. is as-
faffinated - - 117
D'Oi/el, commander of the French troops in

Scotland, endeavours to promote a war
with England, i. 130. his design frustrated,
131. the number troops under his com-
mand, 153. instigates the Queen Regent
to violent menfures against the Reformers,
ibid. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a safe-
conduft from (Q Lizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland - 225

PAISL E1

p
pAISL EY, Abbot of, airives in Scotland,

i. 86. creates a suspicion of the Earl of

Lennox, in the Earl of Arran, Regent, ib.
is made Archbishop of St. Andrews 98
Paris, the manfacre of, ii. 30, 31. rejoicings

of the Popifli party on account of it, 31.
the conlternation and horror of the Pro-
teltants -- ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original con-

ilitution, i. 6--67. particularly that of
Scotland, 67-78. 202. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, zoz. a dif-
ficulty llarted and answered, 203. their
proceedings with regard to religion, zo.4.
condemn the iPopilh and approle the re-
formed dotrines, 205. fercral other re-
gulations of the fame tendency, ibid. zo').
their validity called in qacltion, 207. e.:-
ceed their powers, zoS. their proceedings
laid before the King and Queen, ibid. a
parliament in favour of Blothwell, 353.
pafies an art in favour of the Reformation,
ibid. 35.4. confirm the proceedings of the
confederates, 391. parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, ii.
Is. another of the (tueen's.adhlrents,
ibid. attaint upwards of 2oo of their op-
ponents, iS. a parliament at Stirling by
the King's party, ibid. surprised by the
Queen's adherents, 10. another at Stirl-
ing, 57. one at Edinburgh, 64. and on
the King's being of age, i(il, i6z. fe-
veral new lawrs made there, 16z-i64. the
lcletr Barons admitted into parliament

165
Parry, Door, undertakes to murder Q.

1Elizabeth, ii. i l. is encouraged by ant
gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, 11z. is executed

ibid.
ParJrns, a Jesuit, publiflles a book in favour

of the Infanta of Spain's right of fuc-
celfion to the Crown of England ii. 1g;
Pafyuinadcs and Picures, accusing Bothwell

of Darnly's murder, i. 345, 3t6. 353. a
law made against them - ibid.
Patten, William, his account of the ScottifS

ancient military dircipline i. 1ot, ioz
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one cf Q

Mary's keepers, ii. 107. his rigid ec-
verity to her, 113. discovers her foreign
correspondence, 130. his rude treatment

of her, 14.6. refuses to be cencernc l ii;
privately affliuiiating her, ibid. a letter
from him, Appendix - 4 7
1'cI.-e, Lifflop of A\miens, ii appointed to

support the popifl intereCl ill Scotland,
i. 17o. drives the Q2icn Regent to vio-
lent neafures againit tilc Protell.nts

ibid. 7-
Perth, an infurreclion of the Reformrrs there

againit the lPapills, i. 1.19, go. its inlia-
bitants are fcvercly treated Lby the Qelccn
Regent, 152. a F'renchl g.irfison 1pl.cfd
there, ibid. is beficged and tiken by the
I'roteitants, i.s a great tumult there con
acroun t ot , oric' conllp)ir:icy ii. i.
I/:lip 1. of 'Sp :i, niar;ld to .'ary Q .ilt

of lhl

. nlt, i. ll. ":ciilforces hin :irimy

vith her truop., I:'i. lliis rilat potwer,
ii. li ). join, in the holy lr'ae, ibid. re-
solves to invade ani conquer l'ngland,
1h . his preparations for it dilatory, 17).
I his delign frullrated. ibid. meditates an
invalion of '.ngland tihrough Scotland,
172. intrigues with some Scottill Lords
with thlit vicv, ibid. remits money to
tlh - - i.

(

Pih:c, the battle of - i. lo)
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates QTElizaLbetil,

deprives her of her !ingdom, and absolve,
her flbjcecs --- ii. 7
Pc/'l, one of lIabington's conflirators agiinlt

Q l.lizabeih, ii. 127. adicovers the plot

loS

Psi/iro, a frantic zealot, af.illinates the Duke

of t(uife at the siege of Orleans i. z56
Pont, Mr. Robert, a miniller, and one of

the Lords of Scliion, protells againll laivs
opprcnive to the Church - ii. 9(

IPostry, where molt liourilhing, i. I I8. vlhat

kind prevailed in Scotland, 11). was partly
grafted on [leathenifm, 158. is much hurt
by the congregation, 204. their do/lrines
condemned by Parliament, zo; . the ju-
ri!idieion of their courts aholilhcd, ibid.
their worflhip prol.il)ted, ibid. attempt in
vain to gaill Q(uen Mary's favour, 2,().
the great influence of lPopery 303
Pccer, the balance of, the great coifc-

qulnce of prelfrving it - i. 73
Prftlteriant church government eltablillied

in Scotland, i. zlz. is confirmed by King
James VI. - - ii. 1,
PIrotiy?ants. ii France, violently persecuted,

i. I6, 16(6. are moderate on (Q Mary's
arrival fiom France, 230. are employed

by

by her in the adminiitration, 232. a scheme
for fipprefling them all over Europe, 300.
a league formed for that purpose, ii. 16.
See Reforiation.

R
RA^msey, a favourite of K. James III. nar-

rowly escaped being hanged with his

associates, i. 49. is appointed captain of
the King's guard, and created Earl of
Bothwell, 51. See Bothuwell.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French

to negotiate a peace with England and
Scotland, i. 198. terms agreed on by him

199
Randolph, sent to encourage the Congrega-

tion, i. 180. congratulates Q. Mary's ar-
rival in Scotland, 232. urges the ratifi-
cation of the treaty of Edinburgh, 233. is
imposed on by Q. Mary in the affair of her
marriage with Danrly, 277. sent into Scot-
land on the murder of Murray, ti. 2. in-
terpofes for ilorton, 69. flies from Scot-
land in the night, 71. is sent again there,
and concludes a treaty with England, 124.
several of his letters, App. 335. 339. 342,
343. 352. 357, 358. 361.

Ratclf. See Susex.
Reformarion, its progress in Scotland, i. 109.

account of its frft preachers, ibid. is much
influenced by England, I o. two remark-
able instruments of promoting it, ibid. it
makes great progress, s16. causes con-
tributing to promote it, 114. its ad-
vantages over popery, 17. is favour-
ed by the Q, Regent, 131. an instance
of regard for it in Scotland, 133. the
whole party not chargeable with Cardinal
Beatoun's murder, 140. a priel burnt for
embracing it, 141. the reformers violently
persecuted by the Archbishop of St. An-
drews, ibid. are proteced by the Q. Re-
gent, ibid. apply in vain to the Popifli
clergy. 142. a persecution against them
pushed on by the French intereit, 146. the
preachers summoned before the Regent,
148. they are deceived and declared out-
laws by her, 149. a riotous infurrecion of
them at Perth against the Papists, ibid.
prepare to defend themselves against the
Queen, 150, 151. conclude a treaty with
her which ihe prefenly breaks, 151, 15z.
they take arms.againft the Queen, 153,
154. insist on redreling civil as well as re-
ligious grievances, 154. the influence of

the Reformation on liberty, ibid, they be-
siege and take Perth, 157. they seize Stirl-
ing and Edinburgh, ibid. commit great
violences on churches and monasteries,
ibid. their condu& how accounted for,
ibid. an instance of their moderation, ic8.
fix their residence at Edinburgh, 159. the
Queen prepares to attack them, 160.
makes another treaty with her, ibid. are
forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but
allowed the exercise of their religion, 161.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
ibid. are aware of their danger from France,
165. their party frengthened, ibid. remon-
firate against the French fortifying Leith,
169. take arms in their own defence, 171.
remonstrate again to the regent, 172. are
highly incensed at her imperious answer,
ibid. 173. by advice of a convention de-
prive the Queen Dowager of the office of
Regent, 174. the foundations of this con-
duct, 175. examination of the different
principles on which it was conducted in
different countries, 212. the growth of it
encouraged by parliament, 391, 392. See
Congregation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdiaion of i. 18
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belong-

ing - - i. 18
Revenge, encouraged both by custom and

law - - i. 3
Revenues of the church, proceedings of Par-

liament concerning them - i. 206
Ridolphi, an agent for the Pope at London,

negotiates for Q May, ii. 22. his argu-
ments with the D. of Norfolk 23, z4.
Rizio, David, rome account of him and his

rife, i. 276. Darnly's connexion with him,
277. his good offices courted by Murray,
298. his great interest and familiarity with
the Queen. 304. incurs the hatred of
Darnly, ibid. and of the friends of the
exiled Lords, ibid. several concurring
causes of this, 305. a combination formed
to murder him, 306. he is murdered in
the Queen's palace - 308, 309
Romans invade Britain, i. 2. give the earliest

accounts of the Scots - ibid.
Ross, Bishop of, zealously promotes Queen

Mary's interest at London, ii. 24. is con.
fined to the Tower, and threatened with
capital punishment, 25, z6. is set at li-
berty and banished the kingdom, ibid.
some letters of his, Appendix, 387. 401
Rrbay a foreigner, made keeper of the great

Sealof Scotland. i 1.27

R- Rutweln,

Ruthven, Lord, the rrurder of Rizio pro-

posed to him by ], rrilv, i. 3c6. heads the
conspirators againil him, 3oS. his part in
that tranfaclion, ibii. 309. is admitred
into the Queen's prelence, who promises
him a pardon, 310. did not repe.t of it
at his death -- -- 6
* -- created E. of Gowrir, he and his as-

fociates leize the King, and remo:ltlrate
againlt his fnvourites, ii. 79, So. drive
them from him, Yo. their crndtif approv-
ed in an affcmbly of the stales, Sz. the
King escapes from them, 86. by Arran's
influence violent measures are determined
against them, 89. Q. Elizabeth interccecs
in their behalf, ibid. are declared guilty
of high trealon, 91. take refuge in so-
reign countries, ibid. lie haifhily treated
Ly Q. Llizabeth, loS. a reconciliation
with herbronght about, 119, 20o. r'torn to
ccoLl:ind, and are reconciled to thc i..in,
121. their moderation on being rcllorc.l
to their elatesand honours, Iz. thclir ne-
glelt of their friends the Clergy ibid.
------- that name abolished by 'arliamenr,

ii. -35. See Govrie, PRuzth-v rwi.i, wera:

i,. bl

S

A/ó.'I,; Sir Ralph, his representations of

the relentmentofthe Scots, for the ciizuic
of their lliips by Ilenry VIII. i. S5. ap-
pointed a commifioner to hear the caiilc
between Qt. Mary and her accusers 414.I
S/ittl/rl'asr iof Caldelr, Iord St. John, lent

to lay the proceedings of the c;.i;a gation
parliament before the King and Q(een in
'rance, i. zoS. is coldiiy received and dif-
milled without a ratiication by them ihid.
Savage, a Spaniih officer, his desperate re-

iolution to kill Q Elizabeth ii. Iz6, 127
Scotliand, its ancicnt hillory failIlous, i. i.

the origin o tlie Scot, 2. their hilsory
why remarkably obicure, ,. fomce account
of the writers of it, ,, . is divided into
four periods, 5. a review of the third acra,
6. bome account of the-controverfy con-
cerning its independency, 6- io. this the
cause of great animofities and much blood.
thed, It. the Itate of Scotland when Bruce
began his reign, z. it begins to have an
influence on the fate of dillant nations,
76, 77. influence as to the balance of
power, 76. itate of Scotland at the birth

VOL. 11.

of Q. Mary, 79. is invaded by the Eng-
Jifi, and several places burnt and plutu-
deicd. , 9, 2. much alien itcd froal the
Englifl, 922, 93. a peace concluded be-
tween Elngland, France, andt Scotland, 9).
computation of damages done by the Pns;-
lili in Scohtland, ibid. a new breach with
Engl.ind, 9S. is invadlcd by a great Eng-
lisl army, 99. the Scots are defeated with
great flaughtcr, 1oo. 01o. their manner
of !igfhting at that tifime, lor. 10o. .a mar-
riage agreed of thelir young Qieen and tle
Dauphin of France, io5. they soon repent
this flp, 107. a fray at Edinburgh occa-
sions their itter averflon to the l,'renc!h,
108. this intlaned by another incident,
l2S. they decline a war w;tlh England,
I 9. fend repliefent aives t.i witnelS Il.
Mary's marliigt, 133. their care as to
t!e inariage articles, ibid. they refuel
confeni to the demands of the French,
i)o. four of their deputies ftulpeced to
be phoiloned, 136. which imu.l increales
the avcrfion, ibid. grant the crown maniri-
monial to the Dauphin, 137. they ;apTly
to the E.iglilh for aflillance againil the
I'reclnl, l8o. !,5. an 1.nglilh Ilcet arrivrs
for that purpose, 19o. conclude a peace
with linglatid ant receive an Ett:!ifl arm!',
191, i9z. all parties agree in dctelling the
French, 19g. a treaty betivecn England,
France, and Scotland, 197, 19;. both Egr;-
liOl and French arinics leave Scotland, 20-.
they rejoice much at the death of ice young
King of Iraince, z i . f.:nd to invite the
().lccn to Scoilils;d, 21i(. rejctt proposals
of an albafl'i(lor from tn rance, 2z1. Ilate
of Scotland on Q(. Mary's return f.ro(i
France, z 27. great zeal of.the n1tion :gatilt
l'opery, z3o. the Scots brought into con
tempt by Qiv Mary's conduct, 3(6. in ;
inile:rallc condition after the murder of
Murray the Regent, ii. 17. l.ite of sac-
ti:ms at that time in it, ihid. ii;. a leaIcn
concluded between Scotland an,l Ei tlglaid,
124. a view of the revolutions of Scotland
since thle acefiion of James VI. 25 --z67.
of the policy of the iaite, z; --:i. and
ofthechurch, z6i, z6z. of the genius and
talte as to learning - 262 -zi7
Scott of Buccleugh enters and ravages lEni -

land alter the muider of Murray the Re-
gent, ii. 2. the design of this -
,Sroop, Lord, sent to condole i ith, and wnatch

Q. ivary on her arrival in England, i. .;i3.

3 P he

lhe is committed to his custody at Bolton
castle, 409. why his fidelity is diftrufled,
and the Qjeen removed - 422
SeJfion, Lords and court of, by whom first

appointed, i. 36. the President and one
half of their number of the Clergy 122
Seron, Lord, afifis the Qneen Regent in de-

fending Leith - - i. 183

Shrew/Jbury, Earl of, the charge of Mary's

persbn committed to him, i. 422. why re-
moved from that office, ii. 107. is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence against her exe-
cuted, 15o. letter from him and the Earl
of Kent concerning her death, Appendix,

437
Sinclair, Bishop of Ross, a zealous Papist,

concurs, as President of the Seflion, in
acquitting Knox of a charge of treason,

i. 26z
Socner/et, Duke of, enters Scotland with a

powerful army, i. 99. is reduced to a very
critical situation,- loo. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, xo1. this vicory
why of little advantage, 1oz. cabals againit
him at the court of England, force him
to return, 103. is ruined by his enemies

lo6
Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii.

166, 167. See Armada. The Infanta of,
set up as candidate for the crown of Eng-
land - - 196
SpaniJh ambassadors ordered to leave Eng-

land, for intriguing in favour of Queen
Mary - - i. 25. loi
Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's

conspiracy, ii. 226-228. is executed 228
Sle.wart, James, Prior of St. Andrews,. is

appointed to carry the crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of France, i. 139. See
St. .4ndresws.
*-- Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in

Scotland, ii. 63. See Aubigny.
- Captain James, hischaraer, ii. 63.

becomes a favourite of King James, ibid.
accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 67. is created Earl of Arran. See
Arran.
·--- Col. William, commander of the
King's guard, contributes to his escape
from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 87.
seizes the Earl of Gowrie - 94
--- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell,
ii. 173. joins in a treasonable correspond-
ence with the Popish Lords, ibid. See
Botbwvell.

--- all of that name combine in opposing
the Chancellor - - ii. 187

Stirling seized by the Reformers, i. 157. a

parliament there by the King's party, ii.
19. is surprised by the Queen's adherents,
and a great fray ensues - ibid. 20
Strozzi, Leon, commands a body of French

sent into Scotland, i. 97. reduces and de-
molifhes the cafle of St. Andrews, ibid.
See France.
Succfjion, a remarkable Ratute concerning it

i. 98
Superintendents proposed in the Church of

Scotland, i. 214. their business 215
Suffix, Earl of, one of the commillioners to

hear the cause between Q. Mary and her
accusers, i.414. aflembles a powerful army
on the borders, ii. 3. he and Scroop enter
and ravage Scotland 5

T
TAX upon land sirs proposed in Scotland

i. 129
TIhroknmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambaflador

extraordinary from Q. Elizabeth, to op-
pose Q, Mary's marriage with Darnly,
i. 279, z80. his interceflion for the exiled
lords is much regarded, 298, 299. his
enmity to Cecil, 298. is sent to negociate
Q: Mary'sI liberation, 379. is refused
access to her by the confederates, 3o0.
some letters of his, Appendix, 367. 373.
375. 377, 378, 379.

--- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy

against Q. Elizabeth, ii. 99. at first he de-
nies, but afterwards confefles it, ib. too.
reflections on his confession, loo, iol. is
executed - - 1ot
Tichbourne defsgns to afraffinate Q, Elizabeth

ii. 127
Trea/on, persons guilty of it, tried after their

death by the law of Scotland ii. 227

U
,7ILMORT, a foreigner, made comp-

troller of Scotland, i. 127
Union of Scotland and England, the ad-

vantages of, --- ii. z60o

W
trTALLACE, Sir William, bravely assert-

ed the liberty of his country i. so
WYalfingbam, secretary to Q.Elizabeth, sent

ambal;

ambassador to King James VI. ii. go. re-
turns without success, ibid. makes a fa-
vourable report to her concerning James,
91. interposes in favour of QMary, 0o6.
discovers Babington's conspiracy, 12. why
a determined and inveterate enemy to Q.
Mary, 131. a letter from him, Append.

407
WYaruick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the

government of England - i. 106
r.j fminfter, the conferences concerning Q.
Mary there - i. 420
IYejtmnorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q. Mary, i. 441. his fchemcs
discovered and defeated, 442, 4t3. he
escapes to the Netherlands ibid.
IIhithorn, the Prior of, imprisoncd for cele-

brating mars - - i. 259
I'illox, a minister, declares for refillance and

deprivation of tyrannical rules, i. 174. is
called to attend the Q Dowager on her
death-bed - - 197
7W'ijhart, George, his illegal execution re-

venged - - 9+
WTitchcraft, vigorously prosecuted by K.

James VL in Scotland - ii. 1Si

Woftton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

neg-ciate a peace with France i. 198
Tottorn, Sir Edward, sent by Q. Elizabeth

into Scotland, ii. IX8. his charater, ibid.
soon gets into high favour with K. James,
ibid. procures a league between the two
kingdoms, ib. 1iy. undermines Arran's
power, 119, 120. forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without
taking leave, - - IZO, Izi

Y
'OR'K, the conferences there concerning

Q. Mary - - i. 41 .-

z Z

O UCHE, Lord, Cent ambaflador by Q(
Elizabeth, to remonltrate againit K.

James's lenity to the popinl lords, ii. 19'-
his treachery on that occasion ibid.
THE EN D.

# The following valuable BOOKS are printed for A. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand.

i'iJe following valuable B 0 0 K S are printed for A. STRAHAN; and

T. CADELL, in the Strand.
.' I- E HTSTORY of the Reign of the Emperor CHARLES V.

with a View of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the Sub-

version of the Roman Empire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. embellished with four Plates elegantly
engraved. Three Volumes, 4to. 31. 3s.

* * Another Edition, in 4 Volumes, 8vo. I 1. 4 s.

2. The HISTORY of AMERICA, Vols. I. and II. By the fame
Author. Illuifrated with Maps. 21. 2s.

*** Another Edition, in 3 Vols. 8vo. I8s.

3. The HISTORY of ENGLAND, from the Invasion of Julius

Ctfar to the Revolution in 1688. By DAVID HUME, Efq. A new Edi-
tion, printed on fine Royal Paper, with many Corrections and Additions;
an Account of the Life of the Author written by himself, and a compleat
Jndex. 8 Vols. 4to. with fine Impressions of the Plates. 81. 8 s. 6 d.

i** Another Edition on finall Paper. 41. Ios.
t-t Another Edition, in 8 Vols. Svo. with the Plates. 21. i6s.

4. The HISTORY of the DECLINE and FALL of the ROMAN

EMPIRE. By EDVAR D GIBBON, Efq. 6 Vols. 4tO. Which compleat a
Period of Hillory from the Age of Trajan and the Antonines, to the
Taking of Constantinople by the Turks, and the Establishment at Rome
of the Dominion of the Popes. With a Head of the Author, and Maps
adapted to the Work. 61. 6 s. in Boards.

* , The 4th, 5th, and 6th Volumes may be had separate, to compleat
Sets. 3 1. 3s. in Boards.

-t. Another Edition compleat, in I2Vols. 8vo. 31. 12s.

5. The HISTORY of GREECE. By VWILLIAM MITFORD, Efq.
Vols. I. and II. i 1. I9s. in Boards.

* ** These two Volumes include the Hiftorv of Greece from the earlirct

Accounts to the End of the Peloponnesian War; and it is intended to
continue the History till the ReduEtion of Achaia into a Province of the
Roman Empire.

6. The HISTORY of ANCIENT GREECE, its Colonies, and

Conquests; from the earliest Accounts till the Division of the Macedo-
nian Empire in the East; incldding the History of Litcrature, Philosophy,
and the fine Arts. By JOHN GILLIES, LL. D. With a Head of the
Author, and Maps adapted to the Work. 4 Vols. Svo. 11. 8 s.
