THE
HISTORY

OF

AMERICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
.KINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

IISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOr. SCOTLAND,
AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISIORY AT MADRID.

THE EIGHTH EDITION,
In which is included the PoJIhumous Volume,

CONTAINING

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE YEAR 1688;
AND OF NEW ENGLAND, TO THE YEAR 1652.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. III.

LONDON;

Printed by A. Strahan, Printers-Street,
rOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES, STRAND,

AND E. BALFOUR, EDINBURGH.

1801.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY OF AM2ERICA.

BOOK VII.
As the conquest of the two great empires of

Mexico and Peru forms the moit splendid

and interesting period in the history of America,
a view of their political intlitutions, and a defcrip-
tion of their national manners, will exhibit the
human species to the contemplation of intelli-
gent observers in a very singular itage of its
progress a.

When compared with other parts of the New

World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as
polished states. Instead of small, independent,
hostile tribes, itruggling for subsistence amidst
woods and marshes, strangers to industry and
arts, unacquainted with subordination, and almost
without the appearance of regular government,
we find countries of great extent fubje&ed to
the dominion of one sovereign, the inhabitants
colle&ed together in cities, the wisdom and fore-
fight of rulers employed in providing for the
maintenance and security of the people, the
empire of laws in some measure established, the
authority of religion recognized, many of the

* See NOTE CXLIV.
VOL. 11. a arts

arts essential to life brought to some degree of
maturity, and the dawn of such as are ornamental
beginning to appear.

But if the compalifon be made with the people

of the ancient continent, the inferiority of Ame.
rica in improvement will be conspicuous, and
neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be en-
titled to rank with those nations which merit the
name of civilized. The people of both the great
empires in America, like the rude tribes around
them, were totally unacquainted with the ufcful
metals, and the progref, which they had made
in extending their dominion over the animal
creation was inconsiderable. The Mexicans had
gone no farther than to tame and rear turkeys,
ducks, a species of small dogs, and rabbits b.
By this feeble eflay of ingenuity, the means of
fubfiilence were rendered iomewhat more plenti-
ful and fccure, than when men depend folcly on
hunting; but they had no idea of attempting
to subdue the more robust animals, or of deriving
any aid from their miniRtry in carrying on works
of labour. The Peruvians seem to have ne-
gleced the inferior animals, and had not ren-
dered any of them domeltic except the duck;
but they were more fortunate in taming the
Llama, an animal peculiar to their country, of a
form which bears some resemblance to a deer,
and some to a camel, and is of a size somewhat
larger than a sheep. Under the protection of
man, this species multiplied greatly. Its wool
furnished the Peruvians with clothing, its Bcfh
with food. It was even employed as a bealt of
burden, and carried a moderate load with much

b hrarea, dec.. i. lib. vii. c. 12.

patience

patience and docility C. It was never used for
draught; and the breed being confined to the
mountainous country, its service, if we may judge
bv incidents which occur in the early Spanish
writers, was not very extensive among the Peru-
vians in their original state.

In tracing the line by which nations proceed

towards civilization, the discovery of the useful
metals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as steps of
capital importance in their progress. In our
continent, long after men had attained both,
society continued in that state which is deno-
minated barbarous. Even with all that com-
mand over nature which these confer, many ages
elapse, before industry becomes so regular as to
render fubfifftence secure, before the arts which
supply the wants and furnish the accommodations
of life are brought to any considerable degree of
perfecion, and before any idea is conceived of
various institutions requisite in a well-ordered
society. The Mexicans and Peruvians, without
knowledge of the useful metals, or the aid of do-
meftic animals, laboured under disadvantages
which mull have greatly retarded their progress,
and in their highest state of improvement their
power was so limited, and their operations so
feeble, that they can hardly be confidered as
having advanced beyond the infancy of civil
life.

After this general observation concerning the

most singular and diftinguilhing circumltance in
the state of both the great empires in America,
I mfall endeavour to give such a view of the con-

Vega, p. i. lib. viii. c. 16. Zara:e, lib. i. c. 14.

u 2 fitution

ftitution and interior police of each, as may
enable us to ascertain their place in the political
scale, to allot them their proper station between
the rude tribes in the New World, and the po-
liihed states of the ancient, and to determine how
far they had risen above the former, as well as
how much they fell below the latter.

Mexico was first fubjeaed to the Spanish

crown. But our acquaintance with its laws and
manners is not, from that circumrfance, more
complete. What I have remarked concerning
the defective and inaccurate information on which
we muff rely with refpeA to the condition and
customs of the savage tribes in America, may
be applied likewise to our knowledge of the
Mexican empire. Cortes, and the rapacious ad-
venturers who accompanied him, had not leisure
or capacity to enrich either civil or natural history
with new observations. They undertook their
expedition in quest of one object and seemed
hardly to have turned their eyes towards any
other. Or, if during some short interval of
tranquillity, when the occupations of war ceased,
and the ardour of plunder was suspendcd, the
institutions and manners of the people whom
they had invaded drew their attention, the in-
quiries of illiterate soldiers were conducted with
so little sagacity and precision, that the accounts
given by them of the policy and order established
in the Mexican monarchy are superficial, con-
fused, and inexplicable. It is rather from inci-
dents which they relate occasionally, than from
their own deductions and remarks, that- we are
enabled to form some idea of the genius and
manners of that people. The obscurity in which

the

the ignorance of its conquerors involved the an-
nals of Mexico, was augmented by the super-
ftition of those who succeeded them. As the
memory of past events was preserved among the
Mexicans by figures painted on tiins, on cotton
cloth, on a kind of pasteboard, or on the bark
of trees, the early mifionaries, unable to com-
prehend their meaning, and struck with their
uncouth forms, conceived them to be monu-
ments of idolatry which ought to be destroyed,
in order to facilitate the conversion of the In-
dians. In obedience to an edict issued by Juan
d: Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk, the first
bt!hop of Mexico, as many records of the an-
c l:t Mexican story as could be colleced were
committed to the flames. In consequence of
this fanatical zeal of the monks who firlt visited
New Spain (which their fucccffors soon began
to lament), whatever knowledge of remote events
such rude monuments contained was almost en-
tirely lult, and no information remained con-
cerning the ancient revolutions and policy of the
trmpire, but what was derived from tradition, or
from some fragments of their historical paintings
that escaped the barbarous researches of Zum-
nmaraga d. From the experience of all nations it
iD manifest, that the memory of past transactions
can neither be long preserved, nor be transmitted
with any fidelity, by tradition. The Mexican
paintings, which are supposed to have served as
annals of their empire, are few in number, and of
ambiguous meaning. Thus, amidst the unccr-
tuiaty of the former, and the obscurity of the

d A.c9fra, lib vi. c. 7. Torquem. Pioem. lib. ii. lib. iii.
c 6. .iL xiv. c. 6.

i 3 latter,

latter, we must glean what intelligence can be
colleced from the scanty materials scattered in
the Spanifi writers *.

According

In the sirs edition, I observed thatin consequence of the

deftrucion of the ancient Mexican paintings, occasioned by
the zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might
have conveyed was entirely loft. Every candid reader must
have perceived that the expression was inaccuratei as in a
few lines afterwards I mention some ancient paintings to be still
extant M. Clavigero, not fatiified with laying hold of this
inaccuracy, which I correced in the subsequent editions,
labours to render it more g!aring, by the manner in which he
quotes the remaining part of the sentence. He reprehends
wi:h great asperity the account which I gave of the scanty
materials for writing the ancient hi(lory of Mexico. Vol. I.
Account of writers, p. xxvi. V. II. 3o8. My words,
however, are almost the fame with those of Torquemada,
who seems to have been better acquainted with the ancient
monuments of the Mexicans than any Spanifi author whose
works I have seen. Lib. xiv. c. 6. M. Clavigero himse:f
gives a description of the defiruaion of ancient paintings in
almost the fame terms I have used; and mentions, as an ad-
ditional reason of there being so small a number of ancient
paintings known to the Spaniards, that the natives have become
so solicitous to preserve and conceal them, that it is "difficult,
" if not impoflible, to make them part with one of them."
Vol. 1. 407. II. 194. No point can be more ascertained
than that few of the Mexican historical paintings have been
preserved. Though several Spaniards have carries on inquiries
into the antiquities of the Mexican empire, no engravings
from Mexican paintings have been communicated to the pub-
lic, except those by Purchas, Gemelli Carreri, and Lorenzana.
It affords me rome fatisfadion, that in the course of my re-
searches, I have discovered two coileaions of Mexican paint-
ings which were unknown to former inquirers. The' cut
which I published is an exCa copy of the original, and gives
no high idea of the progress which the Mexicans had made
in the art of painting. I cjnnor conjecture what could in-
duce M. Clavigero to express some dfliatisfaeion with me for
having publiflcd it without the fame colour it has in the

original

According to the account of the Mexicans

themselves, their empire was not of long duration.
Their country, as they relate, was originally
possessed, rather than peopled, by small indepen-
dent tribes, whose mode of life and manners
resembled those of the rudest savages which we
have described. But about a period correspond-
ing to the beginning of the tenth century in the
Christian ara, several tribes moved in successive
migrations from unknown regions towards the
north and north-west, and fettled in different
provinces of Anahuac, the ancient name of New
Spain. These, more civilized than the original
inhabitants, began to form them to the arts of
social life. At length, towards the commence-
ment of the thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a
people more polifled than any of the former,
advanced from the border of the Californian

original painting, p. xxix. He might have recollected, that
neither Purchas, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor Lorenzana, thought
it necessary to colour the prints which they have publified,
and they have never been censured on that account. He may
reft assured, that though the colours in the paintings in the
Imperial Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on
without art, and without " any of that regard to light and
" thade, or the rules of perfpeaive," which M. Clavigero
requires. V. II. 378. If the public express any desire to
have the seven paintings fill in my poiTeffion engraved, I am
ready to communicate them. The print published by Ge-
meili Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans when
they travelled towards the lake on which they built rhecapi-
til of their empire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 48 , is the mo[t
finished monument of art brought from the New World, and
yet a very flight infpelion of it will satisfy every one, that
the anna'; or a nation conveyed in this maantr must be very
meagre and imperfea.

gulf,

gulf, and took possession of the plains adjacent
to the great lake near the centre of the country.
After residing there about fifty years, they
founded a town, since distinguished by the name
of Mexico, which from humble beginnings soon
grew to be the moit considerable city in the New
World. The Mexicans, long after they were
established in their new poefefions, continued,
like other martial tribes in America, unacquainted
with regal dominion, and were governed in peace,
and conducled in war, by such as were entitled
to pre-eminence by their wisdom or their valour.
But among them, as in other Itates whose
power and territories become extensive, the fu-
preme authority centered at lail in a tingle per-
son ; and when the Spaniards under Cortes in-
vaded the country, Montezuma was the ninth
monarch in order who had fwaved the Mexican
fcep,;re, not by hereditary right, but by elec-

Sucl is the traditional tale of the Mexicans

concerninog the progreis of their own empire.
According to thin, its duration was very short.
From the firit rrigration of their parent tribe,
they can reckon little more than three hundred
years. From the establishment of monarchical
government, not above a hundred and thirty
ycars, according to one account ', or a hundred
and ninetv-fever, according to another compu-
tation f, iad elapscd If, on one hand, we
fuppof' the Mcxica-, slate to have been of higher
antiquiit, and to a 'e fufi!ti d during such a
Ic.i.ti oi ti.nc as ti.e _-anr;.h ccounts of its

· Ac a H:fT : ib .

vi. c. , &c.
c j .c'., 1, : .1. 1:i p. Ic '.~, aC.

c.Vl"/t. n

civilization would naturally lead us to conclude,
it is difficult to conceive how, among a people
who poffefled the art of recording events by
pitures, and who confidered it as an essential
part of their national education, to teach their
children to repeat the historical songs which
celebrated the exploits of their ancestors g,
the knowledge of past tranfaftions should be so
slender and limited. If, on the other hand, we
adopt their own system with refpea to the an-
tiquities of their nation, it is no less difficult to
account either for that improved state of society,
or for the extensive dominion to which their
empire had attained, when first visited by the
Spaniards. The infancy of nations is so long,
and, even when every circumlsance is favourable
to their progress, they advance so slowly towards
any maturity of strength or policy, that the
recent origin of the Mexicans seems to be a
strong presumption of some exaggeration, in the
splendid descriptions which have been given of
their government and manners.

But it is not by theory or conjectures that

hillory decides with regard to the fiate or cha-
racter of nations. It produces facts as the
foundation of every judgment which it ventures
to pronounce. In collecting those which must
regulate our opinion in the present inquiry, some
occur that suggest an idea of considerable pro-
grefs in civilization in the Mexican empire, and
others which seem to indicate that it had ad-
vanced but little beyond the savage tribes around
it. Both shall be exhibited to the view of the
reader, that, from comparing them, he may

c Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. IS.

detel mine

determine on which fide the evidence prepon.
derates.

In the Mexican empire, the right of private

property was perfetly underftood,and eflablihtcd
in its full extent. Among several savage tribes, we
have seen, that the idea of a title to the fcparate
and exclusive poffcfion of any object was hardly
known ; and that among all, it was extremely
limited and ill-defined. But in Mexico, where
agriculture and industry had made some progress,
the dillin&tion between property in land and
property in goods had taken place. Both might
be transferred from one person to another by
sale or barter; both might descend by inherit-
ance. Every person who could be denominated
a freeman had property in land. This, how-
ever, they held by various tenures. Some pof-
sessed it in full right, and it descended to their
heirs. The title of others to their lands was
derived from the office or dignity which they
enjoyed; and when deprived of the latter, they
lJt pofeflion of the former. Both these modes
of occupying land were deemed noble, and pe-
culiar to citizens of the highef class. The
tenure, by which the great body of the people
held their property, was very different. In every
diltrict a certain quantity of land was measured
out in proportion to the number of families.
This was cultivated by the joint labour of the
whole; its produce was deposited in a common
liorehoufe, and divided among them according
to their reflec&ivc exigencies. The members
of the Calpui'ee, or al.uLiations, could not alienate
their fharc of the con-n.on estate ; it was an indi-

';;:ie, permanent property, dletined for :ie sup-

port

port of their families h. In consequence of this
diilribution of the territory of the state, every
man had an interest in its welfare, and the hap-
piness of the individual was conneAed with the
public fecuritv.

Another striking circumPtance, which diltin-

gnilhes the Mexican empire from those nations
in America we have already described, is the
number and greatness of its cities. While so-
ciety continues in a rude state, the wants of
men are so few, and they stand so little in need
of mutual affiilance, that their inducements to
crowd together are extremely feeble. Their in-
duftry at the fame time is so imperfect, that it
cannot secure subsistence for any considerable
number of families fettled in one spot. They
live dilfprfcd, at this period, from choice as well
as from necellity, or at the utmost assemble in
small hamlcts on the banks of the river which
fuppiies thvmn with food, or on the border of
some plain left open by nature, or cleared by
their own labour. The Spaniards, accustomed
to this mode of habitation among all the savage
tribes with which they were hitherto acquainted,
were aitonifhcd, on entering Newv Spain, to find
the natives reliding in towns of such extent as
resembled those of Europe. In the first ser-
vour of their admiration, they compared Zem-
poalla, though a town only of the second or
third iixe, to the cities of greatest note in their
own country. When, aftrwnvards, they vified in
fucceslion Tlafcala, Cholula, Tacuba, Tezeuco,
and Mexico itself, their amazement increased so

h Hcnera, ?ec. 3. lib. iv. c. i5. Torquetn. Mon. Ind.
'.. xiv. c. 7 Corita, MS.

mu -,

much, that it led them to convey ideas of their
magnitude and populousness bordering on what
is incredible. Even when there is leisure for
observation, and no interest that leads to deceive,
conje&ural estimates of the number of people in
cities are extremely loose, and usually much ex-
aggerated. It is not surprising, then, that
Cortes and his companions, little accustomed to
such computations, and powerfully tempted to
magnify, in order to exalt the merit of their
own difcovcries and conquests, (hould have been
betrayed into this common error, and have raied
their dcfcriptions considerably above truth. For
this reason, some considerable abatement ought
to be nade from their calculations of the number
of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
fix the Itandard.of their population much lower
than they have done; but fill they will appear
to be cities of such consequence, as are not to
be found but among people who have made
some considerable progress In the arts of social
life i. From their accounts, we can hardly sup-
pose Mexico, the capital of the empire, to
have contained fewer than sixty thousand in-
habitants.

The separation of professions among the

Mexicans is a symptom of improvement no less
remarkable. Arts, in the early ages of society,
are so few and so simple, that each man is fuffi-
ciently mailer of them all, to gratify every de-
mand of his own limited dcfires. The savage
can form his bow, point his arrows, rear his
hut, and hollow his canoe, without calling in
the aid of any hand more skilful than his own.

i See NOTE CXLV.

Time

Time muff have augmented the wants of men,
and ripened their ingenuity, before the produc-
tions of art became so complicated in their
ftru&ure, or so curious in their fabric, that a
particular course of education was requisite to-
wards forming the artificer to expertness in con-
trivance and workmanship. In proportion as
refinement spreads, the diftinftion of professions
increases, and they branch out into more nu-
merous and minute subdivisions. Among the
Mexicans, this reparation of the arts necessary
in life had taken place to a considerable extent.
The functions of the mason, the weaver, the
goldsmith, the painter, and of several other
crafts, were carried on by different persons.
Each was regularly instructed in his calling.
To it alone his industry was confined; and, by
afiduous application to one obje&t, together with
the persevering patience peculiar to Americans,
their artizans attained to a degree of neatness
and perfection in work, far beyond what could
have been expeaed from the rude tools which
they employed. Their various productions were
brought into commerce; and by the exchange
of them in the fated markets held in the cities,
not only were their mutual wants supplied k, in
such orderly intercourse as characerizes an im-
proved state of society, but their industry was
daily rendered persevering and inventive.

The distinction of ranks established in the

Mexican empire is the next circumstance that
merits attention. In surveying the savage tribes

k Cortes, Relat. ap. Ramus. iiL 239, &c. Gom. Cron.

c. 79. Torquem. lib. xiii, C. 3. Hcrrera, dec. , lib. vii.
c. ;1, &c.

VOL. 111. c of

of America, we observed that consciousness of
equality, and impatience of subordination, are
Sentiments natural to man in the infancy of civil
life. During peace, the authority of a superior
is hardly felt among them, and even in war it
is but little acknowledged. Strangers to the
idea of property, the difference in condition re-
fulting from the inequality of it is unknown.
Birth or titles confer no pre-eminence; it is only
by personal merit and accomplishments that
diftinftion can be acquired. The form of society
was very different among the Mexicans. The
great body of the people was in a most humili-
ating state. A considerable number, known by
the name of Mayeques, nearly resembling in con-
dition those peasants who, under various de-
nominations, were confidered, during the pre-
valence of the feudal system, as instruments of
labour attached to the foil. The Mayeques could
not change their place of residence without
permission of the superior on whom they de-
pended. They were conveyed, together with
the lands on which they were fettled, from one
proprietor to another; and were bound to cul-
tivate the ground, and to perform several kinds
of servile work I. Others were reduced to the
lowest form of fubjeetion, that of domestic ser-
vitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that
wretched state. Their condition was held to be
so vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little
value, that a person who killed one of these slaves
was not fubjefed to any punishment m. Even
those confidered as freemen were treated by

Harera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. Corira, MhS.
E Herra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.

their

their haughty lords as beings of an inferior
species. The nobles, possessed of ample terri.
tories, were divided into various classes, to
each of which peculiar titles of honour belonged.
Some of these titles, like their lands, descended
from father to son in perpetual succession.
OChers were annexed to particular offices, or
conferred during life as marks of personal dif-
tinEtion ". The monarch, exalted above all, en-
joyed extensive power, and supreme dignity.
Thus the diftinaion of ranks was completely
established, in a line of regular subordination,
reaching from the higheIt to the loweLl member
of the community. Each of these knew what
he could claim, and what he owed. The peo-
ple, who were not allowed to wear a dress of
the fame fashion, or to dwell in houses of a
form similar to those of the nobles, accolted
them with the molt submissive reverence. In
the presence of their sovereign, they durfl not
lift their eyes from the ground, or look him in
the face '. The nobles themselves, when ad-
mitted to an audience of their sovereign, entered
bare-footed, in mean garments, and, as his
slaves, paid him homage approaching to ador-
ation. This refpeEt due from inferiors to those
above them in rank, was prescribed with such
ceremonious accuracy, that it incorporated with
the language, and influenced its genius and idiom.
The Mexican tongue abounded in expressions of
reverence and courtesy. The style and appella-
tions, used in the intercourse between equals,
would have been so unbecoming in the mouth of

° Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Corita, MS.
Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. I4.

c 2 one

one in a lower sphere, when he accosted a person
in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult P. It
is only in societies, which time and the institution
of regular government have moulded into form,
that we find such an orderly arrangement of men
into different ranks, and such nice attention paid
to their various rights.

The spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized

and bended to subordination, was prepared for
Submitting to monarchical government. But the
descriptions of their policy and laws, by the
Spaniards who overturned them, are so inaccu-
rate and contradi&ory, that it is difficult to de-
lineate the form of their conititution with any
precision. Sometimes they represent the mo-
narchs of Mexico as absolute, deciding accord-
ing to their pleasure, with refpe& to every oper-
ation of the state. On other occasions, we dif-
cover the traces of established customs and laws,
framed in order to circumscribe the power of
the crown, and we meet with rights and privi-
leges of the nobles which seem to be opposed as
barriers against its encroachments. This ap-
pearance of inconsistency has arisen from inatten-
tion to the innovations of Montezuma upon the
Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition subverted
the original system of government, and intro-
duced a pure despotism. He disregarded the
ancient laws, violated the privileges held moit
sacred, and reduced his fubjets of every order
to the level of slaves'. The chiefs, or nobles of
the first rank, submitted to the yoke with such
reluctance, that, from impatience to ihake it off,

P See NOTE CXLVI. r Herea, dec. 3. lib. ii.
. 14. Torqucme. lib. ii. c. 69.

and

and hope of recovering their rights, many of
them courted the protection of Cortes, and
joined a foreign power against their domestic
oppressor 5. It is not then under the dominion
of Montezuma, but under the government of
his predecessors, that we can discover what was
the original form and genius of Mexican policy.
From the foundation of the monarchy to the
election of Montezuma, it seems to have sub-
sifted with little variation. That body of citi-
zens, which may be distinguished by the name of
nobility, formed the chief and molt refpetable
order in the state. They were of various ranks,
as has been already observed, and their honours
were acquired and transmitted in different man-
ners. Their number seems to have been great.
According to an author accustomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there were in the
Mexican empire thirty of this order, each of
whom had in his territories about an hundred
thousand people, and Subordinate to these, there
were about three thousand nobles of a lower
class . The territories belonging to the chiefs
of Tezeuco and Tacuba were hardly inferior in
extent to those of the Mexican monarch "
Each of these poffefied complete territorial jurif.
didion, and levied taxes from their own vassals.
But all followed the standard of Mexico in war,
serving with a number of men in proportion to
their domain, and most of them paid tribute to
its monarch as their superior lord.

' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 1o, 1. Torquem. lib. iv.
. 49. Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. I.a u Tor-
quem. lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS.

C3 In

In tracing those great lines of the Mexican

constitution, an image of feudal policy, in its
most rigid form, rifes to view, and we discern
its three distinguishing charaderiflics, a nobility
possessing almost independent authority, a people
depressed into the lowest state of fubjedtion, and
a king entrusted with the executive power of
the ifate. Its spirit and principles seem to have
operated in the New World in the fame manner
as in the ancient. Thejurifdifion of the crown
was extremely limited. All real and effective
authority was retained by the Mexican nobles in
their own hands, and the shadow of it only left
to the king. Jealous to excess of their own
rights, they guarded with the most vigilant
anxiety against the encroachments of their fove-
reigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
it was provided that the king should not deter-
rnine concerning any point of general import-
ance, without the approbation of a council com-
posed of the prime nobilityx. Unless he ob-
tained their content he could not engage the
nation in war, nor could he dispose of the most
considerable branch of the public revenue at
pleasure; it was appropriated to certain purposes
from which it could not be diverted by the
regal authority alone v. In order to secure full
&etc to those constitutional restraints, the
Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to
descend by inheritance, but disposed of it by
ele&ion. The right of ele&ion seems to have
been originally veiled in the whole body of no-

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. 16. Coriu, MS. 7 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.

bility,

bility, but was afterwards committed to fix
elecors, of whom the Chiefs of Tezeuco and
Tacuba were always two. From refpe& for the
family of their monarchs, the choice fell gene-
rally upon some person sprung from it. But as
the ativity and valour of their prince were of
greater moment to a people perpetually engaged
in war, than a ftrit adherence to the order of
birth, collaterals of mature age or of distinguished
merit were often preferred to those who were
nearer the throne in direct descent z. To this
maxim in their policy, the Mexicans appear to
be indebted for fiich a succession of able and
warlike princes, as raised their empire in a short
period to that extraordinary height of power
which it had attained when Cortes landed in
New Spain.

While the jurifdi&ion of the Mexican rro-

narchs continued to be limited, it is probable
that it was exercised with little ostentation. But
as their authority became more extensive, the
splendour of their government augmented. It
was in this last state that the Spaniards beheld
it; and struck with the appearance of Monte-
zuma's court, they describe its pomp at great
length, and with much admiration. The num-
ber of his attendants, the order, the silence,
and the reverence with which they served him;
the extent of his royal mansion, the variety of
its apartments allotted to different officers, and
the ostentation with which his grandeur was
displayed, whenever he permitted his subje&s
to behold him, seem to resemble the magnifi-

2 AcofRa, lib. vi. c. 24. Herrera, dec. 3. lib, ii. c. 13.
Corita, MS.

cencc

cence of the ancient monarchies in Asia, rather
than the simplicity of the infant states in the
New World.

But it was not in the mere parade of royalty

that the Mexican potentates exhibited their
power; they manifested it more beneficially in
the order and regularity with which they con-
du&ed the internal administration and police of
their dominions. Complete jurifdi&ion, civil
as well as criminal, over its own immediate
vassals, was veiled in the crown. Judges were
appointed for each department, and if we may
rely on the account which the Spanish writers
give of the maxims and laws upon which they
founded their decisions with refpea to the dif-
tribution of property and the punishment of
crimes, justice was administered in the Mexi-
can empire with a degree of order and equity
resembling what takes place in focicties highly
civilized.

Their attention in providing for the support

of government was not less sagacious. Taxes
were laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of
induitry, and upon commodities of every kind
exposed to sale in the public markets. These
duties were considerable, but not arbitrary or
unequal. They were imposed according to
established rules, and each knew what share of
the common burden he had to bear. As the
use of money was unknown, all the taxes were
paid in kind, and thus not only the natural pro-
duEtions of all the different provinces in the
empire, but every species of manufaturc,
and every work of ingenuity and art, were col-
leted in the public itore-houfes. From those

the

the emperor supplied his numerous train of at-
tendants in peace, and his armies during war,
with food, with clothes, and ornaments. People
of inferior condition, neither possessing land nor
engaged in commerce, were bound to the per-
formance of various services. By their stated
labour the crown-lands were cultivated, public
works were carried on, and the various houses
belonging to the emperor were built and kept
in repair a.

The improved state of government among the

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points effen-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but
in several regulations of inferior consequence
with refpe& to police. The institution which
I have already mentioned, of public couriers,
Rtationed at proper intervals, to convey intelli-
gence from one part of the empire to the other,
was a refinement in police not introduced into
any kingdom of Europe at that period. The
firu&ure of the capital city in a lake, with arti-
ficial dykes, and causeways of great length,
which served as avenues to it from different
quarters, ereEted in the water, with no less in-
genuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied
to the ftru&ure of the aqueducs, or conduits,
by which they conveyed a stream of fresh water,
from a considerable distance, into the city, along
one of the causeways b. The appointment of a
number of persons to clean the streets, to light
them by fires kindled in different places, and to

a Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16,17.
See NOTs CXLVIL b See NoTe CXLVIII.

patrole

patrole as watchmen during the night C, dif-
covers a degree of attention which even polished
nations are late in acquiring.

The progress of the Mexicans in various arts,

is confidered as the most decisive proof of their
superior refinement. Cortes, and the early
Spanish authors, describe this with rapture, and
maintain, that the most celebrated European ar.
tifts could not surpass or even equal them in inge-
nuity and neatness of workmanlhip. They repre.
sented men, animals, and other objets, by such
a disposition of various coloured feathers, as is
said to have produced all the effecs of light and
shade, and to have imitated nature with truth
and delicacy. Their ornaments of gold and silver
have been described to be of a fabric no less
curious. But in forming any idea, from general
descriptions, concerning the state of arts among
nations imperfectly polished, we are extremely
ready to err. In examining the works of peo-
ple whose advances in improvement are nearly
the fame with our own, we view them with a
critical, and often with a jealous eye. Whereas,
when conscious of our own superiority, we fur-
vey the arts of nations comparatively rude, we
are astonished at works executed by them under
such manifest disadvantages, and, in the warmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
productions more finimhed than they really are.
To the influence of this illusion, without sup-
posing any intention to deceive, we may impute
the exaggeration of some Spanish authors, in their
accounts of the Mexican arts.

C Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

It

It is not from those descriptions, but from

confidering such specimens of their arts as are
fi;ll preserved, that we muff decide concerning
their degree of merit. As the ship in which
Cortes sent to Charles V. the most curious pro.
dutions of the Mexican artisans, which were
colle&ted by the Spaniards when they first pillaged
the empire, was taken by a French corsair d, the
remains of their ingenuity are less numerous than
those of the Peruvians. Whether any of their
works with feathers, il imitation of painting,
be still extant-in Spain, I have not learned; but
many of their ornaments in gold and silver, as
well as various utensils employed in common
life, are deposited in the magnificent cabinet of
natural and artificial produtions, lately opened
by the king of Spain; and I am informed by
persons on whose judgment and taste I can
rely, that these boasted efforts of their art are
uncouth representations of common objects, or
very coarse images of the human and some other
forms, destitute of grace and propriety e. The
justness of these observations is confirmed by
infpeaing the wooden prints and copper-plates
of their paintings, which have been published by
various authors. In them every figure of men,
of quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every repre-
fentation of inanimated nature, is extremely rude
and awkward *. The hardest Egyptian style,

stiff

d Relac. de Cort. Ramus. iii. 294, F.
e See NOTr CXLIX.
* As a specimen of the spirit and stile in which M. Clavi-

gero makes his firiaures upon my History of America, I ihall
publibh iis remarks upon this passage: " Thus far Robert-

" Ion i

liss and imperfect as it was, is more elegant,
The scrawls of children delineate objects almost
as accurately.

But

" son to whom we answer, firsts That there is no reason to
" believe that those rude works were really Mexican;
" secondly, That neither do we know whether those persons

in whose judgment he confides, may be persons fit to

"1 me;it our faith, because we have observed that Robertfcn
"tufts frequently to t;;e testimony of Gage, Correal,
' Ibagnez, and other such authors, who are entirely un-
' deserving of credit.-Thirdly, It is more probable that
it the arms of copper, believed by those intelligent judges

to be certainly Oriental, are really Mexican." V. 11. 391.

-When an author, not entirely destitute of integrity or
d;fcernment, and who has some solicitude about his own
c::araAcr, asserts that he received his information concerning
2-:y particular point from persons " on whose judgment and
" traie he can rely ;" a very slender degree of candour, one
should ;hink, might induce the reader to believe that he
do-s not endeavour to impose upon the public by an appeal
to teflimony altogether unworthy of credit. My information
concerning the Mexican works of art deposited in the King
of Spain's cabinet, was received from the late Lord Grantham,
armbaffador extraordinary from the cout of London to that
of Madrid, and from Mr. Archdcacon Waddilove, chaplain
to the embassy ; and it was upon their authority that I pro-
nounced the coat of armour, mentioned in the note, to be
of Oriental fabric. As they were both at Madrid in their
public characer when the sirs edi:ion of the History of
America was publiffed, I thought it improper at that time
to mention their names. Did their decision concerning a
matter of taste, or their tettimony concerning a point of faet,
fiand in need of confirmation, 1 might produce the evidence
of an intelligent traveller, who, in describing the royal
cabinet of Madrid, takes notice that it contains " specimens
1c of Mexican and Peruvian utensils, vass, &c. in earthen-
' ware, wretched both in tafle and execution." Dillon's
Travels through Spain, p. 77. As Gage composed his

Sur ey

But however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different station belongs to them, when
confidered as the records of their country as his-
torical monuments of its policy and tranfadions;
and they become curious as well as intereffing ob-
jecs of attention. The noblest and most beneficial
invention of which human ingenuity can boast, is
that of writing. But the first essays of this art,
which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfection slowly, and by a
gradual progression. When the warrior, eager
for fame, wished to transmit some knowledge of
his exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati-
tude of a people to their sovereign prompted them
to hand down an account of his beneficent deeds
to posterity; the first method of accomplishing
this, which seems to have occurred to them, wasto
delineate, in the belt manner they could, figures
representing the acion of which they were soli-

S&r-cy 5f New Spain with all the zeal and acrimony of a new
concert, I have paid little regard to his testimony with rrfpec
to paints relating to religion. But as he resided in several
pr-vinces in New Spain, which travellers seldom visit, and
as he seems to have observed their manners and laws with
an intelligent eye, I have availed myself of his information
with refpe& to matters where religious opinion could have
i;:t;e influence. Correal I have seldom quoted, and never
refled upon his evidence alone. The station in which Ibagnez
was employed in America, as well as the credit given to
.l s veracity by printing his Regno Jefuitico among the
large collection of documents publlhied (as I believe by au-
it.ority; at Madrid, A. D. 1767, justifies me for appealing
to l:is authority.

VOL. 11. D CltOUs

citous to preserve the memory. Of this, which
has very properly been called piaure-vwriing f, we
find traces among some of the most savage tribes
of America. When a leader returns from the
field, he strips a tree of its bark, and with red
paint scratches upon it some uncouth figures
which represent the order of his march, the num-
ber of his followers, the enemy whom he at-
tacked, the scalps and captives which he brought
home. To those simple annals he trusss for re-
nown, and soothes himself with hope that by their
means he shall receive praise from the warriors of
future times g.

Compared with those awkward essays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be confidered as works ofcompofition and de-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording transactions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wished
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progressive order, and de-
scribe, by a proper difpofitlon of figures, the oc-
currences of a king's reign from his accefiion to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attain to the years of ma-
turity; the different recompences and marks of
diftincion conferred upon warriors, in proportion
to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this pi&ure-writing have
been preserved, which are juffly confidered as the
mofl curious monuments of art brought from the

f Divine Legart of Moses, ii,. 73.
C Sir W. Johnson Philof. Tranfa2t. vol. Ixiii. p. 143.
Mcli. d .a Huntan. ii. 191. Lifitau, M:cursde Sauv.ii. 43.

New

New World. The most valuable of these was
published by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is di-
vided into three parts. The first contains the
history of the Mexican empire under its ten mo-
narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, representing
what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their institutions,
domestic, political, and military. Another fpeci-
men of Mexican painting has been published in
thirty-twoplates, by the present archbishop of
Toledo. To both are annexed a full explanation
of what the figures were intended to represent,
which was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians
well acquainted with their own arts. The style of
painting in all these is the fame. They represent
things, not words. They exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest and most
imperfec essay of men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defects in
this mode of recording tranfations must have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals must have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Betides this, no obje&s could
be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as
pi&ure-writing could not convey an idea of these,
it must have been a very imperfec art. The ne-
ceffity of improving it muff have rouzed and {harp-
ened invention; and the human mind holding the
fame course in the New World as in the Old,
might have advanced by the fame successive steps,
firit, from an atual picture to the plain hierogly-

D 2 phic;

phic; next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary character; until, at length, an alphabet
of letters was discovered, capable of expressing all
the various combinations of found employed in
speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
cordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive infpetion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
some approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
where some principal part or circumstance in the
subjet is made to stand for the whole. In the an-
nals of their kings, published by Purchas, the
towns conquered by each are uniformly represented
in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a
house; but in order to point out the particular
towns which submitted to their vicorious arms,
peculiar emblems, sometimes natural objecs, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll published by the archbishop of To-
ledo, the house, which was properly the picture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is em-
ployed to represent it. The Mexicans seem even
to have made some advances beyond this, to-
wards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to describe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
subdued. But it is only in one instance, the no-
tation of numbers, that we discern any attempt to
exhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. The
Meiican painters had invented artificial marks, or
Jsgns of convntion, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings'
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be

paid

paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in small numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were expressed by a peculiar mark, and
they had such as denoted all integral numbers,
from twenty to eight thousand. The short dura-
tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans from
advancing farther in that long course which con-
du&s men from the labour of delineating real ob-
je.s, to the simplicity and ease of alphabetic
writing. Their records, notwithstanding some
dawn of such ideas as might have led to a more
perfect style, can be confidered as little more than
a species of piciure-writing, so far imptoved as to
mark their superiority over the savage tribes of
America; but frill so defective, as to prove that
they had not proceeded far beyond the first itage
in that progress which must bc completed before
any people can be ranked among polished na-
tions d

Their mode of computing time may be confi-

dered as a more decisive evidence of their progress
in improvement. They divided their year into.
eighteen months, each consisting of twenty days,
amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But
as they observed that the course of the fun was not
completed in that time, they added five days to
the year. These, which were properly intercalary
days, they termed supernumerary or Ewafe ; and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them; they
were devoted wholly to festivity and paftimee.
This near approach to philosophical accuracy is a

d See NoT z CL. ' Acofa, ib, vi. c. 2.

D 3 remark.

remarkable proof that the Mexicans had bellowed
some attention upon inquiries and speculations, to
which men in a very rude state never turn their
thoughts .

Such are the most striking particulars in the

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex-
hibit them to view as a peopleconfiderably refined.
But from othercircumltances, one iD apt to fufpe&
that their characer, andmany oftheirinftitutions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other in-
habitants of America.

Like the rude tribes around them, the Mexi-

can. were incessantly engaged in war, and the
motives which prompted them to hostility seem
to have been the fame. They fought, in order
to gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood
of their enemies. In battle they were chiefly in-
tent on taking prisoners, and it was by the num-
ber of these that they estimated the glory of
victory. No captive was ever ransomed or spared.
All were sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh
devoured with the fame barbarous joy as among
the fiercest savages. On some occasions it rose to
even wilder excesses. Their principal warriors
covered themselves with the k-ins of the unhappy
viEcims, and danced about the Rreets, boasting
of their own valour, and exulting over their ene-
miess. Even in their civil institutions we disco-

The Mexican mode of computing time, and every other

particular relaing to their c;rinology, have been confinerabiy
clucida:ed by M. Ciav;gero, Vol. 1. 288; Vol. II. z25, &c.
The observations and tleories of the Mexicans concerning
those fubjeis discover a greater progress in fpecularive fcicnce
than we finr among any peops: in tne New World.

s Hcr:;a, d-c. 3. hb. ii.
cb . Gor. Cron. c. 2z7.

vL.T

ver traces of that barbarous disposition which
their system of war inspired. The four chief
counsellors of the empire were diftinguifihed by
titles, which could have been assumed only by a
people who delighted in blood g. This ferocity
of characer prevailed among all the nations of
New Spain. The Tlafcalans, the people of
Mechoacan, and other states at enmity with the
Mexicans, delighted equally in war, and treated
their prisoners with the fame cruelty. In pro-
portion as mankind combine in social union, and
live under the influence of equal laws and regular
policy, their manners soften, sentiments of hu-
manity arise, and the rights of the species come
tobe understood. The fierceness of war abates,
and even while engaged in hostility, men remem-
ber what they owe one to another. Tie savage
fights to destroy, the citizen to conquer. The
former neither pities nor spares, the latter has ac.
quired sensibility which tempers his rage. To
this sensibility the Mexicans seem to have been
perfet& strangers, and among them war was car-
ried on with so much of its original barbarity,
that we cannot but fufpe& their degree of civil-
ization to have been very imperfect.

Their funeral rites were not less bloody than

those of the most savage tribes. On the death of
any distinguished personage, especially of the Em-
peror, a certain number of his attendants were
chosen to accompany him to the other world,
and those unfortunate viftims were put to death
vithout mercy, and buried in the fame tomb h.

t See Novz CLI.
Henera, d.c. 3. lib. ii. c. 18. Coin, Cron. c. 2t.

Though

Though their agriculture was more extenfve

than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly
to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of aative induitry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give
firmness co the conlfitution. such a remark could
hardly have been made with refpea to any people
furnished plentifully with the necessaries of life.
The difficultv which Cortes found in procuring
subsistence for his fmal body of soldiers, who
were often constrained to live on the spontaneous
producions of the earth, seems to confirm the
remark of the Spanish writers, and gives no high
idea of the state of cultivation in the Mexican
empire .

A practice that was universal in New Spain

appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican
women gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their hulbands k. This precaution against a
burdensome increase of progeny, though necef-
fary, as I have already observed, among savages,
who, from the hardships of their condition, and

i Relat ap. Ramus. iii. 3o6, A. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. 17. dec z. lib. vi. c. 16.

Gom. Cron. c. zo8. Hrrera, dec. 3. lib, iv. c. 16.

the

the precariousness of their subsistence, find it im-
poflible to rear a numerous family, can hardly be
supposed to have continued among a people who
lived at ease and in abundance.

The vast extent of the Mexican empire, which

has been confidered, and with justice, as the moit
decisive proof of a considerable progress in re-
gular government and police, is one of those fats
in the history of the New World which seems to
have been admitted without due examination or
sufficient evidence. The Spanish historians, in
order to magnify the valour of their countrymen,
are accustomed to represent the dominion of
Montezuma as stretching over all the provinces
of New Spain from the Northern to the Southern
Ocean. But a great part of the mountainous
country was possessed by the Otomiesj a fierce un-
civilized people, who seem to have been the re-
fidue of the original inhabitants. The provinces
towards the north and weft of Mexico were oc-
cupied by the Chichemecar, and other tribes of
hunters. None of these recognized the Mexican
monarch as their superior. Even in the interior
and more level country, there were several cities
and provinces which had never submitted to the
Mexican yoke. Tlafcala, though only twenty-
one leagues from the capital of the empire, was
an independent and hostile republic. Cholula,
though Itill nearer, had been fubjeRed only a
short time before the arrival of the Spaniards.
Tepeaca, at the distance of thirty leagues from
Mexico, seems to have been a separate itate go-
verned by its own laws1. Mechoacan, the sion-

Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 15. -l. B. Diaz, C. x3o.

tier

tier of which extended within forty leagues of
Mexico, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable for
its implacable enmity to the Mexican namem.
By these hostile powers the Mexican empire was
circumscribed on every quarter, and the high
ideas which we are apt to form of it from the
description of the Spanish historians, should be
considerably moderated.

In consequence of this independence of several

tates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,
there was not any considerable intercourse be-
tween its various provinces. Even in the interior
country not far diflant from the capital, there
seem to have been no roads to facilitate the con.
munication of one diftrit with another; and
when the Spaniards first attempted to penetrate
into its several provinces, they had to open their
way through forests and marshes n. Cortes, in
his adventurous march from Mexico to Honduras
in 1525, met with obftru&ions, and endured
hardships, little inferior to those with which lie
mutl have struggled in the modt uncivilized regi-
ons of America. In some places he could hardly
force a passage through impervious woods, and
plains overflowed with water. In others he found
so little cultivation, that his troops were fre-
quently in danger of perishing by famine. Such
fats correspond ill with the pompous defcriptioa
which the Spanish writers give of Mexican police
and induilry, and convey an idea of a country
nearly similar to that possessed by the Indian
tribes in North America. Here and theie a
trading or a war path, as they are called in North

m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. jo.

B. la
B c. 66. c. 176.

America,

America, led from one settlement to another ,
but generally there appeared no sign of any efta-
blilhed communication, few marks of industry,
and fewer monuments of art.

A proof of this imperfecion in their commer-

cial intercourse no less striking, is their want of
money, or some universal standard by which to efti-
mate the value of commodities. The discovery of
this is among the feps of greatest consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made,
all their tranfat&ions must be so awkward, so ope-
rose, and so limited, that we may boldly pronounce
that they have advanced but a little way in their
career. The invention of such a commercial
Itandard is of such high antiquity in our hemi-
sphere, and rites so farbeyond the ara of authentic
hiftorv, as to appear almost coeval with the exist-
ence of society. The precious metals seem to have
been early employed for this purpose, and from
their permanent value, their divisibility, and many
other qualities, they are better adapted to serve as
a common standard than any other substance of
which nature has given us the command. But in
the New World, where these metals abound most,
this use of them was not known. The exigencies
of rude tribes, or of monarchies imperfectly civi-
lized, did not call for it. All their commercial
intercourse was carried on by barter, and their
ignorance of any common standard by which to
facilitate that exchange of commodities which
contributes so much towards the comfort of life,
may bejuftly mentioned as an evidence of the in-
sant slate of their policy. But even in the New
World the inconvenience of wanting some gene-

Heirera, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. S.

ral

ral instrument of commerce began to be felt, and
some efforts were made towards supplying that
defet. The Mexicans, among whom the num-
ber and greatness of their cities gave rife to a
more extended commerce than in any other part
of America, had begun to employ a common
standard of value, which rendered smaller tranf.
afions much more easy. As chocolate was the
favourite drink of persons in every rank of life,
the nuts or almonds of cacao, of which it is
composed, were of such universal consumption,
that, in their stated markets, these were willing-
ly received in return for commodities of small
price. Thus they came to be confidered as the
instrument of commerce, and the value of what
one wished to dispose of was estimated by the
number of nuts of the cacao, which he might ex-
pet in exchange for it. This seems to be the
utmost length which the Americans had advanced
towards the discovery of any expedient for sup-
plying the use of money. And if the want of it
is to be held, on one hand, as a proof of their
barbarity, this expedient for supplying that want
should be admitted, on the other, as an evidence
no less satisfying, of some progress which the
Mexicans had made in refinement and civiliz-
ation, beyond the savage tribes around them.

In such a rude state were many of the Mexican

provinces when first viited by their conquerors.
Even their cities, extensive and poptilous as they
were, seem more fit to be the habitation of men
just emerging from barbarity, than the residence
of a polished people. The description of Tlafcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low dtraggling huts, scattered about

irregularl;.,

irregularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone, and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be en-
tered upright P. In Mexico, though, from the
peculiarity of its situation, the disposition of the
houses was more orderly, the ftruAure of the
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the fa-
bric of their temples, and other public edifices,
appear to have been such as entitled them to the
high praises bestowed upon them by many Spanish
authors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
fcure and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which
has been represented as a magnificent building,
raised to such a height, that the ascent to it was
bv a flight of a hundred and fourteen steps, was a
solid mars of earth of a square form, faced partly
with Itone. Its base on each fide extended ninety
feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced in
height, it terminated in a quadrangle of about
thirty feet, where were placed a ffrine of the
deity, and two altars on which the vifims were
Sacrificed q. All the other celebrated temples of
New Spain exaEtly resembled that of Mexico r.
Such ftrucures convey no high idea of progress
in art and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive
that a form more rude and simple could have oc-
curred to a nation in its first efforts towards ere-f
ing any great work.

Greater skill and Ingenuity were displayed, if

we may believe the Spanish historians, in the
houses of the emperor and in those of the princi-

' Herrera, dec. z. lib. vi. c. lz.
4 Herrera, dec. a. lib. vii. c. 17. Sec NoTE CLII.

VOL. III. E pal

pal nobility. There, some elegance of design
was visible, and a commodious arrangement of
the apartments was attended to. But if build.
ings corresponding to such descriptions had ever
exiited in the Mexican cities, it is probable that
some remains of them would flill be visible.
From the manner in which Cortes conducted the
siege of Mexico, we can indeed easily account
for the total destruction of whatever had any ap.
pearance of splendor in that capital. But as
only two centuries and a half have elapsed since
the conquest of New Spain, it seems altogether
incredible that in a period so short, every veflige
of this boasted elegance and grandeur (hould have
disappeared; and that in the other cities, parti.
cularly in those which did not susser by the de
ftructive hand of the conquerors, there are any
ruins, which can be confidered as monuments ot
their ancient magnificence.

Even in a village of the rudefl Indians, there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dweilitg-houfes. Such as are destined
for holding the council of the tribe, and in which
all assemble on occafious of public festivity, may
be called stately edifices, when compared with the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diftinftion of
ranks was established, and property was unequally
divided, the number of distinguished ftrudures in
their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to
merit the pompous epithets which some Spaniff
authors employ in deferibing them. It is pro.
bable that, though more ornamented, and built
on a larger scale, they were ere&ed with the fame

lighl

light materials which the Indians employed in
:heir common buildings s, and Time, in a space
much less than two hundred and fifty years, may
have swept away all remains of them t.

From this enumeration offa&s, it seems, upon

the whole, to be evident, that the state of society
in Mexico was considerably advanced beyond that
Ds the savage tribes which we have delineated.
But it is no less manifest, that with refpe&t to
many particulars, the Spanish accounts of their
progress appear to be highly embellished. There
is not a more frequent or a more fertile source of
deception in describing the manners and arts of
ravage nations, or of such as are imperfectly ci-
vilized, than that of applying to them the names
and phrases appropriated to the inffitutions and
refinements of polished life. When the leader of
a small tribe, or the head of a rude community,
is dignified with the name of king or emperor,
the place of his residence can receive no other
name but that of his palace; and whatever his
attendants may be, they must be called his court.
Under such appellations they acquire, in our
tefimation, an importance and dignity which does
not belong to them. The illusion spreads, and
giving a false colour to every part of the nar-
rative, the imagination is so much carried away
vith the refeniblance, that it becomes difficult to
discern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they first touched on the Mexican coalt,
Pere so much struck with the appearance of at-
tainments in policy and in the arts of life, far fu-
perior to those of the rude tribes with which they
were hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they

'See NOTE CLIIL t See NOT e CLIV.

E2 had

had at length discovered a civilized people in th
New World. This comparison between the
people of Mexico and their uncultivated neigh
bours, they appear to have kept constantly ii
view, and observing with admiration many thing
which marked the pre-eminence of the former
they employ in describing their imperfec policy
and infant arts, such terms as are applicable ti
the institutions of men far beyond them in im
provement. Both these circumitances concur in
detracting from the credit due to the description
of Mexican manners by the early Spanish writers
By drawing a parallel between them and those o
people so much less civilized, they raised thei
own ideas too high. By their mode of deferib
ing them, they conveyed ideas to others no let
exalted above truth. Later writers have adopt
ed the ityle of the original historians, and imr
proved upon it. The colours with which D)
Solis delineates the characer, and describes th
actions of Montezuma, the splendor of his court
the laws and policy of his empire, are the fam
that he must have employed in exhibiting to vie'
the monarch and institutions of an highly po
lifhed people.

But though we may admit, that the warn

imagination of the Spanish writers has adde
some embellihment to their descriptions, this w-
not justify the decisive and peremptory ton
with which several authors pronounce all thei
accounts of the Mexican power, policy, and iaws
to he the fi&cions of men who wished to deceive
or who delighted in the marvellous. There at
few hitorical fa&s that can be ascertained b
c'idence more unexceptionable, than may 1

produce

produced in support of the material articles, in
the description of the Mexican constitution and
manners. Eye witnesses relate what they beheld.
Men who had resided among the Mexicans, both
before and after the conquest, describe inftitu-
tions and customs which were familiar to them.
Persons of professions so different that objecs
must have presented themselves to their view
under every various afpe& ; soldiers, priests, and
lawyers all concur in their testimony. Had
Cortes ventured to impose upon his sovereign, by
exhibiting to him a pi&ure of imaginary man-
hners, there wanted not enemies and rivals who
were qualified to deteEt his deceit, and who
would have rejoiced in exposing it. But accord-
ing to the jult remark of an author, whose inge-
nulty has illustrated, and whose eloquence has
adorned the history of America us this fuppofi-
tion is in itself as improbable, as the attempt
would have been audacious. Who among the
destroyers of this great empire was so enlightened
by science, or so attentive to the progress and
operations of men in social life, as to frame a sic-
titious siftem of policy so well combined and so
consistent, as that which they delineate, in their
accounts of the Mexican government? Where
could they have borrowed the idea of many in-
ititutions in legislation and police, to which, at
that period, there was nothing parallel in the na-
tions with which they were acquainted? There
was not, at the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury, a regular cftablifhment of pests for convey-
ing intelligence to the sovereign of any kingdom
in Europe. The fame observation will apply to

M. I'Abbe Raynal Hil. Philof. & Polit. &c. iii. 1z7.

3 what

what the Spaniards relate, with refpet to the
firulure of the city of Mexico, the regulations
concerning its police, and various laws established
for the administration of justice, or securing the
happiness of the community. Whoever is ac-
customed to contemplate the progress of nations,
will often, at very early stages of it, discover a
premature and unexpe&ed dawn of those ideas,
which give rife to institutions that are the pride
and ornament of its most advanced period. Even
in a slate as imperfetly polished as the Mexican
empire, the happy genius of some sagacious ob-
server, excited or aided by circumitances un-
known to us, may have introduced institutions
which are seldom found but in societies highly
refined. But it is almost impossible that the illi-
terate conquerors of the New World Ihould
have formed in any one inflance, a conception of
customs and laws, beyond the standard of im-
provement in their own age and country. Or
if Cortes had been capable of this, what induce-
ment had those by whom he was superseded to
continue the deception? Why should Corita, or
Motolinea, or Acofta, have amused their fove-
reign or their fellow-citizens with a tale purely
fabulous ?

In one particular, however, the guides whom

we must follow have represented the Mexicans to
be more barbarous, perhaps, than they really
were. Their religious tenets, and the rites of
their worship, are described by them as wild and
cruel in an extreme degree. Religion, which
occupies no considerable place in the thoughts of
a savage, whose conceptions of any superior
power are obscure, and his sacred rites few as

well

xell as simple, was formed, among the Mexicans,
into a regular system, with its complete train of
priests, temples, vi&Eims, and fetlivals. This, of
itfclf, is a clear proof that the ifate of the Mexi-
cans was very different from that of the ruder
American tribes. But from the extravagance of
Lheir religious notions, or the barbarity of their
rites, no conclusion can be drawn with certainty
concerning the degree of their civilization. For
rations, long after their ideas begin to enlarge,
and their manners to refine, adhere to systems of
iluperfition founded on the crude conceptions of
frarly ages. From the genius of the Mexican
ireligion, we may, however, form a most just con-
luilion with refpe& to its influence upon the
charadter of the people. The aspet of fiperfti-
tion in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious. Its
civinities were clothed with terror, and delighted
in vengeance. They were exhibited to the
pcoplc under detestable forms, which created
horror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and
of other deftrudtive animals, decorated their tem-
ples. Fear was the only principle that inspired
their votaries. Fasts, mortifications, and pe-
nances, all rigid, and many of them excruciating
to an extreme degree, were the means employed
to appease the wrath of their gods, and the
Mexicans never approached their altars without
sprinkling them with blood drawn from their
own bodies. But, of all offerings, human facri-
sices were deemed the most acceptable. This
religious belief, mingling with the implacable
spirit of vengeance, and adding new force
to it, every captive taken in war was brought
to the temple, was devoted as a vitim to the
dcity, and sacrificed with rites no less folenm

ttIa

than cruelX. The heart and head were the por.
tion consecrated to the gods; the warrior, by
whose prowess the prisoner had been seized, car.
ried off the body to feast upon it with his friends.
Under the impression of ideas so dreary and ter.
rible, and accustomed daily to scenes of blood.
shed rendered awful by religion, the heart of
man muff harden and be Rteeled to every senti.
ment of humanity. The spirit of the Mexicans
was accordingly unfeeling, and the genius of
their religion so far counterbalanced the influence
of policy and arts, that notwithitanding their
progress in both, their manners, instead of soft-
ening, became more fierce. To what circum-
stances it was owing that fuperttition assumed
such a dreadful form among the Mexicans, we
have not sufficient knowledge of their history to
determine. But its influence is visible, and pro-
duced an effec that is singular in the history of
the human species. The manners of the people
in the New World who had made the greattl
progress in the arts of policy, were, in several re-
fpe&ts, the mofl ferocious, and the barbarity of
some of their customs exceeded even those of the
savage Prate.

The empire of Peru boasts of an higher anti-

quity than that of Mexico. According to the
traditionary accounts colleAed by the Spaniards,
it had subsisted four hundred years, under
twelve successive monarchs. But the know.
ledge of their ancient fiory, which the Peru-
vians could communicate to their conquerors,

Z Cort. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 2-40, &c. B. Diaz, c. 82.

Acofta. lib. v. c. 13, &c. Hcrrra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 15,
ec. Gonara Cron. c. 8, &c. See NTz CLV.

mull

must have been both imperfect and uncertain z.
Like the other American nations, they were
totally unacquainted with the art of writing, and
dectitute of the only means by which the
memory of past tranfa&ions can be preserved
with any degree of accuracy. Even among
people to whom the use of letters is known, the
era where the authenticity of history com-
mences, is much posterior to the introduction of
writing. That noble invention continued, every
where, to be long subservient to the common bu-
finess and wants of life, before it was employed
in recording events, with a view of conveying
information from one age to another. But in
no country did ever tradition alone carry down
historical knowledge, in any full continued
stream, during a period of half the length that
the monarchy of Peru is said to have sub-
sifted.

The Quipos, or knots on cords of different

colours, which are celebrated by authors fond
of the marvellous, as if they had been regular
annals of the empire, imperfectly supplied the
place of writing. According to the obscure de-
icription of them by Acofta a, which Garcilaffo
de la Vega has adopted with little variation and
no improvement, the quipos seem to have been
a device for rendering calculation more expedi-
tious and accurate. By the various colours dif-
ferent objects were denoted, and by each knot a
ditinct number. Thus an account was taken,
a.d a kind of register kept, of the inhabitants in
each province, or of the several producions col-
lected there for public use. But as by these

z Ste NiTE CLVI. ' Hit. lib. vi. c. 8.

knots,

knots, however varied or combined, no moral
or abftraE idea, no operation or quality of the
mind could be represented, they contributed little
towards preserving the memory of ancient events
and institutions. By the Mexican paintings and
symbols, rude as they were, more knowledge of
remote tranfafions seems to have been conveyed
than the Peruvians could derive from their boasted
quipos. Had the latter been even of more ex.
tensive use, and better adapted to supply the
place of written records, they perished so gene.
rally, together with other monuments of Peru.
vian ingenuity, in the wreck occasioned by the
Spanish conquest, and the civil wars subsequent
to it, that no accession of light or knowledge
comes from them. All the zeal of Garcilaffo de
la Vega, for the honour of that race of mo.
narchs from whom lie descended, all the indufiry
of his researches, and the superior advantages
with which he carried them on, opened no source
of information unknown to the Spanish authors
who wrote before him. In his Royal Corn.
mentarie., he confines himself to illuflrate
what they had related concerning the antiqui-
ties and institutions of Peru b; and his illuifra-
tions, like their accounts, are derived entirely
from the traditionary tales current among his
countrymen.

Very little credit then is due to the minute de-

ta'ls which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private chara&er of
the early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon
nothing in their story, as authentic, but a few
fa&s, so interwoven in the system of their religion

b Lib. i. c. Io.

and

and policy, as preserved the memory of them
from being loft; and upon the description of
such customs and institutions as continued in
force at the time of the conquest, and fell under
the immediate observation of the Spaniards. By
attending carefully to these, and endeavouring
to separate them from what appears to be fa-
bulous, or of doubtful authority, I have labour-
ed to form an idea of the Peruvian government
and manners.

The people of Peru, as I have already ob-

fervedc, had not advanced beyond the rudest
form of savage life, when Manco Capac, and his
consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftru& and
civilize them. Who these extraordinary person-
ages were, whether they imported their system
of legislation and knowledge of arts from some
country more improved, or, if natives of Peru,
how they acquired ideas so far superior to those-
of the people whom they addressed, are circum-
fiances with respect to which the Peruvian tra-
dition conveys no information." Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the pro-
pen fity in the Peruvians to superstition, and par-
ticularly of their veneration for the Sun, pre-
tended to be children of that glorious luminary,
and to deliver their inftruftions in his name, and
by authority from him. The multitude listened
and believed. What reformation in policy and
manners the Peruvians ascribe to these founders
of their empire, and how, from the precepts of
the Inca and his consort, their ancestors gradually
acquired some knowledge of those aitr, and some
relish for that induflry, which render subsistence

c Book vi. p. 129, &c.

mec-c

secure and life comfortable, hath been formeit
related. Those blessings were originally confinet
within narrow precincts; but in process of tina
the successors of MIanco Capac extended ther
dominion over all the regions that stretch to th:
weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito, efit
blifhing in every province their peculiar policT
and religious infitutions.

The moRs singular and firiking circumftancei:

the Peruvian government, is the influence of it.
ligion upon its genius and laws. Religious idea
make such a feeble impression on the mind of a
savage, that their effect upon his sentiments ard
manners is hardly perceptible. Among the
Mexicans, religion, reduced into a regular fyflter
and holding a considerable place in their publ
institutions, operated with conspicuous efficac-
in forming the peculiar character of that people.
But in Peru, the whole fyflem of civil policy vwu
founded on religion. The Inca appeared no:
only as a legislator, but as a messenger of Hea-
ven. His precepts were received not merely as
the injuntions of a superior, but as the mandates
of the Deity. His race was to be held sacred;
and in order to preserve it diflinct, without being
polluted by any mixture of less noble blood, the
sons of Manco Capac married their own fifcri,
and no person was ever admitted to the throne
who could not claim it by such a pure descent.
To. those Children of the Sun, for that was th:
appellation beflowed upon all the offspring of the
firit Inca, the people looked up with the revet
rence due to beings of a superior order. They wer:
deemed to be under the immediate proteEtion c
the deity from whom they issued, and by hir

everr

every order of the reigning Inca was supposed to
be didcated.

From those ideas two consequences resulted.

The authority of the Inca was unlimited and ab-
solute, in the moss extensive meaning of the
words. Whenever the decrees of a prince are
confidered as the commands of the Divinity, it
is not only an a& of rebellion, but of impiety,
to dispute or oppose his will. Obedience be-
comes a duty of religion; and as it would be
prophane to control a monarch who is believed
to be under the guidance of Heaven, and pre-
sumptuous to advise him, nothing remains but to
submit with implicit respect. This muff necef-
farily be the effec of every government efla-
blifhed on pretensions of intercourse with fupe-
nor powers. Such accordingly was the blind
submission which the Peruvians yielded to their
sovereigns. The persons of highest rank and
greatest power in their dominions acknowledged
them to be of a more exalted nature; and in
tcitimonv of this, when admitted into their pre-
fence, they entered with a burden upon their
shoulders, as an emblem of their servitude, and
willingness to bear whatever the Inca was pleas-
ed to impose. Among their fubjefts, force was
not requisite to second their commands. Every
officer entrusted with the execution of them was
revered, and, according to the account of an in-
telligent observer of Peruvian manners , he might
proceed alone from one extremity of the empire
to another without meeting opposition; for,, on
producing a fringe from the royal Borla, an orna-
ment of the head peculiar to the reigning Inca,

d Zarate, lib. i. c. 13
Vot. 11i. F the

the lives and fortunes of the people were at his
disposal.

Another confeqnence of establishing govern.

ment in Peru on the foundation of religion was,
that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not confidered as transgressions of human
laws, but as insults offered to the Deity. Each,
without any diftincion between such as were
flight and such as were atrocious, called for
vengeance, and could be expiated only by the
blood of the offender. Consonantly to the fame
ideas, punishment followed the trespass with ine-
vitable certainty, because an offence against Hea.
ven was deemed such an high enormity as could
not be pardoned . Among a people of cor.
rupted morals, maxims ofjurifprudence so severe
and unrelenting, by rendering men ferocious and
desperate, would be more apt to multiply crimes
than to restrain them. But the Peruvians, of
simple manners and unfufpicious faith, were held
in such awe by this rigid discipline, that the
number of offenders was extremely small. Ve-
neration for monarchs, enlightened and diredted
as they believed, by the divinity whom they
adored, prompted them to their duty; the dread
of puniflunent, which they were taught to con-
fider as unavoidable vengeance infliced by of.
fended Heaven, withheld them from evil.

The fyflem of fuperitition on which the Incas

ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority,
was of a genius very different from that ella-
blifhed among the Mexicans. Manco Capac
turned the veneration of his followers entirely to-
wards natural objecs. The Sun, as the great

Vega, lib. ii c. 6.

fourn-

source of light, of joy, and fertility in the
creation attracted their principal homage. The
Moon and Stars, as co-operating with him, were
cititled to secondary honours. WVherever the
propenrity in the human mind to acknowledge
and to adore some superior power, takes this di-
rection, and is employed in contemplating the
order and beneficence that really exist in nature,
the spirit of fuperlfition is mild. Wherever
imaginary beings, created by the fancy and the
fears of men, are supposed to preside in nature,
and become the objecs of worlhip, superstition
always assumes a more severe and atrocious form.
Of the latter we have an example among the
Mexicans, of the former among the people of
Peru. The Peruvians had not, indeed, made
such progress in observation or inquiry, as to have
attained just conceptions of the Deity ; nor was
there in their language any proper name or ap-
pellation of the Supreme Power, which intimat-
ed, that they had formed any idea of him as the
Creator and Governor of the World f. But by
directing their veneration to that glorious lumi-
nary, which, by its universal and vivifying energy,
i; the belt emblem of divine beneficence, the rites
and observances which they deemed acceptable
to him were innocent and humane. They offered
to the fun a part of those productions which his
genial warmth had called forth from the bosom
of the earth, and reared to maturity. They fa-
crificed, as an oblation of gratitude, some of
the animals which were indebted to his influence
for nourishment. They presented to him choice
fpecinens of those works of ingenuity which his

f Acofta, lib. v. c. 3.

F 2 light

light had guided the hand of man in forming,
But the Incas never fained his altars with human
blood, nor could they conceive that their bene.
ficent father the Sun would be delighted with
such horrid vicimsg. Thus the Peruvians, un.
acquainted with those barbarous rites which ex.
tinguiih sensibility, and suppress the feelings ol
nature at the fight of human sufferings, were
formed by the spirit of the superstition which
they had adopted, to a national chara&er, more
gentle than that of any people in America.

The influence of this superstition operated in

the fame manner upon their civil institutions, and
tended to corret in them whatever was adverse
to gentleness of charater. The dominion of the
Incas, though the most absolute of all despotisms,
was mitigated by its alliance with religion. The
mind was not humbled and depressed by the idea
of a forced fubje&ion to the will of a superior;
obedience, paid to one who was believed to be
clothed with divine authority, was willingly
yielded, and implied no degradation. The so.
vereign, conscious that the submissive reverence
of his people flowed from their belief of his hea-
venly descent, was continually reminded of a dif.
tinaion which prompted him to imitate that
beneficent power which he was supposed to re.
present. In consequence of those impreflions,
there hardly occurs in the traditional hiflory of
Peru, any instance of rebellion against the reign-
ing prince, and among twelve fuccefive monarchs,
there was not one tyrant.

Even the wars in which the Incas engaged,
were carried on with a spirit very different from

X See NoTz CLVII,

that

that of other American nations. They fought
not, like savages, to destroy and exterminate; or,
like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divini-
ties with human sacrifices. They conquered, in
order to reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and
to diffuse the knowledge of their own institutions
and arts. Prisoners seem not to have been ex-
posed to the insults and tortures, which were
their lot in every other part of the New
World. The Incas took the people whom they
subdued under their protecion, and admitted
them to a participation of all the advantages en-
joyed by their original subjects. This practice,
¥o repugnant to American-ferocity, and refem-
biing the humanity of the moit polished nations,
must be ascribed, like other peculiarities which
we have observed in the Peruvian manners, to the
genius of their religion. The Incas, confidering
the homage paid to any other objed than to the
heavenly powers which they adored as impious,
were fond of gaining proselytes to their favourite
system. The idols of every conquered province
vwere carried in triumph to the great temple at
Cuzco h, and placed there as trophies of the fu-
perior power of the divinity who was the pro-
ttcor of the empire. The people were treated
with lenity, and inftruaed in the religious tenets
of their new matters , that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number of
the votaries of his father the Sun.

The state of property in Peru was no less fin-

gular than that of religion, and contributed, like-
wife, towards giving a mild turn of characer to

" Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. lz.
Htrrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 8.

F 3 the

the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three ihares. One was con.
fecrated to the Sun, and the produc of it wa
applied to the eretion of temples, and furnishing
what was requisite towards celebrating the public
rites of religion. The second belonged to the
Inca, and was set apart as the provision made by
the community for the support of government
The third and largert share was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. Neither individuals, however, nor
communities, had a right of exclusive property
in the portion set apart for their use. They
poiffefed it only for a year, at the expiration of
which a new division was made in proportion to
the rank, the number, and exigencies of each fa.
mily. All those lands were cultivated by the
joint industry of the community. The people,
summoned by a proper officer, repaired in a body
to the fields, and performed their common talk,
while songs and mulical instruments cheered them
to their labour k. By this singular distribution
of territory, as well as by the mode of cultivating
it, the idea of a common interest, and of mu.
tual subserviency, was continually inculcated.
Each individual felt his connection with those
around him, and knew that he depended on their
friendly aid for what increase he was to reap.
A Rate thus constituted may be confidered as
one great family, in which the union of the mem-
bers was so complete, and the exchange of good
offices so perceptible, as to create stronger at-
tachment, and to bind man to man in closer
intercourse, than fubfiled under any form of so.

k Herrera, dec. 5 lib. i, . 2. V. ga li b v. c. 5.

Ciets

cietv efablifhed in America. From this resulted
gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown in the
savage state, and with which the Mexicans were
little acquainted.

But, though the institutions of the Incas were

so framed as to Sirengthen the bonds of affe&ion
among their fubjets, there was great inequality
in their condition. The diftin&tion of ranks was
fully eftabliihed in Peru. A great body of the
inhabitants, under the denomination of Yana-
conas, were held in a state of servitude. Their
garb and houses were of a form different from
those of freemen. Like the Tamemes of Mexico,
they were employed in carrying burdens, and
in performing every other work of drudgery'.
Next to them in rank, were such of the people
as were free, but diltinguilhed by no official or
hereditary honours. Above them were raised,
those whom the Spaniards call Orejones, from the
ornaments worn in their ears. They formed
what may be denominated the order of nobles,
and in peace as well as war held every office of
power or trust m. At the head of all were the
children of the Sun, who, by their high descent
and peculiar privileges, were as much exalted
above the Orejones, as these were elevated above
the people.

Such a form of society, from the union of its

members, as well as from the diftinsion in their
ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts.
But the Spaniards having been acquainted with
the improved state of various arts in Mexico,
fevcral years before they discovered Peru, were

i Henera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
= Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 1.

not

not so much itruck with what they observed ji
the latter country, and describe the appearances
of ingenuity there with less warmth of admira.
tion. The Peruvians, nevertheless, had ad.
vanced far beyond the Mexicans, both in the
neceffarv arts of life, and in such as have some
title to the name of elegant.

In Peru, agriculture, the art of primary ne-

cefiity in social life, was more extensive, and
carried on with greater skill than in any part of
America. The Spaniards, in their progrcfs
through the country, were so fully supplied with
provisions of every kind, that in the relation of
their adventures we meet with few of those dif.
mal scenes of distress occasioned by famine, in
which the conquerors of Mexico were so often
involved. The quantity of foil under cultivation
was not left to the discretion of individuals, but
regulated by public authority in proportion to
the exigencies of the community. Even the
calamity of an unfruitful season was but little
felt, for the product of the lands consecrated to
the Sun, as well as those set apart for the Incas,
being depositcd in the Tambos, or public store-
houses, it remained there as a stated provision for
times of scarcity D. As the extent of cultivation
wa; determined with such provident attention to
the demands of the state, the invention and in-
duftry of the Peruvians were called forth to ex-
traordinary exertions, by certain defeats peculiar
to their climate and foil. All the vast rivers that
flow from the Andes take their course eastward
to the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered onlv by
fime llreams which rush down from the mo'ln-

'' Z r;.:e, lib. i. c. i4. Vega, lib i. c. S.

ta!i:

ains like torrents. A great part of the low
ountry is sandy and barren, and never refreihed
vith rain. In order to render such an unpro-
plifing region fertile, the ingenuity of the Pe-
xuvians had recourse to various expedients. By
means of artificial canals conduted, with much
patience and considerable art, from the torrents
that poured across their country, they conveyed
a regular supply of moisture to their fields .
They enriched the foil by manuring it with the
dung of sea-fowls, of which they found an in-
exhaustible store on all the islands scattered along
their coasts P. In describing the customs of any
nation thoroughly civilized, such pracices would
hardly draw attention, or be mentioned as in
any degree remarkable; but in the history of the
improvident race of men in the New World, they
are entitled to notice as singular proofs of industry
and of art. The use of the plough, indeed, was
unknown to the Peruvians. They turned up
the earth with a kind of mattock of hard woodl.
Nor was this labour deemed so degrading as to
be devolved wholly upon the women. Both sexes
joined in performing this necessary work. Even
the children of the Sun set an example of in-
duftry, by cultivating a field near Cuzco with
their own hands, and they dignified this func-
tion, by denominating it their triumph over the
earth '.

The superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob-

vious, likewise, in the conftrueion of their

: Zarate, lib. i c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. i, & 24.

Acas, lib. iv. . 37. Vega, lib. v. c. 3. See NOTE
Cl-VlIH.

Zuarac, lib. i. c. 8. T Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

ohoufes

houses and public buildings. In the extenfi
plains which itretch along the Pacific Oceat
where the sky is perpetually serene, and the ci
mate mild, their houses were very properly of!
fabric extremely flight. But in the higher rt.
gions, where rain falls, where the viciflitud t
leafons is known, and their rigour felt, houfs
were constructcd with greater solidity. They wer.
generally of a square form, the walls about eight
feet high, built with bricks hardened in the flu,
without any windows, and the door low and ftrai,
Simple as these structures were, and rude a
the materials may seem to be of which they wev
formed, they were so durable, that many of the2
still subsist in different parts of Peru, long aft!
every monument that might have conveyed to '.
ary idea of the domefiic state of the other A.r:.
rican nations ha, vanished from the face of th
earth. But it was in the temples cunfecrated:
the Sun, and in the buildings destined for thF
rcfidence of their monarchs, that the Peruvi2a:
displayed the utmoit extent of their art and cc--
trivance. The descriptions of them by such a
the Spanish writers as had an opportunity a
contemplating them, while, in some meaiur,
entire, might have appeared highly exaggerate..
if the ruins which still remain, did not vouch ti
truth of their relations. These ruins of sacred C
royal buildings arc found in every province of t;
empire, and by their frequency demonstrate ttL
they are monuments of a powerful people, v.':
numi have fubliited, duriing a period of some t'.
tLlit, in a ftatc of no :iconliderablc improvtmrr'-
T ity appear to have been ediiiccs various in t.:c
di.i:.;io.i5. Some of a moderate size, man.

menie extent, all remarkable for solidity, and
fembling each other in the stile of architecure.
he temple of Pachacamac, together with a pa-
ce of the Inca, and a fortress were so connected
ugctler as to form one great ftruture, above
lss a league in circuit. In this prodigious pile,
he fame singular talte in building is conspicuous,

in other works of the Peruvians. As they
ecre unacquainted with the use of the pulley,
nd other mechanical powers, and could not
plevatc the large stones and bricks which they
mployed in building to any considerable height,
lie walls of this edifice, in which they seem to
ave made their greatest effort towards magnifi-
ence, did not rife above twelve feet from the
r >cnd. Though they had not discovered the
-. ot mortar or of any other cement in building,
t3c bricks or stones were joined with so much
-,iccty, that the seams can hardly be discerned 5
i'he apartments, as far as the distribution of them
:2n be traced in the ruins, were ill-difpofed, and
i.5'nrdcd little accommodation. There was not
iin le window in any part of the building; and
; no light could enter but by the door, all the
?art nents of largest dimension must either have
)Cn perfectly dark, or illuminated by some other
]neans. But with all these, and many other im-
crfcctions that might be mentioned in their art
. building, the works of the Peruvians which
iil remain, must be confidered as stupendous
:.jrts of a people unacquainted with the use
f iron, and convey to us an high idea of the
u'.er possessed by their ancient monarchs.

See NOTE CLIX.

These,

These, however, were not the noblest or mofl

useful works of the Incas. The two great roadi
from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter.
rupted stretch above fifteen hundred miles, are
entitled to still higher praise. The one was con.
dueted through the interior and mountainous
country, the other through the plains on the sea.
coat From the language of admiration in
which some of the early writers express thel;
altonifhment when they first viewed those roads,
and from the more pompous descriptions oflattr
writers, who labour to support some favourite
theory concerning America, one might be led
to compare this work of the Incas to the famou.
military ways which remain as monuments of the
Roman power: but in a country where there wi
no tame animal except the Llama, which was
never used for draught, and but little as a beal
of burden, where the high roads were seldom
trod by any but a human foot, no great degree
of labour or art was requisite in forming them.
The Peru-ian roads were only fifteen feet in
breadth t, and in many places so slightly formed,
that time has effaced every vestige of the course
in which they ran. In the low country littld
more seems to have been done, than to plant
trees or to fix posts at certain intervals, in orde
to mark the proper rout to travellers. To open
a path through the mountainous country was a
more arduous talk. Eminences were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the prefervatioa
of the road it was fenced with a bank of tuf.
At proper diflances, Tambos, or storehouses

Cicca, c. 60.

weN

were erefted for the accommodation of the Inca
and his attendants, in their progress through his
dominions. From the manner in which the road
was originally formed in this higher and more
impervious region, it has proved more durable;
and though, from the inattention of the Spa-
niards to every objeS but that of working their
mines, nothing has been done towards keeping
it in repair, its course may still be traced u. Such
was the celebrated road of the Incas; and even
from this description, divested of every circum-
fiance of manifelt exaggeration, or of suspicious
aspel, it must be confidered as a striking proof
of an extraordinary progress in improvement and
policy. To the savage tribes of America, the
idea of facilitating communication with places
at a diltance had never occurred. To the Mex-
icans it was hardly known. Even in the most
civilized countries of Europe, men had advanced
far in refinement, before it became a regular ob-
jet of national police to form such roads as
render intercourse commodious. It .was a capital
objec of Roman policy to open a communication
with all the provinces of their extensive empire,
by means of those roads which are justly confi-
dered as one of the noblest monuments both of
their vifdom and their power. But during the
long reign of barbarism, the Roman roads were
neglected oi deitroyed; and at the time when the
Spaniards entered Peru, no kingdom in Europe
could boast of any work of public utility that

u Xerez, p. 189-191. Zarate, lib. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,

ix. c. 13. Boguer Voyage, p. 105. Ulloa Entretene-
n:oio, p. 365.
I OL. 111. G could

could be compared with the great roads formed
by the Incas.

The formation of those roads introduced an-

other improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas was interfefted
by all the torrents which roll from the Andes
towards the Western Ocean. From the rapidity
of their course, as well as from the frequency
and violence of their inundation, these were not
fordable. Some expedient, however, was to
be found for pasing them. The Pcruvians, from
their unacquaintance with the use of arches, and
their inability to work in wood, could not con-
firud bridges either of ifone or timber. But
necessity. the parent of invention, fuggeffted a
device which supplied that defect. They formed
cables of great strength, by twitting together
some of the pliable withs or osiers, with which
their country abpunds; fix of there cables they
stretched across the stream parallel to one another,
and made them fast on each fide. These they
bound firmly together by interweaving smaller
ropes so close, as to form a compac piece of
net-work, which being covered with branches of
trees and earth, they passed along it with tolera-
ble security . Proper persons were appointed
to attend at each bridge, to keep it in repair,
and to assist paffengersY. In the level country,
where the rivers became deep and broad and still,
they are pasTed in Ba/zas, or floats; in the con-

See NOTE CLX.

7 Sancho ap. Ram ii. 7i6, B. Zara:e, lib. i c, 14.
\V-g, l.D. ii, c. ,, S. Hicirera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. , .

Itruclion,

firuction, as well as navigation of which, the
ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to be far fu-
peror to that of any people in America. These
had advanced no farther in naval fcill than the
use of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ventured
to raise a malt, and spread a fail, by means of
which their balzas not only went nimbly before
the wind, but could veer and tack with great
celerity z.

Nor were the ingenuity and art of the Peru-

vians confined solely to objecs of essential utility.
They had made some progress in arts, which may
be called elegant. They possessed the precious
metals in greater abundance than any people of
America. They obtained gold in the fame man-
ner with the Mexicans, by searching in the
channels of rivers, or walhing the earth in which
particles of it were contained. But in order to
procure Silver, they exerted no inconsiderable
degree of still and invention. They had not,
indeed, attained the art of finking a Shaft into the
bowels of the earth, and penetrating to the
riches concealed there; but they hollowed deep
caverns on the banks of rivers and the fides of
mountains, and emptied such veins as did not
d:p suddenly beyond their reach. In other
places, where the vein lay near the surface, they
dug pits to such a depth, that the person who
worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baskets a. They had discovered the art
of smelting and refining this, either by the fim-
ple application of fire, or where the ore was
more stubborn, and impregnated with foreign
substances, by placing it in firall ovens or fur-

Ulloa Voy. i. 167, &c. ' Rdmufio, iii. 414, A.

G 2 naces,

naces, on high grounds, so artificially constru&ed,
that the draught of air performed the fun&ion
of a bellows, an engine with which they were
totally unacquainted. By this simple device,
the purer ores were smelted with facility, and the
quantity of ilver in Peru was so considerable,
that many of the utensils employed in the func-
tions of common life were made of it b. Several
of those vessel and trinkets are said to have
merited no small degree of estimation, on ac-
count of the neatness of the workmanship, as
well as the intrinsic value of the materials. But as
the conquerors of America were well acquainted
with the latter, but had scarcely any conception
of the former, most of the silver vessels and trin-
kets were melted down, and rated according to
the weight and fineness of the metal in the divi-
sion of the fpol.

In other works of mere curiosity or ornament,

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many
specimens of those have been dug out of the
Guaca, or mounds of earth, with which the
Peruvians covered the bodies of the dead.
Among these are mirrors of various dimensions,
of hard lhining stones highly polished; vessels of
earthen ware of different forms; hatchets and
other instruments, some destined for war and
others for labour. Some were of flint, some of
copper, hardened to such a degree by an un-
known process, as to supply the place of iron on
several occasions. Had the use of those tool
formed of copper been general, the progress of
the Peruvians in the arts might have been such,

Aco.a, iib iv. c 4, 5. Vega, p. 1. lib. viii. c. 25.
UL'oa Ent:tn. 25J.

as

as to emulate that of more cultivated nations.
But either the metal was so rare, or the operation
by which it was hardened so tedious, that their
instruments of copper were few, and so extremely
fmrall, that they seem to have been employed only
in lighter works. But even to such a circum-
fcribed use of this imperfed metal, the Peruvians
were indebted for their superiority to the other
people of America in various arts'. The fame
observation, however, may be applied to them,
which I formerly made with refpet to the arts
of the Mexicans. From several specimens of
Peruvian utensils and ornaments, which are de-
posited in the royal cabinet of Madrid, and from
some preserved in different collecions in other
parts of Europe, I have reason to believe that
the workmanihip is more to he admired on ac-
count of the rude tools with which it was exe-
cuted, than on account of its intrinsic neatness
and elegance; and that the Peruvians, though
the most improved of all the Americans, were
not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

But notwithstanding so many particulars,

which seem to indicate an high degree of im-
provement in Peru, other circumstances occur
that suggest the idea of a society still in the
first stages of its transition from barbarism to ci-
vilization. In all the dominions of the Incas,
Cuzco was the only place that had the appear-
ance, or was entitled to the name of a city.
Every where else, the people lived mostly in de-
tached habitations, dispersed over the country,
c,r, at the utmost, fettled together in small vil-
: U''oa Voy. tom. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c.

G 3 lages.

lages d. But until men are brought to assemble
in numerous bodies, and incorporated in such
close union, as to enjoy frequent intercourse,
and to feel mutual dependence, they never imbibe
perfetly the spirit, or assume the manners of
social life. In a country of immense extent,
with only one city, the progress of manners, and
the improvement either of the necessary or more
refined arts, must have been so flow, and carried
on under such disadvantages, that it is more fur.
prifing the Peruvians (hould have advanced so far
in refinement, than that they did not proceed
farther.

In consequence of this ifate of imperfec union,

the separation of professions in Peru was not so
complete as among the Mexicans. The lets
closely men associate, the more simple are their
manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts
of common and molt necessary use in life do not,
in such a Rate, become so complex or difficult,
as to render it requilite that men should be trained
to them by any particular course of education.
All the arts, accordingly, which were of daNl
and indispensable utility, were exercised by every
Peruvian indiscriminately. None but the artifis,
employed in works of mere curiosity or ornament,
constituted a separate order of men, or were dif.
tinguifhed from other citizens .

From the want of cities in Peru, another con-

sequence followed. There was little commercial
intercourse among the inhabitants of that great
empire. The activity of commerce is coeval with

Zarate, l;b, . c. 9. Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 4.
Acofa, lib. v;. c. 15. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. iv. C.

the

the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in
considerable numbers in one place, its operations
become vigorous. The citizen must depend for
lubfifence on the labour of those who cultivate
the ground. They, in return, muff receive some
equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is eftan
blilhed, and the produtions of art are regularly
exchanged for the fruits of agriculture. In the
towns of the Mexican empire, flated markets
were held, and whatever could supply any want
or desire of man was an obje& of commerce. But
in Peru, from the singular mode of dividing pro-
perty, and the manner in which the people were
fettled, there was hardly any species of commerce
carried on between different provinces f, and the
community was less acquainted with that ative
intercourse, which is at once a bond of union, and
an incentive to improvement.

But the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was

the most remarkable, as well as most fatal defe&
in their character . The greater part of the
rude nations of America opposed their invaders
with undaunted ferocity, though with little con-
duEt or success. The Mexicans maintained the
firuggle in defence of their liberties, with such
perievering fortitude, that it was with difficulty
the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru was
subdued at once, and almost without resistance;
and the most favourable opportunities of regain-
ing their freedom, and of crushing their oppref.
sorb, were loft through the timidity of the peo-

: Vesa, lib. vi. c. 8.

Xerfz, : 5o Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 372. Hrrera, dec. 5.
lib. i. c 3.

pie.

pie. Though the traditional history of the Pe-
ruvians represents all the Incas as warlike princes,
frequently at the head of armies, which they led
to vitorv and conquest; few symptoms of such
a martial spirit appear in any of their operations
subsequent to the invasion of the Spaniards. The
influence, perhaps, of those inltitutions which
rendered their manners gentle, gave their minds
this unmanly softness; perhaps, the constant fe-
renity and mildness of the climate may have ener-
vated the vigour of their frame; perhaps, some
principle in their government, unknown to us, was
the occasion of this political debility. Whatever
may have been the cause, the fat is certain, and
there is not an initance in history of any people
so little advanced in refinement, so totally defti-
tute of military enterprize. This character hath
descended to their posterity. The Indians of
Peru are now more tame and depresscd than any
people of America. Their feeble spirits, relaxed
in lifeless inaction, seem hardly capable of any
bold or manly exertion.

But, besides those capital defeAs in the poli-

tical state of Peru, some detached circumltances
and faAs occur in the Spanish writers, which
discover a considerable remainder of barbarity in
their manners. A cruel cuilom, that prevailed
in some of the most savage tribes, fubfitted among
the Peruvians. On the death of the Incas, and
of other eminent persons, a confderable number
of their attendants was put to death, and in.
terred around their Guacas, that they might ap-
pear in the next world with their former dignity,
and be served with the fame rfpect. On the
death of Huana-Capac, the moll powerful of

their

their monarchs, above a thousand victims were
doomed to accompany him to the tombh. In
one particular, their manners appear to have been
more barbarous than those of most rude tribes.
Though acquainted with the use of fire in pre-
paring maize, and other vegetables for food;
they devoured both flesh and fish perfectly
raw, and astonished the Spaniards, with a prac-
tice repugnant to the ideas of all civilized
people1.

But though Mexico and Peru are the posses-
sions of Spain in the New World, which on ac-
count both of their ancient and present state,
have attractcd their greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from-being inconsiderable,
either in extent or value. The greater part of
them was reduced to fubje&ion during the
first part of the fixLeenth century, by pri-
vate adventurers, who fitted out their small
armaments either in Hispaniola or in Old Spain;
and were we to follow each leader in his progress,
we (hould discover the fame daring courage, the
fame persevering ardour, the fame rapacious de-
fire of wealth, and the fame capacity of enduring
and surmounting every thing in order to attain
it, which distinguished the operations of the
Spaniards in their greater American conquetls.
But, instead of entering into a detail, which,
from the similarity of the tranfastions, would
appear almost a repetition of what has been al-
ready related, I shall satisfy myself with such a

X AcolLa, lib. 5. c. 7.

Xerez, p. 19o. Sancho, Rar. iii. 371, C. Hcrrera,
dc. 5. lib. i. c. 3.

view

view of those provinces js the Spanifl empin
in America, which have not hitherto been men
tioned, as may convey to my readers an ade
quate idea of its greatnef3, fertility, and opu
lencc.

I begin with the countries contiguous to th(

two great monarchies, of whose hittory and in
ftitutions I have given some account, and fhai
then briefly describe the other diftrits of Spanilf
America. The jurifd'iion of the viceroy ol
New Spain extends over several provinces, which
were not fubjci to the dominion of the Mexicans
The countries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that stretch
along the east lide of the Vermilion fca, or gulf
of California, as well as the immense kingdoms of
New Na-arre and New Mexico, which bend
towards the weft and north, did not acknowledge
the sovereignty of Montezuma, or his predecef.
fors. These regions, not inferior in magnitude
to all the Mexican empire, are reduced some to
a greater, others to a lcfs degree of subjection to
the Spanish yoke. They extend through the
mos1 delightful part of the temperate zone; their
foil is, in general, remarkably fertile, and all
their pro'ductions, whether animal or vegetable,
are molt perfect in their kind. They have all
a communication either with the Pacific Ocean,
or with the Gulph of Mexico, and are watered
by rivers which not only enrich them, but may
become fubfcrviert to commerce. The number
of Spaniards fettled in those vast countries, is
irndecd extremely finall. They may be fairi to
have ubdued rather than to have occupied them.
But if the population in their ancient establish
ments in America (hall continue to increase, they

may

may gradually spread over those provinces, of
which, however inviting, they have not hitherto
been able to take full possession.

One circumstance may contribute to the speedy

population of some districts. Very rich mines
both of gold and silver have been discovered in
many of the regions which I have mentioned.
Wherever these are opened, and worked with
success, a multitude of people resort. In order
to supply them with the necessaries of life, cil-
tivation must be increased, artisans of various
kind. rr.ult assemble, and industry as well as
weakh v.ill be gradually diffused. Many ex-
amples of this' have occurred in different parts of
America since they fell under the dominion of
:he Spaniards. Populous villages and large
toCws have suddenly arisen amidst uninhabited
wilds and mountains; and the working of mines,
though far from being the most proper object
towards which the attention of an infant society
fr.ould be turned, may become the means both
cf promoting useful activity, and of augmenting
the number of people- A recent and singular
i::-.ance of this has happened, which, as it is
bu little known in Europe, and may be pro-
du-tive of great effeEts, merits attention. The
Spaniards fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa and
Sonora, had been long disturbed by the depreda-
tions of some fierce tribes of Indians. In the
year 1765, the incursions of those savages be-
came fu frequent, and so deftruftive, that the
Spanish inhabitants, in despair, applied to the
Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for such
a body of troop3 as might enable them to drive
those formidable invaders from their places of re-

treat

treat in the mountains. But the treasury of
Mexico was so much exhausted by the large
fums drawn from it, in order to support the late
war againlt Great Britain, that the viceroy could
afford them no aid. The refpeft due to his
virtues, accomplished what his official power
could not effe&. He prevailed with the mer.
chants of New Spain to advance about two hun.
dred thousand pesos for defraying the expence
of the expedition. The war was conduced by
an officer of abilities; and after being protracted
for three years, chiefly by the difficulty of pur-
suing the fugitives over mountains and through
defiles which were almoit impassable, it termi.
nated in the year 1771, in the final submission of
the tribes, which had been so long the object of
terror to the two provinces. In the courle of
this service, the Spaniards marched through
countries into which they seem not to have pe-
netrated before that time, and discovered mine;
of such value, as was aitonifhing even to men ac-
quainted with the riches contained in the moun-
tains of the New World. At Cineuilla, in the
province-of Sonora, they entered a plain of four-
teen leagues in extent, in which, at the depth of
only sixteen inches, they found gild in grains of
such a size, that some of them weighed nine
marks, and in filch quantities, that in a short
time, with a few labourers, they colleted a thou-
sand marks of gold in grains, even without taking
time to wash the earth that had been dug, which
appeared to be so rich, that persons of skill coNr-
puted that it might yield what would be equal
in value to a million of pesos. Before the end of
the year 1771, above two thousand perfors were

f It `

fettled in Cireguilla, under the government of
proper magistrates, and the infpe&ion of several
eccltfiaftics. As several other mines, not in-
ferior in richness to that of Cineguilla, have been
discovered, both in Sonora and Cinaloa k, it is
probable that these negleced and thinly-inhabited
provinces, may soon become as populous and
valuable as any part of the Spanish empire in
America.

The peninsula of California, on the other fide

of the Vermilion sea, seems to have been less
known to the ancient Mexicans, than the pro-
;vinces which I have mentioned. It was disco-
vered by Cortes in the year 15361. During a
iong period it continued to be so little frequent-
rd, that even its form was unknown, and in

,ft charts it was represented as an island, not
2s a peninsula ". Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge from its situation, must
oe very desirable; the Spaniards have made small
prr.grefs in peopling it. Towards the close of
:ie las century, the Jesuits, who had great merit
i1 exploring this negleted province, and in ci-
-ilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly ac-
/iired a dominion over it as complete as that
Rhich they possessed in their missions in Paraguay,
ind they laboured to introduce into it the fame
olicy, and to govern the natives by the fame
naxims. In order to prevent the court of Spain
rm conceiving anyjealoufy of their designs and
iperations, they seem studiously to have depre-
.ated the country, by representing the climate

See NOTE CLXI.
Bk v vol. ii. p. 269. m See NOTE CLXII.
VOL, ill. H as

as so disagreeable and unwholesome, and the
foil as so barren, that nothing but a zealous de.
fire of converting the natives, could have in.
duced them to fettle there . Several public
spirited citizens endeavoured to undeceive their
sovereigns, and to give them a better view of
California; but in vain. At length, on the ex.
pulfion of the Jesuits from the Spanish dominions,
the court of Madrid, as prone at that juncure
to fufpe& the purity of the Order's intentions,
as formerly to confide in them with implicit trust,
appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities
have since raised him to the high rank of mi.
nifter for the Indies, to visit that peninsula. Hi'
account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
he discovered mines of gold of a very promifinE
appearance ° From its vicinity to Cinaloa aijc
Sonora, it is probable, that if the population o
these provinces shall increase in the manna
which I have supposed, Califormia may by de
grees, receive fiom them such a recruit of inha
bitants, as to be no longer reckoned amonI
the desolate and useless diftri&s of the Spanif
empire.

On the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Hon

duras are comprehended in the government c
New Spain, though anciently they can hardly b
said to have formed a part of the Mexican en
pire. These large provinces, stretching fro'
the Bay of Campeachy beyond Cape Gracias
Dios, do not, like the other territories of zpai

u Vcnega-, Hill. of Caiforria, i. 26.
° Lorenzano, 3,9, 3;5.

in the New World, derive their value either from
the fertility of their foil or the richness of their
mines; but they produce in greater abundance,
than any part of America, the logwood tree,
which, in dying some colours, is so far prefer-
able to any other material, that the consumption
of it in Europe is considerable, and it has become
an article in commerce of great value. During
a long period, no European nation intruded upon
the Spaniards in those provinces, or attempted to
obtain any ihare in this branch of trade. But
after the conqueRs of Jamaica by the English, it
soon appeared what a formidable rival was now
feated in the neighbourhood of the Spanish ter-
ntories. One ot the fil It objecs which tempted
the English fettled in that illand, was the great
prufit arising from the logwood trade, and the
facility of wresting iome portion of it from the
Spaniards. Some adventurers from Jamaica
rrade the firIt attempt at Cape Catoche, the
fouth-eafl promontory of Yucatan, and by cut-
ting logwood there, carried on a gainful traffic.
When molt of the trees near the coait in that
place were felled, they removed to the island of
'Trilt, in tlhe Bay of Campeachy ; and in later
ti:rcF, their principal Itatiun has been in the Bay
oi Honduras. The Spaniards, alarmed at this
encroachment, endeavoured by negociation, re-
rronitrances, and open force, to prevent the En-
giilh from obtaining any footing on that part of
the American continent. But after itruggling
againlt it for more than a century, the dil-
a: trs of lait war extorted from the court of
Madrid a reluctant consent to tolerate this fettle-

H 2 mcnt

ment of foreigners in the heart of its territoriesP.
The pain which this humbling concession occa.
sioned, fcems to have prompted the Spaniards to
devise a method of rendering it of little confe.
quencc, more effe&ual than all the efforts of
negociation or violence. The logwood produced
on the weft coast of Yucatan, where the foil is
drier, is in quality far superior to that which
grows on the marihy grounds where the English
are fettled. By encouraging the cutting of this,
and permitting the importation of it into Spain
without paying any duty q, such vigour has been
given to this branch of commerce, and the log-
wood which the English bring to market has
funk so much in value, that their trade to the
Bay of Honduras has gradually declined r ince
it obtained a legal fancion; and, it is probable,
will soon be finally abandoned. In that event,
Yucatan and Honduras will become possessions of
considerable importance to Spain.

Still farther east than Honduras lie the two

provinces of Colta Rica and Veragua, which
likewise belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain;
but both have been so much neglefed by the
Spaniards, and are apparently of such small
value, that they merit no particular attention.

The most important province depending on the

vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas had
established their dominion in some of its norther.
diftriris; but in the greater part of the country,
its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants main-

P Trea:v of Paris, Art. xviii.
q RKal Cedula, Campomnnes, iii. I45,
' See NoTz CLXIII.

taicg!

tained their independence. The Spaniards, al-
lured by the fame of its opulence, early attempted
the conquest of it under Diego Almagro; and
after his death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the
Gdeign. Both met with fierce opposition. The
sorn;er relinquished the enterprize in the manner
which I have mentioned3. The latter, after
having given many displays, both of courage and
military skill, was cut off, together with a con-
:iderable body of troops under his command.
Francisco de Villagra, Valdivia's lieutenant, by
r.is spirited conduc, checked the natives in their
career, and saved the remainder of the Spaniards
from deftrucion. By degrees, all the champaign
country along the coast was fubje&ed to the
Spanifi dominion. The mountainous country
:; fill possessed by the Puelches, Araucos, and
,.tlcr tribes of its original inhabitants, formidable
:.cgilbours to the Spaniards; with whom, dur-
i.g the course of two centuries, they have been
Obiiged to maintain almost perpetual hostility,
iufpended only by a few intervals of insecure
peace.

That part of Chili then, which may properly
be deemed a Spanish province, is a narrow dif-
:rit, extended along the coast from the desert
D' Atacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the most delicious
n the New World, and is hardly equalled by
hat of any region on the face of the earth.
Though bordering on the Torrid Zone, it never
:rel th;e extremnity of heat, being screened on
'e east by the Andes, and refrcfhed from the
eCi; by cooling fea-breezes. The temperature

' Book vi, vol. ii . p. 4, &c.

H 3 of

of the air is so mild and equable, that the Spa.
niards give it the preference to that of the
southern provinces in their native country. The
fertility of the foil corresponds with the benig.
nity of the climate, and is wonderfully accom.
modated to European produ&ions. The moil
valuable of these, corn, wine, and oil, abound in
Chili, as if they had been native to the country.
All the fruits imported from Europe attain to
full maturity there. The animals of our hemif.
phere not only multiply, but improve in this
delightful region. The horned cattle are of
larger size than those of Spain. Its breed oi
horses surpasses, both in beauty and in spirit, the
famous Andalufian race, from which they sprung.
Nor has nature exhaulted her bounty on the fur.
face of the earth; (he has stored its bowels with
riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, ci
copper, and of lead, have been discovered in va-
rious parts of it.

A country diftinguiihed by so many blessings,

we may be apt to conclude, would early become
a favourite fation of the Spaniards, and must
have been cultivated with peculiar predilecion
and care. Instead of this, a great part of it re-
mains unoccupied. In all this extent of country,
there are not above eighty thousand white inha.
bitants, and about three times that number of
negroes and people of a mixed race. The mofi
fertile foil in America lies uncultivated, and
some of its most promising mines remain us.
wrought. Strange as this neglet of the Spa-
niards to avail themselves of advantages, which
seemed to court their acceptance, may appear,
the causes of it can be traced. The only intr'

c^....

course of Spain with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the
annual fleet to Porto-Bello. All the produce of
there colonies was shipped in the ports of Callao,
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried from
thence across the isthmus. All the commodi-
ties which they received from the mother-country,
were conveyed from Panama to the fame har-
bours. Thus both the exports and imports of
Chili passed through the hands of merchants
lettled in Peru. These had of course a profit on
each; and in both tranfations the Chilefe felt
their own subordination; and having no direct
intercourse with the parent fate, they depended
:Ipon another province for the disposal of their
productions, as well as for the supply of their
wants. Under such discouragements, popula-
tion could not increase, and induitrv was defti-
tute of one chief incitement. But now that
Spain, from motives which I shall mention here-
after, has adopted a new system, and carries on
her commerce with the colonies in the South
Sea, by ships which go round Cape Horn, a di-
rect intercourse is opened between Chili and the
mother-country. The gold, the silver, and the
other commodities of the province will be ex-
changed in its own harbours for the manufa&ures
of Europe. Chili may speedily rife into that
importance among the Spanish Settlements to
which it is entitled by its natural advantages.
It may become the granary of Peru, and the
other provinces along the Pacific Ocean. It
iray supply them with wine, with cattle, with
Lorfes, with hemp, and many other articles for
v,;uch they now depend upon Europe. Though

the

the new system has been established only a few
years, those effects of it begin already to be
observed'. If it shall be adhered to with any
steadiness for half a century, one may venture to
foretel, that population, induitry, and opu.
lence will advance in this province with rapid
progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of

Tucuman and Rio de la Plata border on Chili,
and like it were dependent on the vice-royalty
of Peru. These regions of immense extent
stretch in length from north to south above
thirteen hundred miles, and in breadth more
than a thousand. This country, which is larger
than mofl European kingdoms, naturally forms
itfclf into two great divisions, one on the north,
and the other on the south of Rio de la Plata.
The former comprehends Paraguay, the famous
missions of the Jesuits, and several other dii-
trids. But as disputes have long subsisted be.
tween the courts of Spain and Portugal, con-
cerning its boundaries, which, it is probable, wil
be soon finally ascertaincd, either amicably, or
by the decision of the sword, I chute to refcrve
my account of this northern division, until I
enter upon the history of Portuguese America,
with which it is intimately connected; and, ii
relating it, I shall be able, from authentic mate.
rials, supplied both by Spain and Portugal, to
give a full and accurate description of the ope-
rations and views of the Jeluits, in rearing that
singular fabric of policy in America, which has
drawn so much attention, and has been so im-
perfe&ly understood. The latter division of the

Camnpcmanes, ii. J57.

provir.c.

province contains the governments of Tucuman
and Buenos-Ayres, and to these 1 ihall at pre-
sent confine my observations.

The Spaniards entered this part of America

by the river De la Plata; and though a fuccef.
sion of cruel difalters besel them in their early
attempts to eftablifl their dominion in it, they
were encouraged to persist in the design, at first
by the hopes of discovering mines in the interior
country, and afterwards by the necessity of oc-
cupying it, in order to prevent any other nation
from fettling there, and penetrating by this rout
into their rich poffeflions in Peru. But except
at Buenos-Ayres, they have made no settlement
iof any consequence in all the vast space which
I have mentioned. There are, indeed, scattered
over it, a few places on which they have be-
Rowed the name of towns, and to which they
have endeavoured to add some dignity, by eret-
ing them into bishoprics; but they are no better
than paltry villages, each with two or three
hundred inhabitants. One circumitance, how.
ever, which was not originally foreseen, has con-
tributed to render this diftriA, though thinly peo-
pled, of considerable importance. The pro-
vince of Tucuman, together with the country
|to the south of the Plata, instead of being
covered with wood like other parts of America,
forms one extensive open plain, almoll without
atree. The foil is a deep fertile mould, watered

ry many streams descending from the Andes,

ad clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich
pasturage, the horses and cattle imported by the
Spaniards from Europe have multiplied to a
degree which almost exceeds belief. This has

enabled

enabled the inhabitants not only to open a In.
crative trade with Peru, by supplying it with
cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on a comn
merce no less beneficial, by the exportation of
hides to Europe. From both, the colony ha
derived great advantages. But its commodioul
situation for carrying on contraband trade, ha;
been the chief source of its prosperity. Whlk
the court of Madrid adhered to its ancient
fyftcm, with refpeA to its communication with
America, the river De la Plata lay so much ont
of the course of Spanish navigation, that inter.
loper>, almost without any ri(k of being eithe
observed or obftruced, could pour in Europta
manufa&ures in luch quantities, that they not
only supplied the wants of the colony, but wen
conveyed into all the eastern districts of Per.
When the Portuguese in Brasil extended thet
settlements to the banks of Rio de la Plata,
new channel was opened, by which prohibitsd
commodities flowed into the Spanish territorie,
with ftll mere facility, and in greater abunt
ance. This illegal traffic, however detrimen:Ti
to the parent state, contributed to the increax
of the fettlemrent, which had the immediate b.
nefit of it, and Buenos-Ayies became gradnuail
a populous and opulent town. What may )'
the effeE of the alteration lately made in tth
government of this colony, the nature of whicd
lhall be described in the subsequent Book, car,
not hitherto be known.

All the other territories of Spain in the Ner

World, the islands excepted, of whose difcovern
and reducion I have formerly given an account
are comprehended under two great divisions; ti

forrr.

former denominated the kingdom of Tierra
Firme, the provinces of which stretch along the
Atlantic, from the eallern frontier of New Spain
to the mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the
New kingdom of Granada, situated in the inte-
rior country. With a short view of these I {hall
close this part of my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

jet to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of
Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-
tinent that the Spaniards first began to plant
colonies, they have made no considerable pro-
grefs in peopling it. As the country is extremely
mountainous, deluged with rain during a good
part of the year, remarkably unhealthful, and
contains no mines of great value, the Spaniards
would probably have abandoned it altogether,
if they had not been allured to continue by the
excellence of the harbour of Porto-Bello on the
one sea, and that of Panama on the other.
These have been called the keys to the communi-
cation between the North and South Sea, be-
tween Spain and her most valuable colonies. In
consequence of this advantage, Panama has
become a considerable and thriving town. The
peculiar noxiousness of its climate has prevented
Porto-Lello from increasing in the fame propor-
tion. As the intercourse with the settlements in
the Pacitic Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-Bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourished
and enriched by that commerce to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
exiiience.

The

The provinces of Carthagena and Santa Mar.

tha stretch to the eastward of the isthmus of
Darien. The country fill continues mountain-
ous, but its rallies begin to expand, are weil
watered, and extremely fertile. Pedro de He-
redia fubjeted this part of America to the
crown of Spain, about the year 1532. It is
thinly peopled, and of course ill cultivated. It
produces, however, a variety of valuable drugs,
and some precious stones, particularly emeralds.
But its chief importance is derived from the har-
bour of Carthagena, the faftit and befl fortified
of any in the American dominions of Spain. In
a situation so favourable, commerce soon begaa
to sourish. As early as the year 15+1, it seems
to have been a town of some note. But when
Carthagena was chosen as the port in which the
galeons should first begin to trade on their ar.
rival from Europe, and to which they were
directed to return, in order to prepare for their
voyage homeward, the commerce of its ilha-
bitants was so much favoured by this arrange.
ment, that it soon became one of the most
populous, opulent, and beautiful cities in Ame.
rica. There is, however, reason to apprehend,
that it has reached its highest point of exaltation,
and that it will be so far asset&ed by the change
in the Spanifil system of trade with America,
which has withdrawn from it the desirable viiits
of the galeons, as to feel at least a temporary
decline. But the wealth now colleced there,
will soon find or create employment for itself,
and may be turned with advantage into some
new channel. Its harbour ;s so safe, and so

CGn-

conveniently situated for receiving commodities
from Europe, its merchants have been so long
accustomed to convey theie into all the adjacent
provinces, that it is probable they will itill retain
this branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to
be a city of great importance.

The province contiguous to Santa Martha on
the east, was firif visited by Alonfo de Ojeda,
in the year 1499 u; and the Spaniards, on their
landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian village built uon piles, in order to raise
them above the stagnated water which covered
the plain, were led to bestow upon it the name of
Venezuela, or Little Venice, -by their usual pro-
penfity to find a resemblance between what they
discovered in America, and the obje&s which
were familiar to them in Europe. They made
rome attempts to fettle there, but with little fuc-
cess. The final reducion of the province was ac-
complifhed by means very different from those to
which Spain was indebted for its other acquifi-
tiolns in the New World. The ambition of
Charles V. often engaged him in operations of
such variety and extent, that his revenues were
not sufficient to defray the expence of carrying
them into execution. Among other expedients
fLr supplying the deficiency of his funds, he had
borrowed large fums from the Velfers of Augf-
burgh, the most opulent merchants at that time
in Europe. By way of retribution for these, or
in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan, he
Leftowed upon them the province of Venezuela,
to be held as an hereditary fief from the crown of

u Book. ii. vol. i. p. 164.
VOL. IiI. a Cafile,

Castile, on condition that within a limited tini
they should render themselves masters of th',
country, and eftablifl a colony there. Unde
the dircction of such persons, it might have bet
expected, that a settlement would have bea
established on maxims very different from thoif
of the Spaniards, and better calculated to en
courage such useful industry, as mercantile prr.
prietors might have known to be the moil cer
tain source of prosperity and opulence. But ua
fortunately they committed the execution of thei
plan to some of those soldiers of fortune witi
which Germany abounded in the sixteenth cen
tury. These adventurers, impatient to amai
riches, that they might speedily abandon a ftatio
which they soon discovered to be very uncoa
sortable, inflead of planting a colony in order ti
cultivate and improve the country, wandere
from diftrit to district in search of mines, plus
dering the natives with unfeeling rapacity, o
opprefing them by the imposition of intolerabi
talks. In the course of a few years, their avaric
and exations, in comparison with which those c
the Spaniards were moderate, desolated the pre
vince so completely, that it could hardly affor
them fuLfiftence, and the Velfers relinquified
property from which the inconsiderate conduc c
their agents left them no hope of ever deriviri
any advantage x. When the wretched remainde
of the Germans deserted Venezuela, the Spani
ards again took poffefion of it; but notwitl
flanding many natural advantages, it is one c
their mofl languihing and unproductive itt:!I
nitllts.

C;tedc, Bagnos Hill de Veaezteli, p. i, &'c.

'FL

The provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are
ie lalt of the Spanish territories on this coast;
buat in relating the origin and operations of the
r.ercantile company, in which an exclusive right
cf trade with them has been vested, I shall heie-
cfpr have occasion to confider their Hate and
production s.

The New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an
ir.land country of great extent. This important
addition was made to the dominions of Spain
cbout the year 1536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar
a.d Gonzalo Ximenes de Quefada, two of the
braveRt and molt accomplished officers employed
in the conquest of America. The former, who
commanded at that time in Quito, attacked it
from the south; the latter made his invasion from
,anta Martha on the north. As the original
jliabitants of this region were farther advanced
in improvement, than any people in America
L t the Mexicans and Peruvians y, they defended
themselves with great resolution and good con-
uc&. The abilities and perseverance of Benal-
cazar and Quefada surmounted all opposition,
though not without encountering many dangers,
and reduced the country into the form of a
?panil province.
The New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele-
vated above the level of the sea, that though it
approaches almost to the equator, the climate is
remarkably temperate. The fertility of its val-
lies is not inferior to that of the richest diftrits
in America, and its higher grounds yield gold
and precious stones of various kinds. It is not
Cv digging into the bowels of the earth that this

1 Bookiv. vol. ii.p 40 o
&c.

i 2 gold

gold is found; it is mingled with the foil near the
surface, and separated from it by repeated wafn.
ing with water. This operation is carried on
wholly by negro slaves; for though the chill sub.
terranean air has been discovered, by experience,
to be so fatal to them, that they cannot be erm
plovcd with advantage in the deep silver mines,
they are more capable of performing the other
species of labour than Indians. As the nativer
in the New Kingdom of Granada are exemrpt
from that service, which has waited their race ls
rapidly in other parts of America, the countrn
is till remarkably populous. Some diftri&s yield
gold with a prufufion no lcfs wonderful than that
in the vale of Cineguilla, which I have formerly
mentiond, and it is often found in large pepita,
or grains, which manifest the abundance in which
it is produced. On a rising ground near Par,.
plona, single labourers have collctied in a day
what was equal in value to a thousand pefosz.
A late governor of Santa Fe brought with him
to Spain a lump of pure gold, estimated to be
worth seven hundred and forty pounds sterling.
This, which is, perhaps, the largest and findi
specimen ever found in the New World, is nor
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid. But
without founding any calculation on what is rar:
and extraordinary, the value of the gold ufualli
colleted in this country, particularly in the pro
vinceb cf Popayan and Choco, is of confiderab1'
amount. Its towns are populous and flourilh
ing. The number of inhabitants in almost ever
part of the country daily increases. Cultivatio:
z Picdrahita Hifi. de! N. Reno, p. 4S I. 5MS. penes mc.

anc:

# BOOK VIII.

Ad industry of various kinds begin to be en-
wuraged, and to prosper. A considerable trade
carried on with Carthagena, the produce of'
le mines, and other commodities, being con-
:red down the great river of St. Magdalen to
,at city. On another quarter, the New King-
am of Granada has a communication'with the
klantic by the river Orinoco; but the country
hich stretches along its 'banks towards the east,
little known, and imperfetly occupied by the
?aniards.

BOOK VIII.
A FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards in

their discoveries and conquests during more

:.Ln half a century, I have conducted them to
:hat period when their authority was eitablifhed
,.er almost all the vast regions in the New World
:.i subject to their dominion. The effec of
heir settlements upon the countlies of which
t:.v took poffeflion, the maxims which they
idoptcd in forming their new colonies, the in-
Icior ftrucure and policy of these, together with
:e influence of their progressive improvement
;?on the parent (ate, and upon the commercial
L.errcourie of nations, are the objecs to which
':e :;ow turn our attention.
The firi visible consequence of the eftab.
:r...nts made by the Spaniards in America,

hi hlie diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to
:'gree equally aftonifting and deplorable. I

1 3 have

have already, on different occafons, mention
the disastrous influence under which the conne.
tion of the Americans with the people of oK
hemisphere commenced, both in the islands, ai
in several parts of the continent, and have touchn
upon various causes of their rapid confumptio.
Wherever the inhabitants of America had refolu.
tion to take arms in defence of their liberty a*n
rights, many perished in the unequal contet
and were cut Off by their fierce invaders. Bu:
the greatest desolation followed after the fwor,
was Sheathed, and the conquerors were fettled i
tranquillity. It was in the islands, and in thoi
provinces of the continent which stretch fro=
the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines of Mexicc.
that the fatal effeas of the Spanish domini..:
were fir! and rrmft sensibly felt. All these we::
occupied either by wandering tribes of hunter.
ur by such as had made but small progress
cultivation and induftrv. When they were cor,.
pelled by their new maiters to take up a fixcc
residence, and to apply to regular labour; wh.
tasks were imposed upon them disproportione.d t.
their strength, and were exated with unrelen!.
ing severity, they possessed not vigour either ci
mind or of body to sustain this unusual load ci
oppression. Deje&ion and despair drove mart
to end their lives by violence. Fatigue and fa.
mine destroyed more. In all those extenfid:
regions, the original race of inhabitants wafted
away; in some it was totally extinguished. 1s
Mexico, where a powerful and martial peop':
distinguished their opposition to the Spaniard
by efforts of courage worthy of a better fate,
great numbers fell in the fieldd and there, zi

_,tn

well as in Peru, still greater numbers perifled
under the hardships of attending the Spanish
arnnies in their various expeditions and civil wars,
worn out with the incessant toil of carrying their
baggage, provisions, and military stores.

But neither the rage nor cnrelty of the Spa.

niards were so deftru&ive to the people of Mexico
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
they eftablilhed their new settlements. The for-
mer were temporary calamities, fatal to indivi-
duals; the latter was a permanent evil, which,
with gradual consumption, wafted the nation.
When the provinces of Mexico and Peru were
divided among the conquerors, each was eager
to obtain a diftria, from which he might expect
an instantaneous recompence for all his services.
Soldiers, accustomed to the carelessness and dif-
fipation of a military life, had neither industry
to carry on any plan of regular cultivation, nor
patience to wait for its flow but certain returns.
Instead of fettling in the vallies occupied by the
natives, where the fertility of the foil would have
amply rewarded the diligence of the planter, they
chose to fix their stations in some of the moun-
tainous regions, frequent both in New Spain and
in Peru. To search for mines of gold and silver,
was the chief objet of their a&ivity. The
profpe.s which this opens, and the alluring
hopes which it continually presents, correspond
wonderfully with the spirit of enterprize and
adventure that animated the first emigrants to
America in every part of their condut. In
order to push forward those favourite projeds, so
many hands were wanted, that the service of the
natives became indispensably recuifite. They

were

were accordingly compelled to abandon their an.
cient habitations in the plains, and driven in
crowds to the mountains. This sudden tranfi-
tion from the sultry climate of tile vallies, to the
chill penetrating air peculiar to high lands in the
torrid zone; exorbitant labour, scanty or un-
wholesome nourishment, and the despondency
occasioned by a species of oppreflion to which
they were not accustomed, and of which they
saw no end, affected them nearly as much as their
cfs industrious countrymen in the islands. They
funk under the united pressure of those calami-
ties, and melted away with almost equal rapi-
ditvz. In consequence of this, together with
the introducion of the small-pox, a malady un-
known in America, and extremely fatal to the
natives2, the number of people both in New
Spain and Pent was so much reduced, that in a
few years the accounts of their ancient popula-
tion appeared almost incredible b.

Such are the most considerable events and

causes which, by their combined operation, con-
tributed to depopulate America. Without at-
tending to these, many authors, astonished at the
suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed this
unexampled event to a system of policy no less
profound than atrocious. The Spaniards, as
the- pretend, conscious of their own inability to
occupy the vast regions which they had dif-
covered, and foreseeing the impoflibility of main.
taining their authority over a people infinitely
superior to themselves in number, in order to

z T-rqnemada, i. 6r . * B. Diaz, c. z4., Herrera,

dec. lib. x. c. . 'U;1a Entreten. 206. b Trr-
q,;-m. 615. 64z, 643. See NOTE CLXIV.

prefertve

preserve the possession of America, resolved to
estenninate the inhabitants, and by converting
a great part of the country into a desert, endea-
voured to secure their own dominion over it c.
But nations seldom extend their views to obje&s
so remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for
the honour of humanity we may observe, that
no nation ever deliberately formed such an exe-
crable scheme. The Spanilh monarchs, far from
aciing upon any such system of deftruftion, were
uniformly solicitous for the preservation of their
new fubjecs. With Isabella, zeal for propagat-
ing the Christian faith, together with the desire
of communicating the knowledge of truth, and
the consolations of religion, to people destitute
of spiritual light, were more than oitenfible mo-
tives for encouraging Columbus to attempt his
discoveries. Upon his success, she endeavoured
to fulfil her pious purpose, and manifested the
most tender concern to secure not only religious
inftruaion, but mild treatment, to that inoffen-
five race of men fubjetted to her crown d. Her
successors adopted the fame ideas; and, on many
occasions, which I have mentioned, their autho-
rity was interposed in the most vigorous exer-
tions, to protect the people oT America from
the oppreflion of their Spanili fubjeds. Their
regulations for this purpose were.numnerous, and
often repeated. They were framed with wisdom,
and dictated by humanity. After their poffcf-
sinns in the New World became so extensive, as
might have excited some apprehensions of diffi-
culty in retaining their dominion over them, the

c Se NOTE CLXV. d See No ra CLXVI.

spirit

spirit of their regulations was as mild as when their
settlements were confined to the islands alone.
Their solicitude to protec the Indians seems ra.
ther to have augmented as their acquisitions in-
creased; and from ardour to accomplish this,
they enaled, and endeavoured to enforce the
execution of laws, which excited a formidable
rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread
alarm and disaffection through all the reft. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be
controlled by the authority of laws. Rapacious
and daring adventurers, far removed from the
feat of government, little accufomed to the re-
ftraints of military discipline while in service, and
still less disposed to refpet the feeble jurifditiun
of civil power in an infant colony, despised or
elided every regulation that set bounds to their
exactions and tyranny. The parent state, with
persevering attention, issued edicts to prevent
the oppression of the Indians; the colonilts, re-
gardlefs of these, or trufing to their dillance
for impunity, continued to confider and treat
them as slaves. The governors themselves, and
other officers employed in the colonies, several of
whom were as indigent and rapacious as the ad-
venturers over whom they presided, were too apt
to adopt their contemptuous ideas of the con-
quered people; and instead of checking, en-
couraged or connived at their excesses. The
desolation of the New World should not then be
charged on the court of Spain, or be confidered
as the effec of any system of policy adopted
there. It ought to be imputed wholly to the
indigent and often unprincipled adventurers,
whose fortune it was to be the conquerors anr'

si..:

nrii planters of America, who, by measures no
i'fs inconsiderate than unjust, counteracted the
c;its of their sovereign, and have brought dif-
grace upon their country.

With fill greater injustice, have many authors

icprefented the intolerating spirit of the Roman
Catholic religion, as the cause of exterminating
:he Americans, and have accused the Spanilh ec-
clcfiaiics of animating their countrymen to the
::ughter of that innocent people, as idolators
a:id enemies of God. But the firit missionaries
v-who visited America, though weak and illiterate,
were pious men. They early espoused the de-
fence of the natives, and vindicated their charac-
ter from the aspersions of their conquerors, who,
describing them as incapable of being formed to
the offices of civil life, or of comprehending the
ductrines of religion, contended, that they were
a subordinate race of men, on whom the hand
of nature had set the mark of servitude. From
the accounts which I have given of the humane
and persevering zeal of the Spanish missionaries,
ia protecting the hclplefs flock committed to
their charge, they appear in a light which re-
fle&ts lutre upon their fun&ion. They were
Tniniilers of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the
rod from the hands of oppressors. To their
powerful interpolition, the Americans were in-
dcbted for every regulation tending to mitigate
ihe rigour of their fate. The clergy in the
,?an.ilh fcttlements, regular as well as secular,
..e Rill conlidercd by the Indians as their natural
;-ardians, to whom they have recourse under
.e iardfhips and exactions to which they are
- ,;ten exposed .

e See NOTE CLXVII.

But,

But, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation

of America, a very considerable number of t
native race still remains both in M exico and Peru,
especially in those parts which were not exposed
to the first fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated
by the first efforts of their industry, still more
ruinous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, and
the other delightful provinces of the Mexican
empire, which stretch along the South-sea, the
race of Indians is still numerous. Their fettle.
ments in some places are so populous, as to merit
the name of citiess. In the three audiences into
which New Spain is divided, there are at leai
two millions of Indians; a pitiful remnant, in.
deed, of its ancient population, but such as still
forms a body of people superior in number to
that of all the other inhabitants of this extensive
country In Peru several diflrids, particularly
in the kingdom of Quito, are occupied almost
entirely by Indians. In other provinces thre
are mingled with the Spaniards, and in many of
their settlements are almost the only persons who
pratife the mechanic arts, and fill most of the
inferior stations in society. As the inhabitant
both of Mexico and Peru were accustomed to a
fixed residence, and to a certain degree of regular
industry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European
modes of civil life. But wherever the Spaniardi
fettled among the savage tribes of America, thei
attempts to incorporate with them have beea
always fruitless, and often fatal to the natives
Impatient of restraint, and disdaining labour a
a mark of servility, they either abandoned the

f See NOTE CLXVIII. E See NOTZ CLXIX.

origln

original feats, and fought for independence in
mountains and foreits inaccessible to their oppref-
fors, or perished when reduced to a state repug-
nant to their ancient ideas and habits. In the
diftrits adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama, and
to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more general
than even in those parts of Mexico and Peru, of
which the Spaniards have taken molt full posses.
sion.

But the establishments of the Spaniards in the

New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabit-
ants, were made at a period when that monarchy
was capable of forming them to belt advantage.
Bv the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain
was become a powerful state, equal to so great
a:, undertaking. Its monarchs, having extended
thcir prerogative far beyond the limits which
once circumscribed the regal power in every king-
dom of Europe, were hardly fubje& to controul,
either in concerting or in executing their mea-
fures. In every wide extended empire, the form
of government must be limple, and the sovereign
authority such, that its resolutions may be taken
with promptitude, and may pervade the whole
with sufficient force. Such was the power of
the Spanish monarchs, when they were called to
deliberate concerning the mode of eitablifhing
their dominion over the molt remote provinces,
which had ever been fubjeEted to any European
state. In this deliberation, they felt themselves
under no constitutional reitraint, and that, as in-
dependent masters of their own resolves, they
might issue the edi&s requiiite for modelling the
government of the new colonies, by a mere at
of prerogative.

VOL. ill. K Tbii

This early interposition of the Spanish crown.

in order to regulate the policy and trade of it
colonies, is a peculiarity which diltinguifhes their
progress from that of the colonies of any othe
European nation. When the Portuguese, the
English, and French, took possession of the re.
gions in America which they now occupy, the
advantages which these promised to yield wvere
so remote and uncertain, that their colonies were
fuffcred to itruggle through a hard infancy,
alioft without guidance or proterfion from the
parent state. But gold and silver, the first pro.
dutions of the Spanish efttlements in the New
World, were more alluring, and immediately at.
tra&ed the attention of their monarchs. Though
they had contributed little to the discovery, and
almotl nothing to the conquelt of the New
W'orld, they inRtantly afflmcd the function of
its lcgillators; and having acquired a fpecis
of dominion formerly unknown, they formed a
plan for exercifilg it, to which nothing similar
occurs in the history of human affairs.

The fundamental maxim of Spanilh jurifpru.

dence with refped to Amelica, is to conlider
what has been acquired there as veiled in the
crown, rather than il the tate. By the bull ol
Alexander VI. on v. iic!i, as its great charter,
Spain founded it: right, all the regions that had
been, or should bc discovered, were bestowed as
a free gift upon Ferdinand and Ifabeila. They
and their fucceflors were uniformly held to be
the universal proprietors of the vail territories,
which the arms of their subjects conquered in the
New World. From them, all grants of land th!.e
flowed, and to tlhem they filailv returned. 'Th

Ica&-'

ikaders who conduced the various expeditions,
the governors who presided over the different
colonies, the officers ofjuftice, and the ministers
of religion, were all appointed by their autho-
rity, and removable at their pleasure. The peo-
ple who composed infant settlements were en-
titled to no privileges independent of their fove-
reign, or that served as a barrier againti the
power of the crown. It is true, that when towns
were built, and formed into bodies corporate,
the citizens were permitted to tlect their own
ragifirates, who governed them by laws which
the community enaced. Even in the most def-
potic flates, this feeble spark of liberty is not
cxtinguifhed. But in the cities of Spanish Ame-
:ca, this jurifdiEtion is merely municipal, and is
c-fiined to the regulation of their own interior
r'mmerce and police. In whatever relates to
ab!lic government, and the general interest, the
'iil of tie fovercign is law. No political power
criginates from the people. All centers in the
c-own, and in the officers of its nomination.

When the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-

srica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
the plan of internal policy for their new domi-
rions, divided them into two immense govern-
mnents, one subjea to the viceroy of New Spain,
the other to the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdic-
:ion of the former extended over all the provinces
belonging to Spain in the northern division of
the American continent. Under that of the
=atter, was comprehended whatever she possessed
in South America. This arrangement, which,
{rom tile beginning, was attended with many in-
onveniencies, became intolerable when the rc-

K 2 ic.te

mote provinces of each vice-royalty began to
improve in induftrv and population. The peo.
ple complained of their fuhje&tion to a superior,
whofc place of residence was so distant, or so i-
accessible, as almolt excluded them from any in-
tercourfe with the feat of government. The au.
thority of the viceroy over diftrids so far re-
moved from his own eye and observation, was
unavoidably both feeble and ill dire&ed. As z
remedy for those evils, a third vicerovaltv hat
been established in the present century, at Santo
Fe de Bogota, the capital of the new kingdon
of Granada, the iurifdition of which extends
over the whole kingdom of Tierra Firme, aal
the province of Quitoh. Those viceroys no:
only represent the person of their sovereign, be
possess his regal prerogatives within the precindi
of their own governments, in their utmolt extent.
Like him, they exercise supreme authority u
every department of government, civil, military,
and criminal. They have the sole right of nomi-
nating the persons who hold many offices of the
higheit importance, and the occasional privileg:
of supplying those which, when they become
vacant by death, are in the royal gift, until the
fucceifor appointed by the king shall arrive.
The external pomp of their government is suited
to its real dignity and power. Their courts an
formed upon tle model of that at Madrid, witD
horse and foot guards, a household regularl.
established, numerous attendants, and ensigns d
command, displaying such magnificence, as-hari
1" retains the appearance of delegated autboh

, ,; y.de .TIl-,^. , ;. UL'!'a,Voy. .. C43. Ga;'6!

B:

But as the viceroys cannot discharge in person

the funtions of a supreme magistrate in every
pat of their extensive jurifdiEtion, they are aided
ji their government by officers and tribunals
firilar to those in Spain. The conduc of civil
affairs in the various provinces and districts, into
which the Spanish dominions in America are di-
vided, is committed to magistrates of various
orders and denominations; rome appointed by
the king, others by the viceroy, but all subje&t
to the command of the latter, and amenable to
is jurifdicion. The administration ofjuftice is
veiled in tribunals, known by the name of Audi-
r c:, and formed upon the model of the court of
Thanccry in Spain. These are eleven in num-

, and dispense justice to as many diftrics, into
hiich the Spanish dominions in America are
',id The number of judges in the court
Audience is various, according to the extent

1. d importance of their jurifdiaion. The station

no less honourable than lucrative, and is com-
ionly filled by persons of such abilities and merit
, renders this tribunal extremely refpetable.
cthi civil and criminal causes come under their
ognizance, and for each peculiar judges are set
part. Though it is only in the moit defDotic
overnments, that the fovercign exercises in per-
n the formidable prerogative of administering
u';ce to his fubjeEs, and in absolving, or con-
lnning, consults no law but what is deposited
n his own breafi; though, in all the monarchies
)f Europe, judicial authority is committed to
agiuratts, vhdofe decisions are regulated by

k See NOTE CLXX.

Y 3 known

known laws and established forms, the Spani.
vicerovs have often attempted to intrude them.
selves into the feat of juflice, and with an ambi-
tion which their dillance from the controul of
a superior rendered bold, have aspired to a
power which their mailer does not venture to
assume. In order to check an usurpation which
rmuft have annihilated jdftice and security in the
Spanith colonies, by fubjecing the lives and pro-
perty of all to the will of a single man, the vice-
roys have been prohibited, in the most explicir
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the
judicial proceedings of the courts of Audience,
or from delivering an opinion, or giving a voice
with refpc-t to any point litigated befole them!.
In some particular cafes, in which any queition
of ci;il right is involved, even the political regu-
lations of the viceroy may be brought under the
review of the court of Audience, which, in thóe.
instances, may be deemed an intermediate pow-e
placed between him and the people, as a con:;.-
tutional barrier to circumscribe is jurisdiction.
But as legal restraints on a person who reprefer.,'
the sovereign, and is clothed with his authority,
are little suited to the genius of Spanilh policy;
the hesitation and reserve with which it consen
this power on the courts of Audience are re.
markable. They may advise, they may temon.
firate; but, in the event of a dire&t collision be.
tween their opinion and the will of the viceroy,
what he determines must be carried into execc.
tion, and nothing remains for them, but to la;
the matter before the king and the council o:

R-cop. lib. ii. tit x. I. . 5 . 44. lib. iii. :i. i.
1. 36, 37.

t'2

the Indies m. But to be entitled to remonstrate,
and inform against a person, before whom all
others mutl be silent, and tamely submit to his
decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to the
courts of Audience. This is farther augmented
by another circumstance. Upon the death of a
viceroy, without any provision of a successor by
the king, the supreme power is vested in the court
ot Audience resident in the capital of the vice-
rovaltv, and the senior judge, affilted by his bre-
ithren, exercises all the functions of the viceroy
while the office continues vacant". In matters
which come under the cognizance of the Audi-
ences, in the course of their ordinary jurifdi&ion,
as courts of juittice, their sentences are final in
every litigation concerning property of less value
than fix thousand pesos; but when the subjec in
di!putes exceeds that fum, their decisions are
subject to review, and may be carried by appeal
before the royal council of the Indies ".

In this council, one of the moll considerable in

the monarchy for dignity and power, is veted
t..U fiipreme government of all the Spanilh do-
inioiins in America. It was firit established by
Ferdinand, in the year T511, and brought into
a more perfect form by Charles V. in the year
1524. Its jurifdiscion extends to ever) depart-
ment, ecclefiasical, civil, military, and com-
mercial. All laws and ordinances relative to the
government and police of the colonies originate
there, and mult be approved of by two-thirds of

'.- 5,)rz. de Jute Ini. :ib. iv c. 3. n. 40. 41. Recip.

Eb.. ii. ti v. 1. 3i . iib. iii t t. iii i. 34. lib v. tit . is . 1 ..

.' e c.;p. lib. ii. t,t. x . 1. 57, &c. - R:cOp. iib, v. it xiii.
i. I,&c.

known laws and established forms, the Span'a
viceroys have often attempted to intrude them.
selves into the feat of justice, and with an ambi.
tion which their dillance from the controul of
a superior rendered bold, have aspired to a
power which their mailer does not venture to
assume. In order to check an usurpation which
must have annihilated jdftice and security in the
Spanish coloniis, by subjecting the lives and pro.
perty of all to the will of a tingle man, the vice.
roys have been prohibited, in the most explicit
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the
judicial proceedings of the courts of Audience,
or from delivering an opinion, or giving a voice
with refpe& to any point litigated befoie then!.
In some particular cafes, in which any quefiion
of ciiil right is involved, even the political regu.
lations of the viceroy may be brought under the
review of the court of Audience, which, in thce:
instances, may be deemed an intermediate powv
placed between him and the people, as a consi".
tutional barrier to circumscribe his urifdiction.
But as legal restraints on a person who repreter.:
the fovercegn, and is clothed with hil authority,
are little suited to the genius of Spanilh policy;
the hesitation and reserve with which it consen
this power on the court. of Audience are re.
markable. They may advise, they may lemon.
ftrate; but, in the event of a dire& collision be.
tween their opinion and the will of the viceror,
what he determines must be carried into exec'c
tion, and nothing remains for them, but to I-;
the matter before the king and the council o:

X Rtcop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35. 38. 44 lib. iii. :i- i.
1. 36, 37.

Lhe Indiesm. But to be entitled to remonstrate,
and inform againlt a person, before whom all
others murt be silent, and tamely submit to his
decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to the
courts of Audience. This is farther augmented
bv another circumstance. Upon the death of a
vicerov, without any provision of a successor by
the king, the supreme power is veited in the court
of Audience refidtnt in the capital of the vice-
royalty, and the senior judge, assisted by his bre.
thien, exercises all the functions of the viceroy
while the office continues vacant". In matters
which come under the cognizanze of the Audi-
ences, in the course of their ordinary jurifdicion,
as courts of justice, their sentences are final in
evenr litigation concerning property of less value
than fix thousand pesos; but when the fubje& in
disputes exceeds that fum, their decisions are
subject to review, and may be carried by appeal
bcfore the royal council of the Indies o.

In this council, one of the moil considerable in

the monarchy for dignity and power, is vetted

.i upreme government of all the Spanish do-
minions in Armerica. It was first eftablilhed by
Ferdinand, in the year 1l i, and brought into
a more perfect form by Charles V. in the year
15z4. Its jurifdition extends to ever) depart-
ment, ecclesiastical, civil, rmiitary, and com-
mercial. All laws and ordinances relative to the
government and police of the colonies originate
there, and mull be approved of by two-thirds of

' S .rz. de Ju.e Ind. :ib. iv c. 3. n. 40. 41. Recp.

l .;;. Uit xv. 1. 3ó. lib. iil tt. iii. i. 34. lib v. tit. ix. I. T.
' .'.

~ e p. lib. ii. t. xv. 1. 51, 7 &c. : R: p. sib. v. it x:ii.
i. :, 'c.

thl

the members, before they are issued in the name
of the king. All the offices, of which the no.
mination is referred to the crown, are conferred
in this council. To it each person employed in
America, from the viceroy downwards, is ac.
countable. It reviews their conduct, reward3
their services, and inflicts the punishments due to
their malversations P. Before it, is laid what.
ever intelligence, either public or secret, is re.
ceived from America, ard every scheme of im-
proving the administration, the police, or the
commerce of the colonies, is submitted to its
consideration. From the first institution of the
council of the Indies, it has been the constant
objec of the catholic monarchs to maintain its
authority, and to make such additions from time
to time. both to its power and its splendor, as
might render it formidable to all their fubjeAs in
the New World. Whhatever degree of public
order and virtue still remains in that countr-,
where so many circumstances conspire to relax
the former, and to corrupt the latter, may be
ascribed in a great measure to the wife regula.
tions and vigilant infpecion of this refpeaable
tribunal q.

As the king is supposed to be always present

in his council of the Indies, its meetings are held
in the place where he resides. Another tribunal
has been instituted, in order to regulate such
commercial affairs as required the immediate and
personal infpedion of those appointed to super-
intend them. This is called Casa de la Conirn-
tacion, or the house of trade, and was eftablilhcd

p Rtcop lib. ii. rti. ii. 1. r, z, &c.
q Solrz. de Jure Ind. i:b. iv. 1. 12.

ir

. Seville, the port to which commerce with the
qew W orld was confined, as early as the year
:ci. It may be confidered both as a board of
rade, and as a court ofjudicature. In the former
rapacity, it takes cognizance of whatever relates
:o the intercourse of Spain with America, it le-
-ulates what commodities should be exported
hither, and has the inspection of such as are
received in return. It decides concerning the
departure of the fleets for the Weft Indies, the
freight and burden of the (hips, their equipment
sd- destination. In the latter capacity, it judges
with retfde to every question, civil, commercial,
or criminal, arising in consequence of the tranf-
aciions of Spain with America; and in both these
cepartm- nts, its decisions are exempted from the
re;iew of any court but that of the council of the
Indies'.

Such is the great outline of that f-ftem of

gave: rmnt, which Spain has established in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
f-bJ(rdinate boards and officers employed in the
aJmriniftration ofjuftice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
the country; to dcfcribc their different functions,
and to inquire into the mode and effect of their
operations; would prove a detail no less intricate
than minute, and uninteresting.

The first objet of the Spanish monarchs was

to secure the productions of the colonies to the
parent state, by an absolute prohibition of any
intcrconlfe with foreign nations. They took
poTefflion of America bv right of conquelt, and

Recop. lib. ix. it. . Vciia Nr:ce de Li Contratacion,

consciouS

conscious net only of the feebleness of their in
sant settlements, but aware of the difficulty in
eftablifh;ng their dominion over regions so exten
five, or in retaining so many reluctant nationi
under the yoke, they dreaded the intrusion oi
l-rangers; they even shunned their infpecion,
and endeavoured to keep them at a distance fron
their coasts. This spirit of jealousy and excle
sion, which at first was natural, and perhap
necessary, augmented as their poffefflons in Arnm
rica extended, and the value of them came to b(
more fully underltood. In consequence of it,
fvftem of colonizing was introduced, to which
there had hitherto been nothing similar among
mankind. In the ancient world, it was not un
common to f£nd forth colonies. But they were ol
two kinds only. They were either migrations,
which fenred to difburder a state of its fuperflu
ous subjects, when they multiplied too fait for
the territory which they occupied; or they were
military detachments, stationed as garrisons, in
a conquered province. The colonies of some
Greek republics, and the swarms of northern
barbarians which fettled in different parts of Eu-
rope, were of the firit species. The Roman
colonies were of the second. In the former, the
connection with the mother-country quickly
ceased, and they became independent itates. In
the latter, as the disjundcion was not complete,
the dependence continued. In their American
settlements, the Spanilh monarchs took what
was peculiar to each, and tfudied to unite them.
By fending colonies to regions so remote, by
eilabkli'ing in each a form of interior policy and
adrmniniration, under difiind governors, and with

peculiar

peculiar laws, they disjoined them from the mo-
thcr-country. By retaining in their own hands
the rights of legislation, as well as that of im-
posing taxes, together with the power of nomi-
nating the persons who illed every department
of executive government, civil or military, they
secured their dependence upon the parent state.
Happily for Spain, the situation of her colonies
was such, as rendered it possible to reduce this
new idea into praEtice. Almolt all the countries
which she had discovered and occupied, lay with-
in the tropics. The productions of that large
portion of the globe are different from those of
Europe, even in its most southern provinces.
The qualities of the climate and of the foil natu-
rally turn the industry of such as fettle there into
new channels. When the Spaniards firit took
polteffion of their dominions in America, the pre-
cious metals which they yielded, were the only
ob;ed that attrated their attention. Even when
t.clr efforts began to take a better diretion, they
j tploved themselves almost wholly in rearing
f!.rh peculiar produ&tions of the climate, as, from
their rarity or value, were of chief demand in
the mother-country. Allured by vast profpeats
of immediate wealth, they disdained to waste
their industry on what was less lucrative, but of
fiptrior moment. In order to render it impoffi-
bie to correc this error, and to prevent them
from making any efforts in industry which might
i;terfere with those of the mother-country, the
itablifhment of several fpccics of manufacures,
i d even the culture of the vine, or olive, are
I.:uohbized in the Spanish colonies', under severe

9 See NOTE CLXXI.

penalties.

penalties . They mull trust entirely to the mo-
ther-country for the objets of primary necessity.
Their clothes, their furniture, their inifruments
of labour, their luxuries, and even a confider.
able part of the provisions which they confunme
were imported from Spain. During a great part
of the sixteenth century, Spain, possessing an es.
tensive commerce and flounihing manufatures,
could supply with ease the growing demands of
her colonies, from her own flores. The produce
of their mines and plantations was given in ex
change for these. But all that the colonies re
ceivcd, as well as all that they gave, was con.
veyed in Spanilh bottoms. No vessel belonging
to the colonies was ever permitted to cam- the
commodities of America to Europe. Even tih
commercial intercoufS of one colony with ano
thcr, was either absolutely prohibited, or limited
by many jealous rellrictions. All that Americ
yields flow\\s into the ports of Spain; all that i
consumes mutl issue from them. No foreizne
can enter its colonies without express permission
no vessel of any foreign nation is received int
their harbours; and the pains of death, wi.
confiscation of moveablts, are denounced again,
every inhabitant who presumes to trade wki'
them .. Thus the colonies are kept in a fiat
of perpetual pupillage; and by the introductii;
of this commercial dependence, a refinement i
policy of which Spain fct the firit example t
the European nations, the supremacy of th
parent state hath been maintained over remo:
colonies during two centuries and a half.

t B. Ulloa Rcetb Jes Manus. c. D. 206.
R eccpil. lib. ix. ti.. xxvii. i. i. ', &c.

S';'

Such are the capital maxims to which the Spa-

ai!h monarchs seem to have attended in forming
jhler new settlements in America. But they

:ouid not plant with the fame rapidity that they

iad dettroyed; and from many concurring causes,
:heir progress has been extremely flow, in filling
,p the immense void which their devastations had
ccainoned. As soon as the rage for discovery
and adventure began to abate, the Spaniards
Dpened their eyes to dangers and distresses, which
it first they did not perceive, or had despised.
The numerous hardships with which the mem-
bcrs of infant colonies have to struggle, the dif-
Rnis of unwholesome climates, fatal to the con-
ftitution of Europeans; the difficulty of bring-

in: a country, covered with forests, into cul-
,ure; the want of hands necessary for labour in
fn.e provinces, and the flow reward of industry,
i ail unless where the accidental discovery of
,.ines enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were
tvil; universally felt and magnified. Discouraged

|v the view of these, the spirit of migration was

I much damped, that sixty years after the dif-
iJvery of the New World, the number of Spani-
9:ds in all its provinces is computed not to have
xceeded fifteen thousand x
The mode in which property was distributed
the Spanish colonies, and the regulations eftab-
:hed with refpecf to the transmission of it, whe-
iser by descent or by sale, were extremely un-
aourable to population. In order to promote
rapid increase of people in any new settlement,
'Jjpertv in land ought to be divided into small
.irs, and the alienation of it should be ren-

See NOTE CLXXII.
-| ' ,:i. . dercd

dered extremely eafyr. But the rapaciousnd
of the Spanish conquerors of the New Wori
paid no regard to this fundamental maxim o
policy; and, as they possessed power, which er.
abled them to gratify the utmost extravagance
of their wishes, many seized diltricts of great exl
tent, and held them as encomiendar. By degren
they obtained the privilege of converting a pan
of these into Mayorafgor, a species of fief, intr.
duced into the Spanish fyitem of feudal juri.
prudence , which can neither be divided not
alienated. Thus a great portion of landed pro
perty, under this rigid form of entail, is with.
held from circulation, and descends from fatha
to son unimproved, and of little value either to
the proprietor or to the community. In th
account which I have given of the reduction a
Peru, various examples occur of enormous tram
of country occupied by some of the conquerors'.
The excesses in other provinces were similar, fa
as the value of the lands which the Spaniards ac.
quired, was originally estimated according to th
number of Indians which lived upon them, Amt.
rica was in general so thinly peopled, that oni
diftrids of great extent could afford such a nun
ber of labourers as might be employed in th
mines with any prospect of coniiderable gai.
The pernicious effe&s of those radical errors ii
the ditnribution and nature of property in t
Spanish settlements, are felt through every d.
partment of industry, and may he confidereda
one great cause of a progress in population i

r Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. I66. z Recop. 1.. P-
tit. ii. 1. z+.. ' L ,,k vi. p. 395'

ns.'

.uch flower than that which has taken place in
etter constituted colonies b.
To this we may add, that the support of the
,normous and expensive fabric of their ecclefiafti-
:al etabliihment, has been a burden on the
Spanirn colonies, which has greatly retarded the
r;grtf'l of population and industry. The pay-
-.cnt of tithes is a heavy tax on industry; and if
he exacmion of them be not regulated and cir-
:unfcribed by the wisdom of the civil magistrate,
: becomes intolerable and ruinous. But instead
js any restraint on the claims of ecclefiatlics, the
.considerate zeal of the Spanish legiflatoTs ad-
,.i:ted them into America in their full extent,
.nd at once imposed on their infant colonies a
burden which is in no flight degree oppressive to
[ociety, even in its molt improved itate. As
early as the year 1501, the payment of tithes in
ic colonies was enjoined, and the mode of it
regulated by law. Every article of primary
peceffity, towards which the attention of new
settlers must naturally be turned, is fubje&ed to
that grievous exaction c. Nor were the demands
pi the clergy confined to articles of simple and
2afy culture. Its more artificial and operose
roduAions, such as sugar, indigo, and cochi-
peal, were soon declared to be tithable ; and
.hus the induitry of the planter was taxed in
:'ery stage of its progress, from its rudest essay
o its highest improvement. To the weight of
.is legal imposition, the bigotry of the Ame-
ican Spaniards has made many voluntary addi-
ons. From their fond delight in the external

' Se NnoTE CLXXiII. c Rccap. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. z.
'tco?. b. i. tit. x.v. 1. 3 and 4.

L 2 pomp

pomp ard parade of religion, and from super.
tious reverence for eccleiiaftics of every denoti.
.atior., they have bestowed profuse donatives .:
churches and monasteries, and have unprofitab;l
waited a large proportion of that wealth, which
might have nourished and given vigour to prr,
ductive labour in growing colonies.

But so fertile and inviting are the regions c

America which the Spaniards have occupied, tha,
not-withstanding all the circumstances which hat:
checked and retarded population, it has gradual
incrcared, and filled the colonies of Spain wv'i
citizens of various orders. Among these, the Spz.
niards, who arrive from Europe, distinguished IT
the name of Chapetones, are the first in rank a:
power. From the jealous attention of the Sparii
court to secure the dependence of the colonies oc
the parent slate, all departments of confequene
are filled by persons sent from Europe; and, i
order to prevent any of dubious fidelity from t.
ing employed, each must bring proof of a cle
dercent from a family of Old Chritfians, untain't
with any mixture of Jcwifh or Mahometan bloc-
and never disgraced by any censure of thei:
quifition '. In such pure hands, power is deemt
to be safely lodged, and almost every public fu::
tion, from the viceroyalty downwards, is co7
mitted to them alone. Every person, \who b
his birth, or residence in America, may be f,:
petcd of any attachment or interest adverfeti
the mother-country, i; the object of diftruftR
such a degree, as am.unts nearlv to an exclul-
from all offices o, confidence or authority f. b

' Recopil. lb. ix. it. xx@i. 1. 15, I6.
' Sce oT£ CLXXIV.

his conspicuous prediletion of the court, the
Chapetones are raised to such pre-eminence in
America, that they look down with disdain on
every other order of men.

The characer and Rfate of the Creoles, or de-
fiendants of Europeans fettled in America, the
sicond class of subje&s in the Spanish colonies,
have enabled the Chapetones to acquire other ad-
vantages, hardly less considerable than those
which they derive from the partial favour of go-
vernment. Though some of the Creolian race
are descended from the conquerors of the New
World; though others can trace up their pedi-
gree to the noblest families in Spain; though
many are poifeffed of ample fortunes, yet, by
the enervating influence of a sultry climate, by
the rigour of a jealous government, and by their
despair of attaining that diftintion to which
mankind naturally aspire, the vigour of their
minds is so entirely broken, that a great part of
them watte life in luxurious indulgencies, mingled
with an illiberal fuperfition still more debating.
Languid and unenterprifing, the operations of
an active extended commerce would be to them
so cumbersome and oppressive, that in almost
every part of America they decline engaging in
it. The interior traffic of every colony, as well
as any trade which is permitted with the neigh-
bouring provinces, and with Spain itself, are
carried on chiefly by the Chapetones g; who, as
the recompence of their industry, amass immense
wealth, while the Creoles, funk in sloth, are satis.
fed with the revenues of their paternal estates.
I Voy. de Ulloa, i. 27. 25x. Voy. de Frezicr, 227.

L 3 From

From this flated competition for power and

wealth between those two orders of citizens, and
the various passions excited by a rivalfhlp so intr.
refting, their hatred is violent and implacable.
On every occasion, symptoms of this aversion
break out, and the common appellations which
each bellows on the other, are as contemptuou;
as those which flow from the most deep-rooted
national antipathy h. The court of Spain, from
a refinement of distrustful policy, cherishes those
feeds of discord, and foments this mutual jea.
lousy, which not only prevents the two mofi
powerful classes of its subjects in the New World
from combining ag3inft the parent state, but
prompts each, with the most vigilant zeal, to ob-
icrc- the motions and to counteract the fcherr.es
of the other.

The third class of inhabitants in the Spani:

colonies is a mixed race, the offspring either oi
an European and a negro, or of an European
and Irdian, the former called Mulattocs, the lat.
ter MJ/fl'zos. As the court of Spain, folicitou
to incorporate its new vassals with its anciert
fubjectts, early encouraged the Spaniards fettlcd
in America to marry the natives of that country
fevcral alliances of this kind were formed in thci
infant colonies'. But it has been more owing tc
licentious indulgence, than to compliance witt
this injunction of their sovereigns, that thl
r.ixed breed has multiplied so greatly, as to co-
ii;tute a considerable part of the population ii
all the Spanish fcttlements. The several stag¢
c- descent in this race, and the gradual variatio'

Gag', Survey,p.9. Frezier, z6. i Recopi!. lib.,

t . .:.. =.. r.

l r-i ,

: c
, . lib. v. c. z. Dec. 3. lib. i,. c.

,f shade until the African black, or the copper
:olour of America, brighten into an European
:omplexion, are accurately marked by the Spa-
liards, and each distinguished by a peculiar name.
rhofe of the first and second generations are
:onfidered, and treated as mere India-ns and Ne-
groes; but in the third descent, the charader-
itic hue of the former disappears; and in the
Efth, the deeper tint of the latter is so entirely
effaced, that they can no longer be distinguished
from Europeans, and become entitled to all their
privilegesk. It is chiefly by this mixed race,
whose frame is remarkably robust and hardy, that
the mechanic arts are carried on in the Spanish
fittlements, and other adcive funcions in society
are discharged, which the two higher classes of
citizens, from pride or from indolence, disdain
to tx<rcife I.

The negroes hold the fourth rank among the

;-habitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro-
ciction of that unhappy part of the human fpe-
cies into America, together with their services
and sufferings there, (hall be fully explained in
ar.other place; here they are mentioned chiefly,
in order to point out a peculiarity in their fitua-
tion under the Spanish dominion. In several of
their settlements, particularly in New Spain, ne-
groes are moitly employed in domestic service.
They form a principal part in the train of luxury,
and are cherished and caressed by their superiors,
to ihofe vanity and pleasures they are equally
fiblcrvient. Their dress and appearance are
Lardly less splendid than that of their mafiers,

k Voy. de UUoa, i. p. 27. 1 Ibid. i. 29. Voy. de Bou-
p.':, p. c4. Melcanez, Teforos Vcrdaderos, L 354.

whose

whose manners they imitate, and whose paffio
they imbibe '. Elevated by this diftinciou,
they have assumed such a tone of superiority ov
the Indians, and treat them with such insolent
and scorn, that the antipathy between the two
races has become implacable. Even in Pen,
where negroes seem to be more numerous, ara
are empl yed in field-work as well as domefti
service, they maintain their ascendant over the
Indians, and the mutual hatred of one to the
other subsists with equal violence. The law
have industriously fomented this averion,to whici
accident gave rife, and, by molt rigorous injunc.
tions, have endeavoured to prevent every into.
course that might form a bond of union betwen
the two races. Thus, by as artful policy, the
Spaniards derive strength from that circumftanc:
in population which is the weakness of other Eu.
ropean colonies, and have secured as affociatt
and defenders, those very persons who ellewher.
are obje&ts ofjealoufy and terror n.

The Indians form the last, and the mofl de

pressed order of men in the country, which bx.
longed to their ancestors. I have already tracd
the progress of the Spanish ideas with respect u
the condition and treatment of that people, an'
have mentioned the most important of their mo-
early regulations, concerning a matter of so mud
consequence in the administration of their ne;
dominions. But since the period to which I hav
brought down the hiltory of America, the i:
formation and experience acquired during twr

Gage, p. 56. Voy. de U;loa, i. 451.

a Recopil. lib..vii. tit. v. 1. 7. H rera, dec. 8. lib.i
. z.. Frexicr, 244.

centur;Ae

Cnturies, have enabled the court of Spain to

,lke such improvements in this part of its Ame-
ian system, that a short view of the present con-
ition of the Indians may prove both curious and
iteretili g.

By the famous regulations of Charles V. in
:542, which have been so often mentioned, the
uigh pretensions of the conquerors of the New
r'orld, who confidered its inhabitants as slaves,
:o whose service they had acquired a full right
;f property, were finally abrogated. From that
period, the Indians have been reputed freemen,
and entitled to the privileges of fubjets. When
admitted into this rank, it was deemed just,
that they should contribute towards the sup-
port and improvement of the society which had
adopted them as members. But as no con-
fidcrable benefit could be expected from the
voluntary efforts of men unacquainted with re-
gular industry, and averse to labour, the court
of Spain found it necessary to fix and secure, by
proper regulations, what it thought reasonable
to exaft from them. With this view, an annual
tax was imposed upon every male, from the age
of eighteen to fifty; and at the fame time, the
nature as well as the extent of the services which
they might be required to perform, were afcer-
tained with precision. This tribute varies in dif-
ferent provinces; but if we take that paid in New
Spain as a medium, its annual amount is nearly
four (hillings a head ; no exorbitant fum in coun-
tries where, as at the source of wealth, the value
oI nr;-oiey is extremely low Q. The right of levy-

See NoTE CLXXV. Recopil. lib. vi. tit.. 1. 42.
j Ha :.i)t, vol. iii. p. 461.

ing

ing this tribute likewise varies. In America
every Indian is either an immediate vassal of t;
crown, or depends upon some subjef to whoz
the diftrid in which he resides has been grantd
for a limited time, under the denomination of a
encomlenla. In the former cafe, about three-fourth
of the tax is paid into the royal treasury; in the
latter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the
holder of the grant. When Spain first took poi.
fellion of America, the greater part of it w-,
parcelled out among its conquerors, or those who
firfl fettled there, and but a small portion re.
served for the crown. As those grants which
were made for two lives only P, reverted fucctf.
fively to the sovereign, he had it in his powe:
either to diffuse his favours by grants to new
proprietors, or to augment his own revenue by
valuable annexations q. Of these, the latter hai
been frequently chosen ; the number of Indiarn
now depending immediately on the crown, i
much greater than in the first age after the con.
quefl, and this branch of the royal revenue con.
tinues to extend.

The benefit arising from the services of the

Indians accrues either to the crown, or to the
holder of the encomienda, according to the fane
rule observed in the payment of tribute. Those
services, however, which can now be legally ex.
aAed, are very different from the talks originally
imposed upon the Indians. The nature of the
work which they must perform is defined, and an
equitable recompence is granted for their labour.
The stated services demanded of the Indians may

P Recopil lib. vi. tit. iii. 1. 4S. Solorz. de lad. Jars,
lib. ii. c. 6. q See NOTE CLXXVI.

be

e divided into two branches. They are either
:rployed in works of primary necessity, without
vhich society cannot subsist comfortably, or are
:ompelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanish colonies derive their chief value and im-
)ortance. In consequence of the former, they
ire obliged to assist in the culture of maize, and
)ther grain of necessary consumption; in tending
:atle; in erecing edifices of public utility; in
juilding bridges; and in forming high roads r;
:ut thcv cannot be constrained to labour in raif-
ng vines, olives, and sugar-canes, or any species
)f cultivation, which has for its object the grati-
ication of luxury, or commercial profit5. In
:onfequence of the latter, the Indians are com-
pelled to undertake the more unpleasant task, of
Extracting ore from the bowels of the earth, and
Ds refining it by successive processes, no less un.
wholesome than operose'.

The mode of exa&cing both these services is the
lame, and is under regulations framed with a view
of rendering it as little oppreflive as possible to
the Indians. They are called out successively in
divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be
compelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the
number called out mufft not exceed the seventh
part of the inhabitants in any diitric u. In new
bpain, where the Indians are more numerous, it
is tixtd at four in the hundredw. During what
time the labour of such Indians, as are employed
in agriculture, continues, I have not been able

' Rccop;l. lib. vi, tit. xiii. 1. 19. Sulorz. de Ind. Jure, ii.

; ' i ..

c 7

9, * R cci. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 8. So-

r.. lib. i. c 7. N' 41, .c. ' Sce NoTE CLXXVII.
'.:kc.m . lib. vi. tt xli. 1. 1. . " Recopil. I;b. vi. 1. zz.

3 to

to learn x. But in Peru, each Mrta, or division,
destined for the mines, remains there fix month.;
and Rhile engaged in this service, a laboure
never receives lets than two shillings a day, ar,d
often earns more than double that fumr. No
Indian, residing at a greater diltance than thirtr
miles from a mine, is included in the Mita, c'
division employed in working it Z; nor are tbh
inhabitants of the low country exposed now to
certain detfru&tion, as they were at first, whke
under the dominion of the conquerors, by comb
pelling them to remove from that warm climate, tG
the cold elevated regions were minerals abound'.

The Indians who live in the principal to-nm,

are enteicly subject to the Spanish laws and magi.
firatts; but in their own villages, they are go-
vcrr,cd by Caviques, some of whom are the de.
fcendants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanish vireroys. These regulate thi
petty affairs of the people under them, accordi,
to maxims ofjuftice, transmitted to them by trn-
dition from their anceflors. To the Indians, tii
jurifdidion, lodged in fuich frientdl hands, affnrdi
some consolation; and so little formidable is tlis
dignity to their new maflers, that they ofttn al.
low it to descend by hereditary rightb. For thi
farther relief of men so much exposed to oppref-
sion, the Spanish court has appointed an office
in every district, with the title of ProteEtor of
the Indians. It is his function, as the name im.
plies, to assert the rights of the Indians; to ap.

1 See NOTE CLXXVIIr. UClloa Enrrcten. i26, :6r.

' Recopi!. lib v;. lit. xii. 1 3. · Ibid. I. 2'. and tt..
I. 1 . S-e YOTE C'LXXIX. b So!o:z. de Jure Ir.
ib,.i. c, 26. Rccoiil. !ib, vi. tic iii.

,. -.

pear as their defender in the courts of justice;
and, by the interposition of his authority, to set
bounds to the encroachments and exations of
his countrymenc. A certain portion of the re-
served fourth of the annual tribute, is destined
far the salary of the caziques and prote&ors;
another is applied to the maintenance of the
clergy employed in the inftruEtion of the In-
sians d. Another part seems to be appropriated
for the benefit of the Indians themselves, and is
applied for the payment of their tribute in years
of famine, or when a particular diftric is affected
bv any extraordinary local calamity c. Besides
this, provision is made by various laws, that hof-
pitals (hall be founded in every new settlement for
the reception of lndiansf. Such hospitals have
accordingly been erefed, both for the indigent
and infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico,
where the Indians are treated with tenderness and
bumanitys.

Such are the leading principles in the jurifpru-

dence and policy by which the Indians are now
governed in the provinces belonging to Spain.
In those regulations of the Spanish monarchs, we
discover no traces of that cruel system of exter-
mination, which they have been charged with
adopting; and if we admit, that the necessity of
securing subsistence for their colonies, or the adt
vantages derived from working the mines, give
them a right to avail themselves of the labour of
the Indians, we must allow, that the attention
with which they regulate and recomrpence that

Solorz. lib. i. c. 17. p. 201. Recnp. lib. vi. tit. vi.

Rtcop. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 30. tit xvi. i. 1--I . lbid.
.'.. t lit. iv. 1. 13. ' Ibid. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. I, &c.

Vc.-. de Ull a, i. 429. 5c9. Churchill, iv. 46.
VOL. , I. 51 labour,

labour, is provident and sagacious. In no code
of laws is greater solicitude displayed, or pre.
cautions multiplied with more prudent concera
for the preservation, the security, and the hap
piness of the subjet, than we discover in the
collection of the Spanifi laws for the Indics.
But those later regulations, like the more earl
edicts which have been already mentioned, have
too often proved ineffectual remedies against tht
evils which they were intended to prevent. In
every age, if the fame causes continue to operate,
the fame effe&s must follow. From the immense
distance between the power entrusted with the
execution of laws, and that by wlofe authority
they are enaced, the vigour even of the mob
absolute government must relax, and the dread
of a superior, too remote to observe with accu.
racy, or to pun;ih with dispatch, muff insensibly
abate. Notwithstanding the numerous injunc.
tions of the Spanish monarch, the Indians fli
susser on many occasions, both from the avarice
of individuals, and from the exataons of the
magistrates, who ought to have protected them;
unreasonable talks are imposed ; the term of th&t
labour is prolonged beyond the period fixed by
law, and they groan under many of the inful:
and wrongs which are the lot of a dependcrt
peopled. From some information on which I
can depend, such oppression abounds more i.
Peru, than in any other colony. But it is no:
general. According to the accounts, even of
those authors who are molt disposed to exagge-
rate the suffering3 of the Indians, they, in fevera!
provinces, enjoy not only ease, but affluence;

D ScNoTt CLXXX.

th'e

:hey possess large farms; they are masters of nu-
merous herds and flocks; and, by the knowledge
which they have acquired of European arts and
nduftry, are supplied not only with the necef-
[aries, but with many luxuries of life i.

After explaining the form of civil government
in the Spanish colonies, and the fate of the vari-
uos orders of persons subjef to it, the peculiari.
ties in their ecclesiastical constitution merit con-
ideration. Notwithstanding the superstitious
reneration with which the Spaniards are devoted
to the Holy See, the vigilant and jealous policy
as Ferdinand early prompted him to take precau-
lions against the introdu&ion of the papal domi.
cion into America. With-this view, he folicitil
Alexander VI. for a grant to the crown of the
tithes in all the newly discovered countriesk,
which he obtained on condition of his making
roiffion for the religious inftrucion of the na-

l;ies. Soon after Julius II. conferred on him,

and his successors, the right of patronage, and
the absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical benefices
there1. But these pontiffs, unacquainted with
the value of what he demanded, bestowed those
donations with an inconsiderate liberality, which
their filcceffors have often lamented, and wilhed
to recal. In consequence of those grants, the
Spanish monarchs have become in effedt the heads
of the American church. In them the adminif-
tration of its revenues is vested. Their nomina-
:ion of persons to supply vacant benefices is in.
f3ntly confirmed by the pope. Thus, in all

Cage's Survey, p S5. go. T04. 119, &c. k Bulla
A.tr. VI. A. D. r jo, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind. ii. p. 498.

uiLa Julii, ii. jo8, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind. ii. 509.

zs a Spaniih

Spanish America, authority of every species cen.
ters in the Crown. There no collision is know0
between Ipiritual and temporal jurifdictUon. The
king is the only superior, his name alone is heard
of, and no dependence upon any foreign powne
has been introduced. Papal bulls cannot be ad.
mitted into America, nor are they of any force
there, until they have been previously examine,
and approved of by the royal council of the In.
diesn; and if any bull should be surreptitiously
introduced, and circulated in America without
obtaining that approbation, ecclesiastics are re.
quired not only to prevent it from taking effec,
but to seize all the copies of it, and tranfiit
dhem to the council of the Indies n. To thi
limitation of the papaljurifdiaion, equally fingu.
lar, whether we confider the age and nation in
which it was devised, or the jealous attention
with which Ferdinand and his successors have
studied to maintain it in full force °, Spain is in.
debted, in a great measure, for the uniform tran,
quillity which has reigned in her American dc.
minions.

The hierarchy is established in America in the

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch.
bishops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries
The inferior clergy are divided into three classs,
under the denomination of Curas, Doarintro,
and Mffioneros. The first are parifh-priefts in
those parts of the country where the Spaniard
have fettled. The second have the charge oi
such diftriAs as are inhabited by Indians sub-

m Recopil. lib. i. ri. ix. 1. 2. and Autas del Conefjo d-

las Indias, clxi. n Recopil. lib. i ut. vii. 1. 55. 0 Ibc-
lib. i. ic. vii, 1. 55. pafiim,

jec¢t

ieced to the Spanifl government, and living un-
der its proteAion. The third are employed in
inflruEing and converting those fiercer tribes,
which disdain fubmiflion to the Spanish yoke,
and live in remote or inacceflible regions, to
which the Spanish arms have not penetrated. So
numerous are the ecclefiatllcs of all those various
orders, and such the profuse liberality with which
many of them are endowed, that the revenues
of the church in America are immense. The
Romish superstition appears with its utmost pomp
in the New World. Churches and convents
:here are magnificent, and richly adorned; and
;n high festivals, the display of gold and silver,
ind precious stones, is such as exceeds the con-
:eption of an European P. An ecclesiastical efla-
;iifhment so splendid and expensive, is unfavour-
ible, as has been formerly observed, to the pro-
-refs of rising colonies; but in countries where
;ches abound, and the people are so delighted
sith parade, that religion must assume it, in
.rder to attrac their veneration, this propensity
0 ostentation has been indulged, and becomes
ds pernicious.
The early inflitution of monasteries in the Spa-
Aih colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in multi-
)lying them, have been attended with confe-
;uences more fatal. In every new settlement,
he first objed Ihould be to encourage population,
nd to incite every citizen to contribute towards
".gmenting the number and strength of the com-
.unity. During the youth and vigour of foci-
::v, while there is room to spread, and fuften-
Lce is procured with facility, mankind increase

P Voy. de Ulloa, i. 430.

m3 with

with amazing rapidity. But the Spaniards hia
hardly taken possession of America, when, witd
a most preposterous policy, they began to erec
convents, where persons of both sexes were she
up, under a vow to defeat the purpose of nature,
and to counteraa the first of her laws. Ir,
fluenced by a misguided piety, which afcnbc
tranfcendant merit to a state of celibacy, or i
lured by the profpee of that listless ease, which,
in sultry climates, is deemed supreme felicity,
numbers crowded into those mansions of flo'i
and fuperfititon, and are loft to society. Ai
none but persons of Spanish extrac are admittr:
into the monasteries of the New World, the e&:
is more sensibly felt, and every monk or nun na1
be confidered as an ative person withdrawn frr:
civil life. The impropriety of such foundatio-'
in any situation where the extent of territory r;
quires additional hands to improve it, is so '.:
vious, that some catholic states have exprefssi
prohibited any person in their colonies from tak
ing the monadic vows . Even the Spanish mo
narchs, on some occasions, seem to have be;
alarmed with the rpreading of a spirit so advern
to the increase and prosperity of their colonice
that they have endeavoured to check it'. B5.
the Spaniards in America, more thoroughly u-
der the influence of superstition than their cour
trymen in Europe, and direaed by ecclefiaftia
more bigoted and illiterate, have conceivre
such an high opinion of monastic fancity, th.
no regulations can restrain their zeal; and, bi

q Voy. de Ulloa, i;. 12. r Herrera, dec. v. lib. :i

c. T, z. Reccp. lib. i. tit iii. 1. I, z, tit. iv. c. ii. So'cT
lib. iii. c. 23.

the excess of their ill-judged bounty, religious
houses have multiplied to a degree no less amaz-
ing than pernicious to society'.

In viewing the state of colonies, where not

only the number but influence of ecclesiastics is
so great, the characer of this powerful body is
an objeA that merits particular attention. A
considerable part of the secular clergy in Mexico
and Peru are natives of Spain. As persons long
accustomed, by their education, to the retire-
ment and indolence of academic life, are more
incapable of active enterprize, and less disposed
to strike into new paths, than any order of men,
the ecclesiastical adventurers by whom the Ame-
rican church is recruited, are commonly such as,
frum merit or rank in life, have little profpeEt
of success in their own country. Accordingly,
the secular priests in the New World, are still
less dillinguifhed than their brethren in Spain,
for literary accomplishments of any species; and
though, by the ample provision which has been
made for the American church, many of its
members enjoy the ease and independence which
are favourable to the cultivation of science, the
body of secular clergy has hardly, during two
centuries and a half, produced one author whose
works convey such useful information, or possess
such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among
those which attra&t the attention of enlightened
nations. But the greatest part of the ecclesiastics
in the Spanish settlements are regulars. On the
discovery of America, a new field opened to the
pious zeal of the monafic orders; and, with a
becoming alacrity, they immediately lent forth

t Sec NOTE CLXXXI.

mriflionaries

missionaries to labour in it. The first attempt
to instruct and convert the Americans, was made
by monks, and, as soon as the conquest of any
province was completed, and its ecclesiastical
establishment began to assume some form, the
popes permitted the missionaries of the four men.
dicant orders, as a reward for their services, to
accept of parochial charges in America, to per.
form all spiritual funcions, and to receive the
tithes, and other emoluments of the benefice,
without depending on the jurifdi&ion of the
bishop of the diocese, or being fubje& to his
censures. In consequence of this, a new career
of usefulness, as well as new objeEfs of ambition
presented themselves. Whenever a call is made
for a fresh supply of missionaries, men of the most
ardent and aspiring minds, impatient under the
reitraint of a cloister, weary of its insipid uni-
formity, and fatigued with the irksome repeti.
tion of its frivolous functions, offer their service
with eagerness, and repair to the New World in
qucft of liberty and diftinfion. Nor do they
pursue diftin&ion without success. The highest
ecclesiastical honours, as well as the most lucra.
tive preferments in Mexico and Peru, are often
in the hands of regulars; and it is chiefly to the
monafdic orders that the Americans are indebted
for any portion of science which is cultivated
among them. They are alinoft the only Spanilh
ecclesiastics, from whom we have received any
accounts, either of the civil or natural history of
the various provinces in America. Some of them,
though deeply tinged with the indelible super.
ftition of their profession, have published books
which give a favourable idea of their abilities.

The

rhe natural and moral history of the New World,
br the Jesuit Acofta, contains more accurate ob-
rerations, perhaps, and more found science, than
ire to be found in any description of remote
countries published in the sixteenth century.

But the fame disgust with monastic life, to
which America is indebted for some inftruAors
,f worth and abilities, filled it with others of a
ery different characer. The giddy, the pro-
figate, the avaricious, to whom the poverty and
rigid discipline of a convent are intolerable, con-
ider a milfion to America as a release from mor-
tifcation and bondage. There they soon ob-
tain some parochial charge, and far removed, by
their situation, from the infpedion of their mo-
nastic superiors, and exempt, by their chara&er,
from the jurifdition of their diocesan u, they are
hardly subjeA to any controul. According to
the testimony of the most zealous catholics, many
of the regular clergy in the Spanish settlements
are not only destitute of the virtues becoming
their profession, but regardless of that external
decorum and refpeEt for the opinion of mankind,
which preserve a semblance of worth where the
reality is wanting. Secure of impunity, some
regulars, in contempt of their vow of poverty,
engage openly in commerce; and are so rapaci-
otfly eager in amalling wealth, that they be-
come the most grievous oppressors of the In-
dians, whom it was their duty to have protec6ed.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their
vow of chastity, indulge with little disguise in
the most dissolute licentiousness x

" Avedano The(. Indic. ii. z53. x See NoTE
--XXXI.,

Various

Various schemes have been proposed for re.

dressing enormities so manifest and so offenfic.
Several persons, no less eminent for piety than
discernment, have contended, that the regulan,
in conformity to the canons of the church, ought
to be confined within the walls of their cloiften,
and {hould no longer be permitted to encroach
on the funtions of the secular clergy. Some
public-fpirited magistrates, from convi&tion of
its being necessary to deprive the regulars of a
privilege bestowed at first with good intention,
but of which time and experience had discovered
the pernicious effects, openly countenanced th.
secular clergy in their attempts to assert ther
own rights. The prince D'Efquilache, viceroy
of Peru under Philip III. took measures so dc.
ciive and effectual for circumscribing the regu.
lars within their proper sphere, as Itruck them
with general consternation r. They had recourse
to their usual arts. They alarmed the fuperfti-
tious, by representing the proceedings of the
viceroy as innovations fatal to religion. They
employed all the refinements of intrigue, in order
to gain persons in power; and seconded by the
powerful influence of Ihe Jesuits, who claimed
and enjoyed all the privileges which belonged to
the Mendicant orders in America, they made a
deep impression on a bigoted prince, and a weak
miniflry. The ancient pracice was tolerated.
The abuses which it occasioned continued to in
create, and the corruption of monks, exempt from
the restraints of discipline, and the infpetion d
any superior, became a disgrace to religion. At
lad, as the veneration of the Spaniards for thi

' See NOTE CLXXXIII.

mona:-;

oonaftic orders began to abate, and the power
i the Jesuits was on the decline, Ferdinand VI.
Fentured to apply the only effe&ual remedy by
ffuing an edict, prohibiting regulars of every
knomination from taking the charge of any
aarifh with the cure of fouls; and declaring,
hat on the demise of the prefcnt incumbents,
ione but secular priests, subjea to the jurifdic-
ion of their diocesans, shall be prefcnted to va.
alt benefices z. If this regulation is carried
nto execution with steadiness in any degree pro-
)ortional to the wisdom with which it is framed,
very considerable reformation may take place
a the eccleGaftical state of Spanish America,
ad the secular clergy may gradually become a
cfpectable body of men. The deportment of
nany ecclefiallics, even at present, seems to be
kccent and exemplary, otherwise we can hardly
appose that they would be held in such high
:irnmation, and poflefs such a wonderful afcen-
ant over the minds of their countrymen through-
,'t all the Spanish settlements.

But whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics in
America may poffcfs, the success of their endea-
ours in communicating the knowledge of true
eligion to the Indians, has been more imperfect
ban might have been expected, either from the
'igree of their zeal, or from the dominion which
hey had acquired over that people. For this,
zrious reasons may be assigned. The first mif-
ionaries, in their ardour to make proselytes, ad-
nitttd the people of America into the christian
:hurch, without previous inftrubion in the doc-
:-es of religion, and even before they them-

Real Ccduia MS. penes me.

selves

selves had acquired such knowledge of the k.
dian language, as to be able to explain to th
natives the mysteries of faith, or the precepts d
duty. Refting upon a subtle diftintion in fcho
laftic theology, between that degree of asser
which is founded on a complete knowledge and
convi&ion of duty, and that which may be yield
ed when both these are imperfe&, they adopter
this strange practice, no less inconsistent with th
spirit of a religion which addresses itself to th
understanding of men, than repugnant to th
dictates of reason. As soon as any body ofpeo
pie, overawed by dread of the Spanili power
moved by the example of their own chiefs, in
cited by levity, or yielding from mere ignorance
expressed the slightest desire of embracing th
religion of their conquerors, they were inftantl
baptized. While this rage of conversion con
tinued, a single clergyman baptized in one da
above five thousand Mexicans, and did not defit
until he was so exhausted by fatigue, that h
was unable to lift his hands . In the course of;
few years, after the reduAion of the Mexica
empire, the sacrament of baptism was admini!
tered to more than four millionsb. Proselyte
adopted with such inconsiderate haste, and wb
were neither inftruced in the nature of the tenet
to which it was supposed they had given assen!
nor taught the absurdity of those which the
were required to relinquish, retained their venen
tion for their ancient superstitions in full fora
or mingled an attachment to its doArines a
rites with that slender knowledge of Chrifianit

P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mond Ind. lib. xvi. c l
Tirribio, MS. Torq--em. lib. xvi. c. 8.

wIL.

-hich they had acquired. These sentiments the
;ew converts transmitted to their posterity, into
whose minds they have funk so deep, that the
ipanifh ecclesiastics, with all their industry, have
;ot been able to eradicate them. The religious

iflitutions of their ancestors are still remem-

xred, and held in honour by many of the In-
iians, both in Mexico and Peru; and whenever
hey think themselves out of reach of infpecion
, the Spanialds, they assemble and celebrate
heir idolatrous rites C.
But this is not the most unsurmountable ob-
acle to the progress of Christianity among the
ndians. The powers of their uncultivated un-
erftandings are so limited, their observations
nd reflections reach so little beyond the mere
,bje&s of sense, that they seem hardly to have
he capacity of forming abftra& ideas, and possess
ot language to express them. To such men,
he filblime and spiritual doctrines of Chriflianity
nuft be, in a great measure, incomprehensible.
rhe numerous and splendid ceremonies of the
opifh worship catch the eye, please and interest
hem; but when their instructors attempt to ex-
?bin the articles of faith, with which those ex-
rn.al observances are connected, though the
[ndians may liften with patience, they so little
:onceive the meaning of what they hear, that
heir acquiefccnce does not merit the name of
;lief. Their indifference is still greater than
:eir incapacity. Attentive only to the present
noment, and ingrofied by the objecs before
lcm, the Indians so seldom reflef upon what

Vo,. de Ullo', i. 341. Torquem. lib. xv. c. z3.
i: x . I. GCae, 171.
VuL. 111. N is

is past, or take thought for what is to come,
that neither the promises nor threats of religion,
make much imprefllion upon them; and whiie
their foresight rarely extends so far as the next
day, it is almost impossible to inspire them with
solicitude about the concerns of a future worl.
Astonished equally at their slowness of compre.
henfion, and at their insensibility, some of the
early miflionarics pronounced them a race of rren
so brutith, as to be incapable of underflandi!g
the firil principles of religion. A council heid
at Lima decreed, that, on account of this ir-
capacity, they ought to be excluded from the
sacrament of the Lucharift '. Though Paul III.
by his famous bull, issued in the year 1537, de.
dared them to be rational creatures, entitled to
all th: privileges of Chriftianse ; yet, after the
lapse of two centuries, during which they hai:
been members of the church, o0 imperfe' a2:
their attainments in knowledge, that very fcr
possess such a portion of spiritual discernment.
as to be deemed worthy of being admitted to
the holy communion f. From this idea of thei:
incapacity and imperfect knowledge of religion,
when the zeal of Philip II. established the is-
quifition in America in the year 1570, the I.
dians were exempted from the jurifdicdon of tha:
revere tribunal g, and frill continue under the i-
fpefiion of their diocesans. Even after the niac
perseEt initruction, their faith is held to b.
feeble and dubious; and though some of then
have been taught the learned languages, afl

d Torquem. lib. xv'. c o0. e Torquem. [ib. z,:

c. Z5 Garcia Origin. 31 . f Voy.dc UUoa, i. 3-:.
c Rccop. lib. vi. it. i. 1. 35,

hr::

have gone through the ordinary course of aca-
demic education with applause, their frailty
i still so much fufpecfed, that few Indians are
either ordained priests, or received into any re-
ligious order h.

From this brief survey, some idea may be
ormed of the interior fiate of the Spanifl colo-
ries. The various productions with which they
;supply and enrich the mother-country, and the
'{l1em of commercial intercourse between them,
come next in order to be explained. If the do-
r. inions of Spain in the New World had been
;f such moderate extent, as bore a due propor-
tion to the parent ftatc, the progress of her co-
Gnizing might have been attended with the fame
enefit as that of other nations. But when, in
>is than half a century, her inconsiderate rapa-
i:v had seized on countries larger than all Eu-
s pe, her inability to fill such vast regions with a
lumber of inhabitants sufficient for the cultiva-
t:Gn of them, was so obvious, as to give a wrong
irection to all the efforts of the colonists. They
!id not form compact settlements, where in-
piarv, circumscribed within proper limits, both
p its views and operations, is conducted with
that fober persevering spirit, which gradually
converts whatever is in its possession to a proper
.:e, and derives thence the greatelt advantage.
ntilead of this, the Spaniards, seduced by the
ioundlefs profpec which opened to them, divid-
their pofeffions in America into governments
i great extent. As their number was too small
to attempt the regular culture of the immense
.:o0inces, which they occupied rather than peo-
I Tcrquem. lib. xvii. c. 13. See NOTE CLXXXIV.

,i 2 pled,

pled, they bent their attention to a few obje&
that allured them with hopes of sudden and a
orbitant gain, and turned away with contemi
from the humbler paths of industry, which la
more fowly, but with greater certainty, t
wealth and increase of national strength.

Of all the methods by which riches may be a

quired, that of searching for the precious met,
is one of the most inviting to men, who are eith
unaccustomed to the regular assiduity with whic
the culture of the earth and the operations
commerce muff be carried on, or who are so a
terprifing and rapacious as not to be fatisfi
with the gradual returns of profit which the
yield. Accordingly, as soon as the fever
countries in America were fubje&ed to the d,
minion of Spain, this was almost the only m
thod of acquiring wealth which occurred to U
adventurers, by whom they were conquers
Such provinces of the continent as did not allu
them to fettle, by the profpet of their affordin
gold and silver, were totally negleaed. Thol
in which they met with a disappointment of tl
sanguine expetations they had formed, we
abandoned. Even the value of the islands, t
firit-fruits of their discoveries, and the first obie
of their attention, funk so much in their eftiM
tion, when the mines which had been opened
them were exhausted, that they were deserted b
many of the planters, and left to be occupied t
more industrious poffefors. All crowded t
Mexico and Peru, where the quantities (
gold and silver found among the natives, wv
searched for them with little indultry and it
fciil, promised an uneihauiicd ttore, as the

comprc

compence of more intelligent and persevering
tfforts.

During several years, the ardour of their re-
searches was kept up by hope, rather than fuc.
cess. At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi,
in Peru, were accidentally discovered in the year
I1545, by an Indian, as he was clambering up
the mountain, in pursuit of a Llama which had
tlrayed from his flock. Soon after the mines of
Sacotecas, in New Spain, little inferior to the
other in value, were opened. From that time,
successive discoveries have been made in both
colonies, and silver mines are now so numerous,
that the working of them, and of some few
mines of gold in the provinces of Tierra Firme,
2.d the new kingdom of Granada, has become
the capital occupation of the Spaniards, a!.d is
seduced into a system no less complicated than
nterefting. To describe the nature of the vari-
ous ores, the mode of extracting them from the
bowels of the earth, and to explain the several
Froceffes by which the metals are separated from
.;e substances with which they are mingled,
ether by the action of fire, or the attra&ive
powers of mercury, is the province of the na-
tural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the
kilorian.

The exuberant profusion with which the moun-
tains of the New World poured forth their trea-
fires, aitonifhed mankind, who had been accuf-
tamed hitherto to receive a penurious supply of
the precious metals, from the more scanty stores
contained in the mines of the ancient hemisphere.
Acco:ding to principles of computation, which

i Fcrnandez, p. i. lib. xi. c. I .

N 3 appear

appear to be extremely moderate, the quantity
of gold and silver that has been regularly entered
in the ports of Spain, is equal in value to four
millions sterling annually, reckoning from the
year 1492, in which America was discovered, to
the present time. This, in two hundred and
eighty-three years, amounts to eleven hundred
and thirty-two millions. Immense as this fum ii,
the Spanilh writers contend, that as much mor
ought to be added to it, in confiaeration oi
treasure which has been extraced from the
mines, and imported fraudulently into Spain,
without paying duty to the king. By this ac.
count, Spain has drawn from the New Woiddi
supply of wealth, amounting at least to two
thousand millions of pounds sterling k.

The mines, which have yielded this amazing

quantity of treasure, are not worked at the ta
pence of the crown, or of the public. In orde
to encourage private adventurers, the perfoa
who discovers and works a new vein, is entitled
to the property of it. Upon laying his claim to
such a discovery before the governor of the pro.
vince, a certain extent of land is measured of,
and a certain number of Indians allotted him,
under the obligation of his opening the mine
within a limited time, and of his paying the cu.
tomary duty to the king, for what it Shall pro-
duce. Invited by the facility with which such
grants are obtained, and encouraged by some
triking examples of success in this line of ad.
venture; not only the sanguine and the bold, ha:
the timid and diffident enter upon it with alloni -

k Uzaariz Theor. v Pra&. d- Conmercia, c a. 1H-
rmra, dec. vai. lib. xi. c. :5. Sec NoTE CLXXI V.

1it

Dg ardour. With vail obje&ts always in view,
red continually with hope, and expe&ting every
eoment that fortune will unveil her fccret stores,
gnd give up the wealth which they contain to
Iheir wishes, they deem every other occupation
insipid and uninteresting. The charms of this
pursuit, like the rage for deep play, are so be-
ritching, and take such full poffeiflon of the
mind, as even to give a new bent to the natural
temper. Under its influence, the cautious be-

nome enterprising, and the covetous profuse.
Powerful as this charm naturally is, its force is
augmented by the arts of an order of men known
in Peru by the cant name of Jearchers. These
are commonly persons ofdefperate fortunes, who,
railing themselves of some skill in mineralogy,
accompanied with the insinuating manner and
confident pretensions peculiar to projecors, ad-
defs the wealthy and the credulous. By plau-
fible descriptions of the appearances which they
have discovered of rich veins hitherto unexplored;
by producing, when requisite, specimens of pro-
mifing ore; by affirming, with an imposing
assurance, that success is certain, and that the
cxpence must be trifling, they seldom fail to per-
fuade. An association is formed; a small fum
is advanced by each copartner; the mine is
opened; the searcher is entrusted with the sole
direction of every operation; unforeseen difficul-
ties occur; new demands of money are made;
but, amidst a succession of disappointments and
delays, hope is never extinguished, and the
ardour of expetation hardly abates. For it is
rbhfeved, that if any person once enter this fe-
&,:cir:g path, it is almost impossible to return;

his

his ideas alter, he seems to be poFefred with an.
ther spirit, visions of imaginary wealth are con.
tinually before his eyes, and he thinks, and
speaks, and dreams of nothing else .

Such is the spirit that muff be formed,

wherever the active exertions of any society ar
chiefly employed in working mines of gold and
silver. No spirit is more adverse to such im.
provements in agriculture and commerce, as ren.
der a nation really opulent. If the system of
administration in the Spanish colonies had bee
founded upon principles of found policy, the
power and ingenuity of the legislature would
have been exerted with as much ardour, in re.
straining its fubjeds from such pernicious in.
duftrv, as is now employed in alluring them to-
wards it. " Projeas of mining," (fays a good
judge of the political conduct of nations,) " i.
" stead of replacing the capital employed in
" them, together with the ordinary profit of
" fock, commonly absorb both capital and pro.
"fit. They are the projects, therefore, to
"which, of all others, a prudent lawgiver, who
"deired to increase the capital of his nation,
" would least choose to give any extraordinary
" encouragement, or to turn towards them 2
(< greater (hare of that capital than would go to
" them of its own accord. Such, in reality, ii
" the absurd confidence which all men have in
' their own good fortune, that wherever there
" is the lead probability of success, tao great a
" share of it is apt to go to them of its own ac.
" cord=." But in the Spaniih colonies, go-

UIloa Entratca. p. 1,3. I Dr. Smith's Inqjin,
&c. ii. 155.

vernme:

vrnmrent is studious to cherish a spirit which it
lould have laboured to depress, and, by the
bnLion of its approbation, augments that in.
ronfiderate credulity, which has turned the arive
oduftry of Mexico and Peru into such an im-
proper channel. To this may be imputed the
lender progress which Spanish America has
made during two centuries and a half, either
in useful manufacures, ol in those lucrative
branches of cultivation, which furnish the colo.
nies of other nations with their staple commo.
ities. In comparison with the precious metals
every bounty of nature is so much despised, that
this extravagant idea of their value has mingled
with the idiom of language in America, and the
Spaniards fettled there denominate a country
rL', not from the fertility of its foil, the abund-
ance of its crops, or the exuberance of its pas-
tures, but on account of the minerals which its
mountains contain. In quest of these, they
abandon the delightful plains of Peru and Mex-
ico, and resort to barren and uncomfortable re-
gions, where they have built some of the largest
towns which they possess in the New World.
As the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards
originally took this dire&tion, it is now so diffi-
cult to bend them a different way, that although,
from various causes, the gain of working mines
is much decreased; the fascination continues,
and almost every person, who takes any ative
part in the commerce of New Spain or Peru, is
fill engaged in some adventure of this kind ".

But though mines are the chief objec of the
Spaniards, and the precious metals which these

See NOTE CLXXXVI.

yield

yield form the principal article in their con.
merce with America; the fertile countries which
they possess there, abound with other commodi
ties of such value or scarcity, as to attraA a con
fiderable degree of attention. Cochineal is z
production almost peculiar to New Spain, ol
such demand in commerce, that the sale is al
ways certain, and it vields such profit, as amph
rewards the labour and care employed in reaing
the curious infects of which this valuable drugs
composed, and preparing it for the market
Quinquina, or Jesuits Bark, the molt falutarn
simple, perhaps, and of most restorative virtue
that Providence, in compaflion to human infi-.
mity, has made known unto man, is found onhl
in Peru, to which it affords a lucrative branci
of commerce. The Indigo of Guatimala i;
superior in quality to that of any provincei:
America, and cultivated to a considerable es-
tent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to the Spa.
nifh colonies, attains to its highest state of per.
feftion there, and from the great confumptidn
of chocolate in Europe, as well as in Americ2,
is a valuable commodity. The Tobacco d!
Cuba, of more exquisite flavour than any brought
from the New World; the Sugar raised in th2:
ifiand, in Hispaniola, and in New Spain, toge-
ther with drugs of various kinds, may be men-
tioned among the natural prcductions of Ame-
rica. which enrich the Spanish Commerce. To
these muff be added, an article of no inconfider.
able account, the exportation of hides; for
which, as well as for many of those which [
have enumerated, the Spaniards are more in-
debted to the wonderful fertility of the country

thb

nhan to their own foresight and industry. The
dc!reftic animals of Europe, particularly horned
cattle, have multiplied in the New World with
rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A few
v:ars after the Spaniards fettled there, the herds
ci tame cattle became so numerous, that their
proprietors reckoned them by thousands°. Less
atention being paid to them, as they continued
to increase, they were suffered to run wild, and
spreading over a country of boundless extent,
u.der a mild climate, and covered with rich
pasure, their number became immense. They
rancg over the vast plains which extend from
Erenos Avres, tow.ards the Andes, in herds of
:irt) or forty thousand; and the unlucky
:a;2iler who once falls in among them, may
poceed several days before he can disentangle
:.mfcf from among the crowd that covers the
.:e of the earth, and seems to have no end.
Thev are hardly less numerous in New Spain,
2:d in several other provinces: they are killed
rerclv for the fake of their hides; and the
ra,.hcter at certain seasons is so great, that the
:enchl of their carcases, which are left in the
fid, would ;nfe& the air, if large packs of
i'd dogs, and vast flocks ofgallinazos, or Ame-
rcan vultures, the most voracious of all the
f:athered kind, did not instantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every
B;et to Europe is very great, and is a lucrative
[ranch of commerce P.

o Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. Icr, B. Hackluyt, iii. 466. 5Ir.
Aco/ta, lib iii. c. 33. Ovallo Hist. of Chili. Church.
C:;;ae. ii. 47. fep. Ibid. v. p. 680. 69z. Lettres Ecif.
1-* 2j5. Fcuille, i. 249.

Almofb

Almost all these may be confidered as fapil

commodities peculiar to Axferica, and different,
if we except that last mentioned, from the pro.
ductions of the mother-country.

When the importation into Spain of those n.

rious articles from her colonies, firif became ac.
tive and considerable, her interior induftrv and
manufacures were in a state so prosperous, that
with the product of these she was able both to
purchase the commodities of the New World,
and to answer its growing demands. Under the
reigns of Ferdinand and Isabella, and CharlesV.
Spain was one of the most iidultrious countria
in Europe. Her manufactures in wool, and flai,
and silk, were so extensive, as not only to furnmil
what was sufficient for her own consumption,
but to afford a surplus for exportation. When
a market for them, formerly unknown, and to
which she alone had acccfs, opened in America,
she had recourfc to her domeitic store, and found
there an abundant flpplvq. This nwcv employ-
ment muff naturally have added vivacity to the
spirit ofinduftry. Nourished and invigorated br
it, the manufacures, the population, and wealtk
of Spain might have gone on incrtali:g in the
fame proportion with the growth of her colonh,.
Nor was the state of the Spanish marine at thi
period less flourishing than that of its manufa-z
tures. In the beginning of the sixteenth ccn-
tury, Spain is said to have poffelfed above a
thousand merchant ship- r, a number probablT
far superior to that of any nation in Europe i:
that age. By the aid which foreign trade ani
domeltic indutlry give reciprocally to each otha

q Sce Norz CLXXXVII. ' Cim;omanr., ii. sc

their progress, the augmentation of both must
ave been rapid and extensive, and Spain might
ve received the fame acceflion of opulence and
rour from her acquisitions in the New Werld,
tht other powers have derived from their colo.
ies there.

But various causes prevented this. The fame
thing happens to nations as to individuals.
1Wealth, which flows in gradually, and with mo-
derate increase, feeds and nourishes that acivity
which is friendly to commerce, and calls it forth
r.to vigorous and well-conducted exertions; but
¢ !en opulence pours in fuddenlv, and with too
.fil a stream, it overturns all fober plans of in-
Iiiirv, and brings along with it a taste for what
is wild and extravagant, and daring in business

in action. Such was the great and sudden
:vnentation of power and revenue that the
priTeffion of America brought into Spain, and
f,re fvmptoms of its pernicious influence upon
the political operations of that monarchy soon

an to appear. For a considerable time, how-
r, the supply of treasure from the New World

e scanty and precarious, and the genius of
C'harles V. conducted public measures with such
!pndence, that the effecs of this influence were
little perceived. But when Philip II. ascended
ihe Spanish throne, with talents far inferior to
.aofe of his father, and remittances from the
:oniies became a regular and confidetable branch
bc revenue, the fatal operation of this rapid
inge in the slate of the kingdom, both on the
Monarch and his people, was at once confpicu-
':- Philip, polfefling that spirit of unceasing

l' uiit, which often characterifcs the ambition
- *L, 111. O of
i

of men of moderate talents, entertained such al
high opinion of his own resources, that t
thought nothing too arduous for him to unde.
take. Shut up himself in the solitude of it.
Escurial, he troubled and annoyed all the ia
tions around him. He waged open war witi
the Dutch and Englifih; he encouraged and aidd
a rebellious fation in France; he conquere
Portugal, and maintained armies and garrifoa
in Italy, Africa, and both the Indies. By fud
a multiplicity of great and complicated open
tions, pursued with ardour during the course o
a long reign, Spain was drained both of men 21
money. Under the weak administration of h.
successor, Philip III. the vigour of the nati:
continued to decrease, and funk into the lowell d
cline, [A.D. 61 l,] when the inconfidcrate big0
try of that monarch expelled at once near a m/
lion of his most industrious fubjeAs, at the ver
time when the exhausted sRate of the kingdom re
quired some extraordinary exertion of politic
wisdom to augment its numbers, and to rent
its strength. Early in the seventeenth centuri
Spain felt such a diminution in the numbere
her people, that from inability to recruit he
armies, she was obliged to contract her oper
tions. Her flourishing manufa&urea were falls
into decay. Her fleets, which had been ti
terror of all Europe, were ruined. Her exto
five foreign commerce was loft. The trade be
tween different parts of her own dominions w5
interrupted, and the (hips which attempted
carry it on, were taken and plundered by enenm
whom The once despised. Even agriculture, :k
primary objea of indufry in every profperoe

isa,

jate, was negle&ed, and one of.the mofi fertile
countries in Europe hardly raised what was sus-
cient for the support of its own inhabitants.
In proportion as the population and manufac-
tureC of the parent state declined, the demands of
ter colonies continued to increase. The Spa-
.iards, like their monarchs, intoxicated with
the wealth which poured in annually upon them,
deserted the paths of industry, to which they
had been accustomed, and repaired with eager-
ness to those regions from which this opulence
ifued. By this rage of emigration, another
drain was opened, and the strength of the colo-
nies augmented by exhausting that of the mo-
ther-country. All those emigrants, as well as
the adventurers who had at first fettled in Ame-
rica, depended absolutely upon Spain for almost
every article of necessary consumption. En-
gaged in more alluring and lucrative pursuits, or
prevented by restraints which government im-
posed, they could not turn their own attention
towards establishing the manufacures requisite
for comfortable subsistence. They received (as
I have observed in another place) their clothing,
their furniture, whatever ministers to the ease or
luxury of life, and even their instruments of la-
bour, from Europe. Spain, thinned of people,
and decreasing in industry, was unable to supply
their growing demands. She had recourse to
her neighbours. The manufacures of the Low
Countries, of England, of France, and of Italy,
which her wants called into exiltence, or ani-
mated with new vivacity, furnished in abundance
whatever Ihe required. In vain did the funda-
mental law, concerning the exclusion of foreign-

Q0 z cr

eis from trade with America, oppose this inr0.
vation. Necessity, more powerful than any ,;
tute, defeated its operations, and constrained th
Spaniards themfelvcs to concur in eluding i:
The English, the French, and Dutch, relying
on the fidelity and honour of Spanif mercihar,
who lend their names to cover the deceit, fHiU
out their manufactures to America, and receirv
the exorbitant price for which they are fok
there, either in specie, or in the rich commoni
ties of the New World. Neither the dread o
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever in
duced a Spani(h factor to betray or defraud thi
person who confided in him '; and that probity
which is the pride and distincion of the nation
contributes to its ruin. In a short time, noi
above a twentieth part of the commodities ex.
ported to America was of Spanish growth c
fabric '. All the reft was the property o:
foreign merchants, though entered in the namn
of Spaniards. The treau re of the New World
may be said henceforward not to have belonged
to Spain. Before it reached Europe, it was an.
ticipated as the price of goods purchased froa
foreigners. That wealth which, by an interni
circulation, would have spread through each vei0
of induitry, and have conveyed life and move-
ment to every branch of manufacture, flowed
out of the kingdom with such a rapid course, a,
neither enriched nor animated it. On the othe
hand, the artizans of rival nations, encouraged
by this quick sale of their commodities, ia-
proved so much in skill and industry, as to be
iblc to affuid them at a rate so low, that tkh
Zival Rcprefentacion, p. :z6. t Campomane, ii. Hr

manuril 2

nanufa&ures of Spain, which could not vie with
theirs, either in quality or cheapness of work,
were fill farther depressed. This deftruative
commerce drained off the riches of the nation
ffter and more completely, than even the ex-
tavagant schemes of ambition carried on by its
.onarchs. Spain was so much astonished and
distressed, at beholding her American treasures
nvni(h almof as soon as they were imported, that
Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite
in circulation, issued an edit, by which he en-
deavoured to raise copper money to a value in
currency nearly equal to that of silver ; and the
lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was re-
duced to a wretched expedient, which is the lait
resource of petty impoverished states.

Thus the possessions of Spain in America have
not proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the
spirit of industry subsists in full vigour, every
person fettled in such colonies as are similar in
their situation to those of Spain is supposed to
give employment to three or four at home in
supplying his wants . But wherever the mo-
ther-country cannot afford this supply, every
emigrant may be confidered as a citizen loft to
the community, and strangers must reap all the
benefit of answering his demands.

Such has been the internal state of Spain from

the close of the sixteenth century, and such her
inability to supply the growing wants of her co-
lonies. The fatal effecs of this disproportion

Uztarez, c. 104. x Child on trade and colonies.

0 3 between

between their demands, and her capacity of al.
fwering them, have been much increased by tht
mode in which Spain has endeavoured to regu.
late the intercourse between the mother-countr
and the colonies. It is from her idea of mono.
polizing the trade with America, and debarring
her fubjets there from any communication with
foreigners, that all her jealous and systematic ar.
rangements have arisen. These are so finguar
in their nature and consequences as to merit a
particular explanation. In order to secure the
monopoly at which the aimed, Spain did not vrit
the trade with her colonies in an exclusive con.
pany, a plan which has been adopted by nations
more commercial, and at a period when mer.
cantile policy was an objed of greater attention,
and ought to have been better understood. The
Dutch gave up the whole trade with their colo-
nies, both in the East and Weft Indies, to cx.
clufive companies. The Englifli, the French,
the Danes, have imitated their example with re.
fpe& to the East Indian commerce; and the two
former have laid a similar restraint upon some
branches of their trade with the New World.
The wit of man cannot, perhaps, devise a me-
thod for checking the progress of industry and
population in a new colony more effecual than
this. The interest of the colony, and of the
exclusive company, must in every point be dia.
metrically opposite; and as the latter possessei
such advantages in this unequal contest, that i;
can prescribe at pleasure the terms of intercourse,
the former muff not only buy dear and fell cheap,
but must susser the mortification of having tne
increase of its surplus flock discouraged by thofl

V:.-.

mer persons to whom alone it can dispose of its
produftions r.

Spain, it is probable, was preserved from fall-
iog into this error in policy, by the high ideas
which she early formed concerning the riches of
the New World. Gold and silver were commo-
dities of too high value to vest a monopoly of
them in private hands. The crown wilhed to
retain the direction of a commerce so inviting;
aid, in order to secure that, ordained the cargo
of every ship fitted out for America, to be in-
fxced by the officers of the Casa de Contrata-
rtn in Seville, before it could receive a licence
to make the voyage; and that on its re-
turn, a report of the commodities which it
brought should be made to the fame board, be-
fore it could be permitted to land them. In
consequence of this regulation, all the trade of
Spain with the New World centered originally
iL the port of Seville, and was gradually brought
hto a form, in which it has been conducted,
with little variation, from the middle of the fix-
ttcnth century almost to our own times. For
the greater security of the valuable cargoes sent
:o America, as well as for the more easy pre-
erntion of fraud, the commerce of Spain, with
lsi colonies, is carried on by fleets which fail
.ilder strong convoys. These fleets consisting of
:'. squadrons, one distinguished by the name of
:'le Galeons, the other by that of the Flcta, are
equipped annually. Formerly they took their
departure from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz
ias been found more commodious, they have
E'chd from it lince the year 1720.

r Smith's Inuirv i, ii 171.

The

The Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firm,

and the kingdoms of Peru and Chil, with almoi
every article of luxury, or necessary consumption,
that an opulent people can demand, touch fir
at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To th
former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Cane.
cas, the New Kingdom of Granada, and feverl
other provinces, resort. The latter is the great
mart for the rich commerce of Peru and Chii
At the season when the Galeons are expe&td,
the produt of all the mines in these two king.
dors, together with their other valuable com.
modities, is transported by sea to Panama. Froa
thence, as soon as the appearance of the fleet
from Europe is announced, they are conveyed
across the isthmus, partly on mules, and partly
down the river Chagre to Porto-be;lo. This pal.
try village, the climate of which, from the perni-
cious union of excessive heat, continual moillure,
and the putrid exhalations arising from a rank
foil, is more fatal to life than any perhaps in the
known world, is immediately filled with people.
From being the residence of a few negroes and
mulattoes, and of a miserable garrison relieved
every three months, Porto-bello assumes fud.
denly a very different aspeA, and its streets are
crowded with opulent merchants from ever
corner of Peru, and the adjacent provinces. A
fair is opened, the wealth of America is ex.
changed for the manufacures of Europe; and,
during its prescribed term of forty days, the
licheft traffic on the face of the earth is begun
and finished, with that simplicity of tranfadion
and that unbounded confidence, which accom-

pa3T

anv extensive commercez. The Flota holds
t' course to Vera Cruz. The treasures and
comi odities of New Spain, and the depending

vrovinces, which were deposited at Puebla de

|; Angeles in expectation of its arrival, are car-
ired thither, and the commercial operations of
Vera Cruz, conduced in the fame manner with
those of Porto-bello, are inferior to them only
in importance and value. Both fleets, as soon
as they have completed their cargoes from Ame.
rica, rendezvous at the Havanna, and return in
cumpany to Europe.

The trade of Spain with her colonies, while
thus fettered and reftri&ed, came necessarily to
be conduEted with the fame spirit, and upon the
fame principles, as that of an exclusive company,
Being confined to a single port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole
of it was gradually engrossed by a small number
of wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now
in Cadiz. These by combinations, which they
can easily form, may altogether prevent that
competition which preserves commodities at their
i natural price; and by acing in concert, to which
Ithey are prompted by their mutual interest, they
may raise or lower the value of them at pleasure.
In consequence of this, the price of European
I goods in America is always high, and often ex-
orbitant. A hundred, two hundred, and even
three hundred per cent. are profits not uncom.
iwo in the commerce of Spain with her colo.
ties . From the fame ingroffing spirit it fre.
qluently happens, that traders of the second

z Se NoTE CLXXXV1II. B. Ulna RetablifT.
SL: P
?. . 191.

order,

order, whose warehouses do not contain a con
plete assortment of commodities for the Amer
can market, cannot purchase from the moo
opulent merchants such goods as they want, a
a lower price than that for which they are fol
in the colonies. With the fame vigilant jet
lousy that an exclusive company guards againd
the intrusion of the free trader, those overgrown
monopolists endeavour to check the progress ol
every one whose encroachments they dread'
This refsraint of the American commerce to onc
po-t, not only assets its domerfic state, be
limits its foreign operations. A monopolist mat
acquire more, and certainly will hazard less, by
a confined trade which yields exorbitant profi,
than by an extensive commerce in which he re.
ceives only a moderate return of gain. It is
often his interest not to enlarge, but to circum-
scribe the sphere of his aaivity; and, infte3d of
calling forth more vigorous exertions of com.
mercial industry, it may be the obje& of hi
attention to check and set bounds to them. By
some such maxim, the mercantile policy of Spain
seems to have regulated its intercourse with
America. Instead of furnishing the colonice
with European goods in such quantity as might
render both the price and the profit moderate;
the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem to ha:e
supplied them with a sparing hand, that the
eagerness of competition amongst customen
obliged to purchase in a scanty market, might
enable the Spanish facors to dispose of their
cargoes with exorbitant gain. About the mid.

b Smith's Inquiry, ii 171. Campomanes, Educ. Popi.
i 438.

~!.,

;e of the last century, when the exclusive trade
to America from Seville was in its most flourish-
ig tate, the burden of the two united fqua-
drons of the Galeons and Flota, did not exceed
twenty seven thousand five hundred tons '. The
fapply which such a fleet could carry, muff have
been very inadequate to the demands of those
populous and extensive colonies, which depended
upon it for all the luxuries, and many of the
;eceffaries of life.

Spain early became sensible of her declension
from her former prosperity, and many refpeEa-
bie and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts
in deviling methods for reviving the decaying in-
daftry and commerce of their country. From
the violence of the remedies proposed, we may
judge how desperate and fatal the malady ap-
peared. Some, confounding a violation of police
with criminality againit the state, contended,
that in order to check illicit commerce, every
pefon convicted of carrying it on, ihould be
punished with death and confiscation of all his
tffe&s d. Others, forgetting the diftintion be-
tween civil offences and a&s of impiety, insisted,
that contraband trade should be ranked among
the crimes reserved for the cognizance of the
Inquisition; that such as were guilty of it might
be tried and punished, according to the secret
and summary form in which that dreadful tri-
i bunal exercises its jurifdition e. Others, un-
irftruced by observing the pernicious effecs of
I nonopolies in every country where they have

' Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435- i;. 11X. d M.
te Santa Cruz Commercia Suelto, p. 141, * Moncada
R.ciidrcion politic 4; 9fpagna, p. 41.

been

been eftablihed, have proposed to vest the trdd
with America in exclusive companies, which ic.
terest would render the molt vigilant guardizs.
of the Spanish commerce against the encroach.
ment of the interlopers f.

Besides these wild proje&s, many fcheren,

better digested and more beneficial, were fig.
gested. But under the feeble monarchs, wilh
whom the reign of the Austrian line in Spain
closed, incapacity and indecision are confpicuoun
in every department of government. Instead of
taking for their model the a&ive administration
of Charles V. they affected to imitate the can.
tious procrastinating wisdom of Philip II. and
destitute of his talents, they deliberated perpe.
tually, but determined nothing. No remcdy
was applied to the evils under which the national
commerce, domcftic as well as foreign, languished.
These evils continued to increase, and Spain,
with dominions more extensive and more opulent
than any European state. poffefted neither vig.
our, nor moneys, nor industry. At length, the
violence of a great national convulsion rouzed
the flnmbenrng genius of Spain. The efforts if
the two contending parties in the civil war,
kindled by the dispute concerning the succession
of the crown at the beginning of this century,
called forth in some degree, the ancient spirit
and vigour of the nation. While men were theu
forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than those which had iilfluenced the
councils of the monarchy during the course of a
ccctur-, Spain derived from an unexpected

f Z.valla y Augnon Reprefentacion, &c. p. loo.
t Ac NOT LL-LXXX1X.

'C':.'

[urce the means of availing itself of their talents.
The various powers who favoured the preten-
,.)ni either of the Aultrian or Bourbon can-
.jate for the Spanish throne, sent formidable
fitts and armies to their support; France, Eng-
ind, and Holland remitted immense fums to
bpain. There were spent in the provinces which
Vtcame the theatre of war. Part of the Ame-
rcan treasure, of which foreigners had drained
tne kingdom, flowed back thither. From this
-ea, one of the most intelligent Spanifi authors
c-es the revival of the monarchy ; and, how-
t;'r humiliating the truth may be, h: acknow-
i ie,, that it is to her enemies his country is
i-bited for the acquitition of a fund of circulat-
.i fppcie, in some nmafure adequate to the exi-
:'r.:;es of tihe public '.

.s ,,on as the Bourbons obtained quiet pof-
::-,)n ci the throne, they discerned this change
;- h spirit of the people, and in the state of
;'. nation, and took advantage of it; for al-
.' h that family has not given monarchs to
.a :n remarkable for superiority of genius, they
;.:_e all been benLiicent princes, attentive to the
i'j-pinyfi of their fubjccts, and solicitous to pro-
.ce it. It was, accildingly, the first objeEt
1 l1h ip V. to suppress an innovation which
ild crept in during the course of the war, and
h4' overturned the whole system of the Spanish
tio.nierce with America. The English and
Dutch, by their superiority in naval power,
La ing acquired such command of the sea, as to
c~t off all intercourse between Spain and her
c;io;lict, Spain, in order to furniih her subjects

i Canmrr.nes, i 420.
'' L- ,ill. P n

in America those necessaries of life, withb
which they could not exist, and as the oU0
means of receiving from thence any part
their treaf:re, departed so far from the uif,
rigour of its maxims as to open the trade wia
Peru to her allies the French. The merchani
of St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted ti
privilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged h
it with vigour, and carried it on upon principle
very different from thole of the Spaniards. Thb
supplied Peru with European commodities atl
moderate price, and not in stinted quantitT.
The goods which they imported were conveyt
to every province of Spanish America, in fuc
abundance as had never been known in an
former period. If this intercourse had been co0
tinued, the exportation of European commor.
ties from Spain mult have ceased, and the d.
ptendence of the colonies on the mother-countn
have been at an end. The most peremptory it
junctions were therefore issued [1 7 13], prohibit.
ing the admifiion of foreign vessels into any po.
of Peru or Chili k, and a Spanish squadron wa
employed to clear the South Sea of intruders
whose aid was no longer necessary.

But though, on the cessation of the w-

which was terminated by the treaty of Utrech:
Spain obtained relief from one encroachment i:
her commercial fvftem, she was cxpofed to ani
ther, which (he deemed hardly less perniciow.
As an inducement that might prevail with Quet
Anne to conclude a peace, which France ar
Spain desired with equal ardour, Philip V. sa

k Frrzier Voy. 256. R. U.loa Rctb. ii. fs;, &c. -.
red- y Hcrrera. A*ifo, &c. -;6.

i':

Dl!v conveyed to Great Britain the Ajiento, or
):itracA fr supplying the Spanish colonies with
,rroes, which had formerly been enjoyed by
F:ance, but granted it the more extraordinary

r-.ilege of fending annually to the fair of Porto-
tClo, a ship of five hundred tons, laden with

Eliropean commodities. In consequence of this,
B-itilh facories were established at Carthagena,
Parama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres, and other
Spanish settlements. The veil with which Spain
Lad hitherto covered the state and tranfa&ions
tf her colonies was removed. The agents of a
r.val nation, residing in the towns of most ex-
trnfive trade, and of c'lief resort, had the best
opportunities of becoming acquainted with the
i:terior condition of the American provinces,
of obfcrving their stated and occasional wants,
a;d of knowing what commodities might be
imported into them with the greatest advan-
tage. In confcqucnce of information so authen-
tic and expeditious, the merchants of Jamaica
a:d other Englilh colonies who traded to
the Spanish main, were enabled to assort and
proportion their cargoes so exactly to the de-
,and3 of the market, that the contraband com-
imerce was carried on with a facility, and to an
extent unknown in any former period. This
however was not the most fatal consequence of
the Affiento to the trade of Spain. The agents
of the British South-Sea Company, under cover
of the importation which they were authorised
to make by the ship sent annually to Porto-bello,
poured in their commodities on the Spaniih con-

:.ncnt, without limitation or restraint. Inftcad
.fa ship of five hundred tons, as stipulated in

P 2 the

the treaty, they usually employed one which e.
ceeded nine hundred tons in burden. She wr
accompanied by two or three smaller vefeii,
which, mooring in some neighbouring cree-,
supplied her clandestinely with fresh bales ti
goods, to replace such as were fold. The i.
fpeaors of the fair, and officers of the reverut,
gained by exorbitant presents, connived at ta
fraud 1. Thus, partly by the operations of t-e
company, and partly by the a&tivity of priva't
interlopers, almost the whole trade of Spani'
America was engrossed by foreigners. The i.L
mense commerce of the Galeons, formerly t,
pride of Spain, and the envy of other nationi,
funk to nothing, [1737,] and the squadron itfti
reduced from fifteen thousand to two thousad
tons m, served hardly any purpose but to fetch
home the royal revenue arising from the fifth c,
silver.

While Spain observed those encroachmenL,

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effe&s, it wa
impossible not to make some effort to reftrai
them. Her firit expedient was to station ship;
of force, under the appellation of Guarda Costa,
upon the coadts of those provinces, to which is-
terlopers most frequently retorted. As privar
interest concurred with the duty which thej
owed to the public, in rendering the officers wv
commanded those vessels vigilant and a&tiiv
some check was given to the progress of the co:-
traband trade, though in dominions so extensive.
and so accessible by fca, hardly any numbere:
cruisers was sufficient to guard againit its inrua i

I See No-r CXC. = Alccoo y -;errra, p. -;
Campomanes, i. 436.

ji every quarter. This interruption of an in.
tercourfe, which had been carried on with so
much facility, that the merchants in the British
colonier. h'ere accustomed to confider it almost as
2n allowed branch of commerce, excited mur-
Eurs and complaints. These authorised, in
lome measure, and rendered more interesting, by
feieral unjustifiable aas of violence committed
br the captains of the Spanish Guarda Costas,
precipitated Great Britain into a war with Spain
1739]; in consequence of which the latter ob-
ained a final release from the Afilento, and was
ift at liberty to regulate the commerce of her
colonies, without being restrained by any en-
gagement with a foreign power.

As the formidable encroachments of the Eng-
lb on their American trade, had discovered to
the Spaniards the vail consumption of European
goods in their colonies, and taught them the
ad.-antage of accommodating their importations
to the occasional demand of the various pro-
vinces, they perceived the necessity of devising
lome method of supplying their colonies, differ-
ent from their ancient one, of fending thither
periodical fleets. That mode of communication
had been found not only to be uncertain, as the
departure of the Galeons and Flota was some-
times retarded by various accidents, and often
prevented by the wars which raged in Europe;
but long experience had shewn it to be ill adapt-
ed to afford America a regular and timely sup-
ply of what it wanted. The scarcity of Eu-
,opean goods in the Spanish settlements fre-
qucntly became excessive; their price rose to an
t-ormous height; the vigilant eye of mercantile

P 3 attention

attention did not fail to observe this favouanb
opportunity, an ample supply was poured in b
interlopers from the English, the French, an;
Dutch islands; and when the Galeons at lenrl
arrived, they found the markets so glutted b
this illicit commerce, that there was no demaan
for the commodities with which they were load
ed. In order to remedy this, Spain has per
mitted a considerable part of her commerce v. :
America, to be carried on by regi/erJ fji
These are fitted out, during the intervals be
tween the stated seasons when the Galeons an;
Flota fail, by merchants in Seville or Cadi7
upon obtaining a licence from the council of th.
Indies, for which they pay a very high premiumr
and are destined for those ports in A\meric
where any extraordinary demand is foreseen r
expeced. By this expedient, such a regulai
supply of the commodities, for which there
the greatest demand, is conveyed to the Arre.
rican market, that the interloper is no longer
allured by the fame prospect of exceflive gain, 0o
the people in the colonies urged by the fame
necessity to engage in the hazardous adventurei
of contraband trade.

In proportion as experience manifefled the

advantages of carrying on trade in this mode,
the number of register Ihips increased; and at
length, in the year 1748, the Galeons, after
having been employed upwards of two centurie,
were finally laid aside. From that period there
has been no intercourse with Chili and Peru but
by single ships, dispatched from time to time as
occasion requires, and when the merchants ex.
pe& a profitable market will open. These Iir'

A2-

fil round Cape Horn, and convey dire&ly to
the ports of the South Sea the produtions and
mranufacures of Europe, for which the people
fettled in those countries were formerly obliged
:o repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These
towns, as has been formerly observed, mult gra-
dually decline, when deprived of that commerce
t: which they owed their profpcrity. This
disadvantage however is more than compensated
b' the beneficial effe&s of this new arrangement,
a, the whole continent of South America re-
cev:es new supplies of European commodities,
':th so much regularity, and in such abundance,
s mutt not only contribute greatly to the hap-
p;sefs, but increase the population of all the
colonies fettled there. But as all the register
s-ips de[tined for the Sonth Seas, must rill take
their departure from Cadiz, and are obliged to
eturn thither , this branch of the American
comrmerce, even in its new and improved form,
continues subjec to the restraints of a species of
monopoly, and feels those pernicious effects of it,
which I have already described.

Nor has the attention of Spain been confined
to regulating the trade with its more flourishing
colonies; it has extended likewise to the reviv-
ng commerce in those fettlemcnts where it was
neglected, or had decayed. Among the new
taftes which the people of Europe have ac-
quired, in consequence of importing the pro-
ductions of those countries which they con-
quered in America, that for chocolate is one of

tie most universal. The use of this liquor made
with a paste, formed of the nut, or almond of

D Campomanes, i, 434. 440.

the

the cacao-tree, compounded with various i.
gredients, the Spaniards tirft learned from tht
Mexicans ; and it has appeared to them, and to
the other European nations, so palatable, si
nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has bt.
come a commercial article of considerable irE
portance. The cacao-tree grows fpontaneo;..,
in several parts of the torrid zone; but the nut
of the best quality, next to those of Guatimal.
on the South Sea, are produced in the rich pla:
of Caraccas, a province of Tierra iirme. I
consequence of this acknowledged fuperioritv i:
the quality of cacao in that province, andi;
communication with the Atlantic, which faci!
tates the conveyance to Europe, the culture c
the cacao there is more extensive than in ai'
district of America. But the Dutch, by ti'
vicinity of their settlements in the small iflan
of Curazoa and Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Ca
raccas, gradually ingroffed the greatest part
the cacao trade. The traffic with the mother
country for this valuable commodity ceased ai
most entirely; and such was the supine negli
gence of the Spaniards, or the defects of thci
commercial arrangements, that they were oblige
to receive from the hands of foreigners this pr,
duetion of their own colonies, at an exorbitaa
price. In order to remedy an evil no less di
graceful, than pernicious to his subje&s, Phiij
V. in the year I728, granted to a body of mir
chants, an exclusive right to the commerce ki:i
Caraccas and Cumana, on condition of ti.,
employing at their own expence, a fufficite
number of armed veftels to clear the coast of ;i
terlopers. This focietv, diitinguifhed fomc:;.*-

the name of the Company of Guipufcoa,

foin the province of Spain in which it is eftab-
.;ned, and sometimes by that of the Company
ci Caraccas, from the diltri& of America to
bhich it trades, has carried on its operations
ith such vigour and success, that Spain has
ecovered an important branch of commerce,

ihich she had suffered to be wrested from her,

znd is plentifully supplied with an article of ex-
tensive consumption at a moderate price. Not
nly the parent state, but the colony of Carac-
as, has derived great advantages from this in-
titiution; for although, at the first aspel, it may
2ppear to be one of those monopolies, whose
utdency is to check the spirit of indultry, in-
tead of calling it forth to new exertions, it has
been prevented from operating in this manner by
several salutary regulations, framed upon fore-
fight of such bad effets, and of purpose to ob-
mate them. The planters in the Caraccas are
not left to depend entirely on the company,
ither for the importation of European com-
modities, or the sale of their own produfions.
The inhabitants of the Canary islands have the
privilege of fending thither annually a register
hip of considerable burden; and from Vera
Cruz in New Spain, a free trade is permitted in
eery port comprehended in the charter of the
company. In consequence of this, there is such
a competition, that both with refpe& to what
the colonies purchase, and what they fell, the
pnce seems to be fixed at its natural and equita-
bie rate. The company has not the power of
raising the former, or of degrading the latter
a: picafure; and accordingly, lince it was eftab-

liihed,

lifhed, the increase of culture, of populatie
and of live flock, in the province of Caracra
has been very considerable°.

But as it is slowly that nations relinquish ar

fyflem which time has rendered venerable, anA
as it is still more slowly that commerce can be
diverted from the channel in which it has long
been accuflomed to flow; Philip V. in his nen
regulations concerning the American trade, pai
such deference to the ancient maxim of Spains
concerning the limitation of all importation fror
the New World to one harbour, as to obgip
both the register (hips which returned fron
Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan Compan}
from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in th
port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments mon
liberal and enlarged begin to spread in Spain.
The spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it s
the glory of the present age to have turned fron
frivolous or abifrufe speculations, to the bufine
and affairs of men, has extended its influence b'e
yond the Pyrenees. In the researches of in
genious authors, concerning the police or corm
merce of nations, the errors and defets ofthk
Spanish system with refpec to both met every
eye, and have not only been exposed with fevc.
rity, but are held up as a warning to other ftatei
The Spaniards, flung with the reproaches oi
these authors, or convinced by their argumenu,
and admonished by several enlightened writers,
their own country, seem at length to have di.
covered the deftrustive tendency of those narru
maxims, which, by cramping commerce in aH
its operations, have so long retarded its progre-

o See NOTE CXCI.

I:

is to the monarch now on the throne, that

Spain is indebted for the first public regulation
ormed in consequence of such enlarged ideas.
While Spain adhered with rigour to her an-
cient maxims concerning her commerce with
America, she was so much afraid of opening any
channel, by which an illicit trade might find ad-
mission into the colonies, that she almost {hut
erfelf out from any intercourse with them, but
that which was carried on by her annual fleets.
There was no establishment for a regular com-
munication of either public or private intelli-
gence, between the mother country and its Ame-
rican settlements. From the want of this necef-
iry institution, the operations of the state, as
well as the business of individuls, were retarded
or conduted unlkilfully, and Spain often re-
ceired from foreigners her firit information with
r:fpect to very interesting events in her own co-
onies. But though this defet in police was
£'nfibly felt, and the remedy for it was obvious,
that jealous spirit with which the Spanish mo-
sarchs guarded the exclusive trade, restrained
t'em from applying it. At length Charles III.
f'rmounted those considerations which had de-
terred his predecessors, and in the year 1 764 ap-
polnted packet-boats to be dispatched on the first
dar of each month, from Corugna to the Ha-
ranna or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are
conveyed in smaller vessels to Vera Cruz and
Porto-bello, and trantmitted by post through
the kingdoms of Tierra Firme, Granada, Peru,
ud New Spain. With no less regularity packet-
'.ats fail once in two months to Rio de la Plata,
'; the accommodation of the provinces to the

n

east of the Andes. Thus provision is made fr,
a speedy and certain circulation of intelligenc
throughout the vast dominions of Spain, froz
which equal advantages muff redound to t:
political and mercantile interest of the kingdom?
With this new arrangement, a scheme of eztend.
ing commerce has been more immediately cr.
necded. Each of the packet-boats, which aj
refsels of rome considerable burden, is allowed tu
take in half a loading of such commodities a
are the produc of Spain, and most in demand i
the ports whither they are bound. In retu.n
for these they may bring home to Corugna a:
equal quantity of American productionsq. Th:,
mav be confidered as the first relaxation of tho;
rigid laws, which confined the trade with th:
New vWorld to a single port, and the first a.
tempt to admit the reft of the kingdom to son.
share in it.

It was soon followed by one more decifivs.

In the year iJ;, Charles III. laid open :t:
trade to the windward islands, Cuba, Hifpanioia,
Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to i;.!
fubjccts in every province of Spain. He pc-
mitted them to fail from certain ports in eac.
province, which are specified in the ediA, at ar.-
season, and with whatever cargo they deemed
most proper, without any other warnant than
simple clearance from the custom house of thi
place whence they took their departure. HP
released them from the numerous and oppreffiif
duties imposed on goods exported to Amerc.
and in place of the whole, substituted a modera:

P Ponz Viage de E.pagna, v;. Prol. p. ij.
q Append. ii. a ia Educ. Pop. p. 31.

ax of fix in the hundred on the commodities
ftnt from Spain. He allowed them to return
ether to the fame port, or to any otherv here
.the n might hope for a more advantageous
rarket, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
:. payment of the usual duties. This ample
drvilege, which at once broke through all the
[ntces which the jealous policy of Spain had
e:en labouring, for two centuries and a half,
; throw romud its commercial intercourfc with
te New W\orld, was soon after extended to
Louisiana, and to the provinces of Yucatan and
C inpeachy r.

The propriety of this innovation, which may
rk confidcred as the moit liberal effort of Spanish
l- :!lation, has appeared from its effeEts. Prior
;. he edict in favour of the free trade, Spain
:-ir-ed hardly any benefit from its neglected co-
:-es in Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and
Ti:.idad. Its commerce wivth Cuba was incon-

'erable, and that of Yucatan and Campeachy
uzS ingrofTed almost intirely by interlopers. But

f, soon as a general liberty of trade was per-

r.lted, the intercourse with thofc provinces re-

v:'d, and has gone on with a rapidity of pro-
-dfiion, of which there are few examples in the
?.t.ory of nations. In less than ten years, the
:-ad cf Cuba has been more than tripled. Even
i those settlements where, from the languishing
:?e of indultry, greater efforts were requisite
, reltore its activity, their commerce has been
-.'b!ed it is computed, that such a number

h .ips is already employed in the free trade,
::t *he tonnage of them far exceeds that of the

A: penj, iL a la Educ. Pop, 37, 54. 91.
''L. 1i1. Qo Galeons

Galeons and Flota, at the most flourishing a
of their commerce. The benefits of this arrange
ment are not confined to a few merchants, cebi
lilhed in a favourite port. They are diffuf~
through every province of the kingdom; and by
opening a new market for their various prodn.
tions and manufaEcures, must encourage and add
vivacity to the industry of the farmer and artifice.
Nor does the kingdom profit only by what t
exports; it derives advantage likewise from wha
it receives in return, and has the prospect of b.
ing soon able to supply itself with several com.
modities of extensive conitmption, for which i
formerly depended on foreigners. The con.
fumption of sugar in Spain is perhaps as grea
in proportion to the nurrbcr of its inhabitant,
as that of any European kingdom. But thoug
possessed of countries in the New World, whose
foil and climate are most proper for rearing tbt
sugar cane; though the domestic culture oftha
valuable plant in the kingdom of Granada wa
once considerable; such has been the fatal tei
dency of ill judged inffitutions in America, and
such the preiTure of improper taxes in Eurow,
that Spain has loft almoit entirely this branch d
induftrv, which has enriched other nations.
This commodity, which has now become a
article of primary nectffity in Europe, the Spa
niards were obliged to purchase of foreigners,
and had the mortification to fee their countr
drained annually of great ftrms on that accoun:.
But if that spirit, which the permnifion of fr:
tract has p:lt i;l mortion, flai; pcrievere in its effor
w.t t: the iame vigour, the cultivation of fu.-

Uztariz, c. 94.

,.

Cuba and Porto-Rico may increase so much,
hat in a few years, it is probable, that their
rowth of sugars may be equal to the demand
f the kingdom.
Spain has been induced, by her experience of
be beneficial consequences resulting from having
claxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient
Rws with refpea to the commerce of the mo-
her-country with the colonies, to permit a more
iberal intercourse of one colony with another.
3y one of the jealous maxims of the old fyltem,
1l the provinces situated on the South Seas were
Irhibited, under the most severe penalties, from
3olding any communication with one another.
Though each of these yield peculiar producions,
:he reciprocal exchange of which might have
sdded to the happiness of their respective in-
abitants, or have facilitated their progress in
rduftry, so solicitous was the Council of the In-
fies to prevent their receiving any supply of
heir wants, but by the periodical fleets from
Europe, that in order to guard against this, it
ruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in the
southern provinces of New Spain, in Guatimala,
and the New Kingdom of Granada, from such a
correspondence with their fellow-fubjets, as
tended manifestly to their mutual prosperity. Of
all the numerous reftrinions devised by Spain for
securing the exclusive trade with her American
settlements, none perhaps was more illiberal,
none seems to have been more sensibly felt, or to
have produced more hurtful effecs. This griev-
ance, coeval with the settlements of Spain in the
countries situated on the Pacific Ocean, is at last
redressed. In the year 1774, Charles III. pub-

z2 lifhed

lifhed an edict, granting to the four great pr,
vinces which I have mentioned, the privilege
a free trade with each other'. What may'
the effecas of openin, this communication bk.
tween countries destined by their situation i
reciprocal intercourse, cannot yet be determind
by experience. They can hardly fail of beng
beneficial and extenlive. The motives for gra:.
ing this permission are manifestly no less laudabl;
than the principle on which it is founded i
liberal; and both difcovcr the progress of a fpi r
in Spain, far elevated above the narrow prej.
dices and maxims on which her system for r.
gulating the trade, and conducting the gover.
ment o her colonies, was originally founded.

At the fame time that Spain has been iite:

on introducing regulations, suggested by mon
enlarged views of policy, into her fyftern a
American commerce, (he has not been inattw
tive to the interior government of her colonir
Here too there was much room for reformatio:
and improvement; and Don Joseph Galvez, wLs
ha; now the direcsion of the department fz
Indian affairs in Spain, has enjoyed the best o0
portunities, not only of observing the defea
and corruption in the political frame of the co.
lonies, but of discovering the sources of thE:
evils. After being employed seven ytars in ib:
New Woild on an extraordinary mifflion, an
with very extensive powers, as infpecfor genenl
of New Spain; after viiting in pcrfon tle ::
niote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora, and G-'-
furnia, and making several important alterat:i:;

' Real Cedula penes me Pontz Viage d: Efparg3,
Proloto.. p, 2- NoT CXCII.

r.

in the state of the police and revenue; he began
bis ministry with a general reformation of the
tribunals of justice in America. In consequence
of the progress of population and wealth in
the colonies, the business of the Courts of Au.
dience has increased so much, that the number
of judges of which they were originally com-
ofed has been found inadequate to the growing
rbours and duties of the office, and the salaries
fettled upon them have been deemed inferior to
the dignity of the Rtation. As a remedy for
both, he obtained a royal edic, establishing an
additional number of judges in each court of
Audience, with higher titles, and more ample
appointments a.

To the fame intelligent minister Spain is in-
debted for a new diltribution of government in
its American provinces. Even since the eftab-
liihment of a third viceroyalty in the New King-
dom of Granada, so great is the extent of the
Spanish dominions in the New World, that feve-
ral places subjea to the jurifdition of each vice-
roy, were at such an enormous distance from the
capitals in which they resided, that neither their
attention, nor their authority, could reach so
far. Some provinces subordinate to the viceroy
of New Spain, lay above two thousand miles
from Mexico. There were countries fubje& to
the viceroy of Peru fiill farther from Lima.
The people in those remote districts could hardly
be said to enjoy the benefit of civil government.
The oppression and insolence of its inferior mi-
niiers they often feel, and rather submit to thcfe

Gazeta de Madrid, i9th March 1776.

CQ3 in

in sile.nce, than involve themselves in the expena
and trouble of resorting to the distant capital
where alone they can find redress. As a remed
for this, a fourth viceroyalty has been erec&n
[Aug. 1776], to the jurifdition of which ar
fubje&ed the provinces of Rio de laPlata, Bueno,
Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, St' Cnizd
la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoe
and St. Juan. By this well-judged arrangernmen
two adv?ntages arc gained. All the inconvea
ences ocafinr.ed by the remote situation of thol
provinceq, which had been long se:t, and Ion
complainel of, are, in a great measure, remorve
The countries most distant from Lima are fep
rated front the viceroyalty of Peru, and unite
under a fupcrior, whose feat of government 2
Buenos-Avies, will be commodious and accci
fible. The contraband trade with the Port.
guefe, nhich was become so extensive, as mrn
have put a finl! flop to the exportation of cor
modities from Spain to her southern colonie
may be checked more thoroughly, and wit'
greater facility, when the supreme magiftratn
by hi; vicinity to the places in which it is car
ried on, can view its progress and effects wil!
his own eyes. Don Pedro Zevallo=, who ha
been raised to this new dignity, vwih appoint
ments equal to those of the other vicerovs, i
well acquainted both with the slate and the in
terest of the countries over which he is to pe
fide, having served in them long, and with d:'
tincaion. By this dismemberment, ficzceedi;-
that which took place at the erection of th:
viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granad&
almost two-third parts of the territories, or,:

rh..

afly fubje& to the viceroys of Peru, are now
opped off from their jurifdidion.
The limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain
wae likewise been considerably circumscribed,
nd with no less propriety and discernment.
Four of its most remote provinces, Sonora, Ci-
Naloa, California, and New Navarre, have been
formed into a separate government. The Che-
ralier de Croix, who is intrusted with this com-
mand, is not dignified with the title of viceroy,
nor does he enjoy the appointments belonging to
bhat rank, but his jurifdiftion is altogether in-
dependent on the viceroyalty of New Spain.
The ereEtion of this last government seems to
have been suggested, not only by the confidera-
tion of the remote situation of those provinces
from Mexico; but by attention to the late dif-
coveries made there, which I have mentioned x
Countries containing the richest mines of gold
that have hitherto been discovered in the New
World, and which probably may arise into great
importance, required the immediate infpe&ion
of a governor, to whom they should be specially
committed. As every consideration of duty, of
interest, and of vanity, must concur in prompt-
ing those new governors to encourage such ex-
ertions as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity
through the provinces committed to their charge,
the beneficial effects of this arrangement may be
considerable. Many difricts in America, long
depressed by the languor and feebleness natural
to the provinces which compose the extremities
of an overgrown empire, may be animated with
vigour and aEtivity, when brought so near the

X Book vii. vol. iii. p. 74.

feat

feat of power, as to feel its invigorating in
fluence.

Such, since the accession of the princes of tL

House of Bourbon to the throne of Spain, ha
been the progref£ of their regulations, and the
gradual expansion of their views with refpe& tc
the commerce and government of their Ameri
can colonies. Nor has their attention been si
entirely engrossed by what related to the mon
remote parts of their dominions, as to rende
them negle&tful of what was still more important
the reformation of domestic errors and defec&s i
policy. Fully sensible of the causes to which
the declension of Spain, from her former prof.
perity, ought to be imputed; they have made
it a great objec of their policy, to revive a
spirit of induitry among their fubjcts, and tc
give such extent and perfection to their manufac.
tures, as may enable them to supply the demanI
of America from their own stock, and to ex.
clude foreigners from a branch of commerce
which has been so fatal to the kingdom. Thi
they have endeavoured to accomplish, by a vari
ety of edicts issued since the peace of Utrecht.
They have granted bounties for the encourage.
ment of some branches of indufiry; they have
lowered the taxes on others; they have either
entirely prohibited, or have loaded with addi.
tional duties, such foreign manufactures as come
in competition with their own; they have in.
ftituted societies for the improvement of trade
and agriculture; they have planted colonies of
husbandmen in some uncultivated dilfrics of
Spain, and divided among them the wade fields;
they have had recourse to every expedient, de.

vied

riled by commercial wisdom, or commercial jea-
lousy, for reviving their own industry, and dif-
countenancing that of other nations. These,
however, it is not my province to explain, or to
inquire into their propriety and effects. There
, no effort of legislation more arduous, no ex-
periment in policy more uncertain, than an at-
tempt to revive the spirit of industry where it
has declined, or to introduce it where it is un-
known. Nations, already possessed of extensive
commerce, enter into competition with such ad-
vantages, derived from the large capitals and
txtenfive credit of their merchants, the dexterity
of their manufacturers, the alertness acquired by
habit in every department of business, that the
iate which aims at rivalling, or supplanting
them, must expet to struggle with many diffi-
culties, and be content to advance slowly. If
the quantity of producive industry, now in
Spain, be compared with that of the kingdom
under the last listless monarchs of the Austrian
line, its progress must appear considerable, and
is sufficient to alarm the jealousy, and to call
forth the most vigorous efforts, of the nations
now in possession of the lucrative trade which the
Spaniards aim at wresting from them. One
circumstance may render those exertions of Spain
an objet of more serious attention to the other
European powers. They are not to be ascribed
wholly to the influence of the crown and its
ministers. The sentiments and spirit of the peo-
ple seem to second the provident care of their
monarchs, and to give it greater effet. The
nation has adopted more liberal ideas, not only
with refpeEt to commerce, but domestic policy.

In

In all the later Spanish writers, defecs in the
arrangements of their country concerning both
are acknowledged, and remedies proposed, which
ignorance rendered their ancestors incapable of
discerning, and pride would not have allowed
them to confess t. But after all that the Spa.
niards have done, much remains to do. Many
pernicious inffitutions and abuses, deeply incor.
porated with the system of internal policy and
taxation, which has been long eftablihed in
Spain, muff be abolished, before indultry and
manufactures can recover an extensive activity.

Still, however, the commercial regulations of

Spain with respect to her colonies, are too rigid
and systematical to be carried into complete ex.
ecution. The legislature that loads trade with
impoitions too heavy, or fetters it by reftricions
too severe, defeats its own intention; and is
only multiplying the inducements to violate it
statutes, and proposing an high premium to en.
courage illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in
Europe and America, being circumscribed in
their mutual intercourse by the jealousy of the
crown, or oppressed by its exactions, have their
invention continually on the stretch how to elude
its edicts. The vigilance and ingenuity of private
interest discover means of effecting this, which
public wisdom cannot foresee, nor public autho-
rity prevent. This spirit counteracting that of
the laws, pervades the commerce of Spain with
America in all its branches; and from the highet
departments in government, descends to the
lowest. The very officers appointed to check
contraband trade, are often employed as inftr-

7 See NOTZ CXCIII.

ment

Bents in carrying it on; and the boards instituted
o restrain and punifi it, are the channels through
which it flows. The king is supposed, by the
most intelligent Spanish writers, to be defrauded,
by various artifices, of more than one half of the
revenue which he ought to receive from Ame-
ricaz; and as long as it is the interest of so
many persons to screen those artifices from de-
tection, the knowledge of them will never reach
the throne. " How many ordinances, fays
" Corita, how many inftrucions, how many
" letters from our sovereign, are sent in order

to corret abuses, and how little are they ob.
served, and what small advantage is derived
from them! To me the old observation ap-
pears just, that where there are many phyfi-
' cians, and many medicines, there is a want
of health; where there are many laws, and
many judges, there is want of justice. We
"have viceroys, presidents, governors, oydors,

corrigidors, alcaldes, and thousands of algua-
zils abound everywhere; but notwithstanding
all these, public abuses continue to multiply ."

Time has increased the evils which he lamented
as early as the reign of Plilip II. A spirit of
corruption has infeced all the colonies of Spain
in America. Men far removed from the feat of
government; impatient to acquire wealth, that
they may return speedily from what they are apt
to confider as a itate of exile in a remote un-
khalthful country; allured by opportunities too
tempting to be refilted, and seduced by the ex-
ample of thlloe aruund them; find their senti-
micuts of honour and of duty gradually relax.

Su.o:z. ce ind. u;rc,ii. lib. v. MS. p:nea me.

In

In private life, they give themselves up to a dif.
solute luxury, while in their public condudt they
become unmindful of what they owe to their
sovereign and to their country.

Before I close this account of the Spanish

trade in America, there remains one detached,
but important branch of it, to be mentioned.
Soon after his accession to the throne, Philip 11,
formed a scheme of planting a colony in the
Philippine islands, which had been negleted
since the time of their discovery; and he accom.
plifhed it by means of an armament fitted out from
New Spain b, [1564]. Manila,in theifland of Lu.
conia, was the station clofen for the capital of this
new establishment. From it an acive commercial
intercourse began with the Chinese, and a con.
fiderablc number of that industrious people, al.
Inred by the profpecd of gain, fettled in the
Philippine islands under the Spanish protection.
They supplied the colony so amply with all the
valuable producions and manufactures ofthe Eait,
as enabled it to open a trade with America, by
a course of navigation, the longest from land to
land on our globe. In the infancy of this trade,
it was carried on with Callao, on the Coast of
Peru; but experience having discovered the im.
propriety of fixing upon that as the port of com.
munication with Manila, the staple of the com-
merce between the east and weft was removed
from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast of New
Spain.

After various arrangements, it has been

brought into a regular form. One or two ships
depart annually from Acapuico, which are pet-

b Torquem. i. lib. v. c. 14.

mittrd

-;cted to carry out silver to the amount of five
ihudred thousand pesos C, but they have hardly
;~v thing else of value on board; in return for
r.ich, they bring back spices, drugs, china,
-d japan wares, calicoes, chintz, muffins, silks,
:-d every precious articl., with which the be-
r.nitv of the climate, or the ingenuity of its
-.ptl, has enabled the East to supply the reft
the world. For some time the merchants of
P.a were admitted to participate in this traffic,
;-d r.bght fend annually a (hip to Acapulco, to
Yit the arrival of the vessels from Manila, and
r:-eive a proportional fhate of the commodities
Fhich they imported. At length, the Peruvians
W-re excluded from this trade by most rigorous
Elats, and all the commodities from the East
r-trvcd solely for the consumption of New
'-- in,

In consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi-
t-i's of that country enjoy advantages unknown
i- the other Spanish colonies. The manufaaures
d the East are not only more suited to a warm
i;mate, and more (howy than those of Europe,
L. can be fold at a lower price; while, at the
hme time, the profits upon them are so confider-
b:!e, as to enrich all those who are employed,
rt ,er in bringing them from Manila, or vending
i'.tm in New Spain. As the interest both of
t"e buyer and feller concurred in favouring this
h-nch of commerce, it has continued to extend
t- spite of regulations, concerted with the most
: x:ous jealousy to circumscribe it. Under cover
L: what the laws permit to be imported, great
-nt.tites of India goods are poured into the

c Recop. lib. ir. c. 45. 1. 6.
' OL, mI. R markets

markets of New Spain d, and when the flota a
rives at Vera Cruz from Europe, it often find
the wants of the people already supplied b
cheaper and more acceptable commodities.

There is not, in the ccmmercial arrangemes

of Spain, any circumst.ance more inexplhcab;
than the permission of this trade between Ne
Spain and the Philippines, or more repugnant t
its fundamental maxim of holding the colonies i
perpetual dependence on the mother-countn
by prohibiting any commercial intercourse tb
might suggest to them the idea of receiving
supply of their wants from any other quant
This permission mult appear still more extraorc
nary, from confidering that Spain herself carrm
on no dire& trade with her settlements in th
Philippines, and grants a privilege to one of h,
American colonies, which she denies to her ful
je&s in Europe. It is probable, that the cok
nifts who originally took possession of the Philii
pines, having been sent out from New Spai
begun this intercourse with a country which tbh
confidered, in some measure, as their pare
state, before the court of Madrid was awarec
its consequences, or could establish regulatio
in order to prevent it. Many remonftrara
have been presented against this trade, as a
trimental to Spain, by diverting into anotb
channel a large portion of that treasure whic
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending:
give rife to a spirit of independence in the co/
nies, and to encourage innumerable. frau
against which it is impossible to guard, in traZ
actions so far removed from the inspection

C See NOTE CXCIV.

goverrn:Ic

government. But as it requires no flight effort
of political wisdom and vigour to abolish any
pra&ice which numbers are intereited in support-
ig, and to which time has added the fanfion
o its authority, the commerce between New
Spain and Manila seems to be as considerable as
veer, and may be confidered as one chief cause
of the elegance and splendor conspicuous in this
part of the Spanish dominions.

But notwithltanding this general corruption in
the colonies of Spain, and the diminution of the
icome belonging to the public, occasioned by
the illicit importations made by foreigners, as
well as by the various frauds of which the co-
bnifts themselves are guilty in their commerce
with the parent state, the Spanish monarchs re-
ceive a very considerable revenue from their
American dominions. This arises from taxes of
various kinds, which may be divided into three
capital branches. The first contains what is
paid to the king, as sovereign, or superior lord
of the New World: to this class belongs the
duty on the gold and silver raised from the mines,
and the tribute exadted from the Indians; the
former is termed by the Spaniards the right of
fgniory, the latter is the duty on vafalage. The
iecond branch comprehends the numerous duties
upon commerce, which accompany and oppress
i in every ftep of its progress, from the greatest
tranfa&ions of the wholesale merchant, to the
petty traffic of the vender by retail. The third
includes what accrues to the king, as head of the
church, and administrator of ecclesiastical funds
in the New World. In consequence of this he
eidives the first fruits, annates, spoils, and other

E. spiritual

spiritual revenues, levied by the apostolic chaz
bet in Europe; and is entitled, likewise, to *t
profit arising from the sale of the bull of Cr.
zado. This bull, which is published every t;;
years, contains, an ablolution from paRl offerac
by the pope, and, among other immunities,;
permission to eat several kinds of prohibitc
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. T,
moi.ks employed in dispersing those bulls, ex:;
their virtues with all the fervour of intercit;
eloquence; the people, ignorant and creduiso
liften with implicit assent; and every perfoni
the Spanish colonies, of European, Creolian,c
mixed race, purchases a bull, which is deeme
essential to his salvation, at the rate fct upos:
by government c.

What may be the amount of those vario:

funds, it is almost impossible to determine * i:
precision. The extent of the Spanish domii;io:
in America, the jealousy of government, wli;
renders them inaccessible to foreigners, the mi,
terious fience which the Spaniards are accn.
tomed to observe with refpe& to the interior lit
of their colonies, combine in covering this fubjc:
with a veil, which it is not easy to remo0:
But an account, apparently no less accurate tha
it is curious, ha~ lately been published of ,-
royal revenue in New Spain, from which we ri
form tome idea with rtlpeci to what is collec
in the other provinces. According to that e
count, the crown does not receive from ali t
departments of taxation in New Spain abuoi
miilion of our money, from which one half il;
be deducted as the expence of the proyi;rs

Ste NoTrr CXCV,

eftabl;;lr.:

lablifhmentf. Peru, it is probable, yields a
an not inferior to this; and if we suppose that
l the other regions of America, including the
lands, furnish a third (hare of equal value, we
1ll not perhaps be far wide from the truth, if
re conclude, that the net public revenue of
;pain, raised in America, does not exceed a
illion and a half sterling. This falls far {hort
,f the immense fums to which suppositions,
Landed upon conje&ure, have raised the Spanish
erenue in Americag. It is remarkable, how-
rer, upon one account. Spain and Portugal
re the only European powers, who derive a
ires revenue from their colonies. All the ad-
Mntage that accrues to other nations, from their
kmerican dominions, arises from the exclusive
~joyment of their trade ; but beside this, Spain
s brought her colonies to contribute towards
ncreafing the power of the state; and in return
or protecion, to bear a proportional (hare of
le common burden.
Accordingly, the fum which I have computed
n be the amount of the Spanish revenue, from
America, arises wholly from the taxes colleced
here, and is far from being the whole of what
cnrues to the king from his dominions in the
New World. The heavy duties imposed on the
:ommodities exported from Spain to America h,
u well as what is paid by those which she fends
bome in return; the tax upon the negro-flaves,
with which Africa supplies the New World, to-
gether with several smaller branches of finance,
bring large fums into the treasury, the precise
rSee NOTE CXCVI. 1 See NOTE CXCVII.
See NOTE CXCVIII.

R 3 extent

extent of which I cannot pretend to afctr
tain.

But if the revenue which Spain draws from

America be great, the expence of adminifrati.,:
in her colonies bears proportion to it. In eve-t
department, even of her domestic police 2.,
finances, Spain has adopted a system more coa
plex, and more encumbered with a varietr
tribunals, and a multitude of officers, than t't:
of any European nation, in which the fovere!-
possesses such extensive power. From the jea!,:
spirit with which Spain watches over her A--
rican fettleme;.ts, and her endeavours to .:-
against fraud in provinces so remote from i:,fr.
t;on; boards and officers have been multipi.
there with fIill more anxious attention. Il,
country where the expence of living is great,
salaries aliotted to every person in public co.
muift be high, and mufl load the revenue with-
immense burden. The parade of governrr»-
greatly augments the weight of it. The ::r
roys of Mexico, Peru, and the New Kingd-
of Granada, as representatives of the king' rP:-
son, among people fond of ostentation, main;-
all the state and dignity of royalty. Theirco:r
are formed upon the model of that at Madr
with horse and foot guards, a household reg, la-;
established, numerous attendants, and enfignc
power, displaying such pomp, as hardly reta-
the appearance of a delegated authority. A;
the expence incurred by supporting the exterrn
and permanent order of government is defrayt
by the crown. The viceroys have besides pcc.
liar appointments suited to their exalted tat;-.
The salaries fixed by law are indeed extrrc

mod:'::

ioderate; that of the viceroy of Peru is only
thirty thousand ducats; and that of the viceroy
o: Mexico, twenty thousand ducatsi. Of late
:cv have been raised to forty thousand.

These salaries, however, constitute but a small
part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys.
Tie exercise of an absolute authority extending
to every department of government, and the
r.wver of d:ipofimg of many lucrative offices,
aiord themr many cpportunities of accumulating
-:21th. 'Ti these, which may be confidered as
1.;? and allowcd emolumen'.s, large fums are

,:-n adcdd hv e.acions, v.'hich in countries so

:- r:w;novcd fromri the feat of g:vernment, it is
'! eafv to ditcover, and impossible to reitrain.
r:.- :ninopu;:/./i, fi>:ne bi-.!:ticles of commerce,
-. 1 .crative conce-n in others, by conniving at
.c frauds of merchants, a viceroy may raise
*:':i n annual revcnue, as no fubjeca of any
r.,runpan monarch er,joVsk. From the single
*i;cle of presents made to him on the anniver-
;rv of his Namne day (which is always observed
- an high festival), I am informed that a vice-
:.) has been known to receive sixty thousand
?tlou. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
rCvcnues of a viceroy are known, his real prolits
dcpend upon his opportunities and lhis con-
fcicnce. Sensible of this, tlhe kings of Spain, aa
I have formerly observed, grant a commission to
their vicer,,s only for a few years. This cir-
curen.ance, however, renders them often more
raacious, and addJ to the ingcnuity and ardour
v ire\sith they labour to improve tvery moment
c: power which they know is hastening fal to a

RPCCO?. lib. i:i, ;. iii. c. 72. S Sec NOTE CXCIX.

period;

period; and short as its duration is, it ufuallr
affords sufficient time for repairing a fhattera
fortune, or for creating a new one. But eve
in situations so trying to human frailty, there a:.
instances of virtue that remain unfeduced. I:
the year 1772, the Marquis de Croix finifnc
the term of his viceroyalty in New Spain wis
unfufpeted integrity; and instead of bringin;
home exorbitant wealth, returned with the a
miration and applause of a grateful people, whoc
his government had rendered happy.

THE
I ISTORY

O F
AM E R ICA.

BOOKS IX. AND X.

CONTAIN ING
THE HISTORY OF VIRCI.VIA,

TO THE YEAR I6S; ANsD
THE H1ISTORY OF NEl EVG'LAND,

TO THE ¥SZA I;;-2.

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.

HE original plan of my Father, the late Dr.

T Robcrtfon, with refpeEt to the History of
America, comprehended not only an account of
the discovery of that country, and of the con-
quests and colonies of the Spaniards, but em-
braced also the history of the British and Portu-
guefe Establishments in the New World, and of
the Settlements made by the several nations of
Europe in the Weft India Islands. It was his
i:tention not to have published any part of the
Work until the whole was completed. In the
Preface to his History of America, he has stated
:he reasons which induced him to depart from
that resolution, and to publish the Two Volumes
which contain an account of the discovery of the
Ncw World, and of the progress of the Spanish
arm.3 and colonies in that quarter of the globe.
Ht fays, " he had made some progress in the
History of British America;" and he announces
his intention to return to that part of his Work,
as soon as the ferment which at that time pre-
vailed in the British Colonies in America should
I^Lfide, and regular government be re-eftab-
iised. Various causes concurred in preventing
.:r. from fulfilling his intention.
During the course of a tedious illness, which
r.e early foresaw would have a fatal termination,
Ir. Robertson at different times destroyed many

of

of his papers. But after his death. I found t-
part of the Hi-iorv of British America v.';,i
he had wrote many years before, and which :
now offered to the Public. It is written ;i::
his o-.n hand, as all his Works were ; it isa
carefully corrected as any part of his Ma.',.
scripts which I have ever seen; and he ha.
thought it worthy of being preservcd, a;
escaped the flames to which so many oi:.:
papers had been committed. I read it with ;.-
utmoit attention; but, before I came to a-;
reolution about the publication, I put :.'
MS. into the hands of omne of those si i.:
whom my Father used to confilt on such 0cc:
sions, as it would have been rafhneis and p),:
fumption in me to have truiled to my own ;.,-.
tial decision. It was perused by fume ot:.-
persons also, in whose talte and judgmt:'t i
have the greate:2 coniidence: by all of t.c::
I was enc..uraged to offer it to the Pul...
as a fragment curious and intcrcRili,g in :
self, and not infcrior to any of my Father':
Works.

When I determined to follow that advice,

was a circumllanice of great weight with r.
that as I never could think myself at liberty t
def.roy those papers which my Father 1.
thought worthy of being preferred, and ;
could not know into whose hands thev mi;_.:
hereafter fall, I confidered it as certain th!it t1: '
would be publi.hed at sone future period, :;}
they migh: r.eet wi:h an Editor, who nut .
ing actuated by the fmnie facrtd regard for t;-
reputation of the Author which I feel, Ir.:

m7.

a.ke alterations and additions, and obtrude the
r.:!e on the Public as a genuine and authentic
a:,rk. The MS. is now published, such as it
*,2 left by the Author; nor have I presumed
: make any addition, alteration, or correstion
b 'lattic.

W"' ROBERTSON.
' rLN-STREET, EDINBURGH,

Ar-"il 1 7)6.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IX.

THE
HISTORr OF AMERICA.

BOOK IX.

THE dominions of Great Britain in America

are next in extent to those of Spain. Its

;cquifitions there are a recompence due to those
.nterprifing talents which prompted the Engli(h
tr enter early on the career of difcoverv, and to
:uifue it with persevering ardour. England was
:nc ccond nation that ventured to visit the New
World. The account of Columbus's successful
,o\age filled all Europe with aftonifiment and
idt.:ration. But in England it did something
r.orc; it excited a vehement desire of emulating
.:.c glory of Spain, and of aiming to obtain

l.., flhare in thlofe advantages which were ex-
-.:-ed in this new fieri opened to national ac-

t'.it. The attention of the English court had

becn turned towards the discovery of unknown
c;untries, by its negociation with Bartholemew
C lumbus. Henry VII. having llitcled to his
;-opufitions with a more favourable ear than
:ould have been expccted from a cautious, dif-
:u:iful prince, averse by habit as well as by
!tmpcr to new and hazard ,us proje&;, he was
more easily induced to approve ofa voyage for

s 2 difcovcry,

discovery, proposed by some of his own fubjcc,
soon after the return of Christopher Columbus.

But though the English had spirit to fort

this scheme, they had not, at that period, a-.
tained to such ikill in navigation as qualified
them for carrying it into execution. From th
inconsiderate ambition of its monarchs, the r.n.
tion had long wafted its genius and activitv i
pernicious and ineffectual efforts to conquer
France. When this ill-directed ardour began
to abate, the fatal contest between the houses ci
York and Lancaster turned the arms of one hal
of the kingdom against the other, and exhausted
the vigour of both. During the course of two
centuries, while industry and commerce were
making gradual progress, both in the south and
north of Europe, the English continued so blind
to the advantages of their own situation, that
they hardly began to bend their thoughts to-
wards those obje&s and pursuits, to which they
are indebted for their present opulence and
power. While the trading vessels of Italy, Spain,
and Portugal, as well as those of the Has;
Towns, visited the moif remote ports in Europe,
and carried on an acive intercourse with its vari-
ous nations, the English did little more than creep
along their own coasts, in small barks, which
conveyed the productions of one county to an-
other. Their commerce was almofl wholly pas.
five. Their wants were supplied by firangers;
and whatever necessary or luxury of life their
own country did not yield, was imported in so-
reign bottoms. The cross of St. George was
seldom displayed beyond the precincts of the
narrow seas. Hardly any English ship traded

wi :I

rith Spain or Portugal, before the beginning of
the fifteenth century; and half a century more
tbpfed before the English mariners became so
adventurous as to enter the Mediterranean.

In this infancy of navigation, Henry could
.: commit the conduc of an armament, def.
.ed to explore unknown regions, to his own
inects. He invested Giovanni Gaboto, a Ve-
:--ian adventurer, who had fettled in Britol,
h.:h the chief command; and issued a commis-
i,n to him and his three son., empowering them
: faill, under the banner of England, towards
:,c cast, north or weft, in order to discover
:iuntries unoccupied by any Chriitian state; to
:ikc possession of them in his name, and to cany
: an exclusive trade with the inhabitants, under
...ditiun of paying a fifth part of the fre profit

e. cry voyage to the crown. This commis-
a, ::a granted on March 5th, 149;, in less

.., ,

two years after the ret,-rn of Columbus

-.; America . But Cabot (for that is the

.-c he affrimed in England, and by which he
'ett known,) did not set out on his voyage for
:o years. He, to ether with his second son
i: atiba i, embarked at Bristol, [May 1497,] on
,ard a Ilip furnishcd by the king, and was ac-
';na;,icd by four small barks, fitted out by the

--rchanti of that citv.
As in that age the most eminent navigators,
;-~.cd by the inituctions of Columbus, or ani-

n:ctd )v his example, were guided by ideas de-
' rom his superior knowledge and experi-
Cabot had a.opted the fvtem of that
i:<' :an, concerning the probability of opeu-

. H^-l, yr, iii. 4.

s 3 ing

ing a new and (horter passage to the East Indin,
by holding a western course. The opinion
which Columbus had formed, with refpeca ro
the islands which he had discovered, was unirvt.
sally received. They were supposed to lie cor.
tiguous to the great continent of India, and to
constitute a part of the vast countries coiprt.
hended under that general name. Cabot, a.
cordingly, deemed it probable, that by fteeri.r
to the north-west, he might reach India bvy
_horter course than that which Columbus ha.
taken, and hoped to fall in with the coast i
Cathay, or China, of whose fertility and opu-
ence the descriptions of Marco Polo had excited
high ideas. After failing for some weeks d.:
weft, and nearly on the parallel of the port frc-.
which he took his departure, he discovered 2
large island, which he called Prima Viia, az-
his sailors Newfoundland; and in a few days L,
descried a smaller ife, to which he gave tr·
name of St. John. He landed on both the;",
[June 24,] made some observations on their l;:
and produtions, and brought off three cf ti:
natives. Continuing his course westward, 1i
sor.n reached the continent of North America,
and failed along it from the fifty-fixth to t'
thirty-eighth degree of latitude, from the coa:.
of Labrador to that of Virginia. As his chi:'
object was to discover some inlet that mig':
open a passage to the weft, it does not appea:
that he landed any where during this exter l'r
run; and he returned to England, without a-:
tempt:ng ei:icr fcttlement or conquest in z:T
part of that continent .

Monfon's Navai Traps,;:: Churchill's Colle&. iii. I;.

If it had been Henry's purpose to prosecute
the objea of the commiflion given by him to
Cabot, and to take possession of the countries
which he had discovered, the success of this
voyage must have answered his most sanguine
expe&ations. His fubjets were, undoubtedly,
the first Europeans who had visited that part of
the American continent, and were entitled to
whatever right of property prior discovery is sup-
posed to confer. Countries which stretched in
an uninterrupted course through such a large
portion of the temperate zone, opened a prof-
ped of fettling to advantage under mild climates,
and in a fertile foil. But by the time that Ca-
bot returned to England, he found both the
tate of affairs and the king's inclination unfa-
vourable to any scheme the execution of which
would have required tranquillity and leisure.
Henry was involved in a war with Scotland, and
his kingdom was not yet fully composed after
the commotion excited by a formidable infur-
rec.ion of his own fubje&ts in the weft. An am-
bafiador from Ferdinand of Arragon was then in
London; and as Henry set a high value upon
the friendship of that monarch, for whose cha-
racer he profefled much admiration, perhaps
from its similarity to his own, and was endeav-
ouring to strengthen their union by negociating
the marriage which afterwards took place be-
tween his eldest son and the princess Catharine,
he was cautious of giving any offence to a prince,
jealous to excess of all his rights. From the
portion of the islands and continent which Cabot
had discovered, it was evident that they lay
within the limits of the ample donative which

the

the bounty of Alexander VI. had conferred
upon Ferdinand and Isabella. No person, in
that age, questioned the validity of a papal grant;
and Ferdinand was not of a temper to relinquifn
any claim to which he had a shadow of title.
Submiflion to the authority of the Pope, and
deference for an ally whom he courted, seem to
have concurred with Henry's own situation, in
determining him to abandon a scheme, in which
he had engaged with some degree of ardour and
expeEtation. No attempt towards discovery v.a
made in England during the remainder of his
reign; and Sebastian Cabot, finding no encou-
ragement for his adive talents there, entered
into the service of Spain ".

This is the most probable account of the fud-

den cessation of Henry's adivity, after such fuc.
cess in his first essay as might have encouraged
him to persevere. The advantages of commerce,
as well as its nature, were so little understood in
England about this period, that by an act of
parliament in the year 1488, the taking of in-
terest for the use of money was prohibited under
severe penalties°. And by another law, the
profit arising from dealing in bills of exchange

u Some fchernme of discovery seem to have bhen forme2 :Z

England towards the beginning of the fix'eenth centur.
But as there is no other memorial of them, rtan vwhat re.
mains in a patent granted by the king to the acventur.rs, .:
i_ probab e that they vere feeb'e or abortive projects. I:
a-) at:empt had been r-.a:e n co.felqence of this eatent, :
would nt have efcarei the k-,owledce of a comp ler so r-
du4:i,;us an Inqufitiiv- as Hail .yt. In his pa:e,;:, Hr:
reqtrlt s tre adventurers ir.nii er.cr;.ach.ig or tr.e coun:-,'!
diicrveved by the kings ot i'orugal, c l

an o'iLer per c' 2

cor,oideracy with EnglanJ. Rynr.er's Fecera, vo. x .
p. 37. D 3 Hen. V1 c. c5

v,-i

jrs condemned as favouring of usury P. It is
not surprising, then, that no great effort should
be made to extend trade, by a nation whose
commercial ideas were frill so crude and illiberal.
But it is more difficult to discover what pre-
veated this scheme of Henry VII. from being
::fumed during the reigns of his son and grand.
fan; and to give any reason why no attempt was
aade, either to explore the northern continent
of America more fully, or to fettle in it. Henry
VIII. was frequently at open enmity with
Spain: the value of the Spanish acquilitions in
America had become so well known, as might
nave excited his desire to obtain some footing in
those opulent regions; and during a considerable
part of his reign, the prohibitions in a papal bull
would not have restrained him from making en-
croachment upon the Spanih dominions. But
the reign of Henry was not favourable to the
progress of discovery. During one period of it,
the active part which he took in the affairs of
tae continent, and the vigour with which he
engaged in the contest between the two mighty
nvals, Charles V. and Francis I., gave full oc-
cupation to the enterpifing spirit both of the
king and of his nobility. During another period
f his administration, his famous controversy with
:he court of Rome kept the nation in perpetual
agitation and suspense. Engrossed by those ob-
ccis, neither the king nor the nobles had in-
i:r.ation or leisure to turn their attention to new
pursuits; and without their patronage and aid,
'si: commercial part of the nation was too in-
c ifderable to make any effort of consequence.

P 3 Hen. VII. .. 6.

Though

Though England, by its total separation fror
the church of Rome, soon after the accession o
Edward VI., disclaimed that authority, which
by its presumptuous partition of the globe be
tween two favourite nations, circumscribed thi
a&ivity of every other state within very nanrro
limits, yet a feeble minority, diffra&ed wi:J
fa&ion, was not a juncure for forming scheme
of doubtful fucccfs and remote utility. Th
bigotry of Mary, and her marriage with Philip
disposed her to pay a sacred regard to that gran
of the Holy See, which veiled in a husband, o0
whom ihe doated, an exclusive right to ever
part of the New World. Thus, through a fir
gular fucceflion of various causes, fixty-one year
elapsed from the time that the English difcovere
North America, during which their monarch
gave little attention to that country which wa
destined to be annexed to their crown, and to b
a chief source of its opulence and power.

But though the public contributed little tc

wards the progress of discovery, naval skit!
knowledge of commerce, and a spirit of enter
prize, began to spread among the Englic.
During the reign of Henry VIII. several ney
channels of trade were opened, and private ad
venturers visited remote countries with wviti
England had formerly no intercourse. SorE
merchants of Bristol having fitted out two ship
for the souther regions of America, committcw
the conduc of them to Sebastian Cabot, wh(
had quitted the service of Spain [l56]J. H
visited the coasts of Brasil, and touched at ti
islands of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico; aL,
though this voyage seems not to have been bcre

fitc

-ial to the adventurers, it extended the sphere
f English navigation, and added to the national
iock of nautical science q. Though disappointed

their expectations of profit in this first essay,

merchants were not discouraged. They

sent, successively, several vessels from different
ports towards the fame quarter, and seem to
have carried on an interloping trade in the Por-
tucuefe settlements with fuccefsr. Nor was it
o0ly towards the well, that the activity of the
English was dirested. Other merchants began
to extend their commercial views to the east
and by establishing an intercoufe with several
irands in the Archipelago, and with some of
the towns on the coast of Syria, they found a
:ew market for woollen cloths, (the only manu-
faEture which the nation had begun to cultivate,)
and supplied their countrymen with various pro-
du&ions of the east, formerly unknown, or re-
ceived from the Venetians at an exorbitant
price '.

But the discovery of a shorter passage to the
East Indies, by the north-west, was still the fa-
uourite proje&t of the nation, which beheld, with
envy, the vast wealth that flowed into Portugal,
from its commerce with those regions. The
scheme was accordingly twice resumed under the
long administration of Henry VIII. [1527 and
1536]; first, with some slender aid from the king,
and then by private merchants. Both voyages
were disastrous and unsuccessful. In the former,
one of the ships was loft. In the latter, the
xock of provisions was so ill-proportioned to the
< Hakluyt, iii 498. r lb;d. iii. 700. s Hakluyt,
.956, &c.

number

number of the crew, that although they wen
but fix months at sea, many perished with hun.
ger, and the survivors were constrained to fu>
port life by feeding on the bodies of their dead
companions t

The vigour of the commercial spirit did nos

relax in the reign of Edward VI. The grel
fishery on the banks of Newfoundland bec-zr.
an objea of attention; and from some reguida
tions for the encouragement of that branch ,
trade, it seems to hlave been prosecuted with a'
tivity and fucccsl'.. But the prospect of open
ing a communication with China and the Spice
Ifands, by some other route than round the Cap,
of Good Hope, itill continued to allure ti,
English more than any scheme of adventure,
Cabot, whole opinion was deservedly of hii,
authority in whatever related to naval en:terpriit
warmly urged the English to make another a2
tempt to discover this paffagc. As it lad cr
thrice searched fur in vain, by fteerir!g to'a:'!
the north-west, he proposed that a trial fUL':
now be made by the north-eait; and supporttd
this advice by such plausible rcafons and counict
tures, as excited sanguine expectations of i'
cess. Several noblemen and persons of ra'i,
together with some principal merchants, ha;::;,
associated for this purpole, were incorpora;tr,
by a charter from the king, under the title.:
The Company of Merchant Adventurers for tli
Discovery of Region%, Dominions, Islands, ar.d
Places unknown. Cabot, who was appoictte
governor of this company, [1553,1 soon fi'tci
out two ships and a baik, furnilhed with inftrc

: Haklut, i. zi3, &c. iii. j29, 130, U ibid. iii. iI

tons in his own hand, which discover the great
extent both of his naval skiil and mercantile
figacity.

Sir HughWilloughby, who was entrufled with
the command, flood direitly northwards along
the coast of Norway, [May io,] and doubled
the North Cape. blut in that tempestuous ocean,
hik finall squadron was separated in a *iolent
foirm. Willoughby's ship and the bark took
-::uge in an obfcuie harbour in a desert part of
Rufian Laplald, wher he and ail his corr.-
palnons were truzen to death. Richard Chan-
ccour, the captain of the other veflel, was more
firtulate; he entered the White Sea, and win-
tered in lafety at Archangel. Though no vessel
of anV foreign nation had ever visited that quar-
ter ot the globe before, the inhabitants received
iltir Iltw viiitors ith an holpitality which
would have done honour to a more polliied peo-
ple. Tle English learned there, that this was
a province of a vait empire, subject to the Great
Luke or Czar of Muscovy, who resided in a
great city twelve hundred mites fiom Arch-
angel. Chailcelour, with a spirit becoming an
officer employed in an expedition for difcoverv,
did not helitate a moment about the part which
li ought to take, and set out for that diltant
calital. On his arrival in Moscow, he was ad-
n;;ted to audience, and delivered a letter which
tic captain of each ship had received from Ed-
ward VI. for the sovereign of whatever country
tlev fiould discover, to John Vafilowitz, who at
t:.ati iie filled tie Ruffian throne. John, though
.e ti'td over his lubjeCts with the cruelty and
c-i!r c. (ofa barbarous dcfpot, was nut destitute of
VOL. 111. T political

political sagacity. He instantly perceived the
happy consequences that might flow from open.
ing an intercourse between his dominions and
the western nations of Europe; and, delighted
with the fortunate event to which he was in.
debted for this unexpected benefit, he treated
Chancelourwith great refpec [Feb. I554]; and,
by a letter to the king of England, invi:cd his
subjects to trade in the Ruffian dominions, wvi;
ample promises of protection and favour2.

Chancelour, on his return, found Mary feated

on the Engliih throne. The success of this voy.
age, the discovery of a new course of navigation,
the establishment of commerce with a vat empire,
the name of which was then hardly known in the
weft, and the hope of arriving, in this direction,
at those regions which had been so long the ob.
jed of desire, excited a wonderful ardour to pro.
fecute the delign with greater vigour. M3ry,
implicitly guided by her husband in every ad of
administration, was not unwilling to turn the
commercial ativity of her subjects towards a
quarter, where it could not excite the jealousy
of Spain, by encroaching on its possessions in the
New World. She wrote to John Vafilovwtz in
the molt respectful terms, courting his fricnd-
[hip. She confirmed the charter of Edward VI.,
empowered Chancelour, and two agents ap.
pointed by the Company, to negociate with the
Czar in her name; and according to the fpinit
of that age, she granted an exclusive right of
trade with Ruflia to the Corporation of Mer-
chant Adventurers . In virtue of this, they
not only eflabli:hed an active and gainful com.

x Hak!uyt, i. 2:.6, &c. r Hikluyt, i. z5jS, &;

v c.t

rerce with Rufia, but, in hopes of reaching
China, they pushed their discoveries eastwards to
the coast of Nova Zembla, the Straits of Wai-
;tz, and towards the mouth of the great river
Oby. But in those frozen seas, which Nature
ieims not to have destined for navigation, they
were exposed to innumerable difalters, and met
iith successive disappointments.

Nor were their attempts to open a communica-
ion with India made only in this channel. They
appointed some of their fa&ors to accompany the
Ruffian caravans, which travelled into Persia by
:'f way of Afiracan and the Caspian Sea, in-
rjcting them to penetrate as far as poflible to-
wards the eaft,and to endeavour, not only to eftab-
:ih a trade with those countries, but to acquire
tn- information that might afford any light
:w'ards the difcoveiy of a passage to China by
::e north-east z. Notwithltanding a variety of
ar.gers to which they were exposed in travelling
:hrough so many provinces, inhabited by fierce
'id licentious nations, some of these factors
'ached Bokara, in the province of Chorafan;
eod though prevented from advancing farther by
re civil wars which desolated the country, they
Pturned to Europe with fume hopes of extend-
ag the commerce of the Company into Persia,
:; with much intelligence concerning the state
:f those remote regions of the east a
The successful progress of the Merchant Ad-
returers in discovery, rouzed the emulation of
.etir countrymen, and turned their activity into
:e channels. A commercial intercourse, hither-
unattempted by the English, having been

Hakluyt, i. 3o0. ' Ibid. i. 3io, &c.

T 2 opened

opened with the coast of Barbary, the fpecime,
which that afforded of the valuable produtio:
of Africa, invited some enterprising navigato
to visit the more remote provinces of that qua
ter of the globe. They failed alonr its wetter
shore, traded in different ports on both fides
the Line, and after acquiring considerable knoi
ledgc of those countries, .-turned with a car,
of gold dust, ivory, and other rich commoditiy
little known at that time in England. Th
commerce with Africa seems to have been pa
sued with vigour, and was at that time no l!
innocent than lucrative; for as the English h:
then no demand for slaves, they carried it on f
many years, without violating the rights of h
ianity. Thus far did the English advance du
ing a period which may be confidered as t
infant state of their navigation and commerce
and feeble as its steps at that time may appear
us, we trace them with an interelting curioli:
and look back with fatisfacion to the ear
cffays of that spirit which we now behold in t
full maturity of its ftr-ngth. Even in the
first efforts of the English, an intelligent obfer
will discern presages of their future improv
mcnt. As soon as the adtivity of the nat;
was put in motion, it took various directior
and exerted itself in each with that steady, per
vering industry, which is the foul and guide
commerce. Neither discouraged by the h3;
Ihips and dangers to which they were exposed
those northern seas which they first attempte
to explore, nor afraid of venturing into the fult
climates of the torrid zone, the English, durin
the reign. of Henry VIII., Edward VI., a:

MI.'.

j[ary, opened some of the moll considerable
feurces of their commercial opulence, and gave
;beginning to their trade with Turkey, with
frici, with Russia, and with Newfoundland.
By the progress which England had already
made in navigation and commerce, it was now
prepared for advancing farther; and on the ac-
cession of Elizabeth to the throne, a period com-
7,enced, extremely auspicious to this spirit which
was rising in the nation. The domestic tran-
quillity of the kingdom, maintained, almost
wi:hout interruption, during the course of a long
2ad prosperous reign; the peace with foreign
nations, that iubfilled more than twepty years
after Elizabeth was feated on the throne; the
Queen's attentive economy, which exempted
Ir subjects from the burden of taxes oppressive
t0 trade ; the popularity of her administration;
werc all favourable to commercial enterprise,
a.d called it forth into vigorous exertion. The
d;rctning eye of Elizabeth having early per-
c.ived that the security of a kingdom, environed
tv the sea, depended on its naval force, (he be-
pn her government with adding to the number
rnd strength of the royal navy; which, during
a factious minority, and a reign intent on no ob-
& but that of suppressing heresy, had been
n glccied, and suffered to decay. She filled her
2-enals with naval stores; (he built several (hips
f great force, according to the ideas of that
are, and encouraged her fubjeEts to imitate her
t-:r.ple, that they might no longer depend on
·:reiners from whom the English had hitherto
; -chased all vessels of any conliderable burden b.

Camd. Annales, p. 70. edit. A6 i fol,

T3 By

By those efforts, the skill of the EnglifI artificer
was improved, the number of sailors increaied
and the attention of the public turned to the narr
as the moit important na:')nal objed. Inflei'
of abandoning any of . ..,.v channels of cor
merce which had been OT ened in the three pre
ceding reigns, the Engiifh frequented them ri:
greater affiduitv, and the patronage of th,'
sovereign added vigour to all their efforts. I
order to secure to them the continuance of the:
exclusive trade with Rufflia, Elizabeth cultivate
the conne&ion with John Vafilowitz, which ha
been formed by her predecessor, and, by fuccel
five embafflies, gained his confidence so thorough
ly, that the English enjoyed that lucrative pr
vilege during his long reign. She encourage
the Company of Merchant Adventurers, who;-
monopoly of the Ruffian trade was confirmed b'
act of parliament , to resume their design o
penetrating into Pcrfia by land [1562]. Thai
second attempt, conducted with greater pr;
dence, or undertaken at a more favoura,,i
junc'ure than the firlt, was more fuccefsfu;
Their agents arrived in the Persian court, 2:;
obtained such protecion and immunities fro-
the Shah, that for a cotirfe of years they carric:
on a gainful commerce in his kingdomd; anc
by frequenting the various provinces of Perfi
became so well acquainted with the vast riche; o
the east, as flrengthened their design of opcnl,
a more diret intercourse with those fertile re
gions by sea.

But as every effort to accomplish this by t'.
north-east had proved abortive, a scheme wi

Hakluyt, i 369. d Ibid. i. 344, &c.

forme'.

bnrmed, under the patronage of the Earl of
f'arwick, the head of the enterprising family of
Dudley, to make a new attempt, by holding an
;ppofite course by the north-west. The con-
~uA of this enterprise was committed to Martin
Frobisher, an officer of experience and reputa.
tion. In three fucceflive voyages [ j576, 1577,
and 1578] he explored the inhospitable coast o0
Labrador, and that of Greenland, (to which
Elizabeth gave the name of Meta Incognita,)
without discovering any probable appearance of
that paflage to India for which he fought. This
new disappointment was sensibly felt, and might
have damped the spirit of naval enterprize among
the English, if it had not resumed frcfh vigour,
amidit the general exultation of the nation, upon
the successful expedition of Francis Drake. That
bold navigator, emulous of the glory which Ma-
gellan had acquired by failing round the globe,
fonned a scheme of attempting a voyage, which
all Europe had admired for sixty years, without
venturing to follow the Portuguese discoverer in
his adventurous course. Drake undertook this
with a feeble squadron, in which the larrgeft
efircl did not exceed a hundred tons, and he ac-
complifhed it, with no less credit to himself,
than honour to his country. Even in this
voyage, condu&ed with other views, Drake
seen-s not to have been inattentive to the fa-
vourite objec of his countrymen, the discovery
of a new route to India. Before he quitted the
Pacific Ocean, in order to stretch towards the
Philippine islands, he ranged along the coast of
California, as high as the latitude of forty-two
Cegrees north, in hopes of difcoverirlg, on that

fide,

fide, the communication between the two fes,
which had so often been searched for in vain on
the other. But this was the only unsuccessful
attempt of Drake. The excessive cold of the
climate, intolerable to men who had long been
accustomed to tropical heat, obliged him to stop
short in his progress towards the north; and
whether or not there be any passage from th.
Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean in that quarter, is
a point still unafcertained .

From this p-riod, the English seem to have

confided in their own abilities and courage, as
equal to any naval enterprize. They had now
visited every region to which navigation extended
in that age, ar,d had rivalled the nation of
higheil repute for naval (kill in its most splendid
exploit. But notwithltanding the knowledge
which they had acquired of the different quarter
of the globe, they had not hitherto attempted
any settlement out of their own country. Their
merchants had not yet acquired such a degree,
either of wealth or of political influence, as were
requisite towards canving a scheme of coloniza-
tion into execution. Persons of noble birth were
destitute of the ideas and information which
aight have disposed them to patroni7e such a
design. The growing power of Spain, however,
and the ascendant over the other nations of
Europe to which it had attained under Charles
V. and his son, naturally turned the attention
of mankind towards the importance of those set.
tlements in the New World, to which they vere
so much indebted for that pre-eminence. Tht
intercourse between Spain and England, duri:'

e Hakluyt, 5ii. 44C. Camd. Anoal. 301, &c.

[he reign of Philip and Mary ; the resort of the
Spanish nobility to the English court, while
Philip resided there; tie Rtudy of the Spanish
ianguage, which became fashionable; and the
tranlfation of several histories of America into
English, diffused gradually through the nation
a core diflinca knowledge of the policy of Spain

planting its colonies, and of the advantages
which it derived from them. When hostilities
ccmmenced between Elizabeth and Philip, the
profptct of annoying Spain by sea opened a new
career to the enterprising spirit of the English
robility. Almost every eminent leader of the
2ge aimed at distinguishing himself by naval ex-
pioits. That fervce, and the ideas conne&ed
vi th it, the discovery of unknown countries, the
cilablifhmcnt of distant colonies, and the enrich-
-.g of commerce by new commodities, became
familiar to persons of rank.

In consequence of all those concurring causes,

thie English began seriously to form plans of set-
t;ing colonies in those parts of America, which
hitherto they had only visited. The projecors
and patrons of these plans were mostly persons
of rank and influence. Among them, Sir Hum-
phry Gilbert, of Compton in Devonshire, ought
to be mentioned with the diftin&ion due to the
conductor of the firit English colony to America.
He had early rendered himself conspicuous by
his military services both in France and Ireland;
and having afterwards turned his attention to
naval affairs, he published a discourse concerning
the probability of a north-west passage, which
discovered no inconsiderable portion both of
learning and ingenuity, mingled with the enthu-

fiafm,

fiafm, the credulity, and sanguine expectatioa
which incite men to new and hazardous under
takings . With those talents, he was deema
a proper person to be employed in eftabli(hing;
new colony, and easily obtained from the Quea
letters patent, [June I, 1578,] vefling in hin
sufficient powers for this purpose.

As this is the first charter to a colony, grante

by the Crown of England, the articles in i
merit particular attention, as they unfold the
ideas of that age, with respect to the nature oj
such fettlemeuts. Elizabeth authorizes him tc
discover and take possession of all remote and
barbarous lands, unoccupied by any Chrifttian
prince or people. She veils in him, his heirs
and alfigns for ever, the full right of property
in the foil of those countries whereof he ihaiU
take poffcflion. She permits such of her sub-
jects, as were willing to accompany Gilbert in
llis voyage, to go and fettle in the countries
which he (hall plant. She empowers him, his
heirs and afligrs, to dispose of whatever portion
of those lands he /hall judge meet to persons
fettled there, in fee-fimple, according to the laws
of England. She ordains, that all the lands
granted to Gilbert shall hold of the Crown of
England by homage, on payment of the fifth
part of the gold or silver ore found there. She
confers upon him, hi; heirs and assigns, the com-
plete jurifdi&ions and royalties, as well marine as
other, within the said lands and seas thereunto
adjoining; and as their common safety and in-
tcreft would render good government neceffar
in their new settlements, Ihe gave Gilbert, his

f Hakluyt, iii. i.

heirs

eirs and assigns, full power to convia, punish,
pardon, govern, and rule, by their good dif-
action and policy, as well in causes capital or
criminal as civil, both marine and other, all per-
sons who shall from time to time fettle within the
aid countries, according to such statutes, laws,
and ordinances as mhall be by him, his heirs and
afigns, devised and established for their better
government. She declared, that all who fettled
here (hould have and enjoy all the privileges of
fre denizens and natives of England, any law,
cullom, or usage to the contrary notwithftand-
irg. And finally, she prohibited all persons
from attempting to fettle within two hundred
lIagues of any place which Sir Humphry Gil-
bert, or his associates, shall have occupied, dur-
ig the space of fix years g.

With those extraordinary powers, suited to
the high notions of authority and prerogative
prevalent in England during the sixteenth cen.
J-ry, but very repugnant to more recent ideas
r'i:h rtfpet to the rights of free men, who vo-
i.ntarily unite to form a colony, Gilbert began
to collect associates, and to prepare for embark-
a:ion. His own character, and the zealous es-
forts of his half-brother, Walter Ralegh, who,
een in his early youth, displayed those splendid
talents, and that undaunted spirit, which create
admiration and confidence, soon procured him a
iLfficient number of followers. But his success
vas not suited either to the sanguine hopes of
.i: countrymen, or to the expence of his pre-
;arations. Two expeditions, both of which he
coududtd in person, ended difaitroufly [I58o].

r Hakluyt, iii. 135.

In the last, he hitafelf perished, without havin:
effcted his intended settlement on the coninen
of America, or performing any thing mort
worthy of notice, than the empty formality of
taking possession of the island of Newfoundland,
in the name of his sovereign. The di:Vtnfioa
among his officers ; the licentious and uingoer.
able spirit of some of his crew; his total igno.
ance of the countries which he purposed to x.
c.py ; his misfortune in approaching the cn-.
tinent too far towards the north, where the ;.
hospitable coast of Cape Breton did not invit,
them to fettle; the shipwreck of his largest v.
fel; and above all, the scanty proviiion which
the funds of a private man could make of wh.:
.-as requisite for eltablifhing a new colony, were
t'.c true causer to which the fail:re of the ec.
tcrptife mnut be imputed, not to any deficiency
cf abiii:ies or resolution in its eaderhb.

But the miscarriage of a scheme, in which

Gilbert had waited his fortune, did not di..
courage Ralegh. He adopted all his brothe';
ideas; and applying to the Qteen, in whoIe
favour he flood high at that time, he procured
a patent, [March 26, 1584,] with jurildid;.
and prerogatives as ample as had been granted
unto Gilbert . Ralegh, no less eager to exs.
cute than to undertake the scheme, ilnftantl di'.
patched two small vefels, [April 27,] under the
command of Amadas and Barlow, two officer :
trust, to visit the countries which he intended :)
fettle, and to acquire some previous .lowlcJ:
of their coasts, their foil, and productino;. ia
order to avoid Gilbert's error, in holding t!,,

h Hakluyt, i. , &t

iii.
3, 43

fr north, they took their cou4e by the Canaries
and the Weft India islands, and approached the
North American continent by the Gulph of
Florida. Unfortunately their chief researches
were made in that part of the country now
,r;own by the name of North Carolina, the pro-
.ince in America most dcftitute of commodious
"arbours. They touched firt at an island, which
:3ey call Wokocon (probably Ocakoke), fituat-
t/ on the inlet into Pamplicoe Sound, and then
a: Raonoke, near the mouth of Albemarle
Sound. In both, they had some intercourse
,with the natives, whom they found to be savages,
r:.h all the characteristic qualities of uncivilized
i:e, bravery, averiion to labour, hospitality, a
?p-Oenfity to admire, and a willingness to ex-
c',ange their rude productions for l'nglifh com-
:odiries, especially for iron, or any of the use-
-1 metals of which they were destitute. After
ipending a few weeks in this traffic, and in vi:it-
i:g some parts of the adjacent continent, Ama-
&asand Barlow returned to England [Sept. 15]
:ith two of the natives, and gave such splendid
deicriptions of the beauty of the country, the
fertility of the foil, and the mildness of the
climate, that Elizabeth, delighted with the idea
of occupying a territory, superior, so far, to
the barren regions towards the north hitherto
riilted by her fubjeAs, bellowed on it the name
of Virginia; as a memorial that this happy dif-
covery had been made under a virgin Queen k.

Their report encouraged Ralegh to haften his
?eparations for taking possession of such an in-
i.uig property. He fitted out a squadron of

k Hak!uyt, iii. 26,
rTL. III. U seven

seven small fiips, under the command of S.
Richard Greenville, a man of honourable bir.d
and of courage so undaunted as to be confpic.
ous even in that gallant age. But the fpirn ci
that predatory war which the English carried dr
against Spain, mingled with this scheme of f.
tlement; and on this account, as well as fT::
unacquaintance with a more diret and fhorte
course to North America, Greenville failed i.
the Weft India islands. He spent some timet'
cruising among these, and in taking prizes; i
that it was towards the close of June before he a:
rived on the coast of North America. He touch:
at both the islands where Amadas and Barlc-
had landed, and made some excursions into c:
ferent parts of the continent round Pamplic:
and Albemarle Sounds. But as, unfortunate:v
he did not advance far enough towards the nor.:
to discover the noble Bay of Chtfapeak, ;
established the colony [August 25] which L
left on the island of Raonoke, an incommodic-
station, without any safe harbour, and almc;
uninhabited .

This colony consisted only of one hundr

and eighty peifons, under the command of Cap
tain Lane, assisted by some men of note, ti
most distinguished of whom was Hariot, an ce:
nent mathematician. Their chief employircs
during a residence of nine months, was to obti;
a more extensive knowledge of the country ; ;
their researches were carried on with grea!
spirit, and reached farther than could have bh
expedEed from a colony so feeble, and in a ftat:
so disadvantageous. But from the fame i:

pati Gi

patience of indigent adventurers to acquire fud-
jan wealth, which gave a wrong direction to the
i-duftry of the Spaniards in their settlements,
:he greater part of the Engliih seem to have
;:,fidered nothing as worthy of attention but
rires of gold and silver. These they fought
!r, wherever they came; these they inquired
i'e.r with unwearied eagerness. The savages
,on discovered the favourite objecAs which al-
Iured them, and artfully amused them with so
ra2nv tales concerning pearl fisheries, and rich
:ries of various metals, that Lane and his com-
.anions waited their time and a&ivity in the chi-
rerical pursuit of these, instead of labouring to
-se provisions for their own fubfillence. On
c:'covcring the deceit of the Indians, they were

much cxafperated, that from expostulations
:d. reproaches, they proceeded to open hostility
'j86i . The fiipplies of provisions which they
tid bten accultomed to receive from the natives
were of course withdrawn. Through their own
,egligence, no other precaution had been taken
:-r their support. Ralegh, having engaged in
;:cheme too expensive for his narrow funds, had
:: been able to fend them that recruit of flores
r 'h which Greenville had pronifed to furnish
:':., early in the spring. The colony, reduced

the utmost distress, and on the point of

:erifhlng with famine, was preparing to disperse
:,o diferent diftrifts of the country in quest of
rod, [June i,] when Sir Francis Drake ap-
xared with his fleet, returning from a successful
.?edition against the Spaniards in the Weft
I:Hies. A scheme which he formed, of furnish-
:; Lane and his associates with such supplies as

u 2 might

might enable them to remain with comfort in
their ifation, was disappointed by a sudden storm,
in which a small vefftl that he destined for their
service was dashed to pi-ces; and as he ccld
not supply them with another, at their joint re.
quest, as they were worn out with fatigue a.,d
famine, he carried them home to Englanad
[June i9].

Such' was the inauspIcious beginning of th;

English settlements in the New World ; and aft,
exciting high expectations, this first atterp,
produced no effet but that of affording a mon
complete knowledge of the country; as it et
ablcd Hariot, a man of science and obfervatio;
to describe its foil, climate, productions, anc
the manners of its inhabitants, with a degree c
accuracy which merits no inconsiderable praise
when compared with the childish and marvelloL
tales published by several of the early visitants o
the New World. There is another confequenc
of this abortive colony important enough to en
title it to a place in history. Lane and his aflc
ciates, by their constant intercourse with the It
dians, had acquired a relish for their favouri:
enjoyment of smoking tobacco; to the use c
which, the credulity of that people not odG
ascribed a thousand imaginary virtues, but the
fupcrftition confidered the plant itself as a grac
ous gift of the gods, for the solace of humi
kind, and the most acceptable offering whic
man can present to heaven". They broug'
with them a specimen of this new commodity'
England, and taught their countrymen the rc

= Hakluyt, iii. z55. Camd. Annal. 387.
H.xiot ap. Hakluyt, iii. 271. Dc Bry. America, Pmi

t:D.

:hod of using it; which Ralegh, and some young
-en of fashion, fondly adopted. From imita-
:iHa of them, from love of novelty, and from
the favourable opinion of its salutary qualities
entertained by several physicians, the pracice
f-read among the English. The Spaniards and
Portuguese had, previous to this, introduced it
i other parts of Europe. This habit of taking
:-bacco gradually extended from the extremities
fthe north to those of the south, and in one
f-m or other seems to be equally grateful to the
:-habitants of every climate; and by a singular
:price of the human species, no less inexplicable
t'an unexampled, (so bewitching is the acquired
2:le for a weed of no manifest utility, and at
.-:} not only unpleasant, but nauseous,) that it
has become almost as universal as the demands
of those appetites originally implanted in our
.a:ure. Smoking was the first mode of taking
-:bacco in England; and we learn from the
comic writers towards the close of the sixteenth
century and the beginning of the seventeenth,
:hat this was deemed one of the accomplishments
of a man of fashion and spirit.

A few days after Drake departed from Roa-
noke, a small bark, dispatched by Ralegh with
a supply of stores for the colony, landed at the
ph1ce where the English had fettled; but on
finding it deserted by their countrymen, they
returned to England. The bark was hardly
gone, when Sir Richard Greenville appeared with
ihree ships. After searching in vain for the co-
,.V which he had planted, without being able
o learn what had befallen it, he left fifteen of
!-i crew to keep poffcffion of the island. This

u 3 handful

handful of men was soon overpowered and cut in
pieces by the savages °.

Though all Ralegh's efforts to eftablilh a c,

lony in Virginia had hitherto proved aborti;:,
and had been defeated by a succession of di'aftm
and disappointments, neither his hopes nor re.
sources were exhausted. Early in the followin;
year [1587] he fitted out three ships, uner-
the command of Captain John White, who c-:.
n'ed thither a colony more numerous than tii:
which had been fettled under Lane. On th(:
arrival in Virginia, after viewing the face of tt:
country covered with one continued forest, w.ic.
to them appeared an uninhabited wild, as it au
occupied only by a few scattered tribes of fa,.
ages, they discovered that they were dcltitL::
of many things which they deemed effentia'iL
nectcary towards their subsistence in such a:
uncomiortable situation; and, with one voice,
requested rWhite, their commander, to return :;
England, as the person among them most likc.;
to solicit, with efficacy, the supply on wb;;.
depended the exiltence of the colony. Whi::
landed in his native country at a most unfavou:.
able season for the negociation which he had u:-
dertaken. He found the nation in univcr.'.
alarm at the formidable preparations of Philip i;.
to invade England, and collecting all its for;:
to oppose the fleet to which he had arrogaatmy
given the name of tht Invincible Armada. Ra.
legh, Greenville, and all the most zealous pa
trons of the new settlement, were called to a&:
distinguished part in the operations of a yea
[15883 equally interesting and glorious to Etg.

0 Hakluyt, iii :65. z83.

and. Amidst danger so imminent, and during
contest for the honour of their sovereign and
the independence of their country, it was impof-
ible to attend to a less important and remote
object. The unfortunate colony in Roanoke
rccived no supply, and perished miserably by
famine, or by the unrelenting cruelty of those
barbarians by whom they were surrounded.

During the remainder of Elizabeth's reign,
the scheme of establishing a colony in Virginia
was not resumed. Ralegh, with a most aspiring
mind and extraordinary talents, enlightened by
knowledge no less uncommon, had the spirit
and the deftEts of a projector. Allured by new
ob-jets, and always giving the preference to
fich as were most splendid and arduous, he was
apt to engage in undertakings so vast and so
various, as to be far beyond his power of ac-
complilhing. He was now intent on peopling
and improving a large diltrift of country in Ire-
iand, of which he had obtained a grant from the
(Oeen. He was a deep adventurer in the scheme
.,ti tting out a powerful armament against Spain,
in order to citablifh I)on Antonio on the throne
of Portugal. He had begun to form his fa-
vourite, but visionary plan, of penetrating into
the province of Guiana, where he fondly dreamed
of taking possession of inexhaustible wealth, flow-
ing from the richetl mines in the New World.
Amidlt this multiplicity' of projecs, of such
promising appearance, and recommended by
novelty, he naturally became cold towards his
ancient and hitherto unprofitable scheme of set-
tling a colony in Virginia, and was easily in-
duccd to assign his right of property in that

country,

country, which he had never visited, together
with all the privileges contained in his patent,
to Sir Thomas Smith, and a company of me.
chants in London [March I596]. This com.
pany, satisfied with a paltry traffic carried on br
a few small barks, made no attempt to take pod.
session of the country. Thus, after a period of
a hundred and fix years from the time that Ca.
bot discovered North America, in the name of
Henry VII., and of twenty years from the time
that Ralegh planted the first colony, there wa;
not a tingle Englishman fettled there at the de.
mise of Queen Elizabeth, in the year one thou.
sand fix hundred and three.

I have already explained the causes of this,

during the period previous to the accession of
Elizabeth. Other causes produced the fame
effec under her adminiflration. Though for
one half of her reign England was engaged in
no foreign war, and commerce enjoyed that per.
fee security which is friendly to its progress;
though the glory of her latter years gave the
highest tone of elevation and vigour to the na.
tional spirit; the Queen herself, from her ex.
treme parsimony, and her aversion to demand
extraordinary supplies of her subje&s, was more
apt to restrain than to second the ardent genius
of her people. Several of the most splendid en.
terprizes in her reign were concerted and exe-
cuted by private adventurers. All the fcherme-
for colonization were carried on by the funds of
individuals, without any public aid. Even the
felicity of her government was adverse to th:
establishment of remote colonies. So powerful
is the attraction of our native foil, and such our

fortunate

frtunate partiality to the laws and manners of
our own country, that men seldom choose to
abandon it, unless thev be driven away by op.
x-efion, or allured by vast prospects of sudden
vealth. But the provinces of America in which
the English attempted to fettle did not, like
:hose occupied by Spain, invite them thither by
2ny appearance of silver or golden mines. All
their hopes of gain were distant; and they saw
that nothing could be earned but by persevering
exertions of industry. The maxims of Eliza.
beth's administration were, in their general tenor,
so popular, as did not force her fubjeEs to emi-
grate, in order to escape from the heavy or vexa-
tious hand of power. It seems to have been
with difficulty that these lender bands of plant-
er were colleted, on which the writers of that
age bestow the name of the firfl and second
Virginian colonies. The fulness of time for
English colonization was not yet arrived.

But the succession of the Scottish line to the
crown of England hastened its approach. James
was hardly feated on the throne before he dif-
covered his pacific intentions, and he soon ter-
minated the long war which had been carried on
between Spain and England, by an amicable
treaty. From that period, uninterrupted tran-
uillity continued during his reign. Many per.
Ions of high rank, and of ardent ambition, to
whom the war with Spain had afforded constant
employment, and presented alluring profpeEs,
not only of fame but of wealth, soon became so
impatient of languishing at home without occu.
pation or objedt, that their invention was on the
aetch to find come exercise for their a&ivity and

talents.

talents. To both these, North America seemrd
to open a new field, and schemes of carrying
colonies thither became more general and more
popular.

A voyage, undertaken by Bartholemew Gc.

nold in the lalt year of the Queen, facilitated, as
well as encouraged, the execution of theft
schemes. He failed from Falmouth in a fm-i!
bark, with thirty-two men. Instead of follow.
ing former navigators in their unnecessary circuit
by the Weft India isles and the Gulf of Florida,
Gofnold steered due weft, as nearly as the wind
would permit, and was the first English corr.
mander who reached America by this shorter
and more direct course. That part of the cor..
tinent which he first descried was a promontory
in the province now called Massachusets Bay, tg
which he gave the name of Cape Cod. Hold.
ing along the coast as it stretched towards the
south-west, he touched at two ifiands, one of
which he called Martha's Vineyard, the other
Elizabeth's Island; and visited the adjoinirg
continent, and traded with its inhabitants. ih
and his companions were so much delighted every
where with the inviting aspea of the country,
that notwithstanding the smallness of their num-
ber, a part of them consented to remain there.
But when they had Icifure to refle&f upon the
fate of former settlers in America, they retracicd
a resolution formed in the first warmth of their
admiration; and Gofnold returned to England
in less than four months from the time of his de.
parture P.

P Purchas, iv. p. 1647.

P.'.

This voyage, however inconsiderable it may
appear, had important effets. The English
now discovered the aspet of the American con-
tnent to be extremely inviting far to the north
of the place where they had formerly attempted
.o fettle. The coast of a vast country, stretching
through the moR desirable climates, lay before
them. The richness of its virgin foil promised a
certain recompence to their industry. In its in-
frior provinces unexpected sources of wealth
might open, and unknown objects of commerce
might be found. Its distance from England was
iiminilhed almost a third part, by the new course
which Gofnold had pointed out. Plans for
clabliflhing colonies began to be formed in dif-
ferent parts of the kingdom; and before these
were ripe for execution, one small vessel was sent
out by the merchants of Bristol, another by the
Earl of Southampton and Lord Arundel of
Wardour, in order to learn whether Gofnold's
account of the country was to be confdered as a
jo& representation of its state, or as the exag-
gerated description of a fond discoverer. Both
returned with a full confirmation of his veracity,
and with the addition of so many new circum-
rances in favour of the country, acquired by a
more extensive view of it, as greatly increased
Ctle desire of planting it.

The most active and efficacious promoter of
this was Richard Hakluyt, prebendary of Weft-
minster, to whom England is more indebted for
i:s American possessions than to any man of that
age. Formed under a kinsman of the fame name,
cminent for naval and commercial knowledge,

he

he imbibed a similar taste, and applied early tc
the itudy of geography and navigation. Thfl
favourite fcienccs engrossed his attention, and t~
diffuse a relish for them was the great object 0
his life. In order to excite his countrymen-:
naval enterprize, by flattering their nation'
vanity, he published, in the year one thoufain
five hundred and eighty-nine, his valuable c,.
lecion of voyages and discoveries made by Ern,
lifhmen. In order to supply them with wh?
information might be derived from the exper
ence of the most successful foreign navigaton
he translated some of the best accounts of th,
progress of the Spaniardc and Portuguese in thti
voyages both to the East and Weft Indies, in;
the English tongue. He was consulted with re
fpet to many of the attempts towards difcccr
or colonization during the latter part of Eliz2
beth's reign. He corresponded with the of
ficers who conducted them, direced their rc
searches to proper objects, and published th
history of their exploits. By the zealous r,
deavours of a person, equally respected by me
of rank and men of business, many of both order
formed an affocia ion to etlablish colonie,!:
America, and petitioned the king for the fanc
tion of his authority to warrant the execution 0
their plans.

James, who prided himself on his profoun

kill in the science of government, and who ha
turned his attention to confider the advantage
which might be derived from colonies, at a tin
when he patronised a scheme for planting the-
in fume of the ruder provinces of his ancic;

kin:ldo:

ingdom, with a view of introducing industry
and civilization thereq, was now no less fond of
creding the a&tive genius of his English fubjests
owards occupations not repugnant to his own
-:iific maxims, and listened with a favourable
-r to their application. But as the extent as
-:11 as value of the American continent began
:2,,r to be better known, a grant of the whole
, such a vast region to-any one body of men,
:rwever refpe&able, appeared to him an act of
I:.olitic and profuse liberality. For this rea-
:;, he divided that portion of North America,
hich stretches from the thirty-fourth to the
i:rtv-fifth degree of latitude, into two diftrits,
.arly equal ; the one called the first or south
:sony of Virginia, the other, the second or
:orth colony [I6o6, April lo]. He autho-
-zed Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers,
Richard Hakluyt, and their associates, mostly
:::ident in London, to fettle any part of the
'f:mer which they should choose, and vested in
::.rn a right of property to the land extending
Long the coast fifty miles on each fide of the
"2cc of their first habitation, and reaching into
zie interior country a hundred miles. The lat-
Or diftri& he allotted, as the place of settlement,
'i sundry knights, gentlemen, and merchants of
B;iiol, Plymouth, and other parts in the weft
t£ England, with a similar grant of territory.
en'cher the monarch who ilfued this charter,
:.r his subje&s who received it, had any con-
crption that thev were proceeding to lay the
':.dation of mighty and opulent states. What
,acs granted was nothing more than a simple

q Hilt. of Scotland, ii. 239.
VOL. II . X charter

charter of corporation to a trading compa-r
empowering the members of it to have a comrr.
feal, and to act as a body politic. But as t,
obiect for which they associated was new, t;
plan established for the administration of th:,
affairs was uncommon. Instead of the po:r
usually granted to corporations, of electing c:
ficers and framing by-laws for the conduc:
their own operations, the fipreme governre:
of the colonies to be fettled was veied i:;
council relident in England, to be named by t.
king, according to such laws and ordinancesa
should be given under his sign manual ; and t:.
subordinate jurisdiction was committed to
council resident in America, which .waa lik.::-,
to be nominated by the kiig, and to zct c'-
forrrably to his infructiono. To this imp,rt.a
clause, which regulated the form of their co-
ititution, was added the concefiion of ftvt-
immunities, to encourage perfor.s to fettle in t;
intended colonies. Some of these were the fa.
which had been granted to Gilbert and Ra!e',
such as the securing to the emigbrad;ts and td:
dcfccndants all the rights of denizens, in ti
fame manner as if they had remained or had hee
born in England; and granting them the pr,:
lege of holding their lands in America by ;.:
freest and least burdensome tenure. Others we:
more favourable than those granted by El:7a
beth. He permitted whatever was neceffaryv .
the fuflenance or commerce of the new coloric
to be exported from England, during the fpac
of fcven years, without paying any duty; at,
as a farther incitement to indulrv, he granri'
them liberty of trade with other nations, a-

aF-r

,propriated the duty to be levied on foreign
cJnmodities, for twenty-one years, as a fund
:r the benefit of the colony r

In this singular charter, the contents of which
b;7e been little attended to by the historians of
America, some articles are as unfavourable to the
r.hts of the colonists, as others are to the in-
:c.it of the parent slate. By placing the legi-
fjive and executive powers in a council nomi-
-2ed by the crown, and guided by its inftruc-
t.ans, every person fettling in America seems to
e bereaved of the noblest privilege ofa free man;
: the unlimited permission of trade with so-
eigners, the parent itate is deprived of that ex-

l.tive commerce which has been deemed the
::!es advantage rcfulting from the eltablifhment
i colonies. But in the infancy of colonization,
ad without the guidance of observation or ex-
pzrience, the ideas of men with respect to the
rode of forming new settlements, were not fully
,inolded, or properly arranged. At a period
>wen they could not foresee the future grandeur
a:d importance of the communities which they
acre about to call into existence, they were ill
cialiied to concert the best plan for governing
tnrm. Betides, the English of that age, accuf-
a,-ncd to the high prerogative and arbitrary rule
o their monarchs, were not animated with such
i;:ral sentiments, either concerning their own
pro nal or political rights, as have become fami-
L-1 in the more mature and improved irate of
atir conititution.

' it-, Hist. of Virgin l,!p. 35. Append. p. I. Pur-
--:. i itho3.

x 2 XWithout

Without hesitation or relu&ance the propri0.

tors of both colonies prepared to execute the
refpe&ive plans; and under the authority of
charter, which would now be rejeted with d.
dain, as a violent invasion of the sacred and i.
alienable rights of liberty, the first permanee
settlements of the English in America wrt
established. From this period, the progref;i
the two provinces of Virginia and New Englan
form a regular and conneted story. The forre
in the south, and the latter in the north, nm2
be confidered as the original and parent colon:a';
in imitation of which, and under whose fhelte,
all the others have been successively planted azn
reared.

The first attempts to occupy Virginia and

New England were made by very feeble bodia
of emigrants. As these fettled, under grea
disadvantages, among tribes of savages, and i
an uncultivated desert; as they attained grade
ally, after long struggles and many disasters, to
that maturity of strength, and order of policy,
which entitles them to be confidered as refpeiu-
ble states, the history of their persevering effort
merits particular attention. It will exhibit
fpetacle no less striking than inftru&ive, at.
presents an opportunity, which rarely occurs, c:
contemplating a society in the first moment a
its political existence, and of observing how di
spirit forms in its infant state, how its principla
begin to unfold as it advances, and how thoe
charateriftic qualities, which distinguish its ma-
turer age, are facceffively acquired. The a.
count of the establishment of the other Eng-/
colonies, undertaken at periods when the i-

porta-:

,prtance of such possessions was better under-
iood, and effeced by more direa and vigorous
exertions of the parent state, is less interesting.
I shall therefore relate the history of the two
oncrinal colonies in detail. With refpeEt to the
fibfequent settlements, some more general ob-
lfrvations concerning the time, the motives, and
c:rcumftances of their eitablifhment, will be sus-
,cient. I begin with the history of Virginia,
tit most ancient and most valuable of the British
culonies in North America.

Though many persons of diftinEtion became
p!opietors in the company which undertook to
?pant a colony in Virginia, its funds seem not to
have been considerable, and its first effort was
cartainly extremely feeble. A small vessel of a
hjndrcd tons, and two barks, under the com-
nand of Captain Newport, failed [Dec. 19]
v::h a hundred and five men, destined to remain
::1 the country. Some of these were of refpet-
aljl families, particularly a brother of the Earl
of Northumberland, and several officers who had
ferned with reputation in the reign of Elizabeth.
Newport, I know not for what reason, followed
the ancient course by the Weft Indies, and did
not reach the coast of North America for four
months [April 26, 1607]. But he approached
it with better fortune than any former navigator;
for having been driven, by the violence of a
form, to the northward of Roanoke, the place
of his destination, the sirs land he discovered
was a promontory which he called Cape Henry,
the southern boundary of the Bay of Chefapeak.
The English stood dire&ly into that spacious
islct, which seemed to invite them to enter;

x 3 and

and as they advanced, contemplated, with
mixture of delight and admiration, that gran,
reservoir, into which are poured the watern
all the vast rivers, which not only diffuse ferti:7-
through that diftrit of America, but open t'e
interior parts of the country to navigation, ar.,
render a commercial intercourse more extenf.;
and commodious than in any other region dc
the globe. Newport, keeping along the southet.
shore, failed up a river, which the natives caire
Powhatan, and to which he gave the name ::
James-River. After viewing its banks, dur-:
a run of above forty miles from its mouth, thtr
all concluded that a country, where safe a.'
convenient harbours seemed to be numero:,
would be a more suitable station for a trari-r
colony, than the ihoally and dangerous coai :o
the south, on which their countrymen ha-
formerly fettled. Here then they determined to
abide ; and having chosen a proper spot for the;-
residence, thev gave this infant settlement tit
name of James-Town, which it still retains; a2d
though it has never become either populous or
opulent, it can boast of being the most ancier:
habitation of the English in the New World.
But however well-chofen the situation might b.,
the members of the colony were far from avail-
ng themselves of its advantages. Violent a,:-
mofitics had broke out among some of their
leaders, during their voyage to Virginia. Theft
did not subside on their arrival there. The ri
deed of the council, which assumed the govern
ment in virtue of a commission brought froe
England under the feal of the company, and
opened of the day after they landed, was an av

c!

of injustice. Captain Smith, who had been ap-
pointed a member of the council, was excluded
from his feat at the board, by the mean jealousy
of his colleagues, and not only reduced to the
condition of a private man, but of one fufpested
and watched by his superiors. This diminution
of his influence, and restraint on his acivity,
ras an essential injury to the colony, which at
that juncture stood in need of the aid of both.
For soon after they began to fettle, the English
w-re involved in a war with the natives, partly
by their own indiscretion, and partly by the
!f"picion and ferocity of those barbarians. And
although the Indians, scattered over the coun-
tries adjacent to James-River, were divided into
independent tribes, so extremely feeble that
hardly one of them could muster above two hun-
dred warriors 5, they teazed and annoyed an in-
sant colony by their incessant hostilities. To
this was added a calamity still more dreadful;
the flock of provisions left for their subsistence,
on the departure of their ships for England
[June 15], was so scanty, and of such bad
quality, that a scarcity, approaching almost to
absolute famine, fcon followed. Such poor un.
wholesome fare brought on diseases, the violence
of which was so much increased by the sultry
heat of the climate, and the moisture of a coun-
try covered with wood, that before the be-
ginning of September, one half of their number
died, and molP of the survivors were sickly and de-
jeted. In such trying extremities, the com-
parative powers of every individual are dif-
covered and called forth, and each naturally

'Purchas, vol. iv. 169z. Smih's Travelh, p. 23.

takes

takes that station, and assumes that ascendant,
to which he is entitled by his talents and forcc
of mind. Every eye was now turned towards
Smith, and all willingly devolved on him tha.
authority, of which they had formerly deprived
him. His undaunted temper, deeply tinctured
with the wild romantic spirit chara'teriilic of
military adventurers in that age, was peculiarl
suited to such a situation. The vigour of his
conflitntion continued, fortunately, still unirr..
pared by disease, and his mind was never ap-
palled by danger. He inltantly adopted the
only plan that could save them from destruction.
He began by surrounding James-Town with such
rude fortifications as were a sufficient defence
against the assaults of savages. He then marched,
at the head of a small detachment, in quest of thn:r
enemies. Some tribes he gained by caresses ar.?
prcfents, and procured from them a fupplv of
provilons. Others he attacked with open force;
and defeating them on every occasion, whatevcr
their superiority in numbers might be, compellc'
them to impart to him some portion of the'i
winter stores. As the recompence of all hi
toils and dangers, he saw abundance and con-
tentment re-established in the colony, and hoped
that he should be able to maintain them in tha:
happy state, until the arrival of ships from Eng-
land in the spring: but in one of his excurfiors
he was surpriscd by numerous body of Indian,
and in making his escape from them, after a ga;
lant defence, he funk to the neck in a fwar.-,
and was obliged to surrender. Though hi
knew well what a dreadful fate awaits the pr-
foners of savages, his presence of mind did r::

for if

,arfake him. He shewed those who had taken him
aotive a mariner's compass, and amused them
nith so many wonderful accounts of its virtues,
as rilled them with astonishment and veneration,
which began to operate very powerfully in his
favour. They led him, however, in triumph
through various parts of the country, and con-
duated him at last to Powhatan, the most con-
iderable Sachim in that part of Virginia. There
the doom of death being pronounced, he was
led to the place of execution, and his head al-
rcadv bowed down to receive the fatal blow,
when that fond attachment of the American
women to their European invaders, the beneficial
cTfects of which the Spaniards often experienced,
interposed in his behalf. The favourite daugh.
tur of Powhatan rushed in between him and the
executioner, and, by her intreaties and tears,
prevailed on her father to spare his life. The
beneficence of his deliverer, whom the early Eng-
lhi writers dignify with the title of the Princess
Pocahuntas, did not terminate here; she soon
after procured his liberty, and sent him from
time to time seasonable presents of provifionst.

Smith, on his return to James-Town, found
the colony reduced to thirty-eight persons, who,
in despair, were preparing to abandon a country
which did not seem destined to be the habitation
of Englishmen. He employed caresses, threats,
and even violence, in order to prevent them
from executing this fatal resolution. With dif-
rculty he prevailed on them to defer it so long,
trlat the succour anxiously expected from Eng-

: Smith's Travels, p. 44, &c. Purchas, iv. 1704.
::-., p. 45, &c.

land

land arrived. Plenty was inltantly restored;;
hundred new planters were added to their nur.
ber, and an ample tfock of whatever was r
quifite for clearing and lowing the ground wa
delivered to them. But an unlucky inciden
turned their attention from that species of in
dufiry which alone could render their fituatio:
comfortable. In a small fiream of water tha
issued from a bank of sand near James-Town,
sediment of some shining mineral substance, whici
had some resemblance of gold, was discovered
At a time when the precious metals were con
ceived to be the peculiar and only valuable pro
dut&ions of the New World, when every moun
tain was supposed to contain a treasure, anr
every rivulet was searched for its golden sands
this appearance was fondly confidered as an in
fallible indication of a mine. Every hand uw
eager to dig; large quantities of this glitterinn
dust were amassed. From some assay of its na
ture, made by an artist as unskilful as his corn
panions were credulous, it was pronounced to bi
extremely rich. " There was now," (fay
Smith) " no talk, no hope, no work, but dir
"gold, wash gold, refine golda." With thi
imaginary wealth the firit vessel returning tc
England was loaded, while the culture of tht
land, and every useful occupation, were totall)
negleced.

The effe&s of this fatal delusion were foot

felt. Notwitlitanding all the provident acivi:j
of Smith, in procuring corn from the natives bl
traffic or by force, the colony began to filfferii
much as formerly from scarcity of food, and wva

u Smith' Travel, p. 53.

rnptt <

s:ied by the fame distempers. In hopes of
.i:aining some relief, Smith proposed, as they
hd not hitherto extended their researches be-
0ord the countries contiguous to James-River,
:. open an intercourse with the more remote
::bes, and to examine into the state of culture
ed population among them. The execution of
·-s arduous design he undertook himself, in a
m.all open boat, with a feeble crew, and a very
;a-,tv lLock of proviiions. He began his survey
2: C2pe Charles, and in two different excursions,
7-.:ch continued above four months, he advanced
X far as the river Sufquehannah, which flows
-:o the bottom of the Bay. He visited all the
:.:ntries both on the ealt and weft shores; he
.-.:ered molt of the conliderable creeks; he failed
3 many of the great rivers as far as their falls.
; traded with some tribes; h- fought with
dchers; he obfer.ed the nature of the territory
wrtlich they occupied, their mode of subsistence,
.e peculiarities in their manners; and left
i-.ong all a wonderful admiration either of the
' reficence or valour of the English. After
si.ing above three thousand miles in a paltry
rt:icl, ill fitted for such an extensive navigation,

'ring which the hardships to which he was ex-

?ksed, as well as the patience with which he
tndured, and the fortitude with which he fur-
mounted them, equal whatever is related of the
':;ebrated Spanish discoverers in their most dar-
': enterprises, he returned to James-Town ; he
-ought with him an account of that large por-
'n of the American continent now compre-
;-rdcd in the two provinces of Virginia and

Maryland,

Maryland , so full and exa&, that after the
progress of information and research for a cc.
tury and a half, his map exhibits no inaccura:.
view of both countries, and is the original up0o
which all subsequent delineations and description
have been formed r.

But whatever pleasing prospect of future be

nefit might open upon this complete difcoven
of a country formed by nature to be the feat of 2:
exclusive commerce, it afforded but little rec1'
for their present wants. The colony still ct
pended for subsistence chiefly on supplies fron
the natives; as, after all the efforts of their ow:
indultry, hardly thirty acres of ground were rv
cleared so as to be capable of culturez. i;
Smith's attention, however, the stores of t.:
Englilh were so regularly filled, that for fir
time they felt no considerable distress; and
this jun&ure a change was made in the confti:L
tion of the company, which seemed to pror.::
an increase of their security and happine.'
That supreme direction of all the company
operations, which the king by his charter haL
reserved to himself, discouraged persons of rasi
or property from becoming members of a focie:
so dependant on the arbitrary will of the crosnt
Upon a reprcfentation of this to James, he grante
them [16og, May 23] a new charter, with mor
ample privileges. He enlarged the boundaries
the colony; he rendered the powers of the com
pany, as a corporation, more explicit and co-
plete ; he aboliihed thejjurifdition of.the couce

Smi:h's Travels, p. 65, &c. r Suib, F -
- Stih, p. 97.

refd;-

retdent in Virginia; he vested the government
a-tirelv in a council residing in London; he
rranted to the proprietors of the company the
giht of electing the persons who were to com-
fie this council, by a majority of voices; he
.ithorized this council to establish such laws,
rders, and forms of government and magistracy,
or the colony and plantation, as they in their
,iicretion should think to be fittest for the good
;f the adventurers and inhabitants there ; he
.powered them to nominate a governor to
:are the admini-tration of affairs in the colony,
:'d to carry their orders into execution a. In
:fniequence of there conccffions, the company
aving acquired the power of regulating all its
;7.n transactions, the number of proprietors in-
reafcd, and among them we find the most re-
spr.table names in the nation.

The first deed of the new council was to ap-
-j;i:t Lord Delaware governor and captain-
E.neral of their colony in Virginia. To a per-
:!-. of his rank, those high-founding titles could
'c ni, allurement; and by his thorough acquaint-
a:ce with the progress and state of the fettle-
rent, he knew enough of the labour and diffi-
cuitv with v.hich an infant colony is reared, to
tipect any thing but anxiety and care in dif-
lrarging the duties of that delicate office. But
i'J. zeal to promote an establishment which he
:'.:rtcd to prove so highly beneficial to his
: ,i :ry, he w ias wiiling to relinquish all the
:..;orts ot an honourable station, to undertake
, ';:;- voyage to fettle in an uncultivated region
:::.:a:e of every accommodation to which he had

Srith, Append. 2.
tCL. I. y been

been accustomed, and where he foresaw that tor
and trouble and danger awaited him. But as
could not immediately leave England, the cou.
cil dispatched Sir Thomas Gates and Sir Georg:
Summers, the former of whom had been a>
pointed lieutenant-general and the latter a-.
miral, with nine ships and five hundred planter
They carried with them commiflions, by whc'a
they were em?owered to supersede the jurifdi.;
tion of the former council, to proclaim Lr-d
Dciaware governor, and, until he should arrie,
to take the administration of affairs into the.:
own hands. A violent hurricane separated ti,
vciTel in which Gates and Summers had e-..
barked from the reft of the fleet, and ilran-"-
it on the coast of Bermudas. The other :r
arrived fafcly at James-Town [August 1'.
But the fate of their commanders was unknoar..
Their comminfion for new-modelling the gover.
ment, and all other public papers, were fu-.
posed to be lolt, together with them. The re.
sent form of government, however, was held t3
be abolished. No legal warrant could be pro-
duced for eflablifhing any other. Smith was
not in a condition at this juncture to assert hi:
own rights, or to a&t with his wonted viro-:.
By an accidental explosion of gunpowder, h:
had been so miserably scorched and mangle.,
that he was incapable of moving, and under ti.
necessity of committing himself to the guida::ce
of his friends, who carried him aboard one !.
the ships returning to England, in hopes th::
he might recover by more /kilful treatment th;
he could meet with in Virginia b

b Purchas, iv. 1734, &c, Smith's Travei!, p. :.
Srilh, p. IGes, &-c. .As

After his departure, every thing tended fast
: the wildefl anarchy. Faction and difeontent
bnd often risen so high among the old settlers,
iat they could hardly be kept within bounds.
The spirit of the new-comers was too ungovern.
able to bear any restraint. Several among them
s better rank were such diifipated hopeless
young men, as their friends were glad to fend
o.t in quest of whatever fortune might betide
:rm in a foreign land. Of the lower order,
rnyv were so profligate or desperate, that their
:-;ntrv was happy to throw them out as nui-
-:-ces in society. Such persons were little capa-
b.e of the regular subordination, the ftri& ceco-
*:--v, and persevering industry, which their
':at/icn required. The Indians observing their
-..iccnduA, and that every precaution for sus
::-.ance or safety was neglected, not only with.
::d the supplies of provisions which they were
a::.!omed to furnish, but haralTed them with
csntinual hostilities. All their fuibfitence was
.-:ived from the stores which they had brought
f-nm England: these were soon consumed; then
:;ec domestic animals sent out to breed in the
coulntrv were devoured; and by this incon-
sc,-ate waste, they were reduced to such ex-
tremity of famine, as not only to eat the most
nafeous and unwholesome roots and berries,
b.t to feed on the bodies of the Indians whom
Ihey flew, and even on those of their companions
W:ho funk under the oppreflion of such compli.
ca:ed distress. In less than fix months, of five
hundred persons whom Smith left in Vilginia,
cn!y sixty remained; and these so feeble and dc-
j-.tcd, that they could not have survived for ten

Y 2 days,

days, if succour had not arrived from a quan
whence they did not exped it c.

When Gates and Summers were thrown a'lho

on Bermudas, fortunately not a single perfonc
board their Ihip perished. A considerable par
of their provisions and stores too was saved, an=
in that delightful spot, Nature, with fpontane
ous bounty, presented to them such a variety c
her produ&tions, that a hundred and fifty peop.
subsisted in affluence for ten months on an un
inhabited island Impatient, however, to efcap
from a place where they were cut off from a
intercourse with mankind, they set about buin
ing two barks with such tools and materials
they had, and by amazing efforts of perfeveran;
and ingenuity they finished them. In there the
embarked, and lteered dire&tly towards Virgian
in hopes of finding an ample consolation for
their toils and dangers in the embraces of thei
companions, and amidst the comforts of
flourishing colony. After a more profpero0
navigation than they could have expected i:
their ill-conftruted vessels, they landed at James
Town [May 23]. But instead of that joyin
interview for which they fondly looked, a spec
tacle presented itself which struck them wki;
horror. They beheld the miserable remainde
of their countrymen emaciated with famine ani
sickness, funk in despair, and in their figure ans
looks rather resembling spectres than human b:
ings. As Gates and Summers, in full con
fidence of finding plenty of provisions in V\'
ginia, had brought with them no larger foci
than was deemed necessary for their own fu>

c St.t, p. I:6. Purchas, iv. 174S.

¥r>:^

port during the voyage, their inability to afford
relief to their countrymen, added to the anguish
with which they viewed this unexpedted scene
ofdiftrefs. Nothing now remained but instantly
to abandon a country, where it was impossible
to subsist any longer; and though all that could
be found in the stores of the colony, when added
to what remained of the stock brought from
Bermudas, did not amount to more than was
ffficient to support them for sixteen days, at
the mofi scanty allowance, they set fail, in hopes
of being able to reach Newfoundland, where
thie expected to be relieved by their countrymen
employed at that season in the fishery there d.

But it was not the will of Heaven that all the
abour of the Englith, in planting this colony,
as well as all their hopes of benefit from its fu-
ture posterity, should be for ever loft. Before
Gates, and the melancholy companions of his
vovage, had reached the mouth of James-River,
.ev were met by Lord Delaware, with three
:i5, that brought a large recruit of provisions,
a confidcrable number of new settlers, and every
thing requisite for defence or cultivation. By
-erfuafion and authority he prevailed on them
to return to James-Town, where they found
t:eir fort, their magazines, and houses entire,
which Sir Thomas Gates, by some happy chance,
i.ad preserved from being set on fire at the time
Gs their departure. A society so feeble and dif-
crdered in its frame required a tender and skilful

A minute and curious account of the shipwreck of
r t ian 5 ,mmerr, t::d of their adventures in ierrnudas,

; ,:u.,-J by Strachy, a gentleman who azcnimpanied

r::, 'ra, was }ubiled by Purchas, iv. 1734.

Y3 hand

hand to cherish it, and restore its vigour. ThiJ
it found in Lord Delaware: he searched into
the causes of their misfortunes, as far as he could
discover them, amidfR the violence of their mu.
tual accusations; but instead of exerting hi
power in punishing crimes that were past, he
employed his prudence in healing their diffe
sions, and in guarding against a repetition of tih
fame fatal errors. By unwearied assiduity, be
the respect due to an amiable and beneficer
charactrr, by knowing how to mingle feverit)
with indulgence, and when to assume the digniti
of his office, as well as when to display thl
gentleness natural to his own temper, he grads
ally reconciled men corrupted by anarchy t
subordination and discipline, he turned the at.
tention of the idle and profligate to induftrr,
and taught the Indians again to reverence azd
dread the English name. Under such an ad.
ministration, the colony began once more tc
assume a promising appearance; when unhappil!
for it, a complication of diseases brought on b!
the climate obliged Lord Delaware to quit the
country' [1611, March 28]; the governmeat
of which he committed to Mr. Percy.

He was soon superseded by the arrival of Si

Thomas Dale [May oj ; in whom the compacT
had velfed more absolute authority than in any o
predecessors, impowering him to rule by martiA
law; a short code of which, founded on the prac
tice of the armies in the Low Countries, the mol
rigid military school at that time in Europe, thr
sent out with him. This system of governme.:
is so violent and arbitrary, that even the Sp-.

Suth, p. 117. Purchas, iv. 1764.

n;w-:;

niards themselves had not ventured to introduce
it into their settlements; for among them, as
soon as a plantation began, and the arts of peace
succeeded to the operations of war, the jurifdic-
tion of the civil magiflrate was uniformly eftab-
lilfed. But however unconstitutional or oppref-
five this may appear, it was adopted by the
advice of Sir Francis Bacon, the most enlight-
ened philosopher, and one of the most eminent
lawyers of the ages. The company, well ac-
quainted with the inefficacy of every method
which they had hitherto employed for restrain-
ing the unruly mutinous spirits which thev had
to govern, eagerly adopted a plan that had the
fauction of such high authority to recommend
it. Happily for the colony, Sir Thomas Dale,
who was entrusted with this dangerous power,
exercised it with prudence and moderation. By
the vigour which the summary mode of military
purmifhment gave to his adminiRfration, he in-
t oduced into the colony more perfet order than
had ever been established there; and at the fame
time he tempered its vigour with so much dif-
cretion, that no alarm seems to have been given
by this formidable innovations.

The regular form which the colony now be-
gan to assume, induced the King to issue a new
charter for the encouragement of the adventurers
[1612, March i2], by which he not only con-
firmed all their former privileges, and prolonged
the term of exemption from payment of duties
on the commodities exported by them, but
granted them more extensive property, as well
as more ample jurifdition. All the islands lying
: Bacon, Elfay cn Flanations, p . 3. s Stih, p. Iz2.

within

within three hundred leagues of the coaf were
annexed to the Province of Virginia. In con.
sequence of this, the company took possession of
Bermudas, and the other small ifes discovered
by Gates and Summers; and at the fame time
prepared to fend out a considerable reinforce.
ment to the colony at James-Town. The ex.
pence of those extraordinary efforts was de.
frayed by the protits of a lottery, which amount.
ed nearly to thirty thousand pounds. This ex.
pedient, they were authorized to employ by
their new charterh; and it is remarkable, as the
first instance, in the English hiitory, of any pub.
lic countenance given to this pernicious seducing
mode of levying money. But the House cf
Commons, which towards the close of this reign
began to observe every measure of government
with jealous attention, having remonstrated
againfl the institution as unconflitutional an.
impolitic, James recalled the licence under the
sanction of which it had been established'.

By the severe discipline of martial laa, the

activity of the coloniffs was forced into a proper
direction, and exerted itself in useful induftrr.
This, aided by a fertile foil and favourable
climate, loon enabled them to raise such a large
flock of provisions, that they were no longer
obliged to trust for fubfiflence to the precarious
supplies which they obtained or extorted from
the Indians. In proportion as the English be.
came more independent, the natives courted
their friendship upon more equal terms. The
happy effects of this were quickly felt. Sir

Stith, p. 191. Appendix, z3, &z.
Chalmcn' Annils, i. 3z.

Thom;r

Thomas Dale concluded a treaty with one of
their most powerful and warlike tribes, situated
3a the River Chickahominy, in which they con-
sented to acknowledge themselves fubjets of
the King of Great Britain, to assume henceforth
the name of Englishmen, to fend a body of their
warriors to the afliitance of the Englilh, as often
as they took the field against any enemy, and to
deposit annually a stipulated quantity of Indian
corn in the ifore-houfes of the colonyk. An
event, which the early historians of Virginia
reate with peculiar fatisfaftion, prepared the
way for this union. Pocahuntas, the favourite
daughter of the great Chief Powhatan, to whose
intercession Captain Smith was indebted for his
life, persevered in her partial attachment to the
English; and as (he frequently visited their fettle-
ments, where (he was always received with refpe&-
ful hospitality, her admiration of their arts and
manners continued to increase. During this in-
ttrcourfe, her beauty, which is represented as
far superior to that of her countrywomen, made
inch impression on the heart of Mr. Rolfe, a
young man of rank in the colony, that he
warmly solicited her to accept of him as a hus-
band. Where manners are simple, courtship is
not tedious. Neither artifice prevents, nor cere-
mony forbids the heart from declaring its senti.
ments. Pocahuntas readily gave her content;
Dale encouraged the alliance, and Powhatan did
not disapprove it. The marriage was celebrated
with extraordinary pomp; and from that period
a friendly correspondence subsisted between the

k Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars x. p. 33.
S th, p. 130.l

colony

colony and all the tribes subjef to Powhatan,
or that flood in awe of his power. Rolfe azd
his princess, (for by that name the writer of
the last age always distinguish her,) set out ior
England, were The was received by James ar.d
his Queen with the refpe& suited to her bith.
Being carefully infiruced in the principles oi
the Chriitian faith, she was publicly baptizei,
bdt died a few years after, on her return to Ame.
rica, leaving one son; from whom are sprung fomr
of the most respectable families in Virginia, who
boast of their descent from the race of the an.
cient rulers of their country'. But notwith.
standing the visible good effecs of that alliance,
none of Rolfe's countrymen seem to have irr.
tated the example which he set them, of inte:
marrying with the natives. Of all the EuropeaE.
who have fettled in America, the Englilh have
availed themselves least of this obvious method
of conciliating the affecion of its original inha-
bitants; and, either from the shyness confpicor
ous in their national character, or from the want
of that pliant facility of manners which accorm
modates itself to every situation, they have bees
more averse than the French and Portuguese, or
even the Spaniards, from incorporating with the
native Americans. The Indians, courting such
an union, offered their daughters in marriage to
their new guest: and when they did not accept
of the proffered alliance, they naturally imputed
it to pride and to their contempt of them as an
inferior order of beings m.

X Hamer Sclida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars x. p. 23.
Stirh, p. 129. 146. Smith's Travels, p. 13. zzi.

Lteccrley's H. ot . i . .

DuriLg

During the interval of tranquillity procured
by the alliance with Powhatan, an important
change was made in the ilate of the colony.
Hitherto no right of private property in land
had been eflablifhtd. The fields that were
cleared had been cultivated by thejoint labour
cf the colonitts; their produc was carried to
:he common flore-houfes, and distributed weekly
:9 every family, according to its number and
ex:gencies. A society, destitute of the firit ad-
T2-tage resulting from ibcial union, was not
fo.red to prosper. Indultry, when not excited
bv the idea of property in what was acquired by
i owsn efforts, made no vigorous exertion. The
}d had no inducement to contrive, nor the
:.::d to labour. The idle and improvident
:rnited entirely to what was issued from the
crIr.on store; the afliduity even of the fober
z-d attentive relaxed, when they perceived that
others were to reap the fruit of their toil; and
i: was computed, that the united induitry of
the colony did not accomplish as much work in
a week as rr.ight have been performed in a day,

each individual had laboured on his own ac-

c-.nt. In order to remedy this, Sir Thomas
Dale divided a considerable portion of the land
i.: f-.ali lots, and granted one of these to each
.dividual in full property. From the moment
:tha indufIry had the certain profpe& of a re-
cmnper,.c, it advanced with rapid progress. The
aicles of primary peceffity were cultivated with

:much attention as secured the means of sub-
:.:ce; and such schemes of improvement were
:'r.ed as prepared the way for the introducion
-: ?j!lence into the colony".

v S;:-'.; Tra.vci, p. 114. Sith, p. 131.

The

The industrious spirit, which began to rs

among the planters, was soon direced towards
new objct; and they applied to it for fomt
time with such inconsiderate ardour as was pro
ductive of fatal consequences. The culture 0
tobacco, which has since become the ftap!eoi
Virginia and the source of its prosperity, vw!
introduced about this time into the color.
[1616]. As the taste for that weed continuec
to increase in England, notwithtianding th:
.zalous declamations of James against it, th!
tobacco imported from Virginia came to a read,
market; and thoulgh it was so much inferior i;
quality or in eflimation to that raised by th,
Spaniards in the Weft Indian islands, that
pound of the latter fold for eighteen shilling.
and of the former for no more than three ihilling.
it yielded a considerable profit. Allured h,
the profpet of such a certain and quick retura.
every other fpecics of industry was negle&ct,
The land which ought to have been reserved fa
railing provilions, and even the streets of Jan:t.
Town, were planted with tobacco. Various r:
gulations were framed to restrain this ill-dreirect
activity. But from eagerness for present ga:.
the planters disregarded every admonition. Th
meanls of subsistence became so scanty as force!
them to renew their demands upon the Indian,
who, feeing no end of those exactirns, their a:
tipathy to the Englih name revived with ad-
ditional rancc)ur, ard they began to form fchc.Tmr
of vengeance, with the secrecy and lilence pc.-
L'ar to Americans °.

0 Srith, p. 4.0. I 7. i4 16S. Smith, p. 140 P-
chai, iv. 1, ;.

A,, .

Meanwhile the colony, notwithstanding this
eror in its operations, and the cloud that was
fthering over its head, continued to wear an
:pect of prosperity. Its numbers increased by
:c;ceffive migrations ; the quantity of tobacco
.ported became every year more considerable,
.-d several of the planters were not only in an
.:v situation, but advancing fast to opulence P;
:.d by two events, which happened nearly at
..: fame time, both population and induflry
sre greatly promoted. As few women had
.::herto ventured to encounter the hardships
-hich were unavoidable in an unknown and un-
:-ltivated country, most of the colonists, con-
.rained to live tingle, confidered themselves as
-, more than sojourners in a land to which they
a-re not attached by the tender ties of a family
:-d children. In order to induce them to fettle
::ere, the company took advantage of the ap-
;:ren.t tranquillity in the country, to fend out a
:.,-fiderable number of young women, of hum-
.e birth, indeed, but of unexceptionable cha-
*:ater, and encouraged the planters, by pre-
rrums and immunities, to marry them q. These
:.w companions were received with such fond-
-.Es, and many of them so comfortably eftab-
..:.ed, as invited others to follow their example,
;-d by degrees thoughtless adventurers, afruming
. sentiments of virtuous citizens and of pro-
: ent fathers of families, became solicitous about
::.: prosperity of a country, which they now
-::.idered as their own. As the colonists began
:; irm more extensive plans of industry, they
re- unexpe&cedly furnished with means of exe-

P Smith, p. i3(. q Stith, p. 166. 197.
L-. !in. z cuting

cuting them with greater facility. A Dukt
ship from the Coast of Guinea, having failed up
James-River, fold a part of her cargo of negro
to the planters ; and as that hardy race r-,
found more capable of enduring fatigue under
sultry climate than Europeans, their number hL
been increased by continual importation; thfn
aid seems now to be essential to the existence a/
the colony, and the greater part of field labour
in Virginia is performed by servile hands.

But as the condition of the colony improve,

the spirit of its members became more ind.
pendent. To Englishmen the summary a2X
severe decisions of martial law, however tempere
by the mildness of their governors, appeared in.
tolerably oppressive; and they longed to recover
the privileges to which they had been accufito.d
under the liberal form of government in thcz
native country. In compliance with this spin.
Sir George Yeardly, in the year 1619 [June-.
called the first general assembly that was ece
held in Virginia; and the numbers of the peops
were now so increased, and their settlements ,.
dispersed, that eleven corporations appeared bI
their representatives in this convention, when
they were permitted to assume legislative powe,
and to excercife the noblest function of fre:
men. The laws ena&ed in it seem neither.x
have been many, nor of great importance; be
the meeting was highly acceptable to the peopn
as they now beheld among themselves an irman
of the English constitution, which they reverence
as the most perse& model of free governrn::-
In order to render this resemblance more coa

r Beverley, p. 37.

F''.

piete, and the rights of the planters more cer-
ain, the company issued a charter or ordinance
July 24], which gave a legal and permanent
cnnr to the government of the colony. The
:;preme legifiative authority in Virginia, in imi-
tion of that in Great Britain, was divided and
lodged partly in the governor, who held the
ihce of the sovereign; partly in a council of
Rate named by the company, which possessed
fame of the diftinetions, and exercised some of
ite fun&tions belonging to the peerage; partly
i; a general council or assembly conlpofed of the
representatives of the people, in which were
Tiled powers and privileges similar to those of
the House of Commons. In both these coun-
cl all questions were to be determined by the
najority of voices, and a negative was reserved
to the governor; but no law or ordinance,
though approved of by all the three members of
the legislature, was to be of force, until it was
ratified in England by a general court of the
company, and returned under its feal'. Thus
the constitution of the colony was fixed, and
the members of it are henceforth to be con-
fidered, not merely as servants of a commercial
company, dependant on the will and orders of
their superior, but as free men and citizens.

The natural effect of that happy change in
their condition was an increase of their indulsry.
The product of tobacco in Virginia was now
teual, not only to the consumption of it in
Grcat Britain t, but could furnish some quantity

for

' S!:h, Appendix, p. 32, &c.
*t is a matter of some curiosity to trace the progress of
- crliumption of this unnecetiiry ccmmodiry. The ule of

z z tobacco

for a foreign market. The company opened,
trade for it with Holland, and established war.
houses in Middleburgh and Flulhing. Jarne,
and his privy council, alarmed at feeing the
commerce of a commodity, fur which the d:.
mand was daily increasing, turned into a chaliad
that tended to the diminution of the revenue, by
depriving it of a considerable duty imposed on tL'
importation of tobacco, interposed with vigor:
to check this innovation. Some expedient we
found, by which the matter was adjuiled forta
present; but it is remarkable as the firit inilaaci
of a difference in sentiment between the parea
state and the colony, concerning their respective
rights. The former concluded, that the trad
of the colony should be confined to England
and all its productions be landed there. Th
latter claimed, not only the general privilege c
Englishmen to carry their commodities to th
best market, but pleaded the particular concte
lions in their charter, by which an unlimitc
freedom of commerce seemed to be grantedto
them u. The time for a more full discussion o
this important question was not yet arrived.

tobacco seems to have been first introduced into Enghl
about the year 1586. ' oibly a few sea-faring perf.-fs i
hare acquired a reliih for it by their intercourle with :
Spaniards previous to that per od i but the use of it ca.
be denominated a national habit iooner than the time i1 '
mentioned. Upon an average of the seven years immrei-s!
preceding the year 62z, the whole import of tobacco its
England amounted to a hundred and forty-two thoufinaj
eighty-five pounds weight. Stith, p. 246. From t-a
appears, that the taste bad spread with a rapidity whic(
remarkable. But how inconfidcrable is that quan;: '
what is now confuamed in Great Ertain !

u buth, p. 2;O, &c.

But while the colony continued to increase
( fast, that fetttlements were scattered, not
,sly along the banks of James and York Rivers,
but began to extend to the Rapahannock, and
(en to the Potowmack, the English, relying
on their own numbers and deceived by this ap-
pearance of prosperity, lived in full security.
They neither attended to the movements of the
Indians, nor fufpeted their machinations, and
:hough surrounded by a people whom they
:ight have known from experience to be both
artful and vindictive, they negleced every pre-
caution for their own safety that was requisite in
,fch a situation. Like the peaceful inhabitants
of a society completely established, they were no
longer soldiers but citizens, and were so intent
g, what was subservient to the comfort or em-
'-llifhment of civil life, that every martial exer-
cife began to be laid aside as unnecessary. The
Indians, whom they commonly employed as
hunters, were furnished with fire-arms, and
aught to use them with dexterity. They were
xrinitted to frequent the habitations of the Eng-
iih at all hours, and received as innocent visit-
ants whom there was no reason to dread. This
inconsiderate security enabled the Indians to
prepare for the execution of that plan of
vengeance, which they meditated with all the
deliberate forethought which is agreeable to
their temper. Nor did they want a leader ca-
pable of conducing their schemes with address.
On the death of Powhatan, in the year i618,
0pechancanough succeeded him, not only as
',::owanee or chief of his own tribe, but in that
t.anfiv, influence over all the Indian nations of

z 3 Virginia,

Virginia, which induced the EngliflI writers:
diflinguifh them by the name of Emperor. A;
cording to the Indian tradition, he was not
native of Virginia, but came from a distaL
country to the south-west, possibly from so0,
province of the Mexican Empire . But as h
was conspicuous for all the qualities of highei;
estimation among savages, a fearless courag:
great strength and agility of body, and cra::
policy, he quickly rose to eminence and powe-
Soon after his elevation to the supreme commanc
a general mafTacre of the English seems to hav
been relolved upon; and during four years, th
means of perpetrating it with the greatest facili:t
and success were concerted with amazing fecre
cy. All the tribes contiguous to the Englii
settlements were successively gained, except thc!
on the Eafiern shore, from whom, on account r
their peculiar attachment to their new neig.
bours, every circumfiance that might difcov.
what they intended was carefully concealed. T
each tribe its station was allotted, and the Fa.
it was to ad prescribed. On the morning i
the day consecrated to vengeance [March 22-
each waa at the place of rendezvous appointee
while the English were so little aware of the in
pending deftrnCion, that they received with c-.
suspicious hospitality, several persons sent b
Opechancanough, under pretext of deliveri,
prefcnts of venison and fruits, but in reality :
observe their motions. Finding them perfeht
secure, at mid-day, the moment that was pre
vioufly fixed for this deed of horror, the Indiaa
rushed at once upon them in all their differnt i'

:scments, and murdered men,women,and children,
,ith undiftinguifhing rage, and that rancorous
c-jeltv with which savages treat their enemies.
I- one hour, nearly a fourth part of the whole
lonv was cut off, almost without knowing by
hrofe hands they fell. The slaughter would
Lave been universal, if compalfion, or a sense of
¾Irtv, had not moved a converted Indian, to
"-hom the secret was communicated the night
K:-'re the massacre, to reveal it to his master
: f, ch time as to save James-Town, and some
r:accent fettlemnents; and if the English, in
c:her diltricEs, had not run to their arms with
:.roluti'n prompted by despair, and defended
: .rnfclves so bravely as to reoulfe their assailants,
i:o, in the execution of their plan, did not dif-
;,acr courage equal to the sagacity and art with
Thich they had concerted it .

But though the blowa was thus prevented from
cice:'ding with its fill effect, it proved very
-:evous to an infant colony. Irn some fettle-
::. :ts not a single Eiiglifhman eftaped. Many
:ór.ons of prime note in the colony, and among
',cfc fevcral members of the council, were slain.
T'e survivors, overwhelmed with grief, aito-
:hr.men, and terror, abandoned all their re-
.ote settlements, and, crowding together for
:aicty to James-Town, did not occupy a terri-
tjry of greater extent than had been planted
.)n after the arrival of their countrymen in
Virginia. Confined within those narrow boun-
daries, they were less intent on schemes of in-
d:lity than on thoughts of revenge. Every
-aa took arms. A bloody war againlf the In-

'r.i ; p. 2c, ? &c, I'brch;as iv, i78z, &c.

dians

dians commenced; and, bent on exterminatinB
the whole race, neither old nor young wer.
spared. The condu& of the Spaniards in thi
Southern regions of America was openly pro
posed as the most proper model to imitate'
and, regardless like them of those principles oi
faith, honour, and humanity, which regulazt
hoffility among civilized nations and set bound
to its rage, the English deemed every thing a'
lowable that tended to accomplish their design
They hunted the Indians like wild beads, rathe
than enemies; and as the pursuit of them t(
their places of retreat in the woods, whic!
covered their country, was both difficult a,,
dangerous, they endeavoured to allure then
from their inacceffable faftneffcs, by offers o
peace and promises of oblivion, made with fud
an artful appearance of sincerity as deceive
their crafty leader, and induced them to retun
to their former settlements, and resume the!
usual peaceful occupations [1623]. The be
haviour of the two people seemed now to b,
perfectly reverted. The Indians, like men ac
quainted with the principles of integrity a;;(
good faith, on which the intercourse betwee
nations is founded, confided in the rcconcili
ation, and lived in absolute fecarity without sus
picion of danger; while the English, with per
fidious craft, were preparing to imitate savage
in their revenge and cruelty. On the approacd
of harvest, when they knew an hostile attack
would be molt formidable and fatal, they fe'
suddenly upon all the Indian plantations, mrur.
dered every person on whom they could lay hold,

z Stit, p. 233.

asr

and drove the reft to the woods, where so many
periihed with hunger, that some of the tribes
cearef to the English were totally extirpated.
This atrocious deed, which the perpetrators la-
boured to rcprefent as a necessary a& of retalia-
tion, was followed by some happy effects. It
delivered the colony so entirely from any dread
of the Indians, that its settlements began again
to extend, and its induifty to revive.

But unfortunately at this junture the fRate of
the company in England, in which the property
of Virginia and the government of the colony
ettled there were veifed, prevented it from
Seconding the efforts of the planters, by such a
reinforcement of men, and such a supply of
necefiaries, as were requisite to replace what
they had loft. The company was originally
composed of many adventurers, and increased so
fast by the junction of new members, allured by
the profpet of gain, or the desire of promoting
a scheme of public utility, that its general
courts formed a numerous assembly . The
operation of every political principle and passion,
that spread through the kingdom, was felt in
those popular meetings, and influenced their
decisions. As towards the close of James's
reign more just and enlarged sentiments with
refpe& to constitutional liberty were diffused
among the people, they came to undertand their
rights better, and to assert them with greater
boldness; a diftinQtion formerly little known,
but now familiar in Englilh policy, began to be
established between the court and the country
parties, and the leaders of each endeavoured to de-

Stith, p. z72. 276.

rive

rive power and consequence from every quarter.
Both exerted themselves with emulation, in order
to obtain the diretion of a body so numercu!
and refpetdable as the company of Virginian ad.
venturers. In consequence of this, business had
been conduaed in every general court for forer
years, not with the temperate spirit of merchants
deliberating concerning their mutual interest,
but with the animosity and violence natural to
numerous assemblies, by which rival facio:s
contend for superiority b.

Ab the king did not often assemble the great

council of the nation in parliament, the generJ
courts of the company became a theatre, on
which popular orators displayed their talents;
the proclamations of the crown, and ass of the
privy council, with refpec to the commerce and
police of the colony, were canvafled there with
freedom, and censured with severity, ill-fuited
to the lofty ideas which James entertained of his
own wisdom, and the extent of his prerogative.
In order to check this growing spirit of discus.
sion, the ministers employed all their address and
influence to gain as many members of the com-
pany as might give them the direEtion of their
deliberations. But so unsuccessful were they in
this attempt, that every measure proposed by
them was reprobated by a vast majority, and
sometimes without any reason, but because they
were the proposers of it. James, little favour.
able to the power of any popular assembly, and
weary of contending with one over which he had
laboured in vain to obtain an ascendant, began
to entertain thoughts of dissolving the company,

b Stith, p. s29, &c. ChLMners, p. 59.

a:c

and of new-modelling its constitution. Pretexts,
neither unplaufible, nor destitute of some founda-
:ton, feerned to justify this measure. The flow
progress of the colony, the large fums of money
cxpended, and great number of men who had
perified in attempting to plant it, the late maf-
;acre by the Indians, and every disaster that had
befallen the English from their first migration to
America, were imputed solely to the inability of
a numerous company to condu& an enterprise so
-,mplex and arduous. The nation felt sensibly
its disappointment in a scheme in which it had
,gaged with sanguine expectations of advan-
age, and wished impatiently for such an impar-
til scrutiny into former proceedings as might
uggeft more salutary measures in the future ad-
mriniftration of the colony. The present itate
ns its affairs, as well as the wifles of the people,
seemed to call for the interposition of the crown;
ai.d James, eager to display the superiority of
his royal wisdom, in correEting those errors into
which the company had been betrayed by inex-
perience in the arts of government, boldly un-
dertook the work of reformation [1623, May 9].
Without regarding the rights conveyed to the
company by their charter, and without the
formality of any judicial proceeding for annulling
it, he, by virtue of his prerogative, issued a
:ommiflion, empowering some of the judges, and
other persons of note, to examine into all the
tranfations of the company from its first eftab-
li'hment, and to lay the result of their inquiries,
to7ether with their opinion concerning the most
Pnectual means of rendering the colony more

profpero

prosperous , before the privy council. At the
fame time, by a strain of authority still higher,
he ordered all the records and papers of the
compaiy to be seized, and two of its principal
officers to be arrested. Violent and arbitrary a,
these a&s of authority may now appear, the
commissioners carried on their inquiry without
any obftru&ion but what arose from some feeble
and ineffectual remonstrances of the compan..
The commissioners, though they conduded tle;i
scrutiny with much acivity and vigourd, did
not communicate any of their proceedings to the
company; but their report, with refped to its
operations, seems to have been very unfavourable,
as the king, in consequence of it, signified to
the company his intention of vesting the supreme
government of the company in a governor and
twelve assistants, to be resident in England, and
the executive power in a council of twelve, which
should reside in Virginia [Oe. 8]. The gover.
nor and assistants were to be originally appointed
by the king. Future vacancies were to be sup-
plied by the governor and his aflltants, but their
nomination was not to take effect until it should
be ratified by the privy council. The twelve
eounfellors in Virginia were to be chosen by the
governor and assistants; and this choice was
likewise fubje&ed to -the review of the pn'ri
council With an intention to quiet the mind;
of the colonists, it was declared, that private
property should be deemed sacred; and for the
more effectual feiurity of it, all grants of land;
from the former company were to be confirmed

: S-;ir. . 28. d Smni:h's Trave;s, p. 165, &c.

by

by the new one. In order to facilitate the exe-
cution of this plan, the king required the com-
pany inifantly to surrender its charter into his
bands'.

But here James and his ministers encountered
a spirit, of which they seem not to have been
aiare. They found the members of the com-
pany unwilling tamely to relinquish rights of
franchises conveyed to them with such legal
formality, that upon faith in their validity they
bad expended considerable fums f; and till more
averse to the abolition of a popular form of go.
vernment, in which every proprietor had a voice,
ia order to fuibjet a colony, in which they were
deeply interested, to the dominion of a fmaU
;unto absolutely dependent on the crown. Nei-
ther promises nor threats could induce them to
depart from these sentiments; and in a general
court [Od. 20] the king's proposal was almost
unanimously rejected, and a resolution taken to
defend to the utmost their chartered rights, if
:nefe should be called in question in any court of
:jiice. James, highly offended at their pre-
:!mption in daring to oppose his will, dire&ed
[Nov. to] a writ of quo warranto to be issued
Egainft the company, that the validity of its
charter might be tried in the Court of King's
Bench; and in order to aggravate the charge
by colle&ing additional proofs of mal-adminiftra-
tion, he appointed some persons, in whom he
could confide, to repair to Virginia to infpe& the
Zate of the colony, and inquire into the conduc
f the company, and of its officers there.
The law-suit in the King's Bench did not
bang long in suspense. It terminated, as was

c Stith, p. 293, &c. f Chalmrs, p. 6z.
VOL. 11:. A 4. usual

usual in that reign, in a decision perfecly coB.
sonant to the wishes of the monarch. The chann
was forfeited, [June 1624], the company wai
dissolved, and all the rights and privileges con.
ferred upon it returned to the king, from whom
they flowed F.

Some writers, particularly Stith, the most in-

telligcnt and heft informed historian of Virgins,
mention the dissolution of the company as a mol
disastrous event to the colony. Animated with
liberal sentiments, imbibed in an age when the
principles of liberty were more fully unfolded tha.
under the reign of James, they viewed his vio-
lent and arbitrary proceedings on this occafio:
with such indignation, that their abhorrence oi
the means which he employed to accomplish hi!
design seems to have rendered them incapable i
contemplating its effets with discernment arn
candour. There is not perhaps any mode c
governing an infant colony less friendly to it
hlberty, than the dominion of an exclusive corpo
ration, pofeffed of all the powers which Jams
had conferred upon the company of adventuren
in Virginia. During several years the colonifi
can hardly be confidered in any other light that
as servants to the company, nourilhed out of i!
stores, bound implicitly to obey its orders, aet
fubje&ed to the most rigorous of all forms of go
vernment, that of martial law. Even after ti,
native spirit of Englishmen began to rouse un&
oppreflion, and had extorted from their superior
the right of enaAing laws for the government a
that community of which they were members
as no at, though approved of by all the brancbh
of the provincial legislature, was held to be Q

Rymcr, voL xvii. p. 61i3 &-c. Chalrr.err, p 6!.

legal force, until it was ratified by a general
court in England, the company fill retained the
paramount authority in its own hands. Nor
was the power of the company more favourable
to the prosperity of the colony, than to its free-
dom. A numerous body of merchants, as long
as its opeiations are purely commercial, may
carry them on with discernment and success.
But the mercantile spirit seems ill-adapted to
condu& an enlarged and liberal plan of civil
policy, and colonies have seldom grown up to
maturity and vigour under its narrow and in-
terested regulations. To the unavoidable defecs
in administration which this occasioned, were
added errors arising from inexperience. The
English merchants of that age had not those ex-
tensive views which a general commerce opens
to such as have the dire&ion of it. WVhen they
first began to venture out of the beaten track,
they groped their way with timidity and hefita-
tion. Unacquainted with the climate and foil
of America, and ignorant of the produtions
bet suited to them, they seem to have had no
fettled plan of improvement, and their schemes
were continually varying. Their fyltem of go-
vernment was equally flucuating. In the course
of eighteen years ten different persons presided
over the province as chief governors. No won-
der that under such administration all the efforts
to give vigour and tlability to the colony should
prove abortive, or produce only flendcr effets.
These efforts, however, when estimated accord-
ing to the ideas of that age, either with refpec to
commerce or to policy, were very considerable,
and coiduted with astonishing perseverance.

A A 2 Above

Above an hundred and fifty thousand pound

were expended in this first attempt to plant a
English colony in Americah; and more thn
iine thousand persons were sent out from the
mother country to people this new settlement.
At the dissolution of the company, the nation,
in return for this waste of treasure and of people,
did not receive from Virginia an annual importa.
tion of commodities exceeding twenty thousand
pounds in value; and the colony was so far fro,
having added strength to the state by an increase
of population, that, in the year one thousand
fir hundred and twenty-four, scarcely two thou.
sand persons survived i, a wretched remnant of
the numerous emigrants who had flocked thither,
with sanguine expetations of a very different fate.

The company, like all unprofperous societies,

fell unpitied. The violent hand with which
prerogative had invaded its rights was forgotten,
and new profpe&ts of success opened, under a
form of government exempt from all the defe&c
to which past disasters were imputed. The king
and the nation concurred with equal ardour in
resolving to encourage the colony. Soon after
the final judgment in the Court of King's Bench
againtt the company, James appointed a council
of twelve persons to take the temporary direc-
tion of affairs in Virginia [Aug. 26], that he
might have leisure to frame with deliberate con.
fideration proper regulations for the permanent
government of the colony k. Pleased with such
an opportunity of exercising his talents as a legi-
flator, he began to turn his attention towards

u Smith's Travels, p. 4. '67. i Chalmers' Annah,
p. 69. L Rymn, xvii. 61i, &c.

t,.

the fubje&; but death prevented him from coma
pleting his plan.

Charles I. on his accession to the throne
[1625, Mar. 27], adopted all his father's maxims
with refpet to the colony in Virginia. He de-
dared it to be a part of the empire annexed to
the crown, and immediately subordinate to its
jurifdiaion: he conferred the title of Governor
on Sir George Yardely, and appointed him, in
conjuntion with a council of twelve, and a fe-
cretary, to exercise supreme authority there, and
enjoined them to conform in every point to such
instructions as from time to time they might re-
ceive from him . From the tenor of the king's
commission, as well as from the known spirit of
his policy, it is apparent, that he intended to
vest every power of government, both legislative
and executive, in the governor and council,
without recourse to the representatives of the
people, as poffeffliig a right to eiaEt laws for
the community, or to impose taxes upon it.
Yardely and his council, who seem to have been
fit initruments for carrying this system of arbi-
trary rule into execution, did not fail to put such
a conftrution on the words of their commission
as was most favourable to their own jurifdition.
During a great part of Charles's reign, Virginia
knew no other law than the will of the sovereign.
Statutes were published, and taxes imposed,
without once calling the representatives of
the people to authorize them by their fanc-
tion. At the fame time that the colonists were
bereaved of political rights, which they deemed
efential to freemen and citizens, their private
property was violently invaded. A proclama-

l Rymer, xviii. 71. 311.

A A3 tion

tion was issued, by which, under pretexts equally
absurd and frivolous, they were prohibited from
felling tobacco to any person but certain com.
miflioners appointed by the king to purchase it
on his account m; and they had the cruel morti.
fication to behold the sovereign, who should have
afforded them proteaion, engross all the pro6ts
of their industry, by seizing the only valuable
commodity which they had to vend, and retain.
ing the monopoly of it in his own hands. Whyk
the staple of the colony in Virginia funk in value
under the oppression and restraints of monopo -,
property in land was rendered insecure by various
grants of it, which Charles inconsiderately be.
flowed upon hi. favourites. These were not
only of such exorbitant extent as to be unfavour.
able to the progress of cultivation; but from in.
attention, or imperfect acquaintance with the
geography of the country, their boundaries were
so inaccurately defined, that large trass alreadyoc.
cupied and planted were often included in them.

The murmurs and complaints which filch 2

a system of administration excited, were aug.
mented by the rigour with which Sir John Har.
vey, who succeeded Yardely in the government
of the colony n, enforced every a& of power.
r1627] Rapacious, unfeeling, and haughty,
he added insolence to oppression, and neither
regarded the sentiments, nor listened to the re.
monstrances of the people under his command.
The colonists, far from the feat of governmei:t,
and overawed by authority derived from a royal
commission, submitted long to his tyranny acd
exactions. Their patience was at last exhauted,
and in a transport of popular rage and indigo-

0Ryner, sxviii 19. °Ibid. p. 9go.

tion, they seized their governor, and sent him a
prisoner to England, accompanied by two of
their number, whom they deputed to prefer their
accusations against him to the king. But this
attempt to redress their own wrongs, by a pro-
ceeding so summary and violent as is hardly
consistent with any idea of regular government,
and can be justified only in cafes of such urgent
necessity as rarely occur in civil society, was
altogether repugnant to every notion which
Charles entertained with refpe& to the obedience
cue by subje&s to their sovereign. To him the
condut of the colonists appeared to be not only
an usurpation of his right to judge and to punish
one of his own officers, but an open and audaci-
ous at of rebellion against his authority. With-
out deigning to admit their deputies into his
presence, or to hear one article of their charge
against Harvey, the king instantly sent him back
to his former station, with an ample renewal of
all the powers belonging to it. But though
Charles deemed this vigorous ftep necessary in
order to aftert his own authority, and to testify
his displeasure with those who had presumed to
offer such an insult to it, he seems to have been
so sensible of the grievances under which the
colonists groaned, and of the chief source from
which they flowed, that soon after [1639] he
not only removed a governor so jutly odious to
them, but named as a successor Sir William
Berkeley, a person far superior to Harvey in
rank and abilities, and still more distinguished
by possessing all the popular virtues to which the
other was a stranger °.

Beverley's Hist, of Virg. p. 50. Chalmers' Annals, i.
l2g, &c.

Urnder

Under his government the colony in Virgini

remained, with some (hort intervals of interrui.
tion, almost forty years, and to his mild and
prudent administration its increase and profperitv
is in a great measure to be ascribed. It was in-
debted, however, to the king himself for such a
reform of its constitution and policy, as gave a
different apect to the colony, and animated all
its operations with new fpiriv. Though the
tenor of Sir William Berkeley's commission wa;
the fame with that of his predecessor, he received
inftru&ions under the great feal, by which he
was empowered to declare, that in all its con,
cerns, civil as well as ecclesiastical, the colons
was to be governed according to the lawso!
England: he was directed to iflue writs for
electing representatives of the people, who, in
conjuncion with the governor and council, were
to form a general assembly, and to possess iu.
preme legislative authority in the community;
he was ordered to eflablifh courts of justice, in
which all questions, whether civil or criminal,
were to be decided agreeably to the forms o:
judicial procedure in the mother country. It ii
not easy to discover what were the motives which
induced a monarch tenacious in adhering to any
opinion or system which he had once adopted
jealous to excess of his own rights, and adveri
on every occasion to any extension of the privi.
leges claimed by his people, to relinquish hi;
original plan of administration in the colony, and
to grant such immunities to his fubjecs fettled
there. From the hiltorians of Virginia, no lesd
superficial than ill-informed, no light can b(
derived with refpe& to this point. It is mo.
probable, that dread of the spirit then rising a

Gre-:.

Great Britain extorted from Charles concessions
so favourable to Virginia. After an intermission
of almost twelve years, the state of his affairs
compelled him to have recourse to the great
council of the nation. There his fubjefts would
find a jurisdiction independant of the crown, and
able to control its authority. There they hoped
for legal redress of all their grievances. As the
colonists in Virginia had applied for relief to a
former parliament, it might be expeced with
certainty, that they would lay their cafe before
the first meeting of an assembly, in which they
were secure of a favourable audience. Charles
knew, that if the spirit of his administration in
Virginia were to be tried by the maxims of the
English constitution, it must be severely repre-
hended. He was aware that many measures of
greater moment in his government would be
brought under a ftrit review in parliament; and
unwilling to give mal-contents the advantage of
adding a charge of oppression in the remote
parts of his dominions to a catalogue of domestic
grievances, he artfully endeavoured to take the
merit of having granted voluntarily to his peo-
ple in Virginia such privileges as he foresaw
would be extorted from him.
But though Charles established the internal
government of Virginia on a model similar to
that of the English constitution, and conferred
on his fubjeas there all the nghts of freemen
and citizens, he was extremely solicitous to
maintain its connecion with the parent Rate.
With this view he infiru&ed Sir William Berke-
r: firitcly to prohibit any commerce of the
colnvy with foreign nations; and in order more
crtainly to secure exclusive possession of all the

advantages

advantages arising from the sale of its produc.
tions, he was required to take a bond from thn.
maiter of each vessel that failed from Virgina,
to land his cargo in some part of the king's do,
minions in Europe P. Even under this restrain:,
such is the kindly influence of free governme.
on society, the colony advanced so rapidly i
industry and population, that at the beginnir.
of the civil war, the English fettled in it exceedeC
twenty thousand q.

Gratitude towards a monarch, from whod

hands they had received immunities which thei
had long wished, but hardly expeted to enjoy
the influence and example of a popular governor
paflionately devoted to the interests of his malle
concurred in preferring inviolated loyalty amon;
the colonists. Even after monarchy was aba
li(hed, after one king had been beheaded, an
another driven into exile, the authority of th
crown continued to be acknowledged and re
vered in Virginia. [i6so] Irritated at thi
open defiance of its power, the parliament issue
an ordinance, declaring, that as the fettleme
in Virginia had been made at the colt and b
the people of England, it ought to be fubo
dinate to and dependant upon the English con
monwealth, and subjet to such laws and regul
tions as are or shall be made in parliament: tha
instead of this dutiful submission, the colonii
had disclaimed the authority of the Rtate, an
audaciously rebelled against it; that on this a(
count they were denounced notorious traitor
and not only all vessels belonging to natives i
England, but those of foreign nations, we

Chalmets' Annals, p. 219. 232. q Ibid. p. I:?

prohibi::

prohibited to enter their ports, or to carry on
any commerce with them.

It was not the mode of that age to wage a
war of words alone. The efforts of an high-
fi;rted government in asserting its own dignity
.-ere prompt and vigorous. A powerful squad-
ron, with a considerable body of land forces,
was dispatched to reduce the Virginians to obe-
dience. After compelling the colonies in Bar-
badoes and the other islands to submit to the
comrmonwealth, the squadron entered the Bay
of Chefapeak [165 ]. Berkeley, with more
courage than prudence, took arms to oppose
.his formidable armament; but he could not
long maintain such an unequal contest. His
gllant resistance, however, procured favourable
terms to the people under his government. A
ge.neral indemnity for all past offences was grant-
ed; they acknowledged the authority of the com-
monwealth, and were admitted to a participation
of all the rights enjoyed by citizens'. Berke-
ley, firm to his principles of loyalty, disdained
to make any stipulation for himself; and choofing
to pass his days far removed from the feat of a
government which he detested, continued to
reside in Virginia as a private man, beloved and
refpeced by all over whom he had formerly
prcided.

Not satisfied with taking measures to subje't
the colonies, the commonwealth turned its at-
tention towards the most effecual mode of re-
taining them in dependance on the parent state,
znd of securing to it the benefit of their increaf-
ing commerce. With this view the parliament

' Thurlow's State Papers, i. 197. Chalmers' Annals,
?. Iz2. Beverley's Hi.t p. 53.

framed

framed two laws [ 65 ], one of which expref~.
ly prohibited all mercantile intercourse betwer,
the colonies and foreign states, and the othe
ordained, that no producion of Asia, Africa,
or America, should be imported into the dorni.
nions of the commonwealth, but in vessels b-.
longing to English owners, or to the people ci
the colonies fettled there, and navigated by a;
Engliih commander', and by crews of whirc
the greater part must be Englishmen. ELC
while the wisdom of the commonwealth pS-
fcribed the channel in which the trade of th.
colonies was to be carried on, it was folicitou
to encourage the cultivation of the faple corn
modity of Virginia by an aft of parliamen.
[1652], which gave legal force to all the in
junctions of James and Charles againif plantin.
tobacco in England'.

Under governors appointed by the common

wealth, or by Cromwell, when he usurped t?!
supreme power, Virginia remained almost nirt
years in perfec tranquillity. During tha
period, many adherents to the royal party, a.
among these some gentlemen of good familits
in order to avoid danger and opprefion, tc
which they were exposed in England, or i:
hopes of repairing their ruined fortunes, resortet
thither. Warmly attached to the cause fc
which they had fought and suffered, and an.
mated with all the pallions natural to men re
cently engaged in a fierce and long ptotracec
civil war, they, by their intercourse with the co
lonifts, confirmed them in principle of loyalty
and added to their impatience and indignatio:
under the reitraints imposed on their commer:!

Scobl's Ads, p. 132. 176. t Ibid, p. 187.

tv

by their new maifers. On the death of Ma-
tiews, the last governor named by Cromwell,
the sentiments and inclination of the people, no
longer under the control of authority, burst out
with violence. They forced Sir William Berke-
lcy to quit his retirement; they unanimously
dleded him governor of the colony: and as he
refused to act under an usurped authority, they
boldly ereted the royal standard, and, acknow-
kdging Charles II. to be their lawful sovereign,
uroclaimed him with all his titles; and the Vir-
ginians long boasted, that as they were the last
of the king's fubjeAs who renounced their al-
legiance, they were the first who returned to
their duty u.

Happily for the people of Virginia, a revolu-
tion in England, no less sudden and unexpeced,
:eated Charles on the throne of his ancestors,
and saved them from the severe chastisement,
:o which their premature declaration in his fa-
ruur muff have exposed them. On receiving the
:nt account of this event, the joy and exulta-
' on of the colony were universal and unbounded.
These, however, were not of long continuance.
Gracious, but unproduAive profeifions of esteem
-d good-will wele the only return made by
Charles to loyalty and services, which in their
ton estimation were so distinguished that no re-
cm.npence was beyond what they might claim.
Ii the king's negle& and ingratitude difap.
pointed all the sanguine hopes which their vanity
rad founded on the merit of their past condut,
t.t spirit which influenced parliament in its
commercial deliberations opened a profpea that
--nmed them with refpeA to their future fitua-

Beverley, p. 55. Cbalmrs, p. 124.
'3L. II. 13 B tion.

tion. In framing regulations for the encourage.
ment of trade, which, during the convulsions of
civil war, and amidst continual fluctuations ia
government, had met with such obstruction that
it declined in every quarter; the House of Com.
mons, instead of granting the colonies that relii
which they expeaed from the restraints in ther
commerce imposed by the commonwealth an,
Cromwell, not only adopted all their ideas con
cerning this branch of legislation, but extendse
them farther. This produced the a, of navig.
lion, the most important and memorable of ar.
in the statute book with refpcet to the hiilor
of English commerce. By it, besides fevern
momentous articles foreign to the subjea of thi
work, it was enaced, that no commoditi:
(hould be imported into any settlement in Afi
Africa, or America, or exported from then
but in vefiels of English or plantation buti
whereof the mailer and three fourths of the r.
rincrs (hall be English fubjeEts, under pain
forfeiting ship and goods; that none but natun
born fubjefts, or such as have been naturalized

ahall exercise the occupation of merchant 0
factor in any English settlement, under pain
forfeiting their goods and chattels; that r
sugar, tobacco, cotton, wool, indigo, ging;
or woods used in dying, of the growth or mar
facture of the colonies, (hall be (hipped from tht
to any other country but England; and in or;
to secure the performance of this, a fuficir
bond, with one surety, shall be.given, befi
failing, by the owners, for a specific fulm
portional to the rate of the vessel employed
them '. The productions subjected to this r

x 1z Car. II. c, iZ.

f; i:

tri&ion are diftlnguiihed, in the language of
commerce and finance, by the name of enumerated
tmmoditie ; and as industry in its progress fur-
nilhed new articles of value, these have been fuc-
cefively added to the roll, and fubjeted to the
fame restraint. Soon after [1663], the ad of
navigation was extended, and additional re-
ftraints were imposed, by a new law, which
prohibited the importation of any European
commodity into the colonies, but what was laden
in England in vessels navigated and manned as
the act of navigation required. More eff'etual
provision was made by this law for exating the
penalties to which the transgressors of the afc of
navigation were fubjeecd; and the principles of
policy, on which the various regulations con-
tairn;d in both statutes are founded, were openly
zaowtd in a declaration, that as the planta-
:ions beyond seas are inhabited and peopled by
-bjects of England, they may be kept in a
i-r.er dependance upon it, and rendered yet
nore beneficial and advantageous unto it, in the
firther employment and increase of English ship-
pirg and seamen, as well as in the vent of Eng-
ih woollen and other manufactures and com-
modities; and in making England a flaple, not
only ot the commodities of those plantations, but
ai;o of the commodities of other countries and
paces. for the supplying of them ; and it being
ite usage of other nations to keep the trade of
their plantations to themfelvesy. In profecu-
lion of those favourite maxims, the English legi-
ftrure proceeded a itep farther. As the at of
avrigation had left the people of the colonies at
tDeny to export the enumerated commodities

7 15 Car. II. c. 7.

B B 2 frcm

from one plantation to another without paying
any duty [1672], it fubjeted them to atau
equivalent to what was paid by the consumer of
these commodities in England z.

By these fucceflive regulations, the plan of

securing to England a monopoly of the con.
merce with its colonies, and of shutting up every
other channel into which it might be diverted,
was perfected and reduced into complete systen.
On one fide of the Atlantic, these reguiationj
have been extolled as an extraordinary effort of
political sagacity, and have been confidered as
the great charter of national commerce, to
which the present state is indebted for all iu
opulence and power. On the other, they haTe
been execrated as a code of oppression, mort
suited to the illiberality of mercantile ideas, tha:
to extensive views of legislative wisdom. Whic
of these opinions is best founded, I shall examis,
at large in another part of this work. But ^
writing the history of the English settlements :
America, it was necessary to trace the progre
of those restraining laws with accuracy, as
every subsequent tranfadion we may obferrei
perpetual exertion, on the part of the mothe
country, to enforce and extend them; and a
the part of the colonies, endeavours no less us
remitting, to elude or to obflru&t their oper
tion.

Hardly was the act of navigation known i

Virginia, and its effecs begun to be felt, wrb
the colony remonstrated against it as a grievana
and petitioned earnestly for relief. But th
commercial ideas of Charles and his minifit
coincided so perfectly with those of parUasr

z25 Car. 1. c.7.

tls.

that, initead of listening with a favourable ear
to their applications, they laboured assiduously
to carry the aft into strict execution. For this
purpose, inftrudtions were issued to the gover-
nor, forts were built on the banks of the princi-
pal rivers, and small vessels appointed to cruize
on the coafl. The Virginians, feeing no prof-
pest of obtaining exemption from the ac, set
hemfelves to evade it, and found means, not-
rithftanding the vigilance with which they were
watched, of carrying on a considerable clandef-
tine trade with foreigners, particularly with the
Dutch fettled on Hudson's River. Emboldened
by observing difaffeaion spread through the co-
bvny, some veteran foldieis who had served under
Cromwell, and had been banished to Virginia,
iormed a design [1663] of rendering themselves
mcaers of the country, and of asserting its in-
cependence on England. This ralh projeft was
icovered by one of their associates, and dif-
concerted by the vigorous exertions of Sir
Wiliam Berkeley. But the spirit of discontent,
though repressed, was not extinguished. Every
avy something occurred to revive and to nourish
- As it is with extreme difficulty that com-
=:c; can be turned into a new channel, tobacco,
:,e staple of the colony, funk prodigiously in
r-ue, when they were compelled to fend it all
Lt one market. It was some time before Eng-
khd could furnish them regularly full afrortments
i those necessary articles, without which the
;i':nlr of tht colony could not be carried on,

its profperitv secured. Encouraged by the
iT.ptoms of general languor and despondency,
r.:ch this declining Rate of the colony occa-
;ed, the Indians feated towards the heads of

B B 3 the

the rivers ventured first to attack the remote
settlements, and then to make incursions into
the interior parts of the country. Unexpe&ed
as these hostilities were, from a people who
during a long period had lived in friendship with
the Englilh, a measure taken by the king seer.
to have excited itill greater terror among th
most opulent people in the colony. Charles h:
imprudently imitated the example of his father
by granting such large tracs of land in Virginr
to several of his courtiers, as tended to unsettd
the distribution of property in the country, anc
to render the title of the most ancient plante:
to their eltates precarious and queftionabh
[1676] From those various causes, which i
a greater or lkTer degree affected every indir
dual in the colony, the indignation of the p.
pie became general, and was worked up to fu:
a pitch, that nothing was wanting to precipita:
them into the moit desperate aAs, but for
leader, qualified to unite and to direE their op
rations a

Such a leader they found in Nathaniel Bac:

a colonel of militia, who, though he had be
fettled in Virginia only three years, had 2:
quired, by popular manners, an insinuating a
dress, and the consideration derived from havi.
been regularly trained in England to the pr
session of law, such general esteem, that he h;
been admitted into the council, and was regard'
as one of the most refpetable persons in '
colony. Bacon was ambitious, eloquent, GA
ing, and prompted either by honest zeal tor
dress the public wrongs, or allured by hopes

a Chi'mrnr' Annals, ch. x. 13, 14. palTim. B-"'
p. 58, &c.

raising himself to diftintion and power, he
mingled with the malcontents, and by his bold
harangues and confident promifcs of removing
all their grievances, he inflamed them almost to
madness. As the devastations committed by the
Indians was the calamity most fcnfibly felt by
the people, he accused the governor of having
negle&fed the proper measures for repelling the
inrafions of the savages, and exhorted them to
take arms in their own defence, and to exter-
minate that odious race. Great numbers assem-
bled, and chose Bacon to be their general.
He applied to the governor for a commiflion,
confirming this election of the people, and of-
sered to march instantly againit the common
enemy. Berkeley, accustomed by long posses-
sion of fupieme command to high ideas of the
refpeE due to his fRation, confidered this tumul-
tuary armament as an open insult to his autho-
rity, and fufpetcd that, under specious appear-
ances, Bacon concealed most dangerous designs.
Unwilling, however, to give farther provocation
to an incensed multitude, by a direct refusal of
what they demanded, he thought it prudent to
negociate, in order to gain time ; and it was not
until he found all endeavours to ofoth them in-
effecual, that he issued a proclamation, requir-
ing them, in the king's name, under the pain
of being denounced rebels, to disperse.

But Bacon, sensible that he had now ad-

vanced so far as rendered it impossible to recede
Mith honour or safety, inltantly took the only
rdeolution that remained in his situation. At
the head of a clieftn body of his followers he
narched rapidly to James-Town, and surround-
ig the !ioure where the governor and council

were

were assembled, demanded the commission for
which he had formerly applied. Berkeley, with
the proud indignant spirit of a cavalier, disdain.
ing the requisitions of a rebel, peremptorily re.
fused to comply, and calmly presented his naked
breast to the weapons which were pointed againfj
it. The council, however, foreseeing the fatal
consequences of driving an enraged multitude,
in whose power they were, to the last extremi.
ties of violence, prepared a commiflion, con.
ftituting Bacon general of all the forces in Vir.
ginia, and by their entreaties prevailed on the
governor to sign it. Bacon with his troops re-
tired in triumph. Hardly was the council de.
livered by his departure from the dread ofpre.
sent danger, when, by a transition not unusual
in feeble minds, prcfumptuous boldness succeed-
ed to excessive fear. The commission granted
to Bacon was declared to be null, having been
extorted by force; he was proclaimed a rebel,
his followers were required to abandon his
standard, and the militia ordered to arm, and to
join the governor.

Enraged at conduc which he branded wi',

the name of base and treacherous, Bacon, in.
stead of continuing his march towards the In-
dian country, intlantlv wheeled about, and ad-
vanced with all his forces to James-Town. The
governor, unable to resist such a numerous body,
made his efcapc, and fled across the bay to
Acomack on the Easter:. shore. Some of the
counsellors accompanied him thither, others re-
tired to their own plantations. Upon the flight
of Sir William Berkeley, and difptrfion of the
cou::cil, the frame of civil government ill the
colony seemed to be dissolvcd, and Bacon he.

cae,

came possessed of supreme and uncontrolled
power. But as he was sensible that his country-
men would not long submit with patience to
authority acquired and held merely by force of
arms, he endeavoured to found it on a more
constitutional basis, by obtaining the fanc'ion of
the people's approbation. With this view he
called together the most considerable gentlemen
in the colony, and having prevailed on them to
bind themselves by oath to maintain his authori-
tv, and to resist every enemy that should oppose
it, he from that time confidered his jurifdic&ion
as legally established.

Berkeley, meanwhile, ha'ing colleEted some
forces, made inroads into different parts of the
colony, where Bacon's authority was recognized.
Several sharp confliEs happened with various
success. James-Town was reduced to aihes,
and the b'lt cultivated diftri&fs in the province
were laid wafe, sometimes by one party, and
sometimes by the other. But it was not by his
own exertions that the governor hoped to ter-
minate the contest. He had early transmitted
an account of the tranfations in Virginia to the
king, and demanded such a body of soldiers as
would enable him to quell the insurgents, whom
he represented as so exasperated by the restraints
imposed on their trade, that they were impatient
to (hake off all dependance on the parent Rate.
Charles, alarmed at a commotion no less danger-
ous than unexpeEted, and solicitous to maintain
his authority over a colony, the value of which
was daily increasing, and more fully understood,
speedily dispatched a small squadron, with such
a number of regular troops as Berkeley had re-
quired. Bacon and his followers received in-

formation

formation of this armament, but were not i.
timidated at its approach. They boldly dete.
mir.ed to oppose it with open force, and de.
dared it to be ccnfiftent with their duty ar.d
allegiance, to treat all who should aid Sir Wi'illi
Berkeley as enemies, until they should have 21
opportunity of laying their grievances before
their sovereign b.

But -while both parties prepared, with equl

animosity, to involve their country in the horro.
of civil war, an event happened [1677], which
quieted the commotion almost as suddenly as i
had been excited. Bacon, when ready to tak;
the field, sickened and died. None of his f.
lowers possessed such talents, or were so muc:
objects of the people's confidence, as entitle'
them to aspire to the supreme command. 1)t.
tute of a leader to conduca and anirr.ate thcr
their fangurne hopes of success subsided; mutea
diflruft accompanied this universal defpondcnc'
all began to with for an accommodation; an;
after a short negociation with Sir William Etrke
Icy, they laid down their arms, and submitted t
his government, on obtaining a promise of ge
neral pardon.

Thus terminated an infurreAion, which, i

the annals of Virginia, is distinguished by ti.'
name of Bacon's rebe/lion. During seven month!
this daring leader was master of the colony
while the royal governor was shut up in a rcmot;
and ill-peopled corner of it. What were th.
real motives that prompted him to take armi
and to what length he intended to carry hi
plans of reformation, either in commerce or go
vcrnment, it is not easy to discover, in the scan::

b ever! r's Hifl. p. 75, 76.

mater-.i

Materials from which we derive our information
with respect to this transaction. It is probable,
that his conduct, like that of other adventurers
i fa&ion, would have been regulated chiefly
bv events; and accordingly as these proved fa-
Parable or adverse, his views and requisitions
would have been extended or circumscribed.

Sir William Berkeley, as Loon as be was re-
i.:ated in his office, called together the repre-
i:natives of the people, that by their advice and
:.rhoritv- public tranquillity and order might he
jrftc&lv elablifhed. Though this assembly met
a ewv weeks after the death of Bacon, while the
eemory of reciprocal injuries was still recent, and
whien the passions excited by such a fierce contest
hd but little time to subside, its proceedings
were conducted with a moderation fcldrom exer.
cicd bv the successful part) in a civil war. No
ran fuifered capitally; a small number were fib-
iKed to fines; others were declared incapable
of holding any office of trust ; and with those ex-
t,;:ions, the promise of general indemnity was
cfnfirrr.ed by law. Soon after, Berkeley was
-:called, and Colonel Jefferys was appointed his
':cccfTor.

From that period to the Revolution in i688,
'.er is scarcely any memorable occurrence in
.he liiloon of Virginia. A peace was conclud( d
rith the Indians. Under several successive go-
vtnors, administration was carried on in the co-
,n-y with the fame arbitrary spirit that dif-
: -.uifhd the latter years of Charles II. and the
?-:cipitatc counsels of James II. The Virgini-
;-, .th a confittution which, in form, refcm-
-:i, tha: of England, enjoyed hardly any por-

tlo:,

# BOOK X.

tion of the liberty which that admirable sysem
of policy is framed to secure. They were de.
prived even of the last consolation of the op.
pressed, the power of complaining, by a law
which, under revere penalties, prohibited them
from speaking difrefpe&fully of the governor, or
defaming, either by words or writing, the ad.
ministration of the colony c. Still, however, the
laws restraining their commerce were felt as 2a
intolerable grievance, and nourished in fecreta
spirit of discontent, which from the necessity of
concealing it, acquired a greater degree of acri
mony. But notwithstanding those unfavourable
circumstances, the colony continued to increase.
The use of tobacco was now become general ih
Europe; and though it had fallen considerably
in price, the extent of demand compensated that
diminution, and by giving constant employment
to the industry of the planters diffused wealth
among them. At the Revolution the numberoi
inhabitants in the colony exceeded sixty thou.
sand d, and in the course of twenty-eight years iLt
population had been more than doublede.

BOOK X,
THES James I. in the year one thousand fin

hundred and fix, made that magnificent

partition, which has been mentioned, of a vai
region in North America, extending from the

c Beverley, p. Si. Chalmers, p. 341. d Chalin'
Annaas, p. 356. e Ibid. p. xz5.

thk-;~.

thirty-fourth to the forty-fifth degree of latitude,
between two trading companies of his subje&s,
ie established the residence of the one in Lon-
don, and of the other in Plymouth. The former
was authorized to fettle in the southern, and the
atter in the northern part of this territory, then
diftinguiflied by the general name of Virginia.
This arrangement seems to have been formed
:5on the idea of some speculative refiner, who
rned at diffusing the spirit of industry, by fix-
3g the feat of one branch of the trade that was
,.w to be opened, on the east coast of the
'1and, and the other on the weft. But London
r.feffes such advantages of situation, that the
commercial wealth and ativity of England have
lways centered in the capital. At the begin-
ning of the last century, the superiority of the
mctropolis in both these respects was so great,
:*at though the powers and privileges conferred
rb the king on the two trading companies were
Cecifely the fame, the adventurers fettled in
>Pymouth fell far short of those in London, in
:k vigour and success of their efforts towards
ccomplihing the purpose of their institution.
Though the operations of the Plymouth com-
;aay were animated by the public-fpirited zeal
,f Sir John Popham, chief justice of England,
:r Ferdinando Gorges, and some other gentle-
.ten of the weft, all its exertions were feeble
ad unfortunate.
The first vessel fitted out by the company was
;ken hy the Spaniards [x6o6]. In the year
Ze thousand fix hundred and seven, a feeble
ttlcment was made at Sagahadoc; but, on ac-
u~'nt of the rigour of the climate, was soon re-
VOL. It. c c linquifhed,

linquifhed, and for some time nothing farther
was attempted than a few fishing voyages to
Cape Cod, or a pitiful traffic with the natives
for skins and oil. One of the vessels equipped
for this purpose was commanded by Captaio
Smith, vhofe name has been so often mentioned
with diftin&ion in the History of Virginia.
[t1614] The adventure was prosperous and
lucrative. But his ardent enterprising mind
could not confine its attention to objets so un-
equal to it as the petty details of a trading
voyage. He employed a part of his time i;
exploring the coast, and in delineating its bayr
and harbours. On his return, he laid a map oc
it before Prince Charles, and, with the ufuSl
exaggeration of discoverers painted the beaut)
and excellence of the country in such glowine
colours, that the young Prince, in the warmnt
of admiration, declared, that it should be calle
New Englandf: a name which effaced that o:
Virginia, and by which it is till distinguishei

The favourable accounts of the country b2

Smith, as well as the success of his voyage, fees
to have encouraged private adventurers to pro
fecute the trade on the coaf of New Englar
with greater briskness; but did not inspire th
languishing company of Plymouth with fbc:
vigour as to make any new attempt towar'
eflablifhing a permanent colony there. Some
thing more than the profpeEt of distant gain:
themselves, or of future advantages to thCe
country, was requisite, in order to induc
men to abandon the place of their nativity,

f Smith's Tray. Book vi p. o03, &c. Purcha '
p. '137.

micS

.igrate to another quarter of the globe, and en-
dure innumerable hardships under an untried
climate, and in an uncultivated land, covered
with woods, or occupied by fierce and hostile
tribes of savages. But what mere attention to
prirate emolument or to national utility could
rot effet, was accomplished by the operation of
za higher principle. Religion had gradually
excited among a great body of the people, a
'?irit that fitted them remarkably for encounter-
ing the dangers, and surmounting the obstacles,
which had hitherto rendered abortive the schemes
of colonization in that part of America allotted
to the company of Plymouth. As the various
'tdzrments in New England are indebted for
their origin to this spirit, as in the course of our
r.rrative we shall discern its influence mingling
in all their transactions, and giving a peculiar
tincure to the characer of the people, as well
a- to their institutions, both civil and ecclefiafti-
c!, it becomes necessary to trace its rife and
progress with attention and accuracy.

When the fuperilitions and corruptions of the
Romish church prompted different nations of
Europe to throw off its yoke, and to withdraw
Hrrm its communion, the mode as well as degree
:f their reparation was various. Wherever re-
orrnation was sudden, and carried on by the
:.oplc without authority from their rulers, or

opposition to it, the rupture was violent and
:ital. Every part of the ancient fabric was
s-erturned, and a different system, not only
Sith refpet to doctrine, but to church govern-
'.tnt, and the external rites of worship, was
:'ablithed. Calvin, who, by his abilities, learn-

c c 2 ing,

ing, and austerity of manners, had acquirte
high reputation and authority in the Prote-in:
churches, was a zealous advocate for this plan
of thorough reformation. He exhibited a mo.
del of that pure form of ecclefiaflical policy,
which he approved in the constitution of th.
church of Geneva. The simplicity of its inftit,.
tions, and still more their repugnancy to those
of the Popish church, were so much admired bv
all the stricter reformers, that it was copied
with some small variations, in Scotland, in the
Republic of the United Provinces, in the doni.
nions of the House of Brandenburgh, in thof,
of the Eletor Palatine, and in the churches o:
the Hugonots in France.

But in those countries where the fleps of de

parture from the church of Rome were take
with greater deliberation, and regulated by th
wisdom or policy of the supreme magistrate
the separation was not so wide. Of all the re
formed churches, that of England has deviate:
lealt from the ancient institutions. The viole
but capricious spirit of Henry VIII. who
though he disclaimed the supremacy, reveret
the tenets of the papal fee, checked innovation
in do&rine or worship during his reign. Whe
his son ascended the throne, and the ProtefLt
religion was established b) law, the cautious pr.
dence of Archbishop Cranmer moderated it
zeal of those who had espoused the new opinioi:
Though the articles to be recognized as th
fyitem of national faith were framed conforra
bly to the dotrines of Calvin, his notions lw::
refpet to church government and the modc-
worship were not adopted. As the hieraci:

n England was incorporated with the civil po-
licy of the kingdom, and confcituted a member
of the legislature, archbishops and bishops, with
all the subordinate ranks of ecclesiastics subjef
to them, were continued according to ancient
foirm, and with the fame dignity and jurifdidion.
The peculiar vestments in which the clergy per-
formed their sacred funcions, bowing at the
name of Jesus, kneeling at receiving the Sacra-
ment of the Lord's Supper, the sign of the
Cross in baptism, the use of the Ring in mar-
riage, with several other rites to which long
usage had accustomed the people, and which
time had rendered venerable, were still retained.
But though Parliament enjoined the observance
of these ceremonies under very severe penaltiesg,
several of the more zealous clergy entertained
cruples with refpet to the lawfulness of com-
plying with this injuncion; and the vigilance
and authority of Cranmer and Ridley with dif-
ficulty saved their infant church from the dif-
grace of a schism on this account.

On the accession of Mary, the furious zeal
with which she persecuted all who had adopted
the tenets of the reformers forced many eminent
Protestants, laymen as well as ecclefiatics, to
seek an asylum on the continent. Francfort,
Geneva, Basil, and Strafburgh, received them
with affefcionate hospitality as sufferers in the
cause of truth, and the magistrates permitted
them to assemble by themselves for religious
worship. The exiles who took up their re-
fidence in the two former cities modelled their
Lttde congregations according to the ideas of

' 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. i.

c c 3 Calvin,

Calvin, and, with a spirit natural to men ia
their situation, eagerly adopted institutions whikh
appeared to be farther removed from the fupe:.
ltitions of Popery than those of their own
church. The returned to England as soon z
Elizabeth re-established the Protestant religion,
not only with more violent antipathy to the
opinions and practices of that church by whic?
they had been oppressed, but with a strong a:.
tachment to that mode of worship to which thcv
had been for some years accustomed. As the-
were received by their countrymen with the v;.
neration due to confessors, they exerted all the
influence derived from that opinion, in order t
obtain such a reformation in the English ritui
as might bring it nearer to the standard of pun::
in foreign churches. Some of the queen's rr.c
confidential ministers were warmly disposed ti
co-operate with them in this measure. Bi
Elizabeth paid little regard to the inclination
of the one, or the sentiments of the other. Fonc
of pomp and ceremony, accustomed, accordi:s
to the mode of that age, to study religious co:
troverfy, and possessing, like her father, Ls.
confidence in her own underitanding that ':
never doubted her capacity to judge and deci:
with refpe& to every point in dispute betwts
contending fe&s b, she chose to a&t according t

Et

h Of the high idea which Elizabeth entertained with r

spec to her own superior cill in theology, as well as ':
haughty tone in which ihe dictated to her fubjtes what :r
ought to believe, we have a ffriking piu:e in her fpter:.
the close of the parliament:, A. D. I 55.-" One t-.L
may not overfi:?. Re:gi.r, the Ground on which all o::
mattcis ough: :o take rco:, al i-d.-g ;.;rr:ptei, ma --

her own ideas, which led her rather to approach
searer to the church of Rome, in the parade of
external worship, than to widen the breach by
abolishing any rite already established i. An a&t
of parliament, in the first year of her reign, not
o'ly required an exa&t conformity to the mode
of worship prescribed in the service book, under
noft rigorous penalties, but empowered the
Queen to enjoin the observance of such addiu
:iJnal ceremonies as might tend, in her opinion,
:* render the public exercises of devotion more
&cent and edifying k.

The advocates for a farther reformation, not-
withstanding this cruel disappointment of the
f5nguine hopes with which they returned to
:heir native country, did not relinquish their de-

. the tree. And that there be some fault-finders with the
:t.er of the clergy, which so may make 2 sander to myself,
and to the church, whose over-ru'er God hath made me,
whose negligence cannot be excused, if any schisms or errors
eretical were suffered. Thus much, I mull fay, that some
filhs and negligences must grow and be, as in all other great
:;2rgee it happeneth; and what vocation without ? All
'.:ch, if you my lords of the clergy do not amend, I mean
ta depose you. Look ye, therefore, well to your charges.
T.i; may be amended without needless or open exclama-
'-13. I am fuppufed to have many studies, but most philo-
fbhical. 1 mult yield this to be true, that I suppose few
: : be not professors) have read more. And I need not tell
;%u, that I am not so simple that I underhtand not, nor so
forgetful that I remember not; and ye-, amidit my many
'ainmes, I hope God's book hath nmt been my feldomeft
raures, in which we find that which by reason all ought
: ieeve. I fee many over-bold wihh God Almighty, mak-
g too many subtle scannings of hik b!esse'l will. The pre-
:..?tion i; so great that I may not susser it," &c. D'Ewes's

:i -a, p. 128.
Se-. Hit.iofthePuritans, i, 13., 176. i X Eliz. c. z.

sign.

sign. They disseminated their opinions with
great induflry among the people. They extolled
the purity of foreign churches, and inveighed
against t}:e rf'perltitious pratices with which
religion was defiled in their own church. In
vain did the defenders of the established system
represent that these forms and ceremonies were,
in themselves, things perfectly indifferent, which,
from long usage, were viewed with reverence
and, by their impression upon the senses and
imagination, tended not only to fix the atten.
tion, but to assec the heart, and to warm i:
with devout and worthy sentiments. The Pun.
tans (for by that name such as scrupled to comr
ply with what was enjoined by the as of uni.
formity were difinguifhed,) maintained, th:
the rites in question were inventions of men,
superadded to the simple and reasonable fervic
required in the word of God; that from th:
excessive solicitude with which conformity to
them was exacted, the multitude must conceiv
such an high opinion of their value and import.
ance, as might induce them to reft satisfied with
the mere form and shadow of religion, and to
imagine that external observances may corn.
penlate for the want of inward fanfity; that ce.
remonies which had been long employed by a so-
ciety manifeitly corrupt, to veil its own defecs,
and to efduce and fascinate mankind, ought now
to be rejected as relics of superstition unworthy cl
a place in achurch gloried in the name ofReform'.

The people, to whom in every religious con-

troverfy the final appeal is made, listened to th:
arguments of the contending parties; and it t
obvious to which of them, men who had lat&T

behc.:

beheld the superstitious spirit of Popery, and
felt its perlecuting rage, would lend the moit
favourable ear. The desire of a farther fepara-
tion from the church of Rome spread wide
through the nation. The preachers who con-
tended for this, and who refused to wear the
surplice, and other vestments peculiar to their
order, or to observe the ceremonies enjoined by
law, were followed and admired, while the
ministry of the zealous advocates for conformity
v.as deserted, and their persons often exposed to
iault. For some time the non-conformiits were
connived at; but as their number and boldness
increased, the interposition both of spiritual and
civil authority was deemed necessary in order
to check their progress. To the disgrace of
Christians, the sacred rights of conscience and
private judgment, as well as the charity and
mutual forbearance suitable to the mild spirit of
the religion which they professed, were in that
age little underltood. Not only the idea of tole-
ration, but even the word itself in the sense now
affixed to it, was then unknown. Every church
claimed a right to employ the hand of power for
the protection of truth and the extirpation of
error. The laws of her kingdom armed Eliza-
beth with ample authority for this purpose, and
ihe was abundantly disposed to exercise it with
fuil vigour. Many of the most eminent among
the Puritan clergy were deprived of their bene-
aces, others were imprisoned, several were fined,
a:id some put to death. But persecution, as
2:ually happens, instead of extinguishing, in-
32med their zeal to such a height, that the jurif-
';:iJ:1 of the ordinaiv courts of law was deemed

insufficient

insufficient to suppress it, and a new tribun2
was eflablifhed under the title of the high cn.
mulon for ecclefaflical afairs, whose powers an
mode of procedure were hardly less odious c
less hostile to the principles of justice than thof
of the Spar.i: innuifition. Several attemp'
were made in the Hor:se of Commons to chec
there arbitrary proceedings, and to moderat
the rage of persecution ; but the Queen alwai
imposed silence upon those who presumed
deliver any opinion with refpe& to a matte
appertaining solely to her prerogative, in a ton
as imperious and arrogant as was ever used b
Henry VIII. in addressing his Parliaments; an
so tamely obsequious were the guardians of ti
people's rights, that they not only obeyed tho!
unconstitutional commands, but consented to a
at, by which every person who should abler
himself from church during a month was fut
jeeted to punishment by fine and imprisonment
and if after conviction he did not, within thre
months, renounce his erroneous opinions an
conform to the laws, he was then obliged to ab
jure the realm ; but if he either refused to con
ply with this condition, or returned from bani!
ment, he should be put to death as a felon wid:
out benefit of clergy 1.

By this iniquitous statute, equally repugnan

to ideas of civil and of religious liberty, the Pu
ritans were cut off from any hope of obtainini
either reformation in the church or indulgenc
to themselves. Exasperated by this rigorou
treatment, their antipathy to the establishcd re
ligion increased, and, with the progress nature

1 35 EI.z. c. r.

I;

to violent passions, carried them far beyond
what was their original aim. The first Puritans
did not entertain any scruples with refpe& to
the lawfulness of Episcopal government, and
seem to have been very unwilling to withdraw
from communion vich the church of which they
were members. But when they were thrown
out of her bosom, and constrained to hold fepa-
rate assemblies for the worship of God, their fol-
lowers no longer viewed a society by which they
were oppressed with reverence or affetion. Her
government, her discipline, her ritual, were ex-
amincd with minute attention. Every error was
pointed out, and every defect magnified. The
more boldly any teacher inveighed against the
corruptions of the church, he was listened to
with greater approbation; and the farther he
urged his disciples to depart from such an im-
pure community, the more eagerly did they
follow him. By degrees, ideas of ecclefiafical
policy, altogether repugnant to those of the
tftablifhed church, gained footing in the nation.
The more fober and learned Puritans inclined to
that form which is known by the name of Pref-
byterian. Such as were more thoroughly pof-
sised with the spirit of innovation, however
much they might approve the equality of pas-
ton which that system establishes, reprobated
the authority which it vests in various judicato-
ries, descending from one to another in regular
fnbordination, as inconsistent with Chriflian
liberty.

These wild notions floated for some time in
the minds of the people, and amused them with
many ideal fchemcs of ecclefiafiical policy. At

length

length Robert Brown Ci580], a popular d.
claimer in high estimation, reduced them to
system, on which he modelled his own congre.
gation. He taught, that the church of Eng-
land was corrupt, and antichriftians, its minis.
ters not lawfully ordained, its ordinances and
sacraments invalid; and therefore he prohibited
his people to hold communion with it in arr
religious fun&ion. He maintained, that a fio
ciety of Christians, uniting together to worfih?
God, conttituted a church, possessed of corr.
plete jurifdi&ion in the condu& of its own afi
fairs, independent of any other society, and ur.
accountable to any superior; that the prieithood
was neither a diftinft order in church, nor con.
ferred an indelible character; but that evern
man qualified to teach might be set apart for
that office by the ele&ion of the brethren, and
by imposition of their hands; in like manner,
by their authority, he might be discharged from
that function, and reduced to the rank of a pr-
vate Chrillian; that every person when admitted
a member of a church ought to make a pub!:l
confession of his faith, and give evidence of hii
being in a state of favour with God; and that
all the affairs of a church were to be regulated by
the decision of the majority of its members.

This democratical form of government, which

abolished all distinction of ranks in the church,
and conferred an equal portion of power on
every individual, accorded so perfectly with the
levelling genius of fanaticism, that it was fondly
adopted by many as a complete model of Chriftiaa
policy. From their founder, they were deno-
minated Brownifis; and as their tenets were

more

aore boftile to the eftablilhed religion than those
of other separatists, the fiercest storm of perfecu-
dmn fell upon their heads. Many of them were
ined or imprisoned, and some put to death; and
though Brown, with a levity of which there
are few examples among enthusiasts whose vanity
has been soothed by being recognized as heads
of a party, abandoned his disciples, conformed
to the established religion, and accepted of a
benefice in the church, the sec not only sub-
filed, but continued to spread, especially among
prfons in the middle and lower ranks of life.
But as all their motions were carefully watched,
both by the ecclesiastical and civil courts, which,
X often as they were detected, punished them
with the utmost rigour, a body of them, weary of
iring in a state of continual danger and alarm,
ird to Holland, and fettled in Leyd n, under the
care of Mr. John Robinson, their pallor. There
they resided for several years unmolested and ob-
fcure. But many of their aged members dying,
and some of the younger marrying into Dutch
iamilies, while their church received no increase,
either by recruits from England, or by prose-
tes gained in the country, they began to be
afraid, that all their high attainments in spiritual
knowledge would be loft, and that perse& fabric
es policy, which they had ereted, would be
[difolved and consigned to oblivion, if they re-
mained longer in a strange land.

Deeply affc&ed with the profpee of an event,
lhich to them appeared fatal to the interests of
truth, they thought themselves called, in order
to prevent it, to remove to some other place,
there they might profess and propagate their
VOL. 1i1. D opinions

opinions with greater success. America, i3
which their countrymen were at that time il.tet
on planting colonies, presented itfclf to thr:
thoughts- They flattered themfelvcs with t op,
of being permitted, in that remote region, th
follow their own ideas in religion without di;
turbance. The dangers and hardships to whici
all former emigrants to America had been ex
posed, did not deter them. " They were -.;
weaned (according to their own defcriptioi.(
from the delicate milk of their mother country
and enured to the difficulties of a strange laisc
They were knit together in a itr': and facrer
band, by virtue of which they held themfclvc
obliged to take care of the good of each othtr
and of the whole. It was not iith them,
with other mea, xhom small things could dii
courage, or small discontents cause to Ili
themfclves at home againm ." The first obhjc
of their folicitudie was to secure the free exerci;c
of their religion [16 18]. For this purpose thet
applied to the king; and though James rcfufc(
to give them any explicit assurance of toleration
they seemed to have obtained from him sorn
promise of his connivance, as long as they con
tinued to demean themselves quietly. So eage
were they to accorrplifh their favourite scheme
that, relying on this precarious security, the
began to negociate with the Virginian companl
for a trai of land within the limits of thei
patent. This they tafily procured from a so
ciety desirous of encouraging migration to a Y
country, of which they had hitherto occup4s
only a few spots.

" Hutchinson's Hifl ofMafach p. p. 4

After the utmost efforts, their preparations
,cll far short of what was requisite for beginning
;he fe'tlement of a new colony. A hundred
ad twenty persons failed from England [ 16zo
ASpt. 6,1 in a tingle ship on this arduous under.
utking. The place of their dellination was
Hudlon's River, where they intended to fettle;
but their captain having been bribed, as is said,
bv the Dutch, who had then formed a scheme
which they afterwards accomplished of planting
a colony there, carried them lo far towards the
north, that the firit land in America which they
made [Nov. 1 ] was Cape-Cod. They were
now, not only beyond the precinss of the ter-
rtory which had been granted to them, but be.
vond those of the company from which they de.
ri.ed their right. The season, however, was so
far advanced, and sickness raged so violently
muong men unaccuitomed to the hardships of a
long voyage, that it became necessary to take
up their abode there. After exploring the coast,
they chose for their station, a place now belong.
ig to the province of Maflachufets Bay, to
which they gave the name of New Plymouth,
probably out of rcfpe& to that company, within
whose jurifdi&ion they now found themselves
Utuated a.

No season could be more unfavourable to set.
ltement than that in which the coilony landed.
The winter, which, from the predominance of
cold in America, is rigorous to a degree un.
known in parallel latitudes of our hemisphere,
was already set in ; and they were slenderly pro.

' HuSarn's Pies. State, p. 3. Cotto.l's Magnaiia, p 1.
u:; .;,fors sHill. p. 3, &c.

D D 2 vided

vided with what was requisite for comfortab!
fubfiftance, under a climate considerably mnc
severe than that for which they had made prepa
ration. Above one half of them was cut off b
fore the return of spring, by diseases, or by si
mine: the survivors, instead of having leisure t
attend to the supply of their own wants, wet
compelled to take arms against the favagesic
their neighbourhood. Happily for the Eng
lifh, a pestilence, which raged in America ti
year before they landed, had swept off so gre
a number of the natives, that they were quickl
repulsed and humbled. The privilege of pro
fessing their own opinions, and of being gc
verned by laws of their own framing, afforde
consolation to the colonists amidst all their dam
gers and hardMhips. The constitution of the
church v al the fame with that which they ha
efatalifhed in Holland. Their system of cil
government was founded on those ideas of th
natural equality among men, to which their ec
clefiaflical policy had accustomcd them. Ever
free man, who was a member of the church, wca
admitted into the supreme legislative body. Th
laws of England were adopted as the bais o
their jurisprudence, though with some diverfit
in the punifhmcnts inflicted upon crimes, bor
rowed from the Mosaic institutions. The ex
ecutive power was vested in a governor and some
assistants, who were elected annually by the
membe-s of the legislative assembly . So fa
their institutions appear to be founded on thi
ordinary maxims ot human prudence. But i
was a favourite opinion with all the enthusiast

Chalmers' Annals, p. 87.

0

of that age, that the scriptures contained a
complete system, not only of spiritual inftruc-
tion, but of civil wisdom and polity; and with-
out attending to the peculiar circumstances or
ituation of the people whose history is there re-
airded, they often deduced gentral rules for
:ieir own condu&, from what happened among
den in a very different state. Under the in.
.:ence of this wild notion, the colonists of New
Pivmouth, in imitation of the primitive Chris-
:ans, threw all their property into a common
.ock, and, like members of one family, carried
:D every work of industry by their joint labour
,r public behoof P. But, however this refolu-
oun might evidence the sincerity of their faith,
retarded the progress of their colony. The
.:me fatal effets flowed from this community of
;ocds, and of labour, which had formerly been
ipcerienced in Virginia; and it soon became
:e.cffary to relinquish what was too refined to
-e capable of being accommodated to the affairs
s.men. But though they built a small town,
-d surrounded it with such a fence as afforded
:fficient security against the assaults of Indians,
te foil around it was so poor, their religious
:riniples were so unsocial, and the supply sent
::em by their friends so scanty, that at the end
: ten years, the number of people belonging
: the settlement did not exceed thre hundred q.
)uring some years they appear not to have ac-
:.;red right by any legal conveyance to the ter-
r.try which they had occupied. At length
6Co0] they obtained a grant of property
Chalmers' Annais, p. 89. Dcuglas's Summar), i.
': ':c. l hi almr eis' Annals, p. 97.

D D 3 from

from the council of the New Plymouth compat
but were never incorporated as a body politic b}
royal charterr. Unlike all the other fettle
ments in America, this colony must be con
fidered merely as a voluntary association, hei
together by the tacit consent of its members to
recognize the authority of laws, and submit to
the jurisdiction of magistrates framed and chose
by themselves. In this state it remained an in
dependent, but feeble community, until it wa
united to its more powerful neighbour, the cc
lony of Massachusets Bay, the origin and prc
grefs of which I now proceed to relate.

The original company of Plymouth havin

done nothing effectual towards establishing an
permanent settlement in America, James I. i
th- year one thousand fix hundred and twent,
ifutd a new charter to the Duke of Lenox, th
Marquis of Buckingham, and several other per
sons of ditlintion in his court, by which he cor
veyed to them a right to a territory in Ameria
ifill more extensive than what had been grante
to the former patentees, incorporating them as
body politic, in order to plant colonies then
with powers and jurifdiftion similar to thof
contained in his charters to the companies c
South and North Virginia. This society w,
distinguished by the name of the Grand Counc
of Plymouth for planting and governing Nn
England. What considerations of public utilit
could induce the king to commit such an unda
taking to persons apparently so ill qualified so
condu&ting it, or what profpea of private ad
vantage prompted them to engage in it, the i

r Chalmers' Annals, p. 97. 107.

format{i

orrnation we receive from contemporary writers
loes not enable us to determine. Certain it is,
that the expectations of both were disappointed,
and after many schemes and arrangements, all
the attempts of the new associates towards colo-
nization proved unsuccessful.

New England must have remained unoccupied,
if the fame causes which occasioned the emigra-
tion of the Brownifts had not continued to ope-
rate. Notwitliftanding the violent persecution
to which Puritans of every denomination were
fill exposed, their number and zeal daily in-
creased. As they now despaired of obtaining
in their own countly any relaxation of the penal
iututes enacted against their fed, many began
to turn their eyes towards some other place of
retreat, where they might profess their own
opinions with impunity. From the tranquillity
which their brethren had hitherto enjoyed in
New Plymouth, they hoped to find this desired
asylum in New England; and by the acdivity of
Mr. White, a non-conformist minister at Dor-
chester, an association was formed by several
gentlemen who had imbibed Puritanical notions,
in order to condu&t a colony thither. They
parchafed from the council of Plymouth [1627,
Mar. 9g] all the territory, extending in length
from three miles north of the River Merrimack,
to three miles south of Charles River, and in
breadth, from the Atlantic to the Southern
Ocean. Zealous as these proprietors were to
accomplish their favourite purpose, they quickly
perceived their own inability to attempt the po-
pulation of such an immense region, and deemed

it

it necessary to call in the aid of more opulent cc
partners'.

Of these they found, without difficulty, a fug.

cient number, chiefly in the capital, and anrrfii
persons in the commercial and other induftrioul
walks of life, who had openly joined the set oi
the Puritans, or secretly Lavoured their opinion;.
These new adventurers, with the caut:on natural
to men conversant in business, entertained doubts
concerning the propriety of founding a colony
on the basis of a grant from a private compa:q
of patentees, who might convey a right of pro.
perty in the foil, but could not confer jurifdic.
tion, or the privilege of governing that focit;v
which they had in contemplation to eftallifh
As it v.-a only from royal authority that futh
powers could R.e derived, they applied for thef:;
and Cha:les granted their rcquelt, with a facility
which appears astonishing, when we confider the
principles and views of the men: who we;e suitors
for the favour.

T'me has been confidered as the parent of po-

litical wisdom, but its infti utions are communi-
cated slowly. Although the expel ience of above
twenty years might have taught the English the
impropriety of committing the government of
settlements in America, to exclusive corpora-
tions resident in Europe, neither the king nor
his fubjets had profited so much by what passcd
before their eyes, as to have extended their ideai
beyond those adopted by James, in his firit at-
tempts towards colonization. The charter or
Charles I. to the adventurers associated for plan:-

s Neal's Hda. of New Enal. i. p. Izz.

i:.,

pg the province of Massachusets Bay, was per-
cly similar to those granted by his father to
he two Virginian companies and to the council
,f Plymouth. The new adventurers were in-
orporated as a body politic, and their right to
he territory, which they had purchased from
he council of Plymouth, being confirmed by
he king, they were empowered to dispose of
le lands, and to govern the people who should
etde upon them. The firlt governor of the
:ompany, and his assistants, were named by the
:rown: the right of elecing their successors was
veted in the members of the corporation. The
executive power was committed to the governor
and affitants; that of legislation to the body of
proprietors, who might make statutes and orders
for the good of the community, not inconsistent
with the laws of England, and inforce the ob-
fervance of them, according to the course of
other corporations within the realm. Their
rnds were to be held by the fame liberal tenure
with those granted to the Virginian company.
They obtained the fame temporary exemption
from internal taxes, and from duties on goods
aported or imported; and notwithstanding their
migration to America, they and their descend-
ants were declared to be entitled to all the rights
of natural-born fubjeas '.

The manifest objet of this charter was to con-
ser on the adventurers who undertook to people
the territory on Massachusets Bay, all the cor-
porate rights poffefied by the council of Ply-
mouth, from which they had purchased it, and
'o form them into a public body, resembling

Hutchinson's Collp. of Orig. paperi, p. 1, &c.

Other

other great trading companies, which the fpiril
or monarchy hid at that time multiplied in t,
kingdom. The king seems not to have foreseen
or to have fufpEtccd, the secret intentions o
thote who projected the meafire; for io far wv
he from alluring emigrants, by any hopes of i
dulgence with respect to their religious icrupic
o. from prorr;ilng any relaxation from th. rigui
of the penal itatutes againit non-conformii:
that he txprefsly provides for having the oei
of supremacy adminifitred to every perfou whi
shall pals to the colony, or inhabit there'.

But whatever were the intentions of the king

the adventurers kept their own object ftcai..
in view. Soon after their powers to eftabli;l
colony were rendered complete by the ru-s
charter [1629], they fitted out five ships tc
Ncw England; on board of which embarkcd up
wards of three hundred paffengcrs, with a rtO
offettling there. These were molily zealous P.
ritans, wnaoic chief inducement to relinquish the.

u Hutchinfun's Co:le&. of Orig. Papers, p. lS-it

surprising, that Mr. Nea,, an inluflrious, Ind ecnera.li
we.l-inforame wriier, f..uld affirm, tht "' fece lirm.ty
co: science was granted by this charter to all who Ihoula es
in th, fe parts, to worship God in the r own way." H:'
of N Enel. i. 1 4. This he repeats in h s Hiflory ot .
Poritans, ii. 21o; and lubfequent historians have c,:z
him implicitly. No permission of that kind, howei°,
contained in the charter; and such an indulgence so.-
have been inconili:tnt uith all the maxims of Char'ntes
his miniHers during the course of his r-ign. At the :'
when Charles issued the chrter, the influence of Laud or:
his councils was at its height, the Puritans were profect.t
with the greatest severity, and the kingdomr was ruled entoc
by prerJgative. ' his is not an zra in which one c nex.
to mee: with concefTfins in favour of non-cznform;ii, ::
a prince oi Chiares's characer anJ principles.

Ea.-'-

:tire land was the hope of enjoying religious
esrtV, in a country far removed from the feat
;f government and the oppression of ecclefiafical
courts. Some eminent non-conformist n;iiieters
,tornpanied them as their spiritual initructors.
On their arrival in New England, they found
:he wretched remainder of a irnall i;dy of emi-
--auitS, who had left England [June 29] the
-eceding year, under the conduct of Endicott,
deep cethulialt, whom, prior to their incor-
.sration by the royal charter, the afociates had
-ppointed deputy governor. They were fettled
7. a place called by the Indians Naurekcag, and
: which Endicott, with the fond affeCiation of
;.atics of that a:ae to employ the language and
?pellations of feripture in the affairs of com-
:on life, had given the name of Salem.

The emigrants under Endicott, and such as
:oajoined them, coincided perfectly in religi-
0.J principles. They were Puritans of the
-nteit form ; and to men of this characer the
?aitation of a church was naturally of such in-
:erefting concern as to take place of every other
bijet. In this first tranfa&ion, they displayed,
t once, the extent of the reformation at which
hey aimed. Without regard to the sentiments
ei that monarch under the faaction of whose au-
thority they fettled in America, and from whom
tFey derived right to at as a body politic, and
14contempt of the laws of England, with which
ste charter required that none of their a&s or
ordinances should be inconsistent, they adopted
a their infant ch irch that form of policy whiich
2i since been diitinguifhed by the name of Inde-
arCdcnt. They united together in religious so-

ciety

ciety [Aug. 6], by a solemn covenant wid
God, and with one another, and in flrit con
formity, as they imagined, to the rules of fcip
ture. They elected a pastor, a teacher, and a
elder, whom they set apart for their refpeCtit
offices, by imposition of the hands of the bre
thren. All who were that day admitted mem
bers of the church, signified their assent to
confession of faith drawn up by their teacher
and gave an account of the foundation of thei
own hopes as Christians; and it was declared
that no person should hereafter be received int
communion until he gave fatisfation to th
church with refpea to his faith and fanditr
The form of public worship which they institute
was without a liturgy, difincumbered of ever
superfluous ceremony, and reduced to the lowd
standard of Calviniflic fimpiicity r.

It was with the utmost complacence that men

passionately attached to their own notions, an
who had long been refirained from avowin;
them, employed themselves in framing this mo
del of a pure church. But, in the first momen
that they began to taste of Christian libertl
themselves, they forgot that other men had a
equal title to enjoy it. Some of their number
retaining an high veneration for the ritual ofthi
English church, were so much offended at th
total abolition of it, that they withdrew fron
communion with the newly-inffituted church
and assembled separately for the worship of God
With an inconsistency, of which there are fuc
flagrant instances among Christians of every de

Math. MagnaL p. i8. Neal's Hil of N. EngL iL 6
Chalmers, p. 14.

no_ nauc-

nomination that it cannot be imputed as a re-
proach peculiar to any set, the very men who
had themselves fled from persecution became per-
fecutors; and had recourse, in order to enforce
their own opinions, to the fame unhallowed
weapons, against the employment of which they
lad lately remonstrated with so much violence.
Endicott called the two chief malcontents before
him; and though they were men of note, and
among the number of original patentees, he ex-
peltd them from the society, and sent them
hime in the ships which were returning to Eng-
and . The colonilts were now united in senti-
cents; but, on the approach of winter, they sis-
faed so much from diseases, which carried off
ilmort one half of their number, that they made
little progreis in occupying the country.

Meanwhile the directors of the company in
England exerted their utmost endeavours in
order to reinforce the colony with a numerous
bod- of new settlers; and as the intolerant spirit
of Laud exa&ed conformity to all the injunc-
tions of the church with greater rigour than
teer, the condition of such as had any fcruplec
wi:h refpea to this became so intolerable, that
may accepted of their invitation to a fccure
:treat in New England. Several of theft were
persons of greater opulence and of better con-
dition than any who had hitherto migrated to
that country. But as they intended to employ
their fortunes, as well as to hazard their per-
ns, in establishing a permanent colony there,
nd foresaw many inconveniences from their sub-
.iion to laws made without their own consent,

Y Mather, p. 19. Neal, p. I29.
VOL. Il. E E and

and framed by a foc;ety which must always h
imperfe&ly acquaint.d with their situation, the
infifltd that the corporate powers of the coi
panT should be transferred from England tu
America, and the government of the colonv i
vested entirely in those who, by fettling in t'h
latter country, became members of it2. Th,
company had already expended confiderablefum
in prosecuting the dcign of their inftitutior
without having received almost any return, at
had no profpe&t of gain, or even of reimbur'e
ment, but what was too remote and uncertil
to be suitable to the ideas of merchants, th
mofi numerous class of its members. Th~
hesitated, however, with rcfpect to the legai:i
of grantinZ the demand of the intended eMr
grants. But such was their cagernefs to b
di .ngraged from an unpromising adventure, tha:
"I b general content, it was determined, tbi
the charter shou!d he transferred, and t;ie ,:
vernment be fettled i:i Nel: England s." Ti
thlc mcmlers of t'h coror :t.mn who choe :
remai.l at home, w-; refer ved a frare in the tr-r
ing stock and pro.it, of the comr a.,y dur..!
fcvcn years.

In this finr lar transaction, to wlhich thr

is nothing fri.ilar in the hiltorv of En'-lih c,:.
nization, two circumnfance mcnt partic'iar ,.
tention: one is the power of the cornTar :
make this transferce.l: ; the other is the ilie-'
acquiescence with which the k;n, permit .! :
to take place. If th a!.l I;'' f this deter.mni.
tion of the comoa-i; be tri'd b' the ca.-::

z Hutchinson's Cll fe Pv-r., p. . ' '>r
p. 2o. Hu;c'infon's Hi.I. . 2z. Cha:mers, p. J-:

which constituted it a body politic, and conveyed
to it all the corporate powers with which it was
hreted, it is evident that it could neither exer-
cife those powers in any mode 'ifferent from
wrhat the charter prescribed, nor alienate them
in such a manner as to convert the jurifdidion
o a trading corporation in England into a pro-
Tincial government in America. But from the
H institution of the company of Massachusets
Bar, its members seem to have been animated
with a spirit of innovation in civil policy, as well
a in religion; and by the habit of rejecting
ctablifhcd usages in the one, they were prepared
for deviating from them in the other. They
had applied for a royal charter, in order to give
kgal effec to their operations in England, as
£zs of a body politic; but the persons whom
they ent out to America, as soon as they landed
there, confidered themselves as individuals, unit-
ed together by voluntary afrociation, possessing
the natural right of men who form a society, to
2iopt what mode of government, and to exa&
what laws they deemed most conducive to gene-
l felicity. Upon this princip'e of being en-
tiled to judge and to decide for themselves,
they established their church in Salem, without
reard to the institutions of the church of Eng-
lnd, of which the charter supposed them to be
members, and bound of consequence to con-
nrrnity with its ritual. Suitably to the fame

was, we (hall observe them framing all their

fature plans of civil and ecclesiastical policy.
The king, though abundantly vigilant in ob-
er;ing and checking fighter encroachments on
h prerogative, was either so much occupied at

E F z that

that time with other cares occasioned by his fatal
breach with his parliament, that he could not
attend to the proceedings of the company; or
he was so much pleased with the profpe ol
removing a body of turbulent fubjets to a dif
tant country, where they might be useful, ard
could not prove dangerous, that he was difpofd
to connive at the irregularity of a measure whica
facilitated their departure.

Without interruption from the crown, th

adventurers proceeded to carry their scheme intc
execution. In a general court, John Winthro;
was appointed governor, and Thomas Dudl:j
deputy-governor, and eighteen assistants wen
chosen; in whom, together with the body of free
men who should fettle in New England [163c]
were vefied all the corporate rights of the cor,
pany. With such zeal and acivity did the
prepare for emigration, that in the course of th
ensuing year seventeen ships failed for New Eng
land, and aboard these above fifteen hundru
persons, among whom were several of refped
able families, and in easy circumstances. 0:
their arrival in New England, many were so il
satisfied wvith the situation of Salem, that the
explored the country in quest of some bette
station; and fettling in different places arouor
the Bay, according to their various fancies, hl
the foundations of Bolton, Charleftown, Dor
chester, Roxborough, and other towns, whid
have since become considerable in the province
In each of these a church was established on th
fame model with that of Salem. This, toge
ther with the care of making provision for the
£bbfiftence during winter, occupied them entirch

durb

dring some months. But in the first general
cort [O&. 19], their disposition to confider
themselves as members of an independent society,
unconfined by the regulations in their charter,
began to appear. The election of the governor
and deputy-governor, the appointment of all
other officers, and even the power of making
laws, all which were granted by the charter to
the freemen, were taken from them, and vested
in the council of affiltants. But the ariftocrati-
cal spirit of this resolution did not accord with
the ideas of equality prevalent among the peo-
pie, who had been surprised into an approba-
tion of it. Next year [1631] the freemen,
whose numbers had been greatly augmented by
the admiflion of new members, resumed their
fonrer rights.

But, at the fame time, they ventured to de-
iate from the ciarter in a matter of great mo-
ment, which deeply affe&ed all the future opera-
tions of the colony, and contributed greatly to
form that peculiar chara&er by which the peo-
pie of New England have been diliinguiihed.
A law was passed, declaring that none shall
hereafter be admitted freemen, or be entitled to
arv share in the government, or be capable of
being chofcn magillrates, or even of serving as
i.rymen, but such as have been received into
tre church as membersb. By this resolution,
every perfcn who did not hold the favourite
opinions concerning the doctrines of religion,
the dilcipline of the church, or the rites of wor-
ship, was at once call out of the society, and
*.i:;.ie. of all the privileges of a citizen. An

E Hutciinfo.l, p. 26. Chalr.ers, p. 153.

L 3 uncon.

uncontrolled power of approving or rejeElig
the claims of those who applied for admiffiot
into communion with the church being vested i
the ministers and leading men of each congrega
tion, the most valuable of all civil rights wa
made to depend on their decision with refpeft to
qualifications purely ecclesiastical. As in ex
amining into there, they proceeded not by an
known or established rules, but exercised a dil
cretionary judgment, the clergy rose graduall
to a degree of influence and authority, fror
which the levelling spirit of the independen
church policy was calcula-ed to exclude them
As by their determination the political conditio
of every citizen was fixed, all paid court to me
possessed of such an important power, by affnn
ing those austere and sanctimonious manner
which were known to be the most certain recon
mendation to their favour. In consequence (
this ascendant, which was acquired chiefly b
the wildest enthusiasts among the clergy, the
notions became a standard to which all ftudie
to conform, and the singularities characteriti
of the Puritans in that age increased, of whic
many remarkable instances will occur in th
course of our narrative.

Though a considerable number of plantee

was cut off by the diseases prevalent in a count
so imperfecly cultivated by its original inhabi
ants as to be still almost one continued forefl, an
several, discouraged by the hardihips to whic
they were exposed, returned to England, r
cruits sufficient to replace them arrived [i632]
At the fame time the small-pox, a diftemp;
fatal to the people of the New World, frci

'.V.

tway such multitudes of the natives that some
whole tribes disappeared; and Heaven, by thus
evacuating a country in which the Englifb might
fettle without molestation, was supposed to de.
dare its intention that they Ihould occupy it.

As several of the vacant Indian stations were
well chosen, such was the eagerness of the Eng.
lilb to take possession of them, that their fettle-
ments became more numerous and more widely
dispersed than suited the condition of an infant
colony. This led to an innovation which totally
altered the nature and constitution of the govern-
ment. When a general court was to be held in
the year one thousand fix hundred and thirty-
four, the freemen, instead of attending it in per-
son as the charter prescribed, elected represent-
atives in their different districts, authorizing them
to appear in their name, with full power to de-
lberate and decide concerning every point that
fell under the cognizance of the general court.
Whether this measure was suggested by some
designing leaders, or whether they found it pru-
dent to tooth the people by complying with
their inclination, is uncertain. The represent-
atives were admitted ; and confidered themselves,
is conjuncaion with the governor and assistants,
ai the supreme legislative assembly of the colony.
In assertion of their own rights they enacted, that
r.o law fnould be passed, no tax should be im.
cosed, and no public officer should be appointed,
but in the general affemblv. The pretexts for
raking this new arrangement were plausible.
The number of freemen was greatly increased;
rany resided at a distance from the places where
the supreme courts were held; personal attend-

alice

ance became inconvenient; the form of govern.
ment in their own country had renderedfamilir
the idea of delegating their rights, and corn
mitting the guardianfiip of their liberties, to
representatives of their own choice, and the ex.
perience of agea had taught them that this ir.
portant trust might with safety be lodged in
their hands. Thus did the company of Mafia.
chufets Bay, in less than fix years from its in.
corporation by the king, mature and perse& a
scheme which, I have already observed, fomrn
of its more artful and aspiring leaders feern to
have had in view when the association for peo.
pling New England was first formed. The cc-
lony must henceforward be confidered, not as a
corporation w!iofc powers were defined, and its
mode of procedure re iulated by its charter, but
as a foc;ety, which, having acquired or assumed
political hterty, had, by its own voluntary deed,
adopted a conititut on or government framed on
the model of that in England.

But however liberal their system of civil policr

might be, as their religious opinions were .o
longer under any reltraint of autthorit, the fpir:
of fanaticism continued to spread, and became
every day wilder and more extravagant. W;,.
iams, a minister of Salem, in high eltimatios,
having conceived an antipathy to the cross ci
St. George in the standard of England, d&.
claimed against it with so much vehemence as a
relic of superstition and idolatry which ought
not to be retained among a people so pure an'
fan&ified, that Endicott, one ( f the members o.
the court of afiaitants, in a tianfport of zei,
publicly cut out the cross from the ensign di.

plv::

played before the governor's gate. This frivol-
ous matter intereited and divided the colony.
Some of the militia scrupled to follow colours
in which there was a cross, left they (hould do
honour to an idol: others refused to serve under
a mutilated banner, left they should be fufpefted
of having renounced their allegiance to the crown
of England. After a long controversy, carried
on by both parties with that heat and zeal which
in trivial disputes supply the want of argument,
the contest was terminated by a compromise.
The cross was retained in the ensigns of forts
and ships, but erased from the colours of the
militia. Williams, on account of this, as well
as of some other doctrines deemed unsound, was
banished out of the colony'.

The prosperous state of New England was now
so highly extolled, and the simple frame of its
cckfiaftic policy was so much admired by all
whose affecions were estranged from the church
if England, that crowds of new settlers flocked
thither [1635]. Among these were two per-
sons, whose names have been rendered memora-
ble by the appearance which they afterwards
made on a more conspicuous theatre: one was
Hugh Peters, the enthusiastic and intriguing
chaplain of Oliver Cromwell; the other Mr.
Henry Vane, son of Sir Henry Vane, a privy
counsellor, high in office, and of great credit
with the king; a young man of a noble family,
animated with such zeal for pure religion and
such love of liberty as induced him to relinquish
all his hopes in England, and to fettle in a co-

'Neal's Hit. of N. Eng. p. 140, &c. Hu:chinfon,
F- 37. Chalmers, p. 156.

lony

lony hitherto no farther advanced in impro-e.
mnert than barely to afford fubfiltence to its mem.
hers, was received with the fondest admiration.
His mortified appearance, his demure look, aad
rigid manners, carried even beyond the standard
of preciseness in that society which he joined,
seemed to indicate a man of high spiritual attain.
ments, while his abilities and address in bufinei
pointed him out as worthy of the highest station
in the community. With universal consent, anc
high expectations of advantage from his admni
niltration, he was eiecacd governor in the yea:
subsequent to his arrival r1636]. But as the
affairs of an infant colony afforded not objeEt.
adequate to the talents of Vane, his busy prag.
matical spirit occupied itself with theologica
fubtilties and speculations unworthy of his altc.
tion. There were excited by a woman, whoif
reveries produced such effeats both -within thi
colony and beyond its precin&s, that, frivolous
as they may now appear, they must be mentioned
as an occurrence of importance in its hi;tory.

It was the cuflom at that time in New Erg.

land, among the chief men in every congrcga-
tion, to meet once a week, in order to repeza
the sermons which they had heard, and to hold
religious conference with refpcA to the doctrine
contained in them. 1Mrs. Hutchinson, whose
hufbaAd was among the most refpe&able mem-
bers of the colony, regretting that persons of
her sex were excluded from the benefit of thole
meetings, assembled statedly in her house a num-
ber of women, who employed themfclves in pious
exercif.c. fimiar to thole of the men. At afi
ihe latisied herself .with repeating what she couid

rccolie&

recolle& of the discourses delivered by their
teachers. She began afterwards to add illuitra-
tions, and at length proceeded to censure some
of the clergy as unsound, and to vent opinions
and fancies of her own. These were all founded
oa the system which is denominated Antinomian
by divines, and tinged with the deepell enthufi-
:mn. She taught, that sanctity of life is no
evidence of juitification, or of a state of favour
Wi:h God; and that such as inculculated the
:eceffity of manifefling the reality of our faith
Iv obedience, preached only a covenant of
w'urks: flie contended that the spirit of God
dwelt personally in good men, and by inward
re-clations and impretlions they received the
f.iielt discoveries of the divine will. The fluency
aid confidence with which ihe delivered these
;otions gained her many admirers and profelvtes,
not only among the vulgar, but among the
:rincipal inhabitants. The whole colony was
.terelted and agitated. Vane, whose sagacity
ad acuteness seemed to forsake him whenever
'hev were turned towards religion, espoused and

fernded her wildest tenets. Many conferences
"cre lield, days of fatting and humiliation were
: :ointed, a general fvnod was called, and, after
..:!cntions so violent as threatened the dissolution
; the colonv, Mrs. Hurchinfon's opinions were
:rcderrned as ernoneous, and (he herself banished
-!)? J_. Several of her disciples withdrew from
.c I.rovince of their own accord. Vane quitted
.::rica in disgust, unlamented even by those

.- h lately admired him; some of whom
c regardcd him as a mere visionary, and others

as

as one of those dark turbulent spirits doomed to
embroil every society into which they enterd.

However much these theological conted

might disquiet the colony of Massachusets Bar,
they contibuted to the more speedy population
of America. When Williams was banifhedfrom
Salem in the year one thousand fix hundred and
thirty-four, such was the attachment of his
hearers to a pastor whose piety they revered, that
a good number of them voluntarily accom.
panied him in his exile. They direded their
march towards the south; and having purchased
from the natives a considerable tra& of land, to
which Williams gave the name of Providence,
they fettled there. They were joined soon after
by some of those to whom the proceeding
againl Mrs. Hutchinson gave disgust; and by
a tranfaaion with the Indians they obtaineda
right to a fertile island in Naraganfet Bay, which
acquired the name of Rhode Island. WillLin
remained among them upwards of forty years, re-
spe&ed as the father and the guide of the colony
which he had planted. His spirit differed from
that of the Puritans in Massachusets; it was mild
and tolerating; and having ventured himfelfto
reje& eftablilhed opinions, he endeavoured to
fccure the fame liberty to other men, by main.
taining, that the exercise of private judgment
was a natural and sacred right; that the ciil
magistrate has no compulfiv jurisdiction in ths
concerns of religion; that the punilhment of anj
person on account of his opinions, was an c,

Ma:ther, book vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 7;
sNeal, p. z. i44 165, .c. C palmers, p. z63.

croachrmni

roacbment on conscience, and an as of perse-
utione. These humane principles he instilled
ito his followers; and all who felt or dreaded
.?pression in other settlements, resorted to a
nmmunity in which universal toleration was
isown to be a fundamental maxim. In the

rnitations of Providence and Rhode Island,
ciitical union was eftablilhed by voluntary affo-
cition, and the equality of condition among the
-crrbers, as well as their religious opinions;
neir form of government was purely democrati-
ai, the supreme power being lodged in the
rtmen personally assemblcd. In this state
ey remained until they were incorporated
;r charter f.

To imilar causes the colony of Connecticut
indebted for its origin. The rivalihip be-
rten Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker, two fa.
iurite ministers in the settlement of Massachusets
hv, disposed the latter, who was least success-
'i in this contest for fame and power, to wish
hr sone settlement at a distance from a compe-
zor by whom his reputation was eclipsed. A
aod number of those who had imbibed Mrs.
niutchinfon's notions, and were offended at such
a combated them, offered to accompany him.
'irng employed proper persons to explore the
:.ntry, they pitched upon the weft fide of the
amt river Conneficut as the most inviting fla-
i,; and in the year one thousand fix hundred
athirty-fix, about an hundred persons, with
cr wives and families, after a fatiguing march

'N-a's His. of N. Eng. p. 141. f Hutchinson,
* . Neal, ii. 14z. Dougl. Sum. ii. p. ;6, &-c.
. -rs. , ch. ii.
rGL. 1si. F Sos

of many days through woods and swamps, at
lived there, and laid the foundation of the towm
of Hartford, Springfield, and Weatheritel
This settlement was attended with peculiar inc
gularities. Part of the difirid now occupi.
lay beyond the limits of the territory granted.
the colony of Mafachufets Bay, and yet tl
emigrants took a commission from the governo
and court of assistants, empowering them to e
ercife jurifdidion in that country. The L)utc:
from Manhados or New York, having difcoct-r
the river Connecticut, and eftablilhed fornc m;;:
ing houses upon it, had acquired all the nr
that prior possession confers. Lord Sav
Sele and Lord Brook, the heads of two iiluf;-
ous families, were so much alarmed at the art'
trary measures of Charles I. both in his c:r
and ecclefiailical adminiltration, that they too
a resolution, not unbecoming young men
noble birth and liberal sentiments, of retiring
the New World, in order to enjoy such a for
of religion as they approved of, and those lib:
ties which they deemed essential to the well-bci:
of society. They, too, fixed on the banks
the Connedicut as their place of settlement, a:
had taken pofleffion, by building a fort at t
mouth of the river, which, from their uri:l
names, was called Say Brook. The emigran
from Massachusets, without regarding either :
defcts in their own right or the preterfions
other claimants, kept poffeifion, and proceed;
with vigour to clear and cultivate the counat
By degrees they got rid of every compct;;
The Dutch, recently fettled in America, a:
too feeble to engage in a war, peaceably ,?:

drew from Connesticut. Lord Say and Sele
ad Lord Brook made over to the colony what-
e-er title they might have to any lands in that
region. Society was eftablifled by a voluntary
compaa of the freemen; and though they soon
ci:claimed all dependence on the colony of Maf-
f2chufets Bay, they retained such veneration for

legilative wisdom, as to adopt a form of

government nearly resembling its institutions,
.ith refpe& both to civil and ecclesiastical po-
icy. At a subsequent period, the colony of
Conneticut was likcwife incorporated by royal
harter g.
The history of the first attempts to people the
provinces of New Hampfaire and Main, which
f:om the fourth and most extensive division in
New England, is obscure and perplexed, by the
isterfcring claims of various proprietors. The
company of Plymouth had inconsiderately par-
celld out the northtrn part of the territory con-
:ained in its grant among different persons: of
,hefe only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain
Mason seem to have had any serious intention to
occupy the lands allotted to them. Their efforts
toaccomplifh this were meritorious and perfever-
ig, but unsuccessful. The expence offettling co-
lonies in an uncultivated country must necessarily
begreat and immediate; the profpea of a return
B often uncertain and always remote. The
finds of two private adventurers were not ade-
gqate to such an undertaking. Nor did the
planters whom they sent out pcffefs that princi-
ple of enthusiasm, which animated their neigh-

t iutciinfon, p. 4A, &c. Neal, i. 147. Douglas,
Ij-, &Sc. Chaliners' Annals, ch. 2.

F F 2 bours

bours of Massachusets with vigour, to ftrugle
through all the hardships and dangers to whic'
society, in its infancy, is exposed in a favae
land. Gorges and Malon, it is probable, mut
have abandoned their design, if, from the fa.e
motives that settlements had been made in Rhoc:
Island and Connecticut, colonists had not c:.
expetedly migrated into New Hampfhirc a:d
Main. Mr. Wheelwright, a minister of fore
note, nearly related to Mrs. Hutchinson, a,
one of her most fervent admirers and partisan,
had, on this account, been banished from t'!
province of Massachusets Bay h. In quest oft
new itation, he took a course opposite to ;:
other exiles; and advancing towards the north,
founded the town of Exeter, on a small rirt
flowing into Pifkataqua Bay. His follower;
few in number, but firmly united, were of fuc
rigid principles, that even the churches of liMa
fachufets did not appear to them sufficient,
pure. From time to time they received for
recruits, whom love of novelty, or diffatisfa&tio:
with the ecclesiastical inltitutions of the othe
colonies, prompted to join them. Their plat
ations were widely dispersed, but the countr
was thinly peopled, and its political state ex
tremely unsettled. The colony of Maffachufe
Bay claimed jurifdision over them, as occupy
ing lands situated within the limits of their gras!
Gorges and Mason asserted the rights conreTr
to them as proprietors by their charter. I
fcveral diftri&s, the planters, without regardi
the pretensions of either party, governed the
fil-es by maxims and laws copied from thofi

a Hutchinson, p. 70.

their brethren in the adjacent colonies1. The
ft reduction of the political constitution in the
provinces of New Hampihire and Main into a
regular and permanent form, was subsequent to
the revolution.

By extending their settlements, the English
became exposed to new danger. The tribes of
Indians around Massachusets Bay were feeble
and unwarlike; yet from regard to justice, as
.ell as motives of prudence, the first colonists
were studious to obtain the consent of the na-
tires before they ventured to occupy any of their
lands; and though in such transactions the con.
fideration given was often very inadequate to
the value of the territory acquired, it was sus-
fcient to satisfy the demands of the proprietors.
The English took quiet possession of the lands
thus conveyed to them, and no open hostility
broke out between them and the ancient poflef-
fors. But the colonies of Providence and Con-
necticut soon found that they were surrounded
by more powerful and martial nations. Among
these the most considerable were the Naraganfets
ind Pequods; the former feated on the Bay
which bears their name, and the latter occupy-
ing the territory which iretches from the river
Pequod along the banks of the Conneticut;
The Pcquods were a formidable people, who
could bring into the field a thousand warriors,
not inferior in courage to any in the New World.
The) foresaw, not only that the extermination
of the Indian race muff be the consequence of
permitting the English to spread over the con-

Hutchinson, p. o03, &c. 176. Dougas's Sum. ii. 22,
te. Chalmers' Annals, ch. 17.

F F 3 tinent

tinent of America, but that if measures were
not speedily concerted to prevent it, the caa.
mity would be unavoidable. With this view
they applied to the Naraganfets, requesting
them to forget ancient animofities for a moment,
and to co-operate with them in expelling a con.
mon enemy who threatened both with def.
truAion. They represented that, when those
strangers first landed, the objet of their visit
was not fufpe&ed, and no proper precautions
were taken to check their progress; that now,
by fending out colonies in one year towards
three different quarters, their intentions wer,
manifest, and the people of America muff aban.
don their native feats to make way for ullj'
intruders.

But the Naraganfets and Pequods, like rn'c

of the contiguous tribes in America, were rivas,
and there fubfilted between them an hereditary
and implacable enmity. Revenge is the daring
passion of savages; in order to secure the indul-
gence of which there is no present advantage
that they will not sacrifice, and no future con.
sequence which they do not totally disregard.
The Naraganfets, instead of closing with the
prudent proposal of their neighbours, discovertd
their hostile intentions to the governor of Maffi-
chufets Bay; and, eager to lay hold on such a
favourable opportunity of wreaking their venge-
ance on their ancient foes, entered into an alli-
ance with the English against them. The Pc-
quods, more exasperated than discouraged by
the imprudence and treachery of their countr-
men, took the field, and carried on the war in
the usual mode of Americans. They surpriscd

ftragglcr,

tragglers, and scalped them; they plundered and
burnt remote fettlcments; they attacked Fort
Say Brook without success, though garrisoned
only by twenty men; and when the English be-
pn to aft offeniively, they retired to fastnesses
which they deemed inaccessible. The different
colonies had agreed to unite against the common
enemy, each furnishing a quota of men in pro-
prtion to its numbers. The troops of Cjn-
nefticut which lay molt exposed to danger were
soon assembled. The march of thufe from
Saffachufets, which formed the most confider-
able body, was retarded by the most singular
aife that ever influenced the operations of a
military force. When they were mustered pre-
,;ous to their departure, it was found that some
of the officers, as well as of the private soldiers,
were Rill under a covenant of works; and that
cie blessing of God could not be implored or
rtpeatd to crown the arms of such unhallowed
sen with success. The alarm was general, and
many arrangements necessary in order to cast out
he unclean, and to render this little band sus-
Iciently pure to fight the battles of a people who
ntertained high ideas of their own fantity k.

Meanwhile the Conneticut troops, reinforced
,r a small detachment from Say Brook, found
- necessary to advance towards the enemy.
They were posted on a rising ground, in the
-:ddle of a swamp towards the head of the river
Miflick, which they had surrounded with palifa-
&-s, the best defence that their slender (kill
12 the art of fortification had discovered.
Though they knew that the English were in

k Neal, i. 168.

motion,

motion, yet, with the usual improvidence and
security of savages, they took no measures either
to observe their progress, or to guard agaiaft
being surprised themferes. The enemy [May
2o], unperceived, reached the palifadoes, aad
if a dog had not given the alarm by bark;ng,
the Indians must have been massacrcd wittlut
resistance. In a moment, however, they sta:ted
to arms, and raising the war-cry, prepared to
repel the assailants. But at that early period ,i
their intercourse with the Europeans, the Ame.
ricans were little acquainted with the use of
gunpowder, and dreaded its effects extrercir.
Wh le some of the English galled them with ls
incessant fire through the intervals between Lth
palifadoes, others forced their way by the e:.
tries into the fort, filled only with branche, oi
trees; and setting fire to the huts which wee
covered with reeds, the confusion and terror
quickly became general. Many of the womrn
and children perished in the flames; and the
warriors, in endeavouring to escape, were either
slain by the English, or falling i;to the hands
of their Indian allies, who surrounded the fort
at a dielance, were reserved for a rmore cruc
fate. After the junEtion of the troops fro,
Massachusets, the English resolved to purfne
their victory; and hunting the Indians from
one place of retreat to another, some fubie.
qurnt encounters were hardly less fatal to them
than the ation on the Miltick. In lets than
three months the tribe of Pequods was extir-
pated: a few mifcrcb;c fugitives who took
refuge among the neighbouring Indians, being
incorporated by them, loll their name as a dil.

tin&

tinj people. In this first essay of their arms,
the colonists of New England seem to have been
condured by skilful and enterprising officers,
and displayed both courage and perseverance as
foldirts But they stained their laurels by the
use which they made of vitory. In tead of
treating the Pequods as an independent people,
Rho made a gallant eff;or to defend the pro-
perty, the rights, and the freedom of their
nation, they retaliated upon them all the bar-
barities of American war. Some they maiTacred
in cold blood, others they gave up to be tor-
tured by their Indian allies, a confiderablc num-
ber they fold as slaves in Bermudas, the reft were
reduced to servitude among thenmfelves i.

But reprehensible as this condut of the Eng-
lish muff be deemed, their vigorous efforts in
this decisive campaign filled all the surrounding
tribes of Indians with such an high opinion of
their valour as secured a long tranquillity to all
their settlements. At the fame time the violence
of administration in England continued to in-
creafc their population and ltrength, by forcing
many respectable fiibjeds to tear themselves from
all the tender connections that bind men to their
native country, and to fly for refuge to a region
of the New World, which hitherto presented to
them nothing that could allure them thither but
exemption from oppression. The number of
those emigrants drew the attention of govern-
ment, and appeared so formidable, that a pro-
clamation was issued, prohibiting masters of
Ihips from carrying passengers to New England

I Hutchinfnn, p. 58. q6, &ac. Mather, Magnalia, b. vii.
n. 6. Hubbaid's State of N. Eng. p. 5. 1s6, &c.

without

without special permiflion. On many occafior,
this injunction was eluded or disregarded. Fa.
tally for the king, it operated with full effec in
one instance. Sir Arthur Haflerig, John Harm>
den, Oliver Cromwell, and some other perf-:
whose principles and views coincided with their,
impatient to enjoy those civil and religious liber.
ties which they struggled in vain to obtain in
Great Britain, hired some ships to carry them
and their attendants to New England. Bv
order of council, an embargo was laid on these
when on the point of failing; and Charles, far
from fulpecting that the future revolutions in hi
kingdoms were to be excited and direced by
perions in such an humble sphere of life, forci.
bly detained the men destined to overturn hi,
throne, and to terminate his days by a violent
death m.

But, in spite of all the efforts of government

to checK this spirit of migration, the measure
of the king and his ministers were confidered by
a great body of the people as so hostile to those
rights which they deemed most valuable, that
in the course of the year one thousand fix hun.
dred and thirty-eight, above three thousand
persons embarked for New England, choofing
rather to expose themselves to all the con.
sequences of disregarding the royal proclama.
tion, than to remain longer under opprellion.
Exasperated at this contempt of his authority,
Charles had recourse to a violent but effc&ual
mode of accomplifhin- what he had in view. A
writ of quo warranto was issued against the cor-

" Ma:her, Mangla, b. i. ch. 5. p. 23. Neal's HiR. of
N. Eog. i. 151. Chum-r.' Annals, i. 155. I60, &c.

poration

poration of Massachusets Bay. The colonifs
had conformed so little to the terms of their
charter, that judgment was given against them
without difficulty. They were found to have
forfeited all their iights as a corporation, which
of course returned to the crown, and Charles
began to take measures for new modelling the
political frame of the colony, and velting the
adminiftratiori of its affairs in other hands. But
hi; plans were never carried into execution. In
c-re- corner of his dominions, the storm no.v
began to gather, which soon burst out with such
fatal violence, that Charles, during the remain-
d.: of his unfortunate reign, occupied with do-
neftic and more interesting cares, had not leisure
to bellow any attention upon a remote and in-
confidcrable province n.

On the meeting of the Long Parliament, such
a Revolution took place in England, that all the
r.otives for migrating to the New Wurld ceased.
The maxims of the Puritans with refp.ct to the
government both of church and state, became
predominant in the nation, and were enforced by
the hand of power. Their oppressors were hum-
bled; that perfee system of reformed polity,
wLich had long been the objeft of their admnira-
ticn and desire, was eltablifhed by law; and
Laidft the intrigues and confli&s of an obstinate
civil war, turbulclt and alpiring spirits found
such full occupation, that they had no induce-
ment to quit a busy theatre, on which they had'
iifcn to aA a mope conspicuous part. From the

Hutchinion, p. 86. 5cz, &c. Chalmers' Annals,

year

year one thousand fix hundred and twenty, when
the first feeble colony was condu&ed to New
England by the Browniits, to the year one
thousand fix hundred and forty, it has been
computed, that twenty-one thousand two hun-
dred British fubjets had fettled there. The
money expen:ded by various adventurers during
that period in fitting out ships, in purchasing
flock, and trarnfpcrting settlers, amounted, on
a moderate calculation, nearly to two hundred
thousand pounds : a vait fum in that age, ar.c
which no principles, inferior in force to tho,;
wherewith the Puritans were animated, could ha c
persuaded men to lay oult, on the uncertain pro:
ptec of obtaining an efablifhment in a remote
u;,c-ltivated region, which, from its situation
and climate, could allure them with no hope
but that of finding fubfiltence and enjoying free-
dom. For some years, even subsistence was pro-
cured with difficulty; and it was towards the
close of the period to which our narrative is
arrivcd, before the product of the settlement
yiclded the planters any return for their flock.
lAbout that time they began to export corn in
fmail quantities to the Weft Indies, and made
some feeble attempts to extend the fishery, and to
open the trade in lumber, which have since proved
the ilaple articles of commerce in the colony P.
Since the year one thousand fix hundred and
forty, the number of people with which New
England has recruited the population of the

N'a-bhr, b. i. ch. p. 17. ch. ;. p. z. Hutchinson,

p. 193. Chbalmrs' Analar, p. 165. r HutchinC;o,
p. 9;, 9.

parent

parent slate, is finppofed at least to equal what
mray have been drained from it by occasional
migrations thither.

But though the sudden change of system in
Great Britain ftopt entirely the influx of settlers
.:to New England, the principles of the colonists
coincided so perfe&ly with those of the popular
eaders in parliament, that they were soon dif-
:nguifhed by peculiar marks of their brotherly
a=reion. By a vote of the Houfc of Commons in
::e year one thousand fix hundred and forty-two,
:'e people in all the different plantations of New

l"p!and were exempted from payment of any

cities, either upon goods exported thither, or
:pon those which they imported into the mother
country, until the House shall take farther order
:o the contrary. This was afterwards confirmed
1646] by the authority of both Houses. En-
couraged by such an extraordinary privilege, in-
cftry made rapid progress in all the diltricis of
Necw England, and population increased along
':th it. In return for those favours, the colo-
::s applauded the measures of parliament, cele-
L-ated its generous efforts to vindicate the rights
.ad liberties of the nation, prayed for the fuc-
crts of its arms, and framed regulations in order
:o prevent any exertion in favour of the king on
he other fide of the Atlanticq.
Relying on the indulgent partiality with
*hich all their proceedings were viewed by men
thus closely united with them in sentiments and
w:fhes, the people of New England ventured on
a measure, which not only increased their fecu-

Hutchinlon, p. 14. App. 517. Chalmes' Annals,
VOL. .

176.
VOL. iII. G G rity

rity and power, but may be regarded as a co-.
fiderable ftep towards independence. Under tit
impreflion or pretext of the danger to wlvi:.
they were exposed from the surrounding tnrib
of Indians, the four colonies of Maffachufict
Plrmouth, Conneeticut, and Newhaven, enter;:
into a league of perpetual confederacy, offenf,..,
and defensive [1643, May 19] ; an idea famrni
to several leading men in the colonies, as it v.-
framed in imitation of the famous bond of uni.-
among the Dutch provinces, in whose domini;.
the Brownifts had long resided. It was ftipi,
lated, that the confederates should hencefor-
be distinguished by the name of the United C.
lonies of New England; that each colony fr.a
remain separate and diftinc, and have exclui!;
jurifdi-tion within its own territory; that::
every war offensive or defensive, each of the c-.
federates shall furnish its quota of men, prc.
sions, and money, at a rate to be fixed fro:
time to time, in proportion to the number c
people in each settlement; that an affen.b!
composed of two commissioners from each c.
lony shall be held annually, with power to dt
berate and decide in all points of common cce
cern to the confederacy; and every determr.i.
tion, in which fix of their number concur, ft.
be binding on the wholer. In this transact&;
the colonies of New England seem to have co:
fidered themselves as independent foieties, pc.
fessing all the rights of sovereignty, and fr'
from the controul of any fupcrior power. T:.-
governing party in England, occupied wiV.

r Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. i. zcz, &c. Hut-bin:;
p, 124. Chlmeri'Ann. p. 177.

aT..:

.airs of more urgent concern, and no wife dif-
posed to observe the condut of their brethren
; America with any jealous attention, suffered
the measure to pass without animadversion.

Emboldened by this connivance, the spirit
of independence gathered strength, and soon
-ifplayed itself more openly: some persons of
note in the colony of Massachusets, averse to the
fvilem of ecclesiastical polity established there,
and preferring to it the government and difci-
pline of the churches of England or Scotland,
having remonstrated to the general court against
the inljuftice of depriving them of their rights as
freemen, and of their privileges as Christians
r16+6], because they could notjoin as members
.ith any of the congregational churches, peti-
'!:ned that theymight no longer be bound to obey
h'ls to which they had not assented, nor be subject
t3 taxes imposed by an assembly in which they
were not represented. Their demands were not
orlv rejected, but they were imprisoned and fined
z; diilurbers of the public peace; and when they
appointed some of their number to lay their
g:cvances before parliament, the annual court,
in order to prevent thia appeal to the supreme
power, attempted firit to seize their papers, and
t:hen to obftruc their embarkation for England.
But though neither of there could be accom-
?lihed, such was the address and influence of
;he colonies' agents in England, that no inquiry
cems to have been made into this transaction S.
This was followed by an indication, still less

: Nel's Hist. N. Eng. i. 213. Hutchinson's Hist. 45,
k:. ColleOc. x3S, &c. Chalm, Ann. 179. Ma-her,
hional. b. iii. ch. i. p. 30.

G G 2 ambi-

ambiguous, of the aspiring spirit preval;e
among the people of Massachusets. Under ever;
form of government the right of coining monen
has been confidered as a prerogative peculiar tc
sovereignty, and which no subordinate membr
in any state is entitled to claim. Regardless ,
this established maxim, the general court ordere(
a coinage of silver money at Bolton [1652]
flamped with the name of the colony, and;
tree as an apt symbol of its progressive vigour'
Even this usurpation escaped without notice
The Independents, having now humbled all riva
felts, engrosscd the whole direction of affairs ii
Great Britain; and long accustomed to admir
the government of New England, framed agree
ably to those principles which they had adopte
as the most perfect model of civil and ecclefiafl
cal polity, they were unwilling to stain its repu
tation, by censuring any part of its condut.

When Cromwell usurped the supreme power

the colonies of New England continued to ftan
as high in his edimation. As he had deepl]
imbibed all the fanatical notions of the Independ
ents, and was perpetually surrounded by th
most eminent and artful teachers of that set, h
kept a constant correspondence with the leadin;
men in the American settlements, who seem t
have looked up to him as a zealous patron,
He in return confidered them as his most devote
adherents, attached to him no less by affectioi
than by principle. He soon gave a ftrikini
proof of this. On the conqueR of Jamaica, h
formed a scheme for the fccurity and impro.'

Hutchinson, 177, 17X. Chaimers' Annals, p. lii.
Hutchinson, App. z2o, &c. Colle. .
p. 23.

JLC-

-ent of the acquisition made by his victorious
t.ens, suited to the ardour of an impetuous spirit
lat delighted in accomplishing its ends by ex-
:-ordinary means. He proposed to transport
::t people of New England to that island, and
rployed every argument calculated to make
=pression upon them, in order to obtain their
c:,fent. He endeavoured to rouse their religi-
:: zeal by representing what a fatal blow it
-:uld be to the man of fin, if a colony of the
::hful were fettled in the midst of his teiri-
--es in the New World. He allured them
.:h prospects of immense wealth in a fertile
:.-lon, which wculd reward the industry of
-.5e ho cultivated it, with all the precious
:,ducltions of the torrid zone, and expressed
.fervent wish that they might take possession
:!, in order to fulfil God's promise of making
people the head and not the tail. He assured
-...n of being supported by the whole force of
:. authority, and of vesting all the powers of

"er! ment entirely in their hands. But by
; time the colonists were attached to a country
:: ;hich they had reflided for many years, and
- 're, though they did not attain opulence,

y enjoved the comforts of life in great abund-
-; and they dreaded so much the noxious
.ate of the ',eft Indies, which had proved
':A1 to a great number of the English who first
:-:lcd in Jamaica, that they declined, though

the mout refpecerful terms, closing with the
:.tector's proposition X.

1 H'tchinfon, p. igo, &c. Chalmers, p. r88.

GG3

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTE CXLIV. p. I.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE CXLIV. p. I.

I' my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mexicans, I have received much information from

a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the
yCar i553, Philip II. in order to discover the mode of
levying tribute from his Indian subjects, that would be
molt beneficial to the crown, and least oppressive to
them, addressed a mandate to all the Courts of Audi-
ence in America, enjoining them to answer certain que.
ries which he proposed to them, concerning the ancient
term of government eflablifhed among the various na-
tir.s of Indians, and the mode in which they had been
ajcullomed to pay taxes to their kings or chiefs. In
obedience to this mandate, Corira, who had resided
nincteen years in America, fourteen of which he passed
in New Spain, composed the work of which I have a
copy. He acquaints his sovereign, that he had made
it an objec during his residence in America, and in all
its provinces which he had visited, to inquire diligently
into the manners and cultoms of the natives i that he
had conversed for this purpose with many aged and in-
telligent Indians, and consulted several of the Spanish
ecclefialtics, who underflood the Indian languages most
ptrfefly, particularly ofme of those who landed in New
Sa.n soon after the conquefl. Corita appears to be a

man

# NOTE CXLV. p. 12.

man of Come learning, and to have carried on his in.
quiries with the diligence and accuracy to which he pre.
tends. Greater credit is due to his testimony from one
circumstance. His woik was not composed with a
view to publication, or in support of any particular
theory, but contains simple, though full answers to
queries proposed to him officially. Though Herrera
does not mention him among the authors whom he had
followed as guides in his history, I should suppose,
from several fascs of which he takes notice, as well as
from several expressions which he uses, that this me.
morial of Corita was not unknown to him.

NOTE CXLV. p. 12.

THE early SpaniSh writers were so hasty and inaccu.

rate in eisimating the numbers of people in the provinces
and towns of America, that it is impossible to ascertain
that of Mexico itself with any degree of preclfion
Cortes defcrbes the extent and populousness of Mexico
in general terms, which imply that it was not inferior
to the greatetl cities in Europe. Gomara is more ex-
plicit, and affirms, that there were 60,cco houses or
families in Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his
opinion, Dec. i. lib. vii. c. 3. ; and the generality of
of writers follow them implicitly without inquiry or
scruple. According to this account, the inhabitants eo
Mexico must have been about 30oo,CO. Torquemada,
with his usual propensity to the marvellous, affcrrs,
that there were a hundred and twenty thousand houfts
or families in Mexico, and consequently about fix hun-
dred thousand inhabitants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a
very judicious account of the Mexican empire, by crc
of Cortes's officers, the population is fixed at 6o,coo
people. Ramufio, ili. 3c, A. Even by this account,
which probably is much nearer the truth than any oi
the foregoing, Mexico was a great city.

# NOTE CXLVI. p. 16.

# NOTE CXLVII. p. 21.

NOTE CXLVI. p. i6.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am in-

debted for this curious obfcrvation. Palafox, bishop of
Ciudad de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illus-
trates it more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only
language in which a termination indicating refped,
fvas reverentiales y de cortefia, may be affixed to every
word. By adding the final syllable zin or azin to any
word, it becomes a proper expression of veneration in
the mouth of an inferior. If, in speaking to an equal,
the word Father is to be used, it is Tatl, but an inferior
ays Tatzin. One priest speaking to another, calls him
Tep:xue; a person of inferior rank calls him Teopixcat-
E.r. The name of the emperor who reigned when
Cortes invaded Mexico, was Montezuma, but his vassals,
from reverence, pronounced it Montezumazin. Torri-
ho, MS. Palaf. Virtudes del Indio, p. 65. The
Mexicans had not only reverential nouns, but reveren-
ctl verbs. The manner in which these are formed
fIom the verbs in common use, is explained by D. Jos.
Aug. Aldama y Guevara in his Mexican Grammar,
N- 188.

NOTE CXLVII. p. 21.

FROM comparing several passages in Corita and Her-
reta, we may colleEt, with some degree of accuracy,
the various modes in which the Mexicans contributed
towards the support of government. Some persons of
the firIt order seem to have been exempted from the
plyment of any tribute, and, as their only duty to the
public, were bound to personal fcrvice in war, and to
siilow the banner of their sovereign with their vassals.
z. The immediate vassals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain
'or,porton of the produce of their lands in kind, 3,
.-ore who held offices or honour or trust, paid a cer-
:..n f are of what they received in consequence of hold-
3 iheric. 4. Each Capull, or association, cultivated

some

# NOTE CXLVIII. p. 21.

some part of the common field allotted to it, for t!t
behoof of the crown, and deposited the produce in tu
royal granaries. 5. Some part of whatever was brough
to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth, cr
the various produtions of their artifis and manofac
turers, was demanded for the public use, and the mtr.
chants who paid this were exempted from every cthre
tax. 6. The Mayeues, or adfcripti glebt, were bound t;
cultivate certain diftri&s in every province, which mi]
be confidered as crVwn lands, and brought the increari
into public ftoreboufes. Thus the foverelgn receiv.
some part of whatever was useful or valuable in :;
country, whether it was the natural production of tb
foil, or acquired by the indufiry of the people. WYh
each contributed towards the support of government
seems to have been inconsiderable. Corita, in anfwe
to one of the queries put to the Audience of Mexico b
Philip II. endeavours to estimate in money the value c
what each citizen might be supposed to pay, and doe
not reckon it at more than three or four reals, abou
eighteen pence or two shillings a head.

NOTE CXLVIII. p. 21.

CoT-r s, who seems to have been as much aflonifne

with this, as with any inflance of Mexican ingenuit.
gives a particular decfription of it. Along one of t'
catfeways, fays he, by which they enter the city, ar
conducted two conduits, composed of clay tempert
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raifl
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a fiream c
excellent water, as large as the body of a man, into ib
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitant
plentifully. The other is empty, that when it is neet
fary to clean, or repair the former, the stream of wate
may be turned into it. As this conduit passes along tm
of the bridges, where there are breaches in the cauft
way, through which the salt-water of the lake flovn
it is conveyed over them in pipes as large as the bcd
of an ox, then carried from the conduit to the rernot

quartZ

# NOTE CXLIX. p. 23.

quarters of the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabit-
ants Relat. ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE CXLIX. p. 23.

I. the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are
~ivn suits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.
They are compored of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
tkh opinion of very intelligent judges they are evidently
arlern. The forms of the silver ornaments upon them,
representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a con-
.rnntion of this. They are infinitely superior in point
cf workmanship to any 'effort of American art. The
Spaniards probably received them from the Philippine
:.ands. The only unquestionable specimen of Mexican
irt that I know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very
to gold, which is said to have belonged to Montezuma.
i: weighs 5 oz. 12 dwt. Three drawings of it were
eshibited to the Society of Antiquaries, June o1, 1765.
. man's head is represented on this cup. On one fide
.: full face, on the other the profile, on the third the
:ack parts of the head. The relievo is (aid to have been
;Foduced by punching the inside of the cup, so as to
make the representation of a face on the outside. The
flatures are gross, but represented with some degree of
an, and certainly too rude for Spanish workmanlhip.
This cup was purchased by Edward earl of Orford,
wvhile he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with the fleet un-
cer his command, and is now in the poffelfion of his
grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for this inform-
a:ion to my respectable and ingenious friend Mr. Bar-
r.ngton.-In the sixth volume of the Archaeologia, p.
1:-, is published an account of some masks of Terra
Cotta, brought from a burying ground on the Ameri-
:.n continent, about seventy miles from the British set-
!*:-ent on the Mosquito shore. They are said to be like-
nctes of chie's, or other eminent persons. Fro n the
c'ription and engravings of them, we have additional
:-Wof of the imperfect state of arts among the Ameri-
'/n..

# NOTE CL. p. 29.

NOTE CL. p. 29.

THE learned reader will perceive how much I ha,

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the guidanc:
of the Bishop of Gloucester, who has traced the fuccef.
five fieps, by which the human mind advanced in thi
line of its progress, with much erudition, and greater
ingenuity. He is the firfi, as far as I know, wkt
formed a rational and consistent theory concerning te
various modes of writing praaifed by nations, accot.
ing to the variouo. degrees of their improvement. Dv
Legation of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important ohfn.
ations have been added by M. le President de Broi-,T
the learned and intelligent author of the Traire d.
la Formation Mechanique des Langues, tom. i. %c;
&c.

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious mono

ments extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will .n
be improper to give some account of the means by wh--
they were preserved from the general wreck of ever
work of art in America, and communicated to the PRb
lie. For the most early and complete collection of the,
puhli(fhd by Purchas, we are indebted to the attentici
of that curious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mcr,
doza, viceroy of New Spain, having deemed thoi
paintings a proper present for Charles V. the ship ii
which they were sent to Spain was taken by a Frend
cruizer, and they came into the possession of Theve
the kings geographer, who having travelled himft;
into the New World, and described one of its province
was a curious observer of whatever tended to illufira:
the manners of the Americans. On his death the
were purchased by Hakluyt, at that time chaplain of th
English ambassador to the French court; and, being d
by him to Purchas, were published at the desire of t
learned antiquary Sir Henry Spelman. Purchas, in
1o6¢. They were translated from English into Frencl
by Melchizedeck Thevenot, and publilhed in his colec
tion of voyages, A. D. 1683.

The second specimen of Mexican pidure-writing,
.as publihed by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri. in two
copper-plates- The firfi is a map, or representation of
the progress of the ancient Mexicans on their first arrival
in the country, and of the various flations in which
lt.ey fettled, before they founded the capital of their
empire in the lake cf Mexico. The second is a Chro-
rclogical Wheel, or Circle, representing the manner in
Ywich they computed and marked their cycle of fifty-
rWo years. He received both from Don Carlos de
:tuetnza y Congorra, a diligent colleaor of ancient
'::,tcan documents. But as it seems now to be a
r::eivtd opinion (founded, as far as I know, on no
tood evidence! that Carrri was never out of Italy, and
i.t his famous Ciro deiMur.do is an accrunt of a ficitious
Xcta2e, I have not mentioned these paintings in the
ttxt. They have, however, manifeitly the appearance
c beirg Mexican producions, and are allowed to be so
lt Rotuinri, who ".as well qualified to determine whe-
tler they were genuine or supposititious. M. Clavigero,
i:twife, admits them to be genuine paintings of the
-ciient Mexicans. To me they always appeared to be so,
r-rugh, from my desire to reft no part of my narrative
.-,n queflionahe authority, I did not refer to them.
:. e;I)le of painting in the former is considerably more
p:itct than any other specimen of Mexican design ; but
is the original is said to have been much detaced by
.ne, I fu(pecl that it has been improved by some touches
'*:m tht hand of an European artifl. Carreri, Churchill,
[T. p. ~4g- The chronological wheel is a just delinea-
,cn of the Mexican mode of computing time, as de-
k:;bed by Acofla, lib. vi. c. 2. It seems to resemble
.- which that learned Jesuit had seen; and if it be
~ntirred as a genuine monument, it proves that the
'!exicars had artificial or arbitrary charaflers, which
'.te'ented several things besides numbers. Each month
:! thcre represented by a symbol expressive of some work
- r::e peculiar to it.
The third specimen of Mexican painting was difcc.
:'"d by another Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Boturini
VOL. 111. a Benaduci

Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by f.re-
incidents to fiudy the language of the Mexicans, and .
collef the remains of their historical monuments. P
perfifled nine years in his researches, with the enthecf
afm of a projector, and the patience of an antiqua.,-
In 1746, he published at Madrid, Idea de una NuN:
H:rflsra Geroral de la America Seprer.trional, containing a,
account of the result of his inquiries; and he added ,
it a catalogue of his American HiRtorical Museum, ar.
rangej under thirty.fix different heads. His idea of;
New History appears to me the work of a whimsu
credulous man. But his cata!ogue of Mexican mapi
paintings. tribute lols, calendars, &c. is much largp
than one could hive expeced. Unfortunately a fth
in which he had sant a considerable part of themr t
Europe, was taken by an English privateer during t,
war between Great Britain and Spain which commene
in the year f73 ; and it is probable that they perifie
by falling into the hands of ignorant captors. Botuni
himself incurred the difpleafu:e of the Spanish cocr
and died in an hospital at Madrid. The hiflury, ofwh;:
the Idea, &c. was only apr: ?alus, waj never publifne:
The remainder of his Museum feemi to have been d.!
perfcd. Some part of it came into the poiffeion of t.
present archhlhop of Toledn, when he was primate.
New Spain, and he published from it that curc:
tribute-roll which I have mentioned.

The only other colletlion of Mexican paintings,

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vire.,
By order of their Imperial Majesties, I have ob:aird
such a specimen of these as I desired, in eight pairr
ings, made with To muzh fidelity, that I am informt
the copies could hardly be diftinguiihed from the or:
nals. According to a note in this FP-dex Mex.cx;r.:,
appears to have been a present from Emmanuel K::
of Portugal to lPo;e Clemen: VII. who died A I
I 3. As'er pa: ing through the hands of several:
l-trious propr.etors, it fell into tihofe of the cardinal
Saix Eif-nach, who prefcn:.d it to the emperor Ltopo

T-:

befe paintings are manifeflly Mexican, but they are
a style very different from any of the former. An
2graving has been made of one of them, in order to
ratify such of my readers, as may deem this an object
rorthy of their attention. Were it an object of fuffici-
nt importance, it might, perhaps, be possible, by re-
oerfe to the plates of Purchas, and the archbihfop

Toledo, as a key, to form plausible conje&ures
oncerning the meaning of this piacure. Many of
he figures are evidently similar. A. A. are targets
nd darts, almost in the fame form with those pub-
ined by Purchas, p. 1c70, 1o71, &c. B B. are
gures of temples, nearly resembling those in Purchas,
:. i;'9 and 1113, and in Lorenzana, Plate II. C. is
i bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the figure of which
:curs in almost every plate of Purchas and Lorenzana.
E.E.E. seems to be Mexican captains in their war
r.ts, the fantaflic ornaments of which resemble the
:ures in Purchas, p. ruic, IlIl, 2113. I mhould
-ppofe this piture to be a tribute roll, as their mode
i noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D. &c.
k:ccrding to Boturini, the mode of computation by
.e number of knots, was known to the Mexicans as
r.!l as to the Peruvians, p. 8.5. and the manner in
riich the number of units is reprefen'ed in the Mexi-
an paintings in my possession, seems to confirm this
pinion. They plainly resemble a firing of knots on a
-rd or slender rope.
Since I published the former Edition, Mr. Waddi-
cTe, who is flill pleated to continue his friendly atten-
en to procure me information, has discovered, in the
Library of the Escurial, a volume in folio, confifling
x forty sheets of a kind of pasteboard, each the size of
common sheet of writing paper, wjth great \ariety
.f uncouth and whimsical figures of Mexican painting,
a very fresh colours, and with an explanation in
Spanish to most of them. The first twenty. two sheets
Le" the signs of the months, days, &c. About the
icddle of each fleet are two or more large figures for

H HZ the

the month, surrounded by the signs of the days. Th.
last eighteen sheets are not so filled with figures. Thq
seem to be the signs of Deities, and images of various
objecs. According to this Calendar in the Escurial,
the Mexican year contained 2z6 days, divided into a:
months of J3 days. Each day is represented by a c,,.
ferent sign, taken from some natural obje&, a ferper.,
a dog, a lizard, a reed, a house, &c. The signs c;
days in the Calendar of the Escurial are precisely .:
fame with those mentioned by Boturini. Idea, &!.
p. 45. But, if we may give credit to that Authir
the Mexican year contained 360 days, divide d ie.:
iS mon'hs of zo days. The order of days ir. ev:
month was computed, according to him, first by wr:
he calls a tridecennary progression of days frcm cne :
thirteen, in the fame manner as in the Calendar ci::
Eftunal, and then by a fptenary progreTflon of c,.
from one to fevcn, making in all twenty. In
Calendar, not only the signs which diltinguirn ra::
day, but the qualities (uppofed to be peculiar to E.:
month, are marked. I here are certain wea'r.'
which seem to accompany the human mind thr.,-:
every flage of its progress in observation and fcir::
Slender as was the knowledge of the IMexicans in .; k
nomy, it appears to have been already connected &.
judicial Astrology. The fortune and character of '
sons born in each month are supposed to be decide' i!
some superior influence predominant at the time c
nativity. Hence it is foretold in the Calendar, tha:.
.who are born in one mon h till be rich, in ar.c:s
warlike, in a third luxurious, &c. The paflcbca.i
or whatever fubflance it may be on which the C3ken:i
in the Escurial is painted, seems, by \'r. Wad'.l:or:
description of it, to resemble nearly that in the I\r.:;i
Library at Vienna In several particulars, the fit-':
bear some likeness to those in the plate which I .'
published. The figures marked D. which indusce nm:
conjeAure, that this painting mieht be a tribute r:'
Limilar to there publilhed by Purchas and the Ar.-

bLJ.--

# NOTE CLI. p. 31.

# NOTE CLII. p. 37.

# NOTE CLIII. p. 39.

titbop of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove supposes to be signs
d days; and I have fach confidence in the accuracy of
is observations, as to conclude his opinion to be well
founded. It appears, from the characers in which the
rplananons of the figures are written, that this curious
nonument of Mexican art has been obtained, soon after
;ie conquest of the empire. It is singular that it should
i'er have been mentioned by any Spanish Author,

NOTE CLI. p. 3-

THE first was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance;
the second, the Divider of Men; the third, the Shedder
of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Darkhoufe.
Acofla, Lib. vi. c. 15.

NOTE CLII. p. 37.

TiE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more
:,:ly than any in New Spain, was likewise the most
.nfiderable. But it was nothing more than a mount
ci (lid earth. According to Torquemada, it was
icove a quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and
;ofe to the height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii.
c. 19. Even M. Clivigero acknowledges that all the
Mexican temples were solid firu&ures, or earthen
zounts, and of consequence cannot be confidered as
any evidence of their having made any considerable
pro.refs in the art of building. Clavig. I!. 2:7.

From inspecting various figures of temples in the
:.ntings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be rome
:frSon for suspecting that all their temples were con-
io&aed in the fame manner. See Vol. iii. p. 1109,
i"o. III3.

NOTE CLIII. P. 39.

NOT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in
M:ico itself, the houses of the people were mere huts
-.;: with turf, or mud, or the branches of tiees.

H a 3 They

# NOTE CLIV. p. 39.

They were extremely low, and flight, and without an
furniture but a few earthen vessels. Like the rued
Indians, several families resided under the fame rooi
without having any separate apartments. Herrers
Dec. s. lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. 3. lib. in
c. 17. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE CLIV. p. 39.

I AM informed by a person who resided long in Nn

Spain, and visited almost every province of it, thi
there is not, in all the extent of that vail empire, ar.
monument, or vestige of any building more arcitr.
than the conquest, nor of any bridge or highway, ex.
cept rome remains of the causeway from Cuadalc-e
to that gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered -
city. MS. pr.es me. The author of another a:ce.
in manufcripr observes, " That at this day the-e ce
not remain even the smallest veflige of tie exiflence
any ancient Indian building public or privare, ei '.tr,,
Mexico or in any province of New Spain. 1 h.i<
travelled, fays he, through all the countries ai;;::
to them, viz. New Cal.cia, New Biscay, New .ex,..:
Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom of Leon, and N.;
Santandero, without having observed any monunrr.
worth notice, except some ruins near an anc.ent .
lage in the valley ,ie Cafia GCrundc, in lat. N. ;o-. 4'
lngit. 2sSc. 4.'. from the ifiand of Tenerifie. or i.:
leagues N. N. W. from V exico." He defcr;he, -: :
ruins minutely, and they appear to be the remair.s c.2
paltry building in turf and stone, plaflered over v..
white earth or lime. A nalTionary informec :r.t
gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of aro',c!
edifice (imilar to the fcrmer, ab: ut an hundrcd ipiri
towards N. W. on the bnks of the River St. I'::..
MS. penes ae.

These teflimonies derive great credit from cre c:-.

cumflarce, that they were not give in fcppoi c i:-
particular f)ftem or theory, but as firnple anfwe-' :
queries which I had propufed. It is probable, hc'..v::,

L :

# NOTE CLV. p. 44.

that when these gentlemen assert, that no ruins or mo-
numents of any ancient work whatever are now to be
discovered in the Mexican Empire, they meant that
there were no such ruins or monuments as conveyed
any idea of grandeur or magnificence, in the works
cf its ancient inhabitants. For it appears from the
reftimony of several Spanish authors, that in Otumba,
Tlafcala, Cholula, &c. fume vefliges of ancient build-
inrs are fiill visible. Villa Segnor Theatro Amer.
p 4. 4 308. 353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, former-
ly archbishop of Mexico, and now of Toledo, in his
ir.trodufion to that edition of the Cartas de Rela-
ci:n of Cortes, which he published at Mexico, men-
ticns some ruins which are still visible in several of
rte towns through which Cortes passed in his way to
the capital, p. 4, &c. But neither of there authors
give any description of them; and they seem to be so
sery inconsiderable, as to shew on'y that some build.
irgs had once been there. The laree mount of earth
at Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with the
name of temple, still remains, but without any steps
by which to ascend, or any facirg of stone. It ap-
pears now like a natural mount, covered with grass
and shrubs, and possibly it was never any thing more.
Tcrquem. lib. iii. c. 19 i have received a minute
cdicription of the remains of a temple near Cuerna-
vaca, on the road from 'Mexico to Acapulco. It is
ccmpofed oc large ficnes, fitted to tach other as nicely
ia thore in tile bu.ldirgs cf the Peruvians, which are
bereafter menticned. it the foundation it forms a
fqLare of zS yards; but as it rifts in height, it di-
m,nlincs in extent, not graduaily, but by being con-
iua&ed fuddtnly at regular distances, so that it mufi
have referrbled the figu;e B in the plate. It teini-
ratcd, it is said, in a fp;re.

NOTE CLV. p. 44.

THE exaggeraticn of the Spani(h historians, with
rtfied to the number of human victims sacrificed in

MLXIco,

Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Go.
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand
human victims were not offered to the Mexican Di.
vinities, and in some years they amounted to fi;y
thousand. Cron. c 229. The skulls of those unhappy
persons were ranged in order in a building erected for
that purpose, and two of Corres's officers who had
counted them, informed Gomara that their number
was an hundred and thirty-fix thousand. Ibid. c. 8.
Herrara's account is flill more incredible, that toe
number of vitims was so great, that five thoufard
have been sacrificed in one d!y, nay, on some occa.
sions, no leTs than twenty thousand. Dec. iii. :b.
ii. c. I6. Torquemada goes beyond both in ext'a.
vagarce, for he asserts, that twenty thousand children,
exclusive of other viciims, were slaughtered annual).
Mon. Ind. lib. vii. c Zr. The molt refpetable au-
thority in favour of such high numbers is that ei
Zumurraga, the first bllhop of Mexico, who, in a
letter to the chapter general of his order, A. D. 16?;,
aflerts that the Mexicans sacrificed annually twen!y
thousand viaims. Davila. Teatro Eccles. z16. In
opposition to all these accounts, B. de las Ca.as ob.
serves, that if there had been such an annual walle
of the human species, the country could never haie
arrived at that degree of populousness, for which i:
was remarkable when the Spaniards first landed t!.ere.
This reasoning is just. If the number of vitims in
all the provinces of New Spain had been so grea:,
not only muff population have been prevented from
increasing, but the human race must have been ex.
terminated in a short time. For besides the wair
of the species by such numerous sacrifices, it is cb-
fervable that wherever the fate of captives taken in
war is either certain death or perpetual slavery, ai
men can gain nothing by submitting speedily to an
enemy, they always resist to the uttermost, and war
becomes bloody and deftrucive to the lat derce.
Las Casas pdftively asserts, that the Mv1exicans ne-cr

facr.- j

# NOTE CLVI. p. 45.

# NOTE CLVII. p. 52.

sacrificed more than fifty or a hundred persons in a
year. See his dispute with Sepulveda, subjoined to
his Breviffima Relacion, p. IoS. Cortes does not
fpeify what number of victims was sacrificed annu-
ally, but B. Diaz del Caftello relates, that an inquiry
having been made, with refpe& to this, by the Fran-
cifcan Monks, who were sent into New Spain im-
mediately after the conquest, it was found that about
two thousand five hundred were sacrificed every year
in Mexico. C. 107.

NOTE CLVI. P. 45.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peru-

vian Chronology is not only obscure, but repugnant
to conclusions deduced from the most accurate and
exttnfive observations, concerning the time that elapses
dur:ng each reign, -in any given fuccefflon of princes.
The medium has been found not to exceed twenty
years. According to Acofta and Garcilaffo de la Vega,
Huana Capac, who died about the year 1517, was
the twelfth Inca. According to this rule of comput-
ing, the duration of the Peruvian monarchy ought
not to have been reckoned above two hundred and
forty years but they affirm that it had fubiflfed
four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega,
lb. i. c. 9. By this account each reign is extended
at a medium to thirty three years, inflead of twenty,
the number ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's obferv-
ations; but so imperfect were the Peruvian traditions,
that though the total is boldly marked, the number
of years in each reign is unknown.

NOTE CLVII. p. 52.

MANY of the early Spanish writers assert, that the

PYrLvians offered human sacrifices. Xeres, p. 190.
Zarate, lib. i. c. I . Acofta, lib, v. c. 19. But Gar-
cilato de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous
pracice prevailed among their uncivihzed ancestors, it

was

# NOTE CLVIII. p. 57.

# NOTE CLIX. p. 59.

was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no hunan
viatim was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. Tha
aflertion, and the plausible reasons with which he con.
firms it, are fuficient to refute the Spanilh writen,
whose accounts seem to be founded entirely upon re-
port, not upon what they themselves had obfered.
Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their festivals, the Pe-
ruvians offered cakes of bread moistened with bloo4
drawn from the arms, the eye-brows, and notes of thtoi
children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite may have been
derived from their ancient pracice, in their uncivilizi
state, of facnficing human victims.

NOTE CLVIII. p. 57.

THE Spaniards have adopted both those customs es

the ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some c.
the aqueducts or canals, made in the days of the Incai,
and have made new ones, by which they water eve:
field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i. 422.
477. They likewise continue to use guano, or the dune
of Tea-fowls, as manure. Llloa gives a defcriprion ci
the almost incredible quantity of it in the small islands
near the coast. Ib;d. 48 .

NOTE CLIX. p. 59.

THE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at

Callo in 'he plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-
Cannar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who
infpe&ed them with great care. M. de Condamin.
published a curious memoir concerning the ruins ci
Atun-Cannar. Mem. de l'Academie de Berlin, A. D.
1716, p. 4'5. Accfla defcrihes the ruins of Cuzco,
which he had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. GarcilatiT,
in his usual stile, gives pompous and confused defcrip-
tions of several temples, and other public edifices.
Lib. iii. c. i. c. z. lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata,
in a large treatise concerning Peru, which has not
hitherto been published, communicates some informa-

ticn

tion with refpe& to several monuments of the ancient
peruvians, which have not been mentioned by other
authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes
some of the ancient Peruvian fortifications, which were
lkewife works of great extent and solidity. Tom. i.
:91. Three circumfiances struck all those observers:
[he vast size of the stones which the Peruvians employed
in some of their buildings. Acofia measured one, which
was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix in thick-
rctfi; and yet, he adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco,
there were stones considerably larger. It is difficult to
Tr.ceive how the Peruvians could move these, and raise
temn to the height even of twelve feet. The second
:i-cumflance is, the imperfection of the Peruvian art,
v.-en applied to working in timber. By the patience
and perseverance natural to Americans, stones may be
formed in:o any (hape, merely by rubbing one against
another, or by the use of hatchets or other instruments
.ade of flone; but with such rude tools, little progress
can be made in carpentry. The Peruvians could not
r.rize two beams together, or give any degree of
uricn or flability to any work composed of timber.
As they could not form a centre, they were totally un-
i;quainted with the use of arches in building, nor can
Spanilh authors conceive how they were able to frame
a roof for those ample firu&ures which they raised.

The third circumstance is a fitriking proof, which
all the monuments of the Peruvians furnihf, of their
,ant of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with
p. :ence no less aflonifhing. None of the stones em-
p:x-rd in those works were formed into any particular
cr uniform shape, which could render them fit for be-
ing compa&ed together in building. The Indians took
t.em as they fell from the mountains, or were raised
cu: es the quarries. Some were square, some triangu-
kr, some convex, some concave. Their art and in-
Cuifry were employed in joining them together, by
t.raiar.g such hollows in the one, as perfectly corref-

tr.ctd to the prjetaions or risings in the other. This

tedious

# NOTE CLX. p. 62.

tedious operation, which might have been so eafli!
abridged, by adapting the surface of the flones to each
other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets of cop.
per, would be deemed incredible, if it were not put
beyond doubt by infpeaing the remains of those build-
ings. It gives them a very singular appearance to an
European eye. There is no regu!ar layer or firatum of
building, and no one flone rtfembles another in dimen.
sions or form. At the fame time, by the perreverin,
but ill-direted indufory of the Indians, they are all
joined with that minute nicety which I have mentioned.
Ulloa made this observation concerning the form of t'e
flones in the fortress of Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. I*.
Pineto gives a timilar description of the fortress of Cuzco,
the most perfect of all the Peruvian works. Zapata
MS. pnes me. According to M. de Condamine, there
were regular strata of building in some parts of Alun.
Cannar, which he remarks as singular, and as a proof
of some progress in improvement.

NOTE CLX. p. 62.

THE appearance of those bridges, which bend witr

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con.
fiderably agitated by the motion of every person who
pafles along them, is very frightful at sirs. But the
Spaniards have found them to be the eafief mode of
passing the torrents in Peru, over which it would b:
difficult to throw more solid firuclures either of stone
or timber. They form those hanging bridges so flroni
and broad, that loaded mules pass along them. All
the trade of Cnzco is carried on by means of such a
bridge over the river Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 35.
A mote simple contrivance was employed in patffin
smaller fireams: A basker, in which the traveller wis
placed, being suspended from a strong rope tfretched
across the tiream, it was pushed or drawn trom one fiGe
to the other. Ibid.

# NOTE CLXI. p. 73.

# NOTE CLXII. p. 73.

# NOTE CLXIII. p. 76.

NOTE CLXI. p. 73.

Mv information with refpe& to those events is taken

fr-m tn icia breve dr. la expedicion militar de Sonora y
t.naloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eflado, en que por
ccnfecuentia de ello, fe han puefto ambas provincias,
publ,.ied at Mexico, June i7th, 17-7i, in order to
satisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnilhed
the viceroy with money for defraying the expence of
the armament. The copies of this Noricia are very rare
in Madrid ; but I have obtained one, which has enabled
me to communicate these curious sacs to the public.

:cwording to this account, there was found in the mine
Vecorato in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two

.,-:s, which weighed fixreen marks four ounces four
oxhavas; this was sent to Spain as a present fit for the
kine, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at
h.adrid.

NOTE CLXII. p. 73.

Tut uncertainty of geographers with refpeC to this
p-int is r-n arkable, for Cortes seems to have surveyed
Is co0fis x;th great accuracy. The archbishop of To-
Ledo has publilhed, from the original, in the pofleffion
of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in 1341, by the pilot Domingo Caflillo, in
which California is laid down as a peninsula, firetching
out nearly in the fame direcion which is now given to
: in the best maps, and the point where Rio Lolorado
enters the gulf is marked with precision. Hilt. de Neuva
Ufpagna, 3 2 7.

NOTE CLXIII. p. 76.

I AM indebted for this sac to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103. and upon consulting an intelligent person,
long fettled on the Mosquito shore, and who has been
tenaged in the logwood trade, I find that ingenious
VOL. III. 11 author

# NOTE CLXIV. p. 92.

author has been well informed. The logwood, cut
near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much
better quality than that on the other fide of Yucatan,
and the English trade in the Bay of Honduras is almoR
at an end.

NOTE CLXIV. p. 92.

P. ToaRIBIo de Benevente, or Motolinea, has

enumerated ten causes of the rapid depopulation cf
Mexico, to which he gives the name of the Ten Plagues.
Many of these are not peculiar to that province. I.
The introdution of the small-pox. This disease was
firit brought into New Spain in the year 1520, by a
negroe slave who attended Narvaez in his expedition
against Cortes. Torribio affirms, that one half of the
people in the provinces, visited with this diflemper,
died. To this mortality occasioned by the small-pox.
Torquemada adds the defiruaivc effees of two con-
tagious distempers which raged in the years 1545 and
1576. In the former 800,000 i in the latter, above
two millions perished, according to an exact account
taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 6::.
The small-pox was not introduced into Peru for several
years after the invation of the Spaniards, but there too
that distemper proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia
Origen, p. 88. a. The numbers who were killed or
died of famine in their war with the Spaniards, parti-
cularly during the siege of Mexico. 3. The great
famine that followed after the redufion of Mexico, as
all the people engaged, either on one tide or the other,
had negleaed the cultivation of their lands. Some-
thing similar to this happened in all the other countries
conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The grievous tafik
imposed by the Spaniards upon the people belonging to
their Repartimientos. 5. The oppreflive burden cf
taxes which they were unable to pay, and from which
they could hope for no exemption. 6. The numbers
employed in collecing the gold, carried down by the
torrents from the mountains, who were forced from

t ,tr

# NOTE CLXV. p. 93.

their own habitations, without any provision made for
their subsistence, and fubjeted to all the rigour of cold
in those elevated regions. 7. The immense labour of
rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such
precipitate ardour, as destroyed an incredible number
of people. 8. The number ,f people condemned to
servitude, under various pretexts, and employed in
working the silver mines. These, marked by each pro-
prieror with a hot iron, like his cattle, were driven in
herds o the mountains. The nature of the labour to
which they were fubjeted there, the noxious vapours
of the mines, the coldness of the climate, and scarcity
of food, were so fatal, that Torribio affirms, the country
round several of those mines, particularly near Guaxago,
was covered with dead bodies, the air corru.,ted with
their stench, and so many vultures and other voracious
birds, hovered about for their prey that the fun was
darkened with their flight. io. The 'paniards. in the
different expeditions which ,hey undertook. and by the
civil wars which they carried on, destroyed many of
the natives whom they compelled to serve them as Ta-
xrl, or carriers of burdens. This last mode of op-
pression was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians.
From the number of Indians vho peri!hed in Gonzalo
Pizarro's expedition into the coun:rnes to the east of the
Andes, one may form some idea of what they suffered
in similar services, and how fafl they were wafted by
them. Torribio, MS. Corira in his Breve y Summaria
Relacion. illustrates and confirms several of Torribio's
observations, to which he refers. MS. penes me,

NOTE CLXV. p. 93.

EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii.
c. x1. But the passion of that great man for system,
sometimes rendered him inattentive to research; and
from his capacity to refine, he was apt, in some in-
lances, to overlook obvious and just causes.

I I z

# NOTE CLXVI. p. 93.

# NOTE CLXVII. p. 95.

NOTE CLXVI. p. 93.

A STeONG proof of this occurs in the testament of

Isabella, where mhe discovers the most tender concetn
for the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Thof:
laudable sentiments of the queen have been adopted into
the public law of Spain, and serve as the introdu8ibn
to the regulations contained under the title of theg.d
treatzfrnt of tbt Izdiarj. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE CLXVII. p. 95.

IN the seventh Title of the sirs book of the Rerepi.a.

cioa, which contains the laws concerning the powers
and fun&ions of archbishops and bishops, almost a third
part of them relates to what is incumbent upon them,
as guardians of the Indians, and points out the various
methods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order
to defend them from oppression, either with refpe& to
their persons or property. Not only do the laws corn.
mit to them this honourable and humane office, but
the ecclesiastics of America actually exercise it.

Innumerable proofs of this might be produced

from Spanish authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as
be was not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popilh
clergy, to which they were not fully entitled. Survey,
p. 14z. 192, &-c Henry Hawks, an English me;-
chant who rcfided five years in New Spain previous to
the year 1572, gives the fame favourable account of the
popish clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V.
not only bishops, but other ecclesiastics are impowered
to inform and admonish the civil magistrates, if any Ic.
dian is deprived of his juit liberty and rights: Recopl-
lac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley 4. ; and thus were constituted
legal protectors of the Indians. Some of the Spanili
eccieliaftics refused to grant absolution to such of thcr
countrymen as poffefled Encomiendas, and confidered th:
Indians as slaves, or employed them in working thei
mines. Gonz. DaviL Teatro. Eccles. i. 57.

# NOTE CLXVIII. p. 96.

# NOTE CLXIX. p. 96.

NOTE CLXVIII. p. 96.

AccoRDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains
,oo: families, and he mentions it only as one of the
Lrgeft Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE CLXIX. p. 96.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of
the slate of population in those kingdoms of Europe
where the police is most perfect, and where science has
made the greatest progress. In Spanish America,
where knowledge is fill in its infancy, and few men
have leisure to engage in researches merely speculative,
lhtle attention has been paid to this curious inquiry.
Bet in the year 1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys
and governors of the several provinces in America, to
mrnke an afual survey of the people under their jurif-
diaion, and to transmit a report concerning their num-
ber and occupations. In consequence of this order,
;he Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain, ap-
pinted D. Jos. Antonio de Villa Segnor y Sanchez, to
execute that commifflion in New Spain. From the re-
ports of the magistrates in the several difiriAs, as well
as from his own observations, and long acquaintance
with most of the provinces, Villa Segnor published the
rtfult of his inquiries in his Teatro Arericano. His re-
port, however, is imperfeft. Of the nine dioceses,
into which the Mexican empire has been divided, he
hai pu lifhed an account of five only, viz. the arch-
biflopric of Mlexico, the bishoprics of Puebla de los
Angeles, Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The
ilhoprics of Yucatan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guati-
mala, are entirely omitted, though the two latter com-
prehend countries in which the Indian race is more
numerous than in any part of New Spain. In his fur-
Tey of the extensive diocese of Nova Galicia, the itua-
litn of the different Indian villages is described, but he
ftcifies the number of people only in a finall part of

11 3 it.

it. The Indians of that extensive province, in whic'
the Spanish dominion is imperfecty established, are no
registered with the fame accuracy as in other parts o
New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the aaua
slate of population in the five dioceses above mentionec
is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, a
the diocefrs of

Fami:ire

Mexico - - - 05,::
Los Angeles - - - 30,6
Mechoacan - - -- 3cS
Oaxaca - - - 7,1
Nova Gali:ia - - - 6,-

190,7c
At the rate of five to a family, the total 9 3,j4

number is 9 3T

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico 119,51
Los Angeles - - -.
M'echoacdn - - - 36
Oax.ia - - - 4.4,2
Nova Galicia - - 6,i

2 94 --

At the rate of fve to a family, the total nun.bcr
1,471,95;. lte may rely with greater certainty c
this compuration ot the number of Indians, as i!
taken from tle ..tn:a!a, or regilter, according:
which the tribu:e paid by them is collcted. As sot
diocfres of nir.e are totally omitted, and in that
Nova Gahcia the numbers are imperfealy recordid,
may conclude, that Ihe number of Indians in the Mrx
can empire exceeds two millions.

The account of the number of Spaniards, &c. fee.

not to be equally complete. Of many places, V
Segnor observes in general terms, that several Spaniarc
nc.rcs, and people of rr.xed race, relide there, wit:
OLt fc;i 'inS thei-r numbe., If, therefore, we rn
ai.Jwa;.Lc ir ih;fi., and fur all who rence in the:

d.c ;

dioceses omitted, the number of Spaniards, and of
those of a mixed race, may probably amount to a mil-
lion and a half. In some places, Villa Segnor dif.
,nnguifhes between Spaniards and the three inferior
races of negroes, mulattoes, and meflizos, and marks
their number separately. But he generally blends them
together. But from the proportion observable in those
places, where the number of each is marked. as well
as from the account of the slate of population in New
Spain by other authors, it is manifest that the number
of negroes and persons of a mixed race far exceeds that
of Spariards. Perhaps the latter ought not to be
reckoned above 500,ooo to a million of the former.

Defetive as this account may be, 1 have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
or people in Peru, as might enable me to form any
con ccture equi!!y satisfying with refpeft to the degree
of its popu:ation. I have been informed, that in the
)ter 1761, the proteaor of the Indians in the vice-
royalty of Peru computed that 612,780 paid tribute to
trie king. As all femrales, and persons under age, are
exempted from this tax in Peru, the total number of
lndians ought by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS.

:'.: ":.

I ihall mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least torm a guess, concerning the state
oi population in New Spain and Peru. According to
an account which I have reason to confider as accurate,
te number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported
to Peru on each new publication, is 1,171,53 ; to
Xew Spain 2,649,326. I am informed, that but few
Indians purchase bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to
the Spanflh inhabitants, and those of mixed race, so
that the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed
race, will amount by this mode of computation to at
Ieaft three millions.

The number of inhabitants in many of the towns in
Spanish America, may give us some idea of the extent
ci ?opulaiuoiL, a;,d colt ct the inaccurate, but popular

notion

notion entertained in Great Britain, concerning thL
weak and desolate flare of their colonies. The city of
Mexico contains at leafl ifo,ooo people. It is re-
markable that Torquemada, who wrote his Monarguia
Indiana about the year 61 z, reckons the inhabitants of
Mexico at that time to be only 7000 Spaniards and
8ooc Indians. Lib. iii. c. 26. Puebla de los Angeles
contains above 60,000 Spaniards, and people of a
mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247. Guadalaxara con.
tains above 3o,oco, exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206.
Lima contains 54,000. D. Cofme Bueno Defcr. de
Peru, 1764. Carthagena contains 55,ooo. Potcfi
contains 25,000. Bueno, 1767. Popayan contain;
above zo,ooo. Ulloa, i. z87. Towns of a second claf
are fill more numerous. The cities in the most thriv.
ing settlements of other European nations in America
cannot be compared with these.

Such are the detached accounts of the number of

people in several towns, which I found scattered in
authors whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have
obtained an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns
in the province of Quiro. on the accuracy of which I
can rely; and I communicate it to the Public, both to
gratify curiosity, and to rectify the miRaken noticn
which I have mentioned. St. Francisco de Quito con-
tains between 50 and 6c,cco people of all the different
races. Betides the city, there are in the Corregimierts
z9 cras or parishes established in the principal villages,
each of which has smaller hamlets depending upon it.
The inhabitants of these are mofily Indians and Mefli-
zcs. St. Juan de Pasto has between 6 and 8ooo in-
habitants, besides 27 dependent villages. St. Miguel
de Ibarra 70-0 citizens, and ten villages. The diflri8
of Havala between 18 and 20,0o0 people. The dif-
tri& of Tacunna between lo and z1,ooo. The difir.e
of Ambato between 8 and lo,ooo, besides 16 depend
mg villages. The city of Riobamba between 16 and
zo,ooo inhabitants, and 9 depending villages. The
difltri of Chimbo between 6 and Sooo. The city

ci

# NOTE CLXX. p. 101.

of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants, and 14
dc.ending villages. The diftrid of Atuafi between
; and 6000oo, and 4 depending villages. The city of
Cuenza between 25 and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9
populous depending villages. The town of Laxa from
X to 1o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villages.
This degree of population, though slender, if we con-
ider the vast extent of the country, is far beyond what
is commonly supposed. I have omitted to mention, in
in proper place, that Quito is the only province in
Spanish America that can be denominated a manufac-
turing country; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarfewoollen
cloths, are made there in such quantities, as to be
(uicient not only for the consumption of the province,
but to furnish a considerable article for exportation into
other parts of Spanish America. I know not whether
the uncommon industry of this province (hould be con-
fidered as the coute or the effect of its populoiufnefs. !But
among the ofientatious inhabitants of the New World,
the paflion for every thing that comes from Europe is
so violent, that I am informed the manufa&ures of
Quito are so much undervalued, as to be on the de-
cane,

NOTE CLXX. p. Ic1.

TsHsz are eftablilhed at the following places. St.
Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New
Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme, Santi-
azo in Guatimala, G uadalaxara in New Galicia, Santa
F- in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the
country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St.
Jazo de Chili, Buenos Ayres. To each of these are
fubjeled several large provinces, and Come so far re-
moved from the cities where the courts are fixed, that
ttey can derive little benefit from their jurifdicion.
The Spanish writers commonly reckon up twelve courts
of Audience, but they include that of Manila in the
I :.FP;ne lslands.

# NOTE CLXXI. p. 107.

# NOTE CLXXII. p. 109.

# NOTE CLXXIII. p. 111.

NOTE CLXXI. p. 107.

0 account of the distance of Peru and Chili from

Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities offuch
bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to
plant vines and olives. But they are ftriily prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to any of the provinces on
the Pacific Ocean, which are in such a situation as t
receive them from Spain. Recop. lib. i. tit. xvii.
L 15-18.

NOTE CLXXII. p. Iog.

THIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. I55S.

fifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Hist.
Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. zi. But as Benzoni wrote w.'h
the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detrat from th.-
Spaniards in every particular, it is probable that h.i
calculation is considerably too low.

NOTE CLXXIII. p. 1i.

MY information with refpet to the division and

tranfmitfion of property in the Spanish colonies, is ir.
perfel. The Spanith authors do not explain this fu1;7,
and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to the effet
of their own institutions and laws. Solorzano de Jue
Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. i6. explains in some measure ;-.
introduction of the tenure of Mayorafgo, and menticr.a
some of its effecs. Villa Segnor takes notice of a fingc.
lar consequence of it. He observes, that in fomr i
the best fitnations in the city of Mexico, a good di
of ground is unoccupied, or covered only with tht
ruins of the houses once ere&ed upon it; and adds, th:
as this ground is held by right of MAayorafgo, and canno
be alienated, tha. desolation and those ruins becomc
perpetual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

# NOTE CLXXIV. p. 112.

# NOTE CLXXV. p. 117.

# NOTE CLXXVI. p. 118.

NOTE CLXXIV. p. 112.

TaEBE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices

either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there are
many Cedulas which recommend the confening places
of trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain and
America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p. 5, 6.
But notwithstanding such repeated recommendations,
preferment in almost every line is conferred on native
Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is produced by
the author last quoted. From the discovery of Ame-
rica to the year 1637, three hundred and fixty-nine
bihops, or archbishops, have been appointed to the
different dioceses in that country, and of all that number
only twelve were Creoles, p. 4o. This predilection
for Europeans seems {till to continue. By a royal
mandate, issued in I 76, the chapter of the cathedral
ci Mexico is direted to nominate European ecclesiastics
ci known merit and abilities, that the king may ap-
point them to supply vacant benefices. MS.penes me.

NOTE CLXXV. p. II7.

MoDeZATE as this tribute may appear, such is the
extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces of
America, that the exacing of it is intolerably oppref-
irc. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 19z.

NOTE CLXXVI. p. II8.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit
a.d services of the first conquerors, as well as the small
iesenue arising from the country previous to the dif-
covery of the mines of Sacatecas, the encomniendas were
granted for three, and sometimes for four lives. Re^
copil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

# NOTE CLXXVII. p. 119.

# NOTE CLXXVIII. p. 120.

NOTE CLXXVII. p. 119.

D. AST. ULLOA contends, that working in miner .

not noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, th-t
many Meflizos and Indians, who do not belong to an?
Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as miners
and feve-al of the Indians, when the legal term of their
feivice expires, continue to work in the mines of choic-.
Entreten. p. 265. But his opinion concerning tht
wholesomeness of this occupation is contrary to the
experience of all ages; and wherever men are allur.J
by high wages, they will engage in any species oflabos',
however fatiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern,
Carillo Altemirano relates a curious fa: incompatib:
with this opinion. Wherever mires are wrought, fays
he, the number of Indians decreases; but in the prc-
vince of Campeachy, where there are no mines, the
number of Indians has increased more than a third
since the conquefl of America, though neither the fclt
nor climate be so favourable as in Peru or Mexico.'
Colbert Collki. In another memorial presented d:
Phil.p II. in the year 1609, Captain Juan Gonzairz
de Azevedo alterts, that in every dlftriQ of Peru, whert
the Indians are compelled to labour in the mines, their
numbers were reduced to the half, and in some placn
to the third, of w hat it was under the viceroyalty of
Don Fran. Toledo in 58 . Colb. Collec.

NOTE CLXXVIII. p. 12o.

As labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with lenl

accuracy, the talks seem to be in a great measure arbi-
trary, and like the services exated by feudal fuperiori,
in trrea pCato a"t rref, from their vassals, are extremely
burdensome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pegr.
Itiner. par Parochos de Indios.

# NOTE CLXXIX. p. 120.

# NOTE CLXXX. p. 122.

NOTE CLXXIX. p. T2o.

THE turn of service known in Peru by the name of
Z:, is called Talna in New Spain. There it continues
nc longer than a week at a time. No person is called
:* serve at a greater distance from his habitation than
: miles. This arrangement is less oppressive to the
Indians than that efiablifhed in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Collect.

NOTE CLXXX. p. 122.

THE firongelf proof of this may be deduced from the
iwvs themselves. By the multitude and variety of re-
nulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
,ec number of abuses that prevail. Though the laws
sire, wifely, provided that no Indian (hall be obliged
't serve in any mine at a greater distance from his
Flsce of residence than thirty miles we are informed in
a memorial of D. Hernan Carillo Altamirano presented
tathe king, that the Indians of Peru ate often com-
prlled to serve in mines at the diflance of a hundred,
hundred and fifty, and even two hundred leagues
i:om their habitation. Colbert Collec. Many mines
are situated in parts of the country, so barren, and so
Ctant from the ordinary habitations of the Indians,
*bat the necessity of procuring labourers to work there,
bu. obliged the Spanish monarchs to dispense with their
:wn regulations in several instances, and to permit the
Ticeroys to compel the people of more remote provinces
t resort to those mines. Efcalona Gazophyl. Perub.
iL. i. c. 16. But in juflice to them it (hould be ob-
frved, that they have been studious to alleviate this
cpprefflon as much as possible, by enjoining the viceroys

employ every method, in order to induce the Indians
; fettle in some part of the country adjacent to the
..nts. Id. ibid.
VOL. llT. Y K

# NOTE CLXXXI. p. 127.

NOTE CLXXXI. p. 127.

ToQ.uEtMAPA, after a long enumeration, which -:

the appearance of accuracy, concludes the numbs; :
rnonatleries in New Spain to be four hundred. M;..
Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monaftrcn,
the city of Mexico alone was, in the year T 745, si;,.
five. Villa Segnor. Thear. Amer. i. 34. Uiloa reck.,
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning (hose :,
nuns, he fays, that a small town might be peopled .t:
of them, the number of persons (hut up there is so ge,'
Voy. i. 4z9. Philip 111 in a letter to the vicero..
Peru, A. D. 16zo, observes, that the number of cc:.
vents in Lima was so great, that they covered mrn
ground than all the reft of the city. Solorz. b :b
c. 13. n. 5 ,. Lib. iii. c. 6. Torquem. lib. xv. c.:.
The firit monastery in New Spain was founded A D,

z 25, four years only after the conquefl. To:.
lib. xv. c. 16.

According to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the comrlet

eflablifhment of the American church in all the Spar, h
fettlemerts was, in the year 1649, x patriarch, 6 arc.
bishops, 32 biflops, 346 prebends, z abbots, 5 rso:
chaplains, 840 convents. Tearro Ecclefialtico de il
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jefu'i
was expelled from all the Spaaifh dominions, the ci .
leges, prfefjed houses, and residences. which it poffc.'!!
in the province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito l;x.
teen, in the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen. -.
Peru seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay tightl-.
in all a hundred and twelve. Colleccion Generai
Providencias hafla acqui tomadas fobre efiranamti .
&c. de la Compagnia, part i. p. 19 The number c!
Jesuits, priefis, and novices in all these, amcunt:d :i
z245. MS. peters re.
In the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a

petition to the king, praying that no new monaflet
mizht be founded, and that the revenues of those alre::'
established might be cir;umfcribed, otherwise the r:l;::

c.,

# NOTE CLXXXII. p. 129.

.: houses would soon acquire the property of the whole
*-jnrrv. The petitioners request likewise, that the
h.hops might be laid under re(tricions in conferring
.bIv orders, as there were at that time in New Spain

fi-fe fix thousand clergymen without any living. Id.
. 16 These abuses muff have been enormous indeed,
bhen the fuperttirion of American Spaniards was
Ihecked, and induced to remonstrate agamft them.

NOTE CLXXXII. p. I29.

Tiils description of the manners of the Spanilh clergy,
I (bould not have ventured to give upon the testimony
ci protestant authors alone, as they may be fufpeaed
of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, who
hd a better opportunity than any protestant, to view
the interior state of Spanilh America, describes the cor-
ruption of the church which he had forsaken, with to
much of the acrimony of a new convert, that I should
have diltrufted his evidence, though it communicates
tome very curious and firiking fats. But Benzoni
mentions the profligacy of ecclefiaflics in America at a
very early period after their settlement there. Hist.
lib. ii. c. 19, 20. M. Frezier, an intelligent observer,
and zealous for his own religion, paints the dissolute
manners of the Spanill ecclefiaflics in Peru, particularly
the regulars, in fironger colours than I have employed.
Voy. p. 51. 215, &c. M. Gentil confirms this account,
Voy. i. 34. Correal concurs with both, and adds
many remarkablecircumftances. Voy. i. 6. i55. r6r.
1 have good reason to believe, that the manners of the
regular clergy, particularly in Peru, are still extremely
indecent. Acofta himself acknowledges that great cor-
ruption of manners had been the consequence of per-
mitting monks to forsake the retirement and discipline
oi the cloilter, and to mingle again with the world, by
undertaking the charge of the Indian parishes. De
procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv. c. l 3, &c. He mentions
particularly those vices, of which I have taken notice,
and confiders the tcmptations to them as so formidable,

K c L that

that he leans to the opinion of those who hold that ts
regular clergy Ihould not be employed as parish pridti.
Lib. v. c. zo. Even the advocates for the regulan
admit, that many and great enormities abounded among
the monks of different orders, when set free from th
reflraint of monastic discipline; and from the tone o
their defence, one may conclude that the charge brough:
against them was not destitute of truth. In the Frenc
colonies, the state of the regular clergy is nearly the
fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the fame con.
sequences have followed. M. Biet, superior of tX
secular priests in Cayenne, inquires, with no less appear.
ance of piety than of candour, into the causes of thi
corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemption o0
regulars from the jurifdi2ion and censures of their die.
cefans; to the temptations to which they are exposed;
and to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p. 31o. 1:
is remarkable that all the authors, who censure tbh
licentiousness of the Spanish regulars with the greatest
severity, concur in vindicating the condue of the Jcfu:;'.
Formed under a discipline more perfet than that of th:
other monaltic orders, or animated by that concern so:
the honour of the society, which takes such full poffi/.
lion of every member of the order, the Jesuits, both in
Mexico and Peru, it is allowed, maintained a most
irreproachable decency of manners. Frezier, iZ;.
Gentil, i. 34. The fame praise is likewise due to tbh
bifihops and molt of the dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

A volume of the Gazette de Mexico for the yean

17z?, 17z9, 173o, having been communicated to rne,
I find there a friking confirmation of what I hav:
advanced concerning the spirit of low illiberal fuperfl-
tion prevalent in Spanish America. From the news-
papers of any nation, one may learn what are th;
objess which chiefly engross its attention, and which
appear to it most interesting. The Gazette of Mexit
is filled almost entirely with accounts.of religious func-
tions, with descriptions of processions, confecratiOls
of churches, beatifications of faints, festivals, autos de

f:,

# NOTE CLXXXIII. p. 130.

# NOTE CLXXXIV. p. 135.

f?~ &c. Civil or commercial affairs, and even the
tranfaaions of Europe, occupy but a small corner in
this magazine of monthly intelligence. From the titles
of new books, which are regularly inferred in this
Gazette, it appears that two-thirds of them are treatises
cf scholastic theology, or of monkish devotion.

NOTE CLXXXIII. p. 130.

SotoRZAN.o, after mentioning the corrupt morals of
so'ne of the regular clergy, with that cautious reserve
which became a Spanish layman in touching on a sub-
irtc so delicate, gives his opinion very explicitly, and
with much firmness, against committing parochial charges
to monks. He produces the teflimony of several re-
fpefable authors of his country, both divines and law-
yers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind. ii.
ib. iii. c. 16. A fsriking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to exclude the
-eulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
esrr collecion of papers. Several memorials were pre-
'crted to the king by the procurators for the monastic
.-ders, and replies were made to these in name of the
'cular clergy. An eager, an.l even rancorous, spirit
: manifelt on both fides, in the conduc of this dispute.

NOTE CLXXXIV. p. 1.;.

NOT only the native Indians, but tlhe Mtfiizos, or

chldren of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally ex-
:.ud,-d from the priesthood, and refused admifiion into
any religious order. But by a law issued Sept. zSth,
t68, Philip II. required the prelates of America to
Qri;lin such meflizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
,;.uld find to be properly qualified, and to permit them
:o take the vows in any monafiery where they had
gone through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit.
I.!. i. 7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this
law in New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a repre-
;io''.cn of this to Charles II. in the year 169-, he

: x 3 nfued

issued a new edi& enforcing the observation of it, anm
professing his desire to have all his fubjecs, Indians
and mestizos as well as Spaniards, admitted to tt:
enjoyment of the fame privileges. Such, however
was the aversion of the Spaniards in America to tht
Indians, and their race, that this seems to have pro.
duced little effet; for, in the year 17z5, Philip V.
was obliged to renew the injuncion in a more peremp.
tory tone. But so unsurmountable are the hatred arn
contempt of the Indians among the Peruvian Spaniards,
that the present king has been constrained to enforce
the former edias anew by a law, pubtifhed Septembtr
31, 1774- Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

M. Clavigero has contradiaed what I have related

concerning the ecclefiaflical slate of the Indians, pari.
cularly their exclusion from the sacrament of the Eu-
charifl, and from holy orders, either as Seculars cr
Regulars, in such a manner as cannot fail to mak: a
deep i.nprefficn. He, from his own knowledge, afferr,
" that in New Spain not only are Indians permitted to
partake of the sacrament of the altar, but that Indian
priests are so numerous that they may be counted by
hundreds; and among these have been many hundreds
of rectors, canons, and docors, and, as report gots,
even a very learned bishop. At present, there ar:
many priests, and not a few rectors, among whom
there have been three or four our own pupils.' Vol.
l1. 34S, &c. I owe it therefore as a duty to the public,
as well as to myself, to confider each of these pointi
with care, and to explain the reasons which induced
nre to adopt the opinion which I have published.

I knew that in the Chriflian church there is no dif-

tinaion of persons, but that men of every nation who
embrace the religion of Jesus, are equally entitled to
every Chnflian privilege which they are qualified to re-
ceive. I knew, likewise, that an opinion prevailed,
not only among most of the Spanifl laity fettledin
America, but among " many ecclesiastics, (I use the
words of Herrera, Dec. ii. Lb. ii. c. 5S.) that the Indians

wert

were not perfect or rational men, and were not pof-
[fled of such capacity as qualified them to partake of
the sacrament of the altar, or of any other benefit of
our religion." It was against this opinion that Las
Casas contended with the laudable zeal which I have
defsribed in Books III. and VI. But as the Bishop of
Darien, Do/or Sepulvida, and other refpecable eccle-
afitics, vigorously supported the common opinion con-
cerning the incapacity of the Indians, it became necef-
fary, in order to determine the point, that the authority
of the Holy See should be interposed; and accordingly
Paul III. issued a bull A. D. 1537, in which, after
condemning the opinion of those who held that the
Indians, as being on a level with brute beaRs, (hould be
reduced to servitude, he declares, that they were really
men, and as such were capable of embracing the Chris-
tian religion, and participating of all its bleflings. My
account of this bull, notwithstanding the cavils of M.
Clavigero, must appear just to every person who takes the
trouble of perusing it; and my account is the fame with
that adopted by Torquemada, lib. xvi. c. oz. and by
Garcia, Orig. p. 311.I- But even after this decision, so
low did the Spaniards residing in America rate the
capacity of the natives, that the firRt council of Lima (I
call it by that name on the authority of the best Spanith
authors) difcountenanced the admilfion of Indians to
the holy communion. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20. In
N;w Spain, the exclusion of Indians from the sacra-
ment was still more explicit. Ibid. After two centuries
have elapsed, and notwithflanding all the improvement
that the Indians may be supposed to have derived from
their intercourse with the Spaniards during that period,
we are informed by D. Ant. Ulloa, that in Peru, where,
as will appear in the sequel of this note, they are sup-
pored to be better instructed than in New Spain, their
Ignorance is so prodigious that very few are permitted
to communicate, as being altogether deftlitute of the
requisite capacity. Voy. I. 34x, &c. Solorz. Polit.
Ind. I. 203.

With

With refpe& to the exclusion of Indians from the

prieflhoJd, either as Seculars or Regulars, we may
observe, that while it continued to be the common
opinion thit the natives of America, on account of
their incapacity, should not be permitted to parrake of
the holy facramenr, we cannot suppose that they would
be clothed with that sacred character which enti:led
them to consecrate and to dispense it. When Torque
mada composed his Monaryuia Indiana, it was almost a
century after the conquest of New Spain; and yet in hi
time, it was ftil the general practice to exclude Indianr
from holy orders. Of this we have the most fatisfyinr
evidence. Torquemada having celebrated the virtuet
and graces of the Indians at great !eng:h, and with a:i
the complacency of a milfionary, he starts as an objec-
t,on to what he had asserted, " If the Indians real'
potfers all the excellent qualities which you have 'e-
fcribed, why are they not permitted to assume !th
religious habit? Why are they not ordained pr'e;s
and bishop-, as the Jewish and Gentile con:erts wre-
in the primitive church, especially as they mr.:hr k
employed with such fuperic.r advan!age too. her pcrfr.t
in the inflrution of their countrymen?' Lib. x'n.
c. !3.

In answer to this objetion, which eflablifhes, in tt:

moli unequivocal manner, what was the generai pr..
tice at that period, Tcrquemada obfervfs, that aihoc ,;
by their natural difpofirions the Indians are '.vil i'-:
f.-r a fubordinare fituarion, they are defiitu:e cf a:l'
qualities requifire in any fta ion of dignity and j.-
thority; and that they are in general so addicted ;
drunkenness, that, upon the flherrfl temp'ation, c:,
cannot promise on their behaving with the decer.
suitable to the clericil charaaer. The propriety *
excluding them from it. on these accounts, was, hi
observed. so well jufRlfied by experience, that whtr a
foreigner of great eru 'irion, who came from Spa n,
condemned the practice of the lMexican church, ?:
was con inned of i.: rmiilale in a ,publ: .Lfp.it'

aith the learned and most religious Father D. Juan de
Gaona, and his retracation is ftillextant. Torquemada,
indeed, acknowledges, as M. Clavigero observes, with
a degree of exultation, that, in his time, some Indians
had been admitted into monasteries; but, with the art
of a disputant, he forgets to mention that Torquemada
specifies only two examples of this, and takes notice
that in both instances those Indians had been admitted
by millake. Relying upon the authority of Torque-
mada with regard to New Spain, and of Ulloa with
regard to Peru, and confidering the humiliating de-
pression of the Indians in all the Spanish settlements, I
concluded that they were not admitted into the ecclefi-
aflical order, which is held in the higheit veneration
all over the New World.

But when M. Clavigero, upon his own knowledge,

asserted fats so repugnant to the conclusion I had
formed, I began to distrust it, and to wish for further
information. In order to obtain this, I applied to a
Spanish nobleman, high in office, and eminent for his
abilities, who, on different occasions, has permitted
me to have the honour and benefit of corresponding
with him. I have been favoured with the following
answer: "What you have written concerning the
admission of Indians into holy orders, or into monas-
teries, in Book VIII. especially as it is explained and
limited in Note LXXXVIII. of the quarto edition, is
in general accurate, and conformable to the authorities
which you quote. And although the congregation of
the council resolved and declared, Feb. 13, A.D. 1682,
that the circumstance of being an Indian, a mulatto, or
mestizo, did not disqualify any person from being ad-
mitted into holy orders, if he was poffefled of what is
required by the canons to entitle him to that privilege;
this only proves such ordinations to be legal and valid
(of which Solorzano, and the Spanish lawyers and
hiflorians quoted by him, Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 2g. were
persuaded), but it neither proves the propriety of ad-
mitting Indians into holy orders, nor what was then

the

the common practice, with refped to this; but, en
the contrary, it [hews that there was some doubt cen-
cerning the ordaining of Indians, and some repugnanc
to it.

" Since that time, there have been some examples

of admitting Indians into holy orders. We have now
at Madrid an aged priest, a native of Tlafcala. Hi
name is D.Juan Cerilo de Caflilla Aquihual ca'ehutle,
descended of a Cazique converted to ChriRtianiy Rcn
after the conquest. He fludied the ecc'efiaflical fciencor
in a seminary of Puebla de los Angeles. He was a
candidate, neverthele.s, for ten years, and it required
much interest before Bifbop Abren would content to
ordain him. This ecclesiastic is a man of unexception.
able characer, modest, felt denied, and with a com-
petent knowledge of what relates to his clerical func.
tions. He came to Madrid above thirty four years ago,
with the sole view of soliciting admission for the Indians
into the colleges and seminaries in New Spain, tha: if,
after being well inftroued and tried, they should find
an inclination to enter into the ecclesiastical slate, they
might embrace it, and perform its funcions with the
greatest benefit to their countrymen, whom they could
address in their native tongue. He has obtained vari.
ous regulations favourable to his scheme, particularly
that the first college which became vacant in confe.
quence of the exclusion of the Jesuits, (hould be let
apart for this purpose. But neither these regulations,
nor any similar ones inserted in the laws of the Ind:e?,
has produced any effec, on account of objections and
representations from the greater part of persons of chid
consideration employed in New Spain. Whether their
opposition be well founded or not, is a problem difficult
to resolve, and towards the solution of which, fevers!
diftineions and modifications are requifire.

" According to the accounts of this ecclefiatic,

and the information of other persons who have reftded
in the Spanish dominions in America, you may rel
airured that in the kingdom of Tierra Firme no f'<c

t!..--

# NOTE CLXXXV. p. 138.

# NOTE CLXXXVI. p. 141.

thing is known as either an Indian secular priest ormonk;
and that in New Spain there are very few ecclesiastics
cf Indian race. In Peru, perhaps, the number may
be greater, as in that country there are more Indians
who posses3 the means of acquiring such a learned edu-
cation as is necessary for persons who aspire to the
clerical characer."

NOTE CLXXXV. p. I38.

UZ TAR I, an accurate and cau'ious calculator, seems
to admit, that the quantity of silver which does not
pay duty may be fated thus high. According to Her-
eira, there was not above a third of what was extracted
from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib.ii.
c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quantity of
i:.vtr which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater
ti.an that which is regularly stamped, after paying the
iith. De Ind. Jure, vol. ii. lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE CLXXXVI. p. I4T.

WVHE, the mines of Potofi were diCcovered in the

year 5j45, the veins were so near the surface, that the
ore was easily extracted, and so rich that it was refined
with little trouble and at a small expence, merely by
t le action of fire. The simple mode of refining by
iunon alone continued until the year 1574, when the
use of mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was
discovered. Those mines having been wrought without
interruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk
so deep, that the expence of extracing the ore is greatly
incrtafed. Besides this, the richness of the ore, con-
trary to what happens in most other mines, has become
less, as the vein continued to dip. The vein has like-
wife diminished to such a degree, that one is amazed
that the Spaniards should persist in working it. Other
nch mines have been successively discovered, but in
general the value of the ores has decreased so much,
while the expence of extracting them has augmented,

that

# NOTE CLXXXVII. p. 144.

that the court of Spain, in the year 1736, reduced the
duty payable to the king from a fifth to a tenth. All
the quicksilver used in Peru, is extraaed from the
famous mine of Guancabelica, discovered in the year

563- The crown has reserved the property of this
mine to itself; and the persons who purchase the
quicksilver, pay not only the price of it, but likewise a
fifth, as a duty to the king. But, in the year x761,
this duty on quicksilver was abolished, on account of
the increase of expence in working mines. LUlloa,
Entretenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 505, c;.
In consequence of this abolition of thefiftb, and forre
subsequent abatements of price, which became necefTary
on account of the increasing expence of working mines,
quicksilver, which was formerly fold at eighty pests
the quintal, is now delivered by the king at the rate ci
sixty pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note.
The duty on gold is reduced to a rwentietb, or five per
cent. Any of my readers, who are desirous of being
acquainted with the mode in which the Spaniards con-
duc the working of their mines, and the refinement
of the ore, will find an accurate description of the an-
cient method by Acofta, Lib. iv. c. i-1. ' And of
their more recent improvements in the metallurgic art,
by Gamboa Comment. a las ordenanz. de minas, c. za.

NOTE CLXXXVII. p. 144.

MANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced date

of industry in Spain, at the beginning of the sixteenth
century. The number of cities in Spain was confider-
able, and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
that was common in other parts of Europe. The canues
of this I have explained, Hilt. of Cha. V. i. x s.
Wherever cities are populous, that species of indufiry
which is peculiar to them increases, artificers and
manufaturers abound. The effe& of the American
trade in giving activity to these is manifest, from a
singular fat. In the year 1545, while Spain continued

to

to depend on its own induflry, for the supply of its
colonies, so much work was bespoke from the manu-
kfdurers, that it was supposed they could hardly finith
i in less than fix years. Campom. i. 406. Such a
gemand must have put much induflry in motion, and
have excited extraordinary efforts. Accordingly, we
;.e inlormed, that in the beginning of Philip lI.'s reign,
ihe city of Seville alone, where the trade with America
centcred, gave employment to no fewer than r6,ooo
o!oms in silk or woollen work, and that above 1lo,ooo
persons had occupation in carrying on these manufac-
tures. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious
was the operation of the causes which I (hall enumerate,
hat before Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in
Sville were reduced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.
Since the publication of the firfl edition, I have the
frtisfaaion to find my ideas concerning the early com-
rercial intercourse -between Spain and her colonies
carfirmed and illufirated by D. Bernardo Ward, of the
Junta de Comercio at Madrid, in his Pr.yrio Economico,
Partii. c. i. " Under the reigns of Charles V. and Philip
ii." fays he, " the manufactures of Spain and of the
Lew Countries subjec to her dominion were in a most
Lcurilhing slate. Those of France and England
zore in their infancy. The republic of the United
Provinces did not then exist. No European power but
Saina had colonies of any value in the New World.
.5ain could supply her settlements there with the pro-
ca&ions of her own foil, the fabrics wrought by the
sands of her own artizans, and all she received in re-
:urn for these belonged to herself alone. Then the ex-
dufion of foreign manufacures was proper, because it
night be rendered effectual. Then Spain might lay
heavy duties upon goods exported to America, or im-
ported from it, and might impose what reflraints Ihe
:temed proper upon a commerce entirely in her own
·ands. But when time and successive revolutions had
ccafioned an alteration in all those circumstances; when
t1 manufactures of Spain began to decline, and the
VOL. 111. . 1. demands

# NOTE CLXXXVIII. p. 153.

# NOTE CLXXXIX. p. 156.

demands of America were supplied by foreign fabrics
the original maxims and regulations of Spain fliouij
have been accommodated to the change in her situation.
The poli:y that was wife at one period, became abfuri
in the other,"

NOTE CLXXXVIII. p. I53.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chert of treasure

is examined. Both are received on the credit of tre
persons to whom they belong; and only one inftan"
of fraud is recorded, during the long period in which
trade was carried on with this liberal confidence. A!l
the coined tilver which was brought from Peru to Porto.
bello in the yea?' i6;4, was found to be adulterated,
and to be mingled with a ffifn part of base metal. Th;
Spanifi merchants, with sentiments suitable to thei,.
usual integrity, sustained the whole loss, and indemnified
the foreigners by whom they were enmployed. The
fraud was deteced, and the treasurer of the revenue in
Peru, the author of ir, was pub:icly burnt. B. Ullca
Rttrblif. de Manus, &c. liv. ii. p. io2.

NOTE CLXXXIX. p. i56.

MANY firikin; proofs occur of the fzarcity of mor'7

in Spain. Of all the immense sims which have be~r
imported from America, the amount of which I (hi'
afterwards have occa;ti-n to mention, Moncada afTerr!.
that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619, abo-.;
two hundred millions of pe's, one half in coined money,
the other in plate and jewels. Reftaur. de Efpagna,
Disc. iii. c. r. Uztariz, who published his valuai'-
work in 1724, contends, that in money, plate, ani
jewels, there did not remain an hundred mill!on.
Theor. &c. c. 3. Campomanes, on the au'hority ,i
a remonfirance from the community of merchanis. .
Toledo to Philip 1I. relates as a certain proof ..

1C3 :c

# NOTE CXC. p. 160.

# NOTE CXCI. p. 166.

carce cash had become, that persons who lent money,
received a third part of the fum which they advanced as
intercft and premium. Educ. Popul. i. 417.

NOTE CXC. p. I60.

THE account of the mode in which the factors of the
South Sea company conduted the trade in the fair of
porto-bello, which was opened to them by the Affiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Herrera, prefi-
dent of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor
cf that province. Don Dionyfio was a person of such
refpedable characer for probity and discernment, that
his teflimony, in any point, would be of much weight;
but greater credit is due to it in this cafe, as he was an
:ve.witnefs of the tranfadions which he relates, and
was often employed in deteaing and authenticating the
frauds which he describes. It is probable, however,
that his representation, being composed at the com-
mencement of the war which broke out between Great
Britain and Spain, in the year 1739, may, in some
Lftances, discover a portion of the acrimonious (pirit,
natural at that juncture. His detail of fa&s is curious
and even English authors confirm it in some degree, by
admitting both that various frauds were pra&ised in
the tranfa&ions of the annual ship, and that the con-
traband trade from Jamaica, and other British colonies,
was become enormously great. But for the credit of
the English nation it may be observed, that those frau-
du;ent operations are not to be confidered as deeds of
hbe company, but as the dilhonourable arts of their
fafors and agents. The company itself fuflained a
considerable loss by the Afiento trade. Many of its
servants acquired immense fortunes. Anderson Chronol.
ceduQ. ii. 388.

NOTE CXCI. p. 166.

SEVERAL sacs with refpeE to the inflitution, -the
progress, and the effecs, of this company, are curious,

L L and

and but little known to English readers. Though th'
province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hun.
dred miles along the coast, and is one of the mods fert.i
in America; it was so much neglected by the Spaniardi,
that during the twenty years prior to the eftablifhmr:-
of the company, only five (hips failed from Spain o
that province; and during I6 years, from 17c6 'o
17z2, not a single (hip arrived from the Caracca :n
Spain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, p. r8.
During this period, Spain muff have been supplied almod
entirely with the large quantity of cacao, which it con.
fumes, by foreigners. Before the ereaion of the con.
pany, neither tobacco nor hides were imported from
Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 17. Since the commer.
cial operations of the company began in the year 173r,
the importation of cacao into Spain has increascd amaz.
ingly. During thirty years subsequent to I70o, the
number of Fatrgas of cacao (each a hundred and ten
pounds) imported from Caraccas, was 643,215. Dur-
ing eighteen years subsequent to 173 , the number of
Far.egas imported was 869,247; and if we suppose th'
importation to be continued in the fame proportion
during the remainder of thirty-years, it will amount
to 1,448,746 Fanegas, which is an increase of Soc,5:t
Fanegas. Id. p. 148. During eight years fubfeqctr'
to I756, there has been imported into Spain by the
company, 88,491 arrcbas (each twenty-five pcunr'
of tobacco: and hides to the number of 177,354. I.
J61. Since the publication of the Noticias de Cam.
pania, in 1765, its trade seems to be on the increaie
During five years subsequent to 1769, it has importel
179,156 FaTnegas of cacao into Spain, 36,20o arrobsi
of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and r21,412 perosin specie.
Campomanes, ii. s6z. The last article is a proof f
the growing wealth of the colony. It receives cai
from Mexico in return for the cacao, with which it
supplies that province, and this it remits to Spain, or
lays out in purchating European goods. But, beside
this, the mou: expl.cit evidence is prcduced, that :;h

ouao'.1

# NOTE CXCII. p. 172.

quantity of cacao railed in the province is double to
what it yielded in 1731 ; the number of its live flock
is more than treble, and its innabitants much aug-
mrnted. The revenue of the bishop, which arises
wholly from tithes, has increascd from eight to twenty
thousand pesos. Notic. p. 69. In consequence of the
augmentation of the quantity of cacao imported into
Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for the
Fanega to forty. Id. 6!. Since the publication of the
sint edition, I have learned that Guyana, including all
the extensive provinces situated on the banks of the
Orinoco, the illands of Trinidad and Margarita are
;dded to the countries wi:h which the company of
Caraccas had liberty of trade by their former chatters.
Real Cedu:a, Nov. 19, 1776. Bat I have likewise
bten informed, that tih institution of this company has
Dot been attended with all tiie beneficial effects which I
have ascribed to it. In many of its operations the
illiberal and cpprzffive spirit of monopoly is Itill con-
fpicuous. Eut in order to exp!a:n this, it would be
necessary to enter in:o minute details, which a:e not
suitcd to the nature of th:s work;.

NOTE CXCII. p. 172.

THIS firtf experiment made by Spain of opening a
free trade with any of her colonies, has produced ttfects
si remarkable, as to merit some farther illuflra'ion.
The towns to which thii liberty has been gran'ed, are
Cadiz and Seville, for the province of Andalusia A!i-
cant and Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Bar-
celona, for Catalonia and Arragon ; Santander, for
Castile Corugna, for Galicia ; and G.jon, for Aflurias.
Append. ii. a la Educ. P^pul. p. 41. These are either
the ports of chief tr.de in their refpeaive difirics, or
those moil conveniently situated for the exportation of
their refpetive produ&cions. The following fa&s give
a view of the increase of trade in the settlements to
which the new rezulations ex-end. Prior to the allow-
ance of free trade, the duties colqeced in the cuflom-

L L 3 l.cufe

# NOTE CXCIII. p. 178.

# NOTE CXCIV. p. 182.

house at the Havannah were computed to be 104,1^s
pesos annually. During the five years preceding i77:,
they rose at a medium to 308,ooo pesos a year. la
Yucatan, the duties have arisen from 8,ooo to 15,0o.
In Hispaniola, from 2,500 to 5,600. In Porto Rico,
from 1,200 to 7 ooo. The total value of goods ia.
ported from Cuba into Spain, was reckoned, in i774
to be i,5oo,ooo pesos, Educ. Popul. i. 4o, &c.

NOTE CXCIII. p. 178.

THE two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Canmo.

manes, Ifrcal del real conejs y Supremo (an office in rank
and power nearly similar to that of Attorney General
in England), and Dire&or of the Royal Academy o,
Hiflory, the one intirled Difcurfo fobre el Fomento dc
la Indufiria Popular; the other, Difcurfo fobre la Eu.-
cacion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the
former published in 1774, and the latter in 1775,
afford a firiking proof of this. Almost every point oi
importance with refpe& to interior police, taxation,
agriculture, manufacures, and trade, domeflic as well
as foreign, is examined in the course of these worki;
and there are not many authors, even in the nations
most eminent for commercial knowledge, who hiv;
carried on their inquiries with a more thorough know-
ledge of those various fubjecis, and a more perfec free-
dom from vulgar and national prejudices, or who ha;:
united more happily the calm researches of philosophy,
with the ardent zeal of a public-fpirited citizen. Theft
books are in high estimation among the Spaniards, and
it is a decisive evidence of the progress of their own
ideas, that they are capable of relifling an author whaf
fcntiments are so liberal.

NOTE CXCIV. p. i82.

Taz galeon employed in that trade, inflead of the fx
hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.

I.;-

# NOTE CXCV. p. 184.

lb. xlv. i. 15. is commonly from twelve hundred to
two thousand tons burden. The ship from Acapulco,
tiken by Lord Anson, instead of the soo,o0o pesos
Fermitred by law, had on board 1,313,843 pgfos, be-
tdes uncoined silver equal in value to 43,61I pesos
more. Anson's Voyage, 384.

NOTE CXCV. p. 1S4.

THE price paid for the bull varies according to the

rank of different persons. Those in the lowest order,
,ho are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or
cne hilliing ; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and those
in public office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de Jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According
to Ch:lton, an Engliih merchant who resided long in
ihe Spanish settlements, the bull of Cruzado bore an
l.iher price in the year 570, being then fold for four
tials at the lowest. Hakluyt, iii. 46r. The price
(fems to have varied at different periods. That exasled
for the bulls issued in the lafl Predica.i:n, will app-ar
from the ensuing table, which will give :ome idea of the
proportional numbers of the different classes of citizens
in New Spain and Peru.

There were issued for New Spain,
Bulls at lo pesos each - 4

at 2 pefrs each - - 2,6ot
at x peso each 164,220
at 2 reals each 2,462,500

Z,t49,325

For Peru,

at 16 pesos 4 reals eacl - 3
at 3 pesos 3 reals each - 14,20
at 1 peso SL reals - 7S,'-2
at 4 reals - - - 4l,?5
at 3 leals 6
_ 6h6.6c

-7l ,jo3

# NOTE CXCVI. p. 185.

NOTE CXCVI. p. 185.

As Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this

information contained in his Thearro Americano, pub.
Lrhed in Mexico, A. D. 1746, was accomptant-general
in one of the molt considerable departments of the royal
revenue, and by that means had access to proper n.
formation, his testimony with refped to this point
merits great credit. No such accurate detail of the
Spanilh revenues in any part of America has hitherto
been published in the Engli(h language, and the parti.
culars of it may appear curious and inttrefting to form
of my readers.

From the bull of Cruzado, published every two years,
there arises an annual revenue in pesos 50o,ooo

From the duty on filvcr - 700,000
From the duty on gold -60,000
From tax on cards - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Ind.ans - - - I6i,oco

From tax on flamped paper - 41,000
From ditto on ice - 15,52
From ditto on leather - -co
From ditto on gunpowder 7';,i5
Frcm ditto on salt - 3,z-;0
Front ditto on copper of Mechochan l,c;o
From di'to on alum - . 6,00o
From ditto on Juego de los gallos 21,100
From the half of ecclefiaflical annats 49,000
From royal ninths of bithopricks, &c. 6S,S:3
From the tribute of Indians - 6jo,0oo
From Alcavala, or duty on (ale of goods 7z1,S75
From the Almajorifafgo, cuflom house 373,335
From the mint - 3j7,500

3,552,683

ThEi

This fum amounts to 819,161 1. sterling; and if we

add to it the profit accruing from the sale of 500o
quintals of quicksilver, imported from the mines of
Almaden, in Spain, on the king's account, and what
accrues from the Averia, and some other taxes which
Villa Segnor does not eflimate, the public revenue in
New Spain may well be reckoned above a million
pounds fierling money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38, &c.
According to Villa Segnor, the total produce of the
Mexican mines amounts at a medium to eight millions
of pesos in silver annually, and to 5911 marks of gold.
lb. p. 44. Several branches of the revenue have been
explained in the course of the history; some, which
there was no occasion of mentioning, require a parti-
cular illuftratinn. The right to the tithes in the New
World, is vefled in the crown of Spain, by a bull of
Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be ap-
plied in the following manner: One fourth is allotted
to the bi(hop of the diocese, another fourth to the dean
and chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The
remaining half is divided into nine equal parts. Two
of there, under the denomination of los dos Novenos
rdahs, are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch
cf the royal revenue. The other seven parts are ap-
flied to the maintenance of the parochial clergy, the
building and support of churches, and other pious uses.
Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano The-
faur. Indic. vol. i. p. 184.

The A.ca.ala is a duty levied by an excise on the sale

of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In
America, to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. I86.

The A/maojrifafgo, or custom paid in America on

goods imported and exported, may amount on an
average to fifteen per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit, xiv.
Ley. i. Avendano, vol. i. t88.

The Aveia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

trard the (hips failing to and from America, was first
imposed when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World

with

with terror by his expedition to the South Sea. It
amounts to two per cent. on the value of goods.
Avendano, vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix.
Ley. 43, 44.

I have not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the several branches of revenue in Peru, later than
the year 1614. From a curious manuscript, containing
a state of that viceroyalty in all its departments, pre-
sented to the Marquis of Montes Claros by Fran. Lopez
Caravanmes, accomptant general in the tribunal of Lima,
it appears that the public revenue, as nearly as I can
compute the value of the money in which Caravantes
states his accounts, amounted in ducats at 4s. id.,
to 2,37,768

Expences of government - y,242,99z

Net free revenue 1,I29,7,7

The total in sterling money £. 583,301
Expences of government - 3o05,68

Net free revenue 277,735

But several articles appear to be omitted in this com-

putation, such as the duty on flamped paper, leather,
ecclefiftical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru
may be well supposed equal to that of Mexico.

In computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a flandard. There
the annual eftabliihment for defraying the charge of
administration, exceeds one half of the revenue col-
leaed, and there is no reason for supposing it to be iefs
in New Spain.

I have obtained a calculation of the total amount

of the public revenue of Spain from America and the
Philippines, which, as the reader will perceive from
the two las articles, is more recent than any of the
former.

Alcavalas

# NOTE CXCVII. p. 185.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas

(Cufioms), &c. in pesos fuertes 2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - 3,:co,ooo
Bull of Cruzado - 1,0oo0.ooo
Tribute of the Indians 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver 300,000
Paper exported on the king's ac.

count, and fold in the royal
warehouses - - 300,oo0

Stamped paper, tobacco, and

other small duties - - ,00,000
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of

one real de la Piata for each
mark - - - 300,000
From the trade of Acapulco, and

the coafling trade from province
to province - - oo0,co

Affiento of negrces - o0,000
From the trade of Mate', or herb

of Paraguay, formerly monopo-
lized by the Jesuits 5

- oo,co
From other revenues formerly be-

longing to that order - 400o,oc

Total 12,oo00,OO

Total in tferling money i 1,7oo,0oo
Dtduc half, as the expence of ad-

nir.ftration, and there remains
net free revenue - £* 1,350,ooo

NOTE CXCVII. p. 185.

AN author, long conversant in commercial fpecula.
lion, has computed, that from the mines of New Spain
alIne, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the fum
1 t 'wo millions of our money. Harris Collec. of Voy. ii.

p. 164.

# NOTE CXCVIII. p. 185.

# NOTE CXCIX. p. 187.

p. 164. According to this calculation, the total pro.
dcce of the mines must be ten millions sterling; a fun
so exorbitant, and so lit'le corresponding with all a:.
counts of the annual importation from America, thet
the information on which it is founded must evidently
be erroneous. According to Campomanes, the total
produt of the American mines may be computed :
thirty m l'ions of pesos, which, at four shillings and
sixpence a peso, amounts to 7,4z5,cool. fierling, t,
king's fifth of which (if that were regularly paid) vwou;d
be 1,485,ooo0 But from this fum mult be deduqt.4
what is loft by a fraudulent withholding of the fifth dio
to the crown, as well as the Tum necessary for defrayr.g
the expence of administration. Educ. Popular. vol u.
p. I 3. note. Both these fums are conliderable.

NOTE CXCVIIr. p. 185.

AcCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods ex.

ported from Spain to America pay duties of varic;,
kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. As
most of the goods with which Spain supplies her colonies
are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so extensive mu'i
yield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de Manus. & dJ
Commerce d'Efp. p. Io5. He computes the value c:
goods exported annually from Spain to America, to t
about two millions and a half tferling, p. 97.

NOTE CXCIX. p. 187.

THE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a

monopoly of fair, and by embarking deeply in the Manila
trade as vell as in that to Spain, ga;ned annually 3
m:llion of ducats. In one year he remitted a mtilion Gc
ducats to Spain, in order to purchase irom the Cone-
Olivares, and h;s creatures, a prolongation of Lis go.
vernmenr, p. 6 r Ile was fucceflful in his suit, ani
continued in office from i6z4 to 1635, double the ufuJi
time.

# INDEX. N.B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the Figures to the Page.

I N D E X.
B. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

A.
A/BlSSIIAr, an embassy sent to that country by John II.

king of Portugal, i. 63.

cpulcC, the nature of the trade carried on from thence to
Manila, iii. 181. Amount of the treature on board the
ship taken by Lord Anson, 39r.

,rJtJ, his method of accounting for the different degrees of

beat, in the old and new continents, i. 389.

,is.r, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 412.

ASanr., his juflification of Hanno's account of the African

ltas, i. 361.
fr.cJ, the western coast of, first explored by order of John
I. kirg of Portugal, i. 46. Is discovered from Cape Non,
to Bojador, 47. Cape Bojador doubled, 52. The coun-
tries iouthward of the River Senegal discovered, 58.
Cape of Good Hope seen by Bartholomew Dias, 62.
Causes of the extreme heat of the climate there, 278.
Ignorance of the ancient astronomers concerning, 36z.
Expedition to the coast of, iii. 207.

Ag-.t;ture, the flare of, among the native Americans, ii. 6.

Two principal causes of the defects of, 9.

Aguads is sent to Hispaniola, as a commiifioner to infpec

the conduct of Columbus, i. 145.
A^uila, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity among

the Indians at Cozumel, by Fernando Cortes, ii. T 7.

A-ui:ve-que, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the Indians

of Hispaniola, i. 236.
Ac.avala, in the Spanish customs, the term explained, iii.

393. A.irnder the Great, his political charater, i. 16. His
motive in founding the city of Alexandria, ibid. His
discoveries in India, 17.
VOL. II. M M .lexaender

.aiexarJer V[. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Ifabi:a cf

Catille, the right of all their western discoveries, i. 12:.
Sends missionaries with Columbus on his second voyag;,
126.
A'rT.agr:, Diego de, his birth and character, ii. 273. Afe.

ciats with Pizarro and ae Luque, in a voyage of diic,
very, ibid. 274. His unsuccessful attempts, 275. II
n-g!ecaed by Pizarro in his Spanifi negociation, 283. h1
reconciled to him 284. Brirgs reinforcements to Pizan-.
at Prru, 304. Beginning of the diffenfionj between hl
and Pizarro, -2o. Invades Chili, 323. Is ctea:ed .
vernor of Chili, and marches to Cuzco, 328. Seiz-:
Cu7co, out of the hands of Pizarro, 329. Defeats A:i.a
r;do, and takes him priforer, 331. Is deceived by :e
artful negociations of Francis Pizarro, 332. Is aefea--:
by the Pizarros, 336. Is taken prisoner, 337. Is trie:
and condemned, 338. Is put to dea'h, 339.
Aimagr' , the son, affords refuge to his father's followers a:

Lin:a, i,. 349. His charaber, rid. Heads a conlp;rac.
ags.inii rFancis Pizarro, ibid. Pizarro affaflinatei, 3:.
Is acknowsiedged as his successor, 352. His precarious si:.'
.:ion, 35;. Is defeated by Vaca de Caffro, 355. Is ic.
trayed and executed, 356.
_A'j-e'rfeg,, in the Spanila American customs, the amocn:

of, iii. 97.
l.'.arado, AImozo, is sent from Lima, by Francis Pizar',

.,th a b'dy of Spaniards to relieve his brothers at Cuzcs,
i. 330. Is taken a prifoncr by Almagro, 331. Iis
escape, 333.
A v.Trad:, Pedro de, is left by Cortez to command at Mexi-

co, while he marched against Narvaez, ii. 195. He is
hbfieged by the Mexicans, zoz. His imprudent condua,
itid. His expedition to Quito in Peru, 31 7.

A.azc:r.:, a community of, said to exist in South Ameri,

by Francis Orellana, ii. 346.

Arn.erca, the continent of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 153. How it obtained this name, 166.
Ferdinand of Castile nominates two governments in, 211.
The propositions offered to the natives, 21z. 111 receF-
tion of Ojeda and Nicueffa among them, 213. Tke
South Sea discovered by Balboa, 225. Rio de Plata dii.
covered, 234. The natives of, injuriously treated by tre
SFaniards, 257. The vat extentof, 272. The grr:

obh;t

objeits it presented to view, ibid. The circumltances of,
favo.rable for commerce and civilization, 273. The
climates of, 276. Various causes of the peculiarity of
its climates, 277. Its rude and uncultivated irate when
firit discovered, 281. Its animals, z4.. Its infeos and
reptiles, 26. Birds, ibid. General account of its foil,
zS8. Inquiry into the firlf population of, 290. Could
not be peopled by civilized nations, 296. The northern
extremity of, contiguous to Asia, 299. Probably peopled
by Aiatics, 307. Condition and cnara&er of the native
inhibitants inquired into, 309. Were more rude than
the natives of any other known parts of the earth, 310.
The Peruvians and Mexicans excepted, 311. The firit
diftoverers incapable of a judicious speculative examin-
ation, 3I2. The various fyitems of philosophers refpea-
ing the natives, 3i4. Method observed in the present
review of their bodily conffiturion and circumflances, 3 16.
The venereal disease derived from this part of the world,
338. Why so thinly inhabited, ii. 15. The country
depopulated by continual wars, 48. Cause of the ex-
treme coldness toward the southern extremity of, i. 394.
The natural uncultivated fRate of the country described,
395. Bones of large extind species of animals discovered
under ground near the banks of the Ohio, 396. Why
European animals degenerate there, 397. Supposed to
have undergone a convulsive separation from Asia, 400.
The vicinity of the two continents of Asia and America
clearly ascertained, 402-406. Causes of the depopula-
tion of, traced, iii. go. This depopulation not the result
of any intentional fyltem of policy, 92. Nor the result
of religion, 95. Number of Indian natives still remain-
ing in Mexico and Peru, 96. All the Spanifl dominions
there, fubje&ed to two viceroys, 99. Its third vice-
royalty lately eltablifhed, xoo. SeeMecxico, Peru, Cortes,
Pizarro, Cabot, &c.

America, North, projec of fettling there, iii. 213. First

expedition to, fails, 215. A second expedition to, ends
difaflroufly, 216. Plan of fettling there resumed without
effe&, ibid. The coast of, divided into two parts. 22S.
Charters granted to two companies for fettling colonies in,
2z9. Emigrations from England to, 313. See Colonis,
1'ew England, Virginia, &c.

rd M Z Amncriansr,

,imericans, native, in Spanifi America, their bodily ctn.

flitution and complexion, i. 317. Their strength ar,
abilities, 31g. Their insensibility with regard to thei-
women, 320. Nodeformitiesin theirframe, 326. Thii
circumstance accounted for, ibid. Uniformity of the r
colour, 3Z8. A peculiar race of, described, 331. Tth
Efquimaux, 333. Paagonians, 334. The exiften¢eoi
Patagonian giants yet remaining to be decided, 33;.
Their diseases, 336. The venereal disease peculiar:r
theirs, 338. The powers and qualities of their misnd
339. Areonly folicizous to supply immediate wants, 34-
The art of computation, scarcely known to them, 341.
Have no abfrac ideaz, 342. The North Americar.
much more intelligent than those of the South, 34:.
Their aversion to labour, 346. Their social slate, 343
Domestic union, ibid. The women, 35o. Their w:.
men not prolific, 353. Their parental affection and fi;:i
duty, 355. Their modes of subsistence, ii. i. Sis.
ig, z. Hunting, 3. Agriculture, 6. The varioi.
objecs of their culture, ibid. Two principal causes r:
the defeas of their agriculture, 9. Their want of tam:
animals, o1. Their want of useful metals, 12. Thr.
political inftirutions, I4. Were divided into small inde-
pendent communities, ibid. Unacquainted with the ic&t
of property, 16. Their high sense of equality and in-
dependence, 17. Their ideas of subordination imperfed,

9g. To what tribes thee descriptions apply, zo. Sae.
exceptions, z2. Florida, z3. The Natchez, ibd. Tre
iiands, 24. In Bogota, 25. Inquiry into the caufis ci
these irregularities, 26. Their art of war, 29. Th::
motilcs to hostility, 3c. Causes of their ferocity, 31.
Perpetuity of their animofties, 33. Their modes o0
conducing war, 34. Are not destitute of courage at.
fortitude, 36. Incapable of military difciplise, 33
Their treatment of prisoners, 39. Their fortitude undo
torture, 40. Never eat human flelh but to gratify revenge
43. How the South Amer:cans treated their prisonen
44. Tbeir military education, 45. Strange method o
chufing a captain, among the Indians on the banks c
the Orinoco, 47. Their numbers ,afted by continu.
wars, 48. Their tribes now recruit their numbers b:
a:opting prisoners, 49. Are never formidable in war, t:

rro:

more polished nations, 51. Their a-ts, dress, and orna-
ments, ibid. 52, 53. Their habitations, 55. Their
arms, 58. Their dom-ftic utensils, 59. ConlRruction
of their canoes, 60. The listlessness with which they
apply to Izbour, 61. Their religion, 63. Some tribes
alnogether destitute of any, ibid. Remarkable diversity
in their religious notions, 69. Their ideas of the im-
mortality of the foul, 72. Their modes of burial, 73.
Why their physicians pretend tn be conjurors, 75. Their
love of dancing, 79. Their immoderate paflion for
gaming, 82. Are extiemely addiaced to drunkenness, 83.
Put their aged and incurable to death, 87. General
etinrate of their character, SS. Their intelleaual
Foyers, 89. Their polit:cal talents, 90. Powers of
2ffelion, 92. Hardness of heart, 93. Their infenfi-
Lilir), ibid. Taciturnity, 95. Their cunning, 96.
'i hir virtues, 98. Their Ipirit of independence, ibid.
F'.rtitude, ibid. Attachment t, their community, 99.
I heir fatisfaAion with their own condition, idid. Ge-
reral caution with relpeci to this inquiry, 103. Two
ci:ir.guiihable classes of, 104. Exceptions as to their
charadtcr, io6. Their charadceriltic features described,
4c7. Instances of their persevering speed, 408. An
antipath) indultrioufly encouraged between them and
the neg:ues in America, by the Spaniards, iii t15.
Their present Londition, 3 17. How taxed, ibid. Stated
f::v:ces demanded from them, it . Mode of eacting
rnefe ler'ices, Ito. How governed, 12o. Proiector ir'
the Indians, hs funclion, ibid. Reasons v.hy so Imall a
piroreif i5 n.ade i', their cornerfi.n, 131.

Arir.gre, Veipucci, puolilhes tre firt written account of

tie New VW'orla, ana hence gave name to An.erica, i.
165. His claim as a discoverer examined, 381.

An;carea, a female cazique of Hilpaniola, her base and

cruel usage by the Spaniards, i. 198.

Arde:, fltpendous height and ex;ent of that range of moun-

tains, i. 273. The'r height compared with other moun-
tains, 387. Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable expedition
o'er, i,. 343.

Aomasi, large, very few found in America at its first dif-

covery, i. 284.

Arents, cause of tie imperfefion of the art of navigation

2i,ong them, i. 6. Their geographical knowledge ex-
trecne,) cnfined, 360-361.

M .1 j Ar.-b.ans,

lraóbans peculiarly attached to the fludy of geograph,

i. 31.
Alrgo.auts, the expedition of, why so famous among tf:

Greeks, i. Il, 14.
Arirbreric, or computation, the art of, hardly known to t.:

native Americans, i. 341.

Ajcolino, father, hi5 extraordinary mission to the prince o.

the Tartars, i. 36.

.Ajiari discoveries made by the Ruffians, i. 299.
,Fiento trade, the nature of, explained, iii, 159. Ti:

frauds in, and how put an end to, x60.

Atauahlpa, is left by his father Huafcar his successor in the

kingdom of Quito, ii. z22. Defeats his brother Hara.
car, and usurps the empire of Peru, 293. Sends prefers
to Pizarro, 295. Visits Pizarro, 300, Is perfidiocLu
seized by h'm, 302. Agrees with Pizarro on a ranforr,
1c3. Is refused his liberty, 307. His behaviour dur'ng
his confinement, 3Io. A form of trial bestowed on hr.,
31I. Is put to death, 31z. Comparison of authoritie:
re'ating to his tranfacions with, and treatment by, Pi.
zarro, ii. 5 1.
Audiener of New Spain, board of, efiablifhed by the Empercr

Charles V. ii. 268. Courts of, their jurifdition, iii.

101.
A.veria, a Spanifl tax for convoy to and from America,

when firit imoofed, iii. 393. Its rate, ibid.
Az:res, those islands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 57.

B
Bacrn, Nathaniel, heads an infurreaion in Virginia, i':.

282. Forces the governor and council there to fly, 24.
They apply to England for succour, 285. His death te:-
minatcs the rebellion, 286.

Eai0ba, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony at Santa Mar'a,

in the gulph of Darien, i. 214. Receives intelligence
of the rich country of Peru, 221. His characer, 22:,
2z3. Marches across the isthmus, 223. Difcovets tke
Southern ocean, 2z5. Returns, 2z6. Is superseded in
his command by the appointment of Pedrarias Dasi!2,
229. Is fined by Pedrarias for former tranfaaions, ili.
Is appointed lieutenant-governor of the countries on th:
South Sea, and marries Pedrarias's daughter, 23I, 2;'
Is arncled and put to dea:h by Pedrarias, 233.

B£-,-;

Bark, Jesuits', a producion peculiar to Peru, iii. 142.
Bartret, his description of the conftruaion of Indian houses,

ii. 41S.

Btk.aim, Martin, the honour of having discovered America

falsely ascribed to him by rome German authors, i. 374.
Account of him and his family, 375.

Bikrirg and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have discovered the north-west extremity of America
from the eastward, i. 302. Uncertainty of their ac-
counts, 400.

Be~alcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the kingdom

of Qito, ii. 316. Is deprived of his command by Pi-
zarro, 343.

Er.jamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordinary travels,

i. 36.

Berraldes, inltances of the bravery of the Caribbees men.

tioned by him, ii. 424.
Brthencsrt, John de, a Norman baron, conquers and pof-

fefes the Canary islands, i. 43.

Eird:, an account of those natural to America, i. 286.

The flight of, often stretch to an immense distance from
land, 369.

Bgisra in America, some account of the inhabitants of,

ii. 26. Causes of their tame fubmiflion to the Spaniards,
28. Their religious dotrines and rites, 75, 76.

Bcladj,, cape, the firfl discovery of, i. 47. Is doubled by

the Portuguefr discoverers, 52.

BSjl;, his account of the American war-fong, ii. 414.
Esvadilla, Francis de, is sent to Hispaniola to inquire into

the conducA of Columbus, i. 171. Sends Columbus
home in irons, 172. Is degraJed, 174. 178.

Bsugainville, his defence of the 'erip!us of Hlanno, i. 359.
K:uguer, M. his charaCter of the native Peruvians, ii. 413.
Erafil, the coaf of, difc'vered by Alvarez Cabral, i. 167.

Remarks on the climate of, i. 392.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, iii. 360.
Buter. Ayres, in South America, some account of that

province, iii. 81.

BuisI, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before exn-

mined and approved by the royal council of the Indies, iii.
Iz4. See Crufjdo.
E:.tirL of the dead, American m3ie of, ii. 73.

Cabti,

C
Cabot, Giovanni, is appointed to command the sirs expedi.

ton to explore unknown countries, iii. 197. Embark,
with his ton at Bristol, ibid. Discovers NewfounaL.:,
I98. Returns to England, ibid. No advantage is ct.
rived from his discoveries, 199. The scheme is at:..
doned, z2c. He is appointee governor of a company cf
merchant-adventurers, for whom he obtains a charn:,

204.

Catet, Sebaflian, fails on an expedition to South America,

iii. 2-2. Vilits Brasil, ana touches at Hispaniola ar,
Puerto Rico, sid. His voyage extends the sphere of
Engi fh na.icaaion, and proves the means of opening .
intertourfe with the Archipelago, and fume towns on tie
coraf of yria, 203.
Cabral. Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, discovers t.e

c-ast cf Brasil, i. I6S.

C3ca', the heft in quality, produced in the Spaniina A-rr.

r.can colonies, iii. 142. The preparation of chucoi,
from, derived from the Mexican: , 164.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from Sevile,

iii. 151.
Calif-ria. the peninfua of, discovered by Fernando Corte;,

ii. 269. The true Itate of this country long unknown,
iii. 73. - I) depreciated by the Jefuirs, ibid. Favour-
able accoun: of, g.tcn by Don Joflph Gavez, 74.

Caiifr.:r.:r, the charater f, by a. Ve:.egas, i. 415.
C.aitejcby, ai:cov.rcd by CurVova, who is repulft by thr

n. 1 Ca, i 1ó4.
C rant.arrsn, Dvr Pero Rocriguez, character of his po:iicsil

and orr.n.ercirl vritings, i:i. 39c. His account of t.e
produce of rEe Spznifh Arnerican m'nes, 396.
Cr.ar, !.anaes execl d into a klingaom by pope Clement VI.

i. 42z r c.r;'-r'e by J.,En ae Bcthencourt, 43.

Carn c;.'", r.o :- pFc ever 'ound to eat human fleth for sub.

finence, rhi.h often it.r ree.-rge ii. 42. 41 5.

Cancrr, American, the conftrurclon of, described, ii. 6o.
Caracrcs, edlablifiment of the company trading to that coafi,

iii. i ó. Growth of thetrae, ;3S.
Cribr.t :L:Ca.c, ci:covered b) Columiusin his second voyage,

. 1:7.

Carriib: r;,

J-ib3ees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. o16. The cha-
rater by M. de Chanvalon, i. 414. Probable conjecure
as to the diftintion in character between them and the
natives of the larger islands, 424.

ip i;, his extraordinary mifflin to the prince of the Tar-

tars, i. 36.
.:rtkagena, the harbour of, the fafels and best fortified of
any in a l the Spanilh American dominions, iii. 84.
5jrtlaginians, state of commerce and navigation among,

i. 9. The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco, 1o.
C;rvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Castor's vic-

trry over young Almagro, ii. 3 6. Encourages Gonza'o
Fizarro to assume the government of Peru, 373. Ad-
vises Pizarro to assume the sovereignty of the country,
377. Is seized by Gafca, and executed, 39.

Carl.,1 Bernal Diaz del, character of his Hiftoria Varda-

dera de la Conquifta de la Nueva Efpagna, ii. 427.

Cr.tena, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the vice.

ry of Peru, ii. 374. Is defeated by Carvajal, and secretes
himself in a cave, 376. Sallies out and seizes Cuzco,
53g. Is reduced by Pizarro, 39. Is employed by
Gafca to make discoveries in the regions about the river
Plata, 398.

Chancellour, Richard, fails in search of a north-west passage,

iii. 205. The fleet is scattered in a lorm, ibid. He
enters the White Sea, and winters at Archangel, ibid.
Visits Moscow, a distance of Izoo miles, and delivers a
letter to the czar, ibid. Is the means of opening a trade
with Russia, 206. Is empowered by Queen Elizabeth to
negotiate with the czar in her name, ibid.

Cian.'valn, M. de, his character of the native Caribbees,

i. 414.

Cbspeton s, in the Spanifl American Colonies, who thus

diftinguiihed, iii. 112.

Charles Ill. king of Spain, eflablifhes packet-boats between

Spain and the colonies, iii. 167. Allows free-trade to
the windward islands, 168. Grants the colonies a free
rade with each other, 171.

Carles V. enperor, fends Roderigo de Figueroa to Hifpani-

ola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment of the In-
dians, i. 248. Causes this subjec to be debated before
him, z254 Equips a squadron at the solicitation of Ser-
dinand Magellan, ii. 253. ReGgns his claim on the

Mloluccas

Moluccas to the Portuguese, 258. Appoints Cortes .
vernor of New Spain, 260. Rewards h.m on conm..;
home, 267. ElRablilhes a board called the Audienc
New Spain, 268. His confuitations on American ass,
357. Eftablihes new regulations, 362.

Cbjeapeak, discovery of. See Virginia.
Cb/i, is invaded by Almagro, ii. 3z3. How fubjeaed by

the Spaniards, iii. 76. Excellence of its ciimate and f..
77. Cause of its being negleated, 78. Profped of,
improvement, 79.
Chiquitos, political state of that people, from Fernanccz,

ii. 411.

CAcs!ate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iii. i6r
Cbolula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with fomn ac-

count of the town, ii. i 58. A conspiracy against Cor,:
discovered, and the inhabitants destroyed, 161.
Cburcb government, sentiments refpe&ing, at the Reformi.

tion, iii. 291. Religious persecution in the reigns oi
Queen Mary, and QEeen Elizabeth, 293, 294. Into0c.
rant spirit of the church, 296. Separation of the Puricazi
from the church, 298. They are reduced into an ecc:e.
fiaftical fyft-m by Robert Brown, a popular dcclaimer,
and adopt the name of Brownifts, 299. Take refuge n
in Holland, 300. Remove thence to America, 3or.
Church government is eftablilhed in Massachusets Bay,
311. Its intolerance, 312. The intolerance of Liud
increases the emigrations from England, 313.

Ccer:, instance of his ignorance in geography, i. 365.
Cnalos, political slate of the people there, ii. 411. Their

mode of living, 418. Are destitute of all religion, 4z21
Extraordinary large grain of gold found there, iii. 361.
Cireguilla, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries of rich

mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 71. Probab;
effects of these discoveries, 73.
Clavigerc, M. several of his objetions answered, iii 373.

3S2.
Clement VI. pope, ereIs the Canary islands into a kingdom,

i. 42.

CUmatrs, influenced by a variety of caufts, i. 276. The:r

operation on mankir.f, 03c. Inquiry into the cause o
the different degrees or hear in, 389.
Cotkineal, an importan: pr. duaion, almotl peculiar to New

Spain, iii. 142.

:d, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of Ame-
rica, i. 276 Causes of this'peculiarity, 278.
:s,*t., Englifi American, project of fettling them, iii.
213. Two expeditions fail, 2r5. The first colony
cfablifhed in Virginia, z17. In danger of perilhing by
/,mine: it returns to England, 22o. A second attempt
made to fettle there, but the colony perilies by famine,
ziz, 223. The scheme of fettling there is abandoned,
223. Circumstances in the reign of Elizabeth unfavour-
aole to colonization, 214. The reign of James favourable
to the establishment of colonies, 225. James divides the
coa' of America into two parts, the one called the first
or foutl colony of Virginia; the other, the second or
north colony, 228. He grants charters to two companies
for tile government oi them, 229. Tenor and defe&s of
thole charters, 230, 23 . Under there charters the set-
ticmenrs of the Englilh in Virginia and New England were
tlabiilhed, 232. Capt. Newport fails from England for
Virginia, and discovers the Chefapeak, 233. Sails up
James River, ana founds a settlement in James Town,
2z4. Its bad adm;niltration, ibid. It is annoyed by the
nlrians, and fuffels from fcarcitv and the unhealthiness
oi Ihe climate, 2zj. Seasonable succours are frnt from
England. z38. A survey of the country is undertaken,
iSad. The colony depends tor fifbfiltence chiefly on sup-
..es from the nat.ves, z40. A change is made in the
cunirution of the company, and a new charter is granted
»i:h more ample privileges, ibid Lord Delaware is ap-
pointed governor of the colony, 241. Anarchy prevails
there, 243. It is almoiR re uced by famine, ibid. Lord
Deiaware arrives, and by his wife adrriniftration restores
order and discipline, z45. His health obliges him to return
to England, and he is f.perfeded by Sir Thomas Dale,
wno eftablilhes martial law, 246. A new charter is issued
to the colony, and new privileges are granted, 247.
Cul;ivation of the land is promoted, and a treaty entered
into with the natives, 243. The land in Virginia be-
tomes property, 251. The culture of tobacco is intro-
duced, and its pernicious consequences, 25z. The com-
pany in England fend out a number of young women, to
induce the colonists to form more extensive plans of indus.
try, 253. Negroes are firit introducd, 254. A new
coaftituuon is given to the colony, 255. A general maf-

fac:e

sacre of the Engliih is planned by the Indians, and n
cuted in mos of the settlements, 257, 25S. A bM.<
v. a is commenced with the Indians, and neither otd r.
young are f(ared, 260. The settlements exnd, a
induitry reviles, z61. Defeas in the first conltiuL-
of the colonies, z66. King Charles's arbitrary gover
ment of them, 269. He grants them new privi!eg.
ziZ. They flourilh under the new government, 2-:
The colonifis remain attached to the royal cause, i
parfiamnnt makes war on Virginia, which is obl;gc :
acknowledge the commonwealth, 274, 275. Reflfri
a e laid on the trade of the colonies, 275. The coloni
are difatisfied with thei restraints, 276. Are the sirs:
acknowledge Charles 1I., but their loyalty is ill rewardtc
277. Restraints on their commerce farther exren ed
the navigation act, 278. Effeas ot the ac, zSo. C
lorilts remonflrate against it, ,bd. The colony of Vi;
g"nia is attacked by the Indians, 285. Difconnts a:
produced by the grants of land by the crown, 282.
colory is ef.abiflhed at New Plymouth in New Englar.:
303 P;an of i:s government, 304. A grand coun;.
is appointed, 306. A new colony is projected, ;c-
Settlcs at Maffchrufets Bay, 31o. The charter or
conr.p;ny in England being transferred to the colon ,t
tdey extend in consequence of it, 3t4-316. The col.
n.t'sincreafe, 39g. New settlers arrive, 321. Seaar,:
re;tie in Providence and Rhode Island, 3z4. Theoloc
ca contests give rife to a colony at Conne&icu-, 2.
IEn.igrants from Mallachufets Bay fettle there, 326
Sct:;emcn:s are formed in the provinces of New Harr.:
ihire a:.d Main, 327. State of the colonies at the Re
vlU::or., 336. Are exempted from certain dutrie, 3-
Enter into a league of confederacy, 338. Affurne t
right of coining, 340. Are patronized by Cromoet.

hJi prcpores to ;zanfport them to Jarraica, i-is. Tbh
dec.me his offer, 341. Sec LN^W England, Virg.r..
&c.
Cc.aoris, Spanifla American, view of the policy ard trade c0

i.i. 89. Depopulation the first effect of them, iA4
Causes of this drpopulation, So. The fmaall-po 'er)
fatal to, 92. General idea of the Spanifi policy in, 9"
Early nterpofition of the regal authority in, 98. A-
exclusive trade the firs objec in, ro5. Compared ui-'

h...

tnofe of ancient Greece and Rome, ibid. The great re-
Itridions they are subject to, IoS. Slow progress of their
population from Europe, 1og. Are discouraged by the
slate of property there, ibid. And by the nature of their
ecclesiastical policy, ii. The various classes of people
in, llz. Ecclesiastical conflitution of, 1.3. Form and
endowments of the church there, i z4. Pernicious effecs
of monastic inftitudons there, z25. Characer of the
ecclesiastics there, I27. Produ&ions of, 135. The
mines, 36. ThofeofPotofi and Sacotecas, 137. The
(pirit with which they are worked, 138. Fatal effects of
this ardour, 140. Other commodities that compose the
commerce of, 14r. Amazing increaje of horned cattle
there, I43. Advantages which Spain formerly derived
from them, 144. Why the fame advantages are not fill
received, 145. Guarda Collas employed to check the
contraband trade in, 160. The use ofregifler Ships in-
troduced, 161. And galeons laid aside, 162. Company
of the Caraccas inltituted, r64. Establishment of regu-
lar packet-boats to, 167. Free trade permitted between
them, 171. New regulations in the government of,
172. Reformation of the courts of justice, 173. New
distribution of governments, ibid. A fourth viceroyalty
established, I74. Attempts to reform domefRic policy,
176. Their trade with the Philippine islands, 18o. Re-
venue derived from, by Spain, 183. Expence of ad-
miniitration there, 186. State of population in, 266.
The number of monasteries there, 374. See Medics,
Peru, &c.
C;umbus, Bartholomew, is sent by his brother Chriflopher

to negociate with Henry VII. king of England, i. 77.
The misfortunes of his voyage, 8r. Follows his brother
to Hispaniola, 136. Is vested with the administration of
affairs there by his brother on his return to Spain, r45.
Founds the town of St. Domingo, 155.
Colnbus, Christopher, birth and education of, i,.65. His

early voyages, 67. Marries and fettles at Lilbon, ibid.
His geographical reflecions, 69. Conceives the idea of
making discoveries to the westward, 71. Offers his ser-
vices to the Genoese senate, 74. Cause of his overtures
being rejeced in Portugal, 76. Applies to the courts of
Caflile and England, 77. His proposal, how treated by
the Spanilh geographere, 78. Is patronised by Joan Perez,
VOL. 111. W 1 Sz.

S2. His proposals again rejeacd, 83. Is invited by
Ifabel.a, and engaged in the Spanish service, 8-. Pie.
parations for his voyage, 88. The amount of .is equi.
ment, S9. Sails from Spain, 9r. His vigilan: attention
to all circumftjnces during his voyage, 93. Apprehcn.
sions of his crew, 94. His address in quieting their ca.
bail, 97. Indications of their approaching land, 99
An irland discovered, ico. He lands, lor. His inrer.
view with the natives, ibid. Names the island San Sa!.
vadore, 103. Prosecutes his discoveries southward, 104
Difcosers, ard lands on the island of Cuba, o16. Di[.
covrrs Hifpanioia, o07. Suffers flipwreck, but is fared
by the Indians, lc. Builds a fort, 113. Returns t:
Europe, 116. His expedient to preserve the memory ci
his difcoreiies unrng a flornm, 117. Arrives at the A.
zores, i8. Arrives at Lisbon, ibid. His reception i7
Spain, izo. His audience with Ferdinand and Ifatelb,
'z2. His equipment for a second voyage, 2zz. Ds.
covers the Caribb.e islands, 127. Finds his colony C,:
Hispaniola defiroaed, zg8. Builds a city, which he ca;:!
Isabella, 130. Visits the interior parts of the country,
13 . His men cifcontented and facious, 133, 134,
Difcosers he island of Jamaica, 135. Meets his brotht
Bartholomew at Isabella, 136. The natives ill used b?
his men, and begin to be alarmed, 137, 138. He et.
feats the Indiars, 141. Exaas tribute from them, 142
Returns to Spain to justify his condut, 146. Is fur.
nifired with a more regular plan for colonization, 14'
His third voyage, 5 I. Discovers the iflandof Trinidac
15z. Difco:ers the continent of America, 153. Stab
of Hispaniola on his arrisal, x55. Composes the mutinr
of Roldan and his adherents, 157. Is diftieffed by th
faaious behaviour of his men, 168. Complaints canic
to Spain againl him, 169, 170. Is sent home in irons

z-2. C:eaTs his condt&, but is not relored to bis an

thority, 1 75. His solicitations negleced, 179. Form
new fcher.es of dilcovery, iSo. Engages in a fonrtl
voyage, iSz. His treatment at Hispaniola, ibid. Searthe
after a pafage to the Indian ocean, 184- Is fipwreck
on the coafi of Jamaica, 185. His artifice to secure tb
fiiendfhip of the Indians, 88. Is delivered, and arivs
at Hispaniola, 9gz. Returns to Spain, 193. His death
194. His right to the original discover of America ae

fence:

fended, 373. The spirit of adventure raised in England
by his discoveries, iii. 195. Is checked by the want of
skill in navigation, 196. His system of opening a passage
to India by fleering a weltern course is adopted by Cabot,
197.

Clurmbus, Don Diego, Cues out his claim to his father's

privileges, i. z07. Marries, and goes over to Hifpa-
niola, 208. Establishes a pearl fishery at Cubagua, 209.
Projecs the conquest of Cuba, 26. His measures
thwaned by Ferdinand, z35. Returns to Spain, 236.
C:rmmerce, the era from which its commencement is to be

dated, i. z. Motives to an intercourse among distant na-
ti-ns, 4. Stiil lourilbed in the eastern empire after the
subversion of the western, z9. Revival of, in Europe, 31.

C;m~as, mariner's, navigation extended more by the inven-

tion of, than by all the efforts of preceding ages, i. 40.
By whom invented, 41.
Ccrdammnt, M. his account of the country at the foot of the

Andes, in South America, i. 395. iis remarks on the
cbaracter of the native Americans, 413, 41-.

C;ngs, the kingdom of, discovered by he Porcuguefe, i. 59
C;r.:fratinople, the consequence of removing the feat of the

Roman empire to, i. 28. Continued a commercial city
after the extinction of the weflern empire, 29. Became
the chief mart of Italy, 32.

Cordsva, Francisco Heinandez, discovers Yucatan, i. 263. Is

repullsd at Campeacby, and returns to Cuba, 264,

Cri:a, Alonzo, his observations on the contraband trade

of the Spanish colonies, ii. 17 . Character of his Ame-
rican memoirs, 343.

Crtei, Fernando, his birth, education, and charaaer, ii.

]og. Is by Velasquez appointed commander of the arma-
ment fitted out by him againtt New Spain, n o. Velaf-
quez becomes jealous of him, 113. Velasquez fends
orders to deprive him of his commission, and lay him
under an arrest, 114. Is protectd by his troops, x15.
The amount of his forces, z 16. Reduces the Indians at
Tabasco, xl8. Arrives at St. Juan de Ulua, ibid. His
interview with two Mexican commanders, 12s. Sends
presents to Montezuma, izs. Receives others in return,
bid. His schemes, izS. Eftabliffes a form of civil
government, 133. Resigns his commnifion under Velaf-
quez, and iffumes the command in the king's name, 13 5.

N K 2 His

His friendihip courted by the Zempoallann, 137. Build!
a fort, 139. Concludes a formal alliance with feera
caziques, 140. Discovers a confpiuacy among his men
and destroys his ships, 143. Advances into the countrr
146. Is opposed by the Tlafcalans, 148. Concludes;
Fesce wit th er-m, iS. His raih zeal, 156. Proced
to Cholula, i58. Dilc.vers a c'nfpiracy againfl bir
here, and dettroys the inhabitants, 161. Approacht
in fight of the capital city of Mexico, 162. His fir
interview with Montezuma, 164. His anxiety at hi
situation .n the city of Mexico, 170. Seizes Monte
zuma, 174. Orders him to be fettered, 177. Reason
of his condu&, iEid. Prevails on Montezuma to owi
himself a vassal to the Spanish crown, 181. Amoun
and division of his treasure, 182. Enrages the Mexi
cans by his imprudent zeal, 186. An armament fen
by Velasquez to supersede him, 19o. His delberatior.
on this event, 91g. Advances to meet Narvaez, 196
Defeats Narvaez, and takes him prisoner, zoo. Gain
over the Spaniih soldiers to hisintereft, 201. Return
to Mexico, 203. His improper conduc on his arrivai
204. Is resolutely attacked by the Mexicans, 2c:
Attacks them in return without success, 206. Death c
Montezuma, 207. Hisextraordinary escape from death
21i. Abandons the city of Mexico, 211. Is attacke
by the Mexicans, 21z. His great losses in the en
counter, 213. Difficulties of his retreat, 215. Barl
of Otumba, z6. Defeats the Mexicans, 218. Mu
tinous fpiit of his troops, 2z2. Reduces the Tepea
cans, 222. Is strengthened by several reinforcemenu
223. Returns to Mexico, 225. Eftablilies his head
quarters at Tezeuco, 227. Reduces or conciliates th
surrounding country, 229. Cabals among his troop!
230. His prudence in fupprefling them, 232. Built
a d launches a fleet of brigantines on the lake, 234
Besieges Mexico, 2:5. Makes a grand assault to tak
the city by storm, but is repulsed, 239. Evades d
Mexican prophecy, 242. Takes Guatimozin prison-s
246. Gains possession of the city, 247. And of ti
w hole empire, zce. Defeats another attempt to fu?
fede him in his command, 259. Is appointed govcrn:
of New Spain, 26c. His schemes and arrangenmel
261. Cruel treatment of the natives, ibid. His co

d-

du& fubjeaed to inquiry, 266. Returns to Spain to
justify himself, ibid. Is rewarded by the emperor
Charles V. 268. Goes back to Mexico with limited
powers, 269. Discovers California, ibid. Returns to
Spain and dies, 270. Inquiry into the nature of his
letters to the emperor Charles V. 425. Authors who
wrote of his conquest of New Spain, 426-428.

Curncil of the Indies, its power, iii. io3.
Crtela, in the Spanilh American colonies, characer of,

iii. 113.

Croglan, Colonel George, his account of the discovery of

the bones of a large extinct species of animals in North
America, i. 396.

Crusade to the Holy Land, the great political advantages

derived from, by the European nations, i, 33, 34.

Cruzado, bulls of, published regularly every two years in the

Spanifl colonies, iii. 184. Prices of, and amount of the
sale at the last publication, 39 .

Cuba, the island of, discovered by Christopher Columbus,

i. o05. Is failed round by Ocampo, 207. The con-
quest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez, zi6. Cruel
treatment of the cazique Hatuey, and his repartee to a
friar, ibid. Columbus's enthusiastic description of a
harbour in, 370o. The tobacco produced there, the
finest in all America, iii. 14z.

Cubagua, a pearl fishery eltablifhed there, i. 209.
Curana, the natives of, revenge their ill-treatment by the

Spaniards, i. 258. The country desolated by Diego
Ocampo, 26o.

Cuzco, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Manco Capac, ii. 29. Is seized by Pizarro, 316. Is
besieged by the Peruvians, 326. Is surprised by Alma-
gro, 330. Is recovered and pillaged by the Pizarros,
337. Was the only city in all Peru, iii. 65.

D

Dancing, the love of, a favourite passion among the Ame-

ricans, ii. 79.

Darien, tie isthmus of, described, i. 22z. The increase of

settlement there, obfiruted by the norioufnefs of the
climate, iii. 83.

N 3 Delaware,

Dclaware, Lord, is appointed governorof Virginia, iii. 241

His wife administraion there, 246. Is obliged toreturn
to England on account of his health, ibid.

De Sslis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata,

i. z14-
Dc Slirs, Antonio, characer of his Hiftoria de la Conquifl

de Mexico, ii. 428.
D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his vigorous mea.

fures for restraining the excesses of the regular clergy
there, iii. 130. Rendered ineffecual, i31.

Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hope,
-i. 62.
DifveTriLes, the difference betweecn those made by land, and

those by sea, fated, i. 364.

Ddwe.ll, his obje&ions to the Periplus of Hanno exploded,

i. 359-
Domings, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by Bar-

tholomew Columbus, i. 1 55.
Dcsniawn, those in Hispaniola publicly remonltrate agalne

the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. z87. See La:

Drake, Sir Francis, fails round the world, iii. 2Ir.
Drunkenrefs, strong propensity of the Americans to indulgr
in, ii 83.

E
Earth, the globe of, how divided into zones by the am

cients, i. z5, z6.
iEgyptians, ancisnt, state of commerce and navigation amoni
them, i. 6.

El Dcrado, wonderful reports of a country so called, mahd

by Francis Orellana, ii. 346.

Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 397.
Elizabetb, the reign of, auspicious to discovery, iii. 2og

She encourages commerce, and secures the trade u
Russia, i2o. Circumstances in her reign unfavourabl
to colonization, a24. Her high idea of her fuperiorfil
in theology, z94.
Ej'ur;ia, curious calendar discovered in the Library there b

Mr. Waldilove, iii 351. Decription of that valubi
monument of Mexican art, 32z.

EfjuimaYz

Ejqimaux Indians, resemblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, i. 306. Some account of,
44. 419.
genen IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exclusive
right to all the countries they Ihould discover, from Gape
Non to the continent of India, i. 55.
Esrpe, how affe&ed by the dismemberment of the Roman

Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 29. Revival of com-
merce and navigation in, 31. Political advantages de-
rived from the crusades, 34.

F

Frdr.arnd king of Caflile. See Columrus and Ifabelia.

Turns his attention at length to the regulation of Ame-
rican affairs, i. 202. Don Diego de Columbus sues out
his father's claimsagainft him, 207. Erecs twogovern-
ments on the continent of America, 2r1. Sends a fleet
to Darien, and supersedes Balboa, 228. Appoints Bal-
boa lieutenant-governor of the countries on the South Sea,
231. Sends Dias de Soils to discover a western paffagt
to the Moluccas, 234. Thwarts the measures of Diego
Columbus, 235. His decree concerning the treatment
of the Indians, 238.

Fernandez, Don Diego, character of his Hiftoria del Peru,

ii. 447.

Fernandez, P. his description of the political late of the

Chiquitos, ii. 411.

Fgeroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of Hifpa-

niola, with a commiflion to examine into the treatment
of the Indian natives, iL 248. Makes an experiment to
determine the capacity of the Indians, z59.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 1z7. The

chiefs there hereditary, ii. i9. Account of, from Al-
vara Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, 406.

Fkita, Spanilh, some account of, iii. 151.
Fvnfca, bishop of Badajos, minister for Indian affairs, ob-

itru&s the plans of colonization and discovery formed by
Columbus, i. 142. 151. Patronizes the expedition of
Alonzo de Ojeda, 164.
F6lobiher, Martin, makes three unsuccessful attempts to
discover a north-caft passage to India, iii. z1o.

GalcorJ,r

G
Galems, Spanill, the nature and purpose of these veffeii,

iii. 15x. Arrangement of their voyage, 15z.
Gal.vez, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true state of Ca!i.

forn-a, iii. 74-
Gama, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 160. Dou.

bles the Cape of Good Hope, 161. Anchors before the
ci'y of Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Malabar,
162.

Cam..wg, strange propensity of the Americans to, ii. Sz.
Garg-s, erroneous ide.s of the ancients as to the position es

that river, i. 363.
Gafca, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as president of the Court of

Audience in Lima, ii. 381. His character and modern.
tion, 382. Tbe powers he was vested with, 383. Ar-
rives at Panama, 354. Acquires possession of Panama
with the fleet and forces there, 387. Advances towards
Cuzco, 390. Pizarro's troops desert to him, 392. HIs
mod-rare use of the vicory, ibid. Devises employmer.t
for his soldiers, 398. His division of the country among
his followers, ibid. The discontents it occasions, 399.
Reflores order and government, 4c0. His receptikn :e
his return to Spain, 4o0.

GCem.s, instance of his ignorance in geography, i. 359.
Gegrapby, the knowledge of, extremely confined among t'¢

ancients, i. 24. Became a favourite study among tbe
Arabians, 31.
Giants, the accounts of, in our early travellers, unconfirmed

by recent discoveries, i. 39. 410, 411.
Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, conducts the first colony to North

America, iiL 213. A charter is granted to him and hil
heirs, 215 Conduos another expedition, which end!
diafiroufly, and in which be perishes, 2z6.

Gioia, Flavio, the inventor of the mariner's compass, i. 4
Glbe, its division into zones by the ancients, L 25.
Gold, why the first metal with which man was acquainted

iii. 78. Extraordinary large grain of, found in the mirn
atCinaloa, 6 1.

Gmtara, chara~ of his Clonica de la Neuva Efpagna, ii
426.

G".

GC:d Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 63.

Gfr.id, Bartholomew, is the first who attempts to fleer a

oire& course from England to North America, iii. 226.
Defcries Massachusets Bay, and returns to England, ibid.
The consequences of his voyage, 227.
Gwvernmrent, no visible form of, among the native Ameli-

cms, ii. 20. Exceptions, 23.

Gran Chaco, account of the method of making war among

the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 412.

Granada, new kingdom of, in America, by whom reduced

to the Spanilh dominion, iii. 87. Its climate and pro-
duce, ibid. A viceroy lately eftablilhed there, 1oo.

Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and dircovery among

them, i. i2. Their commercial intercourse with other
nations very limited, 14, 15.

Greenland, its vicinity to North America, i. 305.
Greenville, Sir Richard, eflablifles a colony in Virginia,

which being in danger of perishing by famine, is obliged
to return to England, iii. 217, 218. Appears off the coast
soon after the departure of the colony, and lands fifteen
of his crew to keep poffeflion of the ifand, who are de-
stroyed by the savages, z221 222.

Grijalva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of dif-

covery, L. 265. Discovers and gives name to New Spain,
266. His reasons for not planting a colony in his newly
discovered lands, 268.

Guarda Costas employed by Spain to check illicit trade in

the American colonies, iii. 160.

Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in America, iii.

142.

Guatirnozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma, fuc-

ceeds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of Mexico, ii. 227.
Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards, in forming the
city of Mexico, 240. Is taken prisoner by Cortes, 246.
Is tortured to discover his treasure, 249. Is hanged,
263.

Guiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility of the foil
there, i. 399.

Haklurjt

H
llaklryt improves the naval and commercial skill of the ig,

in which he lived, iii. 127. Is empowered to fettle any
part of the south colony of Virginia, zz9.
Hanro, his Periplus defended, with an account of his voyage,

L 359.
Hatuy, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treatment, and memora-

ble repartee to a Franciscan friar, i. z 16.

Hawlef'wortb's voyages, account of New Holland, and tt

inhabitants, from, ii. 408.
Hat, the different degrees of, in the old and new continent,

accounted for, i. 389. Etrimated, 398.
Henry Prince of Portugal, his charater and studies, i. 4.

Expeditions formed by his order, 50 Applies for
papal grant of his new aifcoveries, 5 . His death, 57.
Ilerrada, Juan de, afialfinates Francis Pizarro, ii. 35c

Dies, 351.
Hcrrtra, the belt historian of the conquest of New Spai.,

ii 428. His account ofOrellana's vyage, iii. 456.

Hifpariola, the island of, discovered by Chrif'opher Colurn.

bus, i. 107. His tranfa&ions with the natives, ibid i ci
A colony left there by Columbus, 14. The colony re-
flroyed, IzX. Columbus builds a city called ICabella, 133.
The natives ill-used, and begin to be alarmed, 1 17. Atr
defeated by the Spaniards, 139. Tribute exaced froa
them, I41. They scheme to starve the Spaniards, 143.
St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Coiumbus, j55.
Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla, 17z. N;-
cholas de Ovando appointed governor, 175. Summary
view of the conduc of the Spaniards towards the nadivt
of, 196. Unhappy fate of Anacoana, 198. Great pro.
duce from the mines these, 2zo. The inhabitants oi-
miniih, ibid. The Spaniards recruit them by trepanniwn
the natives of the Lucayos, 204. Arrival of Don Dic0i
de Columbus, 209. The natives of, almost extirpated :
slavery, 215. 235. Controversy concerning the treatmenr
of them, z36. Columbus's account of the humane tret-
ment he received from the natives of, 371. Curious Din
fiance of superstition in the Spanish planurs there, 396.

Hslg'nm, Pedro Alvarez, erecs the royal standard in Peru, i

opposition to rhe younger Almagro, ii. 34 Vaca "
Castro arrives and assumes the command, 355.

HKo'

/g,,,s, his account of the navigation of the ancient Greeks,

i. '3.

Hi-uras, the value of that country, owing to its prodution

ot the logwood tree, iii 76.

s;rrnd cattle, amazing increase of them in Spanilh America,

iii. 143.

H:rJf, altoniliment and mistakes of the Mexicans at the

firt fight of them, ii. 433. Expedient of the Peruvians
to render them incapable of a&ion, iii. 455.
Huvara tapac, Inca of Peru, his charaaer and family,

ii. z9z.
a!Fcar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brother Atahual-
pa's fucceflion to QEito, ii. z9z. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Atahualpa, 293. Solicits the affifance of
F'izarro against his brother, 294. Is put to death by
order of Atahualpa, 305.
H:tchinjfn, Mrs. heads a fe& of religious women in New

England, who are denominated Antinomians, iii. 32z.
Her dotrines are condemned by a general fynod there,
323.

7,msa;a, discovered by Christopher Columbus, i. I35.
jeram., St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal Xi-

menes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of the In-
d:ans, i. 243. Their conduct under this commiflion,
246. Are recalled, 248.
7efuirt acquire an absolute dominion over California, iii. 73,

Their motives for depreciating the country, ibid.

Yfwsu, ancient state of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 8.

Irect of Peru, received origin of their empire, ii. 29o.

iii. 47. Their empire founded both in religion and po-
licy, 48. See Peru.
IEdia, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his expedi-

tion to, L 16. The commerce with, how carried on
in ancient times, 2I, zz. And when arts began to re-
vive in Europe, 31. The first voyage made round the
Cape of Good Hope, 16o. Attempts to discover a north-
weft paflage to, unsuccessful, iii. zo3. z11. An attempt
made by the north-east to, 204. A company of mer-
chants in England is incorporated to prosecute discoveries

in,

in, 204- A communication with, attempted by land,
207. The design is encouraged by queen Elizabeth,
210.

IJram in Spanifl America. See Americans.
Indis Weft, why Columbus's discoveries were so iamer,

i. 1z4-

Is.rcant IV. pope, his extraordinary milion to the Prince

of the Tartars, i. 36, 37.

Irqifitan, court of, when and by whom firlf introduced in:o

Portugal, i. 367.

Inrfes and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in Ame-

rica, i. 286-

fibn I. king of Portugal, the first who sent ships to expiorr

the weflern coasts of Africa, i. 46. His son prince
Henry engages in these attempts, 48.
jcrn 11. king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

discoveries, i. 59. Sends an embassy to Abyssinia, 63.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 77.
Iron, the reason why ravage nations were unacquainted with

this metal, ii. 12.
Isabella, queen of Caffile, is applied to by Juan Perez in be-

half of Christopher Columbus, i. z8. Is again applied to
by Quintanilla and Santangel, 85. Is prevailed on a:
equip him, 86. Dies, 193. Her real motives for en-
couraging discoveries in America, iii. 93.

Icadlia, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Christophe

Columbus, i. 130.
Italy, the firfl country in Europe, where civilization and ar

revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire, i. 31.
The commercial spirit of, active and enterprifiog, 33.

L

Ladror illands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 255.
Lake amazing size of those in North America, i. 273.
Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to folici

the cause of the enslaved Indians at the court of Spain
L 241. Is sent back with powers by cardinal Ximenns
242. Returns dissatisfied, 243. 247. Procures a no
commiffon to be sent over on this subjea, 248. Re
cormends the scheme of supplying the colonies wid
negroes, 250. Undertakes a new colony, Z51. Hi
conference with the bishop of Darien before the empcU

Char'

Charles V. 255. Goes to America to carry his schemes
into execution, z56. Circumstances unfavour.ble to him,
258. His finalmifcarriage, 259. Revives his represent-
ations in favour of the indians, at the desire of the em-
peror, 359- Composes a tieatife on the deltruCtion of
America, ibid.

Letn, Pedro Cieza de, character of his Chronica del Peru,

ii. 446.

Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 415.

Lima, the city of, in Peru, founded by PzArro, ii. 322.
Litsi, Mr. the Britihl minifier at Madrid, his answer to

several interetling inquiries relating to the admission of
Indians into holy orders, iii. 381.

Logwood, the commodity that gives importance to the pro-

vinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 75. Policy of the
Spaniards to defeat the English trade in, ibid.

L5uis, St. king of France, his embassy to the chan of the

Tartars, i. 37.

Lozano, his account of the method of making war among the

natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 4 3.

LuYue, Hernando de, a priest, associates with Pizarro in his
Peruvian expedition, ii. 270.

M

Madeira, the island of, firfl discovered, i. 51.
Madrc, prince of North Wales, fiory of his voyage and dif-

covery of North America examined, i. 376.

Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic size of the

Patagonians, i. 334. The exitlence of this gigantic race
yet to be decided, 335. 410, 411. His introducion to
the court of Caflile, ii. 25o. Is equipped with a Iquadron
for a voyage of discovery, 253. Sails through the fa-
mous trait that bears his name, 255. Discovers the
Ladrone and Philippine islands, ibid. Is killed, ibid.

Magnet, its property of attracing iron known to the ancients,

but not its polar inclination, i. 4. Extraotdinary advan-
tages resulting from this discovery, 40.

Malr, St. account of its commerce with Spanilh America,

iii. 158.
rlaror Capac, founder of the Peruvian emtire, account of.
ii. 290, 291. iii. 47.
VOL. 11. o o M0andeville,

Mardetuille, Sir John, his eastern travels, with a character of

his writings, i. 39.
Manila, the colony of, efltblifhed by Philip II. of Spain,

iii. igo. Trace between, and South America, ibid.

Mankirnd, their difpGfiti .n, and manners formed by their

fitnation, i. 29z. Hence resemblances to be traced ir
very ditant p!aces without communication, 293. Have
unif-irmly a:rained the grrazeit perfecion of their nature
in temperate regions, ii. 103.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, h.s extraordinary travels in the

Fast, i. 38.
Marefl, Gabriel, his account of the country between the

Illinois and Machilimakinac, ii. 408.

Marina, Donna, a Mexican fl.ve, herhifory, ii. t19.
AMariras, Tyrius, his errone us position of China, i. 368.
Martyr, Peter, his fentimenns on the first discovery of

America, i. 379.

Marylar-d. See Virgr-ia.
MajacrbuJets Bay. See Armrica, New England, &c.
~lrchants, Englifli, the right of property in the North

Am-ricmn co;onies, velfed in a company of, resident in
London, iii. 2z3. Charte s are granted to two companies
of, to make fetdements in America, 229. Tenor and
defects of these charters, 230, 231. A new charter is
granted to them, with more ample privileges, 240. They
are divided by factions, 261. An inquiry is inflitu:ed
into their condut, 262. They are required to surrender
their charter, which 'hey refute, 264. A writ of Ta
vwarrant is issued cut against them, 265. They are tried
in the court of King's Bench, and the company is dissolved,
266. Their charter is transferred to the colonifs, 314.

Mesias, in the Spanish American colonies, diftincion be-

tween them and Mulattoes, iii. rx4.
Metals, useful, the orignal natives of America totally un-

acquainted with, ii. i2.

M~ irans, their account of their own origin compared with

later discoveries, i. 3o6. Their paintings few in number,
and of ambiguous meaning, iii. 5. Two collecions of
them discovered, 6. npte. Descriptions of their hiftoricil
piaures, 349. Various exaggerated accounts of the num-
berof human vicims sacrificed by them, 355. Their
language furnished *sith rcfpectfu terminations for all iu
words, 345. How they contributed to the support of
government, 346.

reeie:

Mteico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coast of, ii.

i20. His interview with two Mexican officers, 121.
Information sent to MDntezuma, with some Spaniffi
presents, ibid. Montezuma lends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach bis capital, 124. State of
the empire at that time, 125. The Zempoallans court
the friendship of Cortes, 137. Several caziques enter into
alliance with Cortes, 140. Character of the natives of
Tlafcala, 147. The Tlafcalans reduced to sue for peace,
154. Arrival of Cortes at the capital city, 164. The
eity described, 167. Montezuma acknowledges himself a
eaffal to the Spanilh crown, 18 . Amount of the trea-
sure colleded by Cortes, 18z. Rcafons of gold being
found in such small quancities, 124. The Mexicans
enraged by the imprudent zeal of Cortes, 186. Attack
Alvarado during the ablenee of Corte;, 202. Their re-
solute attack on Cortes when he returned, 205. Death
of Montezuma, 2c9. The city abandoned by Cortes,
21I. Battle of Otumba, 216. The Tepeacans reduced,
222. Preparations of the Mexicans against the return of
Cortes, 225. Cortes besieges the city with a fleet on the
lake, 236. The Spaniards repulsed in florming the city,
240. Guatin:ozin taken prisoner, 246. Cortes appoint-
ed governor, 260. His schemes and arrangements, ibid.
Inhuman treatment of the natives, 261. Reception of
the new regulations there, 364. A retrofpet into the
form of government, policy, and arts in, iii. I. Ourin,
formation concerning, very imperfect, 4. Origin of the
monarchy, 5. Number and greatness of the cities, Ii.
Mechanical professions there diflinguifhed from each other,
12. Lifiincion of ranks, 13. Political inlitutions, 16.
Power and splendor of their monarchs, 19. Order of
government, 20. Provision for the support of it, ibid.
Police of, 21. Their arts, zz. Their paintings, 25.
Their meihod of computing time, 29. Their wars eon-
tinual and ferocious, 3c. Their funeral rites, 31. Im-
Felfeaion of their agriculture, 3z. Doubts concerning
the extent of the empire, 33. Little intercourse among
its several provinces, 34. Ignorance of money, 35.
State of their cit es, ;6. Temples and other public
buildings, 3,. Religion of, 42. Caules of the depopu-
lation of this country, 90. The fma.l-pox vry ratal
there, 92. Number of Indian natives remaining there,

002 96.

96. Lifl and chara&er of those authors who wrote ac-
counts of the conquest of, ii. 426. Description of the
aquedu& for the supply of the capital city, iii. 346. St
Colonie.
Micbael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea, discovered and

named by Balboa, i. zz5. The colony of, eftablifhedby
Pizarro, ii. 288.

Migratmis of mankind, why sirss made by land, i. I.
Mird, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the wants of

the body, i. 34:.

Mines of South America, the great inducement to population,

iii. 71. Some account of, 136. Their produce, 137.
The spirit with which they are worked, 138. Fatal
effets of this ardor, 140. Evidence of the pernicious
efecas of labouring in them, 37z. Of Mexico, toal
produce of, to the Spanish revenue, 394, 395, 396.
Molucca Ifands, the Spanish claims on, fold by the Emperor

Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 257.
~oafiaf infitutions, the pernicious effe&s of, in the Spa-

niflh American colonies, iii. z 5. Number of convent
there, 374
MSfrf- s, the periodical course of, when discovered by nai.

gators, i. 22.

Movtefio, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub!ic'

remonstrate against the cruel treatment of the Indiatn,
L 237.
Mimtezrara, the first intelligence received by the Spaniardi

of this prince, i. z68. Receives intelligence of the arri.
val of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 122. Hi'
presents to Cortes, x24. Forbids him to approach hi
capital, 125. State of his empire at this time, ibi
His chara&cer, 126. His perplexity at the arrival of th
Spaniards, z17. His timid negociations with Cortes, i28
His scheme for destroying Cortes at Cholula discovered
i60. His irresolute conduc, 163. His first intervic
with Cortes, 164. Is seized by Cortes, and confined t
the Spanish quarters, 174. Is fettered, 177. Acknoa
ledges himself a vassal to the Spaniih crown, ISi. Rt
main: inflexible with regard to religion, s85. Circum
stances of his death, 209. Account of a gold cup of hi
in England, iii. 347.

Mulattces, in the Spanish American colonies, explanationi
this diftinc.ion, iii 114.

N

.Naraez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velasquez with an armament

to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. I90. Takes possession
of Zempoalla, 197. Is defeated and taken prisoner by
Cortes, 200oo. How he carried on his correspondence with
Montezuma, 439.

NatcLtz, an American nation, their political inflitotions,

ii. 23, 24. Causes of their tame submission to the Spa-
niards, 27. Their religiousdo&rine-, 29.
rvygatricn, the arts of, very fl'wly improved by mankind,
i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial inrercourfe,
,. Imperfetlions of, among the ancients, 4. More im-
proved by the invention of the mariner's compass, than by
all the efforts of preceding ages, 4c. The first naval
rifcoveries undertaken by Portugal, 4..
iegroes, their peculiar situation under the Spanish dominion
in America, iii. lS5.

2rua England, firt attempts to fettle in, unsuccessful, iii.

Z90. Religious difpurcs rive rife to the colony there, 29r.
A Settlement is formed at New Plymouth in Massachusets
Ba), 303. Plan of its government, 304. All property
is thrown into a common stock, 305. A grand council is
appointed, 306. A new colony is projected at Maflachu-
fe:s Bay, and a charter granted for i:s eftabliflhment, 308.
Its settlement there, 31o. A new church is inltituted
there, 311. Its intolerance, 312. Charter of the Eng-
li.h company of merchants in London is transferred to the
c-loniPfs, 314. The colony at Maffacbufers Bay extends,
316. None but members of the church are admitted as
freemen there, 3 17. Bad consequences of this regulation,
318. The settlement increases, and the assembly is re-
striaed to the representatives of freemen, 319. Extent of
political liberty alTumed by the assembly, ibid. Spirit of
fanatidfm spreads in the colony, 320. New settlers
arrive, and the doacrines of the Anrinomians are con-
dernned by a general fynod, 323. Secaries fe'tlein Pro-
is-ence and Rhode Iland, 324. Theological contests
give rfe to the colony of Connecticur, 325. Emigrants
fiom Massachusets Bay fettle in Connecticut, 326. The
Dutch, who had eflabliled a few trading towns on the
ri»er there, peaceably withdraw, itLd. Settlements are
tauiled in the provinces of New Hampfbire and Main,

o3 327.

317. Further encroachments of the Englila are refifd
by the natives, 319. War with the Pequod tribes is
com-nenced, 330. Purification ofthearmy, 33 . The
Indians are defeated, ibid. Cruelties exercised againf
them, 333. Emigrations from England to the colonies are
prohibited by proclamation, ibid. Colony of Maffachuoets
Bay is sued at law, and found to have forfeited its rights,
335. Confederacy of the states in, 338. See Coonirs.

Netwfoundland, its situation described, i. 389. Discovery of,

by Cabot, iii- 198.
New Holland, tome account of the country and inhabitants,

ii. 408.
New Plymnuth, settlement at, iii 303. See Colnies, Nvr

England.

New Spamn, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 66. See Mexico.
hageo, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i I66.
Nor.egiarn might in ancient times have migrated to, and

colonized America, i. 306.
AIugrz Vela, Blasco, appointed viceroy of Peru, to enforce

the new regulations ii. 363. Hischaracer, 368. Cor.
mits Vaca de Cafiro to prison, 369. Difenfions betwern
him and the court of audience, 371. Is confined, ibid.
Recovers his liberty, 373. Resumes his command, 374.
Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, 375. Is defeated and
killed by Pizarro, 376.

0
Ocamps, Diego, sent with a squadron from Hispaniola to de.

solate the country of Curnana, i. 157, 258.
Ocamp, Sebalfian de, firfl fails round Cuba, and dircoven it

to be an island, i. zo7.
Ocfan, though adapted to facilitate the intercourse between

distant countries, continued long a formidable barrier, i a.
See CompafJ and ]Navigation.

Ojeda, Alonzo ae, his private expedition to the Weft India,

L 164. His second voyage, 176. Obtains a govermmni
on the continent, 211.
Olmdc, Father Bartholomew de, checks the rash zeal ol

Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico, ii. 57. Is sent by Cort.
to negociate with Narvaez, 194.
Ordllara, Francis, is appointed to the command of a b2

built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, ii 345. Sa
down the Maragnon, ibid. Returns to Spain with a re

Pa

port of wonderful discoveries, 346. Herrera's account of
his voyage, iii. 456.

Orgognez commands Almagro's party against the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, ii. 336.

Orineco, the great river of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 152. The amazing plenty of sis in, ii. 405.
Strange method of choofing a captain among the Indian
tribes on the banks of, 46.

Otabeite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 420.

Ot.mba, battle of, between Cortes and the Mexicans, ii. 1 6.
Ovands, Nicholas de, is Cent governor to Hispaniola, i. 177.

His prudent regulations, 178. Refuses admilfion to Co-
lumbus, on his fourth voyage, 182. His ungenerous be-
haviour to Columb' s, on his shipwreck, I87. I90. Re-
ceives him at length, and fends him home, I92. En-
gages in a war with the Indians, 196. His cruel treat.
ment of them, 197. Encourages cultivation and manu-
faaures, 202. His method of trepanning the natives of
the Lucayos, 205. Is recalled, o28.

p

Pacific ocean, why, and by whom so named, ii. 255.
Packet boats, first eftablifiment of, between Spain and her

American colonies, iii. I67.

Panama is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 233.
Parmmides, the first who divided the earth by zones, i. 366.
Patagonians, some account of, i. 333, 334. The reality of

their gigantic size yet to be decided, 41o, 41 .

Pedrarias Davila is Cent with a fleet to supersede Balboa in

his government of Santa Maria on the isthmus of Darien,
i. 228. Treats Balboa ill, 229. Rapacious conduct of
his men, 230. Is reconciled to Balboa, and gives him his
daughter, 232. Puts Balboa to death, 233. Removes
his settlement from Santa Maria to Panama, ibid.

Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welch

languagei. 377.

Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the court of Caflile, i.

82. His solemn invocation for the success of Columbus's
voyage, 91.

Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that work justified,
i. 359.

Peru,

Prgu, the firt intelligence concerning this country, receirtd

by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 221. 226. The coast of
first dif.overed by Pizarro, ii. zto. Pizarro's second a.
rival, 286. His hostile proceedings against the native,
287. The colony of St. Michael eftabl.fled, 288. Stale
of the empire at the time of this invasion, 289. Th:
kingdom divided between Huafcar and Atahualpa, zq9.
Arahualpa usurps the gove-nment, z93. Huafcar solicits
afSiiance from Pizarro, 294. Atahualpa visits Pizarre,
299. Is seized by Pizarro, 302. Agreement for his
raniorn, 303. Is refufeo his liberty, 307. Is cruelly pv
to death, 312. Confusion of the empire on this even;,
313. Q.ito reduced by Benalcazar, 316. The city of
Lima founded by Pizarro, 322. Chili invaded by Alma.
gro, 323. Infurrneion of the Petuvians, 3z4. Alma.
gro put to death by Pizarro, 339. Pizarto divides ti:
country among his followers, 342. Progress of the
Soanifh arms there, 3;3. Francis Pizarro aflaffinated,
3 ,o. Reception of the new reguladtons there, 365. The
v;ceroy confined by the court of audieoce, 371. Tih
viceroy defeied and killed by Gonzalo Pizirro, 37,
376. Arrival of Pedro ce la Gafca, 354. Reduc;on
and death of Gonzalo Pizarro, 392 The civil wars tiline
no: carried on with mercenary soldiers, 394 But ntcre-
thclefs gratified with immense rewards, 395. Their pro-
fusion and luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their contests, ;gS
Their want of faith, ibid. Inflr.ces, 397. Division oi,
bv Gafca, an-ong his followers, 398. A retrofpe& in:o
tre original government, arts, and mariners of the native,
iii. I. The high antiquity they pretend to, 44. Their
records, 45. Origin of their civil policy, 47. Th:s
founded iu religion, 4S. The authoriy of the Incas tb-
solute and unlimited, ibid. All crimes were ounifhn
capitally, 50. Mild genins of their religion, ibid. Its
influence on their civil policy, 52. And on their miliurt
system, itid. Peculiar slate of property there, 53. D.-
tincl on of ranks, 55. State of arts, ibid. Improvct
Itate of agriculture, 56. Their buildings, c7- Th-ir
public roads, 60. Their bridges, 6z. Their rmode oi
refining ilver ore, 63. Works ofele-ance, 64. Their
civi;izatioo. neverthelefi, but imperfect, 65. Cuzco :he
only place that had the appearance of a citv, ibid. Si
fcrte fclfara:ion of profefflons, 66. Li:rle comrnmec 1

ioteri~uur:it

intercourse, ibid. Their unwarlike spirit, 67. Eat their
fieli and filh raw, 69. Brief account of other provinces
under the viceroy of New Spain, ibid. Causes of the de-
population of this country, go. The small-pox very fatal
there, 92. Writers who gave accounts of the conquest of,
ii. 446. Their method of building, iii. 358, 359. State
of the revenue derived from, by the crown of Spain, 392.
See Colonis.

Peter I. czar of Russia, his extensive views in prosecuting

Asiatic discoveries, i. 299.

Pkenicians, ancient, state of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 6. Their trade, how conducted, 359.

Phifip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition aided by his

American treasures, iii. 145. Establishes the colony of
Manila, o80.

Pbilip II. exhausts his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iii. 146.

Philippine ilands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 255.

A colony established there by Philip II. of Spain, iii. iSo.
Trade between, and America, ibid.
PhySic, the art of, in America, why connected with divina-

tion, i. 75.

Pinto, Chevalier, his description of the charaCeriflic features

of the native Americans, ii. 4c7.
Pirzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a veflel under Columbus

in his first voyage of discovery, i. go. Sails to America
on a private adventure with four ships, 92. Discovers
Yucatan, 207.

Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzco by the Peruvians,

ii. 327. Is surprised there by Almagro, 331. Escapes
with Alvarado, 333. Defends his brother at the court of
Spain, 340. Is committed to prison, 342.

Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in his settlement on the

isthmus of Darien, i. 2z4. Marches under him acrors
the isthmus, where they discover the South Sea, 224.
His birth, education, and character, ii. 272. Associates
with Almagro and De Luque, in a voyage of discovery,
273,274. His ill success, 275. Isrecalled,and deserted
by most of his followers, 277. Remains on the island of
Gorgona for supplies, 28o. Discovers the coast of Peru,
ibid. Returns to Panama, 281. Goes to Spain to solicit
reinforcements, 2S2. Procures the supreme command for
himself, 283. Is affifed with money by Cortes, 284.

Lands

Lads again in Peru, 86. His hoile proceedings agains
the natives, 287. Eflablifhes the colony of St. Michaei,
288. State of the Peruvian empire at this time, ibd.
Cause of his easy penetration into the country, z93. Is
applied to by HuaCcar for assistance against his viaorious
brother Atahualpa, z94. State of his forces, 295. Ar-
rives at Caxamalca, 297. Is visited by the Inca, 299.
His perfidious seizure of him, 301. Agrees to Atahu.
alpa's offer fjr his ransom, 303. Division of their plunder,
3o6. Refuses Atahualpa his liberty, 307. His igno.
rance exposed to Atahualpa, 3 to. Bestows a form of trial
on the Inca, 3a. Puts him to death, 312. Advancet
to Cuzco, 315. Honours conferred on him by the Spaniih
court, 319. Beginning of diflenfions between him and
Almagro, 320. His civil regulations, 321. Founds thc
city of Lima, 3z2. Infurretion of the Peruvians, 324.
Cuzco seized by Almagro, 330. Deludes Almagro by
negociatioos, 332- Defeats Almagro, and takes him
prisoner, 337. Puts Almagro to death, 339. Divide
the country among his followers, 342. The impolitic
partiality of his allotments, ibid. Makes his brother
Gonzalo governorof Quito, 343. Is assassinated by Juau
de Herrada, 351.
Pizarrc, Gonzalo, is made governor of Q.ito, by his bro-

ther Francis, iL 343. His expedition over the Andc,
344-. Is deserted by Orellana, 345- His distress o.
this event, 347 His disastrous return to Quito, 348. h
encouraged by the people to oppose Nugnez Vela, thi
new viceroy, 369. Assumes the government of Peru,
373. Marches against the viceroy, 374. Defeats aoc
kills him, 375, 376. Is advised by Carvajal to assume
the sovereignty of the country, 377. Choofes to nego-
ciate with the court of Spain, 379. Consultations of tc
court on his conduc, 3So. His violent resolutions oc
the arrival of Pedro de la Gafca, 385. Resolves to op.
pose him by violence. 387. Marches to reduce Centenc
at Cuzco, 328. Defeats him, 389. Is deserted by hi
troops on the approach of Gafca, 39z. Surrenders an
is executed, ibid. His adherents men of no principle
396.

Pti, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis, i. 234- I:
amazing width, ii. 388,

Plafar

plfyfair, Mr. Professor of mathematics in Edinburgh, the

,cfult of his comparison of the narrative and charts given
in Captain Cooke's voyages, published in 1780; and Mr.
Coxe's account of the Ruffian di'coveries, printed in the
fame year, in which the vicinity of the two continents of
Asia and America is clearly ascertained, ii. 402-407.

piry, the naturalist, instance of his ignorance in geography,

i. 365.

Porce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 217. Romantic

motive of his voyage, z2i.

ppIlatisn of the earth, flow progress of, i. r.
Prato Bello, discovered and named by Christopher Columbus,

i 185.

p:rt, Rico, is fettled and fubjeced by Juan Ponce de Leon,

i. zc6.

p,,tr Santo, the first discovery of, i. 5o.
psr!ugal, when and by whcon the court of inquisition was

first introduced into, i. 367.

prtuguefe, a view of the circumstances that induced them

to undertake the discovery of unknown countries, i. 45,
46. First African discoveries of, 47. Madeira discovered,
50, 51. They double Cape Bojador, 52. Obtain a
papal grant of all the countries they should discover, 55.
Cape Verd Islands and the Azores di(covered, 56. Voyage
to the Ealt Indies by Vasco de Gama, r60, 161.

P':si, the rich silver mines there, how discovered, iii. 137.

The mines of, greatly exhausted and scarcely worth work-
ing, 383.

Prijsners of war, how treated by the native Americans, ii.

39. Prpecrty, the idea of, unknown to the native Americans, ii.
16. Notions of the Brafillians concerning, 409.

Pr..tear of the Indians, in Spanifl America, his fun&ion,

iii. 120.

Ptsldrny, the philosopher. his geographical descriptions more

ample and exat than those of his predecessors, i. 27. His
geography translated by the Arabians, 31. His erroneous
position of the Ganges, 363.

Q_
.!tlavaca, brother of Montezuma, succeeds him as king of

lexico, ii. z25. Conduts in person the fierce attacks

which

which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital, zz6. Diat
of the fmail-pox, 227.
zczadao, Bilhop of Darien, his conference with Las Cafia
on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence of the
Emperor Charles V. i. z54.
yiciPulaer, the property of the famous mines of, at Guana
cabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 384. The
price of, why reduced, ibid.
Rainqia.a, or Jesuits Bark, a produ&ion peculiar to Peru,

iii. 142.

Ruips;, or historic records of the Peruvians, frme account

of, iii. 45.
.qit0, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca of

Peru, ii. 29z. Is left to his son Atahualpa, ibid. Ata-
huaipa's general revolts after his death, 314. Is reduced
by the Spaniards under Benalcazar, 316. Benalcazar de-
prived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made governor, 343.

R
Ralgb resumes the plan of fetling colonies in North Ame.

rica, iii. 2 6. Dispatches Amadas and Barlow to examine
the intended settlements, who discover Virginia, and re-
turn to England, 21 7. EBablifhes a colony in Virginia,
which, on account of famine, is obliged to return to Eng-
land, zi2. Makes a second attempt to fettle a colony
therei which periises by famine, 223. Abandons the de.
sign, ibid.
Ramujao, his defence of Hanno's account of the coast of

Africa, i. 361.

Regiser lhips, for what purpose introduced in the trade be-

tween Spain and her colonies, iii. 1 61. Supersede the use
of the galeons, 16z.

Regimn of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii. 63.
Ribas, his account of the political slate of the people of Cina

loa, ii. 41. Of [heir want of religion, 42z.

Ri, de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of those provinces

iii. So.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in America, i. 273.
Rrbifon, professor, his remarks on the temperature of varioul

climates, i. 3S9-391.
Rldan, Francis, is left chief jultice in Hispaniola, by Chrii;

topher Columbus, i. 146. Becomes the ring'eader of
mutiny, jSS. Submits, 16o.

RH=aw.

parns, their progress in navigation and discovery, i. 19.

Their military spirit averse to mechanical arts and com-
merce, 20. Navigation and trade favoured in the pro-
vinces under their government, 21. Their extensive dif-
coveries by land, z3. Their empire and the fclences de-
troyed together, z8.

Rabruquis, father, his embafTy from France to the Chan of

the Tartars, i 37.
Rjffa, a trade to, opened by the English, iii. 206. Re-

irriced to a company of Britilh merchants, ibid. The
connexion with the Ruffian empire encouraged by Queen
Elizabeth, zio.
uff.lars, Asiatic discoveries made by them, i. 299. Uncer-
tainty of, 400,

S

ac:caxl), the rich silver mines there, when discovered, iii.

137.

.an Salvador, discovered and named by Christopher Colum-

bus,i. 103.

Sarcho, Don Pedro, account of his History of the Conquet of

Peru, ii. 446.

Scr.dwval, the fiocking barbarities executed by, in Mexico,

ii. z62.

Shrdval, Franci fco Tello de, is sent by the emperor CharlesV.

to Mexico, as vifitador of America, ii. 364. His modera-
tion and prudence, ibid.
avage life, a general estimate of, ii. 89.
Salps, motive of the native Americans for taking them from

their enemies, ii. 414.

Srralvo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viceroyalty in America, iii. 396.

&Sville, extraordinary increase of its manufaaures by the

American trade, iii. 385. Its trade greatly reduced, ibid.
The American trade removed to Cadiz, 151.

Silver ore, method of refining it pra&ised by the native Pe-

ruv'ans, iii. 63.
,nallH-pox, Indian territories depopulated by, iii. 318.
S;r.:ra, late discoveries of rich mines made there by the

Spaniards, iii. 71.
c:ul, American ideas of the immortality of, ii. 72.
&utb &a, first discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 22 5.

VOL. ll. T P Spain,

Spain, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the Ame.

rican colonies, iii. 97. Early interposition of the rega
authority in the colonies, 98. All the American do-
minions of, fubjeaed to two viceroys, 99- A third vice-
royalty lately eftabliihed, 1oo. The colonies of, corn-
pared with those of Greece and Rome, zo6. Advantagel
lhe derived from her colonies, 144. Why ihe does not
still derive the fame, i45 Rapid decline of trade, ir7.
This decline increased by the mode of regulating the in.
tercourfe with America, r49. Employs guarda cosas to
check illicit trade, 160. The use of regitfer flips in-
troduced, x61. Eftablifment of the company of Carac.
cas, 164. Enlargement of commercial ideas there, 166.
Free trade permitted to several provinces, 168. Revenue
derived from America, 8S3. Specification, 392.
Spariards, their curious form of taking possession of new-

discovered countries, i. 383.

S&rab, a citation from, proving the great geographical igno.

rance of the ancients, i. 362. His own want of gcogra-
phical knowledge, 366.
Sperfiition always conneced with a desire of penetrating into

the fecets of futurity, ii. 74.

T

Tapia, Chriftoval de, is Cent from Spain to Mexico, to super.

fede Cortes in his command, but fails in the attempt,
ii. 529.
Tartars, the possibility of their migrating to America, i.

304.
Tflajcaa, in Mexico, charaaer of the natives of, ii. 147.

Oppose the passage of the Spaniards, 148. Are reduced
to sue for peace, 153.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the befl flavoured of any in all Ame.

rica, iii. 14. The use of, firfl introduced into England,
iii 220. Culture of, in Virginia, and its consequence,
z 5z. Its exportation thence is annually increased, ibid.
Trade for, opened with Holland, 256. Grants and mono-
poly of, 270.
toupirambas, account of their ferocious courage from LCry
ii. 415.
Trade, no efforts made in England to extend it in the l :ig

of Henry VII. or his immediate successors, iii. zo. To:
what causes that neglet was owing, ibid,

'rd:

Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii 168.

Increase of the Spanilh customs from this measure, 389.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when discovered by

navigators, i. 21.

TravJllers, ancient chara&er of their writings, i. 39.
Triiadd, the island of, discovered by Christopher Colum-

bus on his third voyage, i. 15z.

Tuarman, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. So.

Tye, the commerce of that city, how conduded, i. 36o.
'T.:bes of Spaniih America, how applied by the court of
Spain, iii. 393.

V

Vaca de Cafiro, Chriftoval, is lent from Spain to regulate

the government of Peru, ii. 341. Arrives at Qito, 353.
Assumes the fopreme authority, ibid. Defeats young
Almagro, 355. The feveidty of his proceedings, 356.
Prevents an infurreflion concerted to oppose the new re-
gulations, 367. Is imprisoned by the new viceroy, 359.

yalvarde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Atahu-

alpa, Inca of Peru, ii. 300oo Gives his lantion to the
trial and condemnation of Atahualpa, 31 z.

Vega, Garcilaffo de la, chracter of his commentary on the

Spanifi writers concerning Peru, ii. 447.

Vgerables, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil where

they grow, i. 2?9.
'elafluez, Diego de, conquers the island of Cuba, i. 215.
261. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii. 107.
His difficulty in choofing a commander for the expedition,
1oS. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 9og. His motives to
this choice, i I l. Becomes suspicious of Cortes, ibid.
Orders Cortes to be deprived of his commiflion, and ar-
reited, 113, 54.. Sends an armament to Mexico after
Cortes, 183.

.Ycregas, P. his character of the native Californians, i. 41 5.
Verceral difeale, originally brought from America, i. 338.

Appears to be wearing out, ibid. Its first rapid progreft,

411. Vrzi,zuea, history of that ettlement, iii. S6.
Fcice., its origin as a maritime state, i. 34. Travels of
Marco Polo, 38.

PP2
p Vrd

Perd ilands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 56.
Virerrys, all the SpaniLf dominions in America fubjeded to

two, ii. 99. A third lately eftablifed, 0oo. Their
powers, ibid. A fourth established, 174-
Vila Segnor, his account of the fate of population in New

Spain, iii. 366. His detail of the Spaoiih Americas
revenue, 392.
Pillfagna, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, fomenets

mutiny among his troops, ii. 230. Is discovered by Cor-
tes, and banged, 232.

V'Jrgiia, first discovery of, iii. 217. Attempt to fettle

there unsuccessful, ibid. A second attempt to fettle there,
when the colony perifihes by famine, 22z, 223. The
scheme of fettling there abandoned, 223. Is divided into
two colonies, 228. Charters are granted to two companies
to make settlements in, 2z9. Captain Newport fails from
England to, and discovers the Chefapeak, 233. He pro.
ceeds up James river, and founds a colony in James-town,
234- Its bid administration, ibid. Captain Smith is
excluded from his feat at the council board, 235. The
colony is annoyed by the Indians, and suffers from scarcity
and the unhealthiness of the climate, ibid. Smith is re-
called, and the prosperity of the colony reltored, 236.
He is taken prisoner by the Indians, his life spared and his
liberty obtained through the interceflion of the favourite
daughter of an Indian chief, ibid. 237. Returns to James-
town, and finds the colony in diffrefs, 237. The coloniftb
are deceived by the appearance of gold, 238. A survey of
the country is undertaken by Smith, ibid. The company
obtains a new charter with more ample privileges, 240.
The jurifdicion of the council in, is abolifled, and the
government vefed in a council resident in London, 241.
Lord Delaware is appointed governor and captain-general
of the colony, and Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George
Summers are veifed with the command till his arrival,
ibid. 242. The vessel in which they embark is flranded
on the coast of Bermudas, 242. Smith returns to England,
and anarchy prevails in the colony, 243. The Indians
withhold supplies, and the colony is reduced by famine,
ibid. Gates and Summers arrive from Bermudas, and find
the colony in a desperate situation, 244. They are about
to return to England, when Lord Delaware arrives, 245.
He reconciles all differences, and perfecty restore, fobor-

dinatioD,

diration, 246. Is obliged to resign the government, and
return to England, on account of his health, ibid. Is fu-
perfeded by Sir Thomas Dale, who establishes martial law,
ibid. Another charter is granted to the colony with new
privileges, 247. The land is cultivated, and a treatycoii.
cluded with the Indians, 248. Rolfe, a man of rank in
the colony, marries the daughter of an Indian chief, 2491
The land first becomes property, 2zi. The culture of
tobacco is introduced, 252. The quantity exported in-
creases every year, 253. Negroes are first introduced,
254. A general assembly of representatives is formed, ibid.
A new constitution is given to the colony, and a trade for
tobacco opened with Holland, 55. The necessary precau-
tions for the defence of the colony being neglected, a ge-
neral massacre of the English is planned by the Indians,
and executed in most of the settlements, 257. A bloody
war is commenced with the Indians, z60. Their planta-
tions are attacked, and the owners murdered, ibid. A
few escape to the woods, where they perilh with hunger,
261. The settlements extend, and industry rev!ves, ibid.
The strength of the colony is considerably weakened, z68.
A temporary council is appointed for its government, ibid.
The arbitrary government of the colonies on the acceflion
of Charles I. 269. The colonists seize Sir John Harvey,
the governor, ard fend him prisoner to England, 270.
He is released by the king, and reinstated in his govern-
ment, 271. Is succeeded by Sir W. Berkeley, whose
wife administration is productive of the best effels, 27z.
New privileges are granted to the colony, which flourilhes
under the new government, 273. It is attacked by the
Indians, 281. Discontents are produced by grants of
lands from the crown, zSz. An insurrection breaks out,
and the governor and council are forced to fly, 284. They
apply to England for succour, 285. The rebellion is ter-
minated by the death of Nathaniel Bacon, 286. The
governor is reinstated, and an assembly called, 287. The
moderation of its proceedings, ibid. General state of the
colony till the year 1688, ibid. See Colonies.

Ulloa, Don Antonio de, his description of the charafteriffic

features of the native Americans, i. 407. His reason for
the Americans not being so sensible of pain as the reft of
mankind, 416. His account of the goods exported from
Spain to America, with the duty on them, iii. 392.

Yslcans,

yoslcas; , remarkable number of, in the northern parts of !tC

globe difcoveredby theRuffians, i. 401.

W
PPafer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu:;ve

Americans, i. 331. Compared with similar productin,
in Africa, 332.
iFar-rong of the native Americans, the sentiments and term

of, ii. 414.
Wdlazrghy, Sir Hugh, fails in search of a north-east paffiz

to India, iii. 204. Steers along the coast of Norway, aM
doubles the north cape, bid. His squadron is separated in
a storm, and his (hip driven into an obscure harbour in
Ruffian Lapland, where he and all h.s companions a:
frozen to death, zo5.
ycvmer, the condition of, among the native Americans, i.

35o. Are not prolific, 353. Are not permitted tojoiniS
their drunken seass, ii. 86. Nor to wear ornaments, 47;,

X
Xere, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest writl

on his Peruvian expedition, ii. 446.
Ximener, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of tb

Indians in the Spanihf colonies, i. 142. PaJronifes t
attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. zz2.

y
rYcatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Diasc

Solis, i. o07. Described, 386. from wherc:r that pr
vince derives its value, iii. 74. Policy of the courts
Spain with reicea to, 76.

Z
Zarate, Don Augustine, characet of his History of the Cox

quelf of e eru, ii 447.

Zens, the earth how divided into, by the geography of ii

ancients, i z5. By whom firlt so divided, 366.

ZsrraOragi, Juan de, first bilhop of Mexico, the deftrok
of all the ancient records of the Mexican empire, iii. 5.

r. - HE ND.
Printed by A Strahan, PrimaersStrret, Londe.

# Lately published, New Editions of Dr. ROBERTSON'S other Works, as follows:

Lately pulised,
New Editions of Dr. ROBERTSON'S other

Works, as follows:

I. THE HiRfory of Scotland. 2 vols. 4to. 21. is.

Another Edition, in z vols. 8vo. 14s.
Another Edition, in I vol. Svo. 7s. 6d.
Another Edition, in 3 Pocket vols. with new Plates; on

fine Paper, 15s. On common Paper, los. 6d.
2. The Hiitory of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V.

Embellifled with four Plates, elegantly engraved.
3 vols. 4to. 3. 3s.

Another Edition, in 4 vols. 8vo. li. 45s.
Another Edition, in 3 vols. 8vo. Il. Is.
Another Edition, in 4 Pocket vols. with new Plates; on

fine Paper, 16s. On common Paper, los. fewed.
3. An Hiforical Disquisition concerning the knowledge

which the Ancients had of India, and the progress of
trade with that country, prior to the Discovery of the
Cape of Good Hope. 4to. Ils.

Another Edition, in x vol. gvo.
Also the Hiflory of America. z vols. 4to. Illustrated

with Maps. z1. ios.

Another Edition. 4 vols. Svo. iL 2is.
Printed for A. Strahan, T. Cadell jun. and W. Davies, in

the Strand; and E. Balfour, at Edinburgh,
