S

G' WHE
GEORGE IIEATH.

- '
4.. -

l4 %4

ww a

r

THE
T

0

OF THE
R

E

I G

N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

V.

W'I H
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY in EUROPE,

From the Subversion of the R M A N E M P R E, to the

Beginning of the SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON. D. D.

-(<
P R I N c I P AL of the University of E D N U R o H, and H s To R O-

R AH E R to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VOL.

I.

D U B L I N:
Printed for WM. WATSON, and THOMAS EWING, Booksellers, in Capel-

street, and SAMUEL WATSON, Bookseller, in Dame-fireet.

M DCC LXIX.
* v.

1

j _/ . r..--';'*; * T',a "

Y"' '

d~O
I S

R

Y
r-1-(7, 374
1.4

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

SIR,
T PRESUME to lay before your Majesty the

Hiflory of a Period, which, if the abilities

of the Writer were equal to the dignity of the
Subjet, would not be unworthy the attention of
a Monarch, who is no less a Judge than a Patron
of Literary Merit.

H I T OR claims it as her prerogative to offer

inftru6tion to KINGS, as well as to their people.
What reflections the Reign of the Emperor

CHARLES

C1-IAIt1ES V. may suggest to-Your Majesty, it be-
comes not me to conjeture. But your Subjects
cannot observe the various calamities, which that
Monarch's ambition to be diftinguifhed.as a Con-
queror, brought upon his dominions, without re-
colleting the felicity of theit own tines, and
looking up with gratitude to their Sovereign,
who, during the fervour of youth, and amidst
the career of viEtory, possessed such felf-command,
and maturity of judgment, as to set bound§ to his
own triumphs, and prefer the blessings of peace
to the splendour of military glory.

v. wdln b n~tyr )ceibYare. tih'e,Wird6m

POSTERIITY' wiil nt only cel-brat theWiddn

of Your Majefiys' chicE, bt twill 'e meitr tite
many 'Virtues, Whihch dihder your Reign corifpi-
cuous for a sacred regard to all the duties, indum-
bent on the Sovereign of a Free People.

.I IT

IT is our happiness to feel the influence of

these Virtues; and to live under the dominion
of a Prince, who delights more in promoting
the Publick Welfare, than in receiving the just
Praise of his royal beneficence. I am,

S I R
YOUR MAJESTY's

Moit faithful Subjet,

And most dutiful Servant,

WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

# THE PREFACE.

THE
PREFACE.

T 0 period in the history. of ones own country
N 1 can be confidered as altogether uninteresting.

Such tranfadions as tend to illustrate the progress of
its conflitution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost
.attention. Even remote and minute events are objects
of a curiosity, which, being natural to the human
mind, the gratification of it is attended with pleasure.

Bu.T, with refpe& to the history of foreign States

we must set other bounds to our desire of information.
The universal progress of science during the two ait
centuries, the art of printing, and other obvious causes,
have filledEuropewith such a multiplicity of histories,
and with such vast colle6tions of historical materials,
that the term of human life is too short for the study
or even the perusal of, them. It is necessary, then,

VOL. I. a not

not only for those who are called to conduc the as-
fairs of nations, but for such as inquire and reason
concerning them, to remain satisfied with a general
knowledge of distant events, and to confine their
study of history in detail chiefly to that period, in
which the several States of Europe having become
intimately connected, the operations of one power
are so felt by 'all, as' to influence their' cdouncils?
and to egulatetheir 'nea fres "' ' "
'; ' ' '

SOME boundary, then) ought to be fixed'in order

to separate these periods.: An aera ihould be'ptplhtint
out, prior to which, each countty; little eoin teted'
with those around it, may r trace its own A!hi'if
apart; after which, the tranfations of every con-
fiderable: nation in Europe become intee;ftitigWnd
infiruive to all.' With tlis intention' i'ufadrf.
took to write the history of the Emperor CHAtltJE'
V. It was during his adminiftratioft that the
powers of Europe ' were formedl into one greit'po-
litical system, in which each took a fRation, wherein
it has since remained with less variation, than
could have been expeaed after the hocks o-

cafioned

cafioned by so many internal revolutions, and so
many foreign wars. The great events which hap-
pened then have not hitherto spent their force. The
political principles and maxims, then eftabliff ed, Rill
continue to operate. The ideas concerning the bar-
lance of power, then introduced or rendered gene-
ral. itill influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore be con-

fidered as the period at which the political Rate of
Europe began to.affiime, a new form. I have endea-
voured to render my account of it, an introduction
to the history of Europe fiibfequent to his reign.
While his numerous Biographers describe his perfo-
nal qualities and ations; while the historians of
different countries relate occurrences the consequences
of which were local or transient; it hath been my
purpose to record only those great tranfa&ions in
his reign, the effe&s of which were universal, or
continue to be permanent.

*As my readers could derive little inftruaion from
such a history of the reign of CHARLES V. without

a Sfome

some information concerning the slate of Europe
previous to the sixteenth century, my desire of sup-
plying this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and explain
the great causes and events, to whose operation all
the improvements in the political state of Europe,
from the subversion of the Roman Empire to the be-
ginning of the sixteenth century, must be ascribed.
I have exhibited a view of the progress of society in
Europe, not only with refpe& to interior government,
laws and manners, but with refpe6 to the command
of the national force requisite in foreign operations;
and I have described the political conifitution of
the principal flates in Europe at the time when
Charles began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led into fe-

veral critical disquisitions, which belong more pro-
perly to the province of the lawyer or antiquary,
than to that of the historian. These I have placed
at the end of the first volume, under the title of
Proofs and Illustrations. Many of my readers, will,
probably, give little attention to such researches.

To

To some they may, perhaps, appear the most curious
and interesting part of the work. I have carefully
pointed out the sources from which I have derived
information, and have cited the writers on whose au-
thority I rely with a minute exadnefs, which might
appear to border upon ostentation, if it were poflible
to be vain of having read books, many of which no-
thing but the duty of examining with accuracy what-
ever I laid before the public, could have iuduced me to
open. As my inquiries conducted me often into paths
which were obscure or little frequented, such conflant
recourse to the authors who have been guides, was
not only necessary for authenticating the fa6ds which
are the foundations of my reasonings but may be useful
in pointing out the way to such as shall hereafter hold
the fame course, and in enabling them to carry on
their researches with greater facility and success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one omiflion

in my work, the reason of which it is neceflary to
explain. I have given no account of the conquests
of Mexico and Peru, or of the eablifhment of
the Spanish colonies in the continent and islands of

America.

America. The history of these events I originally
intended to have related at considerable length. But
upon a nearer and more attentive consideration of
this part of my plan, I found that the discovery of
the new world; the slate of society among its an-
cient inhabitants; their character, manners, and arts;
the genius of the European settlements in its va-
rious provinces, together with the influence of these
upon the systems of policy or commerce in Europe,
were fubje6ts so splendid and important, that a fu-
perficial view of them could afford little fatisfaition;
to treat of them as extensively as they merited, muff
produce an episode, disproportionate to the principal
work. I have therefore reserved there for a fepa-
rate history; which if the performance now offered
to the publick ihall receive its approbation, I pro-
pose to undertake.

THOUGH, by omitting such considerable but de-

tached articles in the reign of Charles V. I have
circumscribed my narration within more narrow li-
mits, I am persuaded, from this view of the inten-
tion and nature of the work which I thought it ne-

ceflary

ceffary to lay before my readers, that the plan must
fill appear to them too extensive, and the under-
taking too arduous. I have often felt them to be so.
But my conviction of the utility of such a history
prompted me to persevere. With what success I
have executed it, the publick must now judge. I
wait, in follicitude, for its decision; to which I
shall submit with a refpedtful silence.

A VIEW

A
A C E.

XV

## A View of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century. SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

W 0 great revolutions have happened in the political
state, and in the manners of the European nations.
The first was occasioned by the progress of the
Roman power; the second by the subversion of the

Roman Empire. When the spirit of conquest led the armies of
Rome beyond the Alps, they found all the countries which they

VOL. . B invaded,

SECT. I.

The effeets of
the Roman
power on the
state of
Europe.
1

SECT. I.

The defola-
tion which it
occasioned.

The improvc-
irents which
it introduced.

The bad con-
flquences of
their doi.i-
niOlO,

invaded, inhabited by people whom they denominated barbarians,
but who were nevertheless brave and independant. These de-
fended their ancient pofeflions with obstinate valour. It was by
the superiority of their discipline, rather than of their courage,
that the Romans gained any advantage over them. A ingle battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, decide the
fate of a ate. The vanquished people resumed their arms with
frefll spirit, and their undisciplined valour, animated by the love
of liberty, supplied the want of conduct as well as of union.
During there long and fierce Struggles for dominion or indepen-
dance, the countries of Europe were fucccffively laid waste, a
great part of their inhabitants perished in the field, many were
carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant, incapable of further
refitance, submitted to the Roman power.

THE Romans having thus desolated Europe, et themselves

to civilize it. The form of government which they establishcd
in the conquered provinces, though severe, was regular, and
preserved public tranquility. As a, consolation for the loss of
liberty, they communicated their arts, sciences, language, and
manners, to their new fubjeds. Europe began to breathe, and
to recover strength after the calamities which it had undergone;
agriculture was encouraged; population encreafed; the ruined
cities were rebuilt; new towns were founded; an appearance of
prosperity succeeded, and repaired, in ome degree, the havock of
war.

THIS Rtate, however, was far from being happy, or favour-

able to the improvement of the human mind. The vanquished
rations were disarmed by their conquerors, and overawed by

soldiers

soldiers kept in pay to restrain them. They were given up as a
prey to rapacious governors, who plundered them with impunity;
and were drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes, imposed with
so little attention to the situation of the provinces, that the impofi-
tions were generally encreafed in proportion to their inability to
support them. They were deprived of their most enterprizing
citizens, who resorted to a distant capital in quest of preferment,
or of riches; and were accuffomed in all their actions to look up to
a superior, and tamely to receive his commands. Under all thee
deprefling circumstances, it was impossible that they could retain
vigour or generosity of mind. Tile martial and independant spirit,
which had diftinguifled their ancestors, became extinct among all
the people fubjeted'to the Roman yoke; they loft not only the
habit but even the capacity of deciding for themselves, or of ad-
ing from the impulse of their own minds; and the dominion of
the Romans, like that of all great Empires, degraded and debased
the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not subsist long. There were

defects in the Roman government, even in its most perseEt form,
which threatened its dissolution. Time ripened these original
feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders. A
conltitution, unsound, and worn out, muff have fallen ill pieces
of itself, without any external hock. The violent irruption of
the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other barbarians hastened this
event, and precipitated the downfal of the Empire. New na-
tions seemed to arise, and to rush from unknown regions in
order to take vengeance on the Romans for the calamities which
they had inflicted on mankind. These fierce tribes either inha-
bited the various provinces in Germany which had never been

[A] NOTE I.

B subdued

SECT. I.

The irruption
ofthc barbar-
ous nations.

3

4

subdued by the Romans, or were scattered over the vast coun-
tries in the north of Europe, and north-west of Asia, which are
now occupied by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the fubjets
of the Ruflian empire, and the Tartars. Their condition, and
tranfations previous to their invasion of the Empire are but little
known. All our information with refped to there is derived from
the Romans; and as they did not penetrate far into countries
which were at that time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts
of their original itate given by them are extremely imperfet.
The rude inhabitants themselves, destitute of fciencei and of re-
cords, without leisure, or curiosity to enquire into remote events,
retained, perhaps, rome indiftinC memory of recent occurrences,
but beyond these, all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B],

THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon the Empire

from the beginning of the fourth century to the final extinction
of the Roman power, have given rife to an opinion that the coun-
tries whence they issued were crowded with inhabitants ; and va-
rious theories have been formed to account for such an extraordi-
nary degree of population as hath procured these countries the
appellation of The Storehouse of Nations. But if we confider
that the countries poffefned by the people who invaded the Em-
pire were of vait extent ; that a great part of these was covered
with woods and marshes; that ome of the most considerable of
the barbarous nations subsisted entirely by hunting or pasturage,
in both which states of society large tracts of land are required
for maintaining a few inhabitants; and that all of them were
itrangers to the arts, and industry, without which population can-
not increase to any great degree, it is evident, that these coun-

[B] NOTE II.

tries

SECT. I.

State of the
countries
from which
they issued.

STATE OF EUROPE.

tries could not be so populous in ancient times as they are at pre-
sent, when they still continue to be less peopled than any other
part of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if there circumstances prevented the barbarous nations

from becoming populous, they contributed to inspire, or tQ
strengthen the martial spirit by which they were diftinguifled.
Inured by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of their
foil, to hardflips which rendered their. bodies firm, and their
minds vigorous ; accustomed to a course of life which was a con-
tinual preparation for action ; and disdaining every occupation but
that of war ; they undertook and prosecuted their military enter-
prizes with an ardour and impetuosity, of which men softened
by the refinements of more polished times, can scarce. form any
idea [C].

THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceeded rather from

the love of plunder, than from' the desire of new settlements,
Roused to arms by some enterprizing or popular leader, they
rallied out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier provinces
with irreiftible violence ; put all who opposed them to the sword;
carried off the most valuable effects of the inhabitants ; dragged
along multitudes of captives in chains; wafted all before them
with fire or sword; and returned in triumph to their wilds and
faftnefles. -Their success, together with the accounts which they
gave of the unknown conveniencies and luxuries that abounded
in countries better cultivated, or blessed with a milder climate than
their own, excited new adventurers, and exposed the frontier to
new devastations.

[CJ NOTE III,

SECT. 1.

The people
fit for d:ing
enterpi izes.

The motives
of their fir(t
excursions.
WUMr N

5

SECT. I.

Their reasons
for fettling in
the countries
which they
conquered.

'The extent of
their fettle-
1ellt1s.

The circum-
stances which
occasioned
the downfal
of the Roman
Empnire.

WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the adjacent provinces

ravaged by frequent incursions, they marched farther from home,
and finding it difficult, or dangerous to return, they began to
fettle in the countries which they had subdued. The sudden
and short excursions in quest of booty, which had alarmed, and
disquieted the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful calamity im-
pended. Great bodies of armed men with their wives and
children, and slaves and flocks, ifilued forth, like regular colo-
nies, in quest of new settlements. People who had no cities,
and seldom any fixed habitation, were so little attached to their
native foil, that they migrated .without reluctance from one
place to another. New adventurers followed them. The lands
which they deserted were occupied by more remote tribes of
barbarians. These, in their turn, pushed forward into more
fertile countries, and like a torrent continually increasing, roll-
ed on, and swept every thing before them. In less than two
centuries from their first irruption, barbarians of various names
and lineage, plundered and took poffefion of Thrace, Pannonia,
Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy, and Rome itself. The
vat fabrick of the Roman Power which it had been the work of
ages to perfect, was in that flhort period overturned from the foun-
dation.

M A NY concurring causes prepared the way for this great

revolution, and ensured success to the nations which invaded
the Empire. The Roman commonwealth had conquered the
world by the wisdom of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its
military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the former
were forgotten or despised, and the latter was gradually relaxed.
The armies of the Empire in the fourth and fifth centuries bore

scarce
6

scarce any resemblance to tllofe invincible legions which had
been vitorious wherever they marched. Instead of freemen,
who voluntarily took arms from the love of glory, or of their
country, provincials and barbarians were bribed or forced into
service. They were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the
fatigue of military duty. They even complained of the weight
of their defensive armour, as hntolerable, and laid it aside. In-
fantry, from which the armies of ancient Rome derived their
vigour and flability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and un-
disciplined soldiers of later times could scarce be brought to
venture into the field but on horseback. These wretched troops,
however, were the only guardians of the Empire. The jealousy
of despotism had deprived the people of the use of arms; and
subjects oppressed and rendered incapable of defending them.
selves, had neither spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders,
from whom they had little to fear, because they could scarce
make their condition more unhappy. As the martial spirit
became extinct, the revenues of the Empire gradually dimi-
nifhed. The taste for the luxuries of the East increased to such
a pitch in the Imperial court, that great fums were carried into
India, from which money never returns. By the vast subsidies
paid to the barbarous nations a fill greater quantity of specie
was withdrawn from circulation. The frontier provinces wafted
by frequent incursions became unable to pay the customary
tribute; ind the wealth of the world, which had long centered
in the capital of the Empire, ceased to flow thither in the fame
abundance, or was diverted into other channels. The limits of
the Empire continued to be as extensive as ever, while the
spirit requisite for its defence declined, and its resources were
exhausted. A vast body, languid, and almost uanimated, be-

came

SPCT. I.

*_

7

SECT. J. came incapable of any effort to Cave itself, and was. easily over-

t rJ powered. The Emperors, who had the absolute direction of this

disordered system, funk in the softness of Eastern luxury, lhut up
within the walls of a palace, ignorant 'of war, unacquainted
with affairs, and governed entirely by women and eunuchs, or
by ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the approach of
danger, an4 under circumstances which called for the utmost
vigour in counsel as well as in action, discovered all the impotent
irresolution of fear, and of folly.

The circum- IN every refpet, the condition of the barbarous nations was
(lances which the reverfe.of that of the Romans. Among them, the martial
contributed to . .'

. , e..

the uccefs o spirit was. in full vigour; their leaders were. hardy and enterpriz-
thebanbarous ing; the arts which had enervated the Romans were unknown
nations. ,

among them; and such was the nature of their military inl;itu-
tions, that they brought :forces. into te field without any trou-
ble, and supported them at little expence. The merenary and
effeminate troops stationed on the frontier, astonished at their
fierceness, either fled at, their approach, or were routed in the
sirs onset. The feeble expedient to which the Emperors, had
recourse, of taking' large bodies of the barbarians into pay, and
of employing them to repel new invaders, instead of reta^ripg,
hastened the detrudtion of the Empire. They soon turnedtheir
arms against their masters, and with: greater advantage 'than
ever: for, by serving in the Roman arn'ies, they had: acquired
all the discipline, or fiill in war, whick the Romans fill retained:
and upon adding there to their native ferocity, they became
altogether irresistible.

BUT
8

BUT though from there, and many other causes, the progress

and conquests of the nations which over-ran the Empire, be-
came so extremely rapid, they were accompanied with horrible
devastations, and an incredible deftru&ion of the human fpe-
cies. Civilized nations which take arms upon cool reflection, from
motives of policy or prudence, with a view to guard againftifome
distant danger, or to prevent Come remote contingency, carry
on their hostilities with so little rancour, or animosity, that war
among them is disarmed of half its terrors. Barbarians are
strangers to such refinements. They rush into war with impe-
tuofity, and prosecute it with violence. Their ole obje&t is
to make their enemies feel the weight of their vengeailce, nor
does their rage ffide until it be satiated with inflicting on
them every poflible calamity. It is with such a spirit that
the savage tribes in America carry on their petty wars. It was
with the fame spirit that the more powerful and no les fierce
barbarians in the north of Europe, and of Aia, fell upon the
Roman Empire.

WHEREVER they marched, their rout was marked with

blood. They ravaged or destroyed all around them. They
made no diftinaion between what was sacred, and what was
profane. They refpeted no age, or sex, or rank. What es-
caped the fury of the first inundation perished in those which
followed it. The most fertile and populous provinces were con-
verted into deserts, in which were cattered the ruins of villages
and cities, that afforded shelter to a few miserable inhabitants
whom chance had preserved, or the sword of the enemy, weari-
ed with destroying, had spared. The conquerors who first set-
tied in the countries which they had wafted were expelled or

VOL. . C exter-

9

SECT. I.

The spirit
with which
they carried
on war,

The defolatl-
on which they
brought upon
Europe.

SECT. I.

The universal
change which
they occasion-
cd in the late
of Europe.

exterminated by- new invaders, who coming from regions far-
ther tremoved from the civilized parts of the world, were till
more fierce and rapacious. This brought new calamities upon
mankind, which did not cease until 'the north, by pouring forth
fucceflive swarms, was drained of people, and could no lon-
ger furnih i'nstruments of.deftruion. Famine and' pestilence,
which always march in the train of war, when it ravages w;th
such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every part of Europe, and
compleated its sufferings. If'a man were called to fix upon
the period in the liiftory of the world, during which the con-
dition of the human race was most calamitous and afflicted,
he would without hesitation, name that which elapsed from
the death of Theodosius the Great, to the establishment of the
Lombards in Italy c. The contemporary authors who beheld
that scene of desolation, labour and are t a loss for exprefli-
ons to describe the horror of it. The scourge of God, The de-
stroyer of nations, are the dreadful epithets by which they di-
ftinguifh the most noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on the world, to the
havock occasioned by earthquakes, conflagrations, or .deluges,
the most formidable and fatal calamities which the inagination
of man'can conceive.

.'BUT no expreflions can convey, so perfet 'an idea of the de-
ftrutive progress of the barbarians as that which mruft strike an
attentiveobferver, when he contemplates the total change, which
he will discover in the state of Europe when it began to reco-
ver ome degree of tranquillity towards the close of the sixth

, · t #

' I! ' .

c Thcodofius died A. D. 39. The reign of Alboinus in Lombardy, began
A. D. 5 7, so that this Period was 176.

century
10

century; The Saxons were by that time masters of the south-
ern, and more fertile provinces ofBritain; the Franks of Gaul
the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the Goths and
Lombards of Italy and the adjacent provinces. Scarce any vef-
tige of the Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature, re-
mained. , New forms of government, new laws, pew manners,
new dresses, new; languages, and new n.mes of men ad coun-
tries, were every where introduced, To make a great or fud-
den alteration with. refpet to any of these, unless where the an-
cient inhabitants of a country have been amoft totally extermi-
nated, has proved an undertaking beyond the power of the great-
eft conquerors [D]. The total change which the- settlement of
the barbarous natiols,. occasioned in the state of Europe, may,
therefore,; be confidred,as a more decisive proof, than even the
testimony of contempb r oryhiftorians,, ;of the deftrutive violence
with which they carried!on their c9nq~uefts,:and of the havock which
they had made from one extremity of this quarter of the globe to
the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the; chaos occasioned by this general wreck

of nttions, we ;mult,;fearch for the .feeds of order, and endea-
vour to dicovor the.firft ruidiments of:t the policy and laws now
established in'. Europei To. .tlis source, the, historians of its
different kingdoms,!.have: attempted, :though with less attention
andinduftry than ,the irmportance of the enquiry merits, to .trace
baclkthe inffitutions, anid cuftorns peculiar to their countrymen.
It is not my proVince to give a minute detail of the progress of
government aind miahners in each particular nation, whose

[D] NOTE IV.

C2

II

SECT. I.

From ts

ante ofdifor-
der the laws
of govern-
ment now el-
tabliflled niutl
be traced.
LE] NO'rTE V.

tranfaaions

SECT. I.

The princi-
ples on which
the northern
nations made
their fettle-
nients in
Europe.

tranfaftions are the objec of the following history. But in order
to exhibit a just view of the ifate of Europe at the opening of
the sixteenth century, it is necefhary to look back, and to con-
template the condition of the northern nations upon their first
settlement in those countries which they occupied. It is necef-
fary to mark the great steps by which they advanced from bar-
barifm to refinement, and to point out those general principles and
events which by their uniform as well as extensive operation con-
du&ed all of them, to that degree of improvement in policy and
in manners which they had attained at the period when Charles V.
began his reign.

WHEN nations ubjet to despotic government make con-

quests, there serve only to extend the dominion and the power
of their master. But armies composed of freemen conquer' for
themselves, not for their leaders. The people who overturned
the Roman Empire, and fettled in its various provinces, were
of the latter class. Not only the different nations that issued
from the north of Europe, which has always been confidered
as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and Alans who inhabited
part of those countries which have been marked out as the' pecu-
liar region of servitude f, enjoyed freedom and independance
to such a high degree as seems to be scarce compatible with
a state of social union, or with the ubordination necessary to
maintain it. They followed the chieftain who led them forth
in quest of new settlements, not by constraint, but from choice ;
not as soldiers whom he could order to march, but as volun-
teers who offered to accompany him [F.] They confidered

[F] NOTE VI.
De l,'efprit des loix, liv. 17. chap. 3.

their

their conquests as a common property, i which all had a title to
share, as all had contributed to acquire them [G]. In what man-
ner, or by what principles, they divided among them the lands
which they seized, we cannot now determine with any certainty.
There is no nation in Europe whose records reach back to this
remote period; and there is little information to be got from
the uninflruaive and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers ig-
norant of the true end, and unacquainted with the proper objects
of history.

Tpis new division of property, however, together with the

maxims and manners to which it gave rife, gradually introduced
a species of government formerly unknown. This singular in-
ftitution is now distinguished by the name of the Feudal system:
and though the barbarous nations which framed it, fettled in
their new territories at different times, came from different coun-
tries, spoke various languages, and were under the command of
separate leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were established, with
little variation, in every kingdom of Europe. This amazing uni-
formity hath induced some authors i to believe that all these na-
tions, notwithstanding so many apparent circumstances of dif-
tinction, were originally the fame people. But it may be ascribed
with greater probability to the similar state of society and of man-
ners to which they were accustomed in their native countries, and
to the similar situation in which they found themselves on taking
pofeflion of their new domains.

SECT. I.

The feudal
government
gradually eftabliled
among them.

[G] NOTE VII.
i Procop. de Bello Vandal. ap. Script. Byz. edit. Vcn. vol ;. p. 345

'3

SECT. I.

National de-
fence the
great object
of feudal
policy.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acquisitions to main.

tain, not only against such of the ancient inhabitants as they
had spared, but against the more formidable inroads of new in-
vaders, felf-defence was their chief care, and eems to have
been the sole object of their first institution and policy. In-
stead of those loose associations, which, though they scarce
diminished their personal independan'ce, had been sufficient for
their security while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the neceflity of confederating more closely together,
and of relinquishing ome of their private rights in order to
attain publick safety. Every freeman, upon receiving a portion
of the lands which were divided, bound himself to appear in
arms against the enemies of the community. This military
service was the condition upon which he received and held his
lands, and as they were exempted from every other burden,
that tenure, among a warlike people, was deemed both easy
and honourable. The King or general, who led them to con-
quest, continuing still to be the head of the colony, had, of
course, the largest portion allotted to him. Having thus acquir
ed the means of rewarding past services, as well as of gaining
new adherents, he parcelled' out his ands with this vie, bind-

wih this View, bind-

ing those on whom they were bestowed, to follow his standard
with a number of men in proportion to the extent of the territory,
which they received, and to bear arms in his defence. His chief
officers imitated the example of the sovereign, and in distributing
portions of their lands among their dependants, annexed the fame
condition to the grant: Thus a feudal kingdom resembled a mili-
tary establishment, rather than a civil institution. The victorious
army cantoned out in the country which it had fcized, continued
ranged under its proper officers, and subordinate to military

command.
'4

command. The names of a soldier and of a freeman were fyno- SECT. I.
nimous k. Every proprietor of land, girt with a sword, was ready
to march at the summons of his superior, and to take the field
against the common enemy.

BuT though the Feudal policy seems to be o admirably cal-

culated for defence againit the aaults of any foreign power, its
provisions for the interior order and tranquility of society were
extremely defe&ive. The principles of disorder and corruption
are discernable in that constitution under its best and most per-
set form.' They oon unfolded themselves, and spreading with
rapidity. through every part of the system, produced the most
fatal effets. The'bond of political union was extremely feeble;
the sources of anarchy were innumerable. The monarchical and
ariftocratical parts of the constitution, having no intermediate
power to balance them, were perpetually at variance, and
juftling with each other. Tle powerful vassals of the crown
obon extorted a confirmation for life of those grants of land,
which being at first purely gratuitous, had been bestowed only
during pleasure. Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to have
them converted into hereditary pofleflions. One ftep more corn-
pleated their usurpations, and rendered them unalieanable [H].
With an ambition no less enterprizing, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour, as well as
offices of power or trust. These personal marks of diftintion,
which the publick admiration beftowv on illustrious merit, or
which the publick confidence confers on extraordinary abilities,
were annexed to certain families, and transmitted like fiefs, from

'Ihe fcudal
ovelnlaicnt
SefcCtivc in
its !rovarton
for interior
older c

ic y

ciety..
k Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Miles.

[H-] NOTE VIII.

father

15

SEca. I. father to son by hereditary right. The crown vassals having

thus secured the poffellion of their lands and dignities, the na-
ture of the Feudal infitutions, which though founded in sub-
ordination, verged to independance, led them to new, and still
more dangerous encroachments on the prerogatives of the Cove
reign. They obtained the power of supreme jurifdition both
civil and criminal within their own territories; the right of coin-
ing money; together with the privilege of carrrying on war
against their private enemies in their own name, and by their own
authority. The ideas of political fubjeAion were almost entirely
loft, and frequently scarce any appearance of feudal rubordination
remained. Nobles who had acquired such enormous power,
scorned to confider themselves as fubjeds. They aspired openly at
being independant: the bonds which conneced the principal mem-
bers of the constitution with the crown, were dissolved. A king-
dom considerable in name and in extent, was broken into as many
/7 separate principalities as it contained powerful barons. A thou-

sand causes of jealousy and discord subsisted among them, and
gave rife to as many wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or
kept in continual alarm during there endless contests, was filled
with castles and places of strength, erected for the security of
the inhabitants, not against foreign force, but against internal
hostilities. An universal anarchy, deftruaive, in a great mea-
sure, of all the advantages which men expect to derive from
society, prevailed. The people, the most numerous as well
as the most useful part of the community, were either re-
duced to a state of actual servitude, or treated with the fame
insolence and rigour as if they had been degraded into that
wretched condition [1]. The King, stripped of almost every
prerogative, and without authority to enac or to execute falu-

[I] NOTE IX.

tary

tary laws, could neither protet the innocent, nor punish the
guilty. The nobles, superior to all resraint, harraffed each other
with perpetual wars, opprefled their fellow fubjets and humbled
or insulted their overeign. To crown all, time gradually, fixed,
and rendered venerable this pernicious system, which violence had
eftablifled.

SUCH was the iate of Europe with refpec to the interior

adminiRration of government from the seventh to the eleventh
century. All the external operations of its various iates, during
this period, were, of course, extremely feeble. A kingdom dif-
membered, and torn with difention, without any commqn interest
to rouze, or any comron head to conduct its force, was incapable
of acting with vigour. Almost all the wars in Europe, during
the ages which I have mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and
productive of no considerable event. They resembled the llort
incursions of pirates or banditti, rather than the Ready operations
of a regular army.. Every baron at the head of his vaflals, carried
on some petty enterprize to which he was prompted by his own
ambition, or revenge. The Rate itself, destitute of union, either
remained altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make any
effort, that served only to discover its impotence. The superior
genius of Charlemagne, it is true, united all these disjointed and
discordant. members, and forming them again into one body, re-
itored that degree of activity to government which distinguish his
reign, and render the trarifations of it, objects not only of
attention but of admiration to more enlightened times. But
this Rate of union and vigour not being natural to the feudal
government, ,was of short duration.. Immediately upon his
death, the spirit which animated and fiftained the vast system

VOL. I. D which

SscT. I.

It prevented
nations likc-
wife froml
aCling with
vigourin their
external ope-
rations.

17

SECT. I.

The fatal
effes of this
ftateoffociety
on sciences
and arts;

which he had established, being withdrawn, it broke: into pieces.
All the calamities which flow fromr anarchy and discord,. re-
turning with additional force,' afHlited the different kingdoms
into which his Empire was split. From that time to the eleventh
century, a fucceflion of uninteresting events .a eiries, o .wars,
the motives as well as the consequences of which were equally
unimportant, fill and deform the annals of all the nations in
Europe.

To there pernicious effects of the feudal anarchly, may be

added its fatal influence on the character and improvement of
the human mind. If men do not enjoy the protetion of regular
government, together with the' certainty of personal security
which naturally flows fr6m it, they never attempt to make pro-
grefs in science, nor aim at-attaining refinement in taste, or in
manners. That period of tiirbuleice, 6ppreflion, and rapine,
which I have described, was ill suited to favour improvement
in any of these. In less than an century' after the' barbarous
nations fettled in their new conqtiefts, 'almost all: the 'efets
of the knowledge and civility which the Romans had spread
through Europe disappeared. Not only the arts of elegance
which minister to luxury, and are supported by it, but many
of -he useful arts, without' which life can scarce be confidered
as comfortable, were neglected 'or lofR.' Literatttre, fcienc*,
taste, were words scarce in use during the ages we are con-
templating; or if they occur at any time, eminence in them
is ascribed to persons and productions so contemptible, that
it appears their true import was little understood. Persons
of the highest rank, and in the most eminent stations could
not read or write. Many of the clergy did not understand

the

the breviary which they were obliged daily to recite; rome of
them could scarce read it [K]. All memory ..f past .tranfationsi
was loft, orpreferve4r in annals filled with trifling events,; or .l-
gendary tales. Even the codes of laws publifed by the several
nations which eftablilhed themselves in the different countries of
Europe, fell into disuse, while in their place, customs, vague'
and capricious, were substituted.; The human mind negleted, .un.
cultivated, and depreed,' funk into the mofi profound ignoranCe
Europe did not produce, during four centuries, one author: who
merits to be read, either on account of the elegance of his compo-
fition, or thejuftnefs and novelty of his sentiments. There is scarce
one invention useful or ornamental to society of which that long
peridd icanboaft.: ' i !' '

EvEN the Christian religion, though its precepts are delivered,

and itE; institutions' are fixed in scripture with a precision which
should have.exempted them; from being misinterpre'ted or cor-
rupted, degenerated during those ages of 'darkhefs into an ijl
liberal fuperfition. The barbarous nations when converted to
Chrifianity 'changed the object, not the spirit of their religi-
bus ! orfhip,i;. Theyy endeavoured to. conciliate the favour of
the true God by :mens- noti unlike to those which they haid emn
ployed in order to appeife their false: deities. Iiftead'of afplring to
fandity and virtue, which alone can' render men acceptable to
the great author of order and of excellence, they imagined that
they satisfied exery obligation of duty' by a scrupulous obfer-
vance of exte'rnal ceerionies [L]. , Religionr, according ,to) their
conception of it,: comprehended nothing else; and the rites, by
which they' persuAded themselves that they could gain the

[K NOT EX. :

;[LJ NOTE XI.

19

Upon rcligi-
on
favour

SECT. I.

Upon the cha-
rader and vir-
tues of the
human mind.

favour of heaven, were of. such a nature as might have been ex-
pected from the rude ideas of the ages which devised and intro-
duced them. They were either lb unmeaning as to be altogether
unworthy of the Being to wliofe honour they were. consecrated;
or so absurd as to be a disgrace to reason and humanity [M]. Char.
lemagne in France, and Alfred the Great in England, endea-
voured to dispel this darkness, ad gave their fubjets a short
glirrpfe of light and knowledge. But the ignorance of the age
was too powerful for their efforts and intitutions. The dark-
ness returned, and fettled over Europe more thick and heavy
than formerly.

As the inhabitants of Europe during there centuries were

strangers to the arts which embellish a polished age, they were
destitute of the virtues which abound among people who con-
tinue in a simple state. Force of mind, a sense of pe(fonal
dignity, gallantry in enterprize,; invincible; perseverance in exe-
cution, and contempt of danger and of death, are the charac-
teriftic virtues of. uncivilized nations. But these are all the
offspring of equality and independence, both which the feudal
institutions had destroyed. The spirit of domination corrupted
the, nobles; 'the yoke of servitude depressed ;the people;, the
generous sentiments inspired by a sense of equality were extin-
guifhed, and nothing remained to be a check on ferocity and
violence. Human society is in its most corrupted state at that pe-
riod when men have loft their original independence and.fimpli-
city of manners, but have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a sense of decorum and of propriety in con-
duct, as a restraint on tlofe paflions which lead to heinous crimes.

[M] NOTE Xll.

Accordingly,

Accordingly, a greater number of those atrocious ations which
fill the mind of man with aftoniflment and horror, occur in the
history of the centuries under review, than in that of any period
of the fame extent in the annals of Europe. If we open the
history of Gregory of Tours, or of any contemporary author, we
meet with a series of deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so
wild and enormous as almost to exceed belief.

BUT, according to the observation of an elegant and pro-

foiund historian '; there is an ultimate point of depreflion, as'
well as of exaltation, from which human affairs naturally re-
turn in a contrary progress, and beyond which they seldom
pas either in their advancement or decline. When defets,
either in the form, or in the administration of government, oc-
cafion flich disorders in society as are excessive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and to apply such
remedies as will most effecually remove them. Slight incon-
veniencies may be long overlooked or endured, but when
abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society mut go to ruin, or must
attempt to reform them. The disorders in the feudal fyfteim,
together with the corruption of taste and manners confequerit
upon these, which had gone on inereafing during a long course of
years, eemed to have attained their utmost point of excess to-
wards the close of the eleventh century. From that aera, we
may date the return of government and manners in a contrary
direcion, and can trace a fucceflon ofcaufes and events which
contributed, ome with a nearer and more powerful, others with,
a more remote and less perceptible influence, to abolish con-

21

SECT. I.

From Ille be.
ginning of tie
eleventh cen-
tuly govern-
menlt and
manners b-
gin to in-
prove.
a Hume's Hiflory of England, vol ii. p. 41,,

fuion.

SECT. I. fusion and barbarism, and to introduce order, regularity, and re-

finement.

Neceflary to IN pointing out and explaining these causes and events, it is
point out the
causes and not necefary to observe the order of time with a chronological
contibute toh accuracy; it is of more importance to keep in view their'mutual
wards this connection and dependance, and to show how the operatio' of
improeent one event, or of one cause, prepared the way for another, and

augmented its ifluence. We have hitherto been contemplating
the progress of that darkness which spread over Europe from its
first approach, to the period of greatest obscuration; a more plea-
rant exercise begins here, to observe the sirs dawnings of return-
ing light, to mark the various acceflions by which it gradually
increased and advanced towards the full splendor of day.

The tendency I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order to rescue the Holy
of the Cru- Land out of the hands of Infidels, seem to be the first event
fades to intro-
duce a change that rouzed Europe from the lethargy in which it had been long
in govern-
mient and funk, and that tended to introduce any change in government,
manners. or in manners. It is natural to the human mind to view those
The more re-
mote causes places which have been distinguished by being the. residence of
of these expe-
ditions.epe any illustrious personage, or the scene of any great tranfadion,

with rome degree of delight and veneration. From this prin-
ciple flowed the superstitious devotion with which Chrifians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were accustomed to visit
that country which the Almighty had feleted as the inheritance
of his favourite people, and in which the son of God had ac-
complifhed the redemption of mankind. As this distant pilgri-
mage could not be performed without considerable expence,
fatigue and danger, it appeared the more meritorious, and came
to be confidered as an expiation for almost every crime. An

opinion
22

opinion which spread with rapidity over Europe about the close SECT. I.
of the tenth and, begipling of the eleventh century, and whlich '- )
gained univerfnl credit, wonderfully augmented the number of
these credulous pilgrims, and increased the ardour with which
they undertook this useless voyage. The thousand years men-
tinned by St John , were supposed to be accomplished, and the
end of the world to be at hand. A general confternatjon seized
mankind; many relinquiflhed their pofleflions: and abandoning
their friends and families, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined. that Christ would quickly appear to
judge the world . While Palestine. continued subjet to the
Caliphs, they had, encouraged the refqrt of pilgrims to Jerufa-
lejn; and confidered this as a beneficial species of commerce,
which brought into their dominions gold and silver, and carried
nothihg out of them but relics and consecrated trinkets. But the
Turks lhaving conquered Syria about the middle of the eleventh
century, pilgrims were exposed to outrages of every kind from
there fierce barbarians. This change happening precisely at. the
jundurti when the panic terror: which I have mentioned rendered
pilgrimages most frequent, filled Europe with alarm and indigna-
tion. Every person who returned from Palestine, related the dan-
gers which he had encountered, in visiting the holy city; and
described with exaggeration the cruelty and vexations of the
Turks.

WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared, the zeal of a The i,,mcdi.
fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of leading all the forces ate Occasion

Revel xx. 2, 3, 4.
u Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des IIiftoricns de France.

tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p. 332. Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap.
Eccard. Corp. Script. mcdii. svi, vol. i. p. 9og. Annalifta Saxo, ibid. 576.

ot'

23

of Christendom against the infidels, and of driving them out
of the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to give a beginning
to that wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that was the
name of this martial apostle, run from province to province with
a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes and people to this Holy
war, and wherever he came kindled the fame enthusiastic ar-
dour for it, with which he himself was animated. The council
of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand persons were
aflembled, pronounced the scheme to have been suggested by the
immediate inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
(till more numerous, as oon as the measure was proposed, all
cried out with one voice, " It is the will of God." Persons of
all ranks were smitten with the contagion; not only the gallant
nobles of that age, with their martial followers, whom the
boldness of a romantic enterprize might have been apt to allure,
but men in the more humble and pacific fiations of life; eccle-
fiaftics of every order, and even women and children engaged
with emulation in an undertaking which was deemed sacred
and meritorious. If we may believe the concurring testimony
of contemporary authors, fix millions of persons aflumed the
cross , which was the badge that distinguished such as devo-
ted themselves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the
Princess Anna Comnena, torn up from the foundation, seemed
ready to precipitate itself in one united body upon Asia . Nor
did the fumes of this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: the
frenzy was as lasting, as it was extravagant. During two
centuries, Europe seems to have had no object but to recover

x Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gcfta Dci per Francos, vol. i. 387.
edit. Han. I6 1.
Y Alexias. lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 224.

or

SECT. I.
24

or keep poffeffibn of the Holy Land, and through that period, vast
armies continued to march thither'[N].

THa first efforts of valour animated by enthusiasm were irre-

fitible ' part of the leser Asia, all Syria and'Palefine were wrefR-
ed from the infidels; the banner of the cross. was displayed' on
Mount Sion; Conftantinbple the capital of the Cliriftian empire
in the East, was seized by a body of there adventurers, who had
taken arms against the Mahometans, and an Earl of Slanders,
and his descendants, kept po'effion of the Imperial' throne dur-'
ing half a century.' But'though the first impreflion of the'Cru-
faders was so unexpected that they' made their' conquests with
great ease, they found infinite 'difficulty in preserving them. Es-
tablilhments so distant from Europe, fuirrounded by warlike na-
tions, animated with fanatical zeal scarce inferior:'to'that of the
Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in danger of beilig over-
turned, Before' the expiration of the thirteenth century, the
Christians were driven out of all their Asiatic pofefnions, in acquiring
of which incredible numbers of men had perished, and immense
funs of money had been wafted. The 6nly common enterprize
in which the European nations ever engaged, and which all un-
dertook, with equal ardour, remains a singular monument of hu-
man folly.

Bu from these expeditions, extravagant as they were, be-

neficial consequences followed; which had neither been foreseen
nor expected. In their progress towards the Holy Land, the
followers of the' cross marched through countries better culti-

SRCT. I.

The fuccefsof
the CrufRdes.

A. D. 1z9.

The beneficial
effets of the
Crusades on

manners.

LN] N, OT X.
VOL. I.

E

vated,

vated, and more civilized than their own. Their first rendez-
vous was commonly in Italy, in which Venice, Genoa, Pifa'and
other cities had begun to apply themselves to commerce, and had
made some advances towards wealth as well as refinement. They
embarked there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued their route
by land to Constantinople. Though the military spirit had been
long extin&t; i the eafterr Empire, and a despotism of the
worst species had annihilated almost every publick virtue, yet
Constantinople having never felt the defructive rage of the
barbarous nations, was the, greatest, as well as the most boatti-
ful 'city in Europe, aid the only one' in which there remained
any image of the ancient elegance in hmanners, and arts. The
naval power of the eastern Empire :was considerable. Manu-
factures of the most curious fabrick were carried on in itsdo-
minions. Conftantiiople was the nly mart in Europe for the
commodities of the. 'East Iidies. Although the Saracens and
Turks had torn from 'the Empire many of its richest provinces,
and had reduced it within very narrow bounds, yet great
wealth. flowed.. into: the capital ':from. there. various sources,
which not only cherilhed, ifuch a taste for magnificeice but
kept: ali{e such a relish for. the 'sciences as appear bonfider-
able when compared with what was known in other parts of
Europe. Even in Asia, the Europeans who had aflumed the
cross found the remains of the knowledge and arts which the
example 'and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused tlifbugh
their empire. Although the at'tention of the hift6rians of 'the
Crusades was fixed on other objets than the Rate of society and
manners among the nations which they invaded, although
most of them had neither taste nor discernment enough to de-
scribe them, they relate, however, such signal ats of humanity

and

SECT. I.
1-y~
a6

STATE OF EUROPE.

and generosity in the conduc of Saladin as well as some other
leaders of the Mahometans, as give us a'very high idea of
their manners. It was not pollible sot the Crusaders to. travel
through so many countries, and to behold their various. cntoms
and institutions without acquiring information and improvement;
Their views enlarged; their prejudices wore off,' ",new ideas
crowded into their.minds; .and they must havd been ;tnfible on6
many occasions of the rfticity of thejr own manners wheni com-
pared with those of a more polished people. These iniprefllons
were not so light,as to be effaced. upon their return to their na-
tive;; cuntriesi, A',clfeintercoufe subsisted between the, East Itid
Weft during two,centuriesi; new. armiies'were continually march:
ing from Europe: t, .Asia, while former adventurers returned
home and importedilnany Qf;the deftoms to which, they had
been f4ljlizigded ,by a,, lg .refidece fabroad. Accordihgly,i we
difqVgY, fop after. tle, comnmncepnlt of thle Crusades; greater
fplendourin, the ,cortsf Princed, greater pomp, ini public cere
monies,,a. mornirefined:.tafte in; pleasure and amusements,. roge-
thrq witlh, a moeroingptic spirit of enterprize spreading gradually
eve, Eur4pe, i' ndt 9 (tie wild: expeditions, the effdEt.of super-
Ritjon. ,Ogfo . ,w, p 9W ,the fifRt. gl1am, of light, whichl'tended
to dispel barbarity and,jgnortc. . .,

,.]UT es'

beneficial ponfeqences of the Crusades took place

slowly;,. their, ipfle e up9nH he fgt.qlof property, and, eonfl
quently Rs ,ppWr, .in tl; :difftregt, kiiigdorms dfi.Europe, was
more immediate, a wellas discernible.' The nobles who aftiumed
the cross, and bound tlhenfelves to. marci to the Holy Land,
soon perceived that great fums were neceflary towards defray-

.* ,, '

*

**

' ^ '

' ' ':. E ' '

'
in d

SCT, I.

t'rheir influ-
ence on the
state of pro-
perty.

SECT. I. ing the expences of such a distant expedition, and enabling

<V ^ them to appear with suitable dignity at the head of their vasals.

But the genius of the feudal system was averse to the impofitic,
of extraordinary taxes; and fubjets in that age were unaccuf-
tomed to pay them. No expedient remained for levying the
fums requisite, but the sale of their pofeflions. As men were in-
flamed with romantic expectations of the splendid conquest which
they hoped to make in Asia, and pofflefed with such zeal for reco-
vering the Holy Land as swallowed up every other paflion, they
relinquished their ancient inheritances without any relutance,
and for prices far below their value, that they might rally forth
as adventurers in .quest of new settlements in unknown coun-
tries. The Monarchs of the different kingdoms, none of whom
had engaged in the sirs Crusade, eagerly seized this oppor-
tunity of annexing considerable territories to their crowns at
small expence . Besides this, several great barons who perished
in the Holy war, having left no heirs, 'their fiefs reverted'of course
to their refpedive overeigns, and by there acceflions of property
as well as power taken from the one scale and thrown into
the other, .the regal authority incireafed h 'proportion as that of
the Aristocracy declined. The' bfence, too; of many potent as--
fals, accustomed to control and' give law to their overeigns,
afforded them an opportunity of extending their prerogative,
and of acquiring a: degree of weight in the constitution which
they did not formerly poflefs. To these circumstances, we may
add, thatas all who'afumiied the cross, were taken under the
immediate protection of the' church, and its heaviest anathemas
were denounced against such as hould disquiet or annoy those

a Willelm. Malm(bur. Guibert. Abbas. ap. Bongarf. vol. i. 481.

who

who had devoted thenmfelves to this service; the private quarrels
and hostilities which banished tranquility from a feudal kingdom
were suspended or extinguified ; a more general and steady ad-
ministration of justice began to be introduced, and some advances
were made towards the eftabliflment of regular government in
the several kingdoms of Europe b [O].

THE commercial effects of the Crusades were not less con-

fiderable than those which I have already mentioned. The
first armies under the tfandard of the cross which Peter the
hermit and Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the length of
the march, as well Cs the fiercenes of the barbarous people who
inhabited those countries, that it deterred others from taking
the fame route; so that rather than encounter so many dan-
gers, they chose to go by sea. Venice, Genoa, and Pisa fir-
nifhed the transports on which they embarked. The furm which
these cities received merely for freight from fucl numerous
armies was immenfed., This, however, was but a small part
of what they gained by the expeditions to the Holy Land; .the
Crusaders contracted with them, for military stores and provi-
sions; their fleets kept o the coast as the army advanced by
land; and supplying them with whatever was wanting, engrofed.
all the profits of that lucrative branch of commerce. The filc-
cess which attended the arms of the Crusaders was productive of
advantages still more permanent. There are charters yet extant,,

b Du Cange Gloffar. voc, Crucefignatus.. Gull. Abbas ap. Bongars. vol. i..
480, 482.

10] NOTE XIV.
d Muratori Antiquit. Italic. mcdii cevi, vol. ii. 905.

COil -

SECT. I.

Their com-
mercial tffet.

29

SaCr. I.

Theeflablilh-
, ment of com-

munities fa-
vourable to
government
and order.

containing grants to the Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese, of the
most extensive immunities in the several settlements which the
Christians made in Asia. All the commodities which they im-
ported or exported are thereby exempted from every impofi-
tion; the property of entire suburbs in some of the maritime
towns, and of large streets and houses in others, is vested in
them; and all questions arising among persons fettled within their
precints, or who traded under their protetion, are appointed to
be tried by their own laws and by judges of their own appoint-
ment e. When the Crusaders seized Contfantinople, and placed
one of their own number on the imperial throne, the Italian States
were likewise gainers by that event. The Venetians who had
planned the enterprize, and took a considerable part in carrying
it into execution, did not neglect to secure to themselves the
chief advantages redounding from. its success. They made; them,
selves masters of part of the ancient Pleponnefius in, Greece, to,
gether with some of the most fertile- islands, in the Archipelago,
Many valuable branches of the: commerce, which formerly cen-
tered in Conitantinople,. were. trnsfqrred. t Veni¢, Genoa, or
Pisa. Thus a fucceflion. of events occafio.ied. by tlhi,oly! war,
opened various. sources from which wealth flowedi in .fuch:abuni
dance into these cities f, as enabled them,, in concurrence; with
another institution which. shall be immediately mentioned, t fe-
cure their own liberty and independaice. . , '; :.

' '

' '

. - . · i ' i o " "

uI. THE inftitutipn to. which I, alluded was the forming.!of

cities into communities, corporations, or bodies politick, and
granting them the privilege of municipal jurifditdion, which

e Murat. ibid. 906, &c. ':
f Villchardouin hilt. de Conflant, fpus l'Empcreu.rsFrancoisi 15,, &c.

contributed
30

STATE OF EUROPE.

contributed more, perhaps, than any other cause to. introduce
regular government, police and arts, and to diffuse them over
Europe. The feudal government had degenerated into a system
of oppreflion. The usurpations of the nobles were become un-
bounded and intolerable: they had reduced the great body of
the people into a state of atual servitude: the condition of those
dignified with the name of freemen, was often little preferable
to that of the other. Nor was such oppreflion the portion of
those alone who dwelt in the country, and were employed in
cultivating the estate of their master. The cities and villages
held of some great lord, on whom they depended for protection,
and were no less subjet to this arbitrary juridliCtion. The in-
habitants were deprived of the natural, and most unalienable
rights of humanity. They could not dispose of the effTets which
their own industry had acquired, either by a latter will, or by
any deed executed during their life g. They had no right to
appoint guardians for their children, during their minority.
They were not permitted to marry without purchasing the con-
Tent of the lord on whom they depended h. If once they had
commenced a law fiit, they durst not terminate it by an ac-
commodation, because that would have deprived the lord in
whole court they pleaded, of the perquisites due to him on
pafling sentence i. Services of various kinds, no less difgracefill
than opprelive, were exacted from them without mercy or mo-
deration. The spirit of industry was choaked in some cities by
absurd tegulations, and in others by nreafonable exactions:

s Dacherii Spiceleg. torn. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4o0. Ordonances des Rois
de France, tom. iii. 204. No. 2. 6.

h Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22. tom. iii. 203. No. . Murat.
Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. 20. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xi. 325, 341.

i Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182.

nor

SECT. I.

The ancient
slate of cities.

SecT. I.

The freedom
of cities first
eftblifhed in
Italy.

nor would the narrow and oppreflive maxims of a military arifto-
cracy have permitted it ever to rife to any degree of height or
vigour k.

BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn their atten-

tion towards commerce, and to conceive ome idea of the
advantages which they might derive from it, they became im-
patient to fliake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and to efta-
blilh among themselves such a free and equal government as
would render property secure, and industry flourishing. The
German Emperors, especially those of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, as the feat of their government was far distant
from Italy, possesed a feeble and imperfect jurisdiction in that
country. Their perpetual quarrels either with the Popes or
with their ovn turbulent vassals diverted their attention from
the interior police of Italy, and gave constant employment to
their arms. These circumstances encouraged the inhabitants of
some of the Italian cities, towards the beginning of the eleventh
century, to alfume new privileges, to unite together more closely,
and to form themselves into bodies politick governed by laws
eftablihed by common content . The rights,' which many cities
acquired by bold or fortunate usurpations, others purchased from
the Emperors, who deemed themselves gainers when they re-
ceived large ums for immunities which they were no longer able
to withhold; and some cities obtained them gratuitously from the
generosity or facility of the Princes on whom they depended. The
great increase of wealth which the Crusades brought into Italy, oc-
cafioned a new kind of fermentation and ativity in tle minds of

k M. 'AbbW Mably obfervat. fur l'hifl. de France, tom. ii. p. 2. 96.
I Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.

the

33

the people, and excited such a general paflion for liberty and inde-
pendance, that before the conclusion of the last Crusade p.ll the
considerable cities in that country had either purchased or had ex-
torted large immunities from the Emperors [P].

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy before it made

its way into France. Louis the Gross, in order to create some
power that might counterbalance those potent` vassals who con-
trouled, or give law to the crown, firfl. adopted the plan of
conferring new privileges on the towns situated within his own
domaine. These privileges were called charters of corituniimmy,
by which he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolilhed all marks
of servitude, and foriped them into corporations or bodies poli-
tick, to be governed by a council aild magiflrates of their own
nomination. These magistrates had the right of adminiflring
justice within their own precincs, of levying taxes, of embodying
and training to arms the militia of the tow!n, which took the field
when required by the overeign, under the command of officers
appointed by the community. The great barons imitated the ex-
ample of their monarch, and granted like immunities to the towns
within their territories. They had wafted such great films in
their expeditions to the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay
hold on this new expedient for raising money, by the iale of
there charters of liberty. Though the inflitution of communities
was as repugnant to their maxims of.policy, as it was adverse
to their power, they difiegarded remote consequences, in order
to obtain present relief. In less than two centuries servitude
was abolifled in mofl of the towns in France, and they became
free corporations, instead of dependant villages without juril-

[P] NOTE XV.
VOL. I.

SECT. I.

Is introduced
into France
and into oilier
countries of
Europe.
A.D. o18
-1 37.'
diction

34
SECT. I. diction or privileges [Q_3. Much about he fame period, the great

-'
- cities in Germany began to acquire like immunities, and laid

the foundation of their present liberty and independance [R].
The practice spread quickly over Europe, and was adopted in
Germany, Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other feudal
kingdoms [S].

Its happy es- THE good effects of this new institution were immediately
fCls uondon felt, and its influence on government as well as manners was no
the inhabi- less extensive than salutary. A great body of the people was re-
tants

leafed from servitude, and from all the arbitrary and grievous
impositions to which that wretched condition had fubjeaed them.
Towns, upn acquiring the right of community, became so many
little republicks, governed by known and equal laws; and
liberty was deemed such an essential and charateriftic part in
their constitution, that if any slave took refuge in one of them,
and resided there during a year without being claimed, he was
inflantly declared a freeman, and admitted as a member of the
community q.

Upon the As one part of the people owed their liberty to the erection
power of the
nobility. of communities, another was indebted to them for their security.

Such had been the state of Europe during several centuries, that
felf-prefervation obliged every man to court the patronage of
some powerful baron, and in times of danger his castle was the
place to which all retorted for safety. But towns surrounded
with walls, whose inhabitants were regularly trained to arms,

[QJ N OTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII. [S] NOTE XVIII.
1 Stat. Humberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182, 85. Charta
Comit. Forenf. ibid. 193.

and

and bound by interest, as well as by the mol solemn engagemcnts,
reciprocally to defend each other, afforded a more commodious and
secure retreat. The nobles began to be confidered as of less im-
portance, when they ceased to be the sole guardians to whom the
people could look up for protection againfl violence.

IF the nobility suffered rome diminution of their 'credit and

power by the privileges granted to the cities, the crown acquired
an increase of both, as there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the Monarch could'bring no
army into the field but what was compoed of soldiers furnilhed
by the crown-vaffals, always jealous of the regal authority, and
often in rebellion against it; nor had he any funds for carry-
ing on the public service, but such as they granted him with
a very fparinghland, But when the members of communities
were permitted to bear arms, and were trained to the use of
there, this in ome degree supplied the first defec, and gave the
crown the command of a body of men ind.pendant of its great
vassals. The attachment of the cities. to their sovereigns, whom
they refpeded as the first authors of their liberties, and whom
they were obliged to court as the protectors of their immunities
against the domineering spirit of the nobles, contributed somewhat
towards removing the second evil, as it frequently engaged them
to grant the crown fulch supplies of money as added new force to
government 1,'

THE acquifitioIl of,,iberty made such a happy change in the
condition of all the members of communities, as routed them

* Orddh ds RoisdeFrance, tom. i. 602, 785. ton. ii. 318. 422.

F 2 from

35

SECT. I.

Upon the
power of tile
crowIn I

Ulpon tile In-
create ot'in-
duftry.

SET,. I.

The inhabi-
tants ofcities
acquite polit'-
cal power as
members of
the conflituti-
on.

from that stupidity and inaftion into which they had been funk
by the wretchedness of their former itate. The spirit of in-
duftry evivcd. Commerce became an objed of attention, and
began to flourith. Population increased. Independance was es-
tablilhed; and wealth flowed into cities which had long been
the feat of poverty and oppreflion. Wealth was accompanied
by its ufilal attendants, ostentation and luxury; and though
the former was inelegant and cumbersome, and the latter inde-
licate, they led gradually to greater refinement in manners, and
in the habits of life. Together with this improvement in
manners, a more regular species of government and police
was introduced. As cities grew to be more populous, and the
occasion, of intercourse among men increased, statutes and regula-
tions multiplied of course, and all became sensible that their
common safety depended on observing them with exaftefs, and
on punishing such as violated them, with promptitude and ri-
gour. Laws and subordination, as well as polished manners, took
their rife in cities, and diffused themselves insensibly through the
reft of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained personal freedom
and municipal jurifdiion, oon acquired civil liberty and political
power. It was a fundamental principle in the feudal .sysem of
policy, that no freeman could be governed or taxed unless by
his own content. In consequence of this, the vassals of every ba-
ron were called to his court, in which they eftablilhed by mutual
content such regulations as they deemed most beneficial to their
small society, and granted their filperior such supplies of money
as were proportional to their abilities, or to his wants. The
barons themselves, conformably to the fame maxim, were ad-

mitted
36

nitted into the fiupreme aflembly of the nation, a d concurred
with the sovereign in ennaing laws, or in impoling taxes. As
the superior lord,. according to the original plan of feudal po-
licy, retained the dired property of those lands which he
granted, in temporary poffellion, to Ils vasals, tle law, even
after fiefs became hereditary, ifill supposed this original practice
to fibfift, and a baron continued to be confidered as the guardian
of all who resided within his territories. Tile great council of
each nation, whether diftinguiflled by the name of a parliament,
a diet, the Cortes, or the tates general, was compo(cd entirely
of fiuch barons, and dignified ecclefiafics, as hell imediatcly
of the crown. Towns, whether situated within the royal do-
maine, or on the landsof a fiubje, depended for proteftion on
the lord of whom they held. They had no legal name, no
political existence, which could entitle them to be admitted into
the legislative assembly, or could give them any authority there.
But as oon as they were enfranchised, and formed into Bodies
Corporate, they became legal and independant members of the
constitution, and acquired all the rights eential to freemen.
Amongst these, the most valuable, was the privilege of a deci-
five voice in enacting laws, and in granting subsidies. It was
natural for cities, accustomed to a form of municipal govern-
ment, according to which no regulation colld be eftabliflied,
and no money could be raised without their own consent, to
claim this privilege. The wealth, the power and confideratibn
which they acquired on recovering their liberty added weight
to their claim and favourable events happened, or fortunate
conjunctures occurred in the different kingdoms of Europe,
which facilitated or forwarded their obtaining poffeflion of
this important right. In England, one of the firfl countries in

which
$

37
SJLc-I. i.

SECT. 1. which the rprefentatives of boroughs were admitted into the

. j great council of the nation, the barons who took arms against
x D. xi65. Henry III. summoned them to attend parliament in order to add

greater popularity to their party, and to strengthen the barrier
againfl the encroachment of regal power. In France, Philip
the Fair, a Monarch no lets sagacious than enterprizing, confidered
them as instruments which might be employed with equal ad-
vantage to extend the royal prerogative, to counterbalance the
exorbitant power of the nobles, and to facilitate the imposition
of new taxes. With these views, he introduced the deputies of
such towns as were formed into communities, into the states ge-
neral of the nation . In the Empire, the wealth and immmu-
nities of the imperial cities placed them on a level with the
most considerable members of the Germanic body. Conscious
of their own power and dignity, they pretended to the privilege
A. D. 1293. of forming a separate bench in the diet; and made good their

pretension '.

The happy
effets of this
upoI goveri.-
n.ent.

BUT in what way soever. the representatives of cities first gained

a place in the legislature, that event had great influence on the
form and genius of government. It tempered the rigour of
ariftocratical oppression, with a proper mixture of popular li-
berty: It secured to the great body of the people, who had
formerly no representatives, active and powerful guardians' of
their rights and privileges: It eftablifled. an .intermediate pt
between the King and nobles, to which each had recotirfe al-
ternately, and which at ome times opposed the iflirpatiorls of
the former, on other occasions checked the erneoacnitn'ent of

* Pafquier'Retherques'de la France, p. 81. edit. Par. 1633.
. Pfeffel Abregc de l'liiftoire& 'droit d'Allemagne, p. 408. 451.

the

the latter. As oon as the representatives of communities gained
any degree of credit and influence in the legillature, the spirit
of laws became different from what it had formerly been it
flowed from new principles; it was directed towards new objects;
equality, order, the publick good, and tle redress of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into use, and which grew to
be familiar in the statutes and jurisprudence of the European
nations. Alnoft all the efforts in favour of liberty in every
country of Europe have been made by this new power in the
legislature. In proportion as it rote to confidelation and in-
fluence, the severity of the nriitocratical spirit decreased; and
the privileges of the people became gradually more extensive
as the ancient and exorbitant jurisdiCtion of the nobles was
abridged T].

IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been declared free by

the charters of communities, that part of the people which
resided in the country, and was employed in agriculture, be-
,gan to recover liberty by enfranchisement. During the rigour
of feudal government, as hath been already observed, the great
body of the lower people was reduced to ervitude. They were
slaves fixed to the foil which they cultivated, and together with it
were transferred from one proprietor to another, by sale, or by
conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy did not favour the en-
franchifement of that order of men. It was an eftablilhed maxim
that no vassal could legally diminish the value of a fief, to the de-
triment of the lord from whom he had received it. In consequence
of this, manumiflion by the authority of the immediate master, was
not valid; and unless it was co: firmcic b) the superior lord of whom

[T'] NOT E XIX.

he

SECT. .

The people
acquire liber-
ty by enfran-
chifcllcnt.

39

SECi'. I. he held, slaves of this species did not acquire a conpleat right

L'-"^' to their liberty. Thus it became necessary to acend through

all the gradations of feudal holding to the King, the lord Para-
mount x. A form of procedure o tedious and troublerome dif-
couraged the practice of manumiflion. Domestic or personal
slaves often obtained liberty from the humanity or beneficence
of their mailers, to whom they belonged in absolute property.
The condition of slaves fixed to the foil was much more un-
alterable.

The motives BUT the freedom and independance which one part of the
and progrefis
of tis. people had obtained by the institution of communities, inspired

the other with the most ardent desire of acquiring the fame pri-
vileges; and their fiperiors, sensible of the benefits which they
themselves had derived from former colceflions, were less unwil-
' ling to gratify them by the grant of new immunities. The

enfranchisement of slaves became more frequent; and the
Monarchs of France, prompted by necessity, no lets than by
their inclination to reduce the power of the nobles, endeavoured

A.D 3s. to render it general. Louis X. and his brother Philip ifuied
nld 13 S. ordinances, declaring, " That as all men were by nature siee-

born, and as their kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks,
they determined that it hould be To in reality as well as in name;
therefore they appointed that enfranchisements hould be granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon jult and reasonable condi-
tions ." These cdicts were carried into immediate execution
within the royal domaine. The example of their sovereigns,
together with tle. expedation of the considerable fnms which

x Etabliffemers de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Older. tom. i. 283. not. (a).
- Ordon. tom. i. p. 583, 653.

they
4°

STATE OF EUROPE,

tly,migit.raife by. tis expedient,. led maliy of tlie'inobles to et
lleir dependants at. liberty; and; servitude was gradually abo-
lifled in almost every province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy,
the eftablilhment of republican government in their great cities,
the genius ahd maxims of. which were extremely different fom
those 'of tle feudal policyi together with the ideas of equalityi
which the progress of commerce had rendered fatiliar, gradually
introduced the praftice' of enfranchising the ancient predial flaes.
In some provinces of Germany, the peifons who had been fjet
to this species. of bondage, were; released; :in others, the rigbur
of their state was mitigated. In England, as the spirit of, liberty
gained ground, the very,name and idea: of personal servitude,
without any formal interposition of the legislature to prohibit it,
was totally banihed. i

THE effecs of fbch a: remarkable change in the condition of

fo'great a part of the people, .could'not fail of being confidera-
ble and extensive. The hulbandman, master of his own industry,
and secure of reaping for himself thp.fruits of his labour, became
the farmer of the .fae,fieldis where he had formerly been com-
pelled to tpil for the benefit: of anotlie, The odious names of
master and of slave, i the .most mortifying and dpreffing of all
diftin6tions to human nature, were. abolished. New profpeds
opened and nwi: incitements to: ingentity atd.enterprize presented
themfelyes, to thiofe iwho: were eman.jpatd. ,The expegatiqn ps
betteripg, their fortupe,[ ai well asthat,pf; raising themfelv t a
more honourable condition,: concuyred in calling forth, their
aativity and genius; and a.numerous class of nmen, who for-
merly had. no 'political ,xiften¢, ail4 :were eployed merely as

'' '''' ' [UJ;'O'E X ' ' , ; i i

SECr. .
SCT,

The cflt'c of
this upon the
improvement
of society.

.41
VOL. 1

G

infRru-

SECT. I.

The intro-
duflion of a
more regular
adminiftra-
tion ofjuRice,
contributes to
the improve-
ment of
society.

inRruments of labour, became useful citizens, and contributed toi
wards augmenting the force;or riches of the society, which adopted
them as members.

V. THE various expedients which were emp!oyed in!order to

introduce a more regular, equal, and vigorous administration of
justice, contributed greatly towards the improvement of 'society.
What was the particular mode of dispensing jufice in the feve-
ral barbarous nations which over-ran the Roman Empire, and
took pdeflion of its different provinces, canhot now be deter-
mined with certainty. We may conclude from the form of
government eablifhed amnng them, as well as from their
ideas concerning the nature of society, that the authority of the
magistrate was extremely limited, and the idependanc, of in-
dividuals proportionally great. History and records, as far as
they reach back, justify this .donclufion, and represent the ideas
and exercise of uftice in all the countries of Europe, a little dif-
ferent from those which muff take place in a state of nature To
maintain the order and tranquillity of society; by the, regular
execution of known 'laws to 'inflict engeance. oh crimes de;
tiruive of the peace'and fifety 6of individualsi b prosecution
earried on in the name, arid by the authority of the community
to confider the punishment of criminals as a piblic example to
deter others :fom violating the laws; were objects of overn.
mentilittle.underftood in theory, and les. renarded in praiice.
The magistrate could scarce be'sod' to hold the fiord. ofjuRfice,
it was left in the hands of private persfns; Resentment was
almost the sole motive for prosecuting crimes,; and to gratify
that passion,, wasthe end and rule ii pnlihing them.l He 'wh6
filffeed the wrong, was the only person who had a right to pur

:', ~~~,» sue

43

rue the aggreflor, and to ecaa or to remit the punishment;
From a system of judicial procedure, fp crude and efetive as
seems to be scarce compatible with the subsistence of civil society,
disorder and anarchy flowed. SuperRfition concurred with this
ignorance concerning the nature of government, in obftruting
the administration of jutic¢, or in rendering it apricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for there evils, so as to .give a
more regular course to justice; was, during several centuries, one
great objet of political wisdom, The regulations for this' pur-
pose, may be reduced to three general heads.: To eplain these,
and to point out the manner in which: they operated is an im-
poitnt article in the history of. society, amqng the nations of
Eiiropl . .

:. T.Ha first considerable ftep to.wards eablihing 'an equal

administration of justice was the bolilhmintofi ithe right which
individuals claimed of' waging: war with. eaclih. ther,, in, their
own name, and by their own authority, To re .el injuries, an
to revenge wrongs, is no les natural to man than to cultivate
friendlhip and while society remains' in its:; aoft.,fimpleo!ftate,
the: forntbr is confidered as a personal xrihtino;lefsd qnalienakl
than the lattr., Not do ..ren in' this fituatiodideem ,that,. they
have a title, to redrefs'thir own wrongs alone:; they;ate touched
with the injuries of those with whom they are connected, or in
liofe hdnur' they te interRfed ~i ahd ae no. less prompt..to
avenge tlim.. 'Th&i'f'aage, how: iniperfetlyi foeve, he- may
cotmpprelendithe pineples" of political unnionu f els'watily..the
sentiments of fociai affteion, and the :obligations arising ,from
the tieslof blood.' Otl the i-^ppaanc; bs in ;lhjury ot affroit
offered to; his.;family ori ,ibe, Ihe nd.ler,in.o rg .r,,cp pursues
th' authors of it with the keenest resentment. He confiders it

G z as

Sec., I.

This efcled
by abolifling
the praficc
of private
war.

Original ideas
of mlen con-
cerning
jutice.

44

SECT. I. as cowardly to expet redress from any arm but his own, and as

^^J infamous to give up to another the right of determining what

reparation he tlould accept, or with what vengeance he hould
reft satisfied.

These lead to THE maxims and practice of all uncivilized nations, with
the pra&ice respect to the prosecution and puniflment of offenders, particu.
of private
war. larly those of the ancient Germans, and other Barbarians who

invaded the Roman Empire, are perfeCtly conformable to these
ideas. 'While they retained their native simplicity of manners,
and continued to be divided into small tribes or societies, the
defects in this imperfect system of criminal jurisprudence (if it
merits that name) were less sensibly felt. When they came.to
fettle in the extensive provinces which they had conquered, and
to form themselves' into great monarchies when new objects of
ambition. prefentng-themfelves, increased both the number and
the'violence bs their dissensions,' they ought to have adopted new
maxims concerning the redress of injuries, and to have regulated
by general and equal· laws, that which they formerly left to be
dire&ced by the caprice of private pafio. But fierce-.and haughty
chieftains,: accustomed: to avenge themselves ,on. such. as had
injured' them, did not think of relinquishing a right which they
confidered as a' privilege of their order, and a'mark of their inde.
pendance... Laws enforced by the authority 9f Princes and
Magistrates ;who pofefled; little' power, .comman4ed :no great
degree of reverence. The adminiftratiqn of jfice among
rude illiterate .people, was not o' accurate :or decisive, or upi-
form, as to, induce. men to submit implicitly. o its ditermina-
tions.,. Every ,ffendedbaron buckled: on his armourl and., fought
; i Tacit. 'de Mo. German. cap. i .! 'Velli Ptterc. lib. ii.'i l 8. I' '

(,

*.. *i., :-* -. j ..;,. ' .' ... *'*

I *'i ' . .: '
.r .' r edre fts

redress at the head of his vaflals. His adversary met him in
like hostile atray. Neither of them appealed to impotent laws
which could afford them no protection. Neither of them would
submit points; in which their paflions were warmly intetefted, to
the flow determination of a judicial enquiry. Both trusted to their
swords for the decision of the contest. The kindred and de-
pendants of the aggrefor, as well as of the defender, were in
volved in the quarrel. They had not'even the liberty of remain-
ing neutral. Such as refifed to'at in concert with the party to
which they belonged, were not only exposed to infamy, but sub-
jeted' to 'legal p'ehalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn and affli&ed,

during several centuries, by intestine wars, excited by private
animofities, and carried on with all the rage natural to men of
fierce mannets, .and of violent passions. The estate of every
baron was a kind of'independent territory, disjoined from those
around 'it, and the hostilities between them were':perpetual
The evil became fo:inveterate'and deep-rooted) that the form and
laws of 'riVate war were ascertained, and regulations concern-
ihig it :made a pat ih the ifyfte'm of jurisprudence x, in the fame

afihner as if. this practice had been 'founded in some natural

right of humanity, or 'in the original constitution of civil so-
ciety.

'So great was!the disorder, and fach the calamities which
there -perpetual hostilities' occasioned, 'that various efforts were
made to; wrest from the nobles this pernicious privilege which

z Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beauvoifis, ch. 59 et les notes de Thaumaflierc,
P. 447.

. F~;,
,i~"~~ ~they

SECT. I.

The pernici-
ous efftls of
it.

Various me-
thods elnploy..
ed in ord(r to-
abolinl it.

45

they claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign to abolish,
a practice wh!ch almost annihilated his authority. Charlemagne
prohibited it by an express law, as an invention of the devil to
destroy the order and happiness of society y; but the reign of
one Monarch, however vigorous and ative, was too short to
extirpate a custom so firmly eftablilhed. Instead of enforcing
this prohibition, his feeble successors durst venture oil nothing
more than to apply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for
any person to commence war, until he had ent a formal defi-
ance to the kindred and dependants of his adversary they
ordained that, after the commiflion of the trespass or crime
which gave rife to a private war, forty days must elapse before
the person injured hould attack the vaflals of hlis; adyerfary;
they enjoined all persons to suspend their private animofities,
and to cease from hostilities when the King was engaged in any
war against the enemies of the nation. The :church co-operated
with the civil magistrate, and interposed its authority in, or4ep
to extirpate a practice so repugnant to the spirit of Christianity.
Various councils issued decrees, prohibiting all private wars;
and denounced the heaviest anathemas agains such; s

:fhouj.

disturb the tranquillity of society, by claiming; qr exercising that
batbarous right. The aid of eligion was .qalledi ii to.qomb.t
and subdue the ferocity of the times. The Almighty Was:ihid
to have manifested, by visions and revelations to different per-
sons, his disapprobation of that spirit of revenge, which armed
one part of his creatures agaitft .the other. Men .were required,
in the name of God, to fheaith their swords;, and,.to Tertlembe
the sacred ties which united them as. Chriftians,.'and, as membera
of the fame society. But this junction of civil and ecclesiastic

T Capitul. A. D. 80o. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 371.

authority,

SECT. I.

~ cvJc
.46

autfiority, though trengthened by every thing most apt to alarm
and to over-awe the credulous spirit of thofc ages, produced no
other effect than ome temporary suspensions of hotilities, and
a cetation from war on certain days and seasons consecrated to
the more foleinn as of devotion.. The nobles continued to
assert this dangerous privilege; they refused to obey ome of the
laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they eluded others;.
they petitioned; they remonstrated; they struggled for the
right of private war as the highest and most honourable diftin6ti-
on of their order. Even so late as the fourteenth century, we
find the nobles in several provinces of France, contending for
their ancient method of terminating their differences by the
sword, in preference to that of submitting them to the decision
of any judge. The final abolition of this praftice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which, it prevailed, is not to be
nfcribed so much to the force of statutes and decrees, as to the
gradual increase of the royal authority, and to the imperceptible
progress of juster sentiments concerning government, order, and'
public security [X].

2. THI prohibition of the form of trial by judicial combat,

was another considerable tep towards the introdu&ion of such
regular government as secured publick order and private tran-
quillity. As the right;of private war left many of the quarrels
among individuals to be decided, like those between nations, 'by
arms.; the form of trial by judicial combat, which was efta-
blifhed in every country of Europe, banifled equity from courts
ofjufice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of their deter-
minations. In civilized nations, all tranfa6ions of any impor-

SECT. I.

The prohibi-
tion of trial
by judicial
combat, ano-
ther improve-
ment in the
adminiftra-
tion ofjuflice.
[X] NOTE XXI

tance

47

SECT. I.

Defeesin the
judicial pro-
ceedings of
·the middle
ages.

tance are concluded in writing.. The exhibition of the deed
or instrument is full evidence of the fadt, and ascertains with
precision what each party has stipulated to perform. . But among
a rude people, when the arts of reading and writing were such
uncommon attainments, that. to be'mafter. of either, intitled a
person to the appellation of. a clerk or learned man,: fcatce any
thing. was committed to writing but treaties between Princes,
their grants and charters to their subje&s, or such tranfaaions
between private parties as were of extraordinary consequence,
or had an extensive effect. The greater part. of affairs in com,
mon life and bufiners were carried on by verbal contracts or pro-
mises. This, in many 'civil questions, not only made it difficult
to bring proof sufficient to establish any claim, but encouraged
falsehood and fraud, by' rendering them extremely. easy. Even
in criminal cafes, where a particular fat must be ascertained, or
an accusation be disproved, the nature and. effect of, legal evi-
dence was little understood by barbarous nations. To define
with accuracy that species of evidence which a court had reason
to expet; to determine when it ought to insist on positive proof,
and when it should be satisfied with a proof from circumstances;
to compare the testimony of discordant witnesses; and to fix the
degree of credit due to each; were difcuflions too intricate and
subtile for the jurisprudence of ignorant ages. In order to avoid
encumbering themselves with these, a more simple form .ofpro-
cedure was introduced into courts as well civil as criminal.: In
all cafes, where the notoriety of the fad did not.furnifh the clear-
eft and most dired evidence, the person accused, or he against
whom an ation was brought, was called legally, or offered volunta-

rily

\
48

rily to purge himself by oath; and upon his declaring his inno-
cence, he was instantly acquitted . This absurd practice effec-
tually screened guilt and fraud from detection or punish-
ment, by rendering the temptation to perjury so powerful,
that it was not easy to resist it. The pernicious effects of it
were sensibly felt; and in order to guard against them, the
laws ordained that oaths Ihould be administered with great
solemnity, and accompanied with every circumflance which
could inspire religious reverence, or fiperRitious terrors This
however, proved a feeble remedy: there ceremonious rites be-
came familiar, and their impreflion on the imagination gradually
diminilhed; men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at tie folemnities of an oath. Their obferva-
tion of this, put legislators upon devising a new expedient for
rendering the purgation by oath more certain and fatisfatory.
They required the person accused to appear with a certain num-
ber of freemen, his neighbours or relations, who corroborated
the oath which he took, by swearing that they believed all that
he had uttered to be true. These were called Compugators, and
their number varied according to the importance of the subjet
in dispute, or the nature of the crime with which a person was
charged . In ome cafes, the concurrence of no less than
three' hundred of these auxiliary witnefes was requisite to acquit
the person accused h. But even this device was found to be'
inefeAtual. It was a point of honour with every man in Europe,
during several ages, not to desert the chief on whom he depended,

eLeg. Burgund. Tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Alenan. Tit. 89. Leg. Baiwar. Tit.

8. 5. 2. &c. f Du Cange Gloffar. voc. unrarnt'l m, vol. iii. p. 607.
Edit. B.nedi6a. s D Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p: '599. h Speman
Glolir. voc. Affab. Grcgor. Turon. Hill. lib. viii. c. 9.

VOL. 1. .

anl

SecT. I.
A _~c

49
&.

and to stand by those with whom the ties of blood connected
him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate the laws, was
sure of devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager to serve him
in whatever manner he required. The formality of calling Com-
purgators, proved an apparent, not a real security, against false-
hood and perjury; and the sentences of courts, while they con-
tinued to refer every point in question to the oath of the de-
fendant, became so flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal indig-
nation against this method of procedure i.

SENSIBLE of there defecs, but strangers to the manner of

correcting them, or of introducing a more proper form, our an-
ceftors, as an infallible method of discovering truth, and of guard-
ing against deception, appealed to Heaven, and referred every
point in dispute to be determined, as they imagined, by the deci-
sions of unerring ifdom and impartial jutice. The person ac-
cured, in order to prove his innocence, fbmitted, in rome cafes,
to trial, by plunging his arm in boiling water; by lifting a red-hot
iron with his naked hand; by walking bare-foot over burning
plough-shares; or by other experiments equally perilou. and for-
midable. On other occasions, he challenged his accuser to fight
him in single combat. All there various forms of trial were con.-
du&ed with many devout ceremonies; the ministers of eligion
were employed, the Almighty was called upoi to interpose for the
manifestation of guilt, and for the protection of innocehce; and
whoever escaped unhurt, or came off vitorious, was pronounced
to be acquitted by the udgment of God k.

i Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 34.
k Murat. Differtatio de judiciis Dei. Antiquit. Italic. vol. iii. p. 6 a.

AMONG

SECT. .

These intro-
duced the
pratice of
appealing to
heaven:

Particularly
by judicial
combat.
5o

AMON all the whimsical and absurd inflitutions which owe

their existence to the weakness of human reason, this, which
submitted questions that asseted the property, the reputation,
and the lives of men, to the determination of chance, or of bodily
strength and address, appears to be the most extravagant and
preposterous. There were circumtances, however, which led
the nations of Europe to confider this equivocal mode of decid-
ing any poiit in contest, as a dire& appeal to heaven, and a cer-
tain method of discovering its will. As men are unable to com-
prehend the manner in which the Almighty carries on the
government of the universe, by equal, fixed, and general laws,
they are.are apt to imagine that in every cafe which their pafions
or interest render important in their own eyes, the Supreme
Ruler of all, ought visibly to display his power, in vindicating
innocence and punilhing vice. It requires no inconsiderable de-
gree of science and philosophy to correct this popular error.
But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the dark ages,
instead of correting, strengthened it. Religion, for several cen-
turies, consisted chiefly In believing the legendary history of those
faints whose names crowd and disgrace the Romish calendar. The
fabulous tales concerning their miracles, had been declared nu-
thentic by the bulls of Popes, and the decrees of councils; they
made the great subjet of the inftrudions which the clergy offered
to the people, and were received by them with implicit credulity
and admiration. By there, men were acclulomed to believe
that the cftablilhed laws of nature might be violated on the
most frivolous occasions, and were taught to look rather for
particular and extraordinary adts of power under the divine
administration, than to contemplate the regular progress and
execution of a general plan. One superstition prepared the way
fox another; and whoever believed that the Supreme Being had

H inter-

SECT. I.

The intro-
duion of
this pratice
favoured y
the fiuperfti-
*ion of the
middle ages.

51

SEpc. I.

And likewise
by their mar-
tial spirit,

interposed miraculously on those trivial occasions mentioned
in legends, could not but exped his intervention in matters
of greater importance, when solemnly referred to his deci-
sion.

WITH this superstitious opinion, the martial spirit of Europe,

during the middle ages, concurred in eablifhing the mode. of
trial by judicial combat. To be ready to maintain with his
sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first maxim of
honour with every gentleman. To assert their own rights by
force of arms, to inflict vengeance on those who had in-
jured or affronted them, were the diftintion and pride of
high-fpirited nobles. The form of trial by combat coin-
ciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified there paflions.
Every man was the guardian of his own honour, and of his own
life; the justice of his cause, as well as his future reputation,
depended on his own courage and prowes.' This mode of deci-
sion was confidered, accordingly, as one of the happiest efforts of
wife policy; and as soon as it was introduced, all the forms of
trial by fire or water, and other superstitious experiments, fell
into disuse, or were employed only in controversies between
persons of inferior rank. The trial by combat was authorized
over all Europe, and received in every country with equal satis-
facion. Not only questions concerning uncertain or contested
faAs, but general and abftrad points in law were determined by
the issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a method of
discovering truth more liberal as well as more fatisfadory, than.
that by examination and argument. Not only might parties,
whose minds were exasperated by the eagerness and the hostility of
opposition, defy their antagonist, and require him to make good

his
52

his charge, or to prove his innocence, with his sword ; but witnefles,
who had no interest in the issue of the question, though called
to declare the truth-by laws which ought to have afforded .them
protecion, were equally exposed to the danger of a challenge, and
equally bound to aflert the veracity of their evidence by dint of
arms. To complete the absurdities of this military jurisprudence,.
even the charater of a judge was not sacred from its violence.
Any one of the parties might interrupt a judge when about to deliver
his opinion; might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in the
most reproachful terms, and throwing down his gauntlet, might
challenge him to defend his integrity in the field; nor could lie,
without infamy, refuse to accept the defiance, or decline to enter
the lifts againfl-fuch an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other abufcs, fprcad

gradually, and extended to all persons and almost to all cafes.
Ecclesiastics, women, minors, superannuated and infirm pelfons,
who could not with decency or justice be compelled to take
arms,. and to maintain their own cause, were obliged to produce
champions, whom they engaged by affection or rewards, to fight
their battles. The folemnities of a judic;! combat were such
as were natural in an ation, which was confidered both as a
foimal appeal to God, and as the final decision of questions
of the highest moment. Every circurnftance relating to them was
regulated by the edits of Princes, and explained in the comments
of lawyers, with a minute and even superstitious accuracy. Skill
in these laws and rites was the only science of which warlike no-
bles boasted, or which they were ambitious.to attain .

I See a curious difcourfc concerning the laws of judicial combat, by Thomas

of Woodflock, Duke of Glouccfter, uncle to Richard II.in Spelman's Gloflar.
voc. Campus.

SeCT. I.

Jg hcoiea.
univclul.

53

54

SECT. I.

The pernici-
ous effefts of
it.

Various exp.-
dients torabo-
lilhing this
praCtice.

BY this barbarous custom the natural course of proceeding,

both in civil and criminal questions, was entirely perverted.
Force usurped the place of equity in courts of judicature, and
justice was banished from her proper mansion. Discernment,
learning, integrity, were qualities left necessary to a judge than
bodily itreigth, and dexterity in the use of arms. Daring
courage, and superior vigour or address, were of more mo-
mert towards securing the favourable issue of a suit, than the
equity of a cause, or the clearness of the evidence. Men, of
course, applied themselves to cultivate the talents which they
found to be of greatest utility. As strength of body and address
in arms were no less requisite in those lifts which they were ob-
liged to enter, in defence of their private rights, than in the field
of battle, where they met the enemies of their country, it be-
came the great object of education, as well as the chief employment
in life, to acquire these martial accomplishments. The adminiftra-
tion of justice, instead of accustoming men to liften to the voice
of equity, or to reverence the decisions of law, added to the fe-
rocity of their manners and taught them to confider force as the
the great arbiter of right and wrong.

THESE pernicious effets of the trial by combat were To ob-

vious, that they did not altogether escape the view of the unob-
serving age in which it was introduced. The clergy, from the
beginning, remonitrated against it as repugnant to the spirit of
Chrifianity, and subversive of justice and order m. But the
maxims and paflions which favoured it, had taken such hold of
the minds of men, that they disregarded admonitions and cen-

m Du Cange Gloffir. voc. Duellurt, vol. ii. p. 1675.

fures,

55

fircs, which, on other occafions,,would have 'ituck them with
terror. The evil was too great and inveterate to yield to that
remedy, and continuing to increase, the civil power at .length
found it neceflary to interpose. Conscious, however, of their own
limited authority, mnonarclls proceeded with caution, and their
first attempts to restrain, or to et any bounds to this'pradtice,
were extremely feeble. One of the earliest reftriions of this
practice which occurs in the history of Europe, is that of
Henry I. of England., It extended no farther than to pro-
hibit the trial by combat in questions concerning property of
fnall valuen. Louis VII. of France imitated his example, and
issued an edict to the fame effect o. St. Louis, whoe ideas as a
legislator, were far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to
introduce a more perfect juriforudence, and to fbltitute the.trial
by evidence, in place of that by combat. But his regulations,
with respect tp this, were confined to his own domains; for the
great vassals of the crown, poffefled such independant authority,
and were o fondly attached to the ancient praetice, that he duril
not venture to extend it to the whole kingdom. Some barons
voluntarily adopted his regulations. Tle spirit of courts of
justice became averse to the mode of decision by combat, and
discouraged it on every occfion. The nobles, nevertheless,,
thought it so honourable to depend for the security of their
lives and fortunes on their own courage alone, and contended
with so much vehemence for the preservation of this favourite
privilege of their order, that the fucceflbrs of St. Louis, unable
to oppose, and afraid of offending such powerful fubjeAs, were
obliged not only to tolerate, but to authorize the practice which.

o Brufel Usage des Fiefs. vol. ii. p. 962.
o Ordon. tom. i. p. 16:

he

SFc'r. .

he had attempted to abolih p. In other counties of Europe,
efforts equally zealous were employed to maintain the eflablilhed
cuftorp; and similar conceiflons were extorted from their refpec-
tive fovercigns. It continued, however, to be an objec of policy
with every monarch of abilities or vigour, to explode the trial
by combat and various edi&s were iflued for this purpose.
But the observation which was made concerning the right of
private war, is equally applicable to the mode of trial under
review. No custom, how absurd soever it may be, if it has sub-
sifted long, or derives its force from the manners and prejudices
of the age in which it prevails, was ever abolished by the bare
promulgation of laws and statutes. The sentiments of the peo-
ple must change, or ome new power sufficient to counteract it
must be introduced. Such a change, accordingly, took place in
Europe, as science gradually increased, and society advanced to-
wards more perfec order. In proportion as the prerogative of
Princes extended, and came to acquire new force, a power, in-
terested in suppressing every practice favourable to the indepen-
dance of the nobles, was introduced. The struggle, neverthe-
less, subsisted for several centuries; ometimes the new regulations
and ideas seemed to gain ground; sometimes ancient habits re-
curred; and though, upon the whole, the trial by combat went
more and more into disuse, yet instances of it occur, as late as
the sixteenth century, in the history both of France and of Eng-
land. In proportion as it declined, the regular administration of
justice was restored, the proceedings of courts were directed by
known laws, the study of there became an object of attention to
judges, and the people of Europe advanced fast towards civility
when this great cause of the ferocity of their manners was re-
moved [Y].

p Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 390, 435. Y] N O TE XXII.

3. BY

SECT. L
56

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from the courts of the SECT. I.

Barons to those of the King, and fubjefing the decisions of the tihe prvilege
former to the review of the latter, a new flep, not les confider- of appealing

from the

able than these which I have already mentioned, Was taken to- courts ot the
wards eftablihling the regular, consistent, and vigorous admini- bharons, ai

ther great
ftration of justice. Among all the encroachments of the feudal improvement

"

. c i . ». i i . <* * i in tile adini-

nobles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their usurping the nitration of
administration of jutice with supreme authority, both in civil and jufic.
criminal causes, within the precincts of their own estates, was
the most finglar. Itl other nations, fubjeds have contended
with their Princes, and have endeavoured to extend their own
power and privileges; but in the history of their Itruggles and
pretensions, we discover nothing similar to this right which the
feudal barons claimed, and acquired. It must have been Come- Origin of the
thing peculiar in their genius and manners that fuiggefted this idea,, fuprcite and

independant.

and prompted them to insist on such a claim. Among 'the rude juridietion
people who conquered the various provinces of the Roman Em- nobility.
pire, and eftablilhed new kingdoms there, the paion of resent-
ment, too impetuous, to bear controul, was permitted to remain
almost unreftraihed by the authority of laws. The person offended,
as has been observed) retained not only the right of profecut-
ing but of punifiling his adversary. To him it belonged to inflid
such vengeance as satiated his rage, or to accept of fich satis-
fa6tion as appeased it. But while fierce barbarians continued!to'
be the sole judges in their own cause, their enmities were iipla-
cable, and immortal; they et no bounds either to the degree
of their vengeance, or to the duration of their resentment. The
exceies which this occasioned, proved so deftrucive of pedae and
order in society, as forced them to think f some' remedy. At

VOL. I. ' I ' " fir*,

57

firt, arbiters interposed, and by perfiafion or intreaty prevailed
on the party offended to accept of a fine or composition from
the. v.ggreffor, and to drop all farther prosecution. But as fib-
miflion to persons who had no legal or magisterial authority, was
altogether voluntary, it became - necessary to. eftablih judgcs
with power sufficient to enforce their own decisions. The leader
whom they were accustomed to follow and to obey, whose cou-
rage they refpeted, and in whose integrity they placed confi-
dence, was the person to whom a martial people naturally com-
mitted this important prerogative. Every chieftain 'as the com-
mander of his tribe in war, and their judge in peace. Every
baron led his valfals to the field, and administered justice to
them in his hall. Their high spirited dependants would not
have recognized any other authority, or. have. fubmitted'to any
other, jurifdition. But in times of turbulence and violeice, the.
exercise of this new funcion was attended not only with trouble,
but with danger. No person :could aurrie the character of a
judge, if he. did not possess power sufficient to protect the one
party from :thei violence of private revenge, and to compel the
other to accept of fucll reparation a :he, enjoined. Ih consideration
of the extraordinary efforts which this ffice required, judges, be-
fides the fine which they appointed, to be paid as a compensation
to the person or family who had been injured, levied an additional
fum as a recompense for' their own labour; and. in.all} the feudal'
kingdoms the latter was;as precisely ascertained, and as regularly
exacted, as the former. :

THus, By the natural operation of circumstances peculiar to the

manners or political fRate of the feudal nations, separate and territ0-
rialjurifdidions came not only to be established in every kingdom,

but

SECT. I.

The extent
and bad es-
setts of this
privilege.

but were established in such a way, that the intereft.of the
barons concurred with their ambition in maintaining and ex.
tending them. It was not merely a point f honour with the
feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vassals; but from the
exercise of that power arose one capita! branch of their revenue ;
and the emoluments of their 'courts were frequently 'the tmain
support of. their dignity. It was with 'infinite::zeal tiat they as-
ferted and defended this high privilege of their order. By this in-
ftitution, however, every kingdom in Europe was split into as
many separate principalities as it contained powerful barons.
Their vassals, lhether' in peace or in war, were scarce sensible of
any authority, but thiai of their fuiperior lord. They felt them-
selves' subjects to no other command. They were amenable to
no otherjurifdition. The ties which linked together there smaller
coinfederacies beicame c16te and firm.; the bonds of public union
relaxed, or were' difolved. The nobles strained their invention
in devising regulations tlat tended to acertain and perpetuate
this diftintion. In order to guard against any appearance of
subordination in their courts to those of the crown, they con-
strained their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from enter-
ing tieir territories, or from claiming any jurifdition there;
and if, either through mistake, or from the spirit of encroach-
ment, any royal judge ventured to extend his authority to the
vassals of a baron, they might plead their right of exemption,
and the lord of whom they held could not only rescue them out
of his hands, but was entitled to legal reparation for the ijury
and affront offered to him. The jurifdidion of the royal judges
scarce reached beyond the narrow limits of the King's demesnes.
Inffead of a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledging the
authority of the fame general laws, and looking up to these as

I z the

59
SECT. I.

SECT. I.

Expedients
employed in
order to limit
or abelifll it.

the guides of their decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom
a thousand independant tribunals, the proceedings of which
were directed by local customs and contradictory forms. The
collision of jurifdiion between these numerous courts, often
retarded the execution of justice : The variety and caprice of
their modes of procedure must have for ever kept the admini-
ftration of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or per-
fesion.

ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived there encroachments

on their jurifdition, and bore them with impatience. But the
usurpations of the nobles were so firmly eftablilhed, and the dan-
ger of endeavouring to overturn them by open force was so ma:
nifeft, that they were obliged to remain satisfied with attempts
to undermine them. Various expedients were employed for this
purpose each of which merit attention, as they mark the progress
of law and equity in the several kingdoms of Europe. At firit,
Princes endeavoured to circumscribe the jurifdiaion of the barons,
by permitting them to take cognizance only of smaller offences,
reserving those of greater moment, under the appellation of
Pleas of tbe Crown, and Royal Cfer, to be tried in the King's
courts. This affected only the barons of inferior note; the
more powerful nobles scorned such a diftinetion, and not only
claimed unlimited jurifdition, but obliged their sovereigns to
grant them charters, conveying or recognizing this privilege in
the most ample form. The attempt, nevertheless, was produc-
tive of ome good consequences, and paved the way for more.
It turned the attention of men towards a jurifdi&ion diftinC
from that of the baron whose vaflals they were; it accustomed
them to the pretcnfions of superiority which the crown claimed
over territorial judges; and taught them, when oppressed by their

own
6o

bwn uperior lord, to lo6k p to their overeign as their pro-
tctor. This facilitated the introduction of appeals, by which
Princes brought the decisions of the baron's courts under the
review of the royal judges. While trial by combat subsisted in
full vigour, no point decided' acording to that mode, c'uld be
brought 'under the review of another court. It had been refer-
red to the judgment'of God; the iue of battle had declared his
will; and it would have been impious to have called in queflion
the equity of the divine decision. But as oon as that barbarous
cutorn began to fall into disuse, Princes encouraged the vassals
of the barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the royal courts;
The progress, however, of this practice, was flow and gradual.
The sirs instances of appeals were on account of the delay, or te
refutfal of justice in the baron's court; and as tlefe were counte-
nanced by the ideas of fiubordination in the feudal constitution,
the nobles allowed them to be introduced without much oppofi-
tion. But when there were followed by appeals on account of
the injufiice or iniquity of the fentene, the nobles then began to
be sensible, that if this inhovatioh becaime general, the shadow of
power alone would remain in their hands, and all real authority
and juriidiction would center in those courts which posesed the
right of review. They instantly took the alarm, remonstrated
against the encroachment, and contended boldly for their ancient
privileges. But the monarchs in tie different kingdoms of "u-
rope purfted. their plan with steadiness and prudence. Though
forced to suspend their operations, on some occasions, and seeming-
ly to yield when any formidable confederacy of their valfhls united
against them, they refiured their meafiltes, as oon as they obferlved
the nobles to be remiss or feble, and pushed thenm it vigour.
They appointed the royal courts, which originally were ambu-

latory.

SECT. I.

6i

SECT. I. latory, and irregular with refpet to their times of meeting, .to

'*J be held in a fixed place, and at ftted seasons. They were folli-

citous to name judges of more diftinguilhed abilities than such
as presided in the courts of the barons. They added dignity
to their clarader, and splendour to their assemblies.,: They
laboured to render their forms iegular, and tleir decrees cone
fiftent. Such judicatories became, of course, the objets of pulic
confidence as well as veneration. The people, relinquifling the
partial .tribtnals of their, lords, were eager to,bring every subjet
of contest under the more equal and discerning eye of. those whom
their sovereign had .clofen to, give judgment in! jis. name. Thus
Kings became.once more the heads of the community, and the
dispensers of justice to their fubjeas. The barons, in some king-
doms, 'ceased .to. exercise their right of'jurifdiction,, because jt
funk into coiltempt; in others it was circumscribed by such regu-
lations as rendered it innocent, or it was.entirely abpljfhed by eX
press statutes. Thus the administration of justice taking its rife
from one source, and following one dire&ion, held its course in
every state with mo're uni'ormity, and withgreater force i[j].

The regula-
tions of the
canon law
promote a
more perses
adminiltra-
tion.

VI. THE forms and maxims of the canon law,: which were

become universally ..efpeCtable from their authority in the fpiri-
tual courts, contributed not a little towards tlhee improvements
in jurisprudence which I have enumerated. If the canon aw
be confidered politically, either as a, system framed oi purpose
to aflift the clergy in usurping powers and jurifdlifio no less
repugnant to the nature of their function, than inconsistent with
the order of government; or as the chief. iiftrument in-,eftab-
lifhing the dominion of the Popes which shook the throne, and
endangered the liberties o every kingdom in Europe, we must

'[Z] NOT E XXIII.

pronounce

pronou:nce it oie'df the' most 'oBrmidable engines ever formed SRCT, .
against 'the happinfs 'of civi'fdiet:'y'. 't if we cbntelplate it
rnerly as a c6de of laws refpc fig tiheltrihts and property of
individuals;' ahd ttend only' to' the civil efflett'of' ift decifiohs
concerning these, we mist view; it in a different, and'a. much The progef1s

I0a~'6sii~no~nnc

. ,l h

. .

, '.ofecclelifi-

more fAvourable. ligh. ageS of iit nopfance and credulity, the calulurpationl.
nminifters of' religion'h tre tfh:jkeets' 6f; -uperftittau'; '}e~lethtion.
When the :barbarians 'Who Iover;.i thc EE iie 'trfit !eribined
the' Christian' faith, hy dthey nd' th clctrg i po'feion 6f con-
fiderabl pOWei ..and thy fiaturally, transferre' to' tliefe new
guides i:hej profound, fUimiflion and evcreaic: Whichli::they wete
dccuftomed to yield, to. the prieftebf thai religion wihih they hind
orfraken.,: They. deeied. their perfonsi to be fiA; acred as their
funtin ; and would have confidered it as .impious 'to subjet themn
to the profane jurifdi6ion of the laity. The clergy were not
blind to the advantages which the weakness of mankind afforded
them;. .Thy. eftabifhed courts;. il ,which evety qi'eftion relating
to their own charater, their funl6ion, or their property, wasltHiedl'
Theypleaded,. and obtained an almdft total exemption :frd6i' the
authority of ciyil judges;. Upon different pretexts,; a5i'd by a mul-
tiplicity of artifices, they communicated 'thli ptivile te,tb!ifo many
persons, and extended their:;juiifdidibnfro flih n. varity bof!;chfes,
that the greater part of those affairs whicli giv: rile to contte: and
litigation,, was drawn under the cognizance of the spiritual courts.

,,, I. , . ( Y .

' i '
BUT in order t'difpofe the laity to susser tlefe usUrpations with- The plan of

ccef;altica

out murmuring or opposition,, it was nrecef'ary to convince them, JCrifipldence
that the administration of justice would be re:dered more perfet mlore perfca

than that in

by the eftabliliment of this newj jnifdidibon. T'IT;)s was not a diffi- the civil
cult undertaking, at ,the 'period. when, the clergy carried on their colrts.

encroach

.0*.
63

SECT. I.

The good
effeeas of imi-
tating and
adopting it.

encroachments with the greatest success. That scanty portion
of science which served to guide men in the ages of darkness,
was wholly engrossed by the clergy. They alone were accustomed
to read, to enquire, and to reason. Whatever knowledge of
ancient jurisprudence had been preserved, either by tradition, or
in such books as had escaped the deftrutive rage of barbarians,
was possessed only by them. Upon the maxims of that excel-
lent system, they founded a code of laws consonant to the great
principles of equity. Being directed by fixed and known rules,
the forms of their courts were ascertained, and their decisions
became uniform and consistent. Nor did they want authority.
sufficient to enforce their sentences. Excommunication. and
other ecclesiastical censures, were pnifhments more formi-
dable than any that civil judges could inflict in support of their
decrees.

IT is not furprizing, then, that ecclefialtical jurisprudence!

Ihould become such an object of admiration and refpet; that
exemption from civil jurifdidion was courted as a privilege,
and conferred as a reward.. It is not furpriziig, that even to
rude people, the maxims of the canon law hould, appear more.
equal andjuft than that ill-digefted jurisprudence which directed
all proceedings in the civil courts. According to the latter, the
differences between contending barons were terminated, as in a
state of nature, by the sword according to the former, every
matter was subjected to the decision of. laws. The one~ by. per-
mitting judicial combats, left chance and force to be arbiters of
right or wrong, of truth or falsehood the other, pafred judg-
ment with refped to there by the maxims of equity, and the
testimony of witnefes. Any error or iniquity in a fehtence pro.

nounced
64

nounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdi&ion belonged, was
irremediable, because originally it was fubje& to the review of no
superior tribunal the ecclesiastical law eltablifhed a regular grada-
tion of courts, through all which a cause might be ctaried by ap-
peal, until it was determined by that authority which was held to
be supreme in the church. Thus the genius and principles of the
canon law prepared men for approving these three great alterati-
ons in the feudaljurifprudence wllich I have mentioned. But it was
not with refped to there points alone tt the canon law fugget-
ed improvements beneficial to society. Many of the regulati-
ons, now deemed the barriers of personal security, or the safe-guards
of private property, are contrary to the spirit, and repugnant.to
the maxims of the civil jurisprudence, known in Europe during
several centuries, and were borrowed from the rules and practice of
the ecclesiastical courts. By observing the wisdom and equity of
the decisions in these courts, men began to perceive the neceflity
either of deserting the martial tribunals of the barons, or of attempt-
ing to reform them [AA].

VII. THE revival of the knowledge and study of the Roman

law, co-operated with the cauCes which I have mentioned, in
introducing morejuft and liberal ideas concerning the nature of
government, and theadminiftration of justice. Among the cala-
mities which the devastations of the barbarians who broke in
upon the Empire brought upon mankind, one of the greatest
was their overturning the system of Roman jurisprudence, the
noblest monument of the wisdom of that great people, formed
to subdue and to govern the world. The laws and regulations
of a civilized community, were altogether repugnant to the man-

[AA] N TE XXIV.

K
VOL. I.

ners

SECT. I.

The revival
of the Roman
law contri-
butes aioe
liberal ideas
concernin
julfice ad
order.

The circum-
lancees from
which the
Roman law
fell intoobli-
vion.

1

SECT. I.

Circumfan.
ces which fa-
voured the
icvival of it.

The eftflas of
this upon rthe
ideas of men,
and the dif-
penfation of
jul'ce.

ners and ideas of these fierce invaders. They had refpet to
objets, of which a rude people had no conception; and were
adapted to a Rate of society with which they were entirely
unacquainted. For this reifon, wherever they fettled, the Ro-
man jurisprudence oon funk into oblivion, and lay buried for
some centuries under the load of those institutions which the
inhabitants of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But
towards the middle of the twelfth century, a-copy of Jufinian's
Pandeds was accidentally discovered in Italy. By that time, the
fate of society was so far advanced, and the ideas of men
much enlarged and improved by the occurrences of several
centuries, during which they had continued in political union,
that they were struck with admiration of a system Which their
ancestors could not comprehend. Though they had not hitherto
attained such a degree of rfinement, as to catch fiorn the ancients
a relish for true philosophy, or speculative science; though they
were fill insensible to the beauty and elegance of claiical compo-
fition; they were sufficiently qualified t judge with Yefpete to.
the merit of their system of laws, in which all the points most
interesting to mankind, and the chief objects of' their attention
in every age, were fettled with difceiment, precision and equity.
All men of letters studied this neW ce'iince with eagethefs; and
within a'sew years after the discovery

: ':th'e Pandec, prdffelors

of: civil law were appointed,' who taieHt it puolickly in 'iof
countries of Europe.

THE effets f having Such d a:perfecd 'iodel'to fitdy ad to

itnitate Where,'on maniff4t. Meih, as on ad 'they were' a'c-
quaintedi with fixed and geneYal laws; petceived ihd 'advantage
of them, and became impatient to afoertain the principles and

:fortm
66

forms by which judges fiould regulate their decisions. Such
was the ardour with which they carried on an undertaking of
so great importance to society, that before the close of the twelfth
century, the feudal law was reduced into a regular fyfteii; the
code of canon-law was enlarged and methodized' and the loose
uncertain customs of different provinces or kingdoms, were col-
le'ed and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired from
the knowledge of Roman jurifpudence. In some countries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as subsidiary to their own
municipal law; and all cafes to which the latter did not extend,
were decided according to the principles of the former. In'
others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman jurisprudence min-
gled imperceptibly with the laws of the country, and had a pow-
erful, though lets sensible, influence, in improving and perfet-
ing them [BB].

T H.E SE various improvements in the system of jurifpru-

dence, and adminiitratton of justice,' occasioned a change in
manners of great iportance, and of extensive' effect. They
gave rife to a diftindion of prbfeflions; they obliged men to cul-
tivate different talents, and to aim at different accomplifilments,
in order to qualify themselves so' the 'vaiibils departments and
functions which became neceflary i focletya. Among uncivi-
lized nations, there is but one profellion honourable, that of'
arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of the human mind are
exerted in acquiring military kill, or address. The functions of
peace are few and'fimple; and require no particular course of
education or of ftuly, as a' preparation for discharging them.

. [BB] NOTE XXV.
a Dr. Ferguson's Eflay on the Hiltoryof Civil Society, part iv. set. r.

K 2 This

SRcT. .

From all
there arose a
diflinflion in
profelirons.
k,

SecT. I.

The effets
of this on so-
ciety.

This was the slate of Europe during several centuries. Every
gentleman, born a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was
taught no science but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes
were feats of martial prowess. Nor did the judicial character,
which persons of noble birth were alone entitled to assume, demand
any degree of knowledge beyond that which such untutored fol-
diers possessed. To recollet a few traditionary customs which
time had confirmed, and rendered refpe6able; to mark out the
lilts of battle with due formality ; to observe the ifiue of the com-
bat; and to pronounce whether it had been conducted according
to the laws of arms ; included every thing that a baron who ated
as a judge, found it necessary to understand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were fixed, when

the rules of dtcifion were committed to writing, and colleted
into a body, law became a science, the knowledge of which requi-
red a regular course of study, together with long attention to the
pratice of courts. Martial and illiterate nobles; had neither lei-
sure nor inclination to undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so
foreign from all tlie occupations which they deemed entertail-
ing, or suitable to their rank. They gradually relinquished their
places in courts of justice, where teir ignorance exposed them
to contempt. They became/ weary of attending to the difcuflion
of cafes, which grew too intricate for them to comprehend. Not
only the judicial determination of points which were the fubje&
of controversy, but the condut of all legal business and tranfac-
tions was committed to persons trained by previous study and ap-
plication to the knowledge of law. An order of men, to whom
their fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice, and to whom
they looked up for decision in their most important concerns, na-
turally acquired consideration and influence in society. They

were
68

69

were advanced to honours which had been confidered as the pe-
culiar rewards of military virtue. They were entrusted with
offices of the highest dignity, and most extensive power. Thus,
another profefion than that of arms, came to be introduced among
the laity, and was reputed honourable. The functions of civil
life were attended to. The talents requisite for discharging them
were cultivated. A new road was opened to wealth and emi-
nence. The arts and virtues of peace were placed in their proper
rank, and received their due recompence [CCJ.

VIII. WHILE improvements o important with refpec to the

fate of society, and the administration of justice, gradually made
progress in Europe, entiments more liberal and generous had'
begun to animate the nobles. These were inspired by the spirit
of Chivalry, which, though confidered; commonly, as a wild
inilitution, the effecd of caprice, and the source of extravagance,
arose naturally from the fiate of society at that period, and had'
a very serious influence in refining the manners of the European'
nations. The feudal state was a state of perpetual war, rapine,
and arlrchy; during which the weak and unarmed were exposed
every moment to insults or injuries. The power of the. fove-
reign was too limited to prevent there wrongs; and the admini-
ftration of justice too feeble to redress them. There was scarce
any protection against violence and opprefion, but what the
valour and generosity of private persons afforded. The fame
spirit of enterprize which had prompted so many gentlemen
to take arms in defence of the oppressed pilgrims in Pale-
Rine, incited others to declare themselves the patrons and aven-
gers of injured innocence at home. When the final reducion

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

of

SECT. 1.

The fpihit of
chivaliy in-
troduces more
liberal senti-
ments, and
more gcnc-
rous manners.

Origin ofchi-
Valry.

SeCT . I.

Its beneficial
effefts.

of the Holy Land under the dominion of Infidels put as end to
these foreign expeditions, the latter was the only employment
left for the ativity and courage of adventurers. To check the
insolence of overgrown oppreflors; to succour the diftrefed to
rescue the helpless from captivity to protea, or to avenge wo-
men, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could not bear arms in their
own defence to redress wrongs, and to remove grievanceo: were
deemed ads of the highest prowess and merit. Valour, humanity,
courtesy, justice, honour, were the charaaeriftic qualities of chi-
valry. To these were added religion, which mingled itself with
every palfion and institution during the middle ages, and by in-
fusing a large proportion of enthusiastic zeal, gave themn such
force, as carried them to romantic excess. Men were trained to
knighthood by a long previous discipline they were admitted in-
to the order by folemnities no less devout than pompous ; every
person of noble birth courted that honour it was deemed a dif-
tinction superior to royalty; and monarchs were proud to receive
it from the hands of private gentlemen,.

THIS singular institution, in which valour, gallanty,. and

religion, were so strangely blended» was wonderfully adapted to
the taste and genius of martial nobles; and its effects were soon
visible in their manners. War was carried on with lefT ferocity,
when humanity came to be deemed the ornament of knighthood.
no less than courage, More gentle and polished manners were
introduced, when courtesy was recommended as the most amiable
of knightly virtues., Violence and oppreflion decreased, when
it was reckoned meritorious to check and to punish them. A
scrupulous adherence to truth, with the most religious attention
to fulfil every engagement, became the diftinguithing charac-

teriftic
70,

STATE OF EUROPE.

teriftic of A gentleman, because chivalry was etrded as the chool
of honour, and inculcated the' rtt delicate fenfi6ility with refpe
to that point. the admiration of these qualitieb, together with
the high diftihinons and prerogatives conferred on knighthood
in every part of Europe, inspired persons of noble birtl' on some
occasions with a species of military fanaticism, and led them to
extravagant enterprizes. But they imprinted deeply in their
minds the principles of generosity and honour. These were
strengthened by every thing that can asset the senses, or touch
the heart. The wld exploits o6 tliofe romantic knights who
sallied forth in quest of adventures, are well known, and have
been treated with proper ridicule, The political and permanent
effects of the spirit of chivalry have been less observed., Per-
haps, the humanity whilch accompanies all the operations of
war, the refinements of gallantry, and the, point of honour, tlhe
three chief circumstances wlhich difiinguilh modern from ancient:
manners, may be ascribed in a great meafire to this whimsical infti.
tition, feemingly'ot lltte .tenefit to mankind. The fentimcnts
which chivalry inspired, had a wonderful irfluence on mannert and
conduc during the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
centuries. They were so deeply rooted, that they continued to
operate after t!e! vigour, and, repttation of the .intiittion itself.
began to decline,, Some:confiderable traffationi, recorded in the
following liiftor.y resemble tlh .adventurous exploits of chivalry,
rather thap tlie well regulated operations of found plicy..
Some of the moit eminent peribnages, whose characters will!
be delineated,. were itrongly tin ured with this romantic
pirit. Francis I. was ambitious to diftinguilh hilnfelf by all
the qualities of ain accomplishcd kniglt, and endeavoured, to
imitate the enterprizilg genius of' chivalry in war, as well as its

pornm

~F.CT. .

SECT. I.

The progress
of fclence has
great influ-
ence on the
manners and
charater of
lien.

Ignorance of
the middle
ages.

pomp and courtesy during peace. The fame which he acquired
by there splendid ations, o far dazzled his more temperate
rival, that he departed on some occasions from his uufal prudence
and moderation, and emulated Francis in deeds of prowess,. or of
gallantry [DD].

IX. THE progress of science, and the cultivation of litera-
ture, had considerable effet in changing the manners of the
European nations, and introducing that civility and refinement
by which they are now distinguished. At the time when their
Empire was overturned, the Romans, though they had loft that
corre& taste which has rendered the productions of their ancef-
tors the standards of excellence, and models for imitation to fuc-
ceeding ages, still preserved their love of letters, and cultivated
the arts with great ardour. But rude barbarians were so far
from being struck with any admiration of these unknown accom-
plifhments that they despised them. They were not arrived at
that state of society, in which those faculties of the human mind,
that have beauty and elegance for their objects, begit to unfold
themfdves. They were strangers to all those wants and desires
which are the parents .of ingenious invention; and as they did
not comprehend either the merit or utility of the Roman arts,
they destroyed the monuments of them, with industry not inferior
to that with which their posterity have since studied to preserve,
or to recover them. The convulsions occasioned by their fettle-
ment in the Empire; the frequent as well as violent revolutions
in every kingdom which-they established ; together with the inte-
rior defects in the form of government which they introduced,
baniihed security and leisure; prevented the growth of taste, or

IDD] NOTE XXVII.

the

the culture of science; and kept Europe, during several centiu-
ries, in that fitate of ignorance which has been already described.
But the events and inflitutions which I have enumerated, pro-
duced great alterations in society. As oon as their operation,
in refloring liberty and independance to one part of the commu-
nity, began to be felt; as oon as they began to communicate to
all the members of society ome taste of the advantages arising
from commerce, from public order, and from personal security,
the human mind became conscious of powers which it did not
formerly perceive, and fond of occupations or pursuits of which
it was formerly incapable. Towards the beginning of the twelfth
centurr, we discern the first symptoms of its awakening from
that lethargy in which it had: long been funk, and observe it turn-
ing with curiosity and attention towards new objets.

T H first literary efforts, however, of the European na-

tions in the middle ages, were extremely ill-directed. Among
nations, as well as individuals, the powers of imagination
attain ome degree of vigour before the intellectual faculties
are much exercised in speculative or abftrat disquisition. Men
are poets before they are philosophers. They feel with fenfibi-
lity, and describe with force, when they have made but little
progress in investigation or reasoning. The age of Homer and of
Hesiod long preceded that of Thales, or Socrates. But, un-
happily for literature, our ancestors deviating from this course
which nature points out, plunged at once into the depths of
abstruse and metaphysical inquiry. The had been converted
to the Christian faith, Coon after they fettled in their new
conqueits. But they did not receive it pure. The pre-
fumption of men had added. to the simple and inftrutive doe,

VOL. I. L trines

73

SECT. I.

The firIt lite.
rary efforts
ill diretled,
and the
causes of ti.

SECT. I. trines of Chrifianity, the theories of a vain philosophy, that

I"'' attempted to penetrate into myReries, and to decide quefRions

which the limited faculties of the human mind are unable to
comprehend, or to resolve. These over-curious speculations
were incorporated with the system of religion, and came to be
confidered as the moR essential part of it. As soon, then, as
curiosity prompted men to inquire and to reason, there were the
fubjets which first pefented themselves, nd engaged their atten-
tion. The scholastic theology, with its infinite train of bold di-.
quifitions, and subtile diRinctions concerning points which are not
the object of human reason, was the first production of the spirit
of enquiry after it began to refutle ome degree of ativity and
vigour in Europe. It was not this circumftane alone that gave
such a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they began again
to exercise talents which they had so long neglected. Most of
the persons who attempted to revive literature in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received inftrudion, or derived; their
principles of science from the Greeks in the eastern Empire, or
from the Arabians in Spain and Africa. Both theft people,
acute and inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences which
they. cultivated, The former rendered theology a sysei of
speculative refinement, or f endless controversy. The latter
communicated to philosophy a spirit of metaphysical and frivoi
lous subtlety. Misled by these guides, the persons who firfl
applied to science were involved in a maze of intricate inquiries.
Infted.,of allowing their fancy to take its natural range; and
tp produce such works of invention as might have improved their
tgfte, and refined their sentiments; instead of cultivating those
arts which embellish human life, and render it comfortable; they
w.,rr fettered:by authority, they w.re led astray by example, and

walted
74

wafted:the whole force of their,genius in speculations as unavailinlg
as they were difficult. ,

BUT fruitlqfs and,ill:direaed,as these fpeculationswere, their

novelty rouzed, ..and their oldnpfs interested the lumnl mind.
The ardour with which men pursued these uninviting studies,
was astonishing.. Genuine philosophy was never cultivated, in
any enlightened. age,, with, greater zeal. Schoolsi upon the
model of these inifituted by Charlemagne,. were opened in every
cathedral, and lmqft in every monatery of note., Colleges, and
universities were ereted, and formed into communities or cor-
porations, governed by their own laws, and inverted with fepa-
rate and, etenlfiv jurifdi6tion over their own, members. A re-
gular courfd of ftuies. was planned.. Privileges of great value
were conferred on marlerd and scholars.:; Academical titles and
honours of various kinds were invented,! as a recompence for
both. Nor was it in the schools alone that superiority in
science led to reputation and authority it became the objeA
of respect in life, and advanced such as acquired, it to a rank of
no inconsiderable eminence. Allured by all these advantages, an
incredible number of students retorted to these. new feats of
learning,, and crowded with eagerness into that, new path which
was opened to fame and diftineion,

BUT how considerable soever these first efforts may appear,

there was one circumstance which prevented the effects of them
from being as extensive as they ought to have been. All the
languages in Europe, during the period under review, were
barbarous. They, were destitute of elegance, of force, and even
of perspicuity. No attempt had been hitherto made to improve

L or

SE cT. .

They had,
however
consdcrble
efteCs.

A circum-
fiancc which
prcvcntcd
their being
Itiore cxtcil-
five.

75,

SEC'r. I.'

Its influence
on manners,
nlerits atten-
tion.

The progrefa
of commerce
had great
influence on
manners and
government.

or t polih them. The Latin tongue was consecrated by the
church to religion. Custom, with authority scarce less sa'cred,
had appropriated it to literature. All the sciences cultivated in
the twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, were taught'in Latin. All
books with refpet to them were written in that language. To
have treated of any important subjet in'a modern ladguage,
would have been deemed a degradation of it. This confined
science within a very narrow circle, The learned alone were ad-
mitted into the temple of knowledge; the 'gate was hut' against
all others, who were allowed to remain involved in their former
darkness and ignorance.

BuTr though science was thus prevented, during several

ages, from diffusing itself through society, and its influence
was ci:cumfcribed; the progress of it may be mentioned,
nevertheless, among he gre.t causes which contributed to intro-
duce a change of manners into Europe. That ardent, though
ill-judged spirit of enquiry which I have described, occasioned a
fermentation of 'mind which put ingetnuity and invention in
motion, and gave them vigour. It led men to a new employ-
ment of their faculties which they found to be agreeable as well
as interesting. It accuflomed them to ekercifes and occupations
which tended to soften their manner, aid' to give them ome
relish for those gentle virtues, which are peculiar to nations
among whom science hath been cultivated with success [EE];

X. THE progress of commerce had considerable influence in
polishing the manners of the European nations, and in leading
them to order, equal laws, and humanity. The wants of men,

[EE] NOTE XXVIII.

in
76

in the original and most simple state of society, are o few, and
their desires so limited, that they reR contented with the natural
produ6tions of their climate and foil, or with what they can add
to there by their own rude indftry. They have no superfluities
to dispose of, andsew necessities that demand a supply. Every
little community fiRbifting on its own dometick Rock, and
satisfied with it, is either unacquainted with the ates around it,
or at variance with them. Society and manners must be confi-
derably improved, and many provisions must be made for public
order and personal security, before a liberal intercourse can take
place between different nations. We find, accordingly, that the
first effect of the settlement of the barbarians in the Empire, was
to divide those nations which the Roman power had united. E..
rope was broken into many separate communities. The commt
nication between these divided states ceased almost totally during
several centuries. Navigation was dangerous in seas infested by
pirates; nor could strangers trust to a friendly reception ir the
ports of uncivilized nations. Even between distant parts f the
iame kingdom, the intercourse was rare and difficult. The law-
less rapine of banditti, together with the avowed exactions of
the nobles, scarce less formidable and oppressive, rendered a journey
of ny, length. a perilous enterprize. Fixed to the spot in which
they resided, t!e greater part of the irnhabitants of Europe loft, in
a great measure, the knowledge of remote regions, arid were un-
acquainted with their names, their situations, their climates, and
their commodities.

VARIOUS causes, contributed to revive the fpilit of conmerce,

and to renew in ome degree the intercoulfe between diferent
nations. The Italians, by their connection with Conftatil.ople

a:d

SICT. .

Low slate of
commerce in
the middle
ages.

Callses of its
revival.

77

'7
SECT. I. and other cities of the Greek empire, preserved In their own

^VJ country ibme rlilh for the precious commodities, and curious

manufactures of the East. They. communicated forme know-
ledge of theie to the countries contiguous to Italy. This com'
merce, however, was extremely limited, nor was the inter-
course considerable which it occasioned between different nations.
The Crusades, by leading multitudes from every corner of Europe
into Asia, opened a more extensive communication between the
East and Weft, which subsisted fbr two centuries ; and though
the object of these expeditions was conquest and not commerce
though the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the motives
for undertaking them were wild and enthufiatic, their com-
mercial effects, as hath been shewn, were both beneficial'and per-
manent. During the continuance of the Crusades, the great.cities
in Italy and in other countries of Europe acquired liberty, and to-
gether with it such privileges as rendered' them refpedable and
independant cotnmmunities. Thus, in every state there was formed
a new order of citizens, to whom commerce presented itself
as their proper objec, and opened to them a certain path to
wealth and dignity. Soon after the- close of the Holy war, the
mariner's compass was invented, which, by rendering. navigation
more secure as well as more adventrous,' facilitated the communi-
cation btween remote nations, and brought them nearer to each
other.

Sird among
the Italians.

TlHE Italian States, during the fame period, established a

regular commerce with the East in the ports of Egypt,. and
drew from thence all the rich produnks of the Indies. They
introduced into their own territories manufaatures of various
kinds, and carried them on with great ingenuity and vigour.

They

7S

They attempted new arts, and transplanted froth Warmer climates,
to which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar, feVeril natural
productions which now firnilh the materials of a Incrative and
extended cmmerce. All these comtnodities, whether imported
from Asia, or produced by their own skill, they disposed of to great
advantage among the other people of Europe, who, began to
acquire some taste of elegance unknown to their ancestors, or
despised by tlhm. During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
the commerce of Europe was almost entirely in the hands of the
Italians, more commonly known in those ages by the name of
Lombards. Companies or societies of Lombard merchants fettled
in every different kingdom. They were taken under the imme-
diate proteaion of the several governments. They enjoyed ex-
tensive privileges and immunities. The operation of the ancient
barbarous laws concerning strangers was suspended with refpe to
them. They became the carriers, the manufacturers, and the
bankers of all Europe.

WH1t . the Italians; in the south of Europe, cultivated

trade with ftlch industry and success, the commercial spirit
awakened in the north, towards the middle of the thirteenth
century. As the nationi around the Baltic were, at that time,
-extremely' barbarous, and infested that sea with their piracies,
this obliged the cities of Lubec and Hambughl, soon after they
began to open ome trade with thee people, to enter into a
league of mutual defence. They derived such advantages from
this union, that other towns acceded to their confederacy, and,
in a hort time; eighty of the most considerable cities scattered
through those valt countries which stretch from the bottom of

the

SECT, i.

Then by
Meant of the
Hanfeatick.

SECT. .

Commerce
makes pro-
grefs in the
Netheriandi.

the Baltic to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the famous
Hanteatick league, which became so formidable, that its alliance
was courted, and its enmity was dreaded by the greatest mo-
narcns The members of this powerful aflociation formed the
tirl. yftematiplan of commerce known in the middle ages, and
cor.du&t.i it b common laws -iadlted in their general aflem-
blies. They supplied the reft of Europe with naval tores, and
pitched on different towns, the r aft eminent of which was Br -
ges in Slanders, wlhere they e .blifhed staples in which their com-
merce was regularly carried on. Thither the Lombards brought
the productions of India, together with the manufaCtures of Italy,
anc exchanged them for the more bulky, but not lets ufelul com-
modities of the 'lorth, The Hanfeatick merchants disposed of
the cargoes which they received from the Lombards, in the ports
of the Baltic, or carried them up the great rivers into the interior
partsof Germany.

THIS regular intercourse opened between the North and South

of Europe made them sensible of their mutual wants, and created
such new and vast demands for commodities of every kind, that
it excited among the inhabitants of the Netherlands a mlore
vigorous spirit in carrying on the two great manufactures of
wool and flax, which eem to have been considerable in thaw
country as far back as the age of Charlemagne. As Bruges
Became the centre of communication between the Lombard
and Hanseatic merchants, the Flemings traded with both in that
city to such extent as well as advantage as spread among them a
general habit of industry, which long rendered Slanders and the

adjacent
8o

adjacent provinces'the most opuleit, the mnoR populous, and belt
cultivated otttries in .Europe.

S"-RUCK Witn the flourifling state of'there provinces, of which

he discerned the true cause, Edwatd IIl. of England, endeavour-
ed to excite a spirit bs indultry ahmotg his own fubjets, whot blind
to the advantages of their situation , nd ignorant of the source
from which opulence was detined to flow into their country, to-
tally neglected commerce, and did not even attempt thoie manu-
fatures, the materials of which they furnished to foreigners. By
alluring Flemish artisans to fettle in his dominions, as well as by
many wife laws for the encouragement and regulation of trade,
he gave a beginning to the woolen manufadures of England,
and first turned the aive and enterprizing genius of his people
towards those arts which have raised the English to the higlhet rank
among commercial nations.

THIS increase of commerce, and of intercourse between na-

tions, how inconsiderable soever it may appear in refpe of
their rapid and extensive progress during the last and present
age, seems vast, when we compare it with the Itate of both in
Europe previous to the twelfth century. It did not fail of
producing great effeets. Commerce tends to wear off those
prejudices which maintain difRinion and animosity between
nations. It softens and polishes the manners of men. It unites
them, by one of the strongest of all ties, the desire of supplying
their mutual wants. It disposes them to peace, by etRabliflling
in every state an order of citizens bound by their interest to
be the guardians of public tranquillity. As soon as the com-

VOL. !. M nercill

SECT. I.

And in Eng-
land.

The benefici-
al ellelts of
this.

SECT. I. mercial spirit begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an ascendant
^-^^ in any society, we discover a new genius in its policy, its alliances,

its wars, and its negociations. Conspicuous proofs of this occur
in the history of the Italian States, of the Hanfeatick league, and
the cities of the Netherlands during the period under review. In
proportion as commerce made its way into the different countries
of Europe, they successively turned their attention to those objects,
and adopted those manners, which occupy and diftinguilh polilhed
nations [FS].

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

A VIEW

# SECTION II.

V

I

E

W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E

U

R

0

P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

S E C T I

O N

II.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with refpetl to the com-

mand of the national force requisite in foreign operations.
CS UCH are the events and inflitutions, which by their power-

ful operation contributed, gradually, to introduce more re-
gular government and more polished manners into the vari-

ous nations of Europe. When we survey the state of society, or
the charaaer of individuals, at the opening of the fifteenth
century, and then turn back to view the condition of both at

M the

SECT. II.

Stale of so-
ciety greatly
improved at
the beginning
of the sis-
teenth cen-
tury.

SECT. H1.

lit t I deft Ltt I

wiilt illd~t
to he c0111.
ttand c1' ile
nAiti'JloaI IwCr.

tlhe time when the barbarous tribes whicl! overturned the Roman
power completed their fcttlement in their new conquests, the pro-
grefs which mankind had made towards order and refinement will
appear immense.

GovERNUMEr , however, was iill far from having attained

that ate, i which extensive monarchies a with united
vigour, or carry on great undertakings with perseverance
and fucceft. Small tribes or cmmunities, even in their
rudlet Rate, may operate in concert, and exert their utmost
force. They are excited tp a ot ot by the distant objects, and
iiibtile (peculations, which interefi or affect men in polished
focieries, but by their present feelings. The iifult of n
enemy kindle rcfentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation; thcefi pallions communicate from breast to breast,
and all the members of the community, with united ardour,
rult into the field in order to gratify their revenge, or to
acquire diflinCtion. But in widely extended ates, such as the
great king4clms of Europe at the beginning f tle fifteenth
century, where there is little intercourse between the distant
members of tile community, and where every great enterprize
requires previolus concert and long preparation, nothing can
rouse and call forth their united flrength, but the absolute com-
mand of a Depot, or the powerful intfuence of regMlar policy.
Of the former the vast Empires in tie East are an example; the
irrefifable mandate of the Sovereign reaches the moi; remote
provinces of his dominions, ard compels whatever number of
his fiibjes he is pleased to fitmmon, to follow his tandard.
The kingdoms of Europe, in the present age, are an intance
of the lattel ; the Prince, by the less violent, but no less effeCtual

operation
84

ppe.gtipn of hiwy and a well regulated government, is enabled to
avail 1lif)flf f the y/1lol force of his slate, and to employ it in
enterprigse which require strenuous and pprfevering efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, the political

constitution in all the kjngqofnf of Europe was very different
sion) ither of there states of government. The feverpl mo-
narchs, though they had fomewllat enlarged the boundaries of
prerogative by fucpesfill eroachments on the immunities and
privileges of lthe nobility, were possessed of an authority ext
trenmly limited. Tie laws nd interior police of kingdoms,
though much improved by the various events and regulations
which I have enumerated, were fill feeble and imperfe&. In
every country, numerous body of nobles, fRill formidable not-
witlitanding the various expedients employed to depress tlhem,
watclhe4d il the motions of their sovereign with a jealous atten-
tion, which set bounds to his ambition, and either preverted
his forming schemes of extensive enterprize, or thwarted the exe-
cution.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so extremely

small as to be inadequate to any great undertaking. He depended
for extraordinary supplies on the good will of his fubjets, who
granted them often with a reluctant and always with a sparing
hand.

As the revenues of Princes were inconsiderable, the armies

which they could bring into the field were unfit for long and
effetual service. Intead of being able to employ troops trained
to kill in arms, and to military subordination, by regular dif-

cipline,

SECT. 1I.

The power of
Monarchs
very limited.

Their revc-
nues finall.

Their armics
unfit for con-
quest.

cipline, Monarchs were obliged to depend on such forces as
their vassals conduted to their standard in consequence of their
military tenures. These, as they were bound to remain under
arms only for a short time, could not march far from their
usual place of residence, and being more attached to the lord
of whom they held, than to the Sovereign whom they served,
were often as much disposed to counteract as to forward
his schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been more
fibjed to the command of the monarch, proper instruments
to carry into execution any great and arduous enterprize.
The strength of an army formed either for conquest or defence
lies in infantry. To the liability and discipline of their legions,
consisting chiefly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their victories; and when
their descendants, forgetting the institutions which had led them
to universal dominion, so far altered their military system as to
place their principal confidence in a numerous cavalry, the un-
disciplined impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought
mostly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already observed, to
overcome them. These nations soon after they fettled in their
new conquests, uninfluded by the fatal error of the Romans,
relinquished the customs of their ancestors and converted the
chief force of their armies into cavalry. Among the Romans
this change was occasioned by the effeminacy of their troops,
who could not endure the fatigues of service, which their
more virtuous and hardy ancestors fitained with ease. A-
nol,r the people who cflablifhed the nlew mornoiarclie" into
w.l-li Europe was divided, this iovati on in ilitary dilici-
SECT. II.

- -

I II -
86

being distinguished from them in the field as well as during
peace. The institution of chivalry, and the frequency of Tour-
naments, in which knights, in complete armour, entered the
lifts on horseback with extraordinary splendour, displaying
amazing address, and force, and valour, brought cavalry into
still greater esteem. The fondness for that service increased to
such a degree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies, the armies of Europe were composed almof entirely of
cavalry. No gentleman would appear in the field but on
hoifeback. To serve in any other manner he would have
deemed derogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of dif-
tinaion, was called, The battle, and on it alone depended the
fate of every ation. The infantry, collected from the dregs and
refue of the people, ill armed and worse disciplined, was of no
account.

As these circumfances rendered the operations of particular

kingdoms less considerable and less vigorous, so they long kept
the Princes of Europe from giving such attention to the schemes
and tranfa&ions of their neighbours, as led them to form any
regular system of publick security. They prevented them from
uniting in confederacy, or from aing with concert, in order
to eftablill such a distribution- and balance of power, as ihould
hinder any etate from rising to a fiperiority, which might en-
danger the general liberty and independance. During several
centuries, the nations of Europe appear to have confidered
themrelves, as eparate societies, fcrce connecd together Iby
ally Cot1111ii" interclt, a:ic little colnccrnedl in echll ocllcr affaiirs

They are
incapable of
forming any
general or x-
tensive plan o
operation.
SECT. II.

87

SECT. II.

Still defective
with refpea
to the com-
mand of the
national force.

the time when the barbaros tribes which overturned the Roman
power completed their settlement in their new conquests, the pro-
grefs which mankind had made towards order and refinement will
appear immense.

GOV'RNMENt4, however, was ftili far from having attained

that ate, in which extensive monarchies a with united
vigour, or carry on great undertakings with perseverance
and fuccefp. Small tribes or cmunities, even in their
rudest state, may operate- in concert, and 'exert their utmost
force. They are excited to gat rot by the distant objects, and
subtile speculations, which interest or affect men in polished
societies, but by their prefept feelings. The ifult 9f n
enemy kindle resentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation; there paflions ommunicate from breast to breast,
and all the members of the community, with united ardour,
rush into the field in order to gratify their revenge, br to
acquire diftintion. But in widely extended tates, fich as the
great king4qms of Europe at. the, beginqing f the fifteenth
century, where there is little intercourse between the distant
members of the community, and where every great enterprize
requires previous concert and long preparation, nothing canl
rouse and call forth their united strength, but the absolute com-
mand of a.Def(pt, or the. powerful influence of regular policy.
Of the former the vat Empires in t.l East are an exarnple; the
irrefiltable mandate of the Sovereign reaches the moit remote
provinces of his dominions, and compels whatever number of
his fiubjes he is pleased to fummqn, to follow his .tandard.
The kingdoms of Europe, in the preCfnt ge, are an intance
of the latter; the Prince, by the less violent, but no less effectual

operation
84

ppertipn of law.s and a well regulated government, is enabled to
av4il Ili(felf of the willQl force of his state, and to employ it in
enterprizes which require firenuous and prfevering efforts.

urT, at tie opening of the fifteenth century, the politicl

cqniitution in all the kinggoma of Europe was very different
frwn either of there states of government. The several mo-
narchs, though they had fomewlat enlarged the boundaries of
prerogative by fuc:efsful encroachments on the immunities and
privileges of tle nobility, were possessed of an authority e-
trempely limited. Thle laws and interior police of kingdoms,
though much improved by the various events and regulations
which I have enumerated, were still feeble and imperfet. In
every country, a numerous body of nobles, still formidable not-
witlhfanding the various expedients employed to depress them,
watched all the motions of their sovereign with a jealous atten-
tion, which set bounds to his ambition, and either prevented
his forming fclhemes of extensive enterprize, or thwarted the exe-
cution.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so extremely

frnall as to be inadequate to any great undertaking. He depended
for extraordinary supplies on the good will of his fubjeds, who
granted them often with a reluctant and always with a sparing
hand.

As the revenues of Princes were inconsiderable, the armies

which they could bring into the field were unfit for long and
effecual service. Instead of being able to employ troops trained
to kill in arms, and to military subordination, by regular dif-

cipline,

SECT. II.

The power of
Monarchs
very limited.

Their reve-
nues fnall.

Their armies
unfit for con-
quest.

SEcT. II. cipline, Monarchs were obliged to depend on such forces as

^
v^ their vaflals conduted to their standard in consequence of their

military tenures. These, as they were bound to remain under
arms only for a hort time, could not march far from their
usual place of residence, and being more attached to the lord
of whom they held, than to the Sovereign whom they served,
were often as much disposed to counteract as to forward
his schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been more
subje&t to the command of the monarch, proper instruments
to carry into execution any great and arduous enterprize.
The strength of an army formed either for conquest or defence
lies in infantry. To the liability and discipline of their legions,
confifing chiefly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their victories; and when
their descendants, forgetting the institutions which had led them
to universal dominion, so far altered their military system as to
place their principal confidence in a numerous cavalry, the un-
disciplined impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought
mostly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already observed, to
overcome them. These nations soon after they fettled in their
new conquests, uninftruaed by the fatal error of the Romans,
relinquished the customs of their ancestors and converted the
chief force of their armies into cavalry. Among the Romans
this change was occasioned by the effeminacy of their troops,
who could not endure the fatigues of service, which their
more virtuous and hardy ancestors sustained with cafe. A-
mong the people who established the new monarchies into
which Europe was divided, this innovation in military difci-
pline seems to have flowed from the pride of the nobles, who
scorning to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at

being
86

being diftinguihed from them in the field as well as during
peace. The inffitution of chivalry, and the frequency of Tour-
naments, in which knights, in complete armour, entered the
lifts on horseback with extraordinary splendour, displaying
amazing address, and force, and valour, brought cavalry into
still greater eteem. The fondness for that service increased to
such a degree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies, the armies of Europe were composed almost entirely of
cavalry. No gentleman would appear in the field but on
horseback. To serve in any other manner he would have
deemed derogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of dif-
tinction, was called, The battle, and on it alone depended the
fate of every action. The infantry, collected from the dregs and
refuse of the people, ill armed and worse disciplined, was of no
account.

As there circumstances rendered the operations of particular

kingdoms less considerable and less vigorous, o they long kept
the Princes of Europe from giving such attention to the schemes
and tranfaftions of their neighbours, as led them to form any
regular system of publick security. They prevented them from
uniting in confederacy, or from aing with concert, in order
to eablifh such a difiribution. and balance of power, as hiould
hinder any etate from rising to a flperiority, which might en-
danger the general liberty and independance. During several
centuries, the nations of Europe appear to have confidered
themselves as separate societies, scarce conneted together by
any common interest, and little concerned in each others affairs
or operations. An extensive commerce did not afford them
an opportunity of observing and penetrating into the schemes

of

SECT. II.

They are
incapable of
forming any
general or ex-
tensive planof
operation.

87

SECT. Il. of every different state. They had not ambafltdors residing con-
Lt'v-- flantly in every court to watch and give early intelligence of all

its motions. The expectation of remote advantages, or the pro-
fpet of distant and contingent evils were not sufficient to excite
nations to take arms. They only, who were within the sphere of
immediate danger, and unavoidably exposed to injury or insult,
thought themselves interested in any contest, or bound to take
precautions for their own safety.

They were
little connec-
ted with.each
other.

A confirma-
tion of this
fromn the as-
fairs of
France.

WHOEVER records the transactions of any of the more cn-

fiderable European states during the two last centuries mufitu
write the hiflory of Europe. Its various kingdoms, throughotit
that period, have been formed into one great system, (b closely
united, that each holding a determinate flation, the opetations
of one are o felt by all, as to influence their counsels anid regu-
late their meafitres. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unlefa when vicinity of territory rendered the occasions of dil:
cord frequent and unavoidable, or when national eulation
fomented or embittered the spirit of 11otility, the affairs of
different countries are seldom interwoveh. In each kingdom
of Europe great events ahd revolutions happened, Which the
other powers beheld with the fame indifference as if they had
been uninterested fpedators, to whom the effet of thed tranf-
a&ions could hever extend.

DURING the violent ftriggles between France and England,

and notwitliftanding the alarming progress which was made
towards rendering one Prince tie master of both these king-
doms, hardly one measure which can be confidered as the result
of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in order to guard

against
88

against an event so fatal to Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy
and Bretagne, whom their situation would not permit to remain
neutral, engaged, it is true, in the contest; but they more
frequently took the part to which their paflions prompted them,
than that which a just discernment of the danger which threat-
ened themselves and the tranquillity of Europe ihould have
pointed out. The other Princes, seemingly unaffected by the al-
ternate successes of the contending parties, left them to decide
the quarrel, or iterpofed only by feeble and ineffedual nego-
ciations.

NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities in which the

various kingdoms of Spain were engaged during several cet-
turies, and thq fuicceflive occurrences which visibly tended to
unite.,that part of the continent into one great monarchy, the
Princes of Eur9pe Ifcarce! took a tingle ftep, which discovers that
they gave any attention to that important event. They per-
mitted a power to arise imperceptibly, and to acquire strength
there, which soon became formidable to all its neighbours.

AIIYDST the violent convulsions with which the spirit of domi-

nation in: the See; of Rome, and the turbulent ambition of the
German nobles, agitated the Empire, neither the authority of the
Popes, feponded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor the folli-
citatioes.of the mperors, could induce any of the powerful mo-
narchs in Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to avail themselves
of many favourable opportunities of interposing with effec and
advantage.

VOL. . , N THIS

SECT. If.

From those of
Spain.

From thoe of
Germany. ,

89

SECT. II.

This inativi-
ty occasioned
entirely by
the ate of
government.

Events hap-
pened during
the 5th cen-
tury which
render the es-
forts of na-
tions more
powerful and
eCtenfive.

THIS amazing iinativity, during tranfaftions so intercfting,

is not to be imputed to any incapacity of discerning their poli-
tical consequences. The power of judging with sagacity, and of
aCting with vigour, is the portion of men in every age. The
Monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms of Europe dur-
ing several centuries were not blind to their particular interest,
negligent of the publick safety, or strangers to the method of fe-
curing both. If they did not adopt that salutary fyflem, which
teaches modern politicians to take the alarm at the profpef of
distant dangers, which prompts them to check the first encroach-
ments of any formidable power, and which renders each slate
the guardian, in ome degree, of the ights and independance of
all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to the imperfe&ions
and disorders in the civil government of each country, which made
it impossible for sovereigns to at fiitably to those ideas ;whiclh
the posture of affairs; and their own observation must have fig-
gested. '

BuT during the course of the fifteenth century, various events

happened, which, by giving Princes more entire command of
the force in their reipestive domiriio6s, iendered their operhi'Ons
more vigorous and extensive. Id coniequeice of this, tlia afars
of different kingdoms becoming more frequently as well a
more intimately connected, they were gradually acctiufomed'i'o
at in concert and confederacy, and were nfifi'bly prepared for
forming a system of policy, 'in ordei to eftablih o o' prefedve
such a balance of power as was most consistent with the gdherar
security. It was during the reign of Charles the fifth, that
the ideas, on which this system is founded, first came to be
fully understood. It was then, that the maxims by which it

has
90

has been uniformly maintained since that aera were universally
adopted. On this account, a view of the caues and events which
contributed to eablifh a plan of policy more salutary and exten-
five than any that has taken place in the conduc of human affairs,
is not only a necessary introduction to. the followig, work, but is a
capital objec in the history of Europe.

THE first event, that occasioned any considerable alteration in

the arrangement of affairs in Europe, was the annexation of
the extensive territories, which England pofleffed on the con-
tinent, to the crown. of France. While the English were maf-
ters of several of the most fertile and opulent provinces in
France, and a great part of its most martial inhabitants were
bound to follow their standard, their monarchs confidered them-
selves rather as the rivals than as the vassals of the sovereign of
whom they held. The Kings of France, circumscribed and
thwarted in their schemes and operations by an adversary no less
jealous than formidable, durst not venture upon any enterprize
of importance or of difficulty. The Englilh were always at
hand, ready to oppose them. They disputed even their right
to their crown, and being able to penetrate, with ease, into the
heart of the kingdom, could arm against them those very hands
which ought to have been employed in their defence. Timid
counsels, and feeble efforts were natural to monarchs in such
a situation. France, dismembered and over-awed, could not
attain its proper station in the system of Europe. But the death
of Henry of England, happily for France, and not unfortu-
nately for his own country, delivered the French from the
calamity of having a foreign master feated on their throne. The

N 2 weakness

SECT. II.

The il ft of
thcfe was the
depriving the
Englihl of
their tcrrito-
ries on the
continent.

9.'

SECT. II.

Thle cftet of
this onincrea-
sing the power
of the rench
monarchy.

On the slate
of the milita-
ry force in
the nation.

weakness of a long minority, the dissensions in the English court,
together with the unsteady and languid conduc which these occa-
sioned, afforded the French a favourable opportunity of recovering
the territories which they had loft. The native valour of the nobi-
lity of France, heightened to an enthusiastic confidence, by a
supposed interposition of heaven in their behalf; conducted in
the field by kilful leaders; and dire&ed in the cabinet by a prudent
monarch; was exerted with such vigour and success, during tis
favourable juncture, as not only wrested from the Englilh their
new conquests, but stript them of their ancient poffeflions, and
reduced them within the narrow precincts of Calais, and its petty
territory.

As oon as To many considerable provinces were re-united to

their dominions, the Kings of France, conscious of this acquisition
of strength, began to form bolder chemes of interior policy, as
well as of foreign operations. They immediately became formi-
dable to their neighbours, who began to fix their attention on their
measures and motions, the importance of which they fully perceiv-
ed. From this ara, F.ance, possessed of the advantages which it
derives from the situation and contiguity of its territories, as well
from the number and valour of its people, rose to new influence
in Europe, and was the first power in a condition to give alarm to
the jealousy or fears of the states around it.

Now was France indebted for this increase of importance merely

to the re-union of the provinces which had been torn from it. A
circumstance attended the recovery of these, which, though less
considerable, and less observed, contributed not little to give
additional vigour and decision to all the efforts of that monarchy.
During the obiinate truggles between France and England, all

the
92

the defecs of. the military fyftem-undetr'the feudal governmient
were feidfibly felt. :A war of long'continualinc la'nguiihedi whven
carried on by troops bouhd and accustomed to keep the field
only for a few weeks. Armies, compoed chiefly of heavy armed
cavalry, were. unfit either for the' attack or' the defence of the
many towns and cal!es, which it became necessary to guard' or. to
reduce. In order to obtain such permanent and effective'force, as
became equifite during these lengthened contests, the Kings of
France took into their pay considerable bands of mercenary fol-
diers, levied :fometimnes among:their own filbjecs;. and rometimes
in fdreign countries. But as the feudal policy provided no sus-
ficient fund for such extraordinary service, there adventurers weri
dismissed at the close of every campaign, or upon any'profpedt of
accommodation; and having been little accustomed to :the re-
fraint, of discipline, they frequently turned :their arms againfl the
country which they had been hired to defehid, anddefolated 'it
with no less cruelty than its foreign ieierniesi

A BODY.of troops kept constantly on foot, and regularly trained

to military ubordination, would :lave supplied what was. want-
ing in the feudal constitution, and.have funrhhed: Princes :wit
the means of executing enterprizes, to which they were then un-
equal. Such an eftablifhiment, however, was so repugnant to
the, genius: of feudal policy, and lb incompatible' with the pri-
vileges and pretelfions o.f the nobles, ithat during several, den-
,tpries po monarch was either.,fp bold,' or so powerftl; as to'!en-
ture on any ftep towards introducing it. At 'last, Charles' ViI.
availing. himself of .thereputation which he had acquired by his
filcceffes against the Engliih, and takingladvaiitage f the i
prellions of terror wlich filch a formidable enemy had left upon
,the'minds of his filbjects, exccuted that which his predeceflirs

durst

Sic¥. II.

It occasions
the introduc-
tion of lland-
ing armies.

93

94

S.er. U.-
A.D. 1445.

durst not attempt. Under pretence of keeping always on foot a
force fifficient to defend the kingdom against any sudden inva-
sion of the English, he, at the time when he disbanded his other
troops, retained under arms a body of nine thousand cavalry, and
of. sixteen thousand infantry, He appropriated funds for the
regular payment of there; he stationed them in different places
of the kingdom, according to his pleafire ; and appointed the
officers, who commanded and' disciplined them. The prime
nobility courted this service, in which they were taught to de-
pend on their fovereigo, to execute his orders, and' to look up to
him as the judge and rewarder of their merit. 'The feudal 'mi;
litia, composed of the vafials whom the nobles could. call out to
follow their standard, as it was in no degree comparable to a
body of soldiers regularly trained to war, funk gradually in, repu-
tation. Thet trength of armies came to be estimated only by
thq numbhe of difeiplined men which they contained; , In
less than a century, the nobles and their military tenants, though
Sometimes summoned to the field, according to ancient form,
were confidered as an incumbrance upon. the troops with which
they ated; arid were viewed with contempt by soldiers accuftonhed
to the vigorous and steady operations of regular service. :

The effets THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, by establishing
ofthis. the first- Rauding army known in Europe, occasioned an imp6r-

tant revolution in its affairs and. policy. By depriving the nobles
of that direCtion of the military force of the tate,' which had
raised them to such high authority and importance, it gave a deep
wound to the feudal aristocracy, in that part where its power
feeed .to be. most complete. ;
. ' :

I

, :,** . -

. .A N

E:.

'

' ' ,
'. FRAN~{E,

95

,.FR'ANNc, y -fdiling ;this body ds regular tropr, at a time,
when there ;,sas farce a squadron or company kept in conftantl
pay in any other part of Europe, acquired such advantages, eitheri
for attack or defence, over its neighbours, that felf-pefervation
made it necessary fpr them to imitate its example. Mercenary
troops ,were intr6duced:.into all ithet considerable kigdonms on
the cdntinent. riThey gradlally' beame the only- military force.
that was epopbyed of trustld. 'It his long been the chief objet
of policy to increase aid; to support them, aid the, great aim
of Princes or ,'miliers to 'difcredicrand ,tto :iahilate:all other'
means of' nhtiolal a'tiad tyo dfeie .. ;J.'

, :. ' .-'. <

* I . r.' . *

. . . I '''i { "

: * > 1

I ( ;

)

..

, i

,, 1:1 . . I '/

J|

)

As the Kilgslof lersilgot the t rt':of other' pbwers in eita-

blifhing in thei:r doainiidnc'a milirary force, :wlich enablbd them;
to carry on foreign operations with more Oigfl i :a1idi'tl6o'gru'ter
extent, so they were the first who affectiually broke the feudal
aiRtcifacy,:t nd liurbleil' the gbit vaffalis o tfieUdM si, '6ib by
tileir eXbrbiiatit power had long bicumfcl(ibd the 6A6' prtero-
gatiVe within !'vry narrow limit, and had rendeted"' l ther
effbir :dS the imohrchl of tEurope ificfdCb'lei . ' MIy thitiig
cdncurteed: i' ll"ideirniie, ':igra'dally, thli' paiiWe' of t :feudal.
aiittfacy it' Ftal56t. wJeeailh ;laid'ihd'l^^^eiof' ththbitt
were- gfteAtty iimrairi duritng the dn war;i:'whichl thei king-
dbim wat'oblige t-dintaiii vltH"the'.ngi,. 'The eitraordi-
iary eal''with whtdh 'they' exertfedi themilvs'es ih cefence 'of
tHlr iiunr' aain1t ;its: ricielt enehic,' e'haufted tile fbtitui§e
6f dme gieAt'fatines.' s il'adl : eery prbvidce in': he king-
dom, was, in it's turn, the feat do war, the lahds of others ere
exposed' to 'the depiedktidi f' .theb, h e r6j,; er ravagedl by the
mercenary troops whicll, ,their fyereigns,, hirFd pccafionally, but
d', :' ' could:

SUCT. II.

The mo-
narchs of
France en-
couraged to
extend their
prerogative..

.. .

. ! I, .' !
, ;' ,f.s'

could not pay, or were desolated with rage still more deftruetive
by the peasants, in their different infurre&ions. At the fame
time, the neceflities of government having forced their Kings,
upon the desperate expedient of making great and sudden alter-
ations in the. current coin of the, kingdom, the fines, quit-.
rents, and otlier payments, fixed by ancient cuftomi funk much
in value, and the revenues of, a fief! were, reduced far. below
the fum' which it had once yielded. 'During their contests with
the Englilh, in which a generous nobility courted every station
where danger appeared, or honour ,could be gained, . many fami-
lies of note became extint, and their .fiefs were reunited to the
crown. Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell to female heirs,
and were divided among them; were :diminithedby profuse dona-
tions.to tlie church,:,or were broken and split by the fucceflion of
remotecooat'allBeij ii-. , - ' *:' ;.t

i. , :

..:

! ,., ;

:,'J ::_,' |!f.;'j *'s' '. ;I ', ' l ... ,' " 1

1 ;I: ..

,.E.pvaR 4.91:D by tlefe manifest fy iptoms of decline ,,i!, tat
body which he wished to depress, Charles,VI1 4urig,,,the firt
interval of, peace with. England, made several efforts ,twards efta,
blilhingthe regal prerogative oq!,tbhe ir4inS! :pf,-the,(riipcracy..
But his obligations to- the, nobles were so maly, ipwell as ,recen.t,
and their .services .in recovering ithe inngdon .q fpenid,, as made
it neceflary. for. him. to ptoceed. wit!l ,podFpation and .caution.
Such, however, wa, tihe authority. wlicl the,,(crowi had
acquired by tlle, progref'; of its arms ,agqiBr ,:theEnglinh, and
so much was the power of. the nobility diminifled,; that, wjthopu
any opposition, he soon made innovations of great confequnp in.
the constitution. He not only eifabiflled that formijable body of
regular troops, which has been.mentioe,q , .lut hejwvqs tlhelfirft

a Boulainvilliers Hifiotie de Goveriimncnt d Frtr.c'c, Lcttre xii. ' -

monarch

SE.C T. II.

. /

The progress
of the royal
power under
Charles VII.
96

97

monarch of France who, by his royal edic, without the concur-
rence of the States-general of the kingdom, levied an extraordi-
nary subsidy on his people. He prevailed likewise with his sub-
jests, to render several taxes perpetual, which had formerly been
imposed occasionally, and exated during a ihort time. By means
of all these, he acquired such an inoreafe of power, and extended
his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits, that, from being
the most dependant Prince who had ever fat upon the throne
of France, he came to possess, during the latter years of his reign,
a degree of authority which none of his predeceflors had enjoyed
for several ages b.

THAT plan of humbling the nobility which Charles formed,

his son Louis XI. carried on with a bolder spirit, and with
greater uccef, Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant;
and at whatever period he had been called to ascend the throne,
his reign must have abounded with schemes to oppress his
people, and to reAder his own power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling,
cruel; a tranger to every principle of integrity, and regard-
less of decency, he scorned all .the restraints which a sense of
honour, or the desire of fame, impose even on ambitious men.
Sagacious, at the fame time, to discern his true interest, and influ-
enced by that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with a perfever-
ing industry, and of adhering to it with a systematic spirit from wlich
no object could divert, and no danger could deter him.

THE maxims of his adminifiration were as profound as they
were fatal to the privileges of the nobility. He filled all the de-

b Hiloire de France par Velly & Villaret, tom. xv. 33 1, &c. 389. tom. xvi.
324. Variations de la Monarchie Francoise, tom. iii. 162.

VOL. I. 0 partments

SECT. II.

A. D. 1440.

Under
Louis XI.

His meafurcs
for humbling
the nobility.

partments of government with new men, and often with persons,
whom he called from the lowest as well as most despised func-
tions in life, and raised at pleasure to stations of great power or trust.
These were his only confidents, whom he consulted in forming
his plans, and to whom he committed the execution of them:
While the nobles, accustomed to be the companions, the favou-
rites, and the ministers of their sovereigns, were treated with
such ifudied and mortifying neglect, that if they would not sub-
mit to follow a court, in which they appeared without any
ihadow of their ancient power, they were obliged to retire to
their castles, where they remained unemployed and forgotten.
Not satisfied with having rendered the nobles of less confide-
ration, by taking out of their hands the sole direction of affairs,
Louis added insult to neglect; and by violating their most valua-
ble privileges, endeavoured to degrade the order, and to reduce
the members of it to the fame level with other fubjeds. Persons
of the highest rank among them, if so bold as to oppose his schemes,
or so unfortunate as to awaken thejealoufy of his capricious tem-
per, were prosecuted with rigour, from which all who belonged
to the order of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they were tried
by judges who had no right to take cognizance of their actions;
and were fubjeeed to torture, or condemned to an infamous death,
without regard to their birth or condition. The people, accuf-
tomed to fee the blood of the most illustrious personages shed by
the hands of the common executioner, to behold them slut
up in dungeons, and carried about in cages of iron, began
to view the nobility with less reverence than formerly, and
looked up with terror to the royal authority, which seemed to
have humbled or annihilated ever other power in the kingdom.
SECT. I.

w1~
98

AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that opposition might

rouze the nobles, whom the rigour of his government had intimi-
dated, or that felf-prefervation might teach them, at last, to unite,
dexterously scattered among them the feeds of discord ; and in
duftrioufly fomented those ancient animofities between the great
families, which the spirit ofjealoufy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and itill kept alive.
To accomplish this, all the arts of intrigue, all the mysteries
and refinements of his fraudulent policy were empl6yed, and with
flch'fuccefs, that at a juncture which required the most strenuous
efforts, as well as the most perfet union, the nobles never aed,
except during ode hort sally' of resentment at the beginning of his
reign, either with vigour or with concert.

As he stripped the nobility of their privileges, he added to the

power and prerogative of the crown. In order to have at com-
mand such a body of soldiers as might be sufficient to crush any
force that his disaffected fubjeds could draw together, he not only
kept on foot the regular troops which his father had raised, but
took into his pay' fix thousand Swiss, the best difcipliued and
most formidable infantry, at that time, in Europe c. From the
jealousy natural to tyrants, he confided in these foreign merce-
naries, as the most devoted initruments of oppression, and the most
faithful guardians of the power which he had acquired.

GREAT funds were requisite, not only to defray the expence

of this additional establishment, but to supply tne ums employed
in the various enterprizes which the restless aivity of his ge-
nius prompted him to undertake. But the prerogative that his

c Mem. de Comines, ton. i. 367 a. Dan-. i. e a Milice Francoise,
tom. i. 182.

SECT. II.

And of divid-
ing them.

He adds to
the number
of flandiilg
forces.

He augments
the revenues
of the crown.

99

father
0 2

father had assumed of levying taxes, without the concurrence of
the. ates-general, which he was careful not only to retain but
to extend, enabled him to provide in some meafrre for the in-
creasing charges of government.

WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could not furnilh,

his address procured. He was the first monarch in Europe who
discovered the method of managing those great assemblies, in
which the feudal policy had vested the power of granting subsidies
and of imposing taxes. He first taught other Princes the fatal
art of beginning their attack on publick liberty, by corrupting
the source from which it hould flow. By exerting all his
power and address in influencing the election of representatives,
by bribing or overawing the members, and by various changes
which he artfully made in the form of their deliberations, Luis
acquired such entire direation of there assemblies, that, from
being the vigilant guardians of the privileges and property of the
people, he rendered them tamely subservient, in promoting the
most odious measures of his reign d. As no power remained to
set bounds to his exacions, he not only continued all the. taxes
imposed by his father, but made immense additions to them,
which amounted to a fum that appeared astonishing to his,,con-
temporariese. *

d Mem. de Comin. tonj . 1. 36' Chrop. Scandal. ibid. tom. ii. p. 71. i
e Mem. de Corn. tom.i. 334.

* Charles VIL levied taxes to the amount of ,800,000 francs ; Louis XI.

raised 4,700,ooo. The former had in pay-gooo cavalry and 16,000 infantry.
The latter augmented the cavalry to 15,ooo, and the infantry to 25,ooo000.
Mer. de Comines, i. 384. During the latter years of his reign, he kept the
greater part of there encamped'in one place, and ready tomarch on the
fhortefi warning. Ibid. 381.

NOR

SECT. II.

His address
in managing
the assembly
of the Lfates.
IOO

NOR was it the ppwcr alone or, wealth of the crown that Louis SECT..II.

increaed; e extended its territories by acquisitions of various ' r '
kinds. He got poflefion of Rotfillon by purchase; Provence the botIuds

0n. *' .of tie French

was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de Anjou ; and upon monarchy.
the death of Charles the Bold, lie seized with a trong hand Bur-.
gundy and Artois, whicll had belonged to that Prince. : Thus,,
during the coure ;of;.a .ingle reign, France was formed, into one
compact kingdom, and the steady unrelenting policy of .Luis
XI. not only,,fubdlued the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles,,
but established a; species of government,. scar¢, less. ahfolute, or
lets terrible, thap eastern despotism. ' :

BUT fatal as his'adminifiration was to the liberties of his sub- By all these
jes, the authority which he acquired;' the refouirces-of which' the French

government

he became master,: and his:freedom from reftiaint'botli in icon- rendered
certing his plans and in executing them, rendered hi' reign aodretive
adive and enterprizing. Louis negociated in all the courts of: prizing.
Europe; he observed tbe motions of all his neighbours; he. en-
gaged, either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great'
tranfactiop , his resolutions were prompt his: operations,.vigo-
rou$s; and upon .every emergence he could'call forth ito ation
the. whole force of his kingdom. From the era of' his reign,
instead of the.feeble efforts of monarchs fettered and circum-
fcribed by a jealous nobility, the Kings of France, more masters
at home, have exerted themselves more abroad, have formed more
extensive schemes of foreign conqefts,. and have carried on war-.
with a spirit and vigour long unknown in Europe..

TH. example which Louis set was too inviting not to. be Stepstaken

towards ex-
imitated by other Princes. Henry VIJ.. as.. soon as. he was tending the

feated power of the

croWn in
England,.

LOI

SECT. II. feated on the throne of England, formed the plan of enlarging

^^^ his own prerogative, by breaking the' power of the nobility.

The circumstances under which he undertook to execute it, were
less favourable than those under which Charles VII. had made
the fame attempt; and the spirit with which he conducted
it, was very different from that of 'Louis'XI. Charles, by
the success of his arms against the Englilh, by the merit of
having expelled them out of o many provinces, had established-
hi.mself o firmly in the 'cohfidence of his people, as encouraged
him to imake bold encroachments on the ancient conffitution.
The daring genius of Louis broke through every barrier, and
endeavoured to overturn or to remove every obstacle that stood
in his way. But Henry held the sceptre by a disputed title ,' a
popular facion was ready every moment to take arms against
him.; and after long civil wars, during which the nobility had
often displayed their power in creating and deposing Kings, he felt,
that the regal authority had been so much, relaxed, and that he
entered into pofeffion of a prerogative so much abridged, as made
it neceflary, to carry on his measures, deliberately,. and without.
any violent exertion. He endeavoured to undermine that for-
midable ftrudure, which he durRf not attack with!'open force.
His schemes, though cautious and flow in their operation, werec
prudent, and producive in the end of great effects. By his laws,
permitting the barons to break the entails of their estates, and to'
expose them to sale; by his regulations to; prevent the nobility
from keeping in their service those numerous bands of retainers,
which rendered them formidable, and turbulent; by encouraging
population, agriculture and commerce; by securing to his sub-
jests, during a long reign, the enjoyment of the bleflings which
flow from the arts of peace; by'accuftomingi them to an admi-

nifiration

niftration of government, under which the laws were executed
with fleadinefs and vigour; lie made imperceptibly such altera-
tions in the English constitution, that he transmitted to his fuc-
ceflor authority so extensive, as rendered him one of the modt
absolute Monarchs in Europe, and capable of the greatest and
most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the marriage of Ser-

dinand and Iabella; the glory that they acquired by the con-
quest of Granada, which brought the odious dominion of the
Moors to a period; the command of the great armies which it
had been neceifary to keep constantly on foot, in order to accom-
plilh this; the wisdom and teadinefs of their administration.
and the address with which they availed themselves of every
incident to humble the nobility, and to extend their own prero-
gative, conspired in raising these monarchs to such eminence and
authority, as none of their predecessors hlad ever enjoyed.
Though several causes, which shall be explained in another
place, prevented their attaining the fame extensive powers with
the Kings of France and England, and preserved the feudal con-
ftitution in Spain longer entire, their great abilities supplied the
defects of their prerogative, and improved with such dexterity
all the advantages which they possessed, that Ferdinand carried on
all his foreign operations, which were very extensive, with ex--
traordinary vigour and effet. .

WHILE these Princes were thus enlarging the boundaries of

prerogative, and taking fich steps towards rendering their king-
doms capable of ating with union and with force, events occur-
red, which called them forth to exert the new powers which

they

SEcT. II.

And in Spin.

FEvents hap-
pened, which
called the fc-
veral iloln-
archs t cxei t
the Cnew ov.-
el; which
they 1hAd ac-
quired.

f03

SECT. II.

The first of
there events
was the mar-
riage of the
heiress of the
house of Bur-
gundy.

The impor-
tance of this
to the (late of
Europe.

A. D. 1477.
January 5.

Viewsof
Louis X.
with refpeft
to it.

they had acquired. These engaged them in such a series of cn-
terprizes and negociations, that the affairs of all the considerable
nations in Europe came to be insensibly interwoven with each
other; and a great political system was gradually formed, which
grew to be an object of universal attention.

THE first event which merits notice, on account of its influ-

ence in producing this change in the state of Europe, was the
marriage of the daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress of
the house of Burgundy. For Come years before her father's
death, he had been confidered as the apparent successor to his
territories, and Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different Princes, with a view of alluring them, by that
offer, to favour the chemes which his restless ambition was con-
tinually forming.

THIS rendered the alliance with her an objec of general

attention; and all the advantages of acquiring poffeflion of
her territories, the most opulent at that time and belt culti-
vated of any on this fide of the Alps, were perfectly under-
stood. As oon, then, as the untimely death of Charles opened
the succession, the eyes of all the Princes in Europe were turned
towards Mary, and they felt themselves deeply interested in the
choice which he was about to make of the person, on whom she
would bestow that rich inheritance.

Louts XI. from whose kingdom several of the provinces which

she poflefed had been dismembered, and whose dominions
stretched along the frontier of her territories, had every induce-
ment to court her alliance. He had likewise, a good title to

expect
'I 04

expet the favourable reception of any reasonable proposition
he hould make, with refped to the disposal of a Princess, who
was the vassal of his crown, and descended from the royal blood
of France. There were only two propositions, however, which
he could make with propriety. The one was the Imarriage cf
the Dauphin, the other that of the Count of Angouleme, :a
Prince of the blood, with the heiress of Bulgundy. By the
former, he would have annexed all her territories to his crown,
and have rendered France at oice the molt respectable monarchy
in Europe. But the great disparity of age between the two par-
ties, Mary being twenty, arid the Dauphin only eight years old',
the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not to clhue a master pof-
sessed of such power as might enable him to form schemes danger-
ous to their liberties; together with their dread of falling under tie
odious and opprellive government of Louis, were obstacles in the
way of executing this plan, which it was vain to think of fur-
mounting. By the latter, the accomplishment of which might
have been attained with ease, Mary having discovered ome incli-
nation to a match with the Count of Angouleme , Louis would
have prevented the dominions of the house of Burgundy from
being conveyed to a rival power, and in return for such a fplen-
did establishment for the Count of Angouleme, he must have ob-
tained, or would have extorted from him conceflions highly benefi-
cial to the crown of France. But Louis had been accustomed so long
to the intricacies of a crooked and insidious policy, that he could not
be fatisfiedwith what was obvious and simple; and was o fond of
artifice and refinement, that he came to confider these as his ulti-
mate objet, not as the means only of conducing affairs. From this
principle, no less than from his unwillingnes to aggrandize any

f Mem. de Comines, i. 358.
VOL. I. P of

SUcT. II.

log5

SECT.. I1 of his.own filbjes, or from his desire of opprefng the house of
^^-^ Burgundy, wlich he hated, he negleied the course which a Prince

les able and artful would have taken, and followed one more suit-
ed to his own genius.

The singular HE proposed to render himself mailer, by force of arms, of
houre which those provinces, which Mary held of the crown of France, and
he followed

tven to push his conquests into her other territories, while he
anmifed her with insisting continually on tlheimpracticable. match
with the Dauphin. In pofecutinig tlhis plan, he displayqd wol-
drful talents' and industry,. hnd'.exhibited fuch:lfenes! of trea-
chery, falsehood and cruelty, as are amazing even in the 'history
of Louis X[. Immediately upon the death of Charles, he
put his troops in motion, and advanced towads' the Netherlands.
He corrupted the leading men ini the provinces ,9f Burgundy
an.d Artois, and seduced them to' defertt their sovereign. He
got admiflion into some of the frontier towns by bribing the go-
vernors; the gates of others were opened to him in consequence
of his intrigues with the inhabitahts. He negociated with
Mary; and, in order to render herodious to her fubje6sb, he
betrayed to them her most important secrets. He carried bn ia
private correspondence with the two ministers whom 'she chiefly
trRfted, and then communicated the letters which he had re-
ceived fiom them to the states ofFlanders, who, entrged at'
theiriperfidy, brouglt them immediately to trial, tortured them
with most extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the tears and intrea-
ties of their sovereign, who knew and approved of all that the mi.
nifters had done, they beheaded tlem in her prefencee.

g Mem. de Comines. liv. v. ch. 15. p. 309, &c.

WHILE
id6

While Louis, by.this condud, unworthy of 'a great monarch,

was securing the poffefllion of Burgundy, Artois, and the towns
on the Somme, thelitates of Slanders carried on a negociation
with'the Emperor Frederick IIT. and concluded a treaty of mar-
riage between their sovereign and his soh Malimilial, Archduke
of Auftra. Theilluftrious bi'rth of that Prince, is. well, as tlie
high, dignity of wiih ;he lapd tle pofpect,; iendered tih allianc
honourable for Mary, while, from the distance. of hishereditary
territories, and the scantiness of bis revenues, his power was' so
inconsiderable as did n ot excite the: jealousy or fear of the Fle-
mings. ; i·

i . . ' 8

, , , ; ! ,

'I ' ' '

, TUS Loui, ;by thle'caprice of :histemper; and the excess of

his refinements, put the hoitfe of Aittria in poffeflion of this nobie
in!herijnce., By this acquisition, the foundation of. the future
gr.ando¢r ofCh'rles V. was laid; and he became' mnafitr' of
tlof. teirtdriesi, wlhich enabled him; t6 carry on his most formi-
dable.and decisive operations againf France. Thus, too, the
fame monarch who first united the interior force of France, and
eftablilhed it on such a footing as' to render it foritidable to'the
roft ,of Europe, contributed, far' conirary to his intention, to
raise up a rival potver,; which, durin two centuries, has thwarted
the nmeifures, opposed the arms, and checked the progress of his
fucceflors.
' · : : '

,.i . , :
,: :

Ts; ntxt event of consequence in the fifteenth centiry, was

the "epedition of Charles, VUI. into Italy. This' occasioned
tevolutions o10 less memorable ; prdduced'alterations, whicll were
more immediately perceived, both in the nilitary and political
fyflem rouzed the states of Europe to blder efforts; ad

P blended

SE CT. il,

The eftc4 of'
this, the mar-
riageofMaxi-
nilian with
the heiress of
Burgundy.
A. D. 1477.

The influ-
ence of that
on the Iate
of Europe.

The next
considerable
event was
the invalion
of Italy by
Charles VIII.
A. D. 1494.

td7

Thcfirft of . THi first event which' ierits notices on ccouut of it, iitnu-
thefee .eI - -ntl e ;n prodcing this change in the slate of Europe, was the
riaigcot the marriage of t daughter of larles til, e

t he fB3

, t le filc heiires of

heiress o te '

.

'

house ofBur- the house of Burgundy. For ome years before her father's
gundy. death, he had been confidered as the apparent successor to his

territories, and Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different Princes, with a view of alluring them, by that
offer, to favour the schemes which his restless ambition was con-
tinually forming.

The impor- THIS rendered the alliance with her an obje&t of general
tance of this -
to the late of. attention; and all the advantages of acquiring poffeflion of
Europe. her territories, the most opulent at that time and best culti-

vated of any on this fide of the Alps, were perfetly under-
ttood. As oon, then, as the untimely death of Charles opened
the fucceflion, the eyes of all the Princes in Europe were turned

A. D. 1477. towards Mary, and they felt themselves deeply interested in the
January s. choice which he was about to make of the person, on whom he

would bestow that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the provinces which

(he pofleffed had been dismembered, and whose dominions
itretched along the frontier of her territories, had every induce-
ment to court her alliance. He had likewise, a good title to

expec

Views of
Louis X.
with refpe&
to it.

fir' pfr,'c oseWcl.od havie'atlnn.ex}.1j^^Wiel~· terrltor~a " .t . -
former lie wrc;dulvea exd

ha aenned territories to hi.s crtrivn

;ncil liave ritlvc.ed lorance at once tiq: tl(4it relpedable monarchy
in Europe.i But the great disparity of age between the' two par-
ties, Mary being twenty, nd the Dauphin only eight years old'
the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not to cllufe a master pof-
fe(eed of such power as might enable him to form shemes danger-
ous to their liberties together with their dread of falling under the
odious and ppreflive government of Louis, were obstacles in the
way of executing this plan, which it was vain, to think of fur-
mounting. By the latter, the accomplilhment of which might
have been attained with ease, Mary having discovered some incli-
nation to a match with the Count of Angouleme f, Louis would
have prevented the dominions of the house of Burgundy; from
being conveyed to a rival power, and in return for such a fplen-
did eftablihment for the Count of Angouleme, he must have ob-
tained, or would have extorted from him concessions highly benefi-
cial to the crown of France. But Louis had been accustomed so long
to the intricacies of a crooked and insidious policy, that lie cotld not
be satisfied with what was obvious and simple; and was so fond of
artifice and refinement, that he came to confider these as his ulti-
mate obje&, not as the means only of conducting affairs. From this
principle, no less than from his unwillingness to aggrandize any

f Men. de Comines, i. 358.
Vol.. I. P of

S1RCT. 1:

The fingu
course wh
he follow

of his-own. fubjets, or from his desire of opprellingthe house of
Burgundy, which he hated, he negleded the course which a Prince
less able and artful would have taken, and followed one more suit-
ed to his own genius.

, ~ ~ ~~ ~

~~~~~~~. . ,

ilar 'Hz proposed to render himself master, by force of arms, of
edl those provinces, which Mary held of the crown of France, and

tcven to push his conquerts into her other territories, while he
anulnfed her with insisting continually on the!impracdicable niatch
withl the Dauphin. In prpfecutisig this plan, he difpiayqd won-
4crful talents' and industry, . nd' eKhibited such fcen'es'of 'tr.ea
chery, falsehood and cruelty, as are amazing even i the history
of Louis X. Immediately upon the' death of Charles, he
put his troops in motion, and advanced towards: the Netherland.
He corrupted the leasiig mien inl the provinces gs Burgundy
and.Artois, and seduced/ themto' deftct' their. overeign. He
got admifnion into some of the frontier towns' by bribingthe go-'
ver.ors; the gates of others were opened to him in confeqience
of his itriguqs with th inhabitants. He negociated with'
Mary and, in order to rende'r her! dious' toi hdr fubjets, he:
betrayed to them her most important secrets. He carried ii'a
private correspondence with the two ministers whom' lhe chiefly
trtlled, and' then communicated the letters which ,he had re-
ceived fom them to the fates of Slanders,' who, enraged 'at'
theirperfidy;, bbrught; them imimdiately' to trial, tortured: them
with most extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the tears and intrea-
ties of their sovereign, who knew and approved of all that the mi.
nifters had done, theybeheaded them in her presence g. ,

g Mem.de Comincs. liv. v. ch. 15. p. 309, &c. '

WHI LE
156

While Logis, byithis conduct, unworthy of a grent monarch,

wasifecuring tle poffeflion of Burgundy, ArtoJs) and the towns
on the Somime, .theitates of Slanders arried ol a neg6diatioi

ith' the Emperor Frederick III. and concllded a treaty of imar-
riage between their sovereign and his sot Maimniliani, Archduke
of Austria. Tho,.illuftrious birtl of that Prince, :well as the
high dignity of; wfhiph : he p!d the profpe; i iendered; th alliancd
honourable for Mary while, from the, distance. of hisharteditiar
territories, and the scantiness of his revenutes, his power was' so
incolfiderable as did not, excite the: jealotify or fear of the Fle-
mings. , - . . i . ;

TThus Loui, ;y cth'cavprice of,:histemper, and the excetf ot

his refinements, put the lboulb of Aiftria in pofefenion of this noble
ilhfirgjnce., By. this acquisition, the fodndation o. the fiture
gr.ndeur of Cehrles V. was laid; rand he becami .m'bfter of
hbofi teritOicsa, which' enkbledl .him; o6 carry on his most formi:
dableand' decisive operations against Fiance. Thus, too, te
fame monarch who first united-the interior force of France, 'i'd
established it of such a footing ts' to render it formnidable to thie
reft 'of Europe, contributed, far ',cojtrary to his intentiol1, to
raise up.a rival poler,. which, during tWo centuries, 'hai thwarted
the' neafures$! opposed the arms, and checked the progrers of his
fucceflors. , .;
.

; .i .', .1 . ', , . t. 'I . ; . . .,

Ti next .vent of consequence in the fifteenth cenftry was
lhe: 'expedition of Charles VIII.. into Italy;' This' ocdaii6ned
revolutions lo less mermorable , produced'alterations, whi h were
more iimmediately perceived, both in ithe 'nilitary and political
system routed the.;Itates of Europe, to' bdlder effdrts; nand

P 2 blended

SkCT. II,

Tlie ct'' odf
this, the mar-
riaeofMnxi-
niilian with
the heircfs of
Burgundy.
A. . 1477.

The influ-
ence of that
on tile Rate
of Europe.

The next
confidlerable
event was
the invalion
of Italy by
Charles VIII.
A. D. 1494.

S ECT. II.

The motives
of this.

blended their affairs and interells more closely together. Tile
mild adminifiration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince,
seems to have revived the spirit and genius of the French nation,
which the rigid despotism of his father had depressed, and almoit
extinguiihed. The ardour for military service, natural to the
French nobility, returned, and their young monarch was impa-
tient to ditinguifh his reign by some plendid enterprize. While
he was uncertain towards what quarter he flould turn his arms,
the follicitations and intrigues of an Italian politician, no less
infamous on account of his crimes, than eminent for his abilities,
determined his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the
design of deposing his nephew the duke of Milan, and of placing
himself on the ducal throne, was so much afraid of a combina-
tion of the Italian powers to thwart this measure, and to support
the injured Prince, with whom most of them were conneted by
blood or alliance, that he saw the neceflity of securing .the aid
of Come able proteCtor. The King' of France was the perfoh to
whom he applied; and without disclosing to him his own' in-l
tentions, he laboured to prevail with him to march into Italy;
at the head of a powerful army, in order to seize the croii 'of
Naples, to which he had pretensions as heir of the hiife of
Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed by .the Angevin
family, had been conveyed to Louis XI. by Charles of Anjou,
count of Maine and Provence. But that sagacious monarch,
though he took immediate poffefion of those territories of which
Charles was really master, totally disregarded his ideal title to a
kingdom, over which anot'r Prince: reigned in, tranquillity';
and uniformly declined involving himself in the labyrinth of
Italian politicks. His son, more adventurous, or more incon-
fiderate, eibarked eagerly in this enterprize; and contemning

all
io8

llt the remonstrances of his most eperiencied counfelleis, prepared
t6 carry it on Wih11 the utrmoft vigour.

* , :,

CHARLES warted not power equal to such a great undertak-

ing. His father had traufmitted to him fiich nn ample prerogative,
as gave him the entire comnmand of his kingdom. He liim.felf ad
added considerably to !the extet'of his dominions,, by his prudent
marriage with the heiress of Bretagne, wlich rendered him master
of that province, the last of the great fiefs that remained to be an-
nexed to the etown. He soon aflemblcd fortes which he tlhought
sufficient, h nd so' impatient was he to enter on his caree' asa con-
tlderor, that'facrifidiig' what was' real, 'for what was chimerical,
lie restored Roufillon to Ferdinand and gave up part of his father's
acquisitions in Artois to Maximilian, with a view of idicing these
Princes not to m6cfR France, whiie lie'was carying on his ope-
rations in Itily.' ' ! ' i

. ,, . '

i ,

. '

.

BuTr o different were the effrts of tlhe States of Europe in the

fifteenth century, from those (vhich we niall'behold in the colurf:of
this history, that the artril, 'witlh which"'we 'Clarlces ihdert6k this
great enterprize, did not exceed twenty'thouand men; ' The train
of. artillery, however, h6 amriunitioh, 'arid warlik: lores of
every kind provided ifor its use, were ro great as to bear tome
resemblance to the immense apparatusb of ,modern war. . · :'

i *) !) . . - ' ; l,,;i; ,' ' .: ' ,- , .,! . '

I

WHEN the French entered Italy, they met witlh nothitii able

to resist them. The Italian powers having remained, during a
long period, undisturbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy,

.MeY.ry Hil.,

to.. . 77i ' i 7; i
sMe.ecry H-i*. top. ii. 777. I ,

*~~~~ ~~~~ ~

'

.
': "'* 1

11(fl
. I

SECT. I:I

His reources
for this enter-
prize.

His prcpara-
tions for it.
Its ucccrs.

'109

iSc. II. :had:fornled.,f yfyftem with refpet to their affiirs, ;both in peace

"^^ ' and war, peculiar to themselves. In order to adjust te interefls,

and balance the power of the different states into which Italy
was divided; they were engaged in perpetual and endless nego-
Fciations: with each: other, which they conduced with all the
:subtlety of a refining an:rd d4ceitfil policy;, Their ontefts in the
-field, whet they had recoturfe to arms, were.decided ip mock battles,
by innocent and bloodless victories. :Upon the first appearance
of the danger which now impended,, they had recourse to the arts
whichl they ad studied, and, employed their ,utmoIt skill in
intrigue in order to ayert it. it

thji pr,oyig ineffectual, tieir

effeminate mercenaries,; the only. iitary f . lat trenainedin
the country, being fit only for thf parade of service, were terrified
at the aspe't of real war, and hrunk at its approah. The im-
petuofty. of t!e, srench valour, appeared .to them, irrefiibje.
Florence, Pisa, and Rome opened their gates as tlherFepch army
advanced. The profped of this dreadful invasion struck one
King of Naples with fuc a, panic terror, thlt he died, (if we. may
believe .historian ) .fd the: i fright,i, Alothr,^,d.iced hlis' throne
from:thq:famn p.lkgirpoiq spirit:. ;A third fl4 0t1t of :!iidomir
Ajots, a' foon-.,p !th4 ).enmy .appegred.sn the Neapolitap frontiers,
Charles;. after marching ,thilher.fromn th :bottom of the 4lp3, witl
as, nuch: rapidity. ad, almost aw' little oppfition,. as if he had
been on a progrfl,.throluglX<is. own 4nionions: tobk. quiet .pobfefli4
on of the throne of Naples, and intimidated or gave law to every

W

.
in' Ital '. .; 'i

' ' ' '... ,''

its ecs, S U C H, was the cohclufion. of thib eixpditiojii: which ,i-nuft b
particularly in confidered as the firt great exertion of thole new powers which
giving rile to '
ihc systel the Princes of Europe hiad aquiied, aidd now began to exercise.
concerning a
balance o It
power.

lip

STATE O P i.EU R OPE.

Its effet6 were no .les considerable thaln its' fucerde liud blten Sio. .
aftonihing.: The Italiais, unablki to refill tle imprefion of tlthe'
enemy which 'broke in upon tlhem, permitted him to h6ld on his
course undilftrbed. They quickly perceived thlat' no single
pokver, which;they colld ouze to nadion,' was an equal matcli
for a monarch, who' rulOd' over: such extensive' trritoris,' and
was at the head of filch! a martinl people;: but tllht a 'onfedel'
racy might accomplish wlat tie separate members of it durst
ndt attempt. .To tthis expedient, the only one that remained to'
deliver or to pef6rve them - from the yoke, they' 1id' ecotlrfe.
While Charles inc6iderately wafted his 'iimie iat Nhples,' in
f'tivals'and triumphs on acount of his palft' iccfes, ot was
fondlyd'rieaming of future conqueffs in tle Eafft, t the cmpire
of wiich he' now aspi'red, they fotrhild aga inIft l a powerfil
cbmbinaion of almoit all tlhe Ialiad ffates, fipported by tie
Emperor Maximilan, and FPedinand King of Arragon. Tihe
union of so many powers, who speded r forgot allti par-
ticular animofities, that they might a&t with concert ngainfl an
enemy who had beiconme formidable to them all, awaenried
Chailes Irom Is tholigitlhcs Hecirtv. He aw noW o i6' ro-
pct of safety but in returning to Prace. Aniriyof tr ty
thouland men, afferibled by the allies, Was ready t6 obiru f his
march; and though the French, with a daring courage wiich
more than 'counterbalanced' teir feroriyh iumer, brok
through that great body, anrd gained victory, which1 openiea tol
their monarch'a safe paflige into lhis own trltri rls, 'he' was
stripped of all his conquefRs in Italy in as hort a time"as it hiad
colt him to acquire them and the political system in that country
refilmed the iame appearance abes hs befvafiron.' '"

". ' ' . ' . ..; !.i , |:. ;,,. - "''
",' .

THR

SRCT. II.

''hi3 becomes
the great ob-
jct of policy,
first in Italy,
and then in
Europe.

The. wars in
laly render
lhanding ar-
mies general.

'T'He sudden and decisive effec of this confederacy seems to

have initruted the Princes and statesmen of Italy as much as
the irruption of the French had disconcerted and alarmed them.
They had now extended to the affairs of Europe, the maxims of
that political science which had hitherto been applied,only to
regulate the operations of the, petty states in their owncoutry.
They had discovered the method of preventing any monarch
from rising to such a degree of power, as was inconsistent with
the:general liberty and had manifested the importance of at-
tending to that great secret in modern policy, the ,prefervatin,
of a proper diftribqtion of power among all the membRts of the
system into which the states of Europe are formed. During all
the wars of which Italy now became the theatre, and amidt the
hostile operations which the imprudence of Louis XIl. ,and,the
ambition of Ferdinand of Arragon, carried, on in that country,
with little interruption, from the close of the fifteenth cen-
tnry, to that period at which the subsequent history commences,
the maintaining a proper balance of power between the contend-
ing parties became the great objectof attention t9 the fatefien
of Italy. Nor was thel idea confined to them. Self-prefervation
taught other powers to adopt it. It grew to be fashionable
and universal. From this. ra we can trace the progress of that
intercourse between nations, which has linked the powers of
Europe so closely together; and can discern the operatioins of that
provident licy, which, utring peace, guards against remote
and contingent dangers; which, in war, hath prevented rapid
and deftruive conquests.

-,-. , '.. :,, . "'

THIS was not the only effect of the operations which the great

powers of Europe carried on in Italy. Tliey contributed to
render fich a change, as the French had begun to make in the

state
112

Rate of the troops, general ; and obliged all the Princes, who
appeared on this new theatre of ation, to eftabli(h the military
force of their kingdoms on the fame footing with that of France.
When the feat of war came to be remote fronr the countries which
maintained the contest, the service of the feudal vaflals ceased to
be of any use; and the neceflity of employing troops regularly
trained to arms, and kept in conltant pay, came at once to be
evident. When Charles marched into Italy, his cavalry was en-
tirely compoted of those companies of Gendarmes, embodied by
Charles VII. and continued by Louis XI. his infantry onfiftd
partly of Swiss, hired of the cantons, and partly of Gascons, armed
and disciplined after the Swiss model. To these Louis XII. added
a body of Germans, well known in the wars of Italy by the name
of the Black Bands. But neither of these monarchs made any
account of the feudal militia, or ever had recourse to that mili-
tary force which they might have commanded, in virtue of the
ancient institutions in their kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdi-
nand, as soon as they beganto a6t in Italy, employed the fane in-
ftruments, and trusted the execution of their plans entirely to mer-
cenary troops.

THIS innovation in the military fyflem was.quickly followed

by another, which the custom of employing Swiss in the Italian
wars, was the occasion of introducing. The arms and discipline
of the Swiss were different from those of other European na-
tions. During their long and violent firuggles in defence 'of
their liberties against the house of Austria, whose armies, like
those of other considerable Princes, confided chiefly of heavy
armed cavalry, the Swiss found that their poverty, and the
fnall number of gentlemen residing in their country, at that
time barren and uncultivated, put it out of their power to bring

VOL. I. Q. into

SECT. II.

Teach the
Europeans
the fupcrior
importance of
infantry in
war.

113

1"4
SECT. II. into the field any body of horse capable of facing the enemy.

C'^ Necessity compelled them to place all their confidence in infan-

try ; and in order to render it capable of withstanding the shock of
cavalry, they gave the soldiers breast-plates and helmets as defen-
five armour; together with long spears, halberts, and heavyTfwords
as weapons of offence. They formed them into large battalions,
ranged in deep and close array, so as to present on every fide a
formidable front to the enemy h. The men at arms could make
no impression on the solid strength of such body. It repulsed
the Austrians in all their attempts to conquer Swifferland. It
broke the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarce inferior to
that of France, either in number or reputation: And when first
called to aa in Italy, it bore down by its irresistible force every
enemy that attempted to oppose it. There repeated 'proofs 'of
the decisive effe& of infantry, 'exhibited on such conspicuous
occasions, restored that service to reputation, and gradually re-
eftablihed the opinion, which had been long exploded, of its
fiuperior importance in the operations of war . But the g6lry which
the Swiss had' acquired, having inspired t'em with su'ch high
ideas of their own prowess and consequence, as rendered them
mutinous and insolent, the Princes who employed them became
weary of depending on the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and
'" ': began to turn their attention towards the improvement of their

national infantry.. .

National in. THE German powers having the command of men, whom
falzry efla- natuire has enidowed, with that steady courage, and persevering.
C;Gllially. ftrenlgth, which'forms them to,be soldiers, oon modelled their

troops in such a manner, that they vied with the. Swiss both in
difipline and valour.
.: ., h Machiavel Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 451.

.;1i~ , >~~~; THI

The French monarchs, though more slowly, and with greater

difficulty, accustomed the impetuous spirit of their people to sub-
ordination and discipline and were at such pains to render their
national infantry refpe&able, that as early as the reign of Louis
XII. several .gentlemen of high rank had lb fr abandoned their
ancient ideas, as to condescend to enter into that fervicei.

THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult to employ any

other than their national troops, in the southern parts of Italy, which
was the chief scene of their operations in that country, not only
adopted the Swiss discipline, but improved upon it, by mingling
a proper number of soldiers armed with heavy muskets in their
battalions; and thus formed that famous body of infantry, which,
during a century and a half, was the admiration and terror of
all Europe. The Italian ltates gradually diminilhed the num-
ber of their cavalry, and, in imitation of their more powerful
neighbours, brought the strength of their armies to confif in
foot soldiers. From this period the nations of Europe have
carried on war with forces more adapted to. every species of ser-
vice, more capable of acting in every country, and better fitted
both for making conquests, and for preserving them.

As their. efforts in Italy led the people of Europe to there im-

provements in the art of war, they gave them likewise the first
idea of the expence which accompanies great and continued
operations,, and accustomed them to the burden of those impofi-
tions, which are necessary for, upporting them. While the
feudal policy subsisted in full vigour, while armies were com-
posed of military vassals called forth to attack some neighbour-

1!5

SBCT. II.

In France.

In Spain.

The Italian
wars occasion
an incrcafe of
the publick
revenues in
Europe,
iBrantome, tom. x. p. 8. Mern. de Fleuranges, 143.

Q0 2

ing

ing power, and perform, in a short campaign, the Cervices
which they owed to their sovereign, the expence of war was
extremely moderate. A small subsidy enabled a Prince to begin
and to finish his greatest operations. But when Italy became
the theatre on which the powers of Europe contended for fupe-
riority, the preparations requisite for such a distant expedition,
the pay of armies kept constantly on foot, their fubfiftance in a
foreign country, the sieges to be undertaken, and the towns to
be defended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and by
creating demands unknown in les aive times, multiplied taxes
in every kingdom. The progress of ambition, however, was so
rapid, and Princes extended their operations o fast, that it
was impoflible ,at first to etablifh funds proportional to the in-
crease of expence which there occasioned. When Charles VIII,
invaded Naples, the fums requisite for carrying on that enter-
prize so far exceeded those which France had been accustomed to
contribute, that before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his
treasury was exhausted, and the domeftick resources, of which
his extensive prerogative gave him the command, were at an
end. As he durst not venture to lay any new imposition on his
people, oppressed already with the weight of unusual burdens;
the only expedient that remained was, to borrow of the Genoese
as much money as would enable him to continue his march.
But he could not obtain the um that was requisite, without con-
fentitg to pay annually the exorbitant interest of forty-two
livres for every hundred that he receivedk. We may observe
the fame disproportion between the efforts and revenues of other
Princes, his contemporaries. From this period, taxes went
on increasing and during the reign of Charles V. such

k Mem. de Comines, lib. vii. c. 5. p. 440.

fiums

SECT. 11.
A.__'
ii6

films were levied in every state, as would have appeared prodigi-
ous at the close of the fifteenth century, and gradually prepared the
way for the more exorbitant exactions of modern times.

THE last tranfadion, previous to the reigl of Charles V. that

merits attention on account of its influence upon the state of
Europe, is the league of Cambray. To humble the republick of
Venice, and to divide its territories, was the object of all the
powers who united in this confederacy. The civil constitution
of Venice, established on a firm basis, had flffered no confidera-
ble alteration for several centuries; during which, the Itate con-
dudted its affairs by maxims of policy no less prudent than vigo-
rous, and adhered to there, with an uniform consistent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advantage over other
states, whose views and measures changed as often as the form
of their government, or the persons who administered it. By
there unintermitted exertions of wisdom and valour, the Vene-
tians enlarged the dominions of their commonwealth, until it
became the most considerable power in Italy. While their ex-
tensive commerce, the useful and curious manufacures which they
carried on, together with their monopoly of the precious commo-
dities of the East, rendered Venice the most opulent ate in
Europe.

THEIR power was the object of terror to their Italian neigh-

bours. Their wealth was viewed with envy by the greatest
monarchs, who could not vie with their private citizens in the
magnificence of their buildings, in the richness of their dress
and furniture, or in splendor and elegance of living . Ju-

Heliani oratio apud Goldaftim in polit. Imperial. p. 980.

\its

SECT. II.

The league of
Cambray an
thcr inlportait
occurrence.

The motives
ofit.

117

SECT. II.

The rapid
progrels of
the confede-
lates.

lius I. whose ambition was superior, and his bilities equal, to
those of any Pontiff who ever fat on the Papal throne, formed
the idea of this league against the Veuetians, and endeavoured, by
applying to there paflions which I have mentioned, to persuade
other Princes to join in it. By working upon the fears of the
Italian powers, and upon the avarice of the monarchs beyond the
Alps, he induced them in concurre nce with other causes, which
it is not my province to explain, to form against there haughty
republicans one of the most extensive confederacies Europe had
ever beheld.

THE Emperor, the King of France, the King of Aragon, the

Pope, were principals in the league of Cambray, to which almost
all the Princes of Italy acceded, the least considerable ofthem hoping
for ome flare in the spoils of a state, which they already deemed
to be devoted to deftrution. The Venetians might have di.
verted this storm, or have broken its force; but with a prefumptu-
ous rashness, to which there is nothing similar in the course of
their history, they waited its approach. The impetuous valour
of the French rendered ineffe&tual all their precautions for the
safety of the; republick; and the fatal battle of Ghiarradadda en-
tirely ruined the army, on which they relied for defence. Julius
feizedall the towns which they held in the ecclesiastical territories.
Ferdinand re-annexed the towns of which they had got pof-
feflion on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions.
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army, advanced towards
Venice on the one fide. The French pushed their conquests on
the other. The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies,
and left without an ally, funk from the height of presumption
to the depth of despair; abandoned all their territories on the

continent
118

continent; and shut themselves up in their capital, as their last
refuge, and the only place which they hoped to preserve.

·.THIS rapid uccefs, however, proved fatal to the confederacy.

The members of it, united while engaged in seizing their prey,
began to feel their ancient jealousy and animofities revive, as
soon as they had a profped of dividing it. When the Venetians
observed there symptoms of alienation and distrust, a ray of hope
broke in upon them ; the spirit natural to their councils returned;
they refurned such wisdom and firmness, as made some atone-
ment for their former imprudence and dejection they reco-
vered part of the territory which they had loft; they appeared
the Pope and Ferdinand by well-timed concefliQns in their fa-
vour; and at length diflblved the confederacy, which had brought
their commonwealth to the brink of ruin.

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effeds of a league which

lie himself had planned, and imagining that nothing was too ar-
duous for him to undertake, conceived the idea of expelling
every foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force of his
mind towards executing a scheme so well fited to his vast and
enterprizing genius. He diredced his first attack against the
French, who, on many accounts, were more odious to the Ita-
lians, than any of the foreigners who liad acquired dominion in
their country. By his activity and address, he prevailed on most
of the powers, who had joined in the league of Cambray, to.
turn their arms against the King of France, their former ally;
and engaged Henry VIII. who had lately afccnded the throne of
England, to favour their operations by invading France, Louis
XII, resifted all the efforts of this formidable and unexpected

confederalcy,

SECT. 1I.

Division
arites among
them.

New objcds
of their policy
and anmition.

v't9

SECT. II. confederacy, with undaunted fortitude. Hostilities were carried

on, during several campaigns, in Italy, on the frontiers of Spain,
and in Picardy, with alternate success. Exhaufled, at length,
by the variety as well as extent of his operations; unable to
withiRand a confederacy which brought against him superior
force, conduted with wisdom, and aing with perseverance
he found it necessary to conclude separate treaties of peace with
his enemies; and the war terminated with the loss of every
thing which the French had acquired in Italy, except the castle
of Milan, and a few inconsiderable towns in that dutchy.

By this the
inlercourfe
among the
European na-
tions in-
crales.

They are pre-
pared for the
tranfaftions
of the fix-
teenth cen-
tury.

THE various negociations carried on during this busy period,

and the different combinations formed among powers hitherto
little connected with each other, greatly increased that inter-
course between the nations of Europe, which I have mentioned
as one effec of the events in the fifteenth century. While the
greatnes of the objects at which they aimed, the distant expe-
ditions which they undertook, as well as the length and obstinacy
of the contests in which they engaged, obliged them to exert
themselves with a vigour and perseverance unknown in the preced-
ing ages.

THOSE active scenes which the following History will exhi-

bit, and the variety and importance of those tranfations which
distinguish the period to which it extends, are not to be ascribed
solely to the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rivallhip
of Charles V. and of Francis I. The kingdoms of Europe
had arrived at such a degree of improvement in the internal
administration of government, and Princes had acquired such
command of the national force which was to be exerted in foreign
wars, that they were in a condition to enlarge the sphere of

their
120

operations, and to increase the vigour of their efforts. Their
contests i Italy, which led them first to try the extent of the
power that they had acquired, gave rife to so many opposite claims
and pretensions, excited such a spirit of discord and rivallhip be-
tween nations, and laid the foundation of so many quarrels, as
could not fail of producing extraordinary convulsions in Europe;
and the sixteenth century opened with the certain prospect of its
abounding in great and interesting events.

VoL

A VIEW

SecT. I1.

121

# SECTION III.

A
I I. .

E
OF THE

F.'T H i
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

* .*, ; a.a
.

IN . i
E

U

R

0

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECT I O N

III.
iew of the Progress of Society in Europe, with rfpec to the com-

mand of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

SECT. 1I.

A confider-
able variety in
the conftitu-
tion of the
different na-
tions of Eu-
rope.

H AVING thus enumerated the principal causes and events,

the influence of which extended to all the states in Europe,
and contributed either to improve their internal govern-

ent" apd olfe, or to enlarge th sphere of their activity to

augment lheir national force; nothing remains, in order to prepare
my readers for entering with full information upon perusing the His-

tory
W

tory of the Reign of CJarl,. V. bat to ive fopec view of tec par-
ticular conptitutip and fxi. ,f ciyji governncnt , in each of thei
nations which aed any considerable part duting that period.
While these infitutions nd qccurrnen , w)lj.cl I h.aye men-
tioned, formed the people of Euope to reeLmble each other,
and conducted theem from barbfi~ ,to rfilenent, i9 the, £amy
path, and witl lmPo equil tieps, there wyer,e pt!hr cr;c;im-
Rances w!ic)l ogaifiplne4d .di'eretc.,e : i heir lpolitial !,efblif-
ments, and gave rife to those peculiar modes of government,
which have produced such variety in the character and genius
of nations.

IT is no left neceflCary to bcoqre acqaintel with the latter,
nthan to have .conteWlaelted tlhe forer. The view whiicl i have ex-

hibited of the aufes ,,nd events, wl)pfe jnfuence .was ;unierl,
will ,eLnbley my readers ,tp account for the fuirpizing resemblance
amoPng: he n`tios of Europe in tleir interior pqlice, aqld so-
zeign .operations ,But, without a ,dif;int k!owledge of the
peculiar form and .genius of ther civil government, a great part
Qs their txasfaliops ;must appear altogether myRteriopu and ip-
explicable. The historians of particular States, as tlhey fel-
dom extended their views farther than to the amusement or in-
dtruaionof their fellow-citizens, by .whom they might presume
that all domeftick .cutoms .and institutions were 'perfealy
understood, have often negleced to descend into fich. details
with refpedt to there, as are sufficient to convey,to foreigners.full
.light and information concerning the occurrences which they
relate. But a history, which comprehends the tranfadions of so
many different countries, would be extremely imperfet, with-
out a previous furyey of their corifitution and political state. It
;is from his knowledge of these, that the reader must draw those

R principles,

E$,CT. II1.

f#t

Neccfrary to
explain the
ftatc of each,
when
Charles V.
began hli
reign.

123

principles, which will enable him to judge with discernment, and
to decide with certainty concerning the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar forms and regula-

tions in every country, would lead to deduaions of immeasurable
length. To sketch out the great lines which distinguish and cha-
ratlerize each government, is all that the nature of my present
work will admit of, and all that is necefary to illustrate the events
which it records.

The State of
Italy.

The Papal
dignity the
highetl in
Europe.

AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the political face of

Italy was extremely different from that of any other part of
Europe. Instead of those extensive monarchies which occupied
the reft of the continent, that delightful country was parcelled
out among many small states, each of which possesed sovereign
and independant jurifdi&ion. The only monarchy in Italy was
that of Naples. The dominion of the Popes was of a peculiar
species, to which there is nothing similar either in ancient or mo-
dern times. In Venice and Florence, a republican form of govern-
ment was established. Milan was fubjeft to overeigns, who had
assumed no higher title than that of Dukes.

THE Pope was the first of there powers in dignity, and not

the least considerable by the extent of his territories. In the
primitive church, the jurifdiaion of bishops was equal and co-
ordinate. They derived, perhaps, ome degree of consideration
from the dignity of the See in which they presided. They
possessed, however, no real authority or pre-eminence, but what
they acquired by superior abilities, or superior fantity. As
Rome had o long been the feat of Empire, and capital of the

world,

SECT. III.
124

world, its bishops were on that account entitled to refrpe; they
received it; but during several ages they claimed and received
nothing more. From there humble beginnings, they advanced
with uch an adventurous and well-dire&led ambition, that they
established a piritual dominion over the minds and sentiments
of men, to which all Europe submitted with implicit obedience.
Their claim of universal jurisdiCtion, as heads of the church, and
their pretensions to infallibility in their decisions, as fiicceflrs
of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant to the ge-
nius of the Christian religion. But on there foundations, the fit-
perltition and credulity of mankind enabled them to ere an
amazing fuperftru&ure. In all ecclefiaflical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor
was the plenitude of their power confined to there alone; they
dethroned monarchs; disposed of crowns; absolved ubjecs from
the obedience due to their fovreigns; and laid kingdoms under
interdits. There was not a state in Europe which had not.
been disquieted by their ambition. There was not a throne
which they had not haken; nor a Prince, who did not tremble
at their power.

NOTHINO was wanting to render this Empire absolute, and'

to establish it on the ruins of all civil authority, but that the
Popes should have possesed' such a degree of temporal power,
as was fuflicient to second and enforce their spiritual decrees.
Happily for mankind, while their spiritual jurifdiion was most
extensive, and at its greatelt height, their temporal property was
extremely limited. They were powerful Pntiffs, formidable
at a distance, but they were petty Princes, without any confide-
rable domeftick force. They had early endeavoured, indeed,
to acquire territory by arts, similar to th ore which they had em.

ployed

SEc'. Ill.

Origin and
progrel of
the apal
power.

Tlhe ten io-
tics of t
Pop: inade~
quate to ulp-
port tlheii pi-
ritual juril-
didion.

125

SCT. III.

Their autho-
rity in theft
own territo-
ries extremely
limited.

It was cir-
cnmfczibed by
the ambition
of the Roman
barons

p!oyed in extending their jurifdiaion. Under pretence of a
donation from Constantine, and of another from Charlemagne
or his father Pepin, they attempted to take poffeslion of rome
towns adjacent to kome. But thee donations were fictitious, and
availed them little. The benefadions, for which they were in-
debted to the credulity of the Norman adventurers, who conquered
Naples, and to the superstition of the countess Matilda, were real,
and added ample domains to the Holy See.

BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in proportion

to the extent of territory which they had acquired. In the do-
minions annexed to the Holy See, as well as in those subjet to
other Princes in Italy, the overeign of a state was far from hav-
ing the command of the force which it contained. During the
turbulence and confusion of the middle ages, the powerful no-
bility or leaders of popular faCions in Italy, had seized the go-
vernment of different towns; and after strengthening their fortifi-
cations, and taking a body of mercenaries into pay, they set up
for independance. The territory which the church had gained,
was filled with such petty tyrants, who left the Pope hardly the
(hadow of dominion.

As there usurpations almost annihilated the Papal power in

the greater part of the towns fubje& to the church, the Roman
barons frequently disputed the authority of the Popes, even in
Rome itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion began to be
propagated, "That as the function of ecclesiastics was purely
spiritual, they ouglt .to possess no property, and to claim no tem-
poral jurifdition; but, according to the laudable example of
their predecessors in the primitive church, hould subsist wholly

upon
126

upon their tithes, or upon the voluntary oblations of the people ." SECT. II.
This dotrine being addrefled to men, who had beleld the fcanda- "
lous manner in which the avarice and ambition of the clergy
had prompted them to contend for wealth, and to cxercife power,
they lifltened to it with fond attention. The Roman baron,
who had felt moi sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppreflion,
adopted these fentiients with fiicl ardour, that they set them-
selves instantly to hake off the yoke. They endeavoured to
restore ome image of their ancient liberty, by reviving the in- A. D. 1143.
flitution of the Roman senate, in iwhich they vested supreme
authority; committing the executive power sometimes to one
chief senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to a magistrate
dignified with the name of The Patrician, The Popes exerted
themselves with vigour, in order to check this fatal encroach-
ment on theirjurifdiction. Oie of them, finding all his endea-
vours ineffaual, was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut
short his days. Another, having ventured to attack the senators
at the head' 6f ffome armed men, was mortally wounded in te
fray b. During a considerable period, the power of the Popes,
before which the greatest m6tarchs in Europe trembled, was cir-
cumfcribed witllin such narrow limits in their own capital, that
they durst scarce exert any ad of authotity without the permiflion
and concurrence of the'fenate.

ENcRaoAcHME rTswer.e made upon tlhe'Pap.l authority, not on- nad y i).

ly by the usurpations of the'Romri nbility, but by the lmtiinous t'r ,e '
spirit of the people. During seventy years of the fourteenth peo0re, 'Tion

A. D. 1308,

century, the Popes fixed their residence in Avignon. The inha- to A.
; . ,;

OQIto FrInmgenfis de GQefis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. 2o.
b Otio Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27, 31. Id. dc Gfc. Frid. lib. i. c. 27.
IMlit6ri Annali d' Italia, vol. ix. 398, 404.

bitants

137

bitants of Rome, accustomed to confider themfelxes as the de-
fccndants of the people who had conquered the world, and had
given laws to it, were too high-fpitited to ubmit with patience
to the delegated authority of those persons, to whom the Popes
committed the government of the city. On many occasions,
they opposed the execution of the Papal mandates, and on the
slightest appearance of innovation or opprellon, they were ready
to take arms in defence of their own immunities. Towards the
middle of the fourteenth century, being instigated by Nicolas
Rienzo, a man of low birth and a seditious spirit, but of popular
eloquence, and an enterprizing ambition, they drove all the no-
bility out of the city, eftablilhed a democratical form of govern-
ment, elected Rienzo Tribune of the people, and invested him
with extensive authority. But though the frantick proceedings
of the tribune soon overturned this new system though the go-
vernment of Rome was reinflated in its ancient form; yet every
fresh attack contributed to weaken the papal jurisdiction; and
the turbulence of the people concurred with the spirit of inde-
pendance among the nobility, to circumscribe it within very
narrow boundsc. Gregory VII. and other domineering Pontiffs,
accomplished those great things which rendered them so formi-
dable to the Emperors with whom they contended, not by the
force of their arms, or by the extent of their power, but by the
dread of their spiritual censures, and by the effet of their intrigues,
which excited rivals, and called forth enemies against every Prince,
whom they wilhed to depress or to destroy.

c Hiftorie Fiorentine de Giov Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. 104. ap. Murat. Script.

Rerum. Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Rienzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital.vol. iii.
p. 399. &c. Hist. de Nic. Rienzy, par M. de Boifpreaux, p. 91g &c..

MANY

r

Stcr. 1II.
128

STATE OF EUROPE.

MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not only to humble

there usurpers, who lorded it over .tle cities in the ecclesiastical
state, but to break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people. These
were long unfiuccefsful. At la Alexander VI. with a policy no
left artful than flagitious, subdued and extirpated most of them,
and rendered the Popes maiters of their own dominions. The
enterprizing ambition of Julius II added conquests of no incon-
fiderable value' to the patrimony of St. Peter' Thus the Popes, by
degrees, became powerful temporal Princes. Their territories, in
the age of Charles V. were of greater extent than at present; their
country was better cultivated, and more populous; and as they
drew large dontributions from every part of Europe, their reve-
nues far exceeded thoe of the neighbouring powers, and rendered
them capable of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

THE genius of the Papal government, however, was better

adapted to the exercise of spiritual dominion, than of temporal
power. With respect to the former, all its maxims were steady
and invariable. Every new Pontiff adopted the plan of his pre-
deceflor. By education and habit Ecclesiastics were so formed,
that the chara&er of the individual was funk in that of the pro-
fcflion ' and the lpafflons of the man were sacrificed to the interest
and honour of the order. The hands which held the reins of ad-
ministration might change; but the spirit which conduced them
was always the fame. While the measures of other goverrimenits
fluctuated, and the objects at which they aimed varied, the church
kept one end in view; and to this unrelaxing contancy of purfirt,
.it was indebted for its success in the boldest attempts ever made
.by human ambition.

, ,L.I. ,S
' BUT

SECT. III.

Alexander V.
and Julius II.
render the
Popes confi-
derable
'rinces.

DeseRts in the
nature of
ecclefiafical
dominion.

BuT in their civil administration, the Popes followed no such

uniform or consistent plan. There, as in other governments,
the character, the paflions, and the interests of the person who
had the supreme direction of affairs, occasioned a variation both
in objets and meafires. As few Prelates reached the summit of
ecclefiatical dignity, until they were far advanced in life, a
change of masters was more frequent in the Papal dominions
than in other states, and the political system was, of course, les
stable and permanent. Every Pope was eager to make the most
of the hott period, during which he ad the profped of enjoy-
ing power, in order to aggrandize his family, and to attain his
private ends; and it was often the first business of his successor
to undo all that he had done, and to overturn what he had efta-
blifhed.

As ecclefiafticks were trained to pacifick arts, and early ini-

tiated in the mysteries of that policy, by which the court of
Rome extended or supported its spiritual dominion, the Popes
were apt to conduct their temporal affairs with the fame spirit;
and in all their measures were more ready to employ the, refine-
ments of intrigue, than the force of arms. It was in the Papal
court that address and fibtlety in negociation first became a fci-
ence; and during the sixteenth century, Rome was confidered as
the school in which it could be belt acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical charater prevented the

Popes from placing themselves at the head of their armies, or
taking the command, in person, of the military force in their
dominions, they were fraid to arm their filbjeds; and in all
their operations, whether offensive or defensive, they trusted
entirely to mercenary troops.

As

SECT. Ill.
13o

As their power and dominions could not descend to their SECT. II.

posterity, the Popes were less follicitous than other Princes to
form or to encourage schemes of publick utility and improve-
ment. Their tenure was only for a fliort life present advantage
was all that they attended to to squeeze and to amass, not to
meliorate, was their obje. They ereced, perhaps, some work
of ostentation, to rermain as a monument of their Pontificate
they found it neceflary, at ome times, to eftablifl useful inftitu-
tions, in order to ooth and silence the turbulent populace of
Rome but plans of general benefit to their fubjeds, and framed
with a view 'to futurity, were rarely objets of attention in the
Papal policy. The patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed
than any part of Europe; and though a generous Pontiffmight
suspend for a little, or counter-a& the effecs of those vices which
are peculiar to the administration of ecclefiafticks; the difeae
not only remained incurable, but has even gone on increasing
from age to age and the decline of the fate has kept pace with
its progress.

ONE circumstance, farther, concerning tle Papal government, The Popes

derive rome

is so ingular, as to merit attention. As the piritual supremacy advantages
and temporal power were united in one person, and uniformly from the .

union of their

aided each other in their operations, they became so blended fpirtual and
together, that it was difficult to separate them, even in imagina- temporal au
tion. The potentates who found it necessary to oppose the mea-
fures which the Popes pursued as temporal Princes, could not di-
vest themselves of the reverence which they imagined to be due to
them as heads of the church, and vicars of Jesus Christ. It was
with relutance that they could be brought to a rupture with
them they were averse to pu(h their operations agaiRf them
to extremity they listened eagerly to the first overtures of ac-

S commodation,

131

SECT. II. commodation, and were willing to procure it almost upon any

terms. Their confciounefs of this encouraged the enterprizing
Po-.,iffs, who filled the Papal throne about the beginning of the
fxteer.th century, to engage in schemes seemingly the most ex-
travagant. They trusted, that if their temporal power was not
fufficientto carry them through with fucces, the refpec paid to
their fpilitual dig:ity ould enable them to extricate themselves
with facility and with honourd. But when Popes came to take
part more frequently in the contests among Princes, and to engage
as principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in Europe, this ve-
neration for their sacred cha:'acer began to abate, and striking in-
stances will occur in the following history, of its being almost totally
extint.

Conrstion OF all the Italian powers, the republick of Venice, next to
orthe repub-
lick of e- the Pope, was most connected with the reft of Europe. The rife
nice, with its
rife and pro-
grifi. d The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook and carried on war

against Julius II. remarkably illuflrates this oblervation. Louis solemnly con-
ilked the clerg of Frarce, whether it w-as lawfnl to take armsagainfta Pope,
vho had wantonly kind'.. w-ar in Europe, and whom rcither the faith of trea-
t:es, nor gratitude for favours received, nor the decorum of his characer, could
restrain from the most violent acions, to which the lull of power prompts am-
b.icus Princes. Thorgh his clrgy authorized the war, yet Anne of Bretagne,
hls Queen, enerai.ned scruples with regard to the a-wfulness of it. The King
hunielt, f:nm some fuperfition of the fame kind, carried it o faintly; and,
upon every fresh advantge, renewedhis propositions of peace. Mezeray,. Hist.
de Frarce, flt. ed;t. t6S. torn. i. 852. I shall produce another proof of this
reverence for the Papal c..raderflill more linking. Guicciardini, the moll
fgacious, perh2a,, cf. ali modern hirfrians, and the boldefl in painting the
.ices ad ambition of the Popes, represents the death of Migliau, a Spanish of-
sicer, 'no was killed dari-. the siege of Naples, as a p unifthment infliced on
him by he2ven, on accc.rn: of his having opposed the fetlingof Clement VII.
a l b.ry. Guic. Hillor'.a d'Italia, Genev. 645. vol. ii. lib. i8.p. 467.

of
132

of that commonwealth, during the inroads of the IHu;s in the fifth SECT. 111.
century; the singular fituatioa of ts capital in the small ifics of ' '
the Adriatick gulf; and the more fil:gular form of its civil confti-
tution, are generally known. If we view the Vcnttian govcrn-
ment as calculated for the order of nobles aloe.c, its institutions
are so excellent; the deliberative, legislative and executive powcis
are so admirably distributed and adjusted, thot it must be regarded
as a perfect model of political wisdom. But if we confider it as
formed for a numerous body of people subjed to its jurifdicion,
it will appear a rigid and partial aitocracy, which lodges all power
in the hands of a few members of the community, while it de-
grades and oppresses the reft.

THE spirit of goverrment, in a commonwealth of this species, Defeits in is
was, of course, timid and jealous.. The Venetian nobles dif- S""v""'cn"'

'

'' * particularly

trfted their own subjects, and were afraid of allowing them , th refp, c
the use of arms. They encouraged among them he arts of in- opersi.. .
duftry and commerce ; they employed them in manufatures and
in navigation; but never admitted them into the troops which
the itate kept in its pay. The military force of the republick
consisted entirely of foreign mercenaries. ,,The command of thele
was never trusted to noble Venetians, left they hould acquire
filch influetce over the army, as might endanger the publick li-
berty; or become accustomed to the exercifc of tilch power,
as would make them unwilling to return to the condition of pri-
vate citizens. A soldier of' fortune was paced at the head of the
armies of the commonwealthi and to obtain that honour, was
the great objet of tha Italian Condottiern, or leaders of bands,
who, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, made a trade of war,
and raised and hired out soldiers to different states. But the fame
suspicious policy, which induced them to employ there adven-

turers,

1 33

134
SECT. III. turers, prevented their placing entire confidence in them. Two

C v'"^ noblemen, appointed by the senate, accompanied their army when

it took the siec, wih the appellation of Proveditori, and like the
field-deputies of the Dutch republick in latter times, obfeived all
the motions of the general, and checked and controuled him in all
operations.

A REPUBLICK, ith such civil and military infsitutions, was

not formed to make conquests. While its fubjets were dif-
armed, and its nobles excluded from military command, it car-
ried on its warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage. This
ought to have taught the Venetians to make felf-prefervation,
and the enjoyment of domeftick security the objects of their po-
licy. But republicks are apt to be educed by the spirit of ambi-
tion, as well as Princes. When the Venetians so far forgot the
interior defects in their government, as to'aim at. extensive con-
quests, the fatal blow, which they received in'the war excited by
the league of Cambray, convinced them of the imprudence and
danger of making violent efforts, in opposition to the genius and
tendency of their constitution.

Excellence of IT is not, however, 'by its military, but by its naval and com-:
its naval in- mercial power, that; the importance of the Venetian common-
stitutions.

fitutins wealth mufft be estimated. In the latter, the real force and

nerves of the state consisted. The jealdufy of government did
not extend to this department. Nothing was apprehended from
this quarter, that could prove formidable to liberty. The senate
encouraged the nobles to trade, and to serve on board the fleet.
They became merchants and admirals. They encreafed the
wealth of their- country by their'induftiry They added to its

. - dominions,

dominions, by the valour with which they conduced its naval SecT. III.
armaments.

THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible source of opu- The extent of

lence. All the nations in Europe depended upon them, not only its commerce.
for the commodities of the East, but for various manufatures fa-
bricated by them alone, or finithed with.a dexterity: and.elegance
unknown in other countries. From this extensive commerce,
the state derived such immense supplies, as concealed these
vices in its constitution, which I have mentioned, and enabled
it to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an over. match
for the force which any of its neighbours could bring into.the field,
but were sufficient to contend, for some time, with the powerful
monarchs beyond the Alps. During its struggles with. the
Princes united against it by the league of.Camsbay, the: reptb-
lick levied fums which, even in the prefeit age, would be deemed
considerable; and while the King of France paid the exorbitant in-
terest which I have mentioned for the money advanced to him, ,and
the Emperor eager to borrow, but deftitutqf credit,;:yakiown
by the name of Maximilian the Money-less, Fe, eyenetians ,raised
whatever fums they pleased, at the moderaitepremium of five in
the hundred.

THE confiitution of Florence was perfedly the reverse of that The confiitu-
of Venice. It partook as much of the democraticald turbulence tion of Flo1

rence.

and licentiousness, as the other of ariftocratical rigour. Flo-
rence, however, was a commercial, not a military democracy.
The nature of its institutions we e favourable to commerce, and

eHilt. de la ligue faite a Cambray par M. 1' Abb le Bos lib. v. San'di.
Storia Civil. Veneziana, lib. viii. c. 6. p. 89r, &c.

the
: _

135

SECT. 111. the genius of the people was turned towards it. The vast wealth

- which the family of Medici had acquired by trade; added to the

magnificence, the generofitv, and the virtue of the first Cofino,
gave him such an ascendant over the affections as well as the coun-
cils of his countrymen, that though the forms of popular govern-
ment were preserved, though the various departments ofadminiftra-
tion were filled by magistrates diftinguilhed by the ancient names,
and ele&ed in the usual manner, he was in reality the head of the
commonwealth, ar.d in the station of a private citizen he possessed
supreme authority. Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of
this power to his descendants; and during the greater part of
the fifteenth century, the political state of Florence was ex-
tremely singular The appearance of republican government
subsisted, the people were paflionately attached to it, and on some
occasions contended warmly for their privileges, and yet they
permitted a finigle family to assume a direcion of their affairs,
alift as abfute -s if it had been formally invested with fove-
reign power. 'thejealoufv of the Medici concurred with the
commercial spirit of the Florentines, in putting the military force
of eepubltk upon the fame footing with that of the other Italian
'fates.; Tie troops- whidc the Florentines employed in their
wars, onfited alnieft entirely of mercenary soldiers, furnished
by the Condotieri, or leaders of bands, whom they took into their

pay.

The confit- I the kingd of Naples, to which the sovereignty of the
tigd f t iland-of Sicily was annexed, the feudal goverment was efta-
ki~om of
Nsapes. bilfhed in the lame form, and with the fame defects, as in the

other nations of Europe. The frequent and violent revolutions
which happened in that monarchy, had considerably increased
these defecr and rendered them more intolerable. The fuccef-

fio()
136

sion to the crown of Naples had been so often interrupted or SEcr. 111.
altered, and to many Princes of foreign blood had taken pof-
fefion of the throne, that the Neapolitan r:obility had loft, in a
great measure, that attachment to the family of their overeigns,
as well as that reverence for their persons, which, in other feudal
kingdoms, contributed to set ome boul:ds to the encroach-
ments of the barons upon the royal prerogative and power.
At the fame time, the different pretenders to the crown, being
obliged to court the barons who adhered to them, and on whole
support they depended for the success of their claims, they
augmented their privileges by liberal conceilions, and connived
at their boldest usurpations. Even when feated on the throne, it
was dangerous for a Prince, who held his feptre by a disputed
title, to venture on any ftep towards extending his own power,
or circumscribing that of the nobles.

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples was the molt

turbulent of any in Europe, and the authority of its Monarchs
the least extenfivc. Though Ferdinand I. who began his
reign in the year one thousand four hundred and fixty-cight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy ; though his
Ibn Alfonso, that he might crush it at once by cutting off the
leaders of greatest reputation and influence among the Neapo-
litan barons, ventured to commit one of the most perfidious and
cruel actions recorded in history; the order of nobles was never- A. D i4S-
thelefs more cxafperated than humbled by the blow . The
resentment which these outragcs excited was so violent, and
the power of the malccontent nobllc s still io formidable,

f G.inr.onc, book xxviii. char. 2. o!. i. p. .o, &c.

'37
VrOL. I.

T

that

SECT. III. that to there may be arcibed, in a great degree, the 'eae and

rapidity with which Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom of
Naples g.

dispute con-
sdifpute oe rTHe event that gave rife to thle violent contests cone:rnlng
'cerning the the fuccefllon to the crpWh of Naples and Sicily, which brought
right of
fuccenlon to so many calamities upon there kingdonis, happened i the
the crown, thirteenth century. Upon the death of the Emperor Frederick

11, Manfred his natural son aspiring to the Neapolitan throne,
A. D. 254. murdered (if we may believe contemporary historians) his bro-

ther the Efmperor Conrad, and by that crime obtained ofeflion
of it h. The Popes, from their implacable enmity to the hdufr
of Swabia, not only refused to recognize Manfred's title, but
endeavoured to excite againff him some rival capable of wrest-
ing the sceptre out of his hand. Charles Count Ot Anjoti, the
brother of St. Louis King of France, undertook this; and he
received from the Popes, the investiture of the kingdom of
Naples and Sicily as a fief held of the Holy See. The Count
of Anjou's efforts were crowned With fuccefb; Manfred fell in
battle; and he took pofreflon of the vacant throne. Btit soon
after, Charles sullied the glory which he had acqlitred4, by the it-
justice and cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands of
the executioner, Conradin, the last Prince of the houe of
Swabia, and the rightful heir of the Neapolitan crown. That
gallant young Prince aterted his title, to the last, with a courage,
worthy of a better fate. On the fcafolld, he declared Peter, at
that time Prince, and soon after King of Aragon, who had

c Giannone, ibid. p. 414.
h Struv. corp. hit. Germ. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii. ch. .5

married
.138

married Manfred's only daughter, his heir; and throwing his
glove among the people, he entreated that it might be carried
to Peter as a symbol by which he conveyed all his rights to
him i. The desire of avenging the insult offered to royalty by
the death of Conradin concurred with ambition, in prompting
Peter to take arms in support of the title, whichl he had ac-
quired. From that period, during almost two centuries, the
houses of Arragon and Anjou contended for crown of Naples.
Amidst a fucceflion of revolutions more rapid, as well as of
crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the history of almost
any other kingdom, Monarchs sometimes of the Arragonefe
line, and sometimes of the Angevin were feated on the throne.
At length the Princes of the house of Arragon obtained such
firm poffeflion of- this long-difputed inheritance, that they tranf-
mitted it quietly to a bastard branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was not exiint,

nor had they relinquished their title to the Neapolitan crown.
The Count of Maine and Provence, the heir of his family,
conveyed all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to his
successors. Charles VIII, as 1 have already related, crofed the
Alps at the head of a powerful army in order to prosecute his
claim with a degree of vigour far superior to that, which the
Princes from whom he derived it, had been capable of exerting.
The rapid progress of his arms in Italy, as well as the short
time during which hs enjoyed the fruits of his success, are well
known. Frederick the heir of the illegitimate branch of the

i Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. § 2.
k Giannone, book xxvi. ch. 2.

T

SECT. Il.

A.D, 1434.

Pretensions of
the French
and Spanifli
Monarchs.

A. 1). 1494.
Arragonefe

SEC T;II. Aragonefe family, oon recovered the throne of which Charles had

difpoffefled him. Louis XII. and Ferdinand of Arragon united
againit this Prince, whom both, though for different reasons, con-
fidred as an ufirper, and agreed to divide his dominion. between
A. D. '50. them. Frederick, unable to resist the combined Monarchs, each

of whom was far his superior in power, resigned his sceptre.
Louis and Ferdinand, though they had concurred in making
the conquest, differed about the division of it; and from allies
became enemies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly by the exer-
tion of such military talents as gave him a just title to the appella-
tion of the Great Captain, which the Spanifl hiforians have be-
stowed upon him; and partly by such lhamelefs and frequent
violations of the most solemn engagemrnts, as leave an indelible
stain on his memory; stripped the French of all that they pof-
sessed in the Neapolitan dominions, and secured the peaceable
poffeflion of them to his master. These, together with his other
kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted to his grandson Charles V, whose
right to posess them, if not altogether uncontravertible, seems, at
leait, to be as well founded as that, which the Kings of France
set in opposition to it .

State of fie THERE is nothing in the political constitution, or interior go-
durchy of
Milan, and vernment of the the dutchy of Milan so remarkable, as to require
he riglt of a particular explanation. But as the right of fucceflion to that
(tucceilion to
it. fertile province was the cause or the pretext of almoitall the wars

carried on in Italy during the reign of Charles V, it is neceflary to
trace there disputes to their source, and to inquire into the preten-
lions of the various competitors.

1 Droias ds Rois de France au Royaume de Sicile. Merim. de Comin. Edit.
de Frefnoy, tom. iv. part ii. p. 5.

DURING

.. -
140

DURING the long and fierce contcets excited in Itali 'by the SrcT. III.

violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline faCtions, the family of Rj.I o-
Visconti rose to great eminence among their fellow-citizens of grelsot ihe

disputes con-

Milan. As the Visconti had adiiered uniformly to the Ghibcl- cetiinlg this.
line or Imperial interefl, they by way of recompence, received, A. D. I34.
from one Emperor, the dignity of perpetual vicars of the Empire
in Italy m. They were created by another, Dukes of Milan,
and together with that title, the poffefioi of the city and its A. D. s.
territories, was bestowed upon them as an hereditary fief n.
John King of France, among other expedients for railing
money, which the calamities of his reign obliged him to em-
ploy, condescended to give one of his daughters in marriage to
John Galeazzo Visconti the first Duke of Milan, from whom
lie had received considerable fitms. Valentine Visconti one of
the children of thisr marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke
of Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. 'In' their marriage-
contrat with the Pope confirmed, it was flipulated that, upon
failure of heirs-male in the family of Visconti, the dutchy of
Milan Ihould descend to the posterity' f Valentie and the
Duke o Orleans. That event took pla'ce. In the year one
thousand four hundred and forty-feven, Pilip Maria 'the last
Prince of the ducal family of Visconti died. Various compe-
titors pretended to the flcceflion. Charles Duke of Orleans
pleaded 'his right to' it, founded on the nmarriage-contrac of
his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonso King of Naples claim-
ed it in consequence of a will made by Philip Maria in his
favour. The Emperor contended that upon the extinCtion ol
male iflue in the family of Visconti the fief returned to the

m Petrarch. epift. ap. Struv. corp. i. 625.
n Leibnit, cod. jur. gent. diplom. vol. i. 257.

superior

'41

SECT. III. superior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to the Empire. The
--v--' people of Milan fritten with that love of liberty which

prevailed among the Italian States, declared against the domi-
nion of any master, and established a republican form of go-
vernment.

BUT during the struggle among so many competitors, the

prize for which they contended was seized by one from whom
none of them apprehended any danger. Francis Sforza, the
natural son ofJacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and abili-
ties had elevated from the rank of a peasant to be one of the
most eminent and powerful of the Italian Condottieri, having
succeeded his father in the command of the adventurers who
followed his standard, had married a natural daughter of the
last Duke of Milan. Upon this lhadow of a title Francis found-
ed his pretensions to the dutchy, which he supported with flfch
talents and valour as placed him at last on the ducal throne.
The virtues as well as abilities with which he governed, in-
ducing his fubjets to forget the defects in his title, he tranf-
mitted hisdominions quietly to his son; from whom they de
scended to his grandson. He was murdered by his grand uncle
Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, who took poffefion of the dutchy;
and his right to it was confirmed by the investiture of the Empe-
ror Maximilian in the year one thousand four hundred and ninety-
four o.

o Ripalm. hift.Mediol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. corp. i. 930. Du Mont. Corps
Diplom. tom. iii. p. ii. 333. ibid.

LOou I

Louis XI. who took pleasure in dprefning the Princes of the

blood, and who admired the political abilities of Franhcis SfoJza,
would not permit the Duke of Orleans to take any ftep in pro.
fecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lud6vico the Moor
kept up fich a close connection with Charles VIII. that during
the greater part of his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans
continued to lie dlvtnant.' ,But when the crown of France de-
volved to' Loui.XIl.Duke of Orleais, he instantly alirted the
rights of his family with the ardour which it was natural to ex-
peCt. Ludovico Sforga, incapable of contending with such a rival,
was stripped of all liiadominionsin thie fpa¢o f a fw days. The
King, clad in the ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph ; and
soon after, Ludovico having, beent betrayed by the Swiss in his
pay, was sent a prisoner into Fralnce~ and (hut tip in, the cafle
of Locles, wheye he lay unpitied during the remainder of his
(lays. In confequencq of one of tile singular revolutions lhich
occur o frequently in the history of te Milanese, his son Maxi-
milian Sforza was placed on the ducal throne, of which lie kept.
poffeflion during the reign of Louis, XII. His successor Francis I.
vas too high-fpiited and enterprizing tamely to relinquish his
title. ,As oon as he was feated upon the, thron, he prepared to
invade the Milanese; and his right of fucceflio t it, appears
from this detail, to have been not only more natural but wiore jift
than that of any other competitor.

IT is unnecelaJy to enter into any detail with espet to the'

form of gverument in Genoa, Parma, Modena, and the other
inferior States of Italy. Their names; indeed, will often occur
in the following history. But the power of there States them-

selves

SgCT I.
A, D. iz.

143

SECT. Ill.

The conflitu-
tion and go-
vernment or
Spain.

Conqueled
by the Van-
dals,

A. D. 712.
and by the
Moors.

selves was o inconsiderable, that their fate depended little upon
their own efforts; and the frequent revolutions which they under-
went, were brought about by the operations of the Princes who
attacked or defended them, rather than by any thing peculiar in
their internal constitution.

OP the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps, Spain is one of

the most considerable; and as it was the hereditary domain of
Charles V, as well as the chief source of his power and wealth, a
diftint knowledge of its political conflitution is of capital im-
portance towards understanding the tranfaftions of his reign.

THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the Roman power

in Spain, etablilhed a form of government in that country,
and brought in cultoms and laws, perfedly finilar to those
which were introduced into the reft of Europe, by the other
vi&orious tribes which acquired settlements there.: For ome
time, society advanced, among the new inhabitants of Spain,
by the fame fleps, and seemed to hold the fame course, as in
other European nations. To this progress, a sudden stop was
put by the invalion.:of the Saracens or Moors. The Goths
could not withitand the efforts of their enthufiaflick valour,'
which subdued Spain, with the fame impetuous rapidity that
distinguishes all the operations of their arms. The conquerors
introduced into the country in which they fettled the Mahome-
tan religion, the Arabick language, tihe mntiers of the" East,
together with that taste for the' arts, and that love of eila'nce
and splendour, which the Caliphs had begun, to cultivate among
their fubjets.

Sucnl
144

'SUCH: Gothick nobles, as disdained to submit to l)he Moorifli
yoke, fled for refuge to the inacceflible mountains qs Asturias,
and comforted themselves with enjoying there the exercise of
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the authority of
their ancient laws. Being joined by many of the boldest and
most warlike among their countrymen, they sallied out upon
the adjacent settlements of the Moors, in small' pirties; and
making short excursions, were satisfied with plunder and re-
venge, without thinking of conquest. By,legrees, their strength
increased, their views enlarged, a regular government was efta-
blifled among them, and they began to aim at extending their
territories. 'While they pushed on their attacks with the unre-
mitting ardour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire of
.vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their country from op-
preflin ; while they conduced their operations with the courage
natural to men who'had no other occupation but war, and who
were strangers to all the arts which' corrupt or enfeeble the
mind, the Moors gradually loft many of the advantages, to which
they had been indebted for their first success. They threw
off all dependance on the Caliphs*'; they negleted to preserve
a clof coinn'e6ion with.their countrymen in Africa'; their Em-
'pire i'Siain was split into many finall kingdoms together with
the ats' which they cultivated, the luxury to which there gave
tife, relaxed, in ome mealfure, the force of their military infi-
tutions, and abated the vigour of ;their warlike spirit. The
:.Moors, however, 'continued flill to be a gallant people, and pof-
setsed great resources.. According to the magnificent ile of
the Spanish biftorians, eight centuries of almost uninterrupted

*
' 'If. Sim. 'ifmanlpus Hior, Itl. Sc!ipwtores. Vol. iii. p. x35.
VotI. ' U war

SECT. Ill.

The Clhrifli-
ans gradually
recover do-
minion in
Spain.

,45

SECT. III.

1492.

war elapsed, and three thousand seven hundred battles were fought
before the last of the Moorish kingdoms in Spain submitted to the
Christian arms.

The union of As the Christians made their conquests upon the Mahometans
its various
kingdorus. at various periods, and under different leaders, each formed the

territory which he had wrested from the common enemy, into an
independant State. Spain was divided into as many separate king-
doms, as it contained wovinces, and in each City of note, a petty
Monarch established his throne, and assumed all the nfigns of
royalty. In a series of years, however, by the usual events of inter-
marriages, or legal succession, or conqneft, all these inferior prin-
cipalities were annexed to the more powerful kingdoms of Castile
and of Aragon and at length by the fortunate marriage of Ser-
dinand and Isabella, the .frmer the hereditary Monarch of Ara-
gon, and the latter raised. to the throne of Castile by the assec-
1481. tion of her.fubjeCts, all the Spanish crowns were united, and def-

cended in the fame line.

Their ancient
customs and
laws refervtd
amicfi all
their revolu-
tions ;

FROM this period, the political constitution of Spa.in began

to aume a regular and uniform appearance the genius of
government may be delineated, and the progress of its laws
and manners may be traced with certainty. Notwithstanding
the singular revolution which had happened in Spain. and the
peculiarity of its fate, in being so long subjeCted to the Maho-
metan yoke, the customs introduced by the Vandals and Goths
had taken such deep root, and were Co thoroughly incorporated
with the frame of its government, that in every province which
the Christians recovered from the Moors, we find the condition
of individuals, as well as the political constitution, nearly the
fame as in other nations of Europe. Lands were held by the fame

tenure
146

tenure; justice was dispensed in the fame form; the fame pri-
vileges were claimed by the nobility; and the fame power ex-
ercifed by the Cortes, or general assembly of the kingdom.
Several circumitances contributed to secure this permanence of
the feudal institutions in Spain, notwithstanding the conquest
of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned them. Such
of the Spaniards, as preserved their independance, adhered to
their ancient customs not only from attachment 'to them,
but out of antipathy to the Moors, to whose ideas concern-
ing property and government there customs were o totally
repugnant. Even among the Christians, who ubmitted to the
Moorish conquerors, and consented to become their filbje&s,
ancient customs were not entirely abolithed. They were per-
mit'ted to retain their religion; their laws concerning private
property; their forms of adminiftring justice and their mode
of levying taxes. The followers'of Mahomet are the only en-
thufiafts, 'who have united the spirit of toleration with zeal
for making proselytes, and who, at the fame time that they
took arms to propagate the doctrine of' their prophet, permit-
ed such as would not embrace it, to adhere to their own tenets
and to pratife their own rites. To this peculiarity in the
genius of the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire of
the Moors to reconcile the Christians to their yoke, it was
owing that the ancient manners and laws in Spain survived the
violent shock of a conquest, and continued to subsist, notwith-
'standing the introduAion of a new religion and a new form of
government into that country. It is obvious from all there
particulars, that the Christians must have found it extremely
easy to ireeftablifh manners and government on their'ancient
foundations, in those provinces of Spain, which they wrested

U 2 fucccnively

SECT. III.

whichrenders
thrir ft.ite in
Ibine degree
similar to that
of other na-
tions of Eu-
rope.

'47

SECT. 1I.

Certain pecu-
liarities in
their conlitu-
tion and laws.

The preroga-
tive more li-
mited, and
the immuni-
ties of the
people more
extensive.

successively from the Moors. A considerable part of the peo-
ple retained such a fondness for the customs, and such a reve-
rence for the laws of their ancestors, that they wished to fee
them restored with full authority, and were not only willing
but eager to observe the former, and to recognize the authority
of the latter.

BuT though the feudal form of government, with alL the

inflitutions that characterize it, was thus preserved entire in Caf-
tile and Arragon, as well as in all the kingdoms which depended
on there crowns, there were certain peculiarities in their political
constitutions which distinguish them from those of any. other
country in Europe. The regal prerogative, extremely limited
in every feudal kingdom, was circumnfcribed, in Spain, within
such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of the sovereign
almost to nothing. The privileges of the nobility were vast in
proportion, and extended o far, as to border on absolute in-
dependance. The immnunities of the cities were great, they
poffefled considerable influence in the Cortes or fuipreme aflem-
blies of the nations, and, they aspired at obtaining more. 6rich
a slate of society, in which the political macliine was fb ill
adjusted, and the several members of the legislature so impro-
perly balanced, produced interior disorders in the kingdoms
of Spain, which rose beyond the pitch of turbulence and anar-
.chy, usual under the feudal government. The whole tenor of
the Spanish history confirms the truth of this observation and
when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius of their policy
gave birth and vigour, was not restrained and overawed by the
immediate dread of the Moorish arms, it broke out into more

frequent
148

frequent infurredions against the govwnment of their Princes,
as well as more outrageous insults 6o1 their dignity, than occur
in the annals of any other country. There were accompanied
at some times with more liberal sentiments concerning the rights
of the people, at other times with more elevated notions con-
cernidbg the privileges of the nobles, than were commoi in other
nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which. was annexed to the

kingdom of Arragon, the ,impgtience of. he peppleLto obtain the
redress of their grievances haiing; prompted them to take arms
against their sovereign John It, they, by a foleriq :deed, recalled
the oath of allegiance which they had sworn to him, declared him
and his posterity to be unworthy of the throne p, and endeavoured
to eftablilh a republican form. of government,, in order to e-
cure the perpetual enjoyment of that liberty, after which they
aspired q. Nearly about the fame. period$ ,the indignation of
ithe Castilian nobility against the weak and flagitious admini-
ftration of Henry IV, having, led them to combine against him,
they arrogated as one of. the privileges belongihgito their order,
the right of trying and of pafling sentence on theirfovereign.
That the exercise of this power might be as publick and solemn,
as the pretension to it was bold, they summoned all the nobi-
lity of their party to meet at Avila, a spa.cious theatre was
creCted in a plain without the walls of the town, an image re-

.

p Zurita Anales de Arag. tom. iv. 113. 115, &c.
q Ferrcras hist. d' Efpagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans revol. d' Efpagne,

tor. iii. p. 155. L. Marinemus Siculus de reb. Iifpan. apud Schotti script.
Hifpian. vol. 429.

presenting

SECT. Ill.

Inflanccs of
this.

A. D. 1462.
A. D. 146$.

149

presenting the King, was feated on a throne, clad in royal
robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre in its hand, and the
sword of juflice by its fide. The accusation againfi the King
was read, and the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in
pretence of a numerous assembly. At the clol of the first
·article of the charge, the archbishop of Toledo advanced, and
tore the crown from the head of the image; at the close of the
second, the Conde de Placentia (hatched the sword of justice from
its fide; at the close of the third, the Conde de Benevent6 wrested
the sceptre from its hand; at the close of the last, Don Diego
Lopes de Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the throne. At the
fame instant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother, was proclaimed
King of Castile and Leon in his stead r.

THE most daring leaders of faction. would not have ven-

tured on there meatfires, nor have conduced them with filch
publick ceremony, if the sentiments of the people concerning
.the royal dignity, had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in Castile and Arra-
gon,, as prepared them to approve of such extraordinary proceed-
ings, or to acquiesce in therm,

The conftiiu-
tion and go-
vernment of
Arragon.

IN Arragon, the form of government was monarchical, but

the genius. and maxims of it .were purely republican. The
-Kings who were long elective, retained only' the fladow of
power; the real exercise of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This supreme assembly was composed of four

different

SECT. IL
1-\~J 15o

r Mlarian. hisl. lib. xxiii. c. .

different arms or members. The nobility of the first rank.
The Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class. The re-
presentatives of the cities and towns, whose right to a place in
the Cortes, if we may give credit to the historians of Aragon,
was coeval with the constitution. The ecclesiastical order,' com-
posed of the dignitaries of the church, together with the reprefen-
tatives of the inferior clergy . No law could pass in this assem-
bly without the aent of every single member who had a right
to vote'. Without the permiflion of the Cortes, no tax could
be imposed no war could be declared; no peace concluded;
no money,,could be,coined ; nor any alteration be made in the
current fpecieu. The power of reviewing the proceedings of all
inferior courts, the privilege of infpedting every department of
administration, and the right of redrefing all grievances belonged
to the Cortes. Nor did those who conceived themfelves:.to be
aggrieved address the Cortes in, the humble tone of si ppllcants,
and petition for redress; they :demanded it as the birthrlight of
free men, and required the guardians of their liberty to decide
with refpet to the points which they laid before themx. This
sovereign court was held, during several centuries, :eve.y year.;
but, in consequence of a regulation introduced about ghebegin-
ning of the fourteenth century, it was convened from! that
period only once in two years. After it was aflembled, the King
had no right to. prorogue or di0folve it without its own content,
and the fellion continued forty daysy.:

Forma de celebrar Cortes en Aragoid. or Geron. Maricl.
t Martcl. ibid. p. 2.
u Hier. Blanca comment. rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. script. Iiflpan. vol. iii,
p. 750.

x Martel Forma de celebr, p. 2.
y Hier. Blanca comment. 763.

Noi

Si.cr. Ill.

15i

SECT. ill.

Office and
juridifaion of
the Juliza.

NOT atisfied with having ereted there barriers against the

encroachments of the royal prerogative, nor willing to rely
for the prcfervation of their liberties o the vigilance nd ait-
thority of an aflembly, similar to the diets, flates general, and
-parliaments, in which the other feudal nations placed 'so much
confidence, the Aragonefe had recourse to an' in'titutio pecii-
liar to themfelvec, and elected a jJuftia or fuprere jtdge. 'his
magistrate, whose office bore some' refeblaaice to that- of lhe
Ephori in ancient Sparta, ated as the guhrdian of the'people,
and the comptroller of the Prince. The perf6n of the JuRiza
was sacred, ad his p'oWer '.nd jurifditoh iallmofit unbounded.
He was the Ilipreme interpreter of the laws. N6t only infe-
rior judges, but the Kings themselves were bound to' consult
him in every doUbtfuil cfe, ahd to rei.re his refpodfes' With
implicit deference.. An a.ppeal lay! to iitM frdiri the royal
judges .'iab well a from 'thdof appointed by' the' barons within
their refpetlve territorite. Even when no appeal was mad to
him, he coilld interpose by his own authority' prohibit the
ordinary judge 'to prbeed, take- imnediat cognizance of ;the
caurf himself, arid reniove the party accifed 'to the Mnifefn-
tion dr ;prifo' of thi! state, to which no perfonl' lid access 'bdt
by his permilion. 'His power was exerted with no'lefs vigour
and effect in fupetintending the administration of government,
than in 'regulating the course 'of justice. It Wis the 'prerogative
of the Juftiza to infpet the condti of the King.:i He haid a
title to review all the royal proclamations and patents, and to
declare whether or not they were agreeable to law, and ought

Bhlnca has preserved two rcfponfes of the Juftiza to James II. who rigned
towards the close of the thirteenth century, Blanca !748.'

to
I52

to be carried into execution. 'He, by his ole authority, could
exclude any of the King's ministers .from the conduct of aflairs,
and call.them to anfwer,for their mal-administration. He him-
self was accountable to the Cortes alone, for the manner in
which he.diflharged the duties of this high-office, and performed
functions of the greatest importance that could be committed to
a subjea [GG] '.

IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the privileges of the

Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of the rights belonging to the Juftiza,
that a very small portion of power remained in the hands of the
King. The Aragonefe seem to have been follicitous that their
Monarchs flould know and feel this slate of impotence, to which
they were reduced, Even.in swearing allegiance to their fove-
reign, an a which ought, naturally, to be accompanied with
profefions of fubmiflion and refpet, they devised an oath, in
such a form, as to remind him of his dependance on his sub-
jeds. "We," said the Jultiza to the King in the name of his
high-fpirited barons, " who are each of us as good, and who
are altogether more powerful than you, promilt obedience to
your government, if you maintain our rights and liberties;
but if not, not." Conformably to this oath, they eftablifled it
as a fundamental article in their conlsitution, that if the King
should violate their rights and privileges, it was lawful for the
people to disclaim him as their sovereign, and to eled another
in his place '. The attachment of the Aragonefe to this fingu-
lar constitution of government, was extreme, and their refpe&

X Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-755.
[GG] N O T E XXX. Hier. Blanca Comm-nt. 720.
VOL. 1. X for

S.E C T. III.

The regal
power cir-
cumilcribed
within nar-
row linits.

153

'54

SE C T. IIL

Conitution
and govern-
ment of Caf-
tile.

for it approached to superstitious veneration HH. In the pre-
amble to one of their laws, they declare that such was the barren-
ness of their country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that
if it were not on account of the liberties by which they were diftin-
guilhed from other nations, the people would abandon it, and go
in quest of a settlement to rome more fruitful region .

IN Castile, there were not such peculiarities in the form of

government, as to establish any remarkable diftintion between
it, and that of the other European nations. The executive
part of government was committed to the King, but with a
prerogative extremely limited. The legislative authority re-
fided in the Cortes, which was compoed of the nobility, the
dignified ecclefiafticks, and the representatives of the cities.
The assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very ancient, and
seems to have been coeval with the conltitution. The members
of the three different orders, who had a right of suffrage, met
in one place, and deliberated as one collective body; the deci-
sions of which were regulated by the entiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enacting laws, and of redrefling
grievances belonged to this affemblyi and in order to secure
the alfent of the King to such statutes and regulations, as were
deemed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual
in the Cortes, to take no ftep towards granting money,
unntil all business relative to the publick welfare was con-
cluded. The representatives of cities seem to have obtained
a feat very early in the Cortes of Castile, and oon acquired such

[HH] NOTE XXXI.

b Hier. Blan.i Com. p.,7 5.

influence

155

hifluence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a period Sncr. III.
when the splendor and pre-eminence of the nobility had eclip-
fed or annihilated all other orders of men. The number of
members from cities bore fucl a proportion to that of the whole
collective body, as rendered them extremely relpedable in the
Cortes [l. The degree of consideration, which they possesd
in the itate, may be estimated by one event. Upon the death of
John I, a council of regency was appointed to govern the king- A. D. 1390.
dom during the minority of his son. It was composed of an
equal number of noblemen, and of deputies chosen by the
cities ; the latter were admitted to the fame rank, and in-
veted with the fame powers, as prelates and grandees of the
first order . But though the members of communities in Castile
were elevated above the condition wherein they were placed
in other kingdoms of Europe; though they had attained to
filch political importance, that even the proud and jealous fpi-
rit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude them from ome
share of government; yet the nobles, notwithstanding these ac-
quifitions of the commons, continued to assert the privileges of
their order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone extremely high.
There was not any body of nobility in Europe more diftin-
guifhed for independance of spirit, haughtiness of deportment,
and bold pretensions, than that of Castile. The history of that
monarchy affords the most striking examples of the vigilance
with which they observed, and of the vigour with which they
opposed every scheme of their King, that tended to encroach
on their jurifdition, to diminish their dignity, or to abridge
their power. Even in their ordinary intercourse with their

[II NOT E. XXXII. c Marian. Lift. lib. 8. c. i5.

X 2 Monarchs,

SEC T. 11I.

Monarchs, they preserved such a consciousness of their rank, that
the nobles of the first order claimed it as a privilege to be covered
in the royal pretence, and approached their sovereigns rather as
equals than as fubjets.

THE constitution of the subordinate monarchies, which de-'

pended on the crowns of Castile and Aragon, nearly resembled
that of the kingdom to which they were annexed. In all of them,
the dignity and independance of the nobles were great; the immu-
nities and power of the cities were considerable.

Various
causer of the
limited au-
thority of the
Spanili Mo-
narchs.

AN attentive observation of the singular situation of Spain as

well as of the various events which occurred there, from the inva.
sion of the Moors to the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand
and Isabella, will discover those causes, to which all the peculiari-
ties in its political constitution, that I have pointed out, ought to
be ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from the Mahometans

gradually and with difficulty, the nobles, who followed' the
standard of any eminent leader in these wars, conquered not for
him alone, but for themselves. They claimed a Iflare in the lands
which their valour had torn from the enemy, and their prbfpe-
rity and power increased, in proportion as the territory of the
Prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors, the Monarchs

of Spain depended so much on their nobles, that it became ne-
cefiary to conciliate their good will by successive grants of new

honours
i56

honours and privileges. By the time that any Prince could SECT. II.
eftablilh his dominion in a conquered province, the greater part
of the property was parcelled out by him among his barons,
with filch jurifdition and immunities as raiscd them anloft to.
Lbvereign power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms ereted in so many diffe-

rent corners of Spain were extremely inconsiderable. The petty'
Monarch was but little elevated above his nobles. They,
fceling themselves to be almost his equals, atded as such, The
Kings of such limited domains could neither command much
refpe&t, nor potfefs great power; and noblemen, so nearly on
the fame level; could not look up to them with that reverence,,
with which the sovereigns of the great monarchies in Europe
were viewed by their fubjeas KKJ.

THESB circumitances concurred in exalting the nobility, and

in deprefling the royal authority ; there were others, whichI
raised the cities; in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the Moors, was

perpetually exposed to the excursions of the enemy, with whom:
no peace or'truce was so permanant as to prove any lafling fecu-
rity, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all ranks to fix their re-
fidence in places of strength. The castles of the barons, which,
in other countries, afforded a commodious retreat from the
depredations of banditti, or from the transient violence of any

[KK] NOTE XXXIII.

interior

interior commotion, were unable to refif an enemy whose ope-
rations were conduted with regular and persevering vigour.
Cities, in which great numbers united for their mutual defence,
were the only places to which people could retire with any profpeft
of safety. To this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in
Spain of which the Christians recovered poffeflion. All who fled
from the Moorilh yoke retorted to them, as to an asylum ; and
there, the greater part of those, who took the field against the
Mahometans, established their families.

EACH of there cities, during a longer or shorter course of

years, was the capital of a little rlate, and enjoyed all the ad-
vantages, which accelerate the increase of inhabitants in every
place that is the feat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the beginning'of the fifteenth

century, was considerable, and they were peopled far beyond the
proportion which was common in other parts of Europe, except in
Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors had introduced manu-
fa6tures into there cities, while under their dominion. The
Christians, who, by intermixture with them had learned their arts,
continued to cultivate thee. The trade of several of the Spanith
towns appears to have been considerable and the spirit of com-
merce continued to preserve the number of their inhabitants, as
the sense of danger had firit induced them to crowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of the inhabi-
tant were of a rank fiperior to those who resided in towns in

other

SECT. II.
__/~
158

other countries of Europe. That cause, which contributed
chiefly to their population, affected equally perro(s of every
condition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in order to find
flelter, or in hopes of making a stand there against the enemy,
.with greater advantage than in any other flation. The persons
elected as their representatives in the Cortes by the cities, or
promoted to offices of trust and dignity in the government of the
community, were often, as will appear from tranfaaions wlhicl I
shall hereafter relate, of luch considerable rank in the kingdom, as
reflected lufftre on their constituents, and on the stations wherein
they were placed.

As it was impolible to carry on a continual war against the

Moors, without ome other military force, than that which
the barons were obliged to bring, into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to have ome troops,;
particularly a body of light cavalry, in constant pay. It was one
of the privileges of the nobles, that their lands were exempt
from the burden of taxes. The charge of supporting the troops
requisite for the publick safety, fell wholly upon the cities; and
their Kings, being obliged frequently to apply to them for aid,
found it necessary to gain their favour by conceflions, which
extended their immunities, and added to their wealth and:
power.

WHEN the influence of all there circumffances, peculiar to

Spain, is added to the general and common causes, which contri-
buted to aggrandize cities in other countries of Europe, this will

fully

SZCT. 111.
1__F

159

.6o

Sacr.. III.

Measures of
different
Princes in
order to ex-
tend their

power, particularly
of Ferdinand
and Isabella.

Ferdinand's
different
schemes for
abridging th
privileges and
power of the
nobility.

fully account for the extensive privileges which they acquired,
as well as the extraordinary consideration to which they attained,
in all the Spanish kingdoms [LL].

BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility, and this un-
ufixal power of the cities in Spain, the royal prerogative was
hemmed in on every hand, and reduced within very narrow
bounds. Sensible of this, and impatient of fucll restraint, diffe-
rent Monarchs endeavoured, at various junctures, to enlarge
their own jurisdiction, and to circumscribe that of their sub-
jeds. Their power, however, or their abilities were so un-
equal to the undertaking, that their efforts were attended with
little success. But when Ferdinand and Isabella found themselves
at the head of all the united kingdoms of Spain, and delivered
from the ldanger and interruption of domeftick wars, they
-were not only in a condition. to resume, but were able to prosecute
* withadvantage, the schemes of extending the prerogative, which
'their anceftors'had attempted in vain. Ferdinand's profound fa-
,gacity in concerting his measures, his persevering indiftry in con-
*dlding them, and his uncommon address in'carrying them into
execution, -fitted him admirably for an undertaking'which re-
quired all tlefe' talents.

As the overgrown power, and high pretensions of the no-
bility were what the Monarchs of Spain felt most sensibly, and
bore with the greatest impatience, the great object of Ferdi-
nand's policy was to reduce there within more moderate bounds.
Under various pretexts, sometimes by violence, more fre-
quently in consequence of decrees obtained in the courts of law,

[Il] NOTE XXXIV.

he

he wrested from the barois a great part of the lands, which SeCT. III.
had been granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of for-
mer Monarchs, particularly during the feeble and profuse
reign of his predecefror Henry IV. He did not give the entire
conduct of affairs to persons of noble birth, who were accuf-
tomed to occupy every department of importance in peace or
in war, as if it had been a privilege peculiar to their order, to
be employed as the ole counsellors and ministers of the crown.
He often tranfaed business of great consequence without
their intervention, and committed many offices of power and
trust to new men, devoted to his interest'. He introduced a
degree of state dignity into his court, which being unknown in
Spain, while it remained split into many finall kingdoms,
taught the nobles to approach their overeign with more cere-
mony, and gradually rendered him the object of greater deference
and refpet.

THE annexing the mafternhips of the three military orders Particularly

of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara, to the crown, was an- y gandng
other expedient, by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the rnaterfehiPof

the three or-
revenue and power of the Kings of Spain. These orders were ders to the

clown i

instituted in imitation of those of the Knights Templars and of
St. John of Jerusalem, on purpose to wage perpetual war with
the Mahometans, and to protet the pilgrims who visited Com-
poftella, or other places of eminent san&ity in Spain. The
zeal and superstition of the ages, in which they were founded,

d Zurita anales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 22.

prompted

'6t
Vol. .

Y

SECT. III.

A. D. 1476,
and 1493.

Ahd by cir-
cumfcribing
the jurifdic-
tion of the
nobility.

prompted persons of every rank to bestow such liberal donations
on these holy warriors, that, in a short time, they engrossed a
considerable share in the property and wealth of the kingdom.
The mafterlhips of these orders came to be itations of the greatest
power and opulence to which a Spanish nobleman could be ad-
vanced. These high dignities were in the disposal of the Knights
of the Order, and placed the persons on whom they conferred them
almost on a level with their sovereign [MM]. Ferdinand, unwil-
ling that the nobility, whom he confidered as already too formid-
able, hould derive such additional credit and influence from pof-
fefling the government of these wealthy fraternities, was solicitous
to wrest it out of their hands, and to vest it in the crown. His
measures for accomplishing this, were wifely planned, and exe-
cuted with vigour. By address, by promises, and by threats, he
prevailed on the Knights of each Order to place Isabella and him
at the head of it. Innocent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this
elecion the sanction of papal authority'; and subsequent Pon-
tiffs rendered the annexation of these nmaferfiips to the crown
perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by tlis measure, diminilhed the power

and influence of the nobility, and added new lustre or autlio-
rity to the crown, he was taking other important steps with
a view to te fame obje&. The sovereign juri'dii on which
the feudal barons exercised within' their own territones, was
the pride and diftinsion .6f their order. To' ave invaded

[MM] NOTE XXXV.
e Marian. hilt. lib. xxv c. 5.
r Zurita anales toni. v. p. 22.
nand & llizabe gelarum decades.

1 * , ;. .; !

lEii. Anton. Nebriffenfis rerum a Ferdi-
ii. 'apud. Schot. Script. Hifpan. i. 86c.

openly.
162

openly a privilege which they prized so highly, and in defence SECT. III.
of which they would have run so eagerly to arms, was a meafire
too daring for a Prince of Ferdinand's cautious temper. He
took advantage, however, of an opportunity which the state of
his kingdoms and the spirit of his people presented him, in order
to undermine what he durst not afault. The incefant depre-
dations of the Moors, the want of discipline among the troops
which were employed to oppose them, the frequent civil wars
between the crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private wars with each
other, filled all the provinces of Spain with disorder. Rapine,
outrage, and murder, became so common, as not only to inter-
rupt commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all intercourse
between one place and another. That security and protection
which men expect from entering into civil society, ceased almost
totally. Interior order and police, while the feudal inffitutions
remained in vigour, were so little objecs of attention, and the
administration of juflice was so extremely feeble, that it would
have been vain to have expected relief from the eftablilhed laws
or the ordinary judges. But the evil became so intolerable, and
the inhabitants of cities, who were the chief sufferers, grew o
impatient of this anarchy, that felf-prefervation forced them to
have recourse to an extraordinary remedy. About the middle of 6
the thirteenth century, the cities in the kingdom of Aragon,
and after their example those in Caflile, formed thcmfelves into
an association, distinguished by the name of the Holy. Broler.
hood. They exaced a certain contribution from each of the aso-
ciated towns; they levied a considerable body of troops, in or-
der to protec travellers, and to pursue criminals; they appointed
judges, who opened their courts in various parts of the king-

Y 2 dom.

i63

SECT. III.

Notwith-
flanding all
there, the go-
vernment of
Spain still
extremely
free.

dom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery, or of any ad
that violated the publick peace, and was seized by the troops of
the Brotherhood, was carried before their own judges, who,
without paying any regard to the exclusive and sovereign jurif-
dition which the lord of the place might claim, tried and con-
demned the criminals. By means of this, the prompt and impartial
adminiRfration of justice was restored; and together with it, in-
ternal tranquillity and order began to return. The nobles alone
murmured at this salutary inifitution. They complained of it
as an encroachment on one of their most valuable privileges.
They remonstrated against it in an high tone; and, on rome
occasions, refused to grant any aid to the crown, unless it were
abolifled. Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the good
effecs of the Holy Brotherhood with refpe& to the police of his
kingdoms, but perceived its tendency to abridge, and at length to
annihilate the territorial jurifdi&ion of the nobility. He coun-
tenanced the inflitution on every occasion. He supported it
with the whole force of royal authority; and beides the expedi-
ents employed by him in common with the other monarchs of Eu-
rope, he availed himself of this institution, which was peculiar
to his kingdom, in order to limit and abolish that independantju-
rifdition of the nobility, which was no less inconsistent with the au-
thority of the Prince, than with the order of society NN].

BUT though Ferdinand by there measures considerably en-

larged the boundaries of prerogative, and acquired a degree of
influence and power far beyond what any of his predeceflors had
enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority, and the bar-
r[ iers against its encroachments, continued to be many and itrong.
The spirit of liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain;

INN] N TE XXXVI.

the
164

the spirit of independance washigh among the nobility; and though S c T. III.
the love of glory, peculiar to the Spaniards in every period of their
history, prompted them to fipport Ferdinand with zeal in his
foreign operations, and to afford him fich aid as enabled him not
only to undertake but to execute great enterprizes ; he reigned o-
ver his fubjeets with a jurifdliion less extensive than that of any
of the great monarchs in Europe. It will appear from many pas-
fages in the following hiflory, that, during a considerable part of
the reign of his successor Charles V. the prerogative of the Spanihf
crown was equally circumscribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France so nearly refem- Conftitutioe

and govern-

bled those of the other feudal kingdoms, that such a detail with ment of
refpe& to them as was necessary, in order to convey some idea of France
the nature and effects of the peculiar infitutions which took place
in Spain, would be superfluous. In the view which I have exhibit.
ed of the means by which the French monarchs acquired such full
command of the national force of their kingdom, as enabled them
to engage in extensive schemes of foreign operation, I have al-
ready pointed out the great Iteps by which they advanced towards
a more ample pofleflion of political power, and a more uncontroul..
ed exercise of their royal prerogative. All that now remains is to
take notice of such particulars in the conflitution of France, as
serve either to diftinguifli it from that of other countries, or tend to
throw any light on the tranfadions of that period to which the fol-
lowing history extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the first race, the royal pre-

Power of te

rogative was very inconsiderable. The General Aflemblies of the GenernlAf-
nation, which met annually at ltated fcafons, extended their au- fembliea un-

de the first
thority to every department of government. The power of rceof Kings.

clecting

165

SsCT. II. ele&ing Kings, of enacting laws, of redrefling grievances, of

%IJ~ pafling judgment in the last resort, with repe& to every person

and to every cause, and of conferring donations on the Prince,

Under the resided in this great convention of the nation. Under the second
(econd.

race of Kings, notwithfianding the power and splendour which the
conquests of Charlemagne added to the crown, the general assem-
blies of the nations continued to possess extensive authority.
The right of determining which of the royal family should be
placed on the throne was vested in them. The monarchs eleced
by their suffrage were accustomed regularly to call and to consult
them with refpet to every affair of importance to the tlate, and
without their content no law was passed, and no new tax was
levied.

Under the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father of the third
third.

thrd. race of Kings, took pofeflion of the throne of France, such

changes had happened in the political slate of the kingdom, as
coniderably affeced--the power and jurifdiaion of the general
assembly of the nation. The royal authority in the hands of the
degenerate posterity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into infig-
nificance and contempt. Every considerable proprietor of land
had formed his territory into a barony, almost iudependant of
the sovereign. The dukes or governors of provinces, the counts
or governors of towns and small distriCts, and the great officers
of the crown, had rendered these dignities, originally granted
only during pleasure or for life, hereditary in their families.
Each of there had usurped all the rights which hitherto had been
deemed the diftindtions of royalty, particularly the privi-
leges of difpenling justice within their own domains, of coin-
ing money, and of waging war. Every diRtrid was governed by
local customs, acknowledged a diftint lord, and pursued a fepa-

rate
x66

rate interest. The formality of doing homage to their fove-
reign, was almost the only at of fubjeaion which haughty barons
would perform, and that bound them no farther than they were
willing to acknowledge its obligation [00].

IN a kingdom broken into o many independant baronies,

hardly any common principle of union remained; and the gene-
ral assembly in its deliberations could scarce confider the nation
as forming one body, or establish common regulations to be of
equal force in every part. Within the immediate domains of
the crown the King might publilh laws, and they were obeyed,
because there he was acknowledged. as the only lord. But If he
had aimed at rendering these general, that would have alarmed the
barons as an encroachment upon the independance of their jurif-
dition. The baros, with no less care, avoided the enaaing of
general laws, because the execution of them must have been
vested in the King, and would have enlarged that paramount
power which was the objet of their jealousy. Thus, under the
descendants of Hugh Capet, the States General (for that was
the name by which the fuprems 'afemtbly of the French nation
came then to be ditinguifhed) lot 'their legislative authority, or
at least entirely relinquifhed'tle exercise of it. From that pe-
riod, thejurifdi6tion of the States General extended no farther
than to the imposition of new taxes, 'the determination of que-
iions with respect to the right of fucceflion to the crown, the
[ettling o the regency when the preceding monarch had not
fixed it by his will, and the presenting remonstrances enumerat-
ing the grievances of which the nation wilhed to obtain redress.

[0o] NOT E XXXVII.

As,

Sec T. II1.

The power
of the Gene..
ral Assembly
Icfs confide-
rable and ex-
tonfive,

161

SE CT. II:

The crown
begins to ac-
quire legifla-
. tie authority,

and the pow-
er of levying
taxes.

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of Europe eldom

demanded extraordinary subsidies of their fubjeds, and the other
events which required the interposition of the States, rarely oc-
curred, their meetings in France were not frequent. They were
summoned occasionally by their Kings, when compelled by their
wants or by their fears to have recourse to their aid; but they
did not, like the Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the
Parliament in England, form an eential member of the confti-
tution, the regular exertion of whose powers was requisite to give
vigour and order to government.

WHEN the States of France ceased to exercise legislative

authority, the Kings began to assume it. They ventured at first
on a&s of legislation with great reserve; and after taking every
precaution that could prevent their fubjeets from being alarmed
at the exercise of a new power. They did not at once issue their
ordinances in a tone of authority and command. They treated
with their subje&s; they pointed out what was bet ; and allured
them to comply with it. By degrees, however, as the preroga-
tive of the crown extended, and as the supreme jurifdidion of
the royal courts came to be established, the Kings of France as-.
fumed more openly the stile and authority of law-givers, and
before the beginning of the fifteenth century, the complete legis-
lative power was vested in them [PP].

HAVING secured this important acquisition, the steps that led

to the right of imposing taxes were rendered few and eaiy. The
people accustomed to fee their overeigns, by their sole autho-
rity, issue ordinances which regulated points of the greatest con-
sequence with refpet to the property of their fubjecs, were not

[PP] N O T E XXXVIII.

alarmed
168

alarmed when they were required, by the royal edits, to contri- SECT. III.
bute certain fums towards supplying the exigencies of government,
and carrying forward the meafuircs of the nation. When Charles
VII. and Louis XI. firt ventured to exercise this new power, in
the manner which I have already described, the gradual increase
of the royal authority had so imperceptibly prepared the minds of
the people of France for this innovation, that it excited no commo-
tion in the kindom, and seems scarce to have given rife to any
murmur or complaint.

WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrossed every power Government

which can be exerted in government; when the right of making cone purely
laws, of levying money, of keeping an army of mercenaries in nionalchical
constant pay, of declaring war and, of concluding peace centered
in the crown, the confittutiol of the kingdom, which, under the
firt' race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which, under the
second race, became an arilocracy, terminated, tnder the third
race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing that tended to preserve
the appearance, or revive the memory of the ancient mixed go-
vernment, seems from that period to have been indufirioufly
avoided. During the long and aive reign of Francis I. the
variety as well as extent of whose operations obliged him to lay
many heavy impositions on his fubjets, the States General of
France were not once assembled, nor were the people once al-
lowed to exert the power of taxing themselves, which, according
to the original ideas of feudal government, was a right essential to
every free-man.

Two things, however, remained, which moderated the exer- The cxercfe

ofprerogative
cife of the regal prerogative, and restrained it within such bounds reltrainel by

VOL. I. Z as the , .ivileg

lity.

169

170
SECT. III. as preserved the conflitution of France from degenerating into

mere despotism. The rights and privileges claimed by the no-
bility must be confidered as one barrier against the absolute do-
minion of the crown. Though the nobles of France had loft that
political power which was vested in their order as a body, they
still retained the'perfonal rights and pre-eminence which they
derived from their rank. They preserved a consciousness of ele-
vation above other clafles of citizens; an exemption from burdens
to which they were subjeCt; a contempt of the occupations in which
they were engaged; the privilege of assuming ensigns that indi-
cated their dignity, a title to be treated with a certain degree of
deference during peace; and a claim to various diftintions when
in the field. Many of these pretensions were not founded on the
words of flatutes, or derived from positive laws; they were de-
fined and ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title more deli-
cate, but no less sacred. These rights, established and proteced
by a principle equally vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in de-
fending them, are to the Sovereign himself objects of refpe& and
veneration. Wherever they fiand in its way, the royal preroga-
tive is bounded. The violence of a Despot may exterminate
such an order of men; but as long as it subsists, and its ideas of
personal diftintion remain entire, the power of the Prince has
limits g.

As in France, the body of nobility was very numetous, and

retained an high sense of their own pre-eminence, to this we may
ascribe, in a great measure, the mode of exercising the royal
prerogative which peculiarly distinguishes the government of
that kingdom. An intermediate order was placed between the
Monarch and his other fubjeCs, and in every at of authority

g Des Esprits des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Ferguson's Eilay on the Hill. of
Civil Society, part. i. sec. o.

it

it became necefrary to attend to its privileges, and not only
to guard against any real violation of these, but to avoid any
suspicion of its being poflible that they might be violated.
Thus a species of government was eabliflcd in France, un-
known in the ancient world, that of a monarchy, in which the
power of the overeign, though unconfined by any legal or con-
fitutional restraint, has certain bounds set to it by the ideas
which one class of his fubjets entertain concerning their own
dignity.

THE jurifdition of the Parliaments of France, particularly

that of Paris, was the other barrier which served to confine the
exercise of the royal prerogative within certain limits. The par-
liament of Paris was originally the court of the Kings of France,
to which they committed the supreme administration of justice
within their own domains, as well as the power of deciding
with refpe to all cafes brought before it by appeals from
the courts of the barons. When the time and place of its
meeting were fixed, when not only the form of its procedure,
but the principles on which it decided, were rendered regular
and consistent, when every cause of importance was finally
determined there, and when the people became accuftored to re-
fort thither as to the supreme temple of justice, the parliament of
Paris rose to high estimation in the kingdom, its members
acquireddignity, and its decrees were submitted to, with de-
ference. The Kings of France, when they first began to affime
thelegiflative power, in order to reconcile the minds of their
people to this new exertion of prerogative, produced their edicts
and ordinances in the parliament of Paris, that they might
be approved of and registered there, before they ere published
and declared to be of authority in the kingdom. During the

Z intervals

SECT. II.

And by the
jurifdiaion
of the parlia-
ments, parti-
cularly that
of Paris.

17t

SECT. IlL

Contitution
and govern-
ment of the
German Em-
pire.

A VIEW OF THE

intervals between the meetings of the States General of the
kingdom, or under those reigns when the States General
were not assembled, the Monarchs of France were accustomed
to consult the parliament of Paris with refpet to the most ardy-
ous affairs of government, and frequently regulated their condut
by its advice, in declaring war, in concluding peace, and in other
tranfaaions of publick concern. Thus there 'was ereted in.
the kingdom a tribunal which became the great depository of
the laws, and by the uniform tenor of its decrees it established:
principles of justice and forms of proceeding which were confi-
dered as so sacred, that even the overeign power of the Monarch
durst not venture to disregard or to violate them. The members
of this illustrious body, though they neither poffeCs legislative
authority, nor can be confidered as the representatives of the
people, have availed themselves of the reputation and influence
which they had acquired among their countrymen, in order
to make a fland to the utmost of their ability against every un-
precedented and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative. In e-
very period of the French history, they have merited the praise
of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of the rights and
privileges of the nation [QQJ. '

THE kingdom extends to the confines of the German Em-

pire, from whlich Charles V. derived his title of highest dignity.
In explaining the political constitution of this vast 'and com-
plex bdy at the beginning of he sixteenth century, I shall
avoid entering into fucli a detail as would involve my readers
in that inextricable labyrinth, which it formed by the multi-
plicity' of its tribunals, the number of its members, their

[QQ] NOTE XXXIX.

inter-

173,

interfering rights, and by the endlesS difcufliops or refine- SECT. Ill.
ments of the publick lawyers of Germany with refpe& to all H ;
these.

THE Empire of Charlemagne was a ftruture rerted in so Its tateunder
short a time that it could not be permanent. Under his im- Charlemagne.

and his de-

mediate fuccefor it began to totter; and it oon fell to pieces. fcendanta.
The crown of Germany was separated for ever from that of
France, and the descendants of Charlemagne etablifhed two
great monarchies o situated as to give rife to a perpetual rival-
1hip and enmity between 'them, But the Princes of the race.!
of Charlemagne who were placed 'on the imperial throne, were.
not altogether so degenerate, as those of the fame family who.
reigned in France. In the hands of the former the-royal. author:
rity retained some vigour, and the nobles of Germany, though
paleIeed of extcnfive .privileges as ,well as. ample,.territories, .did
not so early attain independance. The great, offices of, the, crown..
continued to. be.,at the,difpofal; of the, sovereign, and, during,.a
long, peripd, fiefs. remained in theijroriginal state, without be,.
coming heretditary and perpetual, in thq famili¢e to which they had.,
been granted.;

AT length the German branch of the .family of Charlemagne.. Other faml.
became extint, and his, feeble descendants who, reigned; in li are raised.

to the mpe-

France had funk into fuclh contempt,. that the Germans, .without rial dgnity.
looking towards them, exercised. the , right inherent in a free
people; and in a general aembly of the nation elected Conrad A D. 9.
Count of Franconia Emperor. After him Henry of Saxony,
and his descendants the three Otlios, were placed, in filccefion,

on

SECT. III. on the Imperial throne, by the suffrages of their countrymen.

The extensive territories of the Saxon Emperors, their eminent
abilities and enterprizing genius not only added new vigour to
the Imperial dignity, but raied it to higher power and pre-emi-
A. D. 9a2. nence. Otho the Great marched at the head of a numerous

army into Italy, and after the example of Charlemagne, gave
law to that country. Every power there recognized his au-
thority. He created Popes and deposed them by his sovereign man-
date. He annexed the kingdom of Italy to the German Em-
pire. Elated with his success, he aflumed the title of Caesar Au-
gultus ' and a Prince born in the heart of Germany pretended to
be the fuccefflr of the Emperors of ancient Rome, and claimed a
right to the fame power and prerogative.

The German
nobility ac-
quire inde-
pendant and
sovereign au-
thority.

BUT while the Emperors, by means of there new titles, and

new dominions, gradually acquired additional power and fplen-
dour, the nobility of Germany went on at the fame time extend-
ing their privileges and jurifdition. The situation of affairs was
favourable to their attempts. The vigour which Charlemagne
had given to government quickly relaxed. The inability of
some of his fuccefl'ors was such, as would have encouraged
vafials less enterprizing than the nobles of that age, to have
claimed new rights and to have aflumed new powers. The civil
wars in which other Emperors were engaged, obliged them to
pay perpetual court to their fubjets on whose support they
depended, and not only to connive at their uurpations, but to
permit and even to authorize them. Fiefs became gradually he-
reditary. They were transmitted not only in the dire&, but in
the collateral line. The investiture of them was demanded not

h Annalifta Sa.o, &c. ap. Strnv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

only
174

only by male but by female heirs. Every baron began to ex-
crcife fovercign jurifdiaion within his own domains; and the
Dukes and Counts of Germany took wide fleps towards ren-
dering their territories diftinA and indepcndant States. The
Saxon Emperors observed their progress, and were aware of its
tendency. But as they could not hope to humble vassals al-
ready grown too potent, unless they had turned their whole
force as well as attention to that enterprize, and as they were
extremely intent on their expeditions into Italy, which they
could not undertake without the concurrence of their nobles,
they were follicitous not to alarm them by any dire&t attack on
tl-ir privileges and jurifdiions. They aimed, however, at
undermining their power, and inconsiderately bellowed ad-
ditional territories, and accumulated new honours on the clergy,
in hopes that this order might serve as a counterpoise to that of
the nobility in any future ftrugglek.

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in policy were

quickly felt. Under the Emperors of the Franconian and Swa-
bian lines, whom the Germans by their voluntary election placed
on the Imperial throne, a new face of things appeared, and a
scene was exhibited in Germany, which astonished all Christen-
dom at that time, and which in the present age appears almost
incredible. The Popes, hitherto dependant on the Emperors, and
indebted for their power as well as dignity to their beneficence
and protection, began to claim a superior jurifdiCion ; and in vir-
tue of authority which they pretend to derive from heaven,

SEc T. III.

The German
ecclefialic;s
rnifed to the
famle power.

The fatal erf
sets of ag-
grandizing
the clergy.
A. D. 10o4,
i Pfcffel a':rc e, p. o, 5 2. Lib. Fcudor, titi.. k ps, fsel. abrege, p. 154

tried,,.

175

SECT. Il.

The conteftR
between the
Popes and.
Emperors,
and the con-
sequences of
these.

tried, condemned, excommunicated and deposed their former
masters. Nor is this to be confidered merely as a frantick ally
of paflion in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas concerning
the extent of priestly domination, and the plenitude of papal
power. Gregory VII. was able as well as daring. His pre-
fumption and violence were accompanied with political dif-
cernment and sagacity. He had observed that the Princes and
nobles of Germany, had acquired such considerable territories
-and such extensive jurisdition as rendered theml hot riot only for-
midable to the Emperors, but disposed themil to favour any at-
tempt to circumscribe their power. f-e foresaw that the eccle-
fiafticks of Gemanyi railed almost to a level with iit Princes,
were ready to support any person who would lfand forth as the
prote&tor of their privileges and independance. Wiih both of these
Gregory negociated, and had secured many devoted adherents
among them, before he ventured to enter the lifts against the head
of the Empire.

HE began his rupttlfe with Henry IV. upon a pretex't that

was popular and plausible. He complained of the venality' aiid
corruption with which the Emperor had granted the investiture
of benefices to ecclefiafticks. He contended that tlis right be-
longed to him as head of the church; he required Henry to
confine himself within the bounds of his civil jurifdidion, ad
to abiftin for the future from filch sacrilegious encroachment
on'. his spiritual dominion. All the censures of the church weie
denounced against Henry, because he refused to relinquish those
powers which his predecessors had uniformly exercised. The
most considerable of the German Princes and ecclefiafticks were
excited to take arms against him. His mother, his wife, his

sons
17'6

tlbos were wrought; pqn to disregard all the tics of blood as well
as of..duty, and to joinl tle party of, his c!lenijes:. SuchI were
the fulccefsftl arts with which the court of Rome iiflaiiedl tile
superstitious zeal and conduted te factious spirit of the Ger-
mans and Italians, that an Emperor,: difinlguihed not only for
many virtues, but possessed of confideralle. talents,, was at length,
obliged to appear as a, supplicant at the gate of the castle ,in
which the Pope resided, and to Rland there, three days, bare-
footed, in the depth of winter, imploring a pardon, which at;
length he obtained with difficulty [RR].

.. . . !

THIS aa of humiliation. degraded the Imperial dignity. i, Nor

was the deprefion nly momentary. The contest between
Greg9ry and Henry gave rife to the two great factions of the
Guelfs and Ghibellines;: the former of which supporting the
prctenfions of the Popes, and the latter, defending the rights .of
tlhe Emperor, kept Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation'
during three centuries. A regular system for humbling the
Emperors and circlumfcriking thlir pover was formed, and; ad-
hered to uniformly throughout that period. The Popes, the
siee States in Italy, the nobility and ecciefiafticks of Germany,
were all interested in its uccefs; and notwithftandiug the return
of some short intervals of vigour, upder tle administration of a
few able Emperors, the Imperial authority continued to decline.
During the anarchy of the long interregnum fubfcquent to the
death of William of Holland, it dwindled down to nothing.
Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder of the houtfe of Aullrial,
and who first opened the way to its future graudeur, was at

k Annal. German. ap. Struv . p. 3 S.
IRR] NOTE XL.

Sc.r, Ill,

A. D. 1 7

The Imperial
authority
gradually de-

lines.

A D. 12563.
A. D. 273.

177
A a

lenglh
VOL. I.

SECT. III.

A total
change in the
political con-
Ititution of
the Empire.

length eleced Emperor, not that he might re eltablifh and extend
the Imperial authority, but because his territories and iiiluence
were so inconsiderable as not to excite the jealousy 'of 'the German
Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms of a conltitution,
the power and vigour of which they had destroyed. Several of his
fucceflors were placed on the Imperial throne from the fame mo-
tive; and ailmdft every remaining prerogative was wrested out
of ihe hands of feeble 'Princes unable to exercise or to defend
them.

DURING this period of turbulence and confusion the conftitu-

tion of the Germanidk-body'undeirent a total chanrge. The'ah'clent
namtes of courts and ihagiftates, together' ith 'the original oforfis
and appearance bs policy Were preserved; but fufch 'flew privi-
les-ndjurifdi6iion wete affiumnd, and o maiy Various 'rigtits
established, that the 'fahie fpdcies of goverfftert ho logIder fiib-
lifted. The Prinoes, ihe grtat nobility, the dignified ecIlefia-
sticks, hth e ee cities 'had taken 'adantage 6f the iterregnifii,
which I1;have mentioned, to establish 'or to eixtfnd 'their uiubpa-
tidns. They claimed and eXerc'ised the right 'of gVeYnifig '{heri
reifeteive trritories ith 'full "f'ovreignty. lThey acknoledged
no :superior ith espe&t to any point, relative to the 'interior
administrAtion and police of their dormains. They 'eiffa&d lawis,
imposed takes, coined money, declared War, cOntluded 'peace,
and xerted every tpr'dogaile peittlir to 'ihdepehdanit States.
The ideas of order ahd political union which 'lid 'lorted the
various provinces of'Germahy into one body 'wvre entirely loft;
and the society must have dissolved, if tlie frms ds feudal' fubor-
dination had not preserved such an appearance of connection or

dependance
178

dependance among the.various members of the community, as
preferyed it from falling to pieces.

THIS bond of union, however, was extremely feeble; and no

principle remained in the German constitution of sufficient force
to maintain publick order, and hardly to ascertain personal fecu-
rity. From the acceflion of Rodulph of Hapfburg!h to tie reign
of Maximilian, the immediate predecessor of Charles V. the
Empire felt every calamity which a fate must endure when the
authority of government is so much relaxed as to have loft all
vigour. The causes of dilention among that vast number of
members which cornpoed the Germanick bod, were infinite
and unavoidable, These gave rife to perpetual private wars,
carried on with all the, violence of resentment when unrestrained
by fuRerior authority. Rapine, outrage, exactions, became uni-
versal. Commerce was interrupted; industry suspende:d and
every part of Germany resembled a country which an enemy
had plundered and laid desolate'. The variety, of expedients
employed, with a view to restore order and tranquility, prove
that the grievances, occasioned by this state of anarchy had grown
intolerable. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the diffe-
rences among the everal.Rates. The cities united in a league,
the object of which was to check the rapine and extoitions of
the nobility. The nobility formed cenfederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquility among: their own order. Germany was
divided. into several Circles, in each of which a provincial and
partial jurifdition was eftabli(hed, to supply the place of a pub-
lick .aid common tribunal".

179

SEC T. II,

Expedients
for ptting.at
end to til,,
Rate of
anarchy.,

1 Ste above, page45 and note xxi. Datt. de pace publica Imper. p. a5; no; 53
p. a8, no. 26. p. 35, no. ll.

m Datt. paitlm. Struv. Corp. Hil. i. 51o, &c.

Aa 2 BUT

1

A VIEW OF THE

SEC'T. III. BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that they served only
aricularly to demonstrate the violence of that anarchy which prevailcd, and
by the infti- the inefficacy of the means employed to correc it. At length
tution of the
Imperial Maximilian, by initituting the Imperial chamber, a tribunal
Chamber compored of judges named partly by. the Emperor, partly
A.D. 1495. by the several States, and vefled with authority to decide finally

concerning all differences among the members of the Germanick
body, re-eltablifled publick order in the Empire. A few years
A. D. 5 2. after, by giving a new form to the Aulick council, which takes

cognizance of all feudal causes, and such as belong to the. Em-
peror's immediate .jurifdition, he restored fopq degree of vigour
to the Imperial authority.

At the begin-
ning of the
sixteenth cen-
tury, the Em-
pire an affo-
ciation of so-
vereign fates.

BUT notwithfltanding the salutary effects of these regulations

jand improvements, the. political constitution of the 'German
Empire, at the commencement of the period of which I propose
to write the history, was of a species so. peculiar, as not t re-
femble perfectly any form of government known either in the
ancient or modern world. It was a complex body, formed' by
tlie afociation of several States, each of which poqfefed sovereign
and independant jurisdiction within its own territories. Of all
the members which compose^t this united body, the Emperor
was the head. In his name; all decrees and regulations wit
refpet&to points of conhmnco ncern, were ifled; aid to him
the power of carrying themi' into execution xtras'comitted. Bi't ,.
this appearance of monarchical power in the Emperor rwas more
than counterbalanced by the influence and authority of the
Princes and States of the Empire in every a of administration.
No law extending to the wholo body could pass, no resolution
that affected the general interest could be taken, without the ap-

,probation

probation of the Diet of the Empire. In this assembl'y, every
sovereign Prince and State of the Germanick body had a right to
be present, to dcliberate, and to vote. The decrees or Recesses of
the Diet were the laws of the Empire, which the Emperor was
bound to ratify and enforce.

UNDER this aspet the constitution of the Empire appears' a
regular confederacy, similar to the Achxan league in ancient
Greece, or to that of the United Provices and of the Swiss can-
tons in modern times. But if viewe4 in another, light, triking
peculiarities in its political' Rfate present. thlemfelves.. The. Ger
manick body was not formed by the union of members altogether
diflinct and independant. All the Princes and States joined in
this aqciation,. were originally subject to the Emperqrs,; and ac-
knowledge them as sovereigns; Besides thiis, :tley originally
held their lands as Imperial fiefs, .and in confequeice of this
tenure owed the Emperors all those services which feudal aflals
are bound to perform to their liege lord. But thoughl,this pli;-
tical fubjetion v as entirely at an end, and the:influleiice'ofthe
feudal relation much diminished, the ancient.forms and 'inftftd-
tions introduced when the Emperors governed Germany witll
authority, not inferior, to that which the other monirchs of
Europe poffefled, still remained. Thus an opposition 'ansicfta
blifled between. the geilus of the government, and tle, form's
of adminifiration in the German, Empire. :The former confi-
dered the Emperor only as the head of a confederacy, tliemem-
bers of which, by their voluntary choice, have raised himto that
dignity; the latter eemed to imply, that heI is reallyinveftcd
with fovercign power. By tis circuimitance, ftcli principles of
hostility and discord vwere interwoven i tie frame of tlie Ger-

* i $mnianick

S{bvr. ll.

Peculiarities
in the nature
of this nffo-
ciation.

'1i , d '/.

The dcfeQl
in the conlli-
tution of tlle
Emlpire.

Sdbi:n I;

Arising from
the limited
power of the
Emperors.

mnick, body,. as, asse<ted each of its members, rendering their
intqriori union ipclmplel and their; exetnl! efforts. feeleh and
irregular The. effe of thi;, vie or disorder inherent in the
conftituti9n of the Empire are -so.. conliderable, that without at-
tending to them, it is impoflible to comprehend many tranfations
in the reign of Charles V. or to form just ideas concerning the
genius qs the German government.

THE Emperors, of Germany, at the beginning of the sixteenth

century, were diftinguilhed- by the most pompous titles, and' by
such ensigns of dignity as intimated their authority to be superior
to. that of all other monarchs. The greatest Princes of the Em-
pire attended and served them on some occasions, as the officers,
of: their, houfhold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed; They retained pretensions to all
the extensive. powers which their predeceflbrs had enjoyed in
apy, formr age. But, at the fame time, instead of poiefling
tht .ample domain which had belonged to the ancient Emperors
of Germany andi which stretched from Basil to Cologne, along
boll banks of; the Rhine ', they were fiript of all territorial
property, and had not a single city, a single cattle, a single foot
of land, that pertained to them as heads of the Empire.
As their domain was alienated, their Rated revenues were
reduced almost to nothing; and the extraordinary aids which
on a few. occaions they obtained, were granted paringly,
and paid with reluctance. The Princes and States of the Em-
pire, though they eemed to recognize the Imperial authority,
were fubjets only in name, each of them poefling a compleat
municipal jurisdiction within the precints of his own territories.

n Pfeffel. Abrege, &c . p241.

FROM
mla

FROM this ill-compa&ted frame of government, effees that

were unavoidable resulted. The Emperors, dazzled with the
splendour of their titles, and the exterior signs of vast authority,
were apt to imagine themselves to be the real foVeteigis of Ger-
many, and were led' to aim continually at'recovering the exer-
cife of those powers 3and pretogt'ties hich the foimns of 'the
constitution feeined to Veil in them, and which their predeceors
'Charlemagne and the Otho's had aually enjoyed. The Princes
and States, aware of the nature as well as extent of their 're-

tensions, were perpetually on their guard, in order to watch all
the motions of the Imperial court, and to circumscribe its
power within limits flill more narrow. The Emperors, in
.support of their claims, appealed to ancient forms and itflitu-
tions, which the States held to be obsolete. The States founded
their rights on recent pracice and modern privileges, which
the Emperors confidered as usurpations.

THIS jealoiiy 6f tlie Imrperial authority, 'together with the oppo-
fitiin 'between it and the rights of the States, increased considerably
'from the time that the' Emperors we're elected, not by the collec-
tive body dt German nobles, 'but by a few Princes of chief dig-
nity. During a long period, all the 'members of the Germanick
body a'emibled, and made choice of the person whom they ap-
pdinted to be their Hiead. But ainid'ft the violence and anarchy

hllich'prevailed for several centuries in the Empire, even Princes
who 0poeffed 'lte most ectenfive territories, and who had ob-
tained a hereditary title'to the great offices of the State, acquired
the exclusive privilege of nominating the Emperor. This ight
was confirmed to them by the Golden Bull the mode of exer-
ciling it was acertained, and they were dignified with the ap-
pellation of Eletlors. The nobility and free-cities being thus

ftrippedt

SECY . I.

From the na-
ture of their
titles and pre-
tensions.

From the
manner in
which they
were elec&d.

s'83

iE c T. III. stripped of a privilege which they had once enjoyed, were lefT

conneced with a Prince, towards whose elevation they had
not contributed by their suffrages, and came to be more appre-
henfive of his authority. The Eleeors, by their extensive
power, and the distinguishing privileges which they pofleffed,
became formidable to the Emperors, witlhr hom they were
placed almot on a level in several ats of jurifdidion. Thus
the introduction of the Eletoral college into the Empire, and the
authority which it acquired, inltead of diminifling, contributed
to strengthen the principles of hostility and discord in the Ger-
manick constitution.

From the dif. THESE were further augmented by the various and repug-
ferent forms
of govern- nant forms of civil policy in the several States which composed
nment efta- the Germanick body. It is no easy matter to render the union
blifhied in the
States which of independant States perfeCt and entire, even when the genius
composed the
Germanick and forms of their refpecive governments happen to be altoge-
body. ther similar. But in the German Empire, which was a confede-

racy of Princes, of Ecclefiafticks, and of free-cities, it was impof-
fible that they could incorporate thoroughly. The free-cities
wete small republicks, in which the maxims and spirit pecu-
liar to that species of government prevailed. The Princes
and nobles to whom supreme jurisdiction belonged, pof-
sessed a fort of monarchical power within their own territories,
and the forms of their interior administration nearly re-
fembled those of the great feudal kingdoms. The interests, the
ideas, the objects of States'fo differently conflituted, cannot be
the fame. Nor could their common deliberations be carried on
with the fame spirit, while the love of liberty and attention to
commerce were the reigning principles in the cities and ardour for

military
184

military glory, together with the desire of power, were the govern-
ing paflions of the Princes and nobility.

THE secular and ecclesiastical members of the Empire were

as little fitted for union as the free-cities and the nobility. Vast
territories were annexed to several of the German biflopricks
and abbeys, and the dignified ecclefiafticks held ome of the
highest offices in the Empire by hereditary right. The younger
sons of noblemen of the second order, who had devoted theln
selves to the church, were commonly promoted to these flations
ofeminence anl power; and it'was no small mortification to the
Princes and great nobility to fee persons raised from an inferior
rank to the fame level with thenifelves, or even exalted to fupe-
rior dignity. The education of these churchmen, 'the genius'6s

their irofeflon,

and their connecion with the court of Rome,

rendered their character as well as interest different from tlofei
of the other 'members of the Germanick body, with whom they
were called to a' in concert. Thus anotlier source of jealouft
and variance was opened, which ought not to be overlooked
when we are fe'archng into thle natdre'of the German conftitu-
tlon. :

To all these causes of ditention may be added one more,

arising from the unequal distribution of power and wealth among
the ;States of the Empire. The electors, and other nobles of
the highest rank, not only possessed sovereign jurisdiction, but
governed such extensive, populous, and rich countries, as ren-
deredlthem great:Princes. Many .f the other members, though
they; enjoyed' all the rights of sovereignty, ruled over fich petty
d6onmins, tliat their real power bore no proportion to this high
prerogative. A well-compacted and vigorous confederacy could

VOL. I. Bb not
', i '!

SECT. III.

From the op-
pofiion be-
tween the fc-
cular nnl ec-
cleiaflical
luemibes.

From the
unequal dif-
tribution of
wealth and
power among
the members.

,85

SEc T. III.

All there ren-
der the Ger-
manick body
incapable of
aEting with
union and
. vigour.

not be formed of such diflimilar fiates. The weaker were jea-
lous, timid, and unable either to art or to defend their just
privileges. The more powerful were apt to assume and to be-
come oppreflive. The Eledors and Emperors endeavoured by
turns to extend their own authority, by encroaching on the rights
of these feeble members of the Germanick body; and they, over-
awed or corrupted, tamely gave up their privileges, or meanly fa-
voured the designs formed against them [SSJ.

AFTER contemplating all these principles of disunion and

opposition in the constitution of the German Empire, it will be
easy to account for the want of concord and uniformity, confpi-
cuous in its councils and proceedings. That flow, dilatory,
distrustful and irresolute spirit, which characterizes all its .deli-
berations, will appear natural in a body, the junction of whose
members was so incompleat, the different parts of which
were held together by such feeble ties, and set at variance
by such powerful motives. But the Empire of Germany, ne-
verthelefs, comprehended countries of such vail extent,, and
was inhabited by such a martial and hardy race of men, that
when the abilities of an Emperor, or zeal for any common
cause, could rouze this unwieldy body to put forth its strength,
it ated with irrefiftable force. In tlie following history Lwe
shall find, that as the meafires on which Charles V. was moil in-
tent, were often thwarted or rendered abortive by the fpitit of
jealousy and division peculiar to the Germanick constitution; so
it was by the influence which he acquired over the Princes of. the
Empire, and by engaging them to co-operate with him, ithat he
was enabled to make ome of the greatest efforts which:difliguifh
his reign.

ISS] NOTE XLI.

THE
:86

THE. Ttlrkifl history is o blended, during the reign of Charles V.
with that of the great nations in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte
interposed so often, and with fulch decisive influence, in the wars
and negotiations of the Chriflian Princes, that ome previous
account of the state of government in that great Empire, is no
leas necefary for the information of my readers, than there views
of the conflitution of other kingdoms which I have already ex-
hibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the more southern and fertile parts of

Asia, atdifferent periods, to be conquered by that warlike and
hardy race of men, who inhabit the valt country known to the
ancients by the name of Scythia, and among the moderns by
that of Tartary. One tribe of there people, called Turks or
Turcomans, extended its conquests, under various leaders, and
during several centuries, from the shore of the Caspian to the
straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the middle of the fifteenth
century, there formidable conquerors took Constantinople by
torm, and established the feat of their government in that Imperial
city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and the other provinces of
the ancient kingdoms of Thrace and Macedonia, together with
part of Hungary, were fubje&ed to their power.

-BUT though the feat of the Turkih government was fixed in
Europe, and the Sultans obtained poffeflion of such extensive
dominions in that quarter of the globe, the genius of their policy
was purely Afiatick; and may be properly termed a despotism,
in contradiction to there monarchial and republican forms of
government which we have been hitherto contemplating. The
supreme power was veiled in Sultans of the Ottoman race,

B b 2 that

SECT. III.

View of the
turkilh go-
v rnmcnt,

Its origin.

Its despotic
genius.

.87

S c T. Ill. that blood being deemed so sacred, that no other was thought worthy

of the throne. From this elevation, these sovereigns could look
down, and behold ail their subjects reduced to the fame level be-
fore them. The maxims of Turkish policy admit not any of
those institutions, which, in other countries, limit the exercise,
or moderate the rigour of monarchial power. No great court
with conftitutior.al and permanent jurisdiction to interpose both
i. te enactment and execution of laws. No body of hereditary
nobles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence, whose conscious-
r.nes of what is due to their rank and charafter, whose jealousy
of their privileges circumscribe the authority of the Prince, and
serve not only as a barrier against the excefles of his caprice, but
stand as an intermediate order between him and the people.
Under the Turkilh government, the political condition of every
subject is equal. To be employed in the service of the Sultan, is the
only circumntance that confers diftincion. Even this distinction
is annexed so closely to the stations in which persons serve, that
it is scarce communicated to those who are placed in them.
The highest dignity in the Empire does not give any rank or
pre-eminence to the family of him who enjoys it. As every
man, before he is raised to any station of authority, must go
through the preparatory discipline of a long and servile obe-
dience*, the moment he is deprived of power, he and his pofte-
rity return to the fame condition with other subjects, and fink
back into obscurity. It is the distinguishing and odious charac-
teriftick of the Eastern despotism, that it annihilates all other
ranks of men, in erder to exalt the monarch; that it leaves no-
thing to the former, hile it gives every thing to the latter; that
it endeavours to fix in the minds of those who are subjet to it,

tate cf the Tu kilfhEmpire by Rycaut, p. 25.

the
,S8

the idea of no relation between men, but that of a mailer and of a SECT. III
save, the former destined to command and to punilh, the latter
formed to tremble and to obey [TTJ.

BUT as there are crcumftances which frequently obftrut or Power of the

Sultan limited

defeat the salutary effects of the beft-regulated governments, by religion;
there are others which 'contribute to mitigate the evils of
the most vicious forms of policy. There can, indeed, be no
constitutional restraints on the will of a Prince in a despotic go-
vernment; but there may he such as are accidental. Absolute
as the Turkilh Sultans are, they feel therrfelves circumscribcd
both by religion, the principle on which their authority is
founded , and by the army, the instrument which they mufft
employ in order to maintain it. Wherever religion inter-
poses, the will of the Sovereign must submit to its decrees.
When the Koran hath prescribed any religious rite; hath en-
joined any moral duty; orhath confirmed, by its sanction, any
political maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot overturn
that which an higher authority hath established. The chief
reftridtion, however, on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by
the military power. An armed force must surround the throne
of every Despot, to maintain his authority, and to execute his
commands. As the Turks extended their empire over nations, and by the
which they did not exterminate, but reduce to fubjedion, they "nitary
found it necessary to render their military establishment nume-
rous and formidable. Amurath, their ti ird Sultan, in order to Or;gin of the
form a body of devoted troops, that might serve as the imme- Janizaries

A D. 36a,

diate guards of his person and dignity, appointed his officers to
seize annually, as the Imperial property, the fifth part of the

p Rycaut, p. 8. [T 1'] NOTE XLII.

youth

189

SECT. IL youth taken in war. These, after being instructed in the Ma-

' hometan religion, inured to obedience by revere discipline, and

trained to warlike exercies, were formed into a body diftin-
gui:hed by the name of Janmaries, or new soldiers. Every fen-
timent which enthufiafrn can inspire, every mark of diftincion
that the favour of the Prince could confer, were employed in
order to animate this body with martial ardour, and with a con-
fcioufnefs of its own pre-eminence . The Janizaries oon be-
came the chief strength and pride of the Ottoman armies; and by
their number as well as reputation, were diftinguilhed above all
the troops, whoe duty it was to attend on the person of the Sul-
tans [UU].

Their vast in- THUs, as the supreme power in every society is possesed by
fluence n the those who have arms in their hands, this formidable body of
Turkifi go-
veranmt. soldiers, destined to be the instruments of enlarging the Sultan's

authority, acquired, at the fame time, the means of controuling
it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like the Praetorian bands
in ancient Rome, quickly perceived all the advantages which they
derived from being tationed in the capital; from their union
under one standard; and from being matlers of the person of
the Prince. The Sultans became no less sensible of their influ-
ence and importance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of the Porte,
was the only power in the Empire that a Sultan or his Vifier
had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity and attachment
of the Janizaries, was the great art of government, and the prin-
cipal object of attention in the policy of the Ottoman court.
Under a monarch, whose abilities and vigour of mind fit him
for command, they are obsequious instruments; execute xhat-

q Prirce C !nem r' ic rv of .: Omnan l'mpire, ?. S7.
[LU N 0 L1- ;XL'!.'

ever

ever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible. Under feeble S c T. III
Princes, or such as are unfortunate, they become turbulent and
mutinous; afiulme the tone of masters; deg deade and exalt Sul-
tans at plealure; and teach those to trenble, tn whose nod, at
other times, life or death depend.

FR oM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, to Solyman, Progrers of

the Turks to-

who began his reign a few months after Charles V. was placed wards domi-
on the Imperial throne, a succession of illustrious Princes ruled
over the Turkish Empire. By their great abiitis, they kept
their fubjiets of every order, military as well as civil, fubmiflive
to government; and had the absolute comiand of whatever
force their vast Empire was able' to exert. Solyman, in parti-
cular, who is known to the Christians chiefly as a conqueror,
but is celebrated in the Turkish annals as the great law-giver
.who eftablifled order and police in their Empire, governed
during his long reign with no less authority than wisdom. He
divided his dominions into several districts; he appointed' the
number of soldiers which each should furnish; he appropriated a
certain proportion of the lands in every province for their main-
tenance he regulated, with a minute accuracy, every thing re-
lative to their dilcipline, their arms, and the nature of their cer-
vice. He put the finances of the Empire into an orderly train
of admitiflration ; and though the taxes in the Turkifli dominions,
as well as in the other despotic mo:ar,'lies of the East, are far
from being considerable, he supplied t.at dfc by an attentive
and Ievere oeconomy.

No R was it only under such Sultans as Solymal, whose ta- Adi'l tag
lents were no lels adapted to pclr:rve i:t Lior oridr, than to pcffrlflovcr

the chrllann
condudl the operations of war, that the Turkilli Empire engaged poers in the

lixteenth cen-
witl tury.

Stcr. IE with an advantage in its contests with the Chriftan flates. The

long fuccefion of able Princes, which I have mentioned, had
given such vigour and firmness to the Ottoman government,
that it seems to have attained, during the fixtenth century,
the highest degree of perfection of which its corfitution was
capable. Whereas the great monarchies in Christendom were still
far from that fate, which could enable them to a with a full
exertion of their force. Besides this, the Turkish troops in that
age poeffed eery advantage which arises from superiority in
military difcipine. At the time when Solyman began his reign,
the jaiezarics had been embodied near a century and a half, and
duriag that long period the severity of their military discipline
had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers drawn from the pro-
viaces of the Empire had been kept almost continually under
arUDS in the various wars which the Sultans had carxied on with
hlrdly any itevnal of peac. Againfl troops thus trained and
accuomed to service, the forces of the Christian powers tok
the field with great disadvantage. The most intelligent as well
as impartial authors of the sixteenth century, acknowledge and
lament the superior attainments of the Turks in the military art.
[XX] The success which uniformly attended their arms in all
their wars, demontrates the justness of this observation. The
Chriffian armies did not acquire that superiority over the Turks,
which they now posses, until the long etablifhment of standing
forces had improved military discipline among the former; and until
various causes and events, which it is not my province to explain,
had corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike institutions among
thelater.

[XX N T E XLIV.

PROOFS

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

P R

OO F S

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.
VOL. L

Cc

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS
P K O O F S

A N
ILLUS TRATIONS.

NOTE I. Scr. . p. .

p LAI.
Tran '\ H E consternation of the Britons, when invaded by the

FPis and Caledonians after the Roman legions were
called out of the island, may give some idea of the

degree of debasement to which the human mind was reduced
by long servitude under the Romans. In their supplicatory
letter to Aetius, which they call the groans of Britain, " We
know not (fay they) which way to turn us. The barbarians
drive us to the sea; and the sea forces us back on the barbari
ans between which we have only the choice of two deaths,
either to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be butchered by
the sword." Hiftor. Gilde. ap. Gale. Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.
-One can scarce believe this dastardly race, to be the descend-
ants of that gallant people, who repulsed Caesar, and defended
their liberty so long against the Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 4. B]

TH barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but regarded

literature with contempt. They found the inhabitants of all
the provinces of the Empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to

C c war.

war. Such. a character was the obje& of scorn to an high-
spirited and gallant race of men. " When we would brand an
enemy," fays Liutprandus, " with disgraceful and contumelious
appellations, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft Romani no-
mine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avari-
tim, quicquid luxuriae, quicquid mendacii, immo quicquid vitio-
rum eft comprehendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Murat.
Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars. . p. 481. This degeneracy of manners,
illiterate barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even as-
ter they ettled in the countries which they had conquered, they
would not permit their children to be inftruted in any science;
"for, (aid they), inftriition in the sciences tends to corrupt, ener-
vate, and depress the mind; and he who has been accustomed to
tremble under the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a sword
or spear with an undaunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Script. Byz. vol. i. A considerable number of years
elapsed, before nations o rude, and To unwilling to learn, could
produce historians capable of recording their tranfations, or of
describing their manners and institutions. By that time, all
memory of their ancient condition was loft, and no monument
remained to guide their firit writers to any certain khowledge
of it. If one expects to receive any fatisfatory account of the
manners and laws of the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during
their relidence in those countries where they were originally
feated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory of
Tours, the earliest and most authentick historians of these people,
he will be miserably disappointed. Whatever imperfec view has
been conveyed to us of their ancient slate, we owe not to heir
own writers, but to the Greek and Roman hiitorians.

NOTE
I96

NOTE III. S CT. I. . p.; [Cj

A CIRCUMSTANCE related by'Prircus :in -his.'jhiftory. of;.the,

embafly to Attila, King of the Huns, gives a striking vi'ew of
the enthusiastic paRion for war, which prevailed among the bar.
barous nations. When the entertainment. to which; that fierce.
conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors was ended; ,two
Scythians advanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in which
they celebrated his victories, and military virtues. All the Huns
fixed their eyes with attention on the bards. Sorme seemed to
be delighted with the verses; others, remembering their owl
battles and exploits, exulted with joy ; while those who were be-
come feeble through age, burst out into tears, bewailing the decay
of their vigour, and the state of inactivity in which they were now
obliged to remain. Excerpta ex hiftoria Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant.
Hiftor. Script. edit. Venet. v. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. ii. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts of this rea-

soning occurs in the liftory of England. The Saxons carried
on the the conquest of that country with the fame deftrudive spirit,
which ditlinguilhed the other barbarous nations. . The ancient in,
habitants of Britain were either exterminated; or. forced to take
shelter among the mountains of Wales ;, or reduced into servitude.
The Saxon governmenti laws, manners and language were of con-
sequence introduced into Britain; and were so perfectly efta-
blithed, that all memory of the institutions previous to. their con-
quest was abolished. The very reverse of this happened in a fiubfe-
quent revolution. A single victory placed William the Norman on

the.

/*

the throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants though oppref-
fed, were not exterminated. William employed the utmost
effort of hit power and policy to make his new fubje<ts con-
form in every thing to the Norman standard; but without fuc-
cess. The Saxons, though vanquished, were far more nume-
rous than their conquerors; when they began to incorporate,
their laws and manners gradually gained ground. The Nor-
iman inftittiohs wet'e unpopular and odious ; many of them
fell intodifufe; aild in thi E gliffh onftitition and lariguage;
at this day, many eclhtial parts aye tnanifeftly of Saxon, not
of Notfimn exita&.

NOTE V. SECT. . p. . [E].

PROdcopiUs, the hftorian, declines, fromr a priiiciple of be-

nevolence, to give any particular detail f the celties of the
Goths "Left, fays he, I should transmit a monument and
example of inhumanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de bello
Goth. lib. iii. cap. 1o. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 1a6. But as the
change, which I have pointed out as a consequence of the set-
tlemnent of the barbarous nations in the countries formerly sub-
jet to the Roman Empire, could not have taken place, if the
greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not been extirpated,
an event of such importance and influence merits a more par-
ticular illustration. This will justify me for exhibiting rome
part of that melancholy fpeAacle, over which humanity
prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I hall not, however, dif-
gust my readers by a long detail ; but reft satisfied with collet-
ing some inflances of the devastations made by two of the
many nations, which fettled in the Empire. The Vandals

were

were the first of the barbarians who invaded Spaip. It was
one of the richest and most populous ofthe Roman Provinces;
the inhabitants had been diftinguihed for courage, and had
defended their liberty against the arms of Rome, with greater
,obRinacy, and during. a longer course of years, than any ha-
tion in Europe. But so entirely' were they,rinervated by their
fubjeion to the iomans, tthat the Vandals who entered the
kingdom A. D. 409. compleated the conquest of it with such
rapidity, that in the year 411, thee barbarians divided it mong
them by casting lots. The desolation occasioned by their .inva-
'lon is' thus defcrlbed by Idatius an eye witner. i'4 The barba-
tians wafted every thing with' hostile ciuelty. The pestilence
was no les deftrutive. A dreadful famine raged, to such
a degree, that the living were constrained to feed on the
dead 'bodies of h'dii '-fellow c:iti ns and ;all' the(e .terrible
plagues desolated at once the unhapp.y kingdprn,." Idatii
Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum. .vol. vi. :p. il233. edit. Lugd. 167/..
The Goths having attacked the' Vandalo in thqir new ,set-
-tlements, a fierce war ensued, the country ws. plundored hy
both. parties the cities which t ;first escaped were laid in
iafhes, and the inhabitants eposed -to fuffr every tlling .tlat
*the wanton, cruelty of barbarians .could Ilnflit. Idatius decribes
these, ibid. p. .x235. b. .236. c. f. A fimrilr pcQu!lt of their
'devastations is given by Ifidorus iHiCpiepfis, and .the ,cotel-
porary writers. Ifid. Chron, ap. Grot.: hift...Goth. 3. ,:FrQpi
Spain the Vandals pased over to .Africa, A. ,?. 428. Africa
;was,.next to Egypt, .the.moft fertile of the Roman provinces.
:It.was.one pf.the:grftinris of the ,lrrmpire, gnd i called by an
ancient writer, the. foul f, tle: commQnwlfli. Though tihe
army with .which.they iiywagded;i, id pot .xced 39q,oo fight-

ing'.

*iing men, they became absolute masters of. the province in;:lefs
than' tw' years.' A contemporary author gives a dreadful ac-
cdunt of the havock' which they' made:' "They found a pro-
vince well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the beauty of the
whole earth. ,They carried their deftruaiye, arms into every
corner of it.; they. difpeopled it by their devastationss iexter-
minating.every thing with fire and:fword. They did ngt,not oven
spare the vines, and fruit trees, that those to whom caves and
inaccessible mountains had afforded a retreat, might; find o
· nourihment of any kind. Their hostile rage.. could. :nt be
*satiated, and there was no place exempted fom the;effetel,pf
it. They'tortured. their'; prisoners with tlhe m oft :.exquisite
.cruelty, that they might force from them a discovery of their
.hidden treasures. The more they discovered, the more they
*expe&ted, and the more implacable they became. . Neither. the
infirmities of age nor of sex; neither the dignity of nobility,
nor the fanCity of the sacerdotal office, could mitigate. their fury;
but the more illustrious their prisoners were, the more barbar-
'bufly they insulted them... The publick buildings which resifted
the violence of the flames, they levelled with the ground.. They
left many cities without an inhabitant. When they approached
any fortified place, which their undisciplined army could not
reduce, they gathered together a multitude of prisoners, and
putting them to the'fword, left their bodies unburied,. that the
Ren'ch of the carcasses might oblige the garrison to abandon.it."
Victor Vitenfis de perfecutione Africana. ap. Bibl. Patrum; vol.
viii. p. 666. St. Augutin an African, and a contemporary
author gives a similar description of their cruelties, opera v. x.
p. 372. edit. 616.-About an hundred years after the fettle-
ment of'tlie Vandals in Africa, Belisarius attacked and dif-

pofieffed
-.ao

pofl'eled' them. Proboius a contemporary hifloiani.defciib,'
the, devaftationwhiih that wr occasioned.: "Africa, fays: he,s
was o entirely difpeopled, that one might travel several days in
it without meeting'.one'man ' and it is :no exaggeration to:fay,
that' iin', the, 6oirfe of'.the war' five millions of erfons;pefhed;"
Proc. h i'ift, Arcana cap. 8 ap. '.Bzy. Script. .ol.l Ii;85rI r5-r,!I
have dwelt longer upon the calamities of this province, becaurfe
they are defcrihed not only by contemporary authors, but by eye-.
witn'efles. The:)prefent' itate of, Africa 'confirms t!heir testimony.
Many'oft the most flourishing and p9pulous cities with which
it was filled;. were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges remain
to point out where they were situated. That fertile territory
which .ftutained .thbe Roman Empire lies' in a great measure
uncultivated. and; ,tht province,w ich Victor jin,Iis barbarous
Latin called, Specioftas totius terra ,eorcti, is' now . the retreat of
pirates and banditti.

'WH IL B the. Vandals laid waste one part of the Empire, the

Huns desolated the reft of it. Of all tie ,arbarous tribes ey
were. the fiercest and most formndatle. A'nmianus Marcellinus
a contemporary author, and one of the best of the later hifto.
rians, gives an account of their policy and manners. They
nearly resemble those of the Scythians described by tlie ancients,
and of the Tartars known to the moderns. In 'fme parts of
their charater, and in several of their customs, they resemble
the savages in North America. Their pasion for war and'
ation, was, extreme. " ts in polished societies (fays Ammianus)'
ease and tranquility are coried,'they aelight in war and dan-
gers. He who. falls, in battle is reckoned happy. They
who die of old age or of disease are deemed infamous. They

r VOL. I D d boast,
''- ..

Rpl

boafty with the uitmoft exultationj of the number of qnemies
whomn they have- flaifi and as the mos glorious f all orna-
mnents, they fasten the scalps of those who have fallen by their
hand to the trappings of their horses." Ammiaot Mar4, lib.
xxxi. p. 477. edit. Groriov. Ludg. 1693,--- Their incurfiona,
ihto- the Empire began in the fourth century; and the Romans
though' n6 ffirngers, by that time, to the effts of barbarous
iage, were aftoriilled at the cruelty of their devastation.,
Th'iace, PinH briit, and lilyiicdnm were' the cotiffries, which
iey firt liid dfolfe;. As 'they hadd no'! ithdhtsof fettlin in
lArope, their intoads ere feqent, nd PcbpiitU oimptUte#
tiit ii\ eaclh i tere, at a tiedium, to hiitidred touftidld" 6son
pdrithe'd or were carried off as lav. -Prddcp.;hl:-'tcant tp,
!.rr*. irpt . 'ri. S'i TihYaci the bft tdltiatdds proVince
ih t'is qartit r 'of 'th Edlfii , w.ah' cortged idto' defirt atd
when Prifcus accompanied the ambaffadord 'it. to Attrla
there were no inhabitants in some of the cities, but a few
miserable people who lad taken ihefter among the 'rdi's of' the
churches . and the 'efds were covered with the bon'6s 6'o tio6f
who had fallen by the sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. voli. . 34.
Attila became 'King f the uns. A. ). 434. 'He is {s 'oneof

-1.-

.' ....-~ ; 1.r;
the greateA and mot 'enteprizing conquerors meitoted" mi

'I n ''

' , I''"' '' · ' 6i ri," '

Sitory. He .etended his imple uover all 'te vaitcountries,
comprehended under the. general names of' cytlia and Ger-
many in tie ahcient divtlon of ti'e wor'd. 'Wit e was
carrying on his wars .gaii' tle, barbaus inations, helept the
Roman Empire under. perpetual aprelhenfions,. and' extorted
vast fiubfdies from the tienid and eremiate i onarchs ho
governed it:' In the year 451, he entered 6aul, at the ead oi
ah army composed of all 'the various nations iich 'he' ad Iub-

dued.
iso2

died. t wa6,mrCAurQcr thin 8ny b

iti wwl . 3

,hads Iitherto 'invaded 1ihei Smpire. IWA dq tiWs whch IP

·Inft siburisling, te yq ,Igl 0 .FsoplrtRO. The 'l"Q~t~t ~prS A0 r
of ;his devatations pke 49rc. i thy Spvia s ,e krlat
'Pei. dit. :1aluz. "j?13r. -,1 iP* ',9;. 1M; g

jlss by ils il

;

-supia,·; p. AM SaS· r. AMIi.MA emt · L a APP AO 4 AP

gR~ ,i t rHI1h

.Believ~e' r: it~hif~~f~S f ,~t~ ~ jahee I Afre l qRaiFpA ,per
'sons ,peniod. ;i Alliili~s~p lLe ~ l ~~~s:p :~I'

ItiR;~~t~r~,ip. 1671r: 'M ft ;.66s.. -,But ng£ j - betiyel/s

toiiatack theeisntxe: of atho JEAPpikceiaad .*nrci~ng iltp Itmly,
riwitted ,4.iwtih' iagc ii4ntlathd 3by .thei ~LrnCe of iisiteidirr .
Wiat Italy, suffergd jby \te 'IMuns ! ex~e~de4 dlI:.ije, sal~njiea
twieh, Ahe~pIec~in i

iir iix~ic~i .barbarian$ / hd4 bWught

-upon ait. o CnjngtuB ihas co1)e~~i s~ygral; , p*Kages sroni tc
eancierit I 4j torits, hcb~~E~ ipovetht'the elsdauitios conimittd
by.theiVndh~s and l-uns i tbI cau nrie8 \'1tua~ed in the -banks
of, ithe Rhine, &.were. no.lefs orue a'nd.Ifatal mt).e liciimaace.
'agercie*tio deitibibu Germanhe..Op'era, vol. ' *8g.. But it is
-.r1kssi:, it 'iii 1111 kin~ ~ ThIsllw )thliefe oftroyers 'of nankind
thrQ1Sh i

fol: liaftyi,.fbene' ' of ,hbrr6Olt i; nd to 'o ntemplate 'the

havook Wibich, they madeof' thei1ixtinan'fpecie5.
* , JRr J~$,ftl~ . it9 yVI~IaT y, &~ pRetO.ye kbep, A~~g

~~8191~Y;Bafer th.,,babA o,,atiqF~~ pit ;~,)irK

~ecjsve pr~pf, ,of e9e erpy ve Yill,)as 1~it

s, tqli1pyx-
lhrubis spring up in the uncultivated fields, .adilfp~tedip ,.y

D d degrcee

degrees form large forests; by the overflowing of rivers, and the
ftagnatir/g' of waters; other parts of: it are converted into; lakes
'and 'itarfiies. Ancieit Italy, the feat of. the Roman elegafice and
luxiry, as cultivated' to. the highest pitch. But' so effd&ually
did the devastations of the barbarians destroy all the effects of
'their industry and cultivation, that in the.'eighth 'entury Italy
appear to have been covered with forests 'aId' marlres f..yaft'lit
tent. :''Mdittori 'litei' into 'a. 16ng detaili coitecernig-the fitultii
on and limits of 'hefe; and proves bythe m thehtick evi-
dene,; that great traas of territory, in all the 'diffekent provinces
of Italy, ;were either: ver-run with' wood, ;or .laid under .a-
,ter. i Nor did these occupy: ,parta,'.of the; countky :naturally
.barren ifor. of; ilittle' vilue, but ,Were ,spread over diftrifp, i which
*ancient writers represent as extremely fertile, and which at pre-
sent are highly cultivated. Muiratori antiquitates Italiqt medii 'tvi
:dissert. xi vi. ii.lp.-149i 153, &c. Aftrong proof of.this Qc;-
'curaiina defEriptionrof,,ctheicity of :Modena,,,byi an' author of
the;-tenth centhry. ' Murar. script. Rerum' Italic. vol. ii. pars. i.
p. 691. The ilfate 'of 'deflatibn in other countries of Europe
seems to have been the.: fame, In many of' the nmoft early
;cliatter i nw ,.extagt, the lands granted t, monaftetie or to .pri-
yvtep.erifos, a.e diftlpgiied,: itotd, ,such as, are cultivated or inr
habited, and such as were retni, desolate. iIn; rany inRfances,
lands are granted to persons because they had taken them from
the defart, ab eirmeo, and had cultivated and planttd'rhemY' ith
inhabitants. '; This' appears fiom' a"' harter !'of' Chaleiiiiie,
publifted by Eckhart de rebus Fi-ancit Orientalis. vol.';i.'p.
864. and from many charters, of his successors quoted by Dti
Cange voc.. Eremus ,

MYRATORX.

MURATORI adds, that during the eigth and ninth centuries,
Italy was greatly infested . by wolves arnd otler wild beads; ano-
ther mark of its being. destitute of inhabitants. . Mrat. Antiq.
vol, ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient world for
its fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the slate of a country
newly peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not: only that some of the descriptions of the

devastations which I. have quoted, may, be exaggerated, but
that the barbarous tribes proceeded in different manners, in
making their new settlements. Some of them seemed to be
bent on exterminating the ancient inhabitants

, others were

more. disposed to incorporate with them. It is not my province
either to enquire into the causes which occasioned this variety in
the condut of the conquerors, or to describe the tfate of those
countries where the ancient inhabitants were treated most mildly.
The! fats which I have produced are fiuficient to prove that the
deftrution of the human species, occasioned by their hostile in,
vafions of the northern nations, and their subsequent fettle-
ments, was much greater than the generality of writers seem to
imagine.,,

NOTE VI. S T. I.p. . 3[FJ

I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only certain information con-
cerning the ancient state of the barbarous nations muf be derived
from the Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account of
the institutions and customs of one people, to which those of all
the reft seem to have been in a great measure similar, has been.
transmitted to us by two authors, the molftcapable, perhaps, that
ever wrote, of observing them with profound discernment, and.
of destribing them witih propriety and force. The reader must

perceive,

205

pertctive-tht 'I:have Coir and Tacitus in my eye. 'The former
gives a 'hort accounrt of the ancient Gernmns in a'sew chapters
6f the fixth'book of his commentaries: The'latter wrote a trea-'
tife expressly on that 'subjet. Thefc are the most precious' ind
inlftrutive monuments of antiquity to the present inhabitants of
Europe. From them we learn,

:i.'TxFH tTtthe:ftate of 'Society among theiJaicient Germans was

dtfthe ru'delt and m6ft :imple' form. They 'ftfbifed entirely' by
hunting or'by pasturage. CC'llb. vi. c. 21. They neglecte'd
agricultire, and lived chieny on milk, cheese, 'and 'fleTh. 'Ibid
c, 22. 'b'acitus agrees with himn in most of these points ; de
miorib. 'Germ. c. 4, I5, 23. The'Goths were equally negli-
gettdfa'gricltire. 'PrIfc. 'Rliet. ap. 'Byz. 'Sciipt.v. i. p. 3. B.
Sdciety was in 'the'aieamflate among theHuns, who 'dlfUalied to
cultivate 'the eartli, or tc. touh a 'plough. 'Amm. 'Mrte'lllb.
Xxi.'p. 475.' The' afne mainnersto6k place antig ' the"lains;
ibid. p. 477. 'While society remains in this-fimple 'fate, ·nen
by uniting together iTcarce relinquih any portion of their rla-
'tual' independaie. '!Accofdinly we arc iriformtd, 2. That'ihe
authority of civil government was extremely limited amogthie
Germans. During times of peace they 'had 'no corpmon or fixed
magistrate, but. the chief men of every diftrit dispensed justice,
and accommodated differences. Caef ibid. c. 23. Their Kings
had not absolute or unbounded. power; their authority confieed
rather in the privilege of advising, than in the power of com-
manding.. Matters of small consequence were deternmined by.
the chief .men; .affairs of importance by 'the wliole community.
Tacit . 7, .' The Huns, in like'mannier, deliberated('iii common

c,

concerning every busiess: of moment to the society; an4 were
not subjed to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.' Malrc'l.

lib.
t1W

lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual among the ancient Ger-
mans was left at liberty to chufe whether he would take prt ii
any military enterprize which was propo;ed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed on him by pub-
lick authority. "When any of the chief men propoCes any ex
pedition, such as approve of the cause and of the leader rife up,
and declare their intention of following him; and those who do
not fulfil this engagement, are confidered as deserters and trai-
tors, and' are looked upon as infamous." Caf. ibid. c. 23, Taci-
tus plainly points' at the fame custom, though in terms more
obscure. Tacit. c.

c ; 4. As every individual was so inde-

pendant, and master in so great a degree of his own aions, it
became, of consequence, the great objet of every person among
the Germans who aimed at being a leader, to gain adherents,
and attach them to his person and interest. These adherents
'Csfar calls jAmnbatIi and Cliortes, i. e. retainers or clients; Ta-
citus, Comites, or companions. The chief diftindtion and power
6f the leaders, consisted in beingattended by a numerous band of
chosen youth. This was their pride as wdll as. anornament during
peace, and their defence in war. The favour of there retainers
the leaders gained or preserved by presents of armour, and of
horses; or by the profuse, though inelegant hospitality, with
which they entertained them. Tacit.. ,14+, ,. 5. 5 Aotber
consequence of the personal liberty..and independance which lthe
Germans retained, even after they united in society, was their
circumscribing the criminal ,jurifdilion of the nmagfrate wit)iin
very narrow. liNits, and their not only claiming bt exercising. a-
most all the rights of private refontmnt.ang revenge. Jiir magi-
ftrates had not the power eitlher of imprisoning,, or of.infliitng
any.corporal punifbment on a free man. Tacit. c.,.. rFvery prfon

was

i

was obliged to avenge the wrongs which his parents or friends had
sustained. Their enmities were hereditary, but not irreconcilea-
ble. Even murder vas compensated by paying a certain number
of cattle.. Tac. c. zi. A part of the fine went to the Kipg, or
state, a part to the person who had been injured,. or to hia kin-
dred. Ibid. c. 2.

THESE particulars concerning the. infitutions and manners

of the Germans, though well known to every person conversant
in ancient literature, I have thought proper to arrange in this
order, and to lay before such of my readers as may be less ac-
quainted with there fads, both because they confirm the account
which I have given of the state of the barbarous nations, and tend to
illustrate all the observations that I hall have occasion, to make
concerning the various changes in their government and customs.
The laws and customs introduced by the barbarous nations into
their new settlements, are the best commentary on the writings of
Ca:far. and Tacitus; and their observations are the best key to
a perfect knowledge of these laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with respect tothe testimonies of Caesar and

Tacitus concerning the Germans, merits attention. Caesar
wrote his brief account of their manners more than an hundred
years before Tacitus composed his treatise de moribus Germano,
rum. An hundred years make a considerable period in the pro-
grefs of national manners, especially if, during that time, those
people who are rude and unpolilhed have had much communi-
cation with more civilized states. This was the cafe with the
Germans. Their intercourse with the Romans began when
Caesar crofed the Rhine, and increased prodigiously during the

interval
20

interval between that event and the time whlln Tacitus flourifed.
Besides this, there was a considerable difference between the state
of society among the different tribes of Germans. The Suiones
were so much improved, that they began to be corrupted. Tac.
cap. 44. The Fenni were so barbarous, that it is wonderful
how they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever under.
takes to describe the manners of the Germans, or to found any
political theory upon the slate of society among them, ought
carefully to attend to both there circumstances.

BZFORE I quit this fbje&, it may not be improper to ob-

serve, that though fucceflive alterations in their inititutions, toge-
ther with the gradual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people, who conquered the
Roman Empire, there is still one race of men nearly in the fame
political situation with that in which they were when they first
fettled in their new conquests: I mean the various tribes and
nations of Savages in North America. It cannot then be con-
fidered either as a digression, or as an improper indulgence of
curiosity to enquire, whether this similarity in their political
state has occasioned any resemblance between their character and
manners. If the likeness turns out to be striking, it is a stronger
proof that a just account has been given of the ancient inhabi-
tants of Europe, than the testimony even of Caesar or of Ta-
citus.

i. The Americans fubfit chiefly by hunting and fishing.

Some tribes neglec agriculture entirely. Among those who
cultivate tome small spot near their huts, that, together with all
works of labour, is performed by the women. P. Charlevoix
Journal Hiftorique d'un Voyage de L'Amerique 4. Par. 1744.
p. 344. In such a state of society, the common wants of

VOL, I. E e men

209

men being few, and their mutual dependence upon each other
small, their union is extremes. imperfect and feeble, and they
continue to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired. It is
the first idea of an American, that every man is born free and
independent, and that no power on earth hath any right to di,
minifh or circumscribe his natural liberty. There is fearce any
appearance of :fubordiantion either in civil or domestic govern-
rent. Every one does what he pleaes; A father and mother
with their children, live like persons whom chance has-brought
together, and whom no.common bond unites. Their manner of
educating their children is suitable to this principle. They never
chastise or punish them, even during their infancy. As they
advance in years, they allow them to be entirely makters of their
own aions, and responsible to no body. Id. p. 272, 273.--
a. The power of their civil magitrates is extremely limited.
Armong most of their tribes, the Sachem or chief is elective. A
council of old men is chosen to aflifi him, without whose advice
he determines no affair of importance. The Sachems neither
offefis nor claim any great degree of authority. They propose and
intreat rather than command, The obedience of their people is
altogether voluntary. Id. p. a66, 268. --3g. They engage in
any military nteprize, not from conltraint, but choice. When
var i tefolved, a chief arifesy and: 6sera himself to be the leader..
They who are willing (for they compel no person) tfand up o01
after another, and. sing their war ong. But if after this, any of
thee Ihould refute to follow the leader, to whom they have
engaged, his life would be in danger, and he would be confi-
dered as the nft infamous of all men. Id, p. 217, 2i8.--
4. Such as engage to follow ny leader, expeEt to be treated by
him with great attention and refpet;. and lie is obliged to
make them presents of considerable value. Id. p. a18.-

5. Among
&l0

5. Among the Americans, the magistrate has scarce any criminal
jurifdition. id. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the pcrfon
or family offended may infli what punilhment they please on
the person who was the author of it. Id. p. 74. Their rcfent-
ment and desire of vengeance are exceflive and implacable. Time
can neither extinguish or abate it. It is the chicf inheritance
parents leave to their children it is tranfinitted from generation
to generation, mntil an occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p.
3o0. Sometimes, however, the offended party is appeared. A
compensation is paid for a murder that has been committed. The
relations of the deceased receive it; and it coDfifts moil com-
monly of a captive taken in war, who being substituted in place
of the person who was murdered, aumes his name, and is
adopted into his family. Id. p. 2'74. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have
pointed out the similarity of those great features which diftin-
gui(h and chara&erize both people. Bochart, and other philolo-
gifts of the last century, who, with more erudition than science,
endeavoured to trace the migrations of various nations, and who
were apt, upon the slightest appearance of resemblance, to find
an affinity between nations far removed from each other, and o
conclude that they were descended from the fame ancestors,
would hardly have failed, on viewing such an amazing similarity,
to pronounce with confidence, " That the Germans and Ameri-
cans must be the fame people." But a philosopher will satisfy
himself with observing, That the charaters of -nations depends
on the state of society in which they live, and on the political
institutions etablifhed among them; and that the human mind,
whenever it is placed in the fame situation, will, in ages the most
distant, and in countries the most remote, assume the fame form,
and be diftinguilhed by the fame manners.

Ee 2 I HAVE

21

I HAVE pushed the comparison betwen the Germans and Ame-

ricans no farther than was neceflary for the illustration of my
fubje&. I do not pretend that the state of society in the two
countries was perfectly similar. Many of the German tribes
were more civilized than the Americans. Some of them were not
unacquainted with agriculture; almost all of them had flocks of
tame cattle, and depended for the chief part of their subsistence
upon there. Most of the American tribes fubfit by hunting, and
are in a ruder and more simple state than the ancient Germans.
The resemblance, however, between their condition is greater per-
haps than any that we know between two races of men, and this
has produced a furprizing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SECT. 1. p. 13. [G]

THE booty gained by an army belonged to an army. The
King himself had no part of it but what he acquired by lot. A
remarkable inflance of this occurs in the history of the Franks.
The army of Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, hav-
ing plundered a church, carried off, among other sacred utensils,
a vase of extraordinary size and beauty. The bishop sent depu-
ties to Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it might be
again employed in the sacred services to which it had been con-
fecrated. Clovis desired the deputies to follow him to Soilons,
as their booty was to be divided in that place, and promised that
if the lot hould give him the disposal of the vase, he would
grant what the bishop desired. When he came to Soilfons, and
all the booty was placed in one great heap in the middle of the
army, Clovis intreated, that b.fore making the division, they,
would give him that vase over and above his share. All appeared
willing to gratify the King, and to comply with his request,

when

when a fierce and haughty soldier lifted up his battle-axe, and
firiking the vase with the utmost violence, cried out with a loud
voice, "You hall receive nothing here but that to which the lot
gives yoh a right." Gregor. Turon. Hiftor. Francorum.. lib. ii.
c. 17. p. 70. Par. 16io.

NOTE VIII. SEc T. I. 15. [H].

THE history of the establishment and progress of the feudal

system, is an interesting obje& to all the nations of Europe. In
Come countries, their jurisprudence and laws are still in a great
measure feudal. In others, many forms and practices established
by custom, or founded on fatutes, took their rife from the feudal
law, and cannot be understood without attending to the ideas
peculiar to it. Several authors of the highest reputation for
genius and erudition, have endeavoured to illustrate this fubje&;
but they have left many parts of it obscure. I fllall endeavour
to trace, with precision, the progress and variation of ideas con-
cerning property in land among the barbarous nations ; and hall
attempt to point out the causes which. introduced there changesh
as well as the effects which followed upon them; Property in
land seems to have gone through four fucceflive changes among
the people who fettled in the various provinces of the Roman.
Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous' nations remained in their original

countries, they had no fixed property. in land, and no certain
limits to their poffeflions. After feeding, their flocks in one
diftrif, they removed with them,,. their wives, and families, to
another; and abandoned that likewise in a. ihort time. They
were not, n consequence of this imperfect.fpecies of property,
brought er any positive or. formal obligation to serve the

community ;.,

icommunity; iall their ervices were purely -voluntary. Every:
individual was at liberty to chufe how far he would cortri-
bute towards carrying on any military enterprize. If he fol-
lowed a leader in any expedition, it was from attachment, not
,from a sense of obligation. The clearest proof of lhis has been
produced in note VI. While property continued in this state,
we can discover nothing that bears any resemblance to a feudal
tenure, or to the ubordination and military service which the.
feudal fyftm introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they subdued, the

vritorious army divided the conquered lands. That portion
which fell to every soldier, he seized as a recompence due to
his valour, as a settlement acquired by his own sword. He took
poflffion of it as a freeman in full property. He enjoyed it
during his own life, and could dispose of it at pleasure, or traof-
mit it as an inheritance to his children. Thus property in land
became fixed. It was at the fame time alldia4 i. e. the pofeffor
had the entire right of property and dominion; he held of no
overeign or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do homage,
and perform service. But as thee new proprietors were in ome
danger (as has been observed in the text) of being disturbed by
the remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in still greater dan-
ger of being attacked by barbarians as fierce and rapacious as
themselves, they saw the neceflity of coming under obligations
to defend the community, more explicit than those to which they
had been subjet in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new settlements, every
freeman became bound to take arms in defence of the commu-
nity, and if he refused or negleted so to do, was liable to a con-

fiderable
214

fiderable penalty. I do not mean that any contrac of this kind
was formally concluded, or mutually ratified by any legal folem-
nity. It was, like the other ompats which hold society toge-
ther, etablifled by tacit consent and their mutual security and.
preservation made it the. interell of all to recognize its authority,
and to enforce the observation of it. We can trace, back tljis
new obligation on the proprietors of land to a very early period
in the hiltory of the Franks. Chilperic, who began his reign
A. D, 562, exacted a fine, banos jufit exigi, from certain persons
who had refused to accompany him, in an expedition. Gregor.
Turon. lib, v. c. :26. p 2ai.. Childibert, who began hi reign
A. D. 576, proceeded in tihe fme manner against others wvhr
had been guilty of a like crime. Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 42.
Charlemagne .ordained, that every freeman who pofTeloe4 five
rnanf i, Le. sixty acres of land, : propery, (hould march in pe.r
son agoinft the enemy. Capitul. A, P. 807. Louis le Pebon-
naire, A. D. $15, granted lands to certain Spaniards who fled:
from the Saracens, and; allowed them to fettle in his territories.,
on condition, that they should serve in the army ike,otker r'
mmen. Capitul. vol. i. p. 5oo, :By land.poefed it. pofrty,
which is mentioned in the law of Clarlemagne, we .ae to undr-
stand, according tb the file of that age, allodial land; allodes
and propri'ets,, alodrtn and propriwm being words perfectly fyno.
nimous. Du Cange voce Alodis. The cleareit proof of .the di-
ftintlion between allodial and beneficiary pofflnion, is contained.
in two charters publishcd by Muratori, by which it appears tlhat
a person might poleif one part of his estate as allodial which he
c eould dispose of at, pl&lte;: the other ps a. beneficiurp,,pf .wlicl(
:le had only the ufitfri't, thel property returningto tlle lfperior.
,Lord oo. his demise. Antiq. Ital. medii evi, vol. i. p. 559, 565..

The.

The fame diftintion is pointed out in a Capitulare of Charle-
magne, A. D. 812. edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 491. In the curious testa-
ment of count Everard, who married a daughter of Louis le
Debonnaire, by which he disposes of his vast estate among his
children, he diftinguiihes between what he poflefed proprietate, and
what he held beneficio, and it appears that the greater part was
allodial. A. D. 837. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplomatica Lovan. 1723.
Vol. p. 9.

IN the fame manner Liber homo is commonly opposed to

Vaffus or Vafalus; the former denotes an allodial proprietor,
the latter one who held of a superior. These fret men
were under an obligation to serve the state; and this duty
was confidered as so sacred, that free men were prohibited
from entering into holy orders unless they had obtained
the consent of the overeign. The reason given for this
in the statute is remarkable, " For we are informed that ome
do so, not so much out of devotion, as in order to avoid that
military service which they are bound to perform. Capitul.
lib. i. §. 114. If upon being summoned into the field, any free
man refused to obey, a full Herebannum, i. e. a fine of sixty
crowns, was to be exa&ted from him according to the law of
the Franks." Capit. Car. magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit.
14. §. 13. p. 539. This expreflion, according to the law of
the Franks seems to imply that both the obligation to serve, and
the penalty on those who disregarded it, were coeval with the
laws made by the Franks at their first ettlement in Gaul. This
fine was levied with such rigour, "That if any person was in-
solvent, he was reduced to servitude, and continued in that

state
at6

slate until such time as his labour fliould amount to the value
of the herebanni." Ibid. The Emperor Lotharius rendered
the penalty still more severe; and if any person poffefling fucli
an extent of property as made it incumbent on him to take the
field in person refilted to obey the summons, all his goods were
declared to be forfeited, and he himself might be punished
with banihment, Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars. ii. p. 153.

II. PROPERTY in land having thus become fixed and sub-

je& to military service, another change was introduced, though
slowly, and ftep by ftep. We learned from Tacitus that the chief
men among tle Germans endeavoured to attach to their per-
sons and intcrefts certain adherents, whom he calls Comites.
These fought under their standard, and followed them in all
their enterprizes. The fame custom continued among them
in their new fcttlements, and those attached or devoted fol-
lowers were called fideles, antrtu/iones. homines in trtle Dorml-
ina & leudes. Tacitus informs us, that the rank of a Comes
was deemed honourable; De morib. Germ. c. 3. The com-
position, which is the standard by which we must judge of the
rank and condition of persons in the middle ages, paid for the
murder of one in trtjle Doininia, was triple to that paid for the
murder of a frceman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44 § . & . . While
the Germans remained in their own country they courted the
favour of there Comites by presents of arms and horces, and by
hospitality. See note VI. While they had no fixed property
in land, these were the only gifts that they could bcftow, and
the only reward which their followers deftred. But upon their
fettling in the countries which they conquered, and whe:l the
value of property came to be undcrftood among tlem, instead

VoL. I. F f of

217

of these flight presents, the Kings and chieftains beflowed a
more substantial recompence in land on their adherents. These
grants were called beneficia, because they were gratuitous do-
nations; and bonores, because they were regarded as marks of
diftinAion. What were the Cervices originally exacted in re-
turn for there beneficia cannot be be determined with absolute pre-
cifion; because there are no records so ancient. When allodial
poWeflions were first rendered feudal, they were not, at once,
fubje&ed to the feudal services. The transition here, as in all
other changes of importance, was gradual. As the great ob-
jea of a feudal valral was to obtain protection, when allodial
proprietors first consented to become vassals of any powerfuil
leader, they continued to retain as much of their ancient inde-
pendance as was confident with that new relation. The ho-
mage which they did to the superior of whom they chore to
hold, was called honagium planwnt, and bound them to no-
thing more than fidelity, but without any obligation either of'
military service, or attendance in the courts of their superior.
Of this bomagiut planurn some traces, though obscure, may
fill be discovered. Brufel, tom. i. p. 97. Among the antient
writs published by D. D-De Vic & Vaifette hit. de Langued.
are a great many which they call homagia. They seem to be
an intermediate ftep between the homagium planum mentioned
by Bruffel, and the engagement to 'perform compleat feudal
service. The one party promies protection, and grants certain
castles or lands, the other engages to defend the person of the
granter, and to assist him likewise in defending his' property as
often as he hall be summoned to do o. But there engagements
are accompanied with none of the feudal formalities, and no.
Iention is made of any of the feudal services. They appear

ratlle
I

2'18

rathller to be mutual contract between equals, than the engage-
mnent of a vassal to perform services to a superior Lord. . Preuves
de 1' hist. de Lang. tom. ii. 173. & paflim. As oon as men
were accustomed to these, the other feudal services were gra-
dually introduced. M. de Montesquieu confiders tlefe beneficis
as fiefs, which originally fubjeaed those who held them to
military service. L'efpr. des Loix. 1. xxx. c. 3. & 16. M.
L'abb de Mably contends that filch as held these were at
lirft fubjeted to no other service than what was incumbent on
every free man. Observations fur 1'hiftoire de France I. 356.
But upon comparing their proofs and reasonings and conjec-
tures, it seems to be evident, that as every freeman, in confe-
quence of his allodial property, was bound to serve the com-
munity under a severe penalty, no good reason can be aligned
for conferring these bencficia, if they did not subjed such aC
received them, to some new obligation. Why should a King
have stripped himself of his domain, if he had not expcdled,
that, by parcelling it our, lie might acquire a right to ervices to
which he had formerly no title ? We may then warrantably
conclude, " That as allodial property fubjeted those who pof-
sessed it to serve the community, so beneficia fubjeed such
as lield them, to personal service and fidelity to him from
whom they received these lands. There beneficia were
granted originally only during pleafire, No circumstance re.
lating to the cuitoms of the middle ages is better afccrtained
than this i and innumerable proofs of it might be added to there
produced in L'efprit des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 16. and by Du Cange
voc. l,>iieflici, & sedum,

F f IV. Br

21g
.

IV. BUT the possession of benefices did not continue long in

this state. A precarious tenure during pleasure was not fufli-
cient to satisfy and attach those who held it to their superior
Lord, they oon obtained the confirmation of their benefices
during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces several
quotations from ancient charters and chronicles in proof of this;
Gloss. voc. Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain or
extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary, first in the,
direc line, then in the collateral, and at ladt in the female
line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. Bene-
ficiurn.

.IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when each of
there changes took place. M. 'Ab. Mably conjecures with.
some probability, that Charles Martel first introduced the prac-
tice of granting beneficia for life; Obfervat. tom. i. p. 103,.
.16; and that Louis le Debonnaire was among thefirft who
rendered them hereditary, is evident from the authorities to
which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon however has published
aplacitum of Louis le Debonnaire. A. D. 860. by which it
appears that he still continued to grant rome beneficia only
during life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the year
889, Odo King, of France granted lands to Ricabodo fideli
suo jure beneficiario & fruauario during his own life; and
if he should die, and a son were born to him, that right was to
continue during the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs merely during life,
and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity. While beneficia continued
under their first form, and were held only during pleasure, he

who

who granted them not only exercised the D.ominim or preroga-
tive of superior Lord ; but le retained the property, giving his
vassal only the ufufrutl. But under the latter form, when they
became hereditary, although feudal lawyers continued to de-
fine a beneficium agreeably to its original nature, the property
was in effet taken out of the ands of the superior Lord, and
lodged in those of the vasal. As soon as the reciprocal ad-
vantages of the feudal mode of tenure came to be understood
by superiors as well as vassals, that species of holding became
so agreeable to both, that not only lands, bt casual rents,
such as the profits of a toll; the fare paid at ferries, &c. the
salaries or perquisites of offices, and even pensions them.
selves, were granted and held as fiefs ; and military service was
promised and exa&ted on account of there. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuvesa l'hift. deBretagne. tom. ii. 78. 690. Bruffel,
tom. p. 41. .How absurd soever it may seem to grant or to
hold such precarious and casual property as a fief; there are
instances of feudal tenures still more singular. The profits
arising from the mafes aid at an altar were properly an eccle-
fiaftical revenue, belonging to the clergy of the church or mo-
naftry which performed that duty, but there were sometimes
seized by the powerful barons. In order to ascertain their right
to them, they held. them as fiefs of the church, and parcelled
them out in 'the fame manner as other property to their sub-
vassals. Bouquet. recueil des hist. vol. x. 238, 480. The fame
fpjrit of encroachment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led the
nobles to extort from their sovereigns hereditary grants of
offices. Many of the great offices ps the crown became heredi-
tary i mft of the kingdoms in Europe, and so conscious were

monarchs.

monarchs of this spirit of uurpation among the nobility, and
so follicitous to guard against it, that, on rome occasions, they
obliged the persons whom they promoted to any office of dig-
nity, to grant an obligation that neither they, nor their heirs,
should claim it as belonging to them by hereditary right. A
remarkable instance of this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des
Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in the Thefaur.
anecdot. published by Marten & Durand. vol. i. p. 873.---
This revolution in property occasioned a change corresponding
to it. in political government the great vassals of the crown,
as they acquired such extensive pofleflions, utfrped a propor-
tional degree of power, depressed the jurifdidion of the crown,
and trampled on the privileges of the people. It is on account
of this connetion, that the tracing the progress of feudal pro-
perty becomes an objet of attention in history; for upon dif-
covering in what state property was at any particular period,
we may determine with precision what was the decree of power
pofeffed by the King or by the nobility at that junCure.

ONE circumtance more, with refpec to the changes which

property underwent, deserves attention. I have shewn that
when the various tribes of barbarians divided their conquests
in the fifth and sixth centuries, the property which they ac-
quired was alodial; but in several parts of Europe property
had become almost entirely feudal by the beginning of the
tenth century. The former species of property seems to be
'o mtch better and more desirable than the latter, that such a
change appears surprising, especially when we are informed that
allodial property was frequently converted into feudal, by a

voluntary

voluntary deed of the possessor. The motives which determined
them to a choice so repugnant to the ideas of modern times
concerning property, have been investigated and explained by
M. de Montesquieu with his usual discernment and accuracy,
lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most considerable is that of which we
have an hint in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer
quoted by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of anar-
chy and disorder which became general in Europe after the
death of Charlemagne; when there was scarce any union
among the different members of the community ; and indivi-
duals were exposed, ingle and undefended by government, to
rapine and oppreflion, it became necelrary for every man to
have a powerful protetor, under wlofe banner he might range
himself, and obtain security against enemies, whom lie could not
singly oppose. For this reason he relinquished his allodial in-
dependance, and iubjeeded himself to the feudal services, that
he might find safety under the patronage of some refpedtable
superior. In ome parts of Europe,. this change from allodial
to feudal property became To general, that he who pofleffed land
had no longer any liberty of choice left. He was obliged to
recognize ome liege Lord,. and to hold of him. Thus Beau-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Clermont and
Beauvbis, if the Lord or Count difcovcred any lands within his
jurifdition, for which no service was performed, and which
paid to him no tax or customs, he might instantly seize it as
his own; for, fays he, according to our cuflom no man can
hold allodial property. Couft. cll. 24 . . 123. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at length become ge-
neral in the law of France, Nirlle terreJfns Seigneur. In other
provinces of France allodial property seems to have remained

longer-

.3

longer unalienated, and to have been rhore highly valued. A
vast number of charters containing grants, or sales, or ex-
changes of allodial lands in the province of Languedoe are
published Hist. gener. de Langued. par D. t). De Vie & Vaifette,
tom. ii. During the ninth, tenth, and greater part of the
eleventh century, the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial ; and scarce any mention of feudal tenures
occurs in the deeds of that country. The slate of property,
during these centuries, seems to have been perfectly imilar in
Catalonia, and the country of Rouflillon, as appears from the
original charters published in the appendix to Petr. de la Mar-
ca's treatise de Marca five limite Hifpanico. Allodial property
seems to have continued in the Low-Countries, to a period frill
later. During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.
this species appears to have been of considerable extent. Miraei
opera Diplom. vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 817, 296, 842, 847, 578.
Some.veftiges of allodial property appear there as late as the
fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. The notions of men with
refpedt to property, vary according to the diversity of their
underiandings, and the caprice of their paflions. At the fame
time that ome persons were fond of relinquishing allodial
property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure, others seems to
have been follicitous to convert their fiefs into allodial property.
An inltance f this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire,
publiflied by Eckhard, commentarii de rebus Francia Orientalis,
vol. ii. 885. Another occurs in the year I 2$9. Reliquie MSS.
omnis avi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. o29. and even one as late as
the year 1337. ibid. vol. vii. p. 4o. The fame thing took
place in'the Low-Countries. Merai oper. i. 5a.
224

INr tracing tlere various revolutions of property, I have

hitherto chiefly confined myself to what happened in France,
because the ancient monuments of that nation have either
been more carefully preserved, or have been more clearly
illustrated than those of' any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in property, and

succeeded each other in the fame order. There is some ground,
however, for conje&turing that allodial property continued
longerin estimation among the Italians, than among the French.
It appears that many of the charters granted by the Emperors
in the ninth century conveyed an allodial right to land.
Murat. antiq. med. aevi. v. i. . 575, &c. But in the eleventh
century, we find ome examples of persons who resigned their
allodial property, and received it back as a feudal tenure. lb.
p. 61o, &c. Muratori observes, that the word feudum, which
came to be fbftituted in place of benefiiurn, does not occur in
any authentic charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
594. A charter of King Robert of France, A. D. oo8, is
the earliest deed in which I have met with the word feudum.
Bouquet recueil des hiftoriens de Gaule & de la France, tom.
x, p. 593. b. This word occurs indeed in an edia, A. D.
790, publilhed by Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77, But the authenti-
city of that deed has been called in quetion, and perhaps the
frequent use of the word feuditn in it, is an additional reason
for doing o. The account which I have given of the nature
both of allodial and feudal pofeflions receives rome confir-
mation from the etymology of the words themselves. Alode
or allodium is compounded of the German particle atn and lot,

VOL. I. Gg i. e.

i. . land obtained by lot. Wachteri Gloffar. Germanicum,
voc. Allodium. p. 35. It appears from the authorities produced
by him and' by Du Cange, voc. ors, that the northern nations
divided the lands'which they had conquered in this manner.
Feodum is compounded of od poffeflion or estate, and sea
wages, pay; intimating that it was stipendiary and granted
as a recompence for service. Wachterus ibid. voc. feodiwu,
p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the Germans

was perfectly similar to that which we have traced in France.
But as the Emperors of Germany, especially after the.Im-
perial crown 'pafied from the descendants of Charlemagne
to the house of Saxony, were far superior to the contemporary
Monarchs of France, in abilities,, the Imperial vassals did not
alpire so early to independance, nor did they o Coon obtain the
privilege of possesing their benefices by hereditary right..
Conrad II. on the Salic, was the first Emperor, according to the.
compilers of the Libri Feudorum, who rendered fiefs hereditary..
Lib. i. tit. i. Conrad:began his reign Ai D. Ioz40 Ludovicus
Pius, under whose reign, grantsof hereditary fiefs were frequent
in France, succeeded his father, A. D. 814. Not. only was this
innovation o much later in being, introduced among the vaflals,
of the German Emperors, but even after Conrad had established.
it, the law continued favourable to the ancient practice, nnd un-
less the charter of the vassal bore exprefly that the, fief descended
to his heirs, it was presumed to be granted only during life..
Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the alteration made by Conrad, it
xas not uncommon in Ge:i:mny to grant fief. only for life; a.

charter

-a.
'226

charter of this kind occurs as late as the year 376. Charta
ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 361. The tranfmifion of
fiefs to collateral and female heirs, took place very slowly
among the Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. Iaor.
conveying the right of'fuccefllon to females, but it is granted
as an extraordinary mark of favour, and in reward of uncom-
mon services. Boehmer. ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well
as in France and Italy, a considerable part of the lands continued
to be allodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was intro-
duced. It appears from the Codex Diplomaticus Monhafterii
Buch, that a great part of the lands in the marquisate of Mifiia
was still allodial as late as the thirteenth century. No 31, 36,
37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptores hilt. German. cura Schoetgenii &
Kreyfigii. Altenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property
seems to have been common in another diftrid of the fame
province, during the fame period. Reliquiae Diplomatica
Santimonial. Beutiz. No 17, 36, 58. ibid. 34, &c.

NOTE IX. S c T. I. P. 16.

As I ihall, in another note, have occasion to represent the con-

dition of that part of the people who dwelt in cities, I will con-
fine myself in this to coifider the ltate of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating the ground dur-
ing the ages under review may be divided into three clafles:
I. Servior slaves. This,'feems to have been the moil nume-
rous class, and confiited either of captives taken in war, or of
persons the property in whom was acquired in some one of the
various methods' enumerated by Du Cange, oc. fi'rvus., v. 6.

G g P. 447.

N

p. 447. The wretched condition of this numerous race of men
will appear from several circumltances. i. Their masters had
absolute dominion over their persons. They had the power of
punilhing their slaves capitally, without the intervention of any
judge. This dangerous right they poffefled not only in the more
early periods, when their manners were fierce, but it continued
as late as the twelfth century. Joach. Potgiefferus de ftatu
lervorum. Lemgov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. i. §. 4 10, , , 24.
Even after thisjurifdiCtion of masters came to be restrained, the
life of a slave was deemed to be of so little value, that a very
flight compensation attoned for taking it away. Idem, lib. iii.
c. 6. If masters had power over the lives of their slaves, it is
evident that almost no bounds would be set to the rigour of the
punifhmennts which they might inflict upon them. The Codes
of ancient laws prescribed puni'hments for the crimes of slaves
different from those which were infli&ed on free men. The
latter paid only a fine or compensation, the former were sub-
jeded to corporal punishments. The cruelty of there was in
many instances excessive. Slaves, on very flight occasions,
might be put to the rack on question. The laws with refpet
to there points are to be found in Potgiefferus, lib. iii. cap. 7.
a. If the dominion of malters over the lives and persons of their
slaves was thus extensive, it was no less so over their ations and
property. They were not originally permitted to marry. Male
and female slaves were allowed and even encouraged to cohabit
together. But this union was not confidered as a marriage, it
was called contubernitmn, not nptia or matroni.oit. Potgiefl.
lib. ii. c. 2. §. . This notion was fo.much eftablilhed, that du-
xing several centuries after the barbarous nations embraced the
Chiftian religion, slaves who lived as husband and wife, were

not

snot joined together by any religious ceremony, and did not
receive the nuptial benediction from a priest. Ibid. §. io, xi.
When this conjuncion between slaves came to be confidered as
a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to marry.without
the content of their matler, and flich as ventured to do so with'-
out obtaining that, were punished with great severity,. and .Tome.
times were put to death. Potgiefle. ibid. §. i2. &c. Gregor.
Turon. hifor. lib. v. c. 3. When the manners of the European
nations became more gentles and their ideas more liberal, slaves
who married without: their; master's content, were .'fibjected
only to a fine. Potgieft :ibid. §. azo. Du Cange GloK voc.
ForJ/Hirritagium. 3. All the children of slaves, were in the
fame condition with their parents, and became the property
of the mater. Du Cange Gloss. voc. fervus, vol. 6. 450.
Murat. antiq. Ital 'vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so entirely the
property of their maiters, that they could fell them at pleasure.
While domeflic slavery continued, the property in a slave was
fold in the fame manner with that which a person had in any
other moveable. Afterwards'flaves became adfcripti 'giebae, and
were conveyed by sale together with the farm or estate to wliicl
theybelonged. Potgiefferus has collected the laws and charters
which illufirate this well-known circumfiance in the condition
of slaves. Lib. -ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves had a title to nothing but
subsistence and cloatls from their master ; all the profits of their
labour accrued to him. If a mailer, from indulgence, gave his
slaves any peculiun or fixed llowance for their subsistence, they
had no right of'property in What they saved out of tlat. All
that they accumulated belonged to their master. PotgiefT lib.
ii. c. o. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. 68. Du Cange, voc. Jervis,

vol.

vol. vi. p. 451. Conformably to the fame principle, all the
effects of naves belonged to their mailer at their death, and
they could not dispose of them by testament. Potgieff. lib. ii. c.
x.i. 6. Slaves were diftinguiflled from free men by a.peculiar
dress. Among all the barbarous nations, ;long hair was a mark
of dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that reason obliged to
have their heads; and by this diftincion, how indifferent soever
it may be in its.own nature, they were reminded every moment
of the inferiority of; their condition. Potgiefi. lib. iii. c. 4.
For the fame reason it was enaced in the laws of almost all the
nations of Europe, that no save .flould be admitted to give evi-
dence against a freeman in a court of justice.. Du Cange, voc.
fervus,, vol. vi .
p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

. illani. They were likewise nadfJipti glela or villa
from which they derived their name, and were transferable
along with it. Du Cange, voc. villanms But in this they
differed from slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their
master for the land which they cultivated, and after paying
that, all the fruits of their labour and indufry belonged to
themselves in property. This diftindion is marked by Pierre
de Fontaine's Confeil. Vie de St. Louis par Joinville, p. I 9.
edit. de Du Cange. Several cafes decided agreeably to this
principle are mentioned by Murat. Ibid. p. 773.

3. THE last class of persons employed in agriculture were

free men. These are distinguished by various names among
the writers of the middle ages, Arimanni, conditionales, origitarii,
tributales, &c. These seem to' have been persons who pofleffed
fQme small allodial property of their own, and besides that,

cultivated
230o

cultivated ome farm belonging to their more wealthy neigh-
bours, for which they paid a fixed rent; and bound them-
selves likewise to perform several fnlall Services in-prato vt int.
meffe. in aratuwa vel in vinea, such as ploughing a certain
quantity of their landlord's ground, aflifting him in harvest:
and vintage work, &c. 'The clearest proof of this may be found
in Muratori, v.. ip. 712. and in Du Cange under the refpedtive
words abovementioned. I have not been able to discover whe-.
tler there ariman)i, &c. were removable at pleaflire, or'held their'
farms by lease for a certain number ds years. The former, 'if.we
may judge from the genius and maxims of the age, seems to be
most probable. These persons, however, were confidered as free.
men in the most honourable sense of the wordi they'enjoyed;
all the privileges of that condition, and were even called to serve
in war; an honour to which no save was admitted; Murat.
Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol ii. p.' 446. This account of the con-
dition of these three different clafes of persons, will enable the
reader to apprehend the full force of an argument which I shall
produce in confirmation of what I have said in the text concern-i
ing the wretched state of the pople. Notwithltanding the im-
mense difference between the first of these classes and the third,
such was the spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of land, and tso various their opportunities of oppress-
ing those who were fettled on their estates, and of rendering their
condition intolerable, that many freemen, in despair- renounced
their liberty, and: voluntarily surrendered - themselves as laves to
their powerful maters. This they did, in order that their mailers'
might become more immediately interested to afford them pro-
tedtion, together with the means of subsisting themselves and.
their families. The forms of such a surrender, or obncxiatio, as
it was then called, are preserved by Marculfus, lib, ii, c, 8 ; and.

by

I3R.

by the anonymous collecor of fWormtnde, published by Bignon,
togetler with Marculfus, c. 16. In both, the reason for te ob-
noxiatio, i the wretched .and indigent condition of tie person who
gives up his liberty. It was flill more commom for freemen to
surrender their:. liberty to bishops or abbots, that they might par-
take of the security which the vassals ad slaves of churches and
monasteries enjoyed, in consequence of the superstitious veilera-
tion paid to the faint under whose immediate protection they were
supposed to be taken. Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286.
That condition must have been miserable indeed, which could
induce a free man voluntarily to renounce his liberty, and to
give up himself as a slave to the disposal of another. The'num
ber of slaves in all the nations of Europe was prodigious. The
greater part of the inferior class of people in France were redu.
ced to this state, at the commencement of the third race of Kings.
L'efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. . The fame was the cafe in
England. Bady Pref. to Gen. Hist. Many curious fads with
refpe& to the ancient state of villains or slaves in England, are
published in observation on the statutes, chiefly the more
ancient ad edit. p. 244.

NOTE Y. SECT. I. p. 19

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced. Many

charters granted by persons of the highest rank are preserved,
from which it appears that they could not subscribe their name.
It was usual for persons who could not write, to make the sign
of the cross in confirmation of a charter. Several of there re.
main, where Kings and persons of great eminence affix Jignum
crucis tnmu propria pro ignoratione literarum. Du Cange, voc.
Crux, vol. iii. p. 1191. From this is derived the phrase of
signing instead of subscribing a paper. In the ninth century,

Herbaud

Herbaud Comes Palatii, though fupremejudge of the Empire by
virtue of his office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau
Traitee de Diplomatique par deux Beneditins, 4to. tom. ii.
p. 422. S .te as tle fourteenth century, Du Guefclin, con-
stable of France, the greatest man in the slate, and one of the
greatest men of his age, could neither read nor write. St. Palaye
Memoirs fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82. Nor was this
ignorance confined to laymen; the greater part of the clergy
was not many degrees fiperior to them in science. Many dig-
nified ecclefiafticks could not subscribe the canons of tllofe coun-
cils, in which they fat as members. Nouv. Trait6 de diplom.
tom. ii. p. 424. One of the questions appointed by the canons
to be put to persons who were candidates for orders was this,
" Whether they could read the gospels and epistles, and explain
the sense of them, at least literally?" Regino Prurnienfis p.
Bruck. Hist. Philof v. iii. p. 631 Alfred the Great complained,
that from the Humber to the Thames there was not a Prielf
who understood the liturgy in his mother tongue, or who could
translate the easiest piece of Latin and that from the Thames
to the ea, the ecclefiafticks were till more ignorant. Aferus
de rebus geftis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c. p. 25. The
ignorance of the clergy is quaintly described by an author of the
dark ages. " Potius dediti gulae quam Gloflae potius colli-
guilt libras quam legunt libros; libentius intuentur Martham
quam Marcum ; malunt legere in Salmone qunm in olomone.
Alanus deart. Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. DiTert. tom. ii. p. 2g. To
the obvious causes of fuchl universal ignorance arising from the
state of government and manners, from the fcventh to the
eleventh century, .we may add the scarcity of books, and the
difficulty of rendering them more conmmon during that period.
The Romans wrote their books either on parchment or on

VOL.. H ih ' paper

033

paper made of the Egyptian papyrus. The latter being tlie
cheapest, was of course the most commonly used. But after. the
.Saracens conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the commu-
nication between that country and the people fettled in Italy or in
other parts of Europe, was almof entirely broke off, and the papy-
rus was no longer in use among them. They were obliged, on that
account, to write all their books upon parchment, and as the price
of that was high, books became extremely rare and of great
value. We may judge of the fearcity of the materials for
writing them from one circumstance. There still remain feve-
ral manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and following centuries,
wrote on parchment, from which ome former writing had been
erased, in order to substitute a new composition in its place. Int
this manner, it is probable, that several works of the ancients-
perished. A book of Livy or of Tacitus might be erased; to.
make room for the legendary tale of a faint, or the fuperftitiou
prayers of a missal. Murat. Anti Itak v. iii. p. 833. P. de
Mofitfaucon affirms, that the greater part of the manuscripts on
parchment which he has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are
written on parchment from which ome former treatise had been
erased. Mem. de L'Acad. des'infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want
of materials for writing, is one reason why so many of the works
of the ancients have perished; it accounts likewise for the small
number of. manuscripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh.
century,' when they began to multiply from a cause which shall be
mentioned. Hist. Liter, de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Many circum-
stances prove the scarcity of.books during these ages. Private
persons seldom possessed any books whatever. Even monafte-
ries of considerable note had only one missal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a letter to the
Pope, A. D. 855, beseeches him to lend him-a copy of Cicero de
OratQre & Qtintilian's Inltitutions, " for," fays he, " although

we.
234

we have parts of those books, there is no compleat copy of them
in all France. Murat. Ant. v. iii. p. 83.. The price of books
became so high, that persons of a moderate fortune could not
afford to purchase them. The countess of Anjou paid for a copy
of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Halberftadt, two hundred
sheep, five quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and
millet. Hiftoire Literaire de France par des Relegieux Benedidins,
tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year 1471 when Louis XI. borrow-
ed the works of Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty of
medicine in Paris, he not only deposited as a pledge a confide-
rable quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure a nobleman
to join with him as surety in a deed, binding himself under a
great forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a 1' hiftoire
de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Frefnoy, tom. iv. p. 81.
Many curious circumstances with refped to the extravagant
price of books in the middle ages, are collected by that induflri-
ous compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as deem this
small branch of literary iftory an object of curiosity. When
any person made a present of a book to a church or a monastery,
in which were the only libraries during there ages, it was
deemed a donative of fitch value, that he offered it on the altar
pro rnedio anitme fuea, in order to obtain the forgivencfs of his
fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836. Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6.
Nouv. Trait. du Diplomat. par deux Benedidtins, 4to. tom. i.
p; 481. In the eleventh century, the art of making paper in the
manner now become universal, was invented; by means of that
not only the number of manuscripts increased, but the study
of the sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib. p. 871.
The invention of, the art of making paper, and the invention of
the art of printing, are two considerable events in literary history,

H h2 It

*39s

It is remarkable that the former receded the first dawning of
letters and improvement in knowledg .towards the close of the
eleventh century; the latter ushered in the light which spread
over Europe at the era of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SEC T. I. p. 19.

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the dark ages are

a proof of this. I hall produce one remarkable testimony in
confirmation of it, from an author canonized by the church of,
Rome, St. Eloy or Egidius, bflop of Noyon, in the seventh cen-
tury. "He is a good Christian who comes frequently to,
church; who presents the oblation which is offered to God upon
the altar; who doth not taste of the fruits of his own industry
until he has consecrated a part of them to God; who, when the
holy festivals shall approach, lives chastely even with his own,
wife during several days, that with a safe conscience he may
drawv near to the altar of God; and who, in the laif place, can
repeat the Creed and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your-
fouls from deftrution while you have the means in your power
offer presents and tythes to churchmen; come more frequently
to church; humbly implore the patronage of the faints; for if
you observe there things, you may come with security in the day
to the tribunal of the eternal judge, andit ay, ". Give to us,
OLord, for we have given unto thee." Dacherii Specilegium.
Veter. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and judicious translator
of Dr. Mofheim's Ecclefiatical History, from one of whose ad-
ditional notes I have borrowed this paflage, subjoins a very pro.
per refletion; " We fee here a large and ample description of a
good Christian, in which there is not the least meition of the

love.:
436

love of God, resignation to his will, obedience to his laws, or of
justice, benevolence, and charity towards men." Mofi. Eccle,.
Hist. v.. i p. 324

NOTE 'XIl. SB T. I. p. 20.

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church of Rome,

whose doctrine of infallibility renders all such insfitutions and
ceremonies as have been once universally received, immutable
and everlasting, that she must continue to observe in enlightened
times, those rites which were introduced during the ages of
darkness and credulity. What delighted and edified the latter,
must disgust and flock. the former ' Many' of. tlefe rites appear
manifestly to have been introduced by a filperftition of the lowest
and most illiberal species. Many of them were borrowed, with
little variation, from the religious ceremonies eftablfhed among
the ancient Heathens. Soine were so' ridiculous, that if every
age did not furnifinftances of the fascinating influence of super-
flition, as well as of the whirnfical forms which it assumes, it muff
appear incredible that they should ever be received or tolerated.
In several churcles of France, they celebrated a' festival in com-
memoration of'tlle Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt. It was
called the feaftof tle As. A' A.young'girl richly dreifed, with a
child in her arms, was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned.
The ass was led 'to the altar. in solemn proceflion. High Mars
was aid with great pomp. The as was taught to kneel at pro-
per places; a hymn no left chiilifih than impious was ung in
his praise: Ad wleli the ceremony was ended, the priest,
instead of the urual words with .which he difmif'ed the people,
brayed. thrce times like an ass, and the people infltead of their

usual

til'

usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three times in the
fame manner. Du Cange, voc. Feftum. v. iii. p. 424. This ri-
diculous ceremony was not, like the festival of fools, and ome
other pageants of those ages, a mere farcical entertainment ex-
hitited in a church, and mingled, as was then the custom, with
an imitation of some .religious rites; it was an ad of devotion,
performed by the ministers of religion, and by the authority of
the church. However, as this pracice did not prevail univer-
sally in the Catholick church,. its absurdity contributed at last to
aboli(h it.

NO T E XIII. Se T. . p. 25.

As there is no event in the history of mankind more fingtilar than
that of the Crusades, every circumstance that tends to explain or
to give any rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of the
human mind is interesting. I have asserted in the text, that the
minds of men were prepared gradually for the amazing effort which
they made in consequence of the exhortations of Peter the her-
mit, by several occurrences previous to his time. A more par-
ticular detail of this curious and obscure part of history, may
perhaps appear to some of my readers to be of importance. That
the end of the world was expeced about the close of the tenth
and beginning of the eleventh century; and that this occasioned
a general alarm, is evident from the authors to whom I refer in
the text. This belief was o universal and so strong, that it
mingled itself with their civil tranfaaions. Many charters in
the latter part of the tenth century begin in this manner:
" Apropinquante mundi termino," &c. As the end of the
world is now at hand, and by various calamities and judgments

t the
238'

the signs of its approach are now manifest. Hist. de Langued.
par. D. D. de Vic Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, 90, 17,
158, &c. One cffect of this was, that a great number of pil-
grims retorted to erufalem, with a resolution to die there, or to
wait the coming of the Lord Kings, Earls, Marquefles, Bifliops,
and. even a great number of women, besides persons of inferior
rank flocked to'the Holy Land Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. x. p. 50, 52. Another hiftoriarl mentions
a vast cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count of An-
gouleme to Jerusalem in tlie year 1oz6. Chronic. Ademari, ibid.
p. 62. These pilgrims filled Europe with lamentable accounts of
the state of Chriitians in the Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr: Hist: ap.
Gest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii.p. 636. Guibert. Abbat. Hilt. ibid.
vol. i. p. 476. besides this, it was ufial fr many of'the Cliriftian
inhabitants of Jerusalem,. as well as of other cities in the East, to
travel as mendicants through Europe; and by describing the wretch-
ed condition of the professors of the Christian faith under the do-
minion of'Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous per-
sons to make Come attempt in order to deliver them from oppref-
sion.' Baldrici. Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c. vol. i.
p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbert, archbishop of Ravenna, after-
wards Pope Silvefter II. addressed a letter to all Christians in the
name of the churchof Jerusalem. It is eloquent and pathetic, and
contains a. formal exhortation to take arms against the Pagan op-
preflors, in order to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Gerbelti
Epiftola ap. Bouquet, Recueil, tom. x. p. 426. In consequence of
this spirited call,. ome fubjeds of the republic of Pita equipped
a fleet, and invaded the territories of the Mahometans in Syria.
Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken
in the East, and an opinion prevailed, A. D. olo, that all the

forces

forces of Chriflendom were to unite, in order to drive the Ma-
hometans out of Palefline. Chron. Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x.
p. I52. It is evident from all there particulars, that the ideas
which led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enterprize were
gradually formed; so that the universal concourse to the standard
of the cross when erected by Urban II. will appear less furpri*
sing.

I the various circumitances which I have enumerated in this

note, as well as in the history, are sufficient to account for the
ardour with which such vast numbers engaged i such a dange-
rous undertaking, the extensive privileges and immunities
granted to those who assumed the cross, serve to account for the
long continuance of this spirit in Europe. . They were ex-
empted from prosecutions on account of debt during the time'of
their being engaged in this holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis
privilegium, v. ii. . I94.---. They were exempted from
paying interest for the money which they had borrowed. Ibid.--
3. they were exempted either entirely, or at least during a cer-
tain time, from the payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonances des Rois
de France, tom. i. p. 33.--4. They might alienate their lands
without the conent of the superior lord of whom they held. Ib.
5. Their persons and effes were taken under the protection of
St. Peter, and the anathemas of the church were denounced
against all who hould molest them, or carry on any quarrel or
hostility against them, during their absence, on account of the holy
war. Du Cange, Ib. Guibertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p 480, 482.---
6. They enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclefiafticks, and were not
bound to plead in any civil court, but were declared subjed to the
spiritual jurifdiaion alone. Du Cange, Ib. Oldon. des Rois, tom. i.

P- 34,

p. 34, 74.---. They obtained a plenary rmiflion of all their
fins, and the gates of heaven were set open to them, withoit
requiring any proof of their p.enitenc, blut their :engaging ii
this expedition, 'and' thus gratifying thei'r favourite palioii,
the love of war Guibert. Abbas, p. .480. When we behold
the civil and ecclefiaialal powers vying with each other, and
firaining their invention 'in order to .devise expedients for
encouragig and adding flrengtb to the spirit of fuperftitioi,
can .we, be furpried that, it ,oud 'become so general s 'to
render it infamous, and mark of.cowardice to decline engag-
ing in.the holy war? ,Williern Tyricnfis ap. fBongarf vol. ii.
p. 6.. Th l'lift.ories pof tli 'Crtlades written by modern
.authlors, wlo..are , t to fbut te

tideas 'abd h.axinms of

their own age in the place of those ich influenced the per.
sons whose ations they attempt to relate, convey a very imper-
sect notion of the spirit tthat tinme predopinan.t in Erpe.

The original hj rip w io w.re ain C^ tepfelves wisl

tlle,fhae .pime ns wh^i ;ql' olieFeQ ;their, :pntempo.rries, exl!jIit
to us a (rore griking piqulre of the rtines and ,manuers whisl
th'y, describe. The enthufiatic. rapture with .whilh .they ,ac-
cpunt for! tlhe eses of tile Pope's.; di,coufe,,jn t!i ,c p cil of
.Cermppt lt. *,,eultio vjotl h

,wj ^i,

! W ch .thnji menton tle numn-

.,qrs wvyhlq evo[4 t!mlryes

:pIttiis hQly, wtyrfare.;.lhe cpnfi-

4delce with !wJiiph .,Ihey ;dy ,9 :tle ,.di viLe .protefCion; the
c.tafy tof oy.with .,ljichb leyefbribe teir takjing p*ifflon .f
Ilhe ho}y £iy,l, wl .,ealjle ,Us; to .cqn¢ve jn. fom dg.ec ,the cx-
h'ravsQpl5 qs tJla,t ,ljl, wli i,giqatet d .tle . ids0Af:en! w.itl
frlch ,yiI.ncqp, anql4,, ,ill frggflf: asany intuareyc iolns to a
plioiopher;,as. ,any r occutence in lie: hitoryr:of :ma.rkind.-- -Jt
i.,:unnecefaTry to,,fe.et the particular paflhges in, the several hi-
fi9rians which confirm this observation. But left these authors

Vol. I. Ii may

may be fufpeed of adorning their narrative with any exagge-
rated description, I shall appeal to one of the leaders who con-
duted the enterprize. There is extant a letter from Stephen,
the earl of Chartres and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he
gives her an account of the progress of the Crusaders. He de-
scribes the Crusaders as the chosen army of Christ, as the ser-
vantsand soldiers of God, as men who marched under the im-
mediate protection of the Almighty, being conduted by
his hand to vitory and conquest. He speaks of the Turks as
accursed,. sacrilegious, and devoted by heaven to deftrution and
when he mentions the soldiers in the Christian army who had,
died, or were killed, he is confident that their fouls were'admit-
ted diredly into the joys of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegiurn,
vol; iv. p. 257.

THE expence of conducting numerous. bodies of men froni

EIarope to Alia, must have been exceflive, and the difficulty of
raising the ieceffary ftims imu have been proportionally great,
during ges when the publick revenues in every nation of Eu-
rope were extremely small,' Some account is preserved of the
expedients employed by Humbert II; Dauphin of Vienne, in
order to levy the noney requisite 'towards equipping him for
the Crusade, A;. Di 346. ; These I hdll mention, a they tend.
to hew the considerable influence.which the Crusades had, both
on the fate of property ana of civil government., i. He ex-
posed to sale part of: his dormains an'd - as tie price was destined
flr such a sacred service, he obtained the' con ent ds the French
King, of whom these: lands were held, ratifying the aiienation.
Hist. de. Dauphine tomr i.p.

i 33h. 335. ---2z. He issued a pro.
claynation, in which he, promied to grantnew privileges to the

- / noblets

nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities and towns, in his
territories, in consideration of certain films which they were in-
ftantly to pay on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512. Many
of the charters of community, which I hall mention in another
note, were obtained in this manner.---3. He xacted a contri-
bution towards defraying the clarges of tle expeditioni from all
his fubjets, whether ecclefiafticks or laymen, who did not ac-
company him iii person to the Eafti' Ibid. tom. i.. . 335.--
4. He appropriated a considerable part of his ufial revenues for
thefi lpprt of the troops to be employed in this ervice ibid.
tom. ii. p. 518.--5, He exaced considerable iums' ndt only of the
Jews fettlcd in his dominions, but also of the Lombards and other
bankers who had fixed their residence there. Ibid. torn. i. p. 338.
tom. ii. 528. NotwithRandin'g the Variey 'of there 'retources,
the Dauphin was involved i uch e:pence by this expedition,
that on his return lie was obliged to make new deinands on hlis
fubjets, and to pillage the Jews by fresh exactions, ibid. tom. i.
P.'344, 347. When the count de Foix engaged in the firll Cru-
fade, he raised the money neceflary for defraying the expences
of that expedition, by alienating part of his territories.. Hi
deLangued. par. D; D. de Vie& Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In
like manner Baldwin, count of. Hainaut, mortgaged or fold part
of his dominions to the bishop of Liege. A. D. o196. Du Mont
Corps liplonatiqte, to ii. p. 59. At a' later period, Baldwin
Count of Namur fold part of his estate to a monastery, when he
inteined to aflhme the cross.' A. D. 239. Mirei oper. i. 313.

INQ9TE XIV. SECT. I. p. 29.

:T 1 E uliral 'iethod f forminig an opinion concerning the
coimp.rativc fate of manners: in two difterent nations, is by

I i a attending

attending to the fa&s which hitRorians relate concerning each.
of them. Various passages might be fele&ed from the Byzantin
historians, describing the splendor and magnificence of the
Greek Empire. P, de Montfaucon has produced from the
writings of St. Chrysostom a very ful account of the elegancct
and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That father in is sermons
enters into such details concerning. the manners and cutltoms
of his contemporaries, as appear firange in discourses from the
pulpit, P, de Montfaicon has collete4, these defriptnis, and
ranged them under different heads., The court of the more
early Greek Emperors seems to have. resembled those of Eastern
monarchs, both in :magnificence and in corruption of manners.
The. Emperors in the eleventh ;enury, though inferior in
power, did not yield to them .in ofRentation and splendor., Me-
miirea de.l'Acad, des Infcript. tor. xx. p. 197. --Sut we
may decide concerning the comparative slate of manners in the-
Eastern Empire, and among the nations in the weft of Europe
by another 'method, which, if not more certain, is at leaf mpr^.
flriking; A , Conftantinple was lhe place of rendezvous for
al the armies .of the:crufaders this brought together $he people..
of the east and weft as to one great interview. There are ex.
tant several contemporary author, both among the; Greeks and
liatirts, who, were witnesses of this ingflar congress of, people
formerly fraigers, in a great measure, to each other; They
defcribe'with simplicity and candour, the imprelion which that
new fpeaacle made upon their own minds. This may be con-
fidered as the''mbi lively and just iAure of the real character
and manners of each people. When the Greeks speak of. the
Franks, they describe them as, barbarians, fierce,, illiterate, im-
petuous and avage. They assume a tone of superiority, as 'a
more polilhed people, acquainted with the arts both of govern-

ment

R45.

mrent and of elegance, of which the other were ignorant. It is
thits Anna Cmnena describes the manners. of the Latins,.
Alexias, p. 224. 231. 237 ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. Shle alway,
treats them with contempt as a rude people, the very mentiog
of whose names was fSfficient to contaminate the beauty and
eleganceof hifory, p. 229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs againfl
them with still more violence, an gives an accousnt of their
ferofity and devastations, in terms not unlike those which pre,
ceding historians had employed in describing the inctirfiQn of
the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap, Byz. Script. vol. iii,
p. 3, &c. But, on the other hand, the Latin liftQrians
were fruck with astonishment it the- magnificence, weglth, and
elegance which 'they discovered in the Eaftrn Empire. I," 0
whata vat city is Contafntinople (exclaims Fylchiius Carn o
tenfis, when lie first beheld it) and how, bautifult How m.ny
monaftries are there in it,, and how many palacea built with
wonderful art! how many mannufadtures are there in the city
amazing to behold ! It would be aRnilhing to relate how it
abouinds with all good things, witl gold, silver, and fRuffT
of various kinds; for every houy sips arrive in its port laden,
with all things necef'ary for the use of man. Fulcher. ap. Bon,
gars. vol. i. p. 386. Willermu5Archbifhop of Tyre, the most
intelligent, historian of the crusades, takes frequent occasion to
describe the elegance and splendour of the court of onfainti-
nople, and'adds, that what they observed there exceeded any
idea which they could have formed of it, noftrarwn eniTm rerum
modum & dignitatem excedunt, Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii.
p. 657, 664. Guntherus, a French .monk who wrote a hiflory
of the conquelt of Conftaritinople by the crusaders i tirle thir-
teenth century, speaks of the magnificence of that city in the-

fame

fame tone of admiration, " Strusturam..autem Edificiorum in
corpore civitatis, in ecclefiis videlicet, & turribus, -& in domi-
bus-magnatorum, vix ullus vel defcribere poteft, vel credere
defiribenti, nifi qui ea oculata ,fide cgnoverit." Hist. Conftan-
tinop. ap. Canifii Letiones Antiquas. fol, Antw. 1725. vol. iv.
p. 14. Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high rank,
and accustomed to all the magnificence then known in the weft,
describes, in similar. term, the astonishment and admiration of
filch of his fellow soldiers, who .beheld Constantinople for. the
firt time :' "They could not have believed, fays he, that there
was 'a city :so beautiful and rich in the whole world. When
they viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its
superb churches, all appeared so great that they could have
formed no conception of this sovereign city, nlefs tey had seen
it with their'own eyes." Hifoire de la Conquete de ConRant.
p. 49. From these undisguised representations of their own
feelings, it is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latins appeared
to be a race of rude, unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the latter.
how much soever they might contemn the unwarlike characer
of the former, could not help regarding them as far superior to
thernfelvesin elegance.. and arts.---That the state of government
and-manners was much more improved in Italy than in the other
countries of Europe is evident not only from the fa&s recorded
in hitory, but it appears that the more intelligent leaders of the
crusaders were struck with the difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco,
a French historian of the holy war, makes an elaborate pehe-
gyiick on the character and manners of the Italians. He views
them as a more polished people, and particularly celebrates them
for their love of liberty, and civil wisdom ; in corfiliis circum-
'fpe&i, in re fua publica procural-da diligentes & ftudiofi.; fibi

,1 ia

in pfterum providentes; aliis filbjici renuentes; ante omnia
libertatem fibi dfendentes; sub uno quern eligunt capitaneo,
communitate fuae jura & inltituta ditantes, & fimiliter obfer-
vantes. Hiftor. Hierofol. ap. Gfta Dei per Francos, vol. ii.
p. 1085.

NO E XV. S E . I. p. 33.

THP different steps taken by the cities of Italy in order

to extend their power and dominion are remarkable. As oon
as their liberties were established, and they began to feel their
own importance, they endeavoured to render themselves maiters
of the territory round their walls. Under the Romans, when
cities enjoyed municipal privileges and juri(dioion, the circurrn
jacent lands belonged to each town, and were the property of
the community. But as it wasi not the genius of feudal policy
to encourage cities, or to hew any regard' for their poIellions
and immunities, there lands had. been seized, and hared! among
the conquerors. The barons to whom' they were .granted,
ereced their castles almost at the gates of the: city, exerp
cifed their. jurifdidtion there. Under pretence of recovering their
ancient property, many of the citiesin Italy, attacked. these trouble-
some neighbours, and difpofefling them, annexed their territories
to the communities, and made thereby a considerable addition to
their power. Several inftanccs of this occur in the eleventh, and
beginning of the twelfth centuries. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p;
159, &c. Their ambition increqfing together with their power,
they afterwards attacked several barons situated at a greater dif.
tance from them, and obliged there to engage that they Ihould
become members of their commnunity : that .they hould take the

1· oath

247

*oath of fidelity to their magistrates; that'they should subjet
their lands to all burdens and taxes imposed by common con-
sent; that they should defend the community gainft all its ene-
mics; and that theyfhould reside within the city during' a cer-
tain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid. 63. This sub-
jeetion of the nobility to the municipal government established
in cities, became almost universal, and was ften extremely
grievous to persons accultomed to confider themselves as inde-
pendant. Otto Frifingenfis thus describes the state of Italy
under Fredetick I. " The cities so much affect liberty, and
are fb fbllicitous to avoid the nfolence of power, that almost
all' of them have thrown off every other uthority,, and .are
:governed by.'theit own 'magistrates. Infomuct that all that
country is now filled with free cities, each of which lave com-
'pelled their bihops to reside within their walls, and there is
-scarce 'any hbleman, :how great soever his. power may be, who
is not subject to the laws and government of some city, De

eftis Frider, I. Inip. lib. ii. c. 13. 'p. 45. I n another: place

he'obferves of the Marquis of Montserrat ithat he was almost
the only Italian baron, who had preserved his ihdependance,
land had 'not become fubjct to the laws ofiAnycity. .See .also
MtNatotri Antichita Eftenfi, vol. i p.' i ,.41. ,,That. -:iate .into
which fme of the nobles were complled' to enter.'others (em-
braced from choice. They oblerved that high degree of fecu-
tity as well as .of .credit and cftimatioi i whicl the .goil)g
wealth. and dominion Dof.the great: comunities procuyted toill
the members of them. They were dfirols ;to prtakeof, h ,
and .to put themselves nder.' Alch powerful protection.,, With
this view they voluntarily became citizens of the towns :to
which:,their lan4s :were.moft contiguous, and abandoning their

ancient
248

ancient castles, took' up their. reidence; in the- cities at'leaft dur*
ing part of the years Several deeds are Rill extant, by which
fome,,of the mRft illufrious families in Italy are associated 'as
citizens of 'different cities. Murat. ib. p. 65, &c. A charter
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a citizen of Olimo,
A. D. 1 98; in the Marclia di Ancona is still extant.: In tlhis
he tipulates,i that he will ackilowledge himself to ba burels
of 'that: comminity,; that 'he willl'to. thelutimot of his power
promote its'hodour :and' welfare ; that he will obey its magi.
ftrates , that he will entet nto no leaglte with jts enemies that
he will' reside1 in';he twntluringl ,two 'mon6thlin every:yeart or
for a longei' time if requredi by .ihe !magistrates. I The comitln
nity on the other-hand tqke him, his.famiy, and friends under
their' prote6tion, and:engage to defend him against. every ene-
my.' Fr. ;Antr. 'Zaclifaias.,Anecdotai medii: 'vi. t Aug.' Taurm.
1755. fol' p. 661. This. prlvilege.,was; deemed' so ipottant,
that noti only iiaymien,; :ut eclfaltibsks:of the highest! tanki
condefceaded'to! be alopted as'lnembera,, f the: great icotmunb
ties, in: hpes of enjoying "the.. safety .anl dignity. ,which that
conferred.. 1iMurat. ib. . il'. i ;Beforp die institution: ofi com,
miinitlesi perfonb of: n6dble'birth,,'had; no 6therrefiddece'. biut
their' caRled.l They kept tiheir petty:.courts there . :and the
cities 'were deferte, 'having hardly any inhabitants but slaves
or persons: of- low condition'. But in consequence of the prac-
tice which I:have mentioned; clie.s not. only becamei m6re po
pilous;'-but,"wte filled wvith' .inhabitants f..better raik,; ind a
cuftdm whihi.;ftlll'fbfiits ih;iitaly ras thien;introduced, thatiall
families 'of diftindion :reside .moe confiantly in ihe great t6wns,
than is'.ufial in othdr parts of Europe. As cities acquired new
confideiation arid dignity :by tie accefion of such citizens, they
VOL. :1i., K k became

249

became more felicitous to preserve their liberty and indepen;
dance. The Emperors, as sovereigns, had anciently a palace in
.almost every great city of Italy; when the visited that country
they were accustomed to reside in these, and the troops which
accompanied them were quartered in the houses of the citizens.
This the citizens confidered both as ignominious and dangerous.
They could not help confidering it as receiving a master and an
enemy within their walls. They laboured therefore to get free
of this fubjetion. Some cities prevailed on the Emperors to
engage that they should never enter their gates, but take up
their residence without the walls: Chart. Hen.. IV. Murat. ib.
p. 24. Others. obtained the Imperial licence to. pull. down the
palace situated. within their libertiesi on ondition that they
built another in the fiuburbs for the reception of the Emperor
Chart.. Hen,. IV. Murat. ib. p. 5. These various encroacht-
ments of the Italian cities alarmed the Emperors, and put them
on schemes 'for re-eftablilhing the Imperial jurifdictin over
them on its ancient footing. Frederick Barbarora .engagedin'.
this enterprize with grear ardour. The free cities of Italy joined
together in a general league, and flood.on their defence; and
after a long contest, carried..on with alternate fuccefr, a folemni
treaty of peace. was concluded at ConRance, A. D. x183. by
which all the privileges' and immunities granted by. former
Emperors. to, the principal cities in Italy were confirmed and
ratified. Murat. dissert. XLVIII. This treaty of Constance was
' confidered as such an important article in the jurisprudence of the
middle ages, that it is ufuially publilied together with the Libri.
Feudorum at the end of the Corpus Juris Civiliss The. treaty.
secured privileges of great importance 'to the confederate citiesi
and thoug! it reserved a considerable degree of. authority and

t jurifdidion

jurifdiaion to the Empire, yet the cities persevered with flch
vigour in their efforts in order to extend their immunities, and
the cnjunctures in which they made them were so favourable,
that, before the conclusion of the thirteenth century, most of the
great cities in Italy had shaken off all marks of fubjetion to the
Empire, and were become independant fovereign:,repblicks.
It is not.tequifite that I should trace the various steps by which
they advanced to this high degree of power so fatal to the Empirei
and so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori with
his usual.. indury has collected many original papers whichl
illustrate this curious and little known part of history. Murat
Antiq. Ital. Dissert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanova: hifl.,Laudis
Pompeii five Lodi in Gracv. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

'i N 0 'E- XVI. 'E c'. I. p. 34..

'LO N G before the inflitution of communities in France,
charters of immunity or Franchlife were granted to sori, towns
and villages by the: Lords on whon they depended. But these are
very .different..from such as became common in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. They did not eret there towns into cor-
porations; they did not eflablifi a municipal government.; they
did not grant: theln the priviJ¢ge of bearing arms. They con-
tained nothing more than a manumiflion of the inhabitants
from tire yoke of servitude; an exemption from certain services
,which were oppreflive and ignominous; and the eftablilhment
of a fixed tax or rent which they were to pay to their Lord in
place of impositions whichl he could formerly lay upon theni at
pleasure. Two charters of this kind to two villages in the
.county of Roufillan, one A. D. 974. the other A. D. 025,

Kk arc

25

are till extant. Petr. de. Matca Mairc. five limes Hifpailcvii
app. p. 9gog9. o38. 'Such conceflions, it is probable, were not
unknown in other parts of Europe, and may beconfidered.as
a.ftep, towards. he:more extensive privileged. conferred. by Louis
the Gro:o .i the towhs withii'. his doiaians. Tlle .Comniunities
in France never aspired tb the fame independanee with hose iii
Italy,. They acquired new privileges arid immunitips,;.but ,the
righp,.f sovereignty remained entire to teKing or. baroritwith-
in;, wqfer ! territories the refpetive cities were situated, and
from, whg.pi thy.: received'. the!, chaitet of their. freedom . A
great lunber of these charter.s granied 'both by the Kings of
France, .aid by. their great vafali are published by M. 'DLAohery
in his Speiilegiurri, nd many: are found in-.the collecion i of the
Ordonances des Rois de France. There convey a very striking;
representation of thel wretched condition,, of, cities previous to
the institution of communities, when they were fubje& to the
judges appointed by the fiperior Lords of whom they held, and
had scarce any other law but their will. Each conceflion in
these charter must be confidered as a grant of some new pri-
vilege'which the people did not formerly enjoy, 'and each re-
gulation as a method of redrefling some grievance under 'which,
they formerly laboured. The charters of' communiies con-
tain likewise' the first expedients employed for the'introduiorl.
of equal laws, and regular government. On both these ac-
counts they' merit particular attention,' and therefore ihftead
of referring my readers to the many bulky olumes in which
they are scattered, I I'hall give them a view of rome of the most
important articles in there charters ranged under two general:
heads. I, Such as refpea personal safety. I., Such as refpet
the security of property.

I, DURING-

I. DURING that. tate of turbulence. and disorder which the

corruption of the feudal government introduced into Europe,
personal, safety was the chief object of eyery, inividualI and
as the great military barons alone were able to give fuffi-
cient pr6teti6n 'to their vafflls, this was one.,grea4. so.urce
of their power and authority. B.ut,; by. tie, infitution of
commtnities, effectual provision' was made foritlleififety. of
individuals independent o6f the nobles. For,: .. the! fundaL
mental, article in every charter was, that all the membera of it
bound themselves by oath to afift, defend, and stand, by each
other against all aggressors, and that they hould. not susser any
person to injure, distress, or molest, any of their fellow citizens.
D'Acher. Spicel. x. 64g. xi. 34r, &c.--a. Whoever resided in any
town which was made free, was obliged under , severe penalty
to accede to the ormunity and to take paIF in the mutual
defence of its members. D'Acler. Spic. X34.. 3Tle cor.
munities had ihe privilege of carrying arms . of making war
on their private enemies; and of executing by military. force
any fetence wlich their magistrates pronounced. D'Ach,
Spicel. x., 643, 644. xi. 843."--4. he practice of making fotis-
fation; by, a pecuniary compensation for murder,. ,afault, or
other ats of violence, mofi inconsistent with the order of society,
and the safety of individuals, was abolished and such as conI-
mitted thefe;;crimes were punished capitally, or with rigour
adequate.to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 62. Miraei opera Diploma-
tica, i. 29.a. -5. No member of a community was bound to jus-
tify or defend himself by battle, or combat, but if he was charged
with any crime, he could be convi6ted only by the evidence of
witnefes, and the regular course of legal proceedings. Miraeus,
ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375, 349. Ordon. torn. iii. ,65.---6. If any

,*a ·~ ~manll

man fufpeded himself, to be in danger from the malice or en-
mity of another, upon his making oath to that effect before a
magistrate, the person fupefted was bound under a severe
penalty to give security for his peaceable behaviour. D' Ach. xi.
346. This is the fame species of security which is still known
in Scotland under the name of Lawburrows. In France it was
firlt introduced among the inhabitants of communities, and
having been found to contribute considerably towards personal
safety, it was extended to all the other members of the society.
Eftabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. i..cap. 28. ap. Du Cange vie
de,St. Louis, p. I.

II. THE provifonsin the charters of communities concerning

the security of property are not less considerable than thole re-
fpe&ing personal safety. By the ancient law of France no per-
son could'be arrested or 'confined in prison on account of any
private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. p: 72, 80.
If any person was arrested upon any pretext, but his having
been guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out
of the hands of the officers who had seized him. Ordon. ii.
p. 7. Freedom from arrest on account of debt seems likewise
to have been enjoyed in other countries. Gudenus Sylloge
Diplom. 473. In society, while it remained in its rudest and
most simple form, debt seems to have been coriidered as an
obligation merely personal. Men had made ome progress to-
wards refinement before creditors, acquired a right of seizing
the property of their debtors in order to recover payment. The
expedients for this purpose. were all introduced originally in
cornmmunities, and we can trace the gradual progress of them.
,i. The limpleft and most obvious species of security was, that

the

the person who fold any commodity hould receive a pledge
from, hin who bought it, which he restored upon receiving
payment. Of this custom there are veStiges in feveralcharter
of community. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.--Z. When no pledge
was given, and the debtor became refractory or insolvent, the
creditor was allowed to seize his effects with a iSrong. hands
and by his private authority; the citizens of Paris are warrant
ed by the royal mandate,.. ut ubicumque,. et quocumque
modo poterunt,. tantum capiant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam
integrl & plenarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores
exiftant." Ordon, &c. tom. i. p. 6. This rude practice, suit-
able only to the violence of a state of nature, was tolerated
longer than one can conceive to be poflible in any. society,
where laws and order were at all known.: The ordonance
authorizing it was ifued, A. D. 1134, and. that which corrects
the law, and prohibits creditors from seizing the effecs- of their
debtors, unless by a warrant from a magistrate, and under his
infpetion, was not published until the year 1351. Ordon. tom. ii.
438. It is probable, however, . that. men were taught, by ob-
serving the disorders which the formermode of: proceeding oc.
cafioned, to correct it in practice long before a remedy. was
provided by.a law'to that effect. Every discerning reader will
apply this observation tol, many. other customs. and.. practices
which I have mentioned. New customs are .not, always to be
afcribed.to the laws which authorize them. These statutes only.
give a legal fantdion to such things as the experience of mankind
has previously found to be proper and beneficial.---3. As. soon
as the interposition of the magistrate became requisite, regular.
provision was made for attaching or difiraining the moveable
effeCts of a debtor and if his moveables were not ffcient to

difcharg.

N

discharge the debt, his immoveable property, or estate in land
was liable to the fame distress, and was fold for the benefit of
'his creditor. D'Ach. ix.' p. 184, 85. xi. p. 348. 380. As
this regulation' afforded the most compleat security to the cre-
ditor, it was confidered as o severe, that humanity pointed
out everal limitations in the execution of it. Creditors were
prohibited from eizihg the wearing apparel of their debtors,
their beds, the door 'of their house, their instruments of hus-
bandry,' &c. D'Ach. x. 184. xi. 377. Upon the fame princi-
ples, when the power of: distraining effecs became- more
general, -thehorfe' aid arms of a gentleman could' not be seized,
D'Ach. ix. 85.' As Huinting was the favourite amusement of
martial nobles, the Emrperor' Lodovicus Pius prohibited the
seizing of a hawk on account of any composition or debt.
Capitul. lib. iv. § '. But' if the debtor had no other move.
ables, even there privileged articles might be seized.- -r4. In
order to render the security of property compleat within a com-
munity, every person who was admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or'bislld a hoUe, or to purchate lands, within
its precints, 6r' at leait.t6 bring'into the town a considerable
portion of his moveables per qte Juftitiari posit, si quid fortein
eumquereleevenerit. D' Ach. xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367. Libertatea
S. Georgii de.Efperanchia. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p.' z6.--
5. That security might'beas'perfet as pofible; in Come towns
the members of the community' eem to have been bound for.
each other. D' Ach.- x. 644.-6. All questions with refped to:
property were tried within the community, by magistrates and
judges, which the citizens elected or appointed. Their deci.
sions were more equal and fixed than the sentences which de-
pended on the capricious and arbitrary will of a baron who

thought
a56

thought himself superior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644, 646. xi.
344. & paflim. Ordon. iii, 204.- 7. No member of a commu-
nity could be burdened by any arbitrary tax ;,for the superior
lord who granted the charter of community, accepted of a fixed
census or duty in lieu of all demands. Ordon. t. iii. 204. Li-
bertates de Calma. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. . p. 19. Libert.
St. Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could the mem-
bers of a community be distressed by an unequal imposition of the
fum to be levied on the community. Regulations are inserted
in the charters of some communities concerning the method of
determining the quota of any tax to be levied on each inhabitant.
D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis published an ordonance concern-
ing this matter, which extended to all the communities. Ordon.
t. i. zi6. These regulations are extremely favourable to li-
berty, as they vest the power of proportioning the taxes in a cer-
tain number of citizens chosen out of each paiilh, who were
bound by solemn oath to decide according to jufice.-That the
more perfet security of property was one great object of those
who instituted communities, we learn, not only from the
ratnre of the thing, but from the express words of several
charters, of which I hall only mention that granted by Alienor,
Queen of England and Dutchess of Guienne, to the community
of Poitiers, " ut fua propria melius defendere pofint, & magis
integrd cuftodire." Du Cange voc. Communia, v. ii. p. 863.--
Snch are some of the capital regulations eftablilhed in communi-
ties during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. These may be
confidered as the first rudiments of law and order, and contributed
greatly to introduce regular government among all the membezr
of society. As Soon as communities were instituted, high senti-
ments of liberty, began to appear. When Hmbert, lord of

Vol.. I. L 1 Beaujeu,

Beaujeu, uipon granting a charter of cotmmuniity to the town of
Belleville, exated of tile inhabitants an oath's fidelity to hit-
self and successors, they stipulated, 'on their part, that he hould
swear to maintaih their ftanchifes and liberties; and for lleir
greater security, they obliged hit to bring :twenty gehtletnir to
take the faine oath, ad to be bound together with hirn: 'D'Ach,
ix. 183. In the fame manner the lord of Moitens in Daujhirie
produced a certain number of perfols as his sureties for the ob-
'fevation of the article contained in the charter of c6ntounity
to that town. 'rhefe were bound to surrender themifelves pfiL
foners to the inhabitants of Moirens, if their liee lord: fnould Vi-.
late any of their franchises, and they promised to refnain in ciit.
tody until he hould grant them redress. i-ift. de Dauphine,
torm. p. p.. If the imayor or chief imagifttate ofa totn did
any ihjry to a citizen, he .was obliged to give seCurity; for hib
appearance in judgment in the fame imanner a a private perbh;
arid if ass; as liable to the famie pehalty. D'Ach. ix. 83.
These are ideas 6f equality ufcoimmon in the feudal times.. Con.

uniite' we o favourable to fredom, that 'they *iee diin-

girtiehd by the namne of Libtrttes.' Db Cange, v. i.1 p. '83.
They were at 'first: extreme'ly diotib to the nobies, who fdeftai
what a check they rtuit piove to ther pb'owe and domindtioh.
hibert Abbot: of' okeit call! tlem execrhable invei-n:,1 by
which, contrary to' law aid jlce, *i*es Withdrew ihetfiy...
from thiat obedience which 'tley'orWe'd. to thelr hihitris. Ti
Cange, ib, 862. The zeal \Witht which ome'of the nobli arnd
powerful ecclefiafticks opposed the eblifliment ofl dommnu-
nitles, and endeavbutied tb 'clhliimfribt kheir priJileges was
extraordilhary. 'A 'Ytiking iffflic6 f his oeiurs ih th dtontef
ietween ithlie h acd
bi ' of Reims, ad 'the inhabitBnts fs lthat

comnmunity.
258

community. It was tle. chief business of every rchbifhopi
during a considerable time, to abridge the rights and jurifdidioo
of the community; and the great objec of the citizens, especially
when the fee was vacant, to maintain, to recover, and to extend
their jurifdifion. Hifloire civile & politique de In ville de Reims
par M. Anquetil. tom. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concerning the ate of

cities, and the condition of their inhabitants, are confirmed by
innumerable paifages in the historians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that ome cities of the first
order were in a better slate, and enjoyed a fperior degree of
liberty. Under the Roman government, the municipal govern-
ment established in cities was extremely favourable to liberty.
The jurifdition of the enate in each corporation, and the pri-
vileges of the citizens, were both extensive. There is reason to
believe, that ome of the greater cities which escaped the deftruc-
tive rage of the barbarous nations, fill retained their ancient
form of government, at least in a great measure. They were
governed by a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom
they themselves elected. Very strong presumptions in favour
of this opinion are produced by M. l'Abbe De Bos. ift.
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. 18, &c. tom. ii. p. 524.
edit. 1742. It appears from rome of the charters of communi-
ties to cities, granted in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries;
that they only confirm the privileges poffeied by the inhabitants
previous to the establishment of the community. D'Acher. Spe-
cileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed their privileges as
having po0efsed them without interruption from the times of
the Romans. Hist. Crit. de la Mon. Franc, tom. ii. p. 33g.' But
the number of cities which enjoyed such immunities was o

L 2 fiall,

£59

small, as in no degree to diminish the force of my conclusions
in the text.

NOTE XVII. ScT. I. p.34.

.HAvING given a full account of the eftablilhment as well as

effects of communities in Italy and France, it will be necefary to
enquire with ome attention into the progress of cities and of mu-
nicipal government in Germany. The ancient Germans had
no cities. Even in their hamlets or villages they did not build
their houses contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
cap: 6. They confidered it as a badge of servitude to be
obliged to dwell in a city surrounded with walls. When one
of their tribes had haken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having recovered li-
berty, to demolish the walls of a town which the Romans had
built in their country. Even the fiercest animals, said they, lose
their spirit and courage when they are confined. Tac. Hitor.
lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built several cities of note on the
banks of the Rhine. But in all the vast countries from that
river to the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly one city pre-
vious to the ninth century of the Christian era. Conringius
Exercitatio de Urbibus Germanie Oper. vol. i. §. 25, 27. 3r,
&c. Heineccifis differs from Conringius with refped to this.
But even after allowing to his arguments and authorities their ut-
most force, they prove only that there were a few places in those
extensive regions on which some historians have bestowed the
name of towns. Elem. Jur. German. lib. i. §. oz. Under
Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his Family, as the political
Rate of Germany began to improve, several cities were founded,

and
260

and men became accustomed to aflociate and to live together in
one place. Charlemagne founded two archbifhopricks and nine
bifhopicks in the most considerable towns of Germany. Aub.
Miraei Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. 16. His fucceflors increaed
the number of these and as the biflops fixed their residence in
there cities, and performed religious fundtions there, that in-
duced many people to fettle in them. Conring. ibid. §. 48.
But Henry, firnamed the Fowler, who began his reign A. D.
920, must be confidered as the great founder of the cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infested by the incursions
of the Hungarians and other barbarous people. In order to op-
pose them, Henry encouraged his fubjedts to fettle in cities
which lie surrounded with walls and towers. He enjoined or
persuaded a certain proportion of the nobility to fix their refi-
dence in the towns, and thus rendered the condition of citizens
more honourable than it had been formerly. Wittikindus
Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. §. 82. From this period the num-
ber of cities continued to encreafe, and they became more popu-
lous and more wealthy. But cities were ill destitute of muni-
cipal liberty or jurifdition. Such of them as were situated in
the Imperial demesnes, were subjet to the Emperors, and their
Conites, Mi, and other judges presided in them, and dispensed
justice. Towns situated on the estate of a baron, were part of
his fief, and he or his officers exercised a similar jurifdidtion in
them. Conring. ibid. §. 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur. Germ.
lib. i. . 104. The Germans borrowed the infitution of com-
munities from the Italians. Knipfchildius Tradatug Politico.
HiRor. Jurid. de Civitatum Imperialium Juribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5. N°. 23. Frederick Barbarofla was the first Emperor who,
from the' fame political consideration ;thar influenced Liewis the

Gross,

Gross, multiplied communities in order to abridge the power of
the nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de 1' Hiftoire & du Droit.Publique
d' Allenagne, 4to. p. 297. From the reign of Henry the
Fowler, to the time when the German cities acquired full pof-
feflion of their immunities, various circumstances contributed to
their increase. The eftabliflhment of bifhopricks (already men-
tioned) and the building of cathedrals, naturally induced many
people to fettle here. It became the custom to hold councils and
courts of judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well as, civil,
in cities. In the eleventh century, many slaves were enfran-
chifed, the greater part of which fettled in cities. Several mines
were discovered and wrought in different provinces, which drew
together fich a concourse of people, as gave rife to several cities.
Conring. §. Io5. The cities began in the thirteenth century to
form leagues for their mutial defence, and for repressing the
disorders occasioned by the private wars among the barons, as
well as by their exa6tions. This rendered the condition of the
inhabitants of cities more secure than that of any order of men,
and allured many: to become members of their communities.
Conring. 94. There were inhabitants of three different,
ranks m the towns of Germany. The nobles, or familiae, the,
citizens, or liberi, and the artizans who were slaves, or homnines
propiii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29. No. 3. Henry V. who
began his reign A. D. i1 o6, infranchifed the slaves who were
artisans or inhabitants in several rowns, and gave them the rank
of citizens, or liberi. Pfeffel, p. 254. Knipfeh. lib. ii. c.,29.
N°. I13, 119. Though the cities in Germany did not acquire
liberty so early as those in France, they extended their privileges
much farther. All tle, Imperial and free citiesi the number of.
which, is confiderablq, acquired the full right of being immne-

diate

'dite; by 'I1ich' tim 'in' the German' jurifiprudence, w ar to
underfland, that t'hey are 'subje&t to the Empire ilone,: nd pbfle'fs
within their own lrecinds all th

t tights 'of compleat and inde-

pendant sovereignty. The various privileges of the Imperial
'cities, the great guardians of the Germanic liberties, are enume-
rated by Knipfchid, tb;.:ii. The great articles atre' 'enerally
known, and it w6uld b improper t enter into any difouifition
concerning minute particulars.

iiii

TH Spai(sh historians are. almost entirely silent c9ncerning

,the originjand progress of commt)nities in that kingdom; .fb
that Ii cnnot fix withr'any degree bf.certqinty the time and. man-
ner of their'!firt introduction there, It appears, however,: fromi
Mariana, vol. ii. p. 2zi. fol, Haga 1736, that in the year 350,
eIghteen. cities had. obtaided h feat .in' the .

C rtes.of CaRile.

From the account which',flal be, giv'n of thair congtitutioji And
pretensions, Se&t;Ii ~of this volume, itLis evident thait tleir
privileges and sori of government were tie fame with tlofe of
the other feudal corporations; and this,; as well as the perfec
similarity of pblitical inftiiutions and trabflAionhb in'all' the;'feu
dal kingdors, may .leadit.u to .concludb,& thntrcdmmunities were
introduced there in the fame manner, and probably hout th e fanme
ltime, as in the other nations of Europe. In Aragon, asT:lhall have oc
cation to observe in ;a fibfequent note, cities seem early to have ac-
quired extenfitv immunities, togeter'wilth' a fre ;n: the tcginn-
-tre. In the year 8, the citizens of Saragofla had not only

attained

attained political liberty, but they were declared to be of equal
rank with the nobles of the second class; and many other im-
munities, unknown to persons in their rank of life in other parts
of Europe, were conferred upon them. Zurita Anales de Ara-
gon, tom. i. p. 44. In England, tne eftablithment of communi-
ties or corporations was polterior to the Conquest. The practice
was borrowed from France, and the privileges granted by the
crown were perfectly similar to those which I have enumerated.
But as this part of history is well known to most of my readers,
I shall, without entering into any critical or minute difcuflion,
refer them to authors who have fully illustrated this interesting
point in the Englilh hiftRry. Brady's teatife of Boroughs.
Madox Firma Burgi, chap. i. se&t. ix. Hume's History of
England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not improbable that
some of the towns; in England were formed inito! corporations,
under; the Saxon Kings, and that the charters granted by the
Kings of the Norman race were not chatters of enfranchisement
from a late of slavery, but a confirmation of privileges which
they already enjoyed, See Lord Lyttleton's History 'of Henry II.
vol. ii. p. 317;.) .,Thie English cities, however, were very. incon-
fiderable in .the twelfth' century. A clear proof of this occurs in
the history to which I last I referred. Fitzftephen, a contempo-
rary author, gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of. Henry II; :and the terms in which he speaks of its trade,
its wealth, and the fplendbut of its inhabitants, would fugge no
inadequate idea. of'its state at present, when it is the greateit
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas of grandeur and
magnificence are merely comparative. It appears from a con-
lempn-ary author, Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London,, who

. -

: had
z64

,had good opportunity of bei.ng well informed, that tlis city, of
..which itzftephen gives such a pompous account, contained no
more than forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 315, 316. The
other cities were fmnall in proportion, and in no condition to ex-
tqrt .ay extensive privileges. That tle constitution of the bo-
;.roFghs .in .Scotland, in,many .circumstances, resembled that of the
towrs in France and ;Tgland, is manifest from the Leges Burgo-
r,um ainnexed .to the Regiam Majeftatem.

N OT,E XIX. .S C.T. I. ,p. 39.

SOON after te introduaion of the third estate into te na-

tional council, the spirit of liberty which. that excited in France
began o produce conspicuous effets. In several provinces of
Franqe, the o biJ,ity and commnunities formed afIociations,
.w,herelby they bound temfclyves ,5o defend their rights and ,d'.
,vileges ,gainft the formidaple and arbitary proceedings :of..le
,Jing. The ,Count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy,?f
on .ps these aciations, dated in the yaar 1 34, .tee. ,yeors
after tle adnmiflon of the ,deputies. from towns nto .t(he ;tatgs
Genpral. , ioire ,de lapcien gouvernement e la France,
tom. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which the peQple ,ferted.and
,,repared to maintain their rights, obliged their fovereignls to
espea them. .Six years after this association, Philip the,Log
issued a writ of fummnns to the community 9f Narbonne, in tle
following ,erms: " Philip, by the race, &c. to our well-
beloved, &c. As we defirc with all our heart, gnd above all
otoler tlhigs, to govern our kingdom ,and people in peace nnd
,tranqullity, by tlhe help of God; and to.reform our said king-
dom,in so far as it ands in need thereof, for the publick good,

VOL. 1. M in ald

1

and for the benefit of our subjeCts, who in times pars have been
aggrieved and oppreffd in diverse manners by the malice of
sundry persons, as we have learned by common report, as well as
by the information of good men worthy of credit, and we having
determined in our council which we have called to meet in our good
city, &c. to give redress to the utmost of our power, by all ways and
means poflible, according to reason and justice, and willing that
this Ihould be done with solemnity and deliberation by the advice of
the prelates, barons, and good towns of our realm, and particularly
of' you, and that it should be tranfa&ed agreeably to the will of
God, and for the good of our people, therefore we command,"
&c. Mably, obfervat. ii. App. p. 386. I shall allow these to
be only the formal words of a publick and legal stile, but the ideas
are singular, and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could expet in that age. A popular monarch of Great Britain
could hardly address himself to parliament, in terms more fa-
vourable to public liberty. There occurs in the History of
France a triking instance of the progress which the principles
of liberty had made in that kingdom, and of the influence which
the deputies of towns had acquired in the States General. Dur-
ing the calamities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the States General
made a bold effort to extend their own privileges and jurif-
diction. The regulations established by the States held A. D.
1355, concerning the mode of levying taxes, the administration
of which they vested not in the crown, but in commifloners
appointed by the States concerning the coining of money; con-
cerning the redress of the grievance of purveyance concerning
the regular administration of jutice; are much more suitable to
the genius of a republican government than that of a feudal

monarchy.
a66

monarchy. This curious itatute is publified, Ordon. t. iii, p. 9.
Such as have not an opportunity to confilt that large collect ion
will find an abridgement of it, Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix.
p. 130. or in Hiftoire de Boulainv. torn. ii. 213. The French hliRo-
rians represent the bilhop of Laon, and Marcel Provotl of thie mer-
chants of Paris, who had the chief direction of this assembly, an
seditious tribunes, violent, interested, ambitious, and aiming at
innovations subversive of the constitution and government of
their country. That may have been the cafe, but there men pof-
sessed the confidence of the people; and the measures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable, plainly prove that the
spirit of liberty had spread wonderfully, and that the ideas which
then prevailed in France concerning government were extremely
liberal. The States General held at Paris A. D. 1355, consisted
of about eight hundred members, and above one half of these
were deputies from towns. M. Secoufe Pref. a Ordon. tom. iii.
p. 48. It appears that in all the different aflemblies of the
States, held during the reign of John, the representatives of
towns had great influence, and in every refpet the third State
was confidered as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other
two. Ibid. pafim. These spirited efforts were made in France
long before the House of Commons in England acquired any
considerable influence in the legislature. As the feudal system was
carried to its utmost height in France sooner than in England,
so it began to decline sooner in the former than in the latter king-
dom. In England, almost all attempts to establish or to extend
the liberty of the people have been successful in France they
have proved unfortunate. What were the accidental events, or
political causes which occasioned this difference, it is not my pre-
ent business to enquire.

267
Mm 2

NOTE

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p. 41.

IN a former note, N VIII. I have enquired into the condi-

tion of that part of the people which was employed in agricul-
ture, and have represented the various hardlhips and calamities
of their ituation. When charters of liberty and manumiflion
were granted to such persons, they contained four concefions
corresponding to- the four capital grievances to which men in a
slate of servitude are subjed. i. The riglit of disposing of
their persons by sale or grant was rlinquihfed. z. Power was
given to them of conveying their property and effects by will
or any other legal deed. Or if they happened to die infefteit,
it was provided that their property flould go to their lawful
heirs in the fame manner as the property of other persons.
3. The services and taxes which they owed to their filperior of'
liege Lord, which were formerly arbitrary and' impofled at plea-
sure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They were allowed the 'pri-
vilege of marrying whatever person they clcfe, as formerly they
could' ontrat no marriage withbut their Lrd's primillion
and with no person but one 6fhis slaves. All th/fe'particulars
are found united in the charter granited Habitatoribus' Monti-.
Britonis. A. D. 1376. Hilt. de Dauphine, torn. i. p 81,. I lany
circumstances concurred with those which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance frorh that retched ltate.
The gentle spirit of the Christian religion, together *ith the'ddc-.
trines which it teaches, concerning the original equality of man.
kind, as well as the impartial eye with which the Alitighty re-
gards men of every condition, and admits them to a' partiipa.
tion of his benefits,' are inconfilt'nt' with servitude. But in
this,. as in many other instances, confideratiohs of interest, arid:

the
263

P'R O O F S A N'D, I l'iL U S T RAT, I 0NS. 26.

tle maxims of faife policy led men. to a conduc' inconsistent with
their principles. They were o sensible, however, of the incon-
liftency, that to set their' fellow Christians at ,liherty, from
frvitude as deemed an a'& of piety highly, meritorious and
acceptable to heaven. The humane spirit of the Christian re-
ligion struggled with the maxims and manners of the world,
and contributed more than any, other circumstance to introduce'
the practice of manumiflion.. When Pope. Gregory the Greati
wlio ourifhed; toward the end' of the sixth cettury, granted
liberty to some of his flavesj he gives this reason for it " Cum
redemptor nofer,' totius coriditoi natura, ad hoc popitiatus
humanam carnem voluerit afnliere, tit divinitati's fuse gratiai
dirempto (quo tenebamu 'captivi) vihetilo priftina rios refti.
tderet lib'ertati; falubriter agititr, si honiihes, qoB ab. initid
liberos natura protulit, 8 jus gentiuri'jugo fitbftitiit' fervitutil
in ea, iua nati 'fueraht, nmarihtiitenti ' beineficid' libefta'tt r'dl.
daintur. ' Gregr. M'Iagn. a'p. P6tgli'ff:''ib. i:.; C. I

, §. Sevi r' '

laws or charters founded' on reafddis ; ltildr' tb thib, a' e p0-'
duced by te fame author. Acordingly a grea't part' of'thli
charters of' iiahurhldion jtdv'vius' to' th'd' reigti' of' Louis X ate
granted pro aiiore' det, 'prA fitedi'l'aniaiti; & pro' riereede
anima;. Miifrt. Afitfq. if.al. ' i."'p 849; :8^,. ;iu Cange,
vdc. hahufttiio.' The britrality of intnanumiflon was exedcttd!
ili a church; a' a :religi6is folomhit, The perbil to be et free
wasled round'the' geat althr with iat;tdoth in his hand he t6ook
hold of the horns ds the altaf, dil' ltlie':- the foleAin *dwtddl cord-
ferring liberty were prdndtirned. DWCatng, 'Ib'.i'vb. Iv.; p 467'
.I shall tratfcribe a part of a' charterbf madu'tiiffon grihted'
A: D. 'o1056; botli a :ltacontairis a still account P tlie ceebio-.
nies used in this form of imaiRitnfiion and' as a f¢ecimn-;' of:the

imperfet

s

imperfea knowledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous age.
It is granted by Willa the widow of Hugo the Duke and Mar-
quis, in favour of Cleriza one of her slaves. Et ideo nos
Domine Wille indite cometiffe-.libera et abfolvo te Cleriza
filia Uberto- pro timore omnopotentis dei, & remedio lumi-
narie anime bone memoire quandam supra fcripto Domini Ugo-
gloriofllfimo, ut quando ilium Dominus de hac vita migrare,
jufierit, pars iniqua non abeat poteltatem ullam, fed anguelus
Domini nofiri Jesu Chrifti colocare dignitur ilium inter fanEtos
diletos suos; & beatus Petrus princips apoftolorum, qui habed
poteftatem omnium animarum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi
abfolvat .animae ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad ilium janua
paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo pref-
biter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fanti Bartholomaei apoftoli;
traad te tribus vicibus circa altare ipfius ecclesia cum caereo ap-
prehenfum in manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am-
buiate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe deviduntur. Sta-
timq; pro remedio luminarie anime bone memorie quondam
supra fcripto Domni ugo, et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia,
& dixit, Ecce quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq; partem
tibi. placuerit, tam sic supra fcripta leriza, qua nofque tui
heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati, vel procreati fuerit
utriufq; fexus, &c." Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other char-
ters might have been fele&ed, which, in point of grammar or
style, are in no wife superior to this.. Manumiflion was fre-
quently granted on death-bed or by latter.will. As the minds,
of men are at that time awakened to sentiments of humanity,
and piety, there deeds proceeded from religious motives, and
are granted pro rdemptione anima, in order to obtain accep-,
tance with God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470. & voc. fieruus

vol.

vol. vi. p. 451. Another method of obtaining liberty was by
entering into holy orders, or taking the vow in a monastery.
This was permitted for rome time; but so many slaves escaped,
by this means out of the hands of their masters, that the prac-
tice was afterwards restrained, and at last prohibited by the laws
of almost all the nations of Europe. Murat. lb. p. 842. Con-
formably to the fame principles, Princes, on the birth of a son,
or upon any other agreeable event, appointed a certain number
of slaves to be enfranchised, as a testimony of their gratitude to
God for that benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39. There
are several forms of Manumiflion published by Marculfus, and
all of them are founded on religious considerations, in order to
procure the favour of God, or to obtain the forgiveness of their
fins. Lib. * c. 3, 33, 34, edit. Baluz. The fame obferva-
tion holds with respect to the other colletions of Formulae an-
nexed to Marculfus. As sentiments of religion induced ome' to
grant liberty to their fellow-Chriftians who groaned under the
yoke of servitude; so mistaken ideas concerning devotion led'
others to relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived an.
extraordinary refpe6t for the faint who was the patron of any
church or monastery in which he was accustomed to attend re-
ligious worlhip, it was not unusual among men pofefred with
an excess of fuperfiitious reverence, to give up themselves and
their polterity to be the saves of the faint. Mabillon. de re
Diplomat. lib. vi. 632. The oblati or voluntary slaves of
churches or monasteries were very numerous, and may be di-
vided into three different clafles. The first were such as put
themselves and effets under the protection of a particular
church or monastery, binding themselves to defend its privileges
and property against every aggreflor. These were prompted to

do.
I.

21

.do:fo, not erely by devotion, but in order to btain tat fecu-
rity which arose from the proteion ,of the church. They
.were rather vasals than laves, and sometimes perfqns of;nQble
,birth found it prudent to secure the proteion of the church in
..this manner. iPerfoqs of the second. class bound themftlves to
pay an .arual tax or quit-rent out of their efttcstto a church
or monastery. .Betides this, they sometimes Cngaged to per-
form certain services. They were called eeitiales. Tle last
class consisted of such as atually enounced their liberty, and
became..flaves in. tlhe ftr.it and proper fenfeof the ,word. (rhefe
.were called nitnferials, and. enslaved their bodies, ,as some
of the ;charters bear, tlhat they might ;p9tocure.the liberty of
tbeir fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorumr, .,i,b. i. p. ,i.. .§ 6, 7.
;HO, w zlzlqs;lhe clegy ,were to encourage tep,iqns w.!ich
,Ied,to.this petice :wll a.pp.ear from a. clfe in, a :lartr.:by
;which one, gives,,pjimfelfas a. slave to a:.moragery, '" C.nfit
:,mni -carnali ,ingenuitaje, generofius ,extrpmum qupdc ml ,I)ei
.£ervitium,, fcsilicet .qucd :terrena .nob.iti.tas, nultos; p.lerumnq; rviio-
· rum fervos,-facit, fervitus veko Chrifti nobiles..virtutibus red-
dit, nemo autem -fani .capitis virtutibus vitia comparaverit,
claret pro certo eum effe generofiorem, qui fe -Dei fervitio pra-
-buerit proniorem.. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens, &c." Ano-
ther .iuthor fays,. Eigens .magis .ele,.ferv.us ,pei quamn libertus
faeuli,firmiter redens &:.fciens, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft,
fummaque ingenuitas fit. in qua fervitus comparabat.ur C!rifti,
.&c.'Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. iz86, 1287. It does pot
,appear, that the enfranlilfement of slaves was .a fequlent ,prac-
tice . while the feudal system preserved its vigour. On lhe
contrary, .there were laws which set bounds to this.prnctic6.as
detrimental to society. Potgiefl: lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The infe-

rior

373

rior order .of men. owed the recovery of their liberty to tie de-
cline of that ariftocratical polify, which lodged the molt ex-
tensive power in the hands of a few members of the society, and
deprefred all the reft.' When Louis X. iflued his ordonance,
several slaves had been so long accustomed to servitude, and
their minds'were so much debased by that unhappy situation, that
they refused to' accept'-of te liberty hith Was 6fser 'thiem.
D'Ach. SXicel. v. xi. p. '387.; 'Long after the reign' of Louis X.
several of the French nobility continued to aftert their ancient do-
minion over their' slaves. It appears from an or46nance of the
faniotis ertrand de Guefclin Confiable' of France, that't lie
cuftorm of enfranlhifing them' was confidered as a pernicious
innovation. Morice Mem. pour' tetvr des preuves A 'hist.' de
Brt.- torn. ii. p. 0o. In ome instances wvhen the prsedia
slavs were declared to' be freemen, they were still bound to
pefform certain 'ervices to their ancient rmafters; and were kept
in' a tate different from other fubjets,' being reftriaed either
from' purchasing land, or becoming members of 'a conmunity
within the precincs of the manor to which they formerly be-
longed. Martene & Durand. Thefaur. Atlecdbt. vol. i. p. 914.
This, however, seems not to have been comrion;--Tlere' is
no'general law fol the manumiflion of. slaves in the Statute-book
of England similar to that which lias been quoted from the ordo-
nances of'the Kings of France. Though ihe genius of the
Englilh constitution seems eatly to have favoured prtfonal liberty,
perfohal servitude, nevertheless, continued long in England in some
particular places. In the year 15i4, we find a charter of Henry'
VIII. enfranchising two saves belonging to one of his manors.
Rym. Feder. vol. xiii. p. 470. As late as the year 1574, there
there is a comminion from 'Queen Elizabeth with respect to
,VOL., ; N n' ' ' the

the manumiflion of certain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer.
in Obfervat. on the ftautes, &c. p. 25 1.

NOTE XXI. StcT. I. p. 47.

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more fngular than

that of private war. It is a right of so great importance, and pre-
vailed so universally, that the regulations concerning it make a
considerable figure in the fyifem of laws during the middle ages.
\t de MNontefquieu, ho has unravelled so many intricate
points in feudal jutliprudence, and thrown light on so many
customs formerly obscure and unintelligible, was not led by his
fubiect to confider this. I shall therefore give a more minute
account of the customs and regulations which directed a practice
so contrary to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. I. Among the ancient Germans, as
well as other natio:-s in a similar state of society, the right of
avenging injuries was a private and personal right, exercised by
force of arms, without any reference to an umpire, or any ap-
peal to a magistrate for decision. The clearest proofs of this
were produced Note VL 2. This practice fubfited among the
barbarous nations after their settlement in the provinces of the
Empire which they conquered; and as the causes of dissention
among them multiplied, their family feuds and private wars
became more frequent. Proofs of this occur in their early his-
torians. Greg. Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. 18. lib. x.
c. 7. ard likewise in the codes of their laws. It was
not only allowable for the relations to avenge the injuries of
their family, but it ''as incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quem cunque hereditas terra per-
veneit, ad illum veftis bellica id eft lorica & ultio proximi,

&S

& folatio leudis, debet pertinere. tit. vi. . . ap. Lindenbr.
Leg. Salic. tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. i4. § to.-
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble birth, had
the right of private war. All disputes among slaves, vil-
lani, the inhabitants of towns, and freemen of inferior con-
dition, were decided in the courts of jutlicc. All di!putcs be-
tween gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were terminated
in the ame manner. The right of private war supposed nobi-
lity of birth, and equality of rank in the contending parties.
Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beau. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon. des
Rois de France, tom. ii. 395. §. xvii. 508. . xv, &c. The
dignified ecclefiafticks likewise claimed and exercised the right
of private war; but as it was not altogether decent for them to
prosecute quarrels in person, advocati or vltd.mes were chosen
by the several monasteries and bilhopricks. These were com-
monly men of high rank and reputation, who became the pro-
tectors of the churches and convents by whom they were
elected; espoused their quarrels, and fought their battles; armis
omnia qu erant. ecclefiae viriliter defendebant, et vigilanter
protegebant. Bruffel Usage des fiefs, tom. i. p. 144. Du
Cange voc. advoc-atzs. On many occasions, the martial ideas
to which ecclefiafticks of noble birth were accustomed, made
them forget the pacifick spirit of their profe.Tion, and led them
into the field in person at the head of their vasSals, " flamma,
ferro, cade, poffelTiones ecclefiarum pralati defendebant."
Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange. Ib. p. 179.-4. It was not every
injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make war
upon his adversary. Atrocious as of violence, insults ad
affrots publicly conmmitted, were legal and permitted motives
for taking arms against the authors of them. Such crimes as
are now punilhcd capitally in civilized natio.s, at that time
justified plivate hotilities. Ecaurnan. ch. lix. Du Ca,.ge

N n 2 Di fllt.

-75

Dissert. xxix. fur Joinville, p. 33t; But though the avenging
of injuries was. the only motive that could legally authorize a
private war, yet disputes concerning civil property, often gave
rife to hostilities, and were terminated by the sword. Du Cange
Dissert. p. 332.- -5. All persons present when any quarrel
arose, or any at of violence, was committed, were included in
the war which it occasioned; for it was supposed to be im-
possible for any man in such a situation, to remain neutral,
without taking fide with one or other of the contending
parties. Beauman. .p. 300.-6. All the kindred of the two
principals in the war were included in it, and obliged to
espouse the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they
were conneced. Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded on
the maxim of the ancient Germans, " fufcipere tam inimici-
tias feu patris, feu propinqui, quam amicitias, neceffe eft ;" a
maxim natural to all rude and simple nations, among which
the form of society, and political union strengthens such a fen-
timent. The method of ascertaining the degree of affinity
which obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of a kipfman
was curious. While the church prohibited the marriage of per-
sons within te seventh degree of affinity, the vengeance of
private war extended as far as this absurd prohibition, and all
who had such a remote connection with any of the principals
were involved in the calamities of war. But when the church
relaxed. somewhat of its rigour, and did not extend its prohibi-
tion of marrying beyond the fourth degree of affinity, the fame
reftrition took place in the conduct of private war. Beauman.
303. Du Cange Dissert. 333.-7. A private war could not
be carried on between two full brothers, because both have
the fame common kindred, and consequently neither have any
persons bound to Rtand by him against the other, in the contest;
but two brothers of the half blood might wage war, because

each
276

each of them has a diftina kindred. Beauman. p. 299.-8. Tile
vaflals of each principal in any private war were involved in
the contest, because by the feudal maxims they were bound to
take arms in defence of the chieftain of whom they held, and
to allift him in every quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feudal
tenures were introduced, and this artificial connection was efla-
blilhed between vassals and the baron of whom they held, vaflals
came to be confidered as in the fame ltate with relations. Beau-
man. 303.-9. Private wars were very frequent for several
centuries. Nothing contributed more to increase those disorders
in government, ad that ferocity of manners which reduced the
nations of Europe to that wretched state which diflinguilhed the
period of hiflory which I am reviewing. Nothing was such an
obstacle to the introduction of a regular administration of justice.
Nothing could more effectually discourage industry, or retard
the progress and cultivation of the arts of peace. Private wars
were carried on with all the deftrutive rage, which is to be
dreaded from violent resentment when armed with force, and
authorised by law. It appears from the laws prohibiting or
reitraining the exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion of
the most barbarous enemy could not be more desolating to a
country, or more fatal to its inhabitants, than those intestine
wars. Ordon. t. i. p. 701. tom. ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The
contemporary historians describe the excees committed in pro-
fecution of there quarrels, in such terms, as excite aonifllment
and horror. I hall mention only one pafflge from the history
of the Holy War, by Guibert, Abbot of Nogent: " Erat eo tem-
pore maximis ad invicem hoftilitatibus, totius Francorum regi
fadta turbatio; crebra ubiq; latrocinia, viarum obfefio audie-
bantur paflim, immo fiebant incendia infinita; nullis prater sola
& indomita cupiditate exiftentibus caufis extruebantur prxlia;

&

277

& ut brevi totum claudam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum fubja-
cebat, nufquam attendendo cujus effet, praeda patebat. Gefta
Dei per Francos, vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus collected the chief regulations which custom

had eftablified concerning the right and exercise of private war,
I (hall enumerate in chronological order the various expedients
employed to abolish or restrain this fatal custom. . The first
expedient employed by the civil magistrate in order to set some
bounds to the violence of private'revenge, was the fixing by law
the fine or composition to be paid for each different crime. The
injured person was originally the sole judge concerning the na-
ture of the wrong which he had suffered,. the degree of vengeance
which he should exat, as well as the species of attonement or
reparation with which he hould reft satisfied. Resentment be-
came of course as implacable as it was fierce. It was:often a point
of' honour not to forgive, nor to be reconciled. This made it
neceflary to fix those compositions which make o great a figure
in the laws of: barbarous nations; The nature of crimes and of-
fences was estimated by the magistrate, and the film due to the
person offended was ascertained with a minute, and ofieh a whim-
fical accuracy. Rotharis. the legislator of the Lombards, who
reigned about the middle of the seventh century, difeovers his
intention both in ascertaining the composition to be paid by
the offender, and in increasing its value; it is, fays he, that the
enmity may be extinguished, the prosecution may cease, and
peace may be restored. Leg. Langob. lib. i. tit. 7. §. o.--
2. About the beginning of the ninth century, Charlemagne
struck at the root of the evil, and enacted, " That when any
person had been guilty of a crime, or had committed an outrage,
he should immediately submit to the penance which the church

imposed

iippofed, ald offer to pay the composition which the law pre-
fCrib4d and if the injured person or his kindred should refu(se
tp accept of this, and prefuine to avenge themselves by force of
arp, their lands and properties ihould be forfeited. Capitul.
A. D, $Q2, edit. Balu;. vol .

i. 371-3. But in this, as well as

in. Qther regulation, tle genius of Charlemagne advanced be-
fore. the spirit of bij age. The ideas of his contemporaries con-
cqrjihg regular go.vernment were too imporfe&, and their man-
ners too fierce to fnbmit to. this law. Private wars, with all the
ca!lpitie wbilh they occafionled, became more frequent than
ever .ft¢e the 4teth Qs that great monarch, His fucceflbrs were
unable to, reftra.i them. The. churchJ found it necessary to in-
terpofe. The most early of there interpositions now extant, is
towards. the end of the tenth century. In the year 99o, several.
Bishops in the south of France aflembled, and published various
regulations, in. order to set fme. bounds to the violence and
frequency of private wars; if any person within their dio-
ceflfep hould venture to. transgress, they ordained that lie should
be excluded from all Christian privileges. during his life, and;
be denied ChrifRian burial, after his death. Du Mont Corps Di-
plomatique, tom. i. p. 41. These, however, were only prtial
remedies; and; therefore a council was held at Lmoges,; A. DI
994. The bodies of the faints, according to the custom of those
ages, were carried thither; and by there sacred relicks men were
exhorted to lay down their arms, to extinguilh their animofities,
and to swear, that they would not for the future violate the. pub-
lick peace by their private hostilities. Bouquet Recueil des
Hiftor. vol . . p, 4, 147. Several other councils issued degrees
to the fame effet. Du Cange Dissert. 343- 4. But the autho-
rity of conncils, how venerable soever in those. ages, was, not
fuficient to abolillh a custom which flattered the. pride of the

; nobles,

,79

nobles, ard gratified their favourite passions. The evil grew
1o intolerable, that it became necessary to employ fipernatural
means for suppressing it. A bishop of Aquitaine, A. D. o132,
pretended that an angel had appeared to him, and brought him
a writing from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their ho-
filities, and to be reconciled to each other. It was during a sea-
lbn of public calamity that he published this revelation. The
mirds of men were disposed to receive pious impressions; and
xilling to perform any thing in order to avert the wrath of hea-
ven. A general peace and cessation from hostilities took place,
and cortinued for seven years; and a resolution was formed that
no man should in times to come attack or molcft his adversaries
during the leafons let apart for celebrating the great festivals of
the church, or from the evening of Thursday in each week to the
morning of Mo::day in the week enfuir.g, the intervening days
being confidered as particularly holy, our Lord's Palfion having
happened on one of these days, and his Resurrection on another.
A charge in the dispositions of men so sudden, and which pro-
duced a reflution so unexpected, was confidered as miraculous;
and the respite from hostilities which followed upon it, was
called THe Truce of Gd. Glaber. Rodnlphus Hiftor. lib. v. ap.
Bouquet. vol x. p. 59. This, from being a regulation or con-
cert in one kingdom, became a general law in Chritendom, and
was confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and the violaters
were fubiected to the penalty of excommu:ication. Corpus Jur.
Canor. Decretal. jib. i. tit. 3- c. i. Du Cange Gloflar. voc.
Treugca. An act of the council of Toulujes in Roulillon, A. D.
io4t, contairi:g all the flipulatio-s required by the truce of
God, is Fub'ilhed by Dcm de Vic & DGom Vaifette Hiss. de
Languedoc, tom. ii. Preuves, p. zo6. A cessation fi-om hoftili-
ties during three co.mp!eat dys in every wvttk, allowed luch a

co fidcrabl-
28o

considerable space for the pafions of the antagonists to cool, and
for the people to erjoy a respite from the calamities of war, as
well as to take mealures for their own fecur;ty, that, if this
truce of God had been exactly observed, it must have gone far
towards putting an end to private wars. This, however, feeml;
not to have been the cafe; the nobles, disregarded the truce,
prosecuted their quarrels without interruption as formerly: Qua
nimirum tempeftatc, univcrfa provincise adeo devaftationis con-
tinuae importunitate inquietantur, ut e ipla, pro obfervatione
divina pacis, profefTa ficramenta cuftodiantur; Abbas Ufper-
genfis apud Datt de pace imperii publica, p. 1g. N;. 35. The
violent spirit of the nobility could not be restrained by any en-
gagements. The complaints of this were frequent; aud bilhops,
in order to compel them to renew their vows and promises of
ceasing from their private. wars, were obliged to enjoin their
clergy to suspend the performance of divine service, and the
exercise of any religious fun&tion within the parihes of such as
were refractory and obstinate, Hilt. de Langued. par D. D. de
Vie & Vaifette, torn. ii. Preuves, p. 8.--- 5. The people,
eager to obtain relief from. their fuss&ings, called in a second
time a pretended revelation to their aid. Towards the end of the
zwelfth century, a carpenter in Gienne gave out that Jesus Christ
together *?th the 'bessed Virgin had appeared 'to him, and hav-
incrtirhtanded hiinY to et mankind to peace, liad given
him, as a proof of is mission, an image of the Virgin holding her
son in her arnms withi tis inlcription, Lamb of God, wbo takefl
away the fins of t world, give us peace. This low fanatick ad-
d'refed hiifelf to an, ignorant- age, prone to credit what was mar-
velta; He-wasc ieiwvd as an inipited meffengerof God. Many
prelates' nd barons airembled at Puy, and took an oath,

Vo . Oo .at

not only to make peace with 'all their own enemies, but to attack
such as refuted to lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to
their enemies. They formed an association for this purpose, and
aflumed the honourable name of the Brotlerfhood, of God.. Robertus
de Monte Michaele ap. M. de.Lauriere Pref. tm.. i. Ordon. p, a9.
But the influehce of this, superstitious terror or, devotion was not
of long continuance.-6. The civil maglftrate was obliged to ex-
ert his authority in order to check a custom which threatened the
diflolution' of government. ;Pbilip'!Auguftus,, as fome,.i magine
or St. Louis, as is more probable, published an ordonance, Ai .D.
1245,. prohibiting. any perfop to ommence hostilities against the
friends and vassals of his adversary, until forty. days after the
,commillion of the crime or offence which gave rife to the quarrel;
.declaring, that if any man .presumed to. transgress this,fittute,
he nhould/be confiderdd as guilty.of: a.!breach of,publik.peace,
and be tried and punished 'by the judge ordiniry.as a traitor.-, ;- O
don; tom: i.,p. 56.., This was called.tke royal ,.ruce,: ad afforded
.time for thq violence of:refiitmeient to.fubfide, as w.ell as leiure
for the god ofices oftfuchs,w,e;wjllilg .,cprp9f,; the :iffr,-
ence.: The. happy ffets, pfihis. regulatioa f0cn lto b.He been cpno-
fiderable, jfwe may judgefrom the, solicitude of fucc,eding ro-
nairchs to enforce it.-77. In order to restrain the exercise o,pri-
Ya, t war fitll frtherf ,thilip: . ihei ir, t.vad^ hr!jcz ls he
faime cenltury,, A.i D, g9. pni blied aq,o4ona9p ,pm dlpg
.all prinate hplites to ceafe,,yieq. h ,as ,eqgag4i in wqr gajft
the enemies of the Rate. Qrqon. tQ9m.i. p. 3a8,,S90o; ,T is re-
gulation, whi,h seems to be almgft essential to te, eiftence
*and pr efetaiilpfi fQie y ,, as..ftn,renewed ,Jy, ,l fceiqrs,
and .being. ienfor d: byi.th. iegal a utbo;iy,.,procd iaconfid.a-
bi ch.eck . thed¢trive contests of' tie ,.nbls. lBothl;hefe

regulaions,
.82

regulations, introduced sirs in France, were adopted by the other
nations of Europe.-8. The evil, however, wab so inveterate, that
it did not yield t6 all.thefe remedies. No sooner was publick peace
eftablifhd, in any kingdom, than the barons renewed their privati
hostilities. They not only struggled to maintain this perilicious
right, but to secure the exercise of it without any restraint. Upon
the death of Philip the Fair, .the nobles of different provinces ini
France formed affociatiois, and iprefented remonstrances to hi'
successor, demanding the repeal of' several laws, by which he had'
abridged the privileges of their order. Among there, the right of
private war is always mentioned as one of the most valuable and
they clairr, that the redtraint'impofed by the truce of God, the
royal truce,. as well 'as that arising' from the ordonance of' the year
t296, fiould be taken off. In ome inftafices, the two sons of
Philip who mounted the throne flcceflively, eluded their demands;
in others, they' were obliged t6 make conceflions. Ordon. tom. i.
p. 55,5555 557, 6J, 73 The rdohances 'to whichiI here. refer,
are of such length that I cannot insert them, but' they are ex-
tremely curious, and may be peculiarly initructive to an Eng-'
lifl reader, as they throw considerable light on that period of
English history, in which the attempts to circumscribe the .'regal
prerogative were' arried on, not by the people 'struggling for
liberty, but by the nobles contending for power. It is not ne-
ceflary to produce any evidence of the continuance and frequency
of private wars under the fcceflors of Philip .the Fair.----. A
practice somewhat similar to the royal truce was introduced, in
order to strengthen and exteiid it; Bonds of aurance, or m'
tual security, were demanded from the parties at variance, by
which they'obliged themselves to abstain from all hostilities,
either during a time mentioned in the bond, or for eer; and
becarme subjed to heavy penalties,: if they violated this obliga-

O o lion.

a s3

tion. Thee :bonds were sometimes granted volntarily, but mpre
frequently exated by the authority of the civil magiftriatc, ;UpaM
apetitiin from. the'party erlho fefithimfelf;wealkeft; 'themagiftiatn
fummqned-l his adversary .tb atppear!in coiixrti nd!robligid. bi tb
give a boqd of assurance. If, after that, he committed any farther
hoflilities, he became subje6t to. all the penalties of treason. This
restraint on private war was. known ;inl the age of St.l buii .
Rfaabliffemens, liv. i. c. 8.. lIt .was ,freuent,:in IBretagnep>and
what is very remarkable, such bonds of affiranc were: given mu
tually between vasals and the lord of whom they 'hild. 'OliveK de
liflon grantorte to the Duke of Bgetagne,. hi f(oyereign. lMrie
Mem. pour fervir. de preuves;lltlhiftJ .da jBet. to l i.,p ;846v i.;
p. 371. Many examples;of bonds si .aflratwe !nlpter prqyipg.e:
of France are colleeted by Bruffel: tomr; ii p. 856. :The, obls of
gurgundy remonftated against this praStie, and.obtaiedexlmp-
tibn. from it as an encroahnmqnt oQ1. lto t piyilege, of ,their,i orde,,
Ordgp. tor.i. p.;. g8,: TWhi mode ofi'fecurity W.4ys fit intron
duced, jin citiqs,,: aid t l t gqd, :eife s 9fl it hfviolbqfrf'fei ther,%
was etended to the pbl.e,4. See Note XVL .o. The. ¢ca-
mjtie. oqc .efiped by privgte wars,, became at some times ,o;
intolerable,.,:tht te., nob!e.- en.tered into voluntary aqcgatpons
bindi-g thenfelves to referall :mattexs in:difpute, wheher, con,
cerning ckvil! property, )r piointi, of hoour, tt the determingai
tion of tlhe majority of the associates. Morice Mem. pour,
fgrvir de p.ave;a; l!hift. de. Bret. tonm. ii. p. 728.---- . But
ai!l thlefe expedient proving ineffedtual, :Charles VI. A. D. x¢i3,,
ifljed an rdonance epreflr prohibiting private wars) on any
pretext whatsoever,; with power to the judge ordinary t6, com-
pel all, persons to comply with this injunction, and. to punish
fich a Ihould prove refractory or disobedient, by imprisoning
their persons, seizing their good, and appointing the officera

of
284

ofjuftice, MangeNrs s& Gafeurs, o live at free qunrters on their
estate.' If those who Were dirfbedient to thiS edic could not be
perfonnally arefted,, he appoirted their friends aid vaflahl to be
seized, and detdined uiitil they gdve fiutey for keetig the peae,
and he abolifled all laws, uftoms, or privileges whlich might
be' pleaded in opposition o liis ordonance. Ordon. torn. x.
p. 138. How flow is the pdgefs of reafoi ad of civil order!
Regulations wliiclti to tus fppe1 f equitable, dbVious, and fiiple,
requited the efforts of civil ald, ccelefiafichl authority, duiiig
several centuries, to introduce and ettablifh them. Even pof-
terior to this period, Loilid XI. was obliged to abblifn private
wars in Dauphin, by .a partictilar edi, A. 451. Du Cange
diffeit. p. 348.

THIS note would' swell to a disproportional bulk, if 1 hduld

attempt to enquire with the fame rtniite attention into thte pro-
grefs of this pernicious cuftomn in the' other countries f Europe.
In England,. the ides f the Saxons coilcerniiig perfoilal re-
venge, the right of private wars, and the composition due to
the party offended, seem to have been lmulch the fame with those
which prevailed on tile continent. The law of Ina de indti-
cantibus, in the eighth century, Lamb. p. 3 those of AdIlmund
in the tenth century, d homicidio, Lamb. p. 7. & de iii-
ciii's p, 76; and those of Edward the Confessor, in the ele-
venth century, de temporibus & diebus panis, or Treuga Dci,
Lamb. p. 126, are perfedly similar to the ordonaticed of the
French Kings their contemporaries. Tlhe laws of Edward de
pace regis, are still more explicit than those of tile French Mo-
narchs, and, by several provisions in them, discover that a
more perfect police was eflablifhed in England at that period,
Lambard. p. I28. fol. verf. Even after the conquest, private
wars, and the regulations for preventing them, were not lto-

gether

gether unknown, as appears from Madox Formulare Anglica-
num, N°. CXLV. and from the extracts from Domesday Book,
publilhed by Gale Scriptores hist. Britan. p. 759, 777. The well
known clause in the form of an English inditment, which, as an
aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions his having assaulted
a person, who was in the peace of God and of the King, seems to
be borrowed from the Treuga or Pax Dei and the Pax Regis
which I have explained. But after the conquest, the mention of
private wars among the nobility, occurs more rarely in the Eng-
lifh history, than in that of any other European nation, and no
laws concerning them are to be found in the body of their fta-
tutes. Such a change in their own manners, and such a variation
from those of their neighbours is remarkable. Is it to be ascribed
to the extraordinary power which William the Norman acquired
by right of conquest, and transmitted to his successors, which
rendered the execution of justice more vigorous and decisive,
and the jurifdition of the King's court more extensive than
under the Monarchs on the continent ? Or, was it owing to
the settlement of the Normans in England, who having never
adopted the pratice of private war in their own country, abo-
lilhed it in the kingdom which they conquered? It is aerted
in an Ordonance of John King of France, that in all times pait,
persons of every rank in Normandy have been prohibited to
wage war, and the pratice has been deemed unlawful. Ordon.
tom. ii; p. 407. If this fad were certain, it would go far to-
wards explaining the peculiarity which I have mentioned. But
as there are ome Englilh Ads of Parliament, which, according
to the remark of the learned author of the Observations on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, which recite fallhoods, it may
be added, that this is not peculiar to the laws of that country.
Notwithstanding the positive assertion contained in this publick

law
286

law of France, there is good reason for confidering' it as a ltatute
which recites a fallhood. his, however, is not the place for dif-
cuffing that point. It is an inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of an
English antiquarian.

IN Castile, the pernicious pra&ice of private war. prevailed,

and was authorised by the customs and law of the kingdom. Leges
Tauri. tit. 76. cum commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 551. As
the Castilian nobleswere no less turbulent than powerful, their
quarrels and hostilities involved'their conntry in many calamities.
Innumerable proofs of this occur in' Mariana. In Arragon, the
right of private revenge was likewise authorised by law; exercised
in its full extent, and accompanied with the fame unnappy confe-
quences. Hieron. Blanca Comment, de rebus Arag. ap. Schotti.
Hifpan. illulrait. vol. iii .

p. 733. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 1247. Sue-

ros & Obfervancias del ikeyno de Arragon, lib. ix. p. 82. Se-
veralconfederacies between the Kings of Arragon and their no-
bles, for the restoring of peace, founded on the truce of God, are still
extant. Petr. de Mrtca. Marca fivi Limnes Hispanic. App. 303,i 88,
1428. As early as the year 165; wefind i combination of the King
and court of Arragon, in order to abolish the right of private war,
and to punish those who presumed to claim that privilege. Anales
*de Arragon por Zurita, vol.' i.p. 73. ' But the evil was lo invete-
rate, that Charles V. A. D. r5k9. was obliged to publinl a law en-
forcing all former regulations tending to fiipprefs this practice. F-
eros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. 185. b.

THE Lombardsl and other norther nations who. fettled in Italy,

introduced the fame maxips colcerning the right of revenge into
that country, and these were followed by the,fame effeats. As the
progress of the evil was perfectly similar. to what happened in

France,

287

France, the expedients employed to check its career, c to extir-
pate it finally, reiembled those which I have enumerated. Murat.
Ant. Ita!. vol. ii. p. 306.

Is Germa-ny the disorders and calamities occasioned by the right

of private war were greater and more intolerable than in any other
cou-try of Europe. The Imperial authority was so much shaken
and enfeebled by the violence of the civil wars, excited by the con-
tests betv-een the Popes ard the Emperors of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, that not o.ly the nobility but the cities acquired al-
most indeperdant power, and scorned all ubordination and obedi
ence to the laxvs. The frequency ofthefefaa'id or private wars, are
often mentioned i tho German Annal.s and the fatal effects of them
ars mos patrheical!,- delcribed, Datt. de pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap.
v. n. o. s paha. The Germans early adopted the Treuga Dei,
v,hich was rf:t eftablilhed in France. This however, proved but a
temporary and iefftectual remedy. The dilorders multiphed so fast,
and grew so enormous, that they threatened the dissolution of society,
and compelled the Germans to have recourse to the only remedy of
the evil, viz an abbolute prohibition of private wais. The Emperor,
XWilliam, pubhlabed his edict to this purpose, A. D. 1255, an hundred
and sixty years pre vious to the ordonance of Charles VI. in Fiance.
Datt. Lb. i. cap. 4. n-. 20. Butn.either he nor his fuccefl)rs had au-
thority io ecure the observance of it This gave rife to a practice in
Germany,ilhich conveys to us a ftrikirg idea both of the intolerable
calamitiesoccafioned by private wars, and of the feeblenes of goverr-
ment during the th a:.d 3th centuries. The cities ard nobles enter-
ed ito alliances and aflbciations, by which they bound themselves
to maintain :he public peace, ar.d to make war on fufch as
ihould violate it. This was te- uoign:i of the lea.gu of the

Rhine,
2S'

Rhine, of Suabia, and of nary fnaller confederacies diflin-
guillied by various names. The riie and beneficial effels of
there aflbciations are traced by Da.t with great accuracy. Wha:-
ever degree of publick peace, or of regular adminiftation was
prefcrvcd in the Empire from the bginlirg of the twelfth cen-
tury to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these leagues.
During that period, political order, refpea for the laws, together
with the equal adminilration ofjuftice, made considerable progress
in Germany. But the final and perpetual abolition of the right
of private war was not accomplifllcd until A. D. 1495. The
Imperial authority was by that time more firmly etablifled, the
ideas of men with refpedt to government and subordination
were become more juRf. The barbarous and pernicious privi-
lege which the nobles had so long possesed, was declared to be
incompatible with the happiness and existence of society.
In order to terminate any differences which might arise among
the various numbers of the Germanick body, the Imperial cham-
ber was instituted with supreme jurifdiEtion, to judge without
appeal in every queltion brought before it. That court has sub-
sifted since that period, forming a very refpetable tribunal,
of essential importance in the German constitution. Datt, lib. iii.
iv. v. Pfeffel abregC de l'HiRloire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. Sc T. I. p. 56. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enumerate the various

modes of appealing to the justice of God, which superstition in-
troduced during the ages of ignorance. I shall mention only
one, because we have an account of it in a placitum or trial in
the pretence of Charlemagne, from which we may learn the im-

VoL. I. P p perfect

perfect manner in which justice was administered even during
his reign. In the year 775, a contefl arose between the bishop
of Paris ad the abbot of St. Denys, concerning the property
of a fmail abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds and records,
in order to prove the right to be in them. Instead of trying the
authenticity, or confidering the import of these, the point was
referred to the judi:ium cruis. Each produced a person,
who, during the celebration of mass, stood before the cross
with his arms expanded; and he whose representative first be-
came weary, and altered his posture, loft the cause. The person
employed by the bishop on this occasion had less strength or less
spirit than his adversary, and the question was decided in favour
of the abbot. Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a
Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne countenanced such an ab-
surd mode of decision, it is no wonder that other monarchs
should tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu has treated of
the trial by judicial combat at considerable length. The two
talents which distinguish that illustrious author, industry in
:racing all the circumstances of ancient and obscure institutions,
and agac ty in penetrating into the causes and principles which
contributed to establish them, are equally conspicuous in his
obfervatia-s o:i this subject. To these I refer the reader, as
:he¥ contain mo.t of the principles by which I have endea-

:uritd to exp ain this practice. De l'Eprit des Loi:, lib. xxviii.
It feamsr to be probable from the remarks of M. de Montesquieu,
as sell as from the facts produced by Muratori, tom. iii. Dissert.
xx-ii.i tfat t e appeals to the juffice of God by the experi-
rnets .lith re a::d water, &c. were practised by the people

h l:;.ed in th'e difTerent provinces of the Roman Empire,
tctore they l ad recourse to the judicial combat. The judicial
conrba. h...r er, v as the most ancient mode of terminating

any
. -,-1

any controvcrly among the barbarous nations in their original
fittlements. This is cvident from Vellcius Paterculus, lib. ii.
c. 118. who informs us, that all quellions which were decided
among the Romans by legal trial, were terminated among the
Germans by arms. The fame thing appears in the ancient laws
and cuctoms of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. O. Stiernilh I- de Jure
Sueonum & Gothorum vetufto. 4to. Holmiac 16 2. lib. i. c. 7.
It is probable that when the various tribes Ml.;i invadld the
Empire were converted to Chriltianity, the repugnance of the
cuflom of allowing judicial combats to the precepts of religion,
was so glaring, that, for some time, it was abolished, and by
degrees, several circumstances which I have mentioned, led them
to resume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable from a law quoted by Stiern-

houk in the treatise which I have mentioned, that the judicial
combat was originally permitted, in order to determine points
refpeaing the personal characer, or reputation of individuals, and
was afterwards extended not only to criminal cafes, but to questions
concerning property. The words of the law are, " if any man shall
fay to another these reproachful words, you are not a man equal
" to other men," or, " you have not the heart of a man," and
the other shall reply, " I am a man as good as you." Let them
meet on the highway. If he who first gave offence appear,
and the person offended absent himself, let the latter be deemed
worse than he was called; let him not be admitted to give
evidence in judgment either for man or woman, and let him not
have the privilege of making a testament. If the person pffcr:ded
appear, and he who gave the offence be abfc:.t, let him call upon
the other thrice with a loud voice, and make mark upon the
earth, and then let him who absented himself be deemed infa-

P p 2 Il,

291

mous, because he uttered words which he durfl not support.
If both shall appear properly armed, and the perfbrn offended
shall fall in the combat, let a half compensation be paid for his
death. But if the person who gave the offence hall fall, let
it be imputed to his own rashness. The petulance of his tongue
lath been fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without any
compensation being demanded for his death." Lex Uplandica
ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial-people were extremely delicate with
refpea to every thing that' asseted their reputation as soldiers.
By the laws of the Salians, i any man called another a hare, or
accufea him of 'laving left his fhleld in the field of battle, he
was ordained to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4, 6.
By the law of the Lombards if any one called another arga, i. e.
a good for nothing fellow, he might immediately challenge him
to combat. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v. i . By the law of the
Salians, if one called/ another cenitus,'a term of reproach equi-
valent to arga, the fine which he was bound to pay was very
high. Tit. xxxii. § . Paulus Diaconus relates the violent im-
prelion which this reproachful expreflion made upon one of his
countrymen, and the fatal effects with which it was attended. De
Geftis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas concerning the
point of honour, which we are apt to confider as a modern refine-
ment, as well as'the pratice of duelling, to which 'it gave rife, are
derived from the notions of our ancestors, while in a state of focie-
ty very little improved.

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this fubjeat did not lead him

to confider every ciicumftance relative to judicial combats, I
fihall mention some particular facts necefrary for the illustration
of what I have said with respect to them. A remarkable in-

stance

fance occurs of the decision of an abftrat point of law by com-
bat. A question aroe in the tenth century concerning the right
of representation, which was not then fixed, though now uni-
verfally established in every part of Europe. " It was a matter
of doubt and dispute, (faith the historian) whether the sons of a
son ought to be reckoned among the children of the family, and
succeed equally with their uncles, if their father happened to
die while their grandfather was alive. An assembly was called
to deliberate on this point, and it was the.general opinion that
it ought to be remitted to the examination and decision of
judges. But the Emperor following a better course, and desirous
of dealing honourably with his people and nobles, appointed
the matter to be decided by battle between two champions. He
who appeared in behalf of the right of children to represent
their deceased father was victorious; and it was eftablilhed,
by a perpetual decree, that they should hereafter share in the
inheritance.together with their uncles. Wittickindus Corbeins,
lib. Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii. If
we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men to any aftion
more extravagant than this of fettling a point in law by
combat, it must be that of referring the truth or falsehood
of a religious opinion to be decided in the fame manner. To
the disgrace of human reason, it has been capable even of this
extravagance. A question was agitated in Spain in the eleventh
century, whether the Mufarabic Liturgy and ritual which had
been used in the churches of Spain, or that approved of by the
See of Rome, which differed in many particulars. from the
other, contained the form of wor(hip most acceptable to the
Deity. The Spaniards contended zealously for the ritual of
their ancestors. The Popes urged them to receive that to which

they

293

they had given their infallible fancion. A viqlent conte(t arose.
The nobles proposed to decide the controversy by the sword.
The king approved of this method of decision. Two knights in
compleat armour entered the lifts. John Ruys de Matanca,
the champion of the Mufarabic Liturgy, was victorious. But the
Queen and Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, insisted on having the matter submitted to another trial,
and had interest enough to prevail in a request, inconfitent with
the laws of combat, which being confidered as an appeal to
God, the decision ought to have been acquiesced in as final. 4
great fire was kindled. A copy of each Liturgy was cart into
the flames. It was agreed that the book which flood this
proof, and remained untouched, hould be received in all the
churches of Spain. The JMufarabic liturgy triuplhed likeWise
in this trial, and if.we may;bdlieve Rpderigo de T,oledo, remip-
ed unhurt by the fire, when the other was reduced to ashs.
The Qeen and Archbishop had power or art fufficient.tQ,elu.4e
this decision also, and the use of the Mufarabic fprm. of devoton
was permitted .only in certain churches. A determinatin ,o
less extraordinary than the .whole tranfation. R9dr. de
Toledo, quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol. d'Efpagne,
tom. i. p. 1t7. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378.'---
A remarkable proof of the general use of trial by combat, and of
the pradilefion for .that mode of decision occurs in the ,!aws of
the Lombards. It was a custom in the middle ages, that any pr-
son might chufe the law to which he would be fubjeed; and by
the prescriptions of that law he was obliged to regulate his trass-
ations, without being bound to comply with any practice au-
thorized by other codes of law, Persons who had fubjested
themselves 'to the Roman law, and adhered to the ancient jurjf-

prudence,
94

prudence, as far as any knowledge of it was retained in thore
ages of ignorance, were exempted from paying any regard to
the forms of proceedings eftablifled by the laws of the Burgun-
dians, Lombards, and other barbarous people.. But the Emperor
Otho, in direA contradiction to this received maxim, ordained,
" That all persons, under whatever law they lived, even although
it were the Roman law, should be bound to conform to the
edicts concerning tile trial 'by combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii.
tit. 56. '§ .38. While the judicial combat fubifted, proof'by
charters, contracts, or other deeds,'became ineffectual; and even
this species of evidence, calculated to reider the proceedings of
courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When a charter or other
initrument was produced'by one of the parties, his opponent
might challenge it, affirm that it was faire and forged, and
offer to prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. ' 34. It is
true, that among the reasons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on ac-
.'couit 6f which judges might refuse to permit a trial by combat,
'one is, "If the point in cotiteft can be clearly proved or; afcer-
'tained by ther evidence. 'Cotit. de Beauv. ch. '63. p. 823.
'But'thatt egulation'-removed the evil only 'a single ftep. iF.or the
'party who' fufpe6ted that a witnes was about to'depofe in a inan-
ner uifavourable to his cause, might accuse him of being
suborned, give him the lie, and challenge him to combat;
if the witness was vanquished in battle, no other evidence was
admitted, and'the patty by whom'he was summoned to appear
lot liis cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 16. 'S . Leg.'iBurgun'd. tit. 45.
Beauman. h. 6. p. 315. The reason given'for obliging a wit-
ness to accept of a defiance, and to defend himlflf by combat, is
remarkable, and contains the fame idea which is'ftill the foun-
dation of what is called the point of honour i 'forit is just,

that

~95

that if any one affirms that he perfc6tly knows the truth of any
tling,- and offers to give oath upon it, that he (hould not hesitate
to maintain the veracity of his affirmation in combat." Leg. Bur-
gund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was eablifled in every

country of Europe, is a fa& well known, and requires no proof.
That this mode of decision was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it, but from the ear-
lieft writers concerning the practice of law in the different na-
tions of Europe. They treat of this custom at great length; they
enumerate the regulations concerning it with minute accuracy;
and explain them with much solicitude. It made a capital and
extensive article in jurisprudence. There is not any one subjet
in their system of law which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or the
compilers of the Aflifes de Jerusalem seem to have confidered as
of greater importance; and none on which they have bestowed
so much attention. The fame observation will hold with refpe&
to the early authors of other nations. It appears from Madox,
that trials of this kind were so frequent in England, that fines,
paid on these occasions, made no inconsiderable branch of the
King's revenue. Hist. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A very
curious account of a judicial combat between Mefire Robert de
Beaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre Tournemine, in presence of the
duke of Bretagne, A, D. 1385, is published by Morice Mem.
pour fervir de preuves A l'hift. de Bretagne, tom. ii. p. 498.
All the formalities observed in such extraordinary proceedings
are there described more minutely, than in any ancient monu-
ment which I have had an opportunity of confidering. Tourne-
mine was accused by Beaumanoir of having murdered his brother.

The
9.g6

The'former was vanquished, but was saved from being hanged
upon tlie' spot, by the geneiou3 interceflion of his antagonifft. A
good account of the origin of the laws concerning judicial combat,
is published in the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix. c.
8. in Grav. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

TH s mode of trial was so acceptable, that ecclefiaflicks, not-

witlhftanding the prohibitions of tile church, were constrained
not only' to' connive at the praice, but to authorize it. A re-
ma'rkable inftRace of this is'produced by Pafquier Recherches,
lib. iv. c. i, p. 350. The abbot Wittikindus, wliofe words I
have produced' in this note, confidered the determination of a
p6int in law by combat, as the befl and most honourable mode
of decision. In the year 978, a judicial combat was fought in
the presence of the Emperor Henry. The archbishop Aldebert
advifed'him'to terminate a contest which had arisen between two
noblemen of his court, by thiis mode of decision. The van-
quilhed combatant, though a person of high rank, was beheaded
on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc. Merb. chez Bouquet
Recueil des Hifl. torn. x. p . 121. Quefions concerning the
property of churches and monasteries, were decided by combat.
In the year 961, a controversy concerning the church of St.
Medard, whether it belonged to the abbey of Beaulicu, was ter-
minated by judicial combat. Bouquet Recueil des Hit. tom. ix.
p. 729. Ibid. p. 612. 8c. The Emperor Henry I. declares,
that his law authorising the practice of judicial combats,' was
enated with content and applause of many faithful biffops.
Ibid. p. 23T. So remarkably did the martial ideas of those ages
prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon law, which in
other instances had filch credit and authority with ecclefiaticks.
A judicial combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles V.
A. D. 1522. The combatants fought in the Emperor's pretence,

VOL, I. Qq and

297

and the battle was conduted with all the rites prescribed by the
ancient laws of chivalry. The whole tranfadtion is described at
great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. 17. p.
205.

THE last instance which occurs in the hifory of France, of a

judicial combat authorised by the magistrate, was the famous one
between M. Jarnac and M. de la Chailtaignerie, A. D. 547.
A trial by combat was appointed in England, A. D. I571. under
the infpeion of the judges in the court of common pleas; and
though it was. not carried to the fame extremity with the for-
mer. Qeen Elizabeth having interposed her authority, and
enjoined the parties to compound the matter, yet in order to
preserve their honour, the lifts were marked out, and all the forms
previous to the combat were observed with much ceremony.
Spelm. Qloff voc. Canpus,.p. o03. In the year 1631. a judicial
combat was appointed between Donald Lord Rea, and David
Ramsay, Efq; by the authority of the Lord high Constable, and
.Earl Marshal of England; but that quarrel likewise terminated
without bloodshed, being accommodated by Charles I. Another
instance occurs seven years later. Rufhworth in Observations on
the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. S c T. I. p. 62. [Z].

Ttt text contains the great outlines which mark the course

of private and public jurifdidtion in the several nations of Eu-
rope. I Ilall here follow more minutely the various steps of
this progress, as the matter is curious and important enough
to merit this attention. The payment of a fine by way of satis-
fadion to the person or family injured, was the'firft device of a
rude people, in order to check the career of private resentment,
and to extinguill those fiide, or deadly. feuds which were pro-

fecuted
298

fecuted among them with the utmost violence. This ctfom
may be traced back to the ancient Germans. Tacit. de Morib..
.Ger. c. 21. and prevailed among other uncivilized nations.
Many examples of this are colleted by tle ingenious and learn-
ed .author of Historical Law-Trats, vol. i. p. 4. These fines
were ascertained and levied in three different manners. At first
they were fettled by voluntary agreement between the parties at
variance. When their rage began to subside, and they felt tile
bad effets of their continuing in enmity, they came to terms of
concord, and the fatisfation made was called a composition, im.
plying that it was fixed by mutual consent. De 'Esprit des
Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from Come of the more
ancient codes of laws, that when these were compiled matters
till remained in that simple itate. In certain cafes, the person
who had committed an offence was left exposed to the resent-
ment of'thoe whom he had injured, until ,he liould recover
their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. 'i .
§ i. The next mode of levying there fines was by the sentence
of arbiters. An arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem
amicabilis compositor.: lib. ii. c. 4. § o. He could cftimate
the degree of offence with more impartiality than the parties inte-
rcfted, and determine with greater equity what fatisfatioh
ought to be demanded. It is difficult to bring an authentic
proof of a custom previous to the records preserved in any na-
tion of Europe. But one of the Formule Andegavenfes com-
piled in the sixth century, seems to allude to a tranfadtion carried
on not by the authority of a judge, but by the mediation
of arbiters. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 566.
But as an arbiter wanted authority to enforce his decisions,
judges. were appointed with compulsive power to oblige both
parties to acquiesce in their decisions. Previous to this last
ftep, the expedient of paying compositions was an imperfect

Q._q remedy

remedy against the pernicious effects of private resentment. As
soon as this important change was introduced, the magistrate,
putting himself in place of the person injured, ascertained the
composition with which he ought to reft satisfied. Every pof-
fible injury that could occur in the course of human society, was
confidered and etimated, and the compositions due to the per-
son aggrieved were fixed with such minute attention as discovers,
in most cafes, amazing discernment and, delicacy, in ome in-
fances, unaccountable caprice. Beides the composition payable
to the private party, a certain fum, called a fredum, was paid
to the King or ltate, as Tacitus expresses it, or to the fifcus, in
the language of the barbarous laws. Some authors, blending
the refined ideas of modern policy with their reasonings con-
cerning ancient tranfations, have imagined that the fredum
was a compensation due to the community, on account of the
violation of the publick peace. But it is manifestly the price
paid to the magistrate, for the protection which he afforded
against the violence of resentment. The enacting of this was
a considerable ftep towards improvement in criminal jurifpru-
dence. In some of the more ancient codes of laws, the freda
are altogether omitted, or so seldom mentioned, that it is evi-
dent they were but little known. In the latter codes the fredum
is as precisely 'pecified as the eompofition. Capitul. vol. i.
p. 52. In some extraordinary cafes, where it was difficult
to protect the person who had committed violence, the fredum
was augmented. Capitul. vol, i. p. 515. These freda made a
considerable branch in the revenues of the barons; and where-
ever territorial jurisdiCtion was granted, thq royal judges were
prohibited from levying any freda. In exlpaining the nature
of the fredum, I have followed, in a great measure, the opinion
of M. de Montefquielu, though I know that several learned anti-

quarians
.300

quarians have taken the word in a different sense. De 'Esprit
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 2o, &c. The great object of judges was
to compel the one party to give, and the other to accept the
fatisfa&ion prescribed. They multiplied regulations to this pur-
pose, and enforced them by grievous penalties. Leg. Longob.
lib. i. tit,. 9. 34. b. tit. 37. § , . Capitul. vol. i. p. 371.
§ 22. The person who received a composition was obliged to
cease from all farther hostility, and to confirm his reconciliation
with the adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
§ 8. As an additional and more permanent evidence of recon-
ciliation, he was required to grant a bond of security to the per-
son from whom he received a composition, absolving him from
all farther prosecution. Marculfus and the other collectors of
ancient writs have preserved several different forms of fuich
bonds. Marc. lib. 1l. § I8. append. § 3. Form. Sirmondicae,
1 39. The Letters of Slanes, known in the law of Scotland,
are perfectly similar to there bonds of security. By the letters
of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a person who had been mur-
dered, bound themselves, in consideration of an affytbment or
composition paid to them, to forgive, pafl over, and forever for-
get, and in oblivion interr all rancour, malice, revenge, preju-
dice, grudge and resentment, that they have or may conceive
against the aggressor or his posterity, for the crime which
he had committed, and discharge him of all acion, civil or cri-
minal, against him or llis estate, for now and ever. System of Stiles
by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862. In the ancient form of let-
ters of Slanes, the private party not only forgives and forgets,
but pardons and grants remillion of the crime. This pralcice,
Dallas, reasoning according to the principles of his own age,
confiders as an encroachment on the rights of sovereignty, as
none, fays he, could pardon a criminal but the king. Ibid. But
in early and rude times, the prosecution, the punihiment, and.

the.

.Soi

the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of the private person
who was injured. Madox has publilhed two writs, one in the
reign of Edward I. the other in the reign of Edward III. by
which private persons grant a release or pardon of all trespasses,
felonies, robberies, and murders committed. Formul. Anglican.
N. 702, 705. In the last of these instruments, some regard
seems to be paid to the rights of the sovereign, for the pardon
is granted en quant que en nous eft. Even after the authority of
the magistrate is interposed in punishing criminals, the punish-
ment of criminals is long confidered chiefly as a gratification
to the resentment of the persons who have been injured. In
Persia a murderer is frill delivered to the relations of the person
whom he has slain, who put him to death with their own hands.
If they refue to accept of a fum of money as a compenfa-
tion, the sovereign, absolute as he is, cannot pardon the mur-
derer. Tavernier's Voyages, book v. c. 5 and o. By a law in
the kingdom of Aragon as late as the year 1564, the punith-
ment of one condemned to death cannot be mitigated but by con-
sent of the parties who have been injured. Fueros & Obfervan-
cias del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from enmity, which I

have mentioned, any person renewed hostilities, and was guilty
of any violence, either towards the person from whom he had
received a composition, or towards his relations and heirs, this
was deemed a most heinous crime, and punished with extraor-
dinary rigour. It was an at of direc rebellion against the
authority of the magistrate, and was repressed by the interpofi-
tion of all his power. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit . . § 8, 34.
Capit. vol. i. p. 371. § 22. Thus the avenging of injuries
was taken out of private hands, a legal composition was efta-
blilled, and peace and amity were restored under the infpedion,

and
362

and by the authority of a judge. It is evident, that at the time
when the barbarians fettled in the provinces of the Roman Em-
pire, they had fixed judges eftablilhed among them with com-
pulfive authority. Persons vested with this charactr are
mentioned by the earliest iftorians. Du Cange, voc. 7ltdices.
The right of territorial jurifdiaion was not altogether an ufur-
pation of the feudal barons. There is good reason to believe
that the powerful leaders who seized different diftrits of the
countries which they conquered, and kept poffeflion of them as
allodial property, aflumed at the fame time the right of jurif-
diation, and exercised it within their own territories. This
jurifdidion was supreme, and extended to all causes. The
clearest proofs of this are produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit
publique de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. o6, &c. The
privilege of judging his own vassals, appears to have been ori-
ginally a right inherent in every baron who held a fief. As far
back as the archives of nations can conduct us with any cer-
tainty, we find the jurifdiEtion and fief united. One of the
earliest charters to a layman which I. have met, with, is that of
Ludovicus Pius, A. D. 814. Ad it contains the right of terri-
torial jurifdldion, in the most express and extensive terms.
Capitul. vol. ii. p. 1405. There are many charters to churches
and monasteries of a. more early date, containing grants of fimi-
lar jurifdidion, and prohibiting any royal judge to enter the
territories of those churches or monasteries, or to perform any
at of judicial authority there. Bouquet.. Recueil. des Hilt.
tom. iv. p. 628, 631, 633. tom. v. p. 703, 710, 752, 762.
Muratori has publilhed maniy very ancient charters containing
the fame immunities. Antiq. Ital. Difert. Ixx. In moss of
these deedss the exading of Freda is particularly prohibited,
which (hews that they constitutcd a valuable part of the publick
revenue at that junture. The expence of obtaining a sentence

i1

30o3

in a court of justice during the middle ages was o considerable,
tiat this circumstance alone was sufficient to render men unwil-
ling to decide any contest in judicial form. It appears from a
charter in the thirteenth century, tat the baron who had the
right of justice, received the fifth part of the value of every
fubjedt, the property of which was tried and determined in his
court. If, after the commencement of a law suit, the parties
terminated the contest in an amicable manner, or by arbitration,
they were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth part of the sub-
jec contested to the court before which the suit had been brought.
Hist de Dauphine. Geneve, I722. tom. i. p. 22. Similar to this
is a regulation in a charter of liberty granted to the town of
Friburg, A. D. I 20. If two of the citizens (hall qn rel, and if
one of them shall complain to the superior Lord or to his judge,
and after commencing the suit shall be privately reconciled to his
adversary the judge, if he does not approve of this reconciliation,
may compel him to insist in his law-suit; and all who were
present at the reconciliation hall forfeit the favour of the superior
Lord. Hiftoria Zaringo Badenfis. Auitor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus.
Carolfr. 1765. 4to. vol. v. p. 55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurisdiction which those who

held fiefs possessed originally, we cannot now determine with
certainty. It is evident that, during the disorders which pre-
vailed in every kingdom of Europe, the great vassals took ad,
vantage of the feebleness of their Monarchs, and enlarged their
jurifditions to the utmost. As early as the tenth century, the
more powerful barons had usurped the right of deciding all
causes, whether civil or criminal. They had acquired the High
7rtrice as well as the Low. Eftabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24,
25. Their sentences were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any superior court. Several striking instances of this

are
304,

are colleced by Brufiel. Traits des Fiefs, liv. iii . c. , 12, 3.
Not satisfied v.itd this, the more potent barons got their territories
ere&ed into Regalities, with almoll every royal prerogative and
jurifdition. Instances of there were frequent in France. Bru:.
ib. In Scotland, where the power of the feudal nobles became
exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical Law Tradts,
vol. i. tra&. vi. Even in England, though the authority of the
Norman Kings circumscribed the jurifdidion of the ba-
rons more than in any feudal kingdom, several counties palatine
were ereCted, into which the King's judges could not enter,
and no writ could come in the King's name, until it received the
feal of the county palatine. Spelman, GloLT voc. Conites Palattinil
Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. iii.
p. 78. These lords of regalities had a right to claim or rescue
their vaflals from the King's judges, if they aued any jurif-
dition over them. Brufel ubi supra. In the law of Scotland'
this privilege was termed the right of repledging; and the fre-
quency of it not only interrupted the course of juflice, but gave
rife to great disorders in the exercise of it. His. Law Trats, ib.
The jurifdition of the counties palatine was productive of like in-
conveniencies in England.

T i remedies provided by Princes against the bad effe&s of

there usurpations were various, and gradually applied. Under
Charlemagne and his immediate descendants, the regal preroga-
tive still retained great vigour, and the Duces, Comires, and
Miji Doinint/i, the former of whom were ordinary and fixed
judges, the latter extraordinary and itinerant judges, in the
different provinces of their extensive dominions, exercised a
jurifdition co-ordinate with the barons in tome cafes, and fil-

Vot. 1. R r rerior

305

perior to them in others. Du Cange voc. Dux, Cotites &
Mii. Murat. Antiq. Difiert. viii. & ix. But under the feeble
race of Monarchs who succeeded them, the authority of the
royal judges declined, and the barons usurped that unlimited
jurisdiction which has been described. Louis VI. of France
attempted to revive the funation of the Mits Dominici under the
title of Juges des Exempts, but the barons were become too power-
ful to bear such an encroachment on their jurifdiaion, and he
was obliged to desist from employing them. Henaut. Abrege
Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His successors (as has been observed)
had recourse to expedients less alarming. The appeal de de-
saute de Droit, or on account of the refusal of justice, was the
sirs which was attended with any considerable effe. Accord-
ing to the maxims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many
vasals as enabled him to try by their peers, the parties who
offered to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused to pro-
ceed in the trial, the cause might be carried, by appeal, to the
court of the superior lord of whom the baron held, and tried
there. De 'Esprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange voc.
defelus JufJliti . The number of Peers or aelors in the courts
of Barons was frequently very considerable. It appears from
a criminal trial in the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D.
1i99, that upwards of two hundred persons were present, and
assisted in the trial, and voted in paling judgment. Hist. de
Langued. par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette, tom. iv. Preuves,
p. 114. As the right of jurifdition had been usurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to hold courts.
This gave frequent occasion to such appeals, and rendered the
practice familiar. By degrees, such appeals began to be taken
from the courts of the more powerful barons, and it is evident,

fronm
306

from a dedifion recorded by Bruffiel, that the royal judges were
willing to give countenance to any pretext for them. Traite
des Fiefs, tom. i. p. 235, '26. This species of appeal had
lefg effet .in abridging the jurifdition of the nobles, than
the appeal on account of the injufice of the sentence.
When the feudal monarchs were powerful, and their judges
poflefled extensive authority, such appeals seem to hive been
frequent. Capitul. vol. i. p. 175, 180; and they were knade in
a manner suitable to the rudeness of a simple age. The persons
aggrieved resorted to the palace of their sovereign, and with
outcries and loud noise called to him for redress. Capitul. lib.
iii. c. 59. Chronic. Lawterbergienfe ap. Mencken. Script.
German. vol. ii. p. 284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the
appeals to the ufliza or supreme judge were taken in such a
form as supposed the'appellant to be in immediate danger of
death, or of fome'violent outrage; hle rushed into the prefeiice of
the judge crying with a loUd voice, Avi, vi,

A t eza, rFuerza,

thus imploring (as it were) the instant interposition of that iu-
preme judge in order to ave hiim. Hier. Blanca Comment. de
rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Pittorii, vol. iii. p. 753.
The abolition of the trial by coimbat facilitated the revival of
appeals of this kind. The effects of this ubordination which
appeals established, in introducing attention, equity, and con-
fiftency of decision into courts of judicature, were soon confpi-
cuous; and almost all causes' of iportance were carried to be
finally determined in the King's courts. Brunel, tom. i. 252.
Various circumstances which contributed towards the introduc-
tion and frequency of such appeals are enumerated De l'Efprit
des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of ilch
effect as the attention which monarchs gave to the confti'ution

Rr z and

367

and dignity of their courts of justice. It was the ancient cuf-
tom for the feudal monarchs to preside themselves in their
courts, ind to administer justice in person. Marculf. lib. i.
§ 25 IViurat. Diflert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he was dreffi
ing, ued to call parties into his pretence, and having heard and
confidered the subjet of litigation, gave judgment concerning it.
Eginhartus vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hist. of Exche-
quer, vol. i. p. 91. This could not fail of rendering their
courts refpedable. St. Louis, who incouraged to the utmost
the practice of appeals, revived this ancient custom, and. ad.
ministered jultice in person with all the ancient simplicity,
"I have often seen the faint," fays Joinville, " fit under the
shade of an oak in the wood of Vincennes, when all who
had any complaint, freely approached him. At other times
he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and feating him.
self upon it, heard the causes that were brought before him."
Hist. de St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior rank,
who possesed the right of justice, sometimes dispensed it in
person, and presided in their tribunals. Two intfances of this
occur with refpe; to the Dauphines of Vienne. His, de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and
Princes could not decide every cause in person, nor bring them
all to be determined in the fame court; they appointed Baillis,
with a right of jurifdicion, in different diltrits of their king,
dom. These possesed powers romewhat similar to tho.se of the
ancient OCnites. It was towards the end of the twelfth cen-
tury, and beginning of the thirteenth, that this office was first
intituted in France. Bruefll, liv. ii.. c. 35. When the King
had a court established in different quarters of his dominions, this
invited his fubjets to have recourse to it. It was the private in-

terest
308

terest of the Baillis, as well as an objec of publick policy, to
extend their jurisdiction. They took advantage of every de-
feLijn the rights of the barons, and of every error ,of their
proceedings, to remove causes out of their courts, and to bring
them uuder their own cognizance. There was a diftintion in
the feudal law, and an extremely ancient one, between the
high justice and thie,low., Capitul. 3. A. D. 812. 4. A. D.
815. § 3. Eabl. de St. Louis, liv. i. c. 40. Many barons pof-
feled the latter jurifdidion who had no title to the former. The
former included the right of trying crimes of every kind, even
the highest; the latter was confined to petty. trespasses., ,his
furnished endless pretexts for obftruting, reflraining and Le-
viewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457,
§ 25. 458. § a9. -- A regulation of greater importance fc-
ceeded the, institution of Baills. The King's supreme court or
parliament'was rendered fixed as: to the place, and :conftant.as
to the time of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of justice was originally
ambulatory, followed the person of the monarch, and was.:held-
only during some of the great festivals. Philip Augustus, A.,D.
1305. rendered it sedentary at Paris, and 'continued its terms
during the greater part of the year. Pafquier Rcchercles, liv,
ii. c. 2 and. 3, &c.. Ordon. tom. .. p. 366..§ 62.. He and his,
fucceobrs' vested extensive powers in that court;. they granted
the members of it. several privileges and djftidiions which it:
would be tedious to enumerate.. Pafquier,, ih..Velly hist.. de.
France, tom. vii; p. 307.. Peronls eminent. for, i!tegrity and,
kill in. law were. appointed judges there. lb., ;By degrees. the.
final decision of all causes of importance was brought ito the
parliament of Paris, and the other. parliaments which admini-.
ftred jtice in the King's name, in different provinces of the

kingdom.

kingdom. This jurifdition, however, the parliament of :Paris
acquired very slowly, and the great vaffals-of the crown made
violent 'efforts in order to obftrtia the attempts of this :parlia-
ment to extend its authority. Towards the close of the thirteenth
century, Philip the Fair was obliged .to prohibit his parliament
fr6m taking cognisance of certain appeils brought into it from
the courts of the Count of .Btetagne, and to recognise his right
of -supreme and final jurifdition. Memoires pour fervir .de
Preuves a'l'Hiftoire de Bretagne par Morice,'.tm. i. p. o037.
1o74. Charles'VI. at the end of the following century was
obliged to confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in more
ample form. 'Ibid. tom.' ii. p. 580, 581.' iSo iolent was the
opposition of -the barons to this right of appeal which they
conlidered as fatal to their privileges and power, that. the aui
thors of the Etycycopeie have mentioned several inlfanee' ii
which: barons put to death, or mutilated,. or confifoatedi the :gods
Qs: such as; ventured to appeal from the sentences pronounced in
their ourts, to the parliament of Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parlement,
p. , 25. '

THE progress of juiifdition in the other feudal kingdoms

was in a great measure similar to that which we have traced in
France. In England, the territorial jurisdiction of the barons
was both ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons. N° 5 and 9.
After the Norman coniueft it became more strictly feudal; and
it is evident from fats recorded in the English history, as well
as from the inititution of counties Palatine, which I have already
mentioned, that the usurpations of the nobles in England were
not inferior to. thoe' of their contemporaries on the continent.
The fame expedients were employed to circumscribe or abo-
lilh those dangerous jurifdicions. William the Conqueror eta-

bilhed
31o

blifhed a constant court in the hall of his palace; from which
the four courts now entrusted with the administration .of
juflice in England took their rife. Henry II. divided his king-
dom into fix circuits, and ent itinerant judges to hold their courts
in them at fiated seasons. Blackstone's Comhientaritee on the
Laws of England, vl. iii. 57 Justices of peace were appointed,
in every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose jurifdidion
the people gradually had recourse in many civil causes. The pri-
vileges of the Counties. Palatine were gradually limited ,. with re-
spect to rome points they were abolished; and the administration
ofjuftice was brought into the King's co'urts, or befprejude;Jof
his appointment. The several iteps taken for this piurp-ble
are enumerated in Dalrymple's History of Feudal' Poperty,
chap. vii.

IN Scotland the usurpations of the nobility were more exor-.

bitant than in any other feudal kingdom. The progress of their.
encroachments, and the methods taken by.:the crown to lmisj or. a-
bolih their territorial and indepetidantjurifdi&ionsf ibotll which I had
occafion'to confider and explain in a former work, differed.very lit-
tle from those of which I have now given the detail. Hiftory.of
Scotland, vol. i.. p. 45.1

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers'- in the labyrinth 9uS

German jurisprudence, were I to attempt to delineate. the pro-,
grefs of jurifdition in the Empire with a minute accuracy. It
is fluicient to observe, that the authority which. the.Aulisk con,
cil and Imperial chamber now po'cefs,.took its rife from the lame
abuse of territorial jurifdi(ion, and was acquired in the fame
manner that the royal courts attained influence in other coun-
tries. All the important fads with respect to both these particu-

lars,
S

3t

lars may be found in Phil. Datt. de Face ruiblca !rrprii, i b. i;
The capital articles are pointed out in fessel Abreg- d l'Hiftoire
& Droit publique d'Allemagne, p. 556, 581; and in Trait du
Droit publique de 1' Empire par M. le Coq. de Villeray. Both
the two last treatises are of great authority, having been composed
under the eye of M. Schoepflin of Strafburgh, one of the ablest
publick lawyers in Germany.

NOTE XXIV. S c T. I. p. 65. [AA]

IT is not easy to fix with precision the period at which Eccle-

fiafticks first began to claim exemption from the civil jurisdiction.
It is certain, that during the early and purest ages of the church,
they pretended to no such immunity. The authority of the
civil magistrate extended to all persons, and to all causes. This
fad has not only been clearly established by Protestant authors,
but is admitted by many Roman Catholicks of eminence, and
particularly by the writers in defence of the liberties of the Gal-
lican church. There are several original papers published by
Muratori, which show that in the ninth and tenth centuries,
causes of the greatest importance relating to ecclefiafticks were
still determined by civil judges. Antiq. Ital. vol. v. Dessert. lxx.
Ecclefiaticks did not shake off all at once their subjection to civil
courts. This privilege, like their other usurpations, was gained
slowly, and ftep by ftep. This exemption seems at firfi to have
been meerly an ad of complaisance, flowing from veneration for
their character. Thus from a character of Charlemagne in favour
of the church of Mans, A. D. 796, to which M. l'Abbe de Soy
refers in his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 201, that monarch

directs

directs his judges, if any difference should arise between the
administrators of the revenues of that church and any perlbn
whatever, not to llinnmon the administrators to appear in mallo
publico; but firfl of all to meet with them, ad to endeavour to
accommodate the difference in an amicable manner. This in-
dulgence was in process of time improved into a legal exemp-
tion; which was founded on tile ame fuperfltious refpedt of the
laity for the clerical character and funtion. A remarkable in-
stance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick Barbarossa, A. D.
r172, to the monastery of Altenburg. He grants them judi-
cium non tantum fanguinolentis plaga, fed vita & mortis; he
prohibits any of the royal judges from disturbing their jurifdic-
tion; and the reason which he gives for this ample conceflion is,
nam quorum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus leve
eft, & jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus illius oppreflionis
contumelia, vel manu Laica fatigari. Mencken. Script. rer. Germ.
vol. iii. p. 1067.

IT is not necessary for illuitrating what is contained in the

text, that I hould describe the manner in which the code of the
canon law was compiled, and shew that the docrines in it most
favourable to the power of the clergy, are founded on ignorance,
or supported by fraud and forgery. The reader will find a full
account of these in Gerard. Van Maftricht, Hiftoria Juris Eccle-
fiaftici, & in Science de Government par M. Real, tom. vii. c. .
& 3. § 2, 3, &c. The history of the progress and extent of
ecclesiastical jurifdition, with an account of the arts which the
clergy employed in order to draw causes of every kind into the
spiritual courts, is no lels curious, and would throw great light
upon many of the customs and institutions of the dark ages; but

VOL. . S f it

3'J

it is likewise foreign from the present ubied. Du Cange in
his Goffar.-, voc. CGria Cbrifizaiatis, has collected most of the
causes with relpect to which the clergy arrogated an exclusive
iurifdicion, and refers to the authors, or original papers, which
confirm his observations. Giannone in his Civil History of
Naples, lib. ix. § . has ranged these under proper heads, and
scrutinizes the pretensions of the church with his usual bold-
ness and discernment. M. Fleury observes, that the clergy mul-
tiphled, a iuch a rate, the pretexts for extending the authority
of the spiritual courts, that it was in their power to withdraw
every perobn and every cause from the jurisdiction of the civil
magistrate. Hist. Eccle torn. xix. Dic. Prelim. 16. But how

ill founded soever the urifdiction of the clergy may be, or what-
ever might be the abuses to which their manner of exercising it
gave rife, the principles and forms of their jurisprudence were
far more perfect than that which was known in the civil courts.
It is probable that ecclesiastics never submitted, during any
period of the middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes of
the barbarous nations, but were governed entirely by the Ro-
man lag,. The)- regulated all their traniations by such of its
maxims as were preserved by tradition, or were contained in the
Theodosian code, and other books extant among them. This
we learn from a cuflom which prevailed universally in those ages.
Every person was permitted to chute among the various codes
of laws then in force, that to which he was willing to conform.
In any transaction of importarce, it was ufiual for the persons
contracting to mention the law to which they submitted, that it
might be known how any controversy that should arise between
them was to be decided. Innumerable proofs of this occur in
the charters of the middle ages. But the clergy confidered it as
such a valuable privilege of their order to be governed by the

Roman
1,4

Roman law, that when any person entered into holy orders, it
was usual for him to renounce the laws to which he had been

formerly fubjeet, and to declare that he now submitted to the
Roman law. Conftat me Johannem clericum, filium quondam
Xerandi, qui profeffus fum, ex natione mea, lege vivere Lango-
bardorum, fed tamen, pro honore ecclefiatlico, lege nunc videor
vivere Romana. Charta A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui
profeffus um, more facerdotii mei, lege vivere Romana. Charta,
A. D. 1075. Muratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol. i. p. 78.

The code of the canon law began to be compiled early in the

ninth century. Mem. de'lAcad. des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346,
&c. It was above two centuries after that before any collection
was made of those customs, which were the rule of judgment
in the courts of the barons. Spiritual judges decided, of
course, according to written and known laws; Lay judges, left
without any fixed guide, were directed by loose traditionary
cufloms. But betides this general advantage of the canon law,
its forms and principles were more consonant to reason, and
more favourable to the equitable decision of every point in con-
troverfy, than those which prevailed in lay courts. It appears
from Notes XXI. and XXII. concerning private wars, and the trial
by combat, that the whole spirit of ecclesiastical jurisprudence
was adverse to these sanguinary customs which were deftruaive
of justice; and the whole force of ecclesiastical authority was
exerted to abolish them, and to fub(titute trials by law and evi-
dence in their room. Almost all the forms in lay courts which
contribute to eftablilh, and continue to preserve order in judicial
proceedings, are borrowed from the canon law. Fleury Inflit.
du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St. Louis in his EabliTs.

S f 2 me

mens confirms many, of his new regulations concerning pro-
perty, and the adminitration of, justice, by the .authority of the
canon'liw, fr6or which he borrowed them. Thus, for instance,
the first hint of attaching 'moveables for the recovery of a debt,
was taken- from the canon law. Eftabl liv. ii. c. 2r and 40. And
likewise the cefllo, boioruim, by a perfol, who was insolvent.
Ibid. In the fame"mafier, he establishe.d new regu!atiops with
refpe& to the effets; of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89.
These and many.other salutary regulations, the Canonists bor-
rowed from the Roman law. Many other examples might be
produced;;'f lrrnate perfet jurifprddende, in. the atlon Llaw than
wai knwn in lay coTts.;l! Sot that teafpn;;it, was. deemed an
high privilege to be fubje& to ecclesiastical jurifdiciop. Among
the mahy immunitiesJ. by which: men .were allured, to engage in
the dangerous; expeition forF the recqvery of the Holy Land,
on! of tlhq mot confilerablq).wa ,the dclaring tbofe who took
the Crqfs to be fibjet only :t9 e. spir.itual cou!rts. See Note
XIII. and Du Cange, voc. .rueis privilegia.

N O TE ;-;'XXV S E:a t IL p: 67. [BB],

~he rapidity with 'whic "li e n' knoleadgt and study bs the'

Roman law fpread'o9v iaro6pe; is arliahtg. t'he '6py:6f thb
Pandet s was fbimnd t Aialphi; A. D. t 13. Iriieius pened a
cllege f.e; ivll;.law; a. oBologne ' ',fe, ,.eara iafter., Giahn Hist.
book kxi c. .': 'It began ;to be .taughit as;, a pat of Aqadnical
learning. ii', differenit; pdr;ts d6s Fragco,befpre thej rniddleq.,f ;thq
century. Vaccarius gave.,ledures on the. civil law,at Oxford as
early as the yeari 1147. A rtgular ifyftp of-,feudal law, form-,
ed:plainly in 'imitation of the. Roman; cdegitya .,ompfhi by
two Milanese lawy.eks;..ablut the yeqr Il 150o., -Graian. pblifliAc

' ' .'

.''. . , the
316

the code of canon law, with large additions and emendations,
about the fame time. The earliest colletion of these customs,
which served as the rules Qs deifion ,in: the(,curts.ofjuftice, is
the Afifes de yerufaletn. They were compiled,, as. the preamble
informs us, in the year' tog, and are called Jus Confue-
tudina'rium quo regebatur regnum orientale;i .Willerm. Tyr.
lib. xix. c 2. Bit peculiar, circumstances were the bccafion of
this early compilition.' Te'vit&orious Crusaders fettled as'a
colony in a foreign' colntry, and adventurers from all the diffe-
rent nations of' Europe composed this new society. It was ne-
cefary on that account td' afcertain'thC laws and cufltos which
were to reguiate the tranfEibns of bufihefs, and the adminiftra-
tion of justice among thea., ':But there wa's at that time nd
colleetion of customs, and no attempt to render law fixed in any
country 'of Eto6.' Th - first undertaking 'of'that kinid wa' by
Clariille, Lord Chief'Juftice bs ngland, in is Tradatiid de
IJgibus' 8& Confuetudi'iibus 'ngli'e cbEbip6led ab6ut' the
year 1181.. The Regiani Majeftatem in Scotland, afcribed'to
David I.':feems to be an imitatiotn, and a servile one of Glan-
vile.' 'ierre e' Fohfiinfes, who teils'us'thathe wa.the''firT
wlio i'ad lattemptti'thl'c A wiok~ i'il' Fance, composed 'is 'don-

- ' . '.! .''

t. 'l

· i .·; ; .,,' '. ofl d.- ,' .
Jil, which contairs an account o tecuos of th coun

f;ils of t

"** '''*.*,* i '' ,, ' io st'.op h * .country

of Vermandois, in the reign of St. Louis, which began A D.
2z6. ..eaumanot. thie autlor of the luw Bavoi
,r I l: "- '

, (.J *

. ~."I-I/.iZi. ), i - .; . i:, .C!![? / . r:, v"~.;_ r»s s

lived ,bouYt tlme metime. The Efabliffemens of St. Louis_

I d, ();'/. / ) , t) |;

/s ); !'

( , , ;i .i

· II

J1 -
contaiting a 'large collection of the customs wliiclh,prvailed

,i *..' - ..

. ... ,;/ 1,;

* .i'.a1 :, .

' . : ! .' ( . ' , ·'. IJ. . .i. .
witlil the royal domains, were publiifhed by. the ahorit of

·a (. . 'I,, .i l .s: , .s

m ,en ,. *i,',j.. ' :)t .

i, ! i.i'

that monarch. As l6on as men became acquainted with the
9dYiqstag^ o~ ayifrt.ittqn cu.9:s ,lflil9ms,.:n4, la , o

hjl, h tey
puld jiav; recpu(:!e on, qvc y pcp9Q,. the etolPf tWledting

:'.~~~~~" ~themt

317

them became common. Charles VII. of France, by an ordo-
nance, A. D. 1453. appointed the customary laws in every pro.
vince of France to be collected'and arranged. Velly and Villaret.
Hiftoire, tom. xvi. 'p. 113. His successor, Louis XI. renewed
the injunction. But this salutary undertaking hath never been
fully executed, and:the French jurisprudence remains more ob-
fcure'and uncertain than if.thefe prudent regulptions of their mo.
narchs had. taken effeft.. A pra6tice was. eablihed in the
middle ages, which affords the clearest proof that judges while
they had no other rule to dire4t their decrees but unwritten and
traditionary cutoms, were often at a loss how to :ind out the
fadts and principles accprig to wiic h they were ound, to de-
cide. They were obliged in dubious cafes to call a certain num-
ber of old men, and to lay the cafe; before them, that they
might inform them what wa the praCtie ,r custom with regard

the pint. This: was called. Enquet par toirbe., Du; Cange,

voc. urba,, The, effets^.'f the reyival of the, Roma jurif-
prudence have been explained by M. 4e Montesquieu, liv. xxviii.
c,;t. and by Mr. ume, Hist. of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I
av.e adopted many, of their ideas. Who ca pretend to review
any. fubije which such writers hve copfidered, without receiv-
ing from them light and information ? At the fame time I am
convinced that the knowledge of the Roman law was not so en-
tirely loit in Europe during the middle ages, as is commonly
believed. y suBJet jloes .not r.qure me to examiine this point.

any fi'riking fats with regard to it are colleCted by Donato An-

tolio b'Afti Dall' Ufo e autorita della ragione civile nelle pro-
vinbie dell' Imperio Occidentale. 'Nap. 1751. 2 vol; 0 vo:
l!i* .. .'

- , ,1 ....

. ....

* i , 1

. '

,, ,;

: T'H A' the civil; la*: is intiiately cozhe&ed': with the muni-
cipl juriiiprudence in several counties' of Ei'rope, is a fact so

well
318

319

well known, that it needs no illustration. Even in England,
where the Common law is fippofed to form a system perfectly
diftint from the Roman code, and although those who apply
in that country to the study of the Common law boaR,
with affectation, of this diftindion, it is evident that many of
the ideas and maxims of the civil law are incorporated into the
English jurisprudence. This is well illutrated by the ingenious
and learned author' of Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the
more ancient. ad. edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI, .SECT. .

i p. 69. [CC].

THE whole history of the middle ages makes it evident that

war was the sole profeflion of gentlemen, and the only subjed
attended, to in their education. Even after some change in
manners began to take place, and' the civil arts of life had ac-
quired Come reputation, the ancient ideas' with refpet 'to the
accomplishments neceflary for a person of noble birth, continued
long in force. In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. '9, &c. we
have an account of the youthful exercises and'. ocupations bs
Francis I. and' they are altogether martial and athletic. That
father of letters owed his relith for them, not to education, !at
to his own good sense, and good taste. The manners of the
superior order'-of ecclesiastics' during the middle ages, furnifl
the strongest proof that the diftintion of professions .w.as.fcarc
known in Europe. The functions and character;of the clergy
are obviously very different from those of laymen and among
the inferior orders of churchmen, 'this conftittted'a diftind
cliaraetr,' 'separate from that 'of 'the citizens.. 'But ihe' digni-
sied ecleflaftRlcs who were! firquently 'of' noble birth, were above
'such a diftinion; 'tiey retained the idea of what' belonged to
them as gentlemen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes, or

* ' i '' .' *:

I *. . 1 'j . /' ;, ' *,,/:
q'i,.' - · e;;

the canons of councils, they bore arms, led their vassals to the
field, and fought at their head in battle. Among them the
priesthood was 'scarce a separate profefllon; the military accom-
plilhments which they thought essential to them as gentlemen,
were cultivated , the theological science, and pacific virtues suit-
able to their spiritual funiti;n, were negleEted and despised.

As oon as the science of law became a laborious study, and

the practice of it a separate profelffon, such as rote to'eminence
in it obtained honours formerly appropriated to soldiers. Knight-
hood was the most illuftrlous mark of .diftintion during several
ages, and conferred privileges to which rank or birth alone
were not entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent for
their knowledge of law were advanced, and by that, were
placed on a level with those whom their military talents had
rendered conspicuous, Miles Yufitiie, Miles Literatus became
common titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as early'
as A. D. .25.I. If a judge attained a certain rank in the courts
of justice, that alone gave him a right to the honour of knight
hood. Pafquier Recherches, liv.x r. c. 16. p., 130. Differ.ta-
tations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie par Honore de Sainte Marie,
p. I 64, &c. A .profeflion which led to offices that enobled
fCfih 4s held thim, grew into credit, and the eople, 9f Europe
becatne acuftomed to fee men rife to eminence by ciil. as well as
iilitary' talent.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. .

P . [DD].,

THipE chief intention of these notes, was to bring at.once uIp

der the. view of my readers, such fats and cirpurpfaqqe,,as
tend to illustrate or confirm what is contained in that part of
the history to which they refer. When these lay cattered in
many different authors, and were taken from books not gene-

rally
..o0

rally known, or which it would. be disagreeable. to consult, I
thought it would be of advantage to collet them together. But
when every thing necessary for the proof or illustration of my
narrative or reasonings may be. found in any one book which
is generally known, or deserves to be so, I hall, satisfy' yfelf
witl referring known, or deserves to be o, I hall satisfy myself
with referring to it. This is the cafe with refped to Chivalry.
Almost every fat which I have mentioned in the text, toge-
ther with many other curious and intru&ive particulars, con-
cerning this singular institution, may be found in Meinoires fur
l'ancienne Chevalerie confiderce comme un eftabliflement politi-
que & militaire, par M. de la Curale de St. Palaye.

NO T E XXVIII. S c T. III. p. 76. EE]

THE subjet of my. enquiries does not call me to write a

hilRory of the progress of science. The fads and observations
which I have produced are fiflicient to illustrate the efli'es of
its'progrefs upon manners and the Ifate of focicty. While fci-
ence was altogether extind in the western parts of Europe, it
was cultivated in Conflantinople and other parts of the Grccian
Empire. But the subtle genius of the Greeks turned almost
entirely to theological disputation. The Latins borrowed that spirit
from them, and many of the controversies which still occupy,
and'divide' theologians, took their rife among the Greeks, from
whom the other Europeans derived a considerable part of their
knowledge. See the teRtimony of /Eneas Sylvius ap. Conringium
de antiq. academicis, p. 43. Hiltoire literaire de France, tom.
vii. p. '1 , &c. tom. ix.' ij' 5i, kc. Soon 'afteri the Empire
of the Caliphs was eftblifiled in theEaft, sone illustrious prin-
ces arose among them, whoi'encbicraged science. But when the
Arabians turned their attention to the literature cultivated by
theancient Greeks and. Romans, the chaste and correct tall of
thoiri orkls.of, genius' appkaredi frigid and unaniniated to a;

VOL. I. T t people

321

people of a more warm imagination. It was impoflible for them
to admire the poets and historians of Athens, or of Rome.
But they were sensible of the merit of their philosophers. The
operations of the intellect are more fixed and uniform than
those of the fancy or taste. Truth makes an impreflion nearly
the fame in every place; the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant,
or ublime, vary in different climates. The Arabians, though
they negleted Homer, translated the most eminent of the Greek
philosophers into their own language; and, guided by their pre-
cepts and discoveries, applied themselves with great ardour to
the study of geometry, astronomy, medicine, dialectics and
metaphysics. In the three former they made considerable and
useful improvements, which have contributed not a little to ad-
vance those sciences to that high degree of perfection which
they have attained. In the two latter, they chore AriRotle for
their guide, and refining on the subtle and distinguishing spirit
which characterizes his philosophy, they rendered it altogether
frivolous or unintelligible. The schools established in the East
for teaching and cultivating there sciences, were in high repu-
tation. 'They communicated their love of science to their coun-
trymen, who conquered Asia and Spain; and the schools infti-
tuted there were little inferior in fame to those in the East.
Many of the persons who diftinguihed themselves by their pro-
ficiency in science in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were
educated among the Arabians. Bruckerus collets many inRfan-
ces of this, Hiftor. Philof. v. iii. p. 68I, &c. AlmoR all the
men eminent for science during several centuries, were intruded
in the sciences by the Arabians. The first knowledge of the.
Aristotelian philosophy in the middle ages, was acquired by
translations of his works out of the Arabick. The Arabian
commentators were deemed the most kilfiul and authentic
guides in the study of his system. Conring. antiq. acad. Difl iii.

P-95,
322

p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iii.
p. 932, &c. From them the Schoolmen derived the geniu
and principles of their philosophy, which contributed so much
to retard the progress of true science.

THE establishment of Colleges or Universities is a remarkable
era in literary history. The schools in cathedrals and mona-
fteries confined themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar.
There were only one or two masters employed in that office. But
in colleges, profefbors were appointed to teach all the different
parts of science. The time that ought to be allotted to the
fludy of each was ascertained. A regular form of trying the
proficiency of students was prescribed and academical titles
and honours were conferred on such as acquitted themselves
with approbation. A good account of the origin and nature of
there is given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiquitates Roftochienfes,
five, Hiftoria Urbis & Academiae Roftoch. ap. Monumenta inedita
Rer. Germ. per E. J. de Wefiphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. 1743.
The first obscure mention of these academical degrees in the Uni-
verfity of Paris, (from which the other universities in Europe have
borrowed most of their customs and inRitutions) occurs, A. D. 2 t 5.
Crevier hist. de l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were
completely established, A. D. 1231. Ib. 248. It is unnecelary to
enumerate the several privileges to which batchelors, masters, and
do&tors were intitled. One circumstance is flfficient to demon-
ftrate the high degree of estimation in which they were held.
Do&ors in the different faculties contended with knights for
the precedence, and the dispute was terminated in many inftan-
ces by advancing the former to the dignity of knighthood, the
high prerogatives of which I have mentioned. It was even aflerted,
that a doctor had a right to that title without creation. Bar-
tolus taught-- dotorem aualiter regentem in jure civili per

T t z decennium

323

decennium effici militem ipso fato. Honore de St. Marie Dif-
fert. p. 65. This was called Chevalerie de letures, and the
persons advanced to that dignity, milities Clerici. These new
establishments for education, together with the extraordinary
honours conferred on learned men, greatly encreafed the num-
ber of scholars. In the year 1262, there were ten thousand
fludents in the university of Bologna; and it appears from the
history of that university, that law was the only science taught
in it at that time. In the year 1340, there were thirty thou-
sand in the university of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Ander-
son's Chronol. Dedution of Commerce, vol. i. p. 172. In the
fame century, ten thousand persons voted in a question agitated
in the university of Paris ; and as graduates alone were admitted
to that privilege, the number of tfudents must have been vastly
great. Velly Hist. de France, tom. xi. p. 147. There were
indeed few universities in Europe at that time; but such a
number of fludents may nevertheless be produced as a proof
of the extraordinary ardour with which men turned to the study
of science in those ages; it hows likewise that they already be-
gan to confider other profeflions than that of a soldier as ho-
nourable and useful.

NOTE XXIX. SECT. III. p. 82. [FS].

THE great variety of fubjeds which I have endeavoured to

illustrate, and the extent of this upon which I now enter, Will
justify my adopting the words of M. de Montesquieu, when he
begins to treat of commerce. " The fubje& which follows
"would require to be discussed more at large ; but the nature
" of this work does not permit it. I wish to glide on a tran-
" quil stream; but I am hurried along by a torrent."

MANY
324

MANY proofs occur in hlftory of the little intercourse between

nations during the middle ages. Towards the cdole of tie tenth
century, Count Bouclard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des SofTes, near Paris, applied to an abbot of Clugny in
Burgundy, famous for his fantity, intreating him to conduct
the monks thither. The language in which he addrefled that
holy man is singular: He tells him, that he had undertaken the:
labour of such a great journey; that he was fatigued with the
length of it, therefore hoped to obtain his request, and. that his.
journey into such a distant country Ihould not be in vain. The
answer of 'the abbot is fiill more extraordinary: He refused,
to comply with his desire, as it would be extremely fatiguing to
go along with him into a range and unknown region. Vita
Burchardi venerabiles Cornitis ap. Bouquet Rec. des Hist. vol. x_
p. 351. Even so late as the beginning of the twelfth century,,
the monks of Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know that
there was such a city as Tournay in Slanders; and the monks;
of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unacquainted with the
situation of Ferrieres. A tranfation in which they ..were both
concerned, made it necefairy for them to have fime intercourse.
The mutual interest of both monasteries prompted each to find
out the situation of the other. After a long search, which is
particularly described, the discovery was made by accident.
Herimannus Abbas de Reftauratione St. Martini Tornacenfis ap..
Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of the middle
ages with refpet to the situation and geography of remote coun-
tries was still more remarkable. The most ancient geographical
chart which now remains as a monument of the state of that
science in Europe during the middle ages, is found in a manu-
'script of the Chronique de St. Denys. There the three parts of
the earth then known are so represented, that Jerusalem is
placed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria appears to

be

BI5

be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de l'Acad. des Belles Lettres,
tom. xvi. p. 85. There seem to have been no inns or houses
of entertainment for the reception of travellers during the mid-
dle ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 58i, &c. This is a
proof of the little intercourse which took place between different
nations. Among people whose manners are simple, and who
are seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is a virtue of the
first rank. This duty of hospitality was so necessary in that
state of society which took place during the middle ages, that it
was not confidered as one of those virtues which men may
pratife or not, according to the temper of their minds, and the
generosity of their hearts. Hospitality was enforced by statutes,
and those who negleted this duty were liable to puniihment.
Qicumque hofpiti venienti leatum, aut focum negaverit, trium
folidorum inlatione mulaetur, Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § I.
Si quis homini aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
fexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul. lib. vi. § 82.
This increase of the penalty, at a period so long after that in
which the laws of the Burgundians were published, and when
the slate of society was much improved, is very remarkable.
Other laws of the fame purport are collected by Jo. Fred. Polac
Syftema Jurifprud. Germanice, Lips. 1733. p. 75. The laws of
the Slavi were more rigorous than any that he mentions; they
ordained, " that the moveables of an inhospitable person should be
confiscated, and his house burnt. They were even so follicitous
for the entertainment of strangers, that they permitted the land-
lord to fleal for the support of his guest." Qod noctu sura-
tus fueris, eras appone, hofpitibus. Rerum Mecleburgicar.
lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 1751. p. 50. In confe-
quence of there laws, or of that state of society which made it
proper to enact them, hospitality abounded while the intercourse
· among men was inconsiderable, and secured the stranger a kind

reception
326

327

reception under every roof where he chore to take (helter. This,
too,. proves clearly, that the intercourse among men was rare, for
as soon as this inereafed, what was a pleasure became a burden,
and the entertaining of travellers was converted into a branch of
commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof still more con-

vincing of the small intercourse between different nations. The
genius of the Feudal system, as well as the spirit of jealousy
which always accompanies ignorance, joined in discouraging
strangers from fettling in any country. If a person removed
from one province in a kingdom to another, he was bound
within a year and a day to acknowledge himself the vaflal of
the baron in whose estate he fettled if he ,egleted, to do so, he
became liable to a penalty; and if at his death, he neglected; to
leave a certain legacy to the baron within whose territories he
resided, all his goods were confiscated. The hard(hips imposed
on foreigners fettling in a strange country, were still more intole-
rable. In more early times, the superior lord of any territory
in which a foreigner fettled, might seize his person, and reduce'
him to servitude. Very (riking instances of this occur' in the
history of the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the Normans;
in the ninth century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime,
provinces of France to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom.
But instead of beiig received with that humanity to which their
wretched condition entitled them, they were reduced to a fate of
servitude. Both the civil and, ecclesiastical powers found it ne,.
ceflary to interpose, in. order to put a fop to this barbarous:
practice. Potgiefler. deStatu Servor. lib. i.: c. i. § 6. , In other
countries, the laws permitted the' inhabitants of the' maritime
provinces to reduce such as were Ihipwrecked on their coast to ser-
vitude. Ibid. § 17. This barbarous custom prevailed in other.

countries

qountriesiof Euroei The.pra6tice 6f sizing the goods of.per-
sons who, had been fhipwreckedi and of onfifcating-as the. pro-
perty of the lord on whose manor they were thrown, seems
to have been universal. De Weftphalen Monum. inedita Rer.
Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange, voc. Laganum, Beehr;'
Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 5a. Among the ancient Weflh, three forts
of'perfons, a madman, a stranger, and a leper, 'might be killed
with impunity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfervat. on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, p. 22.' M. de Lauriere
roduces several ancient 'deeds whlich prove that h different
prvintes ofFrdnce, 'trangers became the slaves of te lordo

wliore' landi they :ittled. Glofioaire dti Droit Francois,' Art.
Aubaine, p. z9. BeaumanOir fays, " that there are several places
inlFrance, 'miwhich' if i' ftraigP 1fixes his residence for a year
analddyr, he'becofies tlih'have of the lord of 'he manor. CoUr.
delBeauvj oh. 4 'p. 254. 'But' as a practice so: contrary to hu-
rhanityoould not ftibftit, the superior, lords found it necellary to
reft f tisfi.d with, lvying certain annual. taxes from aliens,
ilgfmgg, upQon them fomel extraordipary duties or, services. . But
xwl, ny angqer qied, he c9u4 nqt convy his effes by a will;;
apj, all;lhirea as, well as personal eftatefell to the King, or to the
lord of the barony, to the, exolufion of his natural heirs. This is
termed in France Iroit daun.e . Pref de Laurier. Ordun.
tom. p. P5. ' B rultel. tom. i. p. 94. ,u Cange, voc. Albani,
Pafqciier' Recherches; p. 367. ThiS pracaice of ,confiscating the
effects of 'strangers upon their death was very.ancient. It is
mentioiied, though very obscurely, inh a law of Charleragne,
A.:'-D'i ' 3. *' Capitul. Ba;luz. p.'507. ' 5.' - Not only persons
wao,wre; born in n .fbraign country wete subjEt to the Droit''
d'AllhaAie, .*bit, eyen, such. as. removed;frbnionei diocese to ano-
teir o;x so jthq
h lapdsqo of o kon. to, 'another; Bruffel. vol. ii.

!. ,*

*
i, ! , p. 947

p. 947, 949. It is scarce poflible to conceive any law more un-
favourable to the intercourse between nations, Something fimi..
lar to it, however, may be found in the ancient laws of every
kingdom in Europe. With refpe&t to Italy, fee Murat. Ant.
vol. ii. p. 14. It is no small disgrace to the Frenci jurifpru-
dence, that this barbarous, inhospitable cuflom, hould ftill:re.
main in a nation so highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded under a feeble

form of government, incapable of framing or executing salutary
laws, rendered the communication between the different pro-
vinces of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It appears
from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in the ninth century,
that the highways were so much infested by banditti, that it was
neceflary for travellers to form thcmfelves into companies or
caravans, that they might be safe from the assaults of robbers.
Bouquet Recueil des Hist. vol. vii. 5I5. The numerous regu-
lations published by Charles the Bald in the fame century, disco.
ver the frequency of these disorders and such ats of violence
were become so common, that by many. they were hardly confi-
dered as crimin4al and for this reason the inferior judges called
Centenarii were required to take an oath, that they would nei-
ther commit any robbery themselves, nor protet such as were
guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63, 68.
The historians of the ninth and tenth centuries give pathetic
descriptions of there disorders. Some remarkable pafiages to
this purpose are colle&ed by Mat. Jo. Beehr Rer. Mecleb.
lib. viii. p. 603. They became so frequent and audacious,
that the authority of the civil magistrate was unable to
repress them. The ecclesiastical jurifdiaion was called in to aid
it, Councils were held with great solemnity, the bodies of the
faints were brought thither, and in pretence of their sacred

VOL, I. U u reliques,

329

reliques, anathemas were denounced against robbers, and other'
violators of the publick peace. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom.
x. p. 360, 431, 536. One of there forms of excommunication
issued A. D. 988, is still preserved, and is so singular, and com-
posed with eloquence of such a peculiar kind, that it will not
perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After the usual in-
trodutAion, and mentioning the outrage which gave occaflon to
the anathema, it runs thus; Obtenebrefcant occdli veftri, qui
concupiverunt; arefcant manus, quae rapuerunt; debilitentur
omnia membra, quae adjuverunt. Semper laboretis, nec requiem
inveniatis, fuiuque vefiri laboris privemini. Formidetis, &
paveatis, a facie perfequentis, & nori perfequentis hoftis, ut tabe-
fcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum Juda traditore Domini,
in terra mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda veftra ad fatisfac-
tionem plenam convertantur'.-- Ne cefrent a vobis hoe mali-
di&iones, fcelerum veftrrrum perfecutrices, quamdii permane-
bitis in peccato pervafionis. Amen. Fiat, 'Fiat." Bouquet. lb.
p. 517.

WITH'refpce'f'to the pr6grefs' f' commerce which I have'de-

fcribed, p. 78, &c. it ma''be obbferved that the Italian states carried
on some commerce with the cities of the Greek empire, as early
as the age of Charlemagne, and imported into their own coun-
try the rich coniioditiesof the ealt. .Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii.
p. 882. In the tnth ceritiry, {he Venetians had opened a trade
with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. 'The inhabitants of Amaiphi
and Pisa had likewise extended their trade to the fame ports. Mu-
rat: Ib. p;'884, 885. The effies of the Ctufades in' increasing the
wealth anid coinmerce'6f the Italian states, and paiticularly that
which they carried on with theiEaft, I have explained page 2gth of
this volume. They not only imported the Indian commodities from
the East, but established manufactures of curious fabric in their own

country
330

country. Several of these are enumerated by Muratori in his
Diflertations concerning te arts and the weaving of the middle
ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399. They made great pro-
grefs, particularly in the manufacture of silk, which had long
been peculiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk stuffs were
of fuchl high price in ancient Rome, that only a few perfohns of
the first rank were, able to purchase them. Under Aurelian,
A. D. 27o, a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound of
gold. Abfit ut auro fila penfentur. Libra enim auri tunc libra
ferici suit, Vopifcus i Aureliano. Justinian, in the sixth century,
introduced the. art of rearing filk-orms into Greece, which ren-
dered the commodity somewhat more plentiful; though still it was
of such great value, as to remain an article of luxury or magnifi-
cence, reserved only for persons of he first order, or for publick
folemnities. ,Roger I. King of Sicily, about the :year 1130,
carried off a .number of artificers in the silk trade from Athens
and fettling them in Palermo, introduced tie culture of silk into
his kingdom, from which it was communicated to other parts
of'Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7. This seems to
have rendered silk so common, that about the middle of, the
fourteenth century, a thousand citizens. of Genoa appeared in
one proceflion clad in'filk robes. Sugar is likewise a produc-
tion of the East., Some plants of the sugar cane were brought
from Asia; and the.firfl, attempt' to cultivate ,them .i Sicily was
made, abqut the middle of the twelfth century.. From thence
they were transplanted into, the southern provinces of Spain.
From Spain they were carried to the Canary and Madeira isles,
and at length into the new world. Ludovico Guicciardini, in
enumerating... the goods imported into Antwerp, about the year
560, mentions the sugar which :tiey received from Spain and
Portugal as a considerable article. He describes that as the pro-

U u dut

43'

dut of the Madeira and Canary islands. Defcritt. de Paefi Bafli,
p. 180, 181. The sugar cane Was either not introduced into
the Wef-Indies at that time, or the cultivation of it was not so
considerable as to furnish an article in commerce. In the middle
ages, though sugar was not raired in such quantities, or employ-
ed for so many purposes, as to becoine oe of the cotnon ne-
'cefaries of life, it appears to have been a considerable article in
the commerce of the Italian fates.

TESE various commodities with which the Italians furnilhed
the other nations of Europe, pocured them a favdurable recep-
tion in very kingdom. They were established in France In the
thirteenth century with most extensive immunities. They not
only obtained every indulgeiice favourable to their commerce,
but perfbnal ights and privileges were granted to them, which
the natives of the kirigdim did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By it fpecil proviso, they We exempted from the
droit d'aubaine. Ibid. p. 67o. As the Lombards engrossed the
trade of every kingdom ih which they fettled, they becamee
masters of 'its calh. Mbney bs course was in 'their hands not
only a frgn of the value of their cbmnfodities, but became ai
object .of cddtiiitce itself. They dealt largely as bankers. In
an ordonaht, AD. . i: we seifd thefsl"tiled r~itbr iafd
tdi/pfoJis. They crtried o t hiss it .Well as other brihdhsi of
their c6iitirce With -'6nlCwhat of that raLtplous Ipiit Which iS
natural to monopolizers, wh atf nbt rehrained by' the cbncur-
iene of rivals. An absurd piriioh, which prrailed in the
sliddle ages, was, however, in Ibne fiCarure, thte tiufe ds their
exorbitant denmaidi, ihd fiay be plladd in apology fbr them.
tomminerce cannot be carried otn With advantage uniefs the pir-
sons Who lend a fum are allowed a certai premim for the uit
6f their money, and as a cofipednfation for the risk which they

run

run in permitting another to trafflck ith their stock. This
premium is fixed by law in all commercial countries, and is
called the legal interest of money. But the Fathiers of the church
prepofteroufy applied the pr6hibitiois of usury i scripture
to the payment of legal interest, and condemned it as a fin. The
fchoolmen, mined by Aristotle, whose fntinients they followed
implicitly, and without eamination, adopted the fame error,
and enforced it, Blackstone's Commentaries on the laws of
England, Vol. ii. p. 455. Thus the Lombards found them-
selves engaged in a traffick which was deemed criminal and
odious. They were liable to punishment if deteced.. They
were not satisfied, therefore, with that moderate premium,
which they might have claimed if their trade had been
open and authorised by law. They exacted a fum propor-
tional to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Accord-
ingly, we find that it was uual for them to demand twenty
per cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth century.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 89j. About 'the begliinng
of that century, the cointedl of Filndetb ws dbliged to
borrow money in ordet to pay her hulband's &iAtfoi. Sh6
procrted the Iim re4quisite, either frbrn Italian imerttthats o.
from Jews. The lowest interelt which he paid t6 them was above
twenty per cent. and fonme iofthem exicted near thirty. Mar.
fehb aild Duiand. 'Tlreflair. Acdotorm l. . p. : 8f6. Itn
the fourteenth century, A D. I3 , Philip IV. fixed the intreft
which might be legally exacted in the fairs of Champagne t
twenty per cent. Ordonan, tom. i. p. 484. The interest of money
in Aragon was somewhat lower. James I. A. D i4a.: fxe it
by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca. Maria five Limes
Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as the year 14., it aparars that

the

333

the interest of money in Placentia, was at the rate of forty per
cent. This is the more extraordinary, because at that time
the commerce of the Italian States was become considerable.
Memorie Storiche de Piacenza, tom. viii .

p. 104. Piac. 1760.

It appears from Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V.. had fixed
the rate of interest in his dominions in the Low-Countries at
twelve per cent. and at the time when he wrote about the year
1560, it was not uncommon to exact more than that fum. He
complains of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effects
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di Paefi Bafi, p. 172.
This high interest of money, is alone a proof that'the profits
on commerce were exorbitant.-The Lombards were likewise
eftablifled in England, in the thirteenth century, and a con-
fiderable reet in the city of London still bears' their name.
They enjoyed great privileges, and carried on an extensive
commerce, particularly as bankers. See 'Anderson's Clronol.
Deduction, vol. i. p. 137, 6o, 204, 231, where the fiatutes or
other authorities which confirm this are quoted. But the chief
mart for Italian commodities was at Bruges. Navigation was
then so imperfec, that, a voyage between the Baltick and Me-
diterranean could not be performed in one summer. For that
reason a magazine or storehouse half way between the com-
mercial cities in the north,: and. those in .Ialy become necefiry.
Bruges was pitched upon [as the nimol convenient station. That
choice introduced vast wealth into the Low-Countries. Bruges
was at once the staple for English wool; for the woollen and
lndti manufatures of the Netherlands; for the naval Rores,
and, other bulk ycommodities of the north; and for the Indian
commodities, 'as well as dbmefiick produtions imported by the
Italian States. The extent of its commerce in Indian goods

with
334

with Venice alone appears from one fad. In the year 318',
five Venetian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities arrived
at Bruges, in order to dispose of their cargoes at the fair.
L. Guic. Defcritt. di Paefi Bafli, p. 174. Galeaffes Were vessels
of very considerable burden. It was the greatest emporium
in all Europe. Many proofs of this occur in the historians and
records of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. But ins'tead
of multiplying quotations, I hall refer my readers to Ander'on,
vol. i. p. 12, 137, 213, 246, &c. The nature of this work
prevents me from entering into any long details, but there are
some detached faas, which give an high idea of the wealth
both of the Flemish and Italian commercial fates. The' Duke
of Brabant contracted his daughter to the Black Prince, son of
Edward III. of England, A. D. 1339, and gave her a portion
which would amount to three hundred thousand pounds of our
present money. Rymer's Faedera, vol. v. p. !13. John Gale-
azzo Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a treaty of marriage
between his daughter and Lionel Duke of Clarence Edward's
third son. A. D. 1 67. and granted her a portion equal to two
hundred thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer Fder.
vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant furs to far exceeding what
was then granted by the most powerful monarchs, and which
appear extraordinary even in the present age, when the wealth
of Europe is so much increased, must have arisen from the
riches which flowed into these countries from their extensive
and lucrative commerce. The first source of wealth to the
towns situated on the Baltick sea, seems to have been the her.
ring-filhery; the shoals of herring frequenting at that time the
coafRs of Sweden and Denmark, in the fame manner as they
now refbrt to the British coasts. The effets of this fithery are

thus

thus described by an author of the thirteenth century. The
Danes, fays he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of
tailors, are now cloathed in carlet, purple and fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing from their annual fihery
on the coast of Schonen; so that all nations retort to them,
bringing their gold, filvet and precious commodities, that they
may purchase herrings, which the divine bounty bestows upon
them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Conring. de Urbib. German.
§ 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful commercial

confederacy known in history. Its origin towards the close of
the twelfth century, and the objects of its union, are described
by Knipfcildt Traaatus Hiftorico-Politico Juridicus de Juribus
Civitat Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson ihas mentioned the
chief afts with refpet to their commercial progress, the extent
of the privileges which they obtained in different countries,
their fucccfsful wars with several monarchs, as well as the pirit
and zeal with which they contended for those liberties and rights
without which it is impoflible to carry on commerce to advan-
tage. The vigorous efforts of a ociety attentive only to
commercial objects, could not fail of diffusing over Europe
new and more liberal ideas concerning justice and order
wherever they fettled.

Ih England the progress of commerce was extremely flow

and the caues of this are obvious. During the Saxon heptarchy,
England, split into many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually
at variance with each other, expoted to the fierce incursions of

the
336

the Danes, and other nrtherh pirates,.and. funk in barbarity
and ignorance, was in'ino condition' to cultivate comlmrce, or
to pursue any system of ufefill and salutary policy. When a
better profped began to open by the union of the kingdom
under' one monarch, the Norman conqilcft took place. This
occaSioned such a violent hock, 'and such a sudden and
total revolutioli of property, that the 'nation did not recover
from it during several reigns. By the time that the conftitu-
tion began to acquire eome liability, and the Engifli had so
incorporated with their conquerors as to become one people,
the nation engaged with no les 'ardor than imprudence in
support of their monarch's pretensions to the crown of France,
and long wafted its vigour and genius in its wild efforts to
conquer that kingdom. When by> ill success, and repeated
disappointments, a period was at la(t put to, this fatal frenzy,
and the nation beginning to. enjoy ome repose, had leisure
to breathe and to gather new strength, the deftrutive wars
betwee the houses of York datd Lancaster broke out, and in-
volved the kingdom in the wori of all Calamities. Thus, e-
fides the common obftruCtibns of;commerce occafibned by the
nature of the feudal government, and tile slate of manners
d'uring the middle 'ages, its progress in England was retarded
by peculiar causes. Such a fiuic.eflion of' events adverse to tie
commercial spirit was sufficient to have checked its growtli,
although every other circumstance had favoured it. The Eng-
lilh were accordingly: one of the las nations in Europe who
availed themselves of their natural commercial advantages.
Before the reign ofiEdward 'II. all thi'wdol of England,' except
a small quantity wrought into: coarse cloaths for home confump-
tion, was fold to the Flemings or Lombards, and manufadtured

VOL. I. Xx by

.337

by them. Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some
of the Flemish weavers to fettle in England, it was long before
the Englilh were capable of fabricating cloth for foreign mar-
kets, and the export of unwrought wool ill continued to be
the chief article of their commerce. Anderson paflim.-All
foreign commodities were brought into England by the Lom,
bard or Hanseatic merchants. The Englilh ports were fre-
quented by hips both from the north and south of Europe,
and they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits arising
from the supply of their wants. The first commercial treaty
of England on record, is that with Haquin King of Norway,
A. D.I 217. Anders. vol. i. p. o8. But they did not venture
to trade in their own hips to the Baltick until the beginning of
the fourteenti century. lb. iSi. It was after tie'middle of
the fifteenth before they ent any ship into the Mediterranean:
lb. p. 177. Nor was it!long before this period tiat their veflels
visited the ports of Spain or Portugal. But though 1 have
pointed out the flow progress of the Englifi commerce, as,4
fad little attended to, and yet meriting oonfideration the con-
course of foreigners .,to the ports of England,. together with the
communication among all the different countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of the twelfth
century, is sufficient tojuftify all the observations and reasonings
in the text concerning the influence of commerce on the state of
manners, and of society.

NOTE XXX. S c '.'II; p. i53;

I HAVE not been ble to dfcover th. precise manner in
which the Juftiza was appointed. Among the claims of

:

, ;

'

. ,, . , the
'338

the jruta or union formed against James I. A. D. 1264, this was
One; that the Kilg hould not nominate any person to be Jufr
tiza without the consent or approbation of the ricos-lombres or.
nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragoi, vol. i. p. 180, But tlhe;
King in his answer to their remonstrance aflerts, " that it was
eftablifled by immemorial pratice, and was conformable to the
laws of the kingdom, that the Kinig, in virtue of his royal
prerogative, iamed the Juftiza, Zurita, Ibid. 18 . Blanca, 66.
From another pafage in Zurita, it appears that while the Ara-
gonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union, i. e. the power of
confederating against their fovcreign as often as they conceived
that he had violated any of their rights and immunities, the
Juftiza was not only nominated by thelKing, but held his office
during his pleasure. Nor was this practice attended witl any
bad effects, ,as te privilege of the union was a sufficient and
effetual check to any abuse of the royal prerogative. But when
the privilege of the union was abolilled as dangerous to the
order and peace of society, it was agreed that the Juftiza.
should continue in office during life. Several Kings, however,
attempted io. remove, he,Jutftizas who were obnoxioPs to, them,
and; they ometimes succeeded in the atteript. In.order to guard
against this encroachment, which would have destroyed the in-
tention of the institution, and have rendered the Juftiza the:
deperidant and tbol ds she crown, instead of th guardian of the'
people, a ltaw ws nafted i the Crtes, *A; :D. 1442, or-
dainig tha't:"'e; juiza 'tiould continue in office "during life,.
and should not be rertoved from it unless by the authority of
the Cortes Plueros & Obfervancial del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. 22l. y former laivs the person of the Juftiza had been
declared 'acred, and he was reeponfible only t6'the Cortes. Ibid.

j ':1
p. I5. b. Zurita and Blanca, who both published their hifto-

X.x 2 ric,.

339

ries while the Juftiza of Aragon retained the full exercise of
his privileges and jurifdi6tion, have neglected to explain several
circumstances with regard to the office of that refpe&table magi-
ftrate, because they addressed their works to their countrymen,
who were well acquainted with every particular concerning the
functions of a judge, to whom they looked up as to the guardi-
an of their liberties. It is vain to consult the later historians of
Spain, about any point, with refpet to which the excellent his-
torians whom I have named are silent. The ancient constitution
of their country was overturned, and despotism established on
the ruin of its liberties, when the writers of this and the pre-
ceding century composed their histories, and on that account
they had little curiosity to know the nature of those institutions
to which their ancestors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or they
were afraid to describe them with much accuracy. The spirit
with which Mariana, his continuator Miniani, and Ferreras,
write their histories, is very different from that of the two his-
torians of Aragon, from whom I have taken my account of the
constitution of that kingdom.

Twol eircumftances concerning the Juftiza, betides, those

which I havexmetioned in the text, are worthy of observation,
. None of the ricos-hombres, or noblemen of the first order,
could be appointed Juftiza. He was taken out of the second
class or cavalleros,:,.vho anfwcr nearly to gentlemen or common-
ers in Great Britain. Fueros & Obfervanc. del Reyno,: &c. lib. ,
p. ai. b. The reason was, by the laws of Aragon, the ricof-
hombres were not subjet to capital puniflhment; but as it was
necessary for the security of liberty, that the Juftiza should be
accountable for tile manner, in, which he .eecuted the high trust
reposed in !tim? it was a powerful restraint upon Ilm tp know

that
340

that he was liable to be punifled with the utmost rigour.
Blanca, p. 657, 76. Zurita, tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Obfer-
vanc. lib. ix.'p. 82. b. 183. It appears too from many pa!lhges
in Zurita, that the Jufiza was appointed to check the domi-
neering and opprefive spirit of the nobles, as well as to set
bounds to the power of the monarch, and thercfQre lie was
chosen from an order of citizens equally interested in oppo-
sing both.

2.' A MAGISTRATE poeffed of fucch vast powers as the Jus-

tiza, might have exercised them in a manner pernicious to the
state, if he himself had been subjec t6 no controul. A confti-
tutional remedy, however, was provided against this danger.
Seventeen' persons were chosen by lot in each meeting of the
Cortes. These formed a tribunal called the court of inquisition
into the oflice of Juftiza. This court met at three stated terms
in each year. Every person had liberty of complaining to it of
any iniquity or neglec of duty in the Juftiza, or in the infe-
rior judges, who aed in his name. The Juftiza and his de-
puties were called to answer for their conduct. The members
of the court passed sentence by ballot. They might punifhl by
degradation, confiscation of goods, or even with death. The
law which ereced this court, and regulated the forms of its
procedure, was enacted, A. D. 1461. Zurita Anales, iv. 102.
Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. 7,70. Previous to this period,
inquiry was made into the condut of the. Juftiza, though not
with the fame formality. He was from the firfi inflitution of
the office fubjeet to the review of the Cortes. The conitant
dread of such an impartial and evere inquiry into his behavi-
our, was a powerful motive to the' vigilant and faithful dif-

charge

34x

charge of his duty. A remarkable instance of the authority of
the Juftiza when opposed to that of the ing, occurs in the
year 1386. By the constitution of Aragon, the eldet' fbn or
heir apparent of the crown pofeffed considerable power and
jurifd tion in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. 'del Reyno
de Arag. lib. i. p. 6. Peter IV. instigated by a second 'wife,
attempted to deprive his son of this, and enjoined his fubjed;s
to yield him no obedience. The Prince immediately applied!
to the Juftiza ; " the safe-guard and defence, fays Zurita, against
all violence and oppreflion." The Juftiza granted him the firmo
de derecho, the effect of which was, that upon his giving surety~
to appear in judgment, he could not be deprived of any imn-
munity or privilege, hich he pofleffed, but in cohfequenCe of a
legal trial before the Juftiza, and of a sentence pronounced by
him. This was publihed throughout the kingdom, and. not.,
withstanding the proclamation. in contradiction to this which:
had been iffied by the King, the Prince continued in the eert
cife of all his rights, and his authority was universally recog-
nized. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. SEC T. III. p. 154.

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring testimony of many

respectable authors, to mention this as the constitutional form of
the oath of allegiance, which the Aragonefe swore to their So-
vereigns. I must acknowledge, however, that I have not found,
this singular oath in any Spanish author whom I have had an.
opportunity to consult. It is mentioned neither by Zrita, nor
Blanca, nor Argunfola, nor Sayas, ho were all' hiftoriogr*.,
phers appointed by the Cortes of Arhg6n to record the tanfhti
tioas of the kingdom. All theft writers poflfeb a mrit, *lioh

is

is very rare among historians. They are extremely accurate in
tracing the progress of the laws and constitution of their country.
Their silence with rcfpect to this, creates some suspicion con-
cerning the genuineness of the oath. But as it is mentioned by so
many authors, who produce the ancient Spanish words in which
it is expressed, it is probable that they have taken it fronm ome
writer of credit, whose works have not fallen into my hands.
The spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the. genius of the
Aragonefe constitution.

THE privilege of Union wbich I mentioned in the preceding

note, and alluded to in the next, is indeed one of the most fin-
gular which could take place in a regular government, and the
oath that I have mentioned exprenfes' othing more than this con-
ftitutional privilege entitled the Aragonefe to perform. If tie
King or his minliters violated any of the laws or immunities of'
the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate redress in consequence
of their representations and remonstrances, the nobles of the first
rank, or Ricos-omnbres de atura, & de meirnada, the equestrian
order, or the nobility of the second class, called' Hlidlgos E lfifan.
ciones, together with the magistrates of cities, might either in
the cortes, or in a voluntary assembly, joinin u nion, and binding
themselves by.mutual oaths and the exchange of hostages to be
faithful to each other, they might require the King, in the name
and by the authority of his ?body corporate, to grant themn. re-
dress. If the King refused to comply with their request, or
took arms in order to oppose them, they might, in virtue of
the privilege of union, intanty withdraw their allegiance from
the King, refuse to .aclpnowledge him as their Sovereign, and
proceed to elect another Monarhll; nor did they incur any

guilt,

*A43

guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that account.
Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 66i, 669. This union did not re-
femble the confederacies in other feudal kingdoms. It was a
conflitutional aflbciation, which pretended to legal privileges,
which issued its mandates under a common feal, and prdceeded
in all its operations by regular and ascertained forms. This
dangerous right was not only claimed, but exercised In the
year 287, the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso III. and obliged the King not only to' comply with
their demands, but to ratify a privilege so fatal to the power of
the crown. Zurita Anales, torn. i. p. 322. In the year 347,
·an union was formed against Peter IV. with equal success, and
a new ratification of the privilege was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii.
p. 202. But soon after, the King having defeated the leaders
of the union in battle, the privilege of union was finally abro-
gated in the Cortes, and all the laws or records which contained
any confirmation of it, were cancelled or destroyed. The King,
in pretence of the Cortes, called for the at whereby he had
ratified the union, and having wounded his band with his poi
niard, he held it above the record, "That privilege, fays lie,
" which has been o fatal to the kingdom, and so injurious to
"royalty, flould be effaced with the blood of a King." Zu.
rita, tom. ii. p. z29. The law abolilhing the union is pub.
lilhed. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. 178. From that pe-
riod the Juffiza became the conAitutional guardian of publick
liberty, and his power and jurifdition occasioned none of'thofe
violent convulsions which the tumultuary privilege of the union
was apt to produce. The conftitutidn, of Arago6i, however,
still remained extremely free. One source :of this liberty was
from the. early admifllohi of the representatives of citites into tho

Cortes.
344

Cortes.. It, seems probable, from Zurita, that burgefes were
contituen.t members of the Cortes from its first institution. He
mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D., it 3, in which the procu-
radors ;'d as ciuvddes y. villa were present. Tom. i. p. 5X.
This is the constitutional language. in which their, presence is
declared, in the Cortes, after the journals. of,that court were re-
gularly, kept. t: is. probable, that an historian so accurate as
Zurita, would, not, have used there words, if he had not taken
them from ome authentick record. It was more than a cen-
tury after this period before the, representatives of cities formed
a constituent part. in the supreme. asremblies of the other Euro-
pean nations. The free spirit of the Aragonefe government is
conspicuous in many particulars. The Cortes not only opposed
the attempts of their Kings to increaef their revenue, or to ex-
tend their prerogative, but they. claimed, rights and exercired
powers, whichi will. appear extraordinary, ven. in a country ac.
customed to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year zi86, the.
Cortes claimed the privilege of naming the. members of the
King's council and the officers of his household, and they seem
to hayw-obtained it for some time. Zurita, tom. i. p. 303, 307.
It was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers who
commanded the troops raised by their authority. This seems
to be evident from a pafage in Zurita. When the Cortes, in
the year I503, raised a body of troops to be employed in Italy,
it paed an a& empowering the King to name the officers who
should command them, Zurita, tonm . v. p. 274; which plainly
implies that without this warrant, it did not belong to him in
virtue of his prerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias del
reyno de Aragon, two general declarations of the rights and pri-
vileges of the Aragonefe are published the one in the reign of

VOL. I. Y y Pedro

Pedro I. A. D. 1283, the other in that of James II. A. D. 1325.
They are of such length, that I cannot insert them, but it is
evident from there, that not only the privileges of the nobility,
but the rights of the people, personal as well as political,
were, at that period, more extensive, and better understood than
in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The oath by
which the King bound himself to observe those rights and liber-
ties of the people, was very solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p. 15.
The Cortes of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and
vigilance, which are peculiar to free states, in guarding the efien-
tial parts of the constitution, but they were scrupulously atten-
tive to observe the most minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed. According to the established laws and
customs of Aragon, no foreigner had liberty to enter the hall
in which the Cortes assembled. Ferdinand, in the year i48i,
appointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the kingdom, while he
was absent during the course of the campaign. The law re-
quired that a regent hould take the oath of fidelity in presence
of the Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner, before she could be
admitted, the Cortes thought it necefiary to pass an at authorizing
the ferjeant-porter to open the door of the hall, and to allow her
to enter; " so attentive were they, fays Zurita, to observe their
" laws and forms, even such as may seem most minute." Tom. iv.

. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure the persona

rights of individuals, than to maintain. the freedom of the
constitution and the spirit of their itatutes with refpede to both
was equally liberal. Two fats relative to this matter merit
observation. By an express statute in the year 325, it was

declared
346

declared to be unlawful to put any native Aragonefe to the tor-
ture. If he could not be convicted by the testimony of witneles,
he was instantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita re-
cords the regulation with the fatisfation natural to an historian,
when he contemplates the humanity of his countrymen. He
compares the laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both ex-
empted citizens and freemen fiom such ignominious and cruel
treatment, and had recourse to it only in the trial of slaves.
Zurita had reason to bestow such an encomium on the laws of
his country. Torture was at that time permitted by the laws of
every other nation in Europe. Even in England, from which
the mild spirit of legislation has long banished it, torture was
not, at that time, unknown. Observations on the Statutes,
chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

T HE other fat llows, that the fame spirit which influenced

the legislature prevailed among the people. In the year 1485, the
religious zeal of Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. Though the Aragonefe were
no less fuperltitioufly attached than the other Spaniards to the
Roman Catholick faith, and no les defirots to root out the feeds
of error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors had cfattered,
yet they took arms against the inquisitors, murdered the chief
inquisitor, and long opposed the eftablilhment of that tribunal.
The reason which they gave for their conduc was, That the
mode of trial in the inquisition was inconfiflent with liberty.
The criminal was not confronted with the witneles, he was
not acquainted with what they deposed against him, he was
fubjeded to torture, and the goods of persons condemned were
confiscated. Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

347
Yy

Ttr.

T HE form of government in the kingdom of Valencia, and
principality of Catalonia, which 'ere annexed to the crown of
Aragon, was likewise extremely favourable to liberty. The
Valencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame manner
with the Aragonefe. But they had no magitrate resembling the
Juftiza. The Catalonians were' no lefb jealous of their liberties
than the two other nations, and no lefts bold in aflerting them.
But it is not necessary for illustrating the following history to enter
into any farther detail concerning the peculiarities in the conftitu-
tion of these kingdoms.

N O'T E XXXII. S C T. III. . I.

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians of Castile' for

such information as might enable me to trace the progress of
laws and government in Castile, or to explain the nature of
the constitution with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith I
have described the political state of Aragon. It is manifest not
only from the historians of CaRile, but from its ancient laws,
particularly the Fuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally
elective. Ley 2, 5, 8. They were chosen by the bishops, the
nobility, and the people, ibid. It appears from the 'fame vene-
rable code of laws that the prerogative of the Castilian monarchs
was extremely limited. Villaldiego, in his commentary 'on there
laws, produces many fats and authorities in confirmation of
both there particulars. Dr. Geddes, who was well acquainted
with Spanish literature, complains that he could find no au-
thor, who gave a diftint account of the Cortes or supreme
aflembly of the nation, or who described the manner in which
it was held, or mentioned the precise number of members who
had a right to fit in it. He produces, however, from Gil

Gonzales.
348

Gonzales d'Avila, who pblifhed a ,liftory of Henry II, the
writ of summons to the town of. Abula, requiring it to bhufc
representatives to alpear in the' Corts .wiih;.he called to ireet
A. D. 1390. From this'we learn,.:thatiPrelate, itDuke, :-.ar-
quiffes, the masters, of the three military oiders, Conds .and
:Riccos-hombres were required to attend. ' Thef. ompofed .the
bodies of ecclefiafticks and nobldlwhioh formed two: ,members
of the legillature. The cities which fctt members to that
meeting of the. Cortes' were :forty-eight. The number of
'representatives, )(fbr 'the citieslhad a :'right 'to) chfe more or
fewer according to their refpedtive dignity) amounted .to. an
hundred; and, twenty-five. .Geddes Mifdellaneous .:Trats, yol. i.
.331. -:Zurita having occasion; to i-mention ..the Cortes which
Ferdinand held at Toro A. D. 50o5, i. order:to (secure to: him-
.self "the government '.of Castile afte :the death of ,Ibella,
records,! with his uual accuracy, ithe names of the members
present. and of the cities which they reprcrented.. i Frm that
lift it appears, that only eighteen' cities had deputies in this.
afiembly. Anales de Aragon, tom. v: p. 3. What wa..,the oc-
cafion of this great inequality in tha number of'the citiesxcprefcnt-
ed in these two meetigs, of the.Cortes, I am unable:to explain..

N O T E XXXIII. B c T. I. p; 157.,

A OREATr part of the territory in Spain was engrossed by

the nobility. L Marinaeus Siculus, who composed the treatise de
Rebus Hifpanie during the reign -of Charles,V. gives a cata-
logue of the Spanilh nobility, together with the yearly rent of
their: estates. According to his accolurt,: which h affirma was

s,5;

349

as accurate as the nature of the subject would admit, the fum
total of the annual revenue of their lands amounted to one
million four hundred and eighty two thousand ducats. If we
make the allowance :for the vast difference in the value of
money in the fifteenth century' from that which it now
bears, and confider that the catalogue of Marineeus includes
only the sTitulados, or nobility 'whose families were diftin-
gulfhed by ome honorary title, their wealth must appear
very great. L Marinaeus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i.
p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their contests with the
crown, which I hall hereafter relate, complain of the exten-
five property of the nobility as extremely pernicious to the
kingdom. In one of their manifesto's they afert that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an hundred
leagues, the crown 'did not poflefs more than three villages.
All' the reft belonged to the nobility, and could be subjected
to no publick burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Charl. V. vol.
i, p. 42. It appears from the testimony of authors quoted
by Bovadilla that there vast poffellions were bestowed upon the
Ricos-bombresi bhidalgos, and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile,
in reward for the allftance, which they received from them
in expelling the Moors. They likewise obtained by the fame
means a considerable influence in the cities, many of which
anciently depended upon the nobility. Politica para Corregi-
dores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXIV. SEC T. III. p. 160.

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain, as I observed

Note XVIII. with refpet to the origin of'communities or free
cities in Spain, It is probable, that as soon as there were reco-

vered
350

vered from the Moors, theinhabitants who fixed their residence
in them being persons of dilinion ad credit, had all die
privileges of .municipal government and jurifdition conferred
upon them. Many friking proofs occur of the splendour,
wealth and power of the Spanish cities. Hieronymup Paulus
wrote a description of Barcelona in the year 149I, and coin-
pares the dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and the
elegance of its buildings, the variety of its manufactures, and
the extent of its commerce to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap.
Scottum. Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marinsus' describes Toledo as
a large and populous city. A great' number of its' inhabitants
were persons of quality and of illustrious rank. Its commerce
was great. It applied particularly to the manufatures of silk
and wool ' and the number of inhabitants employed in these
two branches of trade amounted nearly to ten thousand. Marin.
ubi supr. p. 308. I know. no city, fays he, that I would pre.
ser to Valladolid for elegance' and splendour. Ibid. p. 312.
We may form ome estimate of its populousness from the' fol-
lowing circumstances. The citizens took arms in.''the year
1516, in order to oppose a measure concerted by Cardinal Xi-
menes, and they mustered in the city, and in the' territory
which belonged to it thirty thousand fighting men. Sandov. Vida
del Emper. Carl. V. tom. i. p. 81. The manufatures carried
on in the towns of Spain were not intended merely for home
consumption, they were exported to foreign countries, and, that
commerce was a considerable source of wealth to the inhabitants.
The maritime laws of Barcelona are the foundation of mer-
cantile jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges Rhodie
were among the ancients. All the commercial states in Italy
adopted these laws, and regulated their trade according to them.

Sandi

351

Sandi Storia Civile Veneziana, Vol. ii. 865. It appears from
several ordonances of the Kings of France, that 'the merchants
of Aragon and Castile. were received on the fame footing,, and
admitted to the fame privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances
des Roys &c. tom. ii, p . 5. iii., 66, 504 635. Cities in
fueh a flourishing flate-became a refpedable part of the society,
and wereentitled to a considerable share in the legislature.
The magistrates of Barcelona apired to the highest honour a
Spanish subjef can enjoy, that of being,covered, in ,the presence
of their, sovereign, aon of being,treated as. gnandees of the
kingdom: Origin de la dignidad de. Grande de Castilla por
Doo.Alonfo Carillo. Madr; 657. B. I8!

..

NOTE.XXXV. S CT. III, p... 6.

THB military order of St. Jago,. the molt honourable and'opu-

lent of the three Spani(h orders, was instituted about the year
1170 The bull of confirmation by Alexander III. is dated
A. P. 176. At that time a considerable part of Spain was
subjeC to the Moors, and the whole country much exposed to
the depredations not .only. of the enemy, but of banditti. It is
no wonder, then, that an intfitution, the object of which was to
oppose the enemies of the Christian faith, and to restrain and
punish thoe who disturbed the publick peace, (hould be ex-
tremely popular, and: meet with general encouragement. The,
wealth and power of the order became fb great, that one historian
fays, that the gran Master of St. Jago, was the person in Spain
of greate. power and dignity next to the King. Eil. Anton.
bebriflenfias ap. Schott. Scrip.; Hifp. i. 812. Another observes,
hat the order possesed every thing in Castile that a King would

most

ioft desire to obtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22. Tile knights took
the vows of obedience, of poverty, and ,f conjugal chastity. By
the former they were bound implicitly to obey the commands of
their grand master. The order could bring into the field a
thousand men at arms. AEl. Ant. Nebref. p. .8 3. If these men
at arms were accompanied as was Iufial in that age, this was a
formidable body of cavalry. There belonged to this order
eighty four commanderies, and two hundred priories and other
benefices. Difertations fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St.
Marie, p. 262.. It is easy to fee how formidable to his fovercign
the command of there troops, the administration of fiuch revenues,
and the disposal of so many offices, must have rendered a subjed.
The other two orders, though inferior to that of St. Jago in
power and wealth, were. nevertlelefs very considerable. When
the conquest of Granada deprived the knights of St. Jago of
those enemies against whom their zeal ws originally directed,
fuperflition found out a new object, in defence of which they
engaged to employ their courage. To their usual oath, they
added the following clause " We swear to believe, to maintain,
and to contend in public and in private, that the Virgin Mary,
the mother of God, our Lady, was conceived without the stain of
original fin." This singular addition was made about the middle
of the seventeenth century. Honore de St. Marie Dissertations, &c.
p. 263.

NOTE XXXVI. S CT. IIl. p. 164.

I 'HAV frequently had occasion to take notice of the defects

in police during the middle ages, occasioned by the feebleness of
government, and the want of proper ubordination among the

Vol. I, /z dzifferent

different ranks of men. I have observed in a former note, that
this greatly interrupted the intercourse between nations, and
even between different places in the fame kingdom. The defcrip-
tion which the Spnnifh hitlorians give of the frequency of ra-
pine, murder, and every at of violence, in all the provinces of
Spain, are amazing, and present to us the idea of a society but
little removed from the disorder and turbulence of that which
has been called a state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i.
175. il. Ant. Nebriflenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist. ap. Schot-
tum II. 849. Though the excess of these disorders rendered
the institution of the Santa Hermandad necefiry, great care
was taken at first to avoid giving any offence or alarm to the
nobility. The jurifdiclion of the judges of the Hermandad was
expressly confined to crimes that violated the publick peace. All
other offences were left to the cognizance of the ordinary judges.
If a person was guilty of the most notorious perjury in any
trial before a judge of the Hermandad, he could not punish him,
but was obliged to remit tile cafe to the ordinary judge of the
place. Commentaria in Regias Hifpan. Conftitut. per Alph. ,de
Azevedo, pars v. p. 220,&c. fol. Duaci, 612. Notwithstanding
these reftridiors, the Barons were enfible how much te Her-
mandad would encroach on their jurifdiion. In CaRile, ome
opposition was made to the infitution; but Ferdinand had the
address to obtain the content of the Constable to the introduction
of the Hermandad into that part of the kingdom where his estate
lay; and by that meats, as well as the popularity of the infli-
tutiQn, he furlmounted every obfRacle that ,fiood i its. way.
JEi. Ant. Nebrifen, 851. In Aragon, the obles combined
against it with greater rpilt;' and Ferdinand, though he sap-
ported it with vigour, was obliged to make some concellions in

order
354

order to reconcile thenr. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. Tle
power ad revenue of the Hermandad in Castile seems to have
bea vy gret, Ferdinand, wlhe preparing for the war
aginft te Moors of Granada. required of the Hermandad to
furnish him sixteen thoufanr beats of burden, together with
eight thoufaid men to conduft th, and 1e obtained what he
demanded. Ek Ant. Nebrifl 881. T, Hermandad has been
found to be of si. mudu use in preserving peace, and restraining
or detc<ting crimes, that it is still continued in Spain, although
it be no longer neceflary either for moderating the power of the
nobility, or extending that of the crown,

NOTE XXXVU. SECT. III. p. 167.

NoTHItra is more common among Antiquarians, and there is

not a more copious fdurce of error, than to decide concerning
the infitutions and manners of past ages, by the forms and ideas
which prevail in their own times. The French lawyers in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries having found their fove-
reigns in polefllon of absolute power, seem to think it a duty in-
cumbent on them, to maintain that such unbounded authority
belonged to the crown in every period of their monarchy.
"' The government of France, fays M. de Real very gravely,
is purely monarchial at this day, as it was from the beginning.
Our Kings were absolute originally as they are at present."
Science du Gouvernement, tom ii. p. 31. It is ipoflible, how-
ever, to conceive two fRates of civil society more unlike to each
other, than that ofthe French nation under Clovis, and that under
Louis XV. It is evident from the codes of laws of the various
tribes which fettled in Gaul and the countries adjacent to it, as

Z z 2 well

well as from the history of Gregory of Tours, and other early
annalists, that among all there people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they had scarce begun
to acquire the first rudiments of that order and police which are
neceflary in extensive societies. The King or leader had the
command of soldiers or companions, who followed his standard
from choice, not by constraint. I have produced the clearest
evidence of this, Note VI. An event related by Gregory of
Tours, lib. iv. c. 14, affords the most striking proof of the de-
pendance of the early French Kings on the sentiments and incli-
nation of their people. Clotaire I. having marched at the head
of his army, in the year 553, against the Saxons, that people,
intimidated at his approach, sued for peace, and offered to pay a
large fum to the offended monarch. Clotaire was willing to
close with what they proposed. But his army insisted to be
led forth to battle. The King employed all his eloquence to
persuade them to accept of what the Saxons were ready to pay.
The Saxons, in order to ooth them, increased their original
offer. The King renewed his follicitations: But the army
enraged, rushed upon the King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged
him out of it, and would have slain him on the spot, if he had
not consented to lead them instantly againit the enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France pofef[led such limited autho-

rity, even while at the head of their army, their prerogative
during peace will be found to be still more confined. They
ascended the throne not by any hereditary right, but in confe-
quence of the eletion of their subje.s. In order to avoid an
unneceflary number of quotations, I refer my readers to Hotto-
manni Franco gallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will

find
356

find the fullest proof of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus,
and the most authentick historians of, the; Merovingian Kings.
The effea of this election was not to invest them with absolute
power. Whatever related to the general welfare of the nation,
was submitted to publick deliberation, and determined by the
suffrage of the people, in the annual afemblies called Lea
Champs des Mars and Les Champs de Mai. These afemblies
were called CJanmps, because, according to the custom of all tlie
barbarous nations, they were held in the open air, in rome plain
capable of containing the vast number of persons who had a
right to be present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis vetcrum
Germanorum, vol. i. § 19, 8rc. They were denominated
Champs de Mars and de Mai, from the months in which they
were held. Every free man seems to have had a right to be
present in there assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. § 33, &c. Thle
ancient annals of the Franks describe tihe perons who were pre-
sent in the aembly held A. D. 788, in these words: In placito
Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majores, minores, facer-
dotes, reguli, duces, comites, prafedi, cives, oppidani, Apud
Sorber. § 304. There every thing that concerned the iappinefs
of their country, fays an ancient hiltorian, every thing that could
be of benefit to the Franks was confidered, and enjoined. Fre-
degarius ap. Du Cange Gloflar. voc. Campus Martii. Chlotlia-
rius II. describes the business, and acknowledges the authority
of there afllmblies. They are called, fays he, that what'ver
relates to the common safety may be confidered and're'olved by
common deliberation; and whatever they determine, to that I
will conform. Amoinus de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bou-
quet Recueil. iii. 116. The flatutory laufes, or wordh of leg?-
flative authority in the. decrees ifued in there adfmblies,'run not

in.

357

in the name of the King alone. " We have treated, fays Chil-
debert, in a decree, A. D. 53z, in the assembly of March, toge.
ther with our Nobles, concerning some affairs, and we now pub-
li(h the conclusion, that it may come to the knowledge of all.*
Childeb. Decret. ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hlftor. tom. iv. p. 3. We
have agreed together with our vassals. Ibid. § 2. It is agreed
in the assembly in which we were all united. Ibid. 4. The
Salic laws, the most venerable monument of French jurifpru-
dence, were ena&ced in the fame manner; Ditaverunt Salicam
legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tune temporis apud earn erant
Re&tores. Sunt autem eleti de pliribus viri quatuor-qui per
treS Mallos conyenientes, omnes caufarum origines folicite difcur-
repdo, traOtantes de fingulis judicium decreverunt hoc modo.
Prf. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid. p. xzz. Hoc decretum
eft apud regem & principes ejus, t& apud cuntum populum
chriltianupm, qui infra regnum. Merwingorum confi(tunt. Ibid.
p. 12,4. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings, of the first
race are careful to specify that they were granted with the con-
fQnt of their vaflals. Ego Childebertus Rex uni cum confenft
&, voluntate Francorum, &c. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 622.
Chlbthaius.III. un cun patribus noftris epifcopis, optimatibus,,
cetgrifque palatii noflri. miniltris, A. D. 66q4 Ibid. 648; De
confenf fidelium noLtrorum. Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 239. The
hiftor.ias likewise describe the funions of the King in the
natiopal aflemblies in, such terms, as imply that his authority
there. was extremely small, and that every thing depended on
the, Qurt itself. Ipfe Rex (fays, the authors of Annales Franco-
run, feaigne of the. Field of March) fedebat in fella regia, cir-
cumftante exercitu, praecipiebatque is, die illo, quicquid a Fran-
cis decretum erat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THrA

THAT the general afemblies exercised supreme jurifidion

over all persons, and with refped to all causes, is so evident
as to tand in need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut, A.
D. 63, how unjust soever the sentence againt her may be as
related by Fredegarius, Chlrn. cap. 42. Bouquet. ibid. 43o. is
in itself fuffiient proof of this. The notorious -violence and ini-
quity of the sentence serve to demonltrate the extent of jurif.
dition which this aflembly potefTed, as a Prince so sanguinary
as Clotllire I. thoughlt the fandion of its authority would be
sufficient to justify his rigorous treatment of the mother and
grandmother of so many Kings.

WITH refpe& to conferring donatives on the Prince, we may

obierve that among nations whose manners and political inftitu-
tions are simple, the publick, as well as individuals, having few
wants, they are unacquainted wit taxes, and free uncivilized
tribes disdain to submit to any stated imposition. This was
remarkably the cafe of the Germans, and of all the various
people that ifihed from that country. Tacitus pronounces two
tribes not to be of German origin, because they submitted to pay
taxes. )D Morib. Germ. c. 43 ; and rpeaking of another tribe
according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he ays, " they
were not degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid.. c. 9.
Upon their ettlement in aul, we may conclude that while
elated with the conrcioufners o vicory, they would notrenounce
the high-fpirited ideas of their ancestors, or voluntarily fibmit
to aburden which they regarded as a badge of ervitude. The
evidence of the earlielf records and hiltorias justify tis, conclu.
flon. M. de Montesquieu in, the twelfth and filbifqunt chap.
ters of the thirteenth book of 1'Esprit es i;x and . M de

Mably

859

Mably Obfervat. fur 'Hist. de France, tom. i. p. 24.7. have
investigated this fad with great attention, and have proved
clearly that the property of no free-man among the Franks was
fubje& to any stated tax. That the Rate required nothing from
persons of this rank but military service at their own expence,
and that they fliould entertain the King in their houses when
he was upon any progress through his dominions, or his offi-
cers when ent on any publick employment, furnishing them
with 'carriages and horses. Monarchs fubfifed almost entirely
upon the revenues 'of their own domains, and upon the per-
quifites arising from the administration of justice, 'together with
a few small fines and forfeitures exated from those who ad
been guilhy of certain trespasses. It is foreign from my sub-
jed, to.enumerate there. The reader may find them in Obfervat.

e . de Mably, vol. i. . 267.
)... l' I' ;,: .-i

' '

. , ' " "

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by free-men to

their sovereign it was purely voluntary. In, the annual qsem-
bly' of M'arch' or May it was the custom to make the King a
present o' money, of, horses or arms, or of ome other thing
of value. This was an ancient custom, and derived from their
ancestors the Germians. Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim
conrferri principibus vel armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honore
acceptum, etiam neceflitatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ.
c. i' . Thee gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning
thn'frrom te ligeneral terms in which they are mentioned by the
ancient hiftorans; were considerable, and made no small part of
tfie 'oyal' revenue. Many paflages to this purpose are produced
b iM.: du Cange,' Diflert. iv. fur'Joinville, 153. Sometimes a
conquered people pecified' the sift which they bound themselves

to
360

to pay annually, and it was exacted as a debt if they failed.
Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. 55. It is probable
that the firIt ftep towards taxation was to afccrtain the value of
these gifts which were originally gratuitous, and to compel the
people to pay the fum at which they were rated. Still, however,
some memory of their original was preserved, and the aids granted
to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Europe were termed bnevo-
lences or free-gifts.

TH E Kings of the second race in France were raised to the

throne by the election of the people, Pepinus Rex pius,' fays
an author who wrote a few years after the tranfadion which
he records, per authoritatem Pape, & undionem fandti chris-
matis, & eletionem omnium Francorum in regni folio filbli-
matus et. Claufula de Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Rccueil
des Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the chief men of
the nation had transferred the crown from one family to another,
an oath was exacted of them that they fliould maintain on the
throne the family which they had now promoted; ut nunquam
de alterius lumbis regem in xevo prfiumant eligere. Ibid. p. o.
This oath the nation faithfully observed during a considerable
space of time. The posterity of Pippin kept poflenlion of the
throne; but with refpe& to the manner of dividing their domi-
nions among their children, Princes were obliged to consult the
general assembly of the nation. Thus Pippin himself, A. D.
768, appointed his two sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to,
reign as joint sovereigns but he did this, una cum confenfu Fran-
corum & procerum fuorum feu & epifcoporum, before whom
he laid the matter in their general aflembly. Conventus apud
fantum Dionyfium. Capitular, vol. i. p. 187. This deflination

VOL.I. A a a the

.1

the' French confirmed in a subsequent a!fembly, which was called
upon the death of Pippin; for, as Eginhart relates, they not only
appointed them Kings, but by their authority they regulated the
limits of their refpestive territories, Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet
Recueil, tom. v. p. go. In the fame manner, it was by the
authority of the supreme aemblies that any dispute which arose
among the descendants of the royal family was determined.
Charlemagne recognizes this important part of their jurifdic-
tion, and confirms it in his charter concerning the partition of
his dominions for he appoints, that, in cafe of any uncertainty
with refpet to the right of the several competitors, he whom
the people hall chufe, hall succeed to the crown. Capitular.
vol. i. 442.

U N DER the second race of Kings, the afembly of the nation,

distinguished by the name of Conventus, Malli, Placita, were
regularly aflembled once a year at leat, and frequently twice in
the year. One of the molt valuable monuments of the history of
France is the treatise of Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheinis, de
ordine Palatii. He died A. D. 882. only fixty-eight years
after Charlemagne, and he relates in that hort discourse the
fads which were communicated to him by Adalhardus, a minis-
ter and confident of Charlemagne. Prom him we learn that
this great monarch never failed to hold the general assembly of
his fubjeCs every year. In quo placito generalitas mnivetforurn
majorum tam clericorum qam laicorum conveniebat. Hincm,
oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii. c. . zl. in there afflemblies,
matters which related to the general fatety and state of the king-
dom were always discussed, before they entered upon any pri-
vate or less important business. Ibid . 33. p. 213. His

immediate
36»

immediate fuccefors imitated his example, and tranfaded no
affair of importance without the advice of their great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of the French

government continued to be in a good measure democratical.
The nobles, the dignified ecclesiastics, and the great officers of
the crown, were not the only members of the national council;
the people, or the whole body of free-men, either in person, or
by. their reprefen tatives, had a right to be present in it. Hinc-
marus, in describing the manner of holding the general aem-
blies, fays, that if the weather was favourable, they met in the
open air, but, if otherwise, they had different appartments allot-
ted to them, o that the dignified clergy were separated from the
laity, and the comites vel hjufmodi principes fibimet honorifi-
cabiliter a caetera multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. p. c. 35.
p. 114. Agobardus, archbilhop of Lyons, thus describes a na-
tional council in the year 833, wherein he was present. QUi
ubique conventus extitit ex reverentiflimis epifcopis, & magni-
ficentiflimis viris inluftribus, collegio quoque abbatum & comi-
tum, promifcueque etatis & dignitatis populo. The cetera
rmultitudQ of Hincmarus is the fame with the populus of Agobar-
dus, and both describe the inferior order of freemen, the fame
who were afterwards known in France by the name of the third
eflate, and in Epgland by the name of commons. The people,
as well as the members of higher dignity, were admitted to a
(hare of the legislative power. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803. it is
ordained, " that the queflion hall be put to the people with
refpet to every new law, and if they hall agree to it, they
shall confirm it by their signature. Cpit.,vol. i. 394. There
are two capitularia which convey to us a full idea of the part
whicl the people had in the adminillration of government.

A a a 2 lhen

363

When they felt the weight of any grievance, they had a right
to petition the overeign for redress. One of there petitions, in
which they desire that ecclefiafticks might be exempted from
bearing arms, and from serving in person against the enemy, is
still extant. It is addrefled to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used only by men
conscious of liberty, and of the extensive privileges which they
poffefled. They conclude with requiring him to grant their
demand, if he wilhed that they should any longer continue faith-
ful fubjets to him. That great monarch, instead of being
offended or furprized at the boldness of their petition, received
it in a most gracious manner, and signified his willingness to
comply with it. But sensible that he himself did not posIess
legislative authority, he promires to lay the matter before the
next general assembly, that such things as were of common
concern to all might be there confidered and eftablithed by com-
mon consent. Capitul. tom. i. p. 405-409. As the people
by their petitions brought matters to be proposed in the general
afembly, we learn from another capitulare the form in which
they were approved there, and enacted as laws. The proposs-
tions were read aloud, and then the people were required to de-
clare whether they aflented to them or not. They signified
their assent by crying three times, "We are satisfied," and
then the capitulare was confirmed by the subscription of the mo-
narch, the clergy and the chief men of the laity. Capitul.
tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 822. It seems probable from a capitulare
of Carolus Calvus, A. D. 851, that the overeign could not
refute his aflent to what was proposed and established by his
subje.s in the general assembly. Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii.
p. 47. It is unnecessary to multiply quotations concerning the

legislative
364

legislative power ,of the national af'emnbly of France under,,the
second race, or concerning. its right to.:determine wi.th regard ,tQ
peace and war. The uniform style of the Capitularia is an abun-
dant confirmation of the former. The reader who desires any far-
ther information with refpet to the latter; mray consult Les Ori-
gines du l'Ancien Gouvernement de 1a France, tom. iii;l p. i87, &i .
What has been said with re'pe& to 'the admiflin '6f' tha: people: or
their representatives into the supreme assembly merits attention not
only in tracing the progress of the French government, but on ac-
count of the light wlich it 'throw upon h similar queltion agitated
in'England, concerning the' time when' the codimndios bedame part
of the legislative body in that'kingdom. ' '

NO T E XXXVnIl. .SECT. III. p. i68 . :.

* . . ,

''; .' '. . [ , I

THAT important change which the- constitution of France

underwent, when the legifatiye power was transferred from
the great council of the nation .t, ;the King, has been explained
by the French antiquarians with lefsi;cate, than they bestow in
illustrating. other:'events 'in their: history. For, that eafon I
have endeavoured with the greater attention to trace the steps
which led to this memorable. revolution., I fhall.lere ad forome
particulars.which tend farther to illuftlrate it, :The Legeg Sall
cae, the Leges Burgundionumn, and other codes publiflied by; the
several tribes which fettled.in Gaul, were general laws extend-
ing to every person, to every province and di&ri6t where their
authority was acknowledged. , But they seem to have' become
obsolete and the reason of their' falling into difure is very obvi-
ous. Almost the whole' property of the 'nation' 'v.as' allodial
when these laws were framed. But when the feudal inftitu-

tions

tions became general, and gave rife to an infinite variety of
questions peculiar to that species of tenure, the ancient codes
were of no use in deciding with regard to tefe, because they
could not contain regulations applicable to cafes which did not
exist at the time when they were compiled. This, considerable
change'in thei nature of property made it neceCfary to publifl
the nw resglations contained in the Cpittdari. Many of
thofo, m ijs vident from the perusal of them,' were general
laws eteqpding to the whole French nation, in the general afrem-
bly of which they were enaged.. The weakness of the
greater part of the nmnarlrs Gs the fecQpd race, and the
disorder into which the nation wag thrown by the depre-
dations of the Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an
independant power formerly unknown in France. The nature
and extent of that jurifdition which they assumed, I have for-
merly confidered. The political union of the kingdom was at
an end, its ancient coiftitution was difllved, and only a feudal
relation fubflfed between the King and his vafials. The regal
jurifdition extended no further than the domains of the
.crown. Under the last Kings of the second race, there wore
reduced almost to nothing. Under the firflt Kings of the third
raee, they comprehended little more than the patrimonial estate
9f Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the crown. Even with
this acceflon, they continued to be very narrow. Velly. Hist.
do France, tom, iii. p. 3. i: Many of the moR considerable pro-
vinces of France di4 not at first acknowledge Hugh Capet as a
lawful Monarch. There are fill extant several charters, granted
during the first years of his reign, with this remarkable clause
in the fr o dating the charter; " Deo regnante, rege ex.
', pe4tanteh" egn.nte domino ,oftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis au-

tem
366

tern contra jus regnum ufurpante gone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil. tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title was thus openly
disputed, was not in a condition to art the royal jurifdition,
or to limit that of the barons.

ALL these circumstances rendered it ey for the barons to
usurp the rights of royalty within their on territories. Tho
capitularia became no les obsolete than the ancient laws;
local cftoms were every where introduced, and became the sole
rule by which all civil tranfa&ions were conduted, and all
causes were tried. The wonderful ignorance, which became
general in France, during the ninth and tenth centuries, contri-
buted to the introduction of customary law. Few persons, except
eeclefiaftics, could read; and as it was not pollible for them to
have recourse to written laws, either as their guide in business,
or their rule in adtniftring justice, the customary law tmniver-
rally prevailed.

DURINo this period, the general assembly of the nation

seems not to have been called, nor to have once exerted its legis-
lative authority. Local customs regulated and dcided every
thing. A striking proof of this occurs in ttacing 'te progress
of the French jurisprudence. the last of the apitularia co-
leted by M. Baluze, was ifued in the year 921, by Charles
the Simple. An hundred and thirty years elapsed from that pe-
riod to the publication of the sirs ordonance of the Kings of the
third race, contained in the great collection of M. Lauriere,
and the first ordonance which appears to be an at of legislation
extending to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Auguflus,
A. . 19 Co. Ordon, torn. i p. , 18. During that long

period

367

368 PROOFS AND ILL 4USTRATIONS.

period of one hundred and fixty-nine years, all tranfations were
directed by local customs, and no addition was made to the fia-
tutory law of France. The ordonances, previous to the reign of
Philip AuguiRus, contain regulations, the authority of which did
not extend beyond the King's domains.

VARIOUS instances occur of the caution with which the Kings
of France ventured at first to exercise legislative authority. M.
l'Ab. de Mably produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A. D.
20o6, concernig the Jews, who, in that age, were in ome
measure the property of the lord in whose territories they re-
fided. But it is not so much an a of royal power, as a treaty
of theKing with the countes of Champagne, and the comte de
Dampierre; and the regulations in it seem to be established not
by his authority, but by their content. Obfervat, fur l'hift. de
France, ii. p. 355. In the sale manner an ordonance of Louis
VIII. concerning the Jews, A. D. 223, is a contra& between
the King and his nobles, with refpet to their monner of treat-
ing that unhappy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The
Eftabliiemens 'of St. Louis, though well adapted to serve as
general laws to the whole kingdom, were not published as such,
but only as a complete code of customary law, to be of autho-
rity within the King's domains. The wisdom, the equity and
the order conspicuous in that code of St. Louis, procured ita
favourable reception throughout the kingdom. The venera-
tion due to the virtues and good intentions of its author, con-
tributed not a little to reconcile the nation to that legislative
authority, which the King began to aume. Soon after his
time, the idea of the King's polfefling fuprerhe legislative power
became common. If, fays Beamanoir, the King makes any

establishment

establishment pecially for his own domain, the barons may never-
thclefs adhere to their ancient customs, but if the establishment
be general, it shall be current throughout the whole kingdom,
and we ought to believe that such eftablifhmenta are made with
mature deliberation, and for the general good. Cout. de Beau-
voifis, c. 48. p. 265. Though the Kings of the third race did
not call the general aflimbly of the nation, during the long pe-
riod from Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair, yet they seem to have
consulted the bishops and barons who happened to be present in
their court, with refpe& to any new law which they publilhed.
Examples of this occur Ordon. tom i. . 3 & 5. The practice
seems to have continued as late as the reign of St. Louis, when the
legislative authority of the crown was well etablifhed. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1246. This attention paid to the barons
facilitated the King's acquiring such full pofneflion of the legislative
power, as enabled them afterwards to exercise it without obferv-
ing that formality.

THE aflemblies, distinguished by the name of the States Gene-

ral, were first called, A. D. 302, and were held occasionally from
that period to the year 614, since which time they have not
been summoned. These were very different from the ancient
assemblies of the French nation under the Kings of the first and
second race. There is no point with refpe&a to which the
French antiquarians are more generally agreed, than in main-
taining that the States General had no ruffrage in the pafling of
laws, and poffefled no proper jurifdition. The whole tenor
of the French history confirms this opinion. The form of pro-
ceeding in the State, General was this. The King addreled
hlnfelfto the whole body aflemlled in one place, and laid be-
fore them the affairs on account of which he had fiulmoned

Vo L. B b b them.

369

them. The deputies of each of the three orders, of nobles, of
clergy, and of the :third estate, met apart, and prepared their
eahier or memiorial,- containing their nfwer to the propositions
which had been made to them, together with the reprefentai
tions which they thought proper to lay before the King. These
answers and representations were confidered by the King in his
council, and generally gave rife to an ordonance. These ordo-
nances were not addressed to the three estates in common. Some-
times the King addrefTd an ordonance to each of the dftates in
particular. Somretimes he mentioned the assembly of the three
estates. Sometimes mention is made only of the afembly of
that estate to which the ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no
mention at all is made of the ambly of eftatea, which fug-
, gested th propriety of qeacing the law. Peface au tomr. iii.

des Ordon. p. X, Thus the States Gneral had only the privi-
lege of advising. and remonftrting the legiflaltive authority re-
ided in the King alone.

N O T E XXXIX. S c. . II1. p. 172.

IF tlhe parliament of aris be confidered only as the supreme

court of Jutice, every thing relative to its origin and jurifdic-
tiqn is clear and obvious. It is the ancient court of the King's
palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and invested with
an extensive qnd ascertained jurifdidion. The powver of this
court, while employed in this p.rt of its' fintions, i not the
obje of present consideration. The pretensions of the parlla-
ment to controul the eercife of the legislative authority, and'
its claim of a right to interpose with refpet to public affairs
and the political administration of.the kindo'm,, lead to inqui-
ries attended with greater' difficulty. As the oficers and mem-

bers
37°

bers of the parliamnent of Paris werp anciently nominated by tle
King, were paid by him, and on several ocafiops were, remove4
by him at pleasure, (Chroniq. Scandaleufq de Louis XI. chex
les Mem. de Comines, tom. ii. p. 5!.. Edit. de M. Lenglet de
Frefnoy,) tley cannot be confidered, as repre,ptatiyes. of, thl
people, nor could tley claim any fhareil! tle legiatie, powis
as afting, in their name, We, nuft search for some, other. (ourc
of this higlh privilege. The parliament ,was, originally oo-
poscd of the, most eminent persons in. the ipgdom. The peers
of France, ecclefiattics qs te higheft.order, .and noblemen, of
illustrious birth were members of it, t whom were added some
clerks and counsellors learned in the laws,, Pafquier Recherches,
p. 44, &c. Encyolopedie, ,tom. xii. Art, Parlenment, p. 3, .
A court thus constituted was properly, a.,committee of the States
General of the kingdom, and was compoed of these barons and
fideles, whom the Kings of France were accustomed to consult
with regard to every at of jurifdition or legislative authority,
It was natural, therefore, duripg the. intervals between the
meetings of the States General, or during those periods when
that assembly was not called, to consult the parliament, to lay
matters of, publick concern before it, and to obtain its approbation
and concurrence, before any ordonance was published,, to which
the people were required to conform. . Under the second race of
Kings, every new law: was reduced into proper form by the Chan.
cellor of the: kingdom, was proposed by him to the people, and
when ena&ed, was.committed to him to be kept among the pub-.
lick records,, that he might give authentic copies of it to all
who hould demand them. incm. de ord. palat. c. 6. Capitul.
Can. Calv. tit. xiv. §': . tit. xxxiii. The chancellor presided in
the parliament of Paris at its first institution. Encyclopedic,

Bbb 2 tOIl.

37'1

tom. iii. art. Cbancelier. p. 88. It was therefore natural for
the King to continue to employ him in his ancient functions of
framing, taking into his cuflody, and publishing the ordonances
which were i sued. To an ancient copy of the Capitularia of
Charlemagne, the following words are subjoined. Anno tertio
Clementiffimi domini noftri Caroli Augufti, sub ipso anno, hec
fai&a Capitula funt, '& confignata Stephand comiti, ut hec ma-
nifefta faceret Parifiis mallo publico, "& illa legere faceret
coram Scabineis, quod ita & fecit, & omnes in uno confenfe-
runt, quod ipfi voluifient obfervare ifque in pofterum, etiam
omnes Scabinei,' Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria
fubter fignaverunt. Bbuquet Recueil. tom. . p. 663. Mallus
signifies not only the publick aemblyjef the nation, but the
court of justice held by:the comes, ,iprmiffus dominicus. ' Sca-
bini were the judges, or the affefors of the judges in that court.
Here then seems to be a very early infiance, not only of laws
being publified in a court of justice, but of their being veri-
sied or confirmed by the subscription of the judges. If this was
-the common pratice, it naturally introduced the: verifying of
edi&s in the parliament of Paris. But this conjeture I pro-
pose with that diffidence, which I have felt in all my reason-
ings concerning the laws and institutions of foreign nations.
3. This supreme court of justice in France was dignified with
the appellation of parliament, the name by which the general
assembly of the nation was diftinguithed towards the close of
the second race of Kings; and men, both in reasoning and in
condu&, are wonderfully influenced by the fimiliarity' of names.
The preserving the ancient names of the magistrates established
while republican government subsisted in Rome, enabled Au-
gulfts and his successors to aflume new powers, with lets obfer-

vation,

vation, and greater ease. The beltowing the fame name in
France upon two courts, which were extremely different, con-
tributed not a little to confound their jurifdidtion and func-
tions.

ALL there circumstances concurred in leading the Kings of

France to avail themselves of the parliament of Paris, as the in-
ftlument of reconciling the people. to their exercise of legifla-
tive authority. The French, accuflomed to fee all new laws
examined and authorized before they were published, did. not
sufficiently diftinguilh between the effeCt of performing this in
the national aflembly, or in a court appointed by the King. But
as that court was composed of refpeCable members, and well
Dkilled in the laws of their country, when any new edit received
its fantion, that was fuficient to dispose the people to impli-
cit fubmiflion.

WHEN tle practice of verifying and regitring the royal

edits in the parliament of Paris became common, the parlia-
ment contended that this was necelfary in order to give them
legal authority. It was established as a fundamental maxim in
French jurisprudence, that no law could be published in any
other manner; that without this formality no edic or ordo-
nance could have any effec; that the people were not
bound to obey it and ought not to confider it as an edit
or ordonance until it was verified in the supreme court,
after free deliberation. Roche flavin des Parlemens de France,
4to. Gen. x162. p. 9. The parliament, at different times,
hath with great fortitude and integrity opposed the will of
their sovereigns, and notwithstanding their repeated and pe-
remptory requisitions and commands,. hath refused to verify

and

373

and publish such edicts as it conceived to be oppreflive to the
people, or subversive of the constitution of the kingdom.
Roche-flavin reckons that between the year 1562, and the
year 589, the parliament refused to verify more than a hun-
dred edi&ts of the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many infiances of the
spirit and constancy with which the parliaments of France op-
posed pernicious laws, and aferted their own privileges are
enumerated by Limnaeus Notitiae Regni Franciae, lib. i. . . p.
224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain and defend

this privilege, bore no proportion t its importance, or to the
courage with which its members aerted it. When any mo-
narch was determined that an edit should be carried into
execution, and found, the parliament inflexibly resolved not to
verify or publish it, he could easily supply this defet by the
plenitude of his regal power. He repaired to the parliament
in person, he took poffeflion of his feat of justice, and com-
manded the edict to be read, verified, registered and published
in his pretence. Then, according to another maxim of French
law, the King himself being present, neither the parliament,
nor any magistrate whatever, can exercise any authority, or
perform any funcion. Adveniente Principe, cellat magiftratus.
Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Encyclopedie tom. ix. Art. Lit.
de Yifice, p. 581. Roche-flavin mentions several instances of
Kings who atually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to the
residue of the rights and liberties transmitted to the French by
their ancestors. Pafquier produces some instances of the fame
kind. Rech. p. 6I. Limnaeus enumerates many others, which
the length to which this note has swelled, prevents me from

inserting
374

375

inserting at length, tltougl .tlAey tend greatly to illultrate this
important article in the French history4 p. 245. Thus by an
exertion of prerogative, which, though violent, seems to be
contlitutional, and is justified by innumerable precedents, all
the efforts of the parliament to limit and controul the King's
legislative authority, are rendered ineffectual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the constitution or jurif-

diion of any parliament. in France, but that of Paris. All of
them are formed upon the model of that most ancient and
refpedable tribunal, and all my observations confcerning it will
apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. SECT. Il:p. 177.

THi humiliating posture, in hiich a great Emperor im-

plored absolution, is an event so fingutar that the words in
which Gregory himself difcribes it, merit a place here, and
convey a striking piture of the arrogance of that PontiWf
Per triduum, ante portam caftri, depofito ;o ni regi6 cultu,
miferabiliter, utpote difcalceatus, & lafieis indutus, peYfiitens,
non prius cum malto fletu apostolic miferationis auxiliim, &
consolationem implorari deflitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderair,
8 ad quos rumor ille prevenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paflionis miferiiordiam movitr ur po eo multis precibub &
lacrimis iitercedentes omnes quidemn infolitam noftree mentis
duritiem mirarentur ; nonnulli vero in nobis non apoftolict fedis
grdvitatem, fed quasi tyrannicsi feritatisi crudtlitateri efb' cla.

' ( rtenr.

marent, Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Conteffa Matilda da
Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756, vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLL SECT. III. p 86.

As I have endeavoured in the history to t!ace the various

fleps in the progress of the constitution of the Emtrl!e, and to ex-
plain the peculiarities in its policy very fully, is :ot necessary to
add much by way of illustration. What a,;-,.ars o be of any
importance I shall range under dil;nt hed:

I. WITH respect to the p-v'er, .: .:-- :;: and revenue of

the Emperors. A very jufct i-d '

. - r.- b. foirmced by

attending to the view which Ps-i. .. : : li:gts of the
Emperors at two different periuoj -i ' c!osc of
the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. Teit, . o his c;;une-
ration were the right of conferring a,, - .ce ailial
benefices in Germany ; of receiving tne Icvenuws :tf ~hem
during a vacancy; of Mort-main, or of i.._.-: g io the
effects of ecclesiastics who died intestate. Tn II. :;t of con-
firming or of annulling the elections of the popes. The right
of assembling councils, and of appointing them to decide con-
cerning the affairs of the church. The right of conferring
the title of King upon their vassals. The right of granting
vacant fiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the Em-
pire, whether arising from the Imperial domains, from imposts
and tolls, from gold or silver mines, frorh the taxes paid by
the Jews, or from forfeitures. The right of governing Italy
as its proper sovereigns. The right of erecting free cities, and
of eftablifling fairs in them. The right of assembling the

diets
376

diets of the Empire, and of fixing the time of their duratio;.
The right of coining money, and of conferring that privilege
on the ates of the empire. The right of adiniflring both
high and low juftie within the territories of the different states.
Abreg. p. 160. The other period is at the extinaion of the
Emperors of the families of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D.
1437. According to the .fame autho the'Imperial prerogatives
at that time were the right of 'conferring all dignities and
titles, except the privilege of being a state of the Empire. The
rig1t of Preces prirmari or of appointing once during their reign
a dignity in each chapter or religious house. The right of grant-
ing dispensations with rcfpet to the age of majority. The right
of ereting cities, and of conferring the privilege of coining mo-
ney. The right of calling the meetings of the diet, and of pre-
fiding in them. Abrege, &c. p. 507. It were easy to show that
M. Pfeffel is well founded in all these assertions, and to confirm
them by the testimony of the moRs refpetable authors. In the
one period the Emperors appear as mighty lovereigns with extensive
prerogatives; in the other as the heads of a confederacy with very
limited powers.

TH revenues of the Emperors decreased still more than

their authority. The early Emperor, and particularly those
of the Saxoh ine, belides their vast' patrimonial or hereditary
:territories; pfefed 'ar ' extensive domain both in Italy and
Gerrahy which belonged to theni :as 'Emperors. Italy be-
longed to the Eripeiors s thiir proper kingdom,, anrd:there.
venues which they drew from it were very considerable.' The
first alienations of the Imperial revenue were ade in :this
'couritry. The Italian' cities having acquired wealth, and afpir-

0'VOL. I. i . Cc' . ing

377

icg at i::depe;:dance, purchased their liberty from different Em-
pcrors, as 1 have observed Note XV. The ums which they
paid, and the Emperors with whom they concluded there bar-
gains, are mentioned by Cafp. Klockius de JErario Niorimb.
1671. p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his ion Wenceslaus diili-
pated all that remained of the Italian branch of the domain.
The German domain lay chiefly upon the banks of the Rhine,
and was under the government of the Counts Palatine. It is
not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to estimate the value
- of this ancient domain, which has been so long incorporated

w'lth the territories of different -Princes. Some hints with re-
spec' to it may be found in the gloflary of Speidelius which he
has intituled Speculum Juridico-Philologico-politico-Hiftoricum
Obfervationum, &c. Norimb. 1673. vol. i.' 679. 1045. a more
full account of it. is given by Klockius deErario, p. 84. Be-
fides this, the Emper6rs pofieffed coifiderable diftiits of land
lying intermixed' with the estates of the Dukes and barons.
They were accustomed to visit these frequently, and drew from
them what was sufficient to support their court during the
time.of: ther refidencm/ Annalifte, ap. Struv. tom.i. 611. A
great part of these were seized by the nobles during the long
interregnum, or during-.the wars occasioned by the contests
between the Emperors and the. court of Rome. At the fame time
that -fiuch incroachrnents were rade on she fixed or territorial
.property. of:.the. Emperors, they were robbed almost entirely
of their casual revenues , The Princes and barons appropria-
ting: tol themselves taxes and:d.uties of every kind, which had
'-:fsalgy been' paid; to::themn, PfeffeiAbreg, - 374. The profuse
- and inconsiderate ambition of Charles IV. squandered whatever

remained of the Imperial revenues after so many defalcations.

He,

He, in the year 1376, in order to prevail with the Elcorls to
chute his son Wenceslaus King of the Romans, promised each
of them a hundred thor.and crowns. But being unable to pay
so large a fum, and eager to secure the election to his son, he
alienated to the three ecclefiaflical .Eletors, and to the Count
Palatine, such countries as still belonged to the Imperial. domain
on the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over to them all
the taxes and tolls then levied by the Emperor in that district.
Trithemius, and the author f the Chronicle of Magdeburgh
enumerate the territories and taxes which were thus alienated,
and represent this as the last and fatal blow to the Imperial
authority. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 437 From that period, the
shreds of the ancient revenues possessed by the Emperors have
been so inconsiderable, that, in the opinion of Speidelius, all
that they yeild would be so far from defraying the expence of
supporting their houfhold, that they would not pay the charge'
of maintaining the posts eftablilhed in the Empire. Speidelii
Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680. These funds, inconsiderable as
they were, continued to decrease. Granvelle, the minister of
Charles V. aferted in the year 546, in pretence of several of
the German Princes, that his master drew no money at all
from the Empire. Sled. History of the Reformation. Lond.
1689. p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present. Trait de
droit Publique de 'Empire par M le Coq de Villeray, p. 55.
From the reign of Charles IV. whom Maximilian called the
pest of the Empire; the Emperors have depended entirely on
their hereditary dominions, as the only source of their power and
even of their subsistence.

Ccc2

379
%. THE

z. THE ancient mode of electing the Emperors, and the va-

rious changes which it underwent, require some illustration.
The Imperial crown,. as well as those of most monarchies in
Europe, were originally attained by election. An opinion long
prevailed among the antiquaries and publick lawyers of Ger-
many, that the right of chufing the Emperors was vested in
the arcbifhops of Mentz, Cologne and Treves, the King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edic ofOthoIII,
confirmed by Gregory V, about the year 996. But the whole
tenor of history contradicts this opinion. It appears that from
the earliest period in the history of Germany, the person who
was to reign over all, was eleited by the suffrage of all. Thus
Conrad L was elected by all the people of the' Franks, fay some
ara.lifs ,.byall the princes and chief men, fay others; by all the
nation, fay others. .Seetheir words, Struv. Corp. i. Coriringiu'
dc Germanri. _per. Repub.. Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654.
p. 193 In the. year 124, p6fterior to the fuppofed'regulations
ofQ tho II, Conra'd 1, was eleEted by all the chief rnen arid hls
election was approved and cofirmed by the people, Struv. C6.
84 . At,the eletion of Lotharius. l A D. 1125, sixty thou-
sand perfens of all ranks were prefen t. He was named y the
chief men,, and. their nomination was approved by'the peple
$truv. ibid. p. :357, The firftt author who mentioinsthe si' i
fletors js. Martinus, Polonus, who flourilhed in the reign of
Erederick.JI, ,hich ended A, D. 256. We find that in all tlif
ancient elctions to which- I have reeferred, th'. Princes 6o
greatest power and authority were allowed by their cointry-
men to name the person whom they wished to appoint Emperor,
&ai the people approved or disapproved of their nomination.

This
3o9

This privilege of. voting first is called by the German lawyers
the right of Prataxation. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was
the sirs origin of the exclusive right which the Elecors ac-
quired. The Electors pofeffed the most extensive territories of
any Princes in the Empire; all the great offices of the slate
were in their hands by hereditary right; as soon as they ob-
tained or engrossed so much influence in the election, as to be
allowed the right of pretaxation, it became unnecelfary for the
inferior ecclefiafticks and barons to attend, when they had no
other function but that of confirming the deed of there more
powerful Princes, by their assent. During times of turbu-
lence, they could not resort to the place of eletion, without
a numerous retinue of armed vaflals, the expence of which they
were obliged to defray out of their own revenues. The rights
of the seven Eleators were supported by all the defendants and
allies of their powerful families, who shared in the splendor
and influence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing pri-
vilege. Pfeffel. Abreg., p. 376. The seven Electors were coi-
fidered as the representatives of all the orders, which composed
the highest class of German nobility. There were three arch-
bifiops, chancellors of the three great diftrias into. which the
Empire was anciently divided; one King; one Duke; one
Marquis; and one Count. All these circumtanics contributed
to render the introduction of this considerable innovation into
the conftitition of the Germanick body, extremely easy. Every
thing of importance, relating to this branch of the political state
of the Empire, is well iiluftrated by Onupfrius' Panvinius an
Augustinian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles.
V. His treatise, if we make some allowance for that partiality

which.

3SI

PROOFS AND ILLUS'TRATIONS.

which he exprefles in favour of the powers whioh the Popes
claimed in the Empire, has the merit of being one of the first
works in which a controverted point in history is examined
with critical precision, and with a proper attention to that evi-
dence which is derived frofi records, or the tetimnony of con-
temporary historians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Politica
Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Eletors have engrofled the ole right of chufig the

Emperors, they have aflumed likewise :that of deposing' them.
This high power the Eleftors have not only presumed to claim,:
but have ventured, in more than one instance, 'to exercise. In
the year' 1298, a part of the Electors deposed Adolphus o'f
Naifau and fubftitued Albert of: Aufria in his' place.' 'The
reasons on which they found ;their sentence, how that this
deed flowed from factious, not from piblick-fpirited motives.
Struv. Corp. vol. i. 54o. In the first year of the fifteenth cen-
tury, the Eletors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed the Imperial
crown on the head of Rupert EleEtor Palatine. The at:of depofi.'
tion is fill extant. GoldaftiConftit. vol. i. 379. It ,is pronoun.
ced in the name and by the authority of the Eletors, and confirm-
ed by several prelates and barons of the Empire, who were present.
These exertions of the electoral power demniftrate that the Impe-
rial authority was funk very low.

THE other privileges of the electors, and the rights of the elec-

toral college are explained by the writers on the publick law, i,
Germany. .

3. W. .
3. WITH

383

3. WITH refpe& to the diets or general aflemblies of the.

Empire, it would be necesary, if my objet were to write a par-
ticular history of Germany, to enter into a minute.detail, con-
cerning the forms of aflembling it, the persons who have right to
be prefenit, their division into fveral Colleges or Benches, the
, objeds of their deliberation, the mode. i which they. carry on

their debates or.give .thlir futffages, and the authority of their
decrees or recefies. But; in a, general hiltory i is ficient.to
obLerve, that, originally, the diets of the Empire' vere perfectly
the fampe ,with the aemblies of March and of May held by the

aI once ayear.

ve.

Ji, ..

Kings of France.. They met, at leaftr once a year. Every iree
;I tian hga a.ight tq, be present. They were amblies, in 'whlich

a mopar ch deliberated wltlh his lubjets, concerning their cbm-
mon interest. Artumeus de comitiis Rom.!German. Imperil, 4to,
Jena. I66o, cap. 7. No. 'o, '&c. But when the princes, dig-
nified ecclefiattics, and barons,' acquired teritorial 'and inde-
pendant jurifdition, the diet became an afembly of the' eparate
tfates, which formed the confederacy of which the Emperor was
hqd. While theconftitution of the Empire remained in its pri-
. reitive'form, attendance on the diets was a duty', lite th'"otlier
services due from feudal fibjects' to their' fovreiln;,.wvhictiillhe
members were bound 'to perform 'in erfon' anhd if: anyi member
who hlad 'a ight' to be"prefeint'in the diet negleEted to attend. in.
per'fobn,'l'e"i dtf o'ly loft hisVoie, but. was-liable to n heavy
.penalty. ' Arumae is de'omi:t! :s.&i.P. 40:' Whereas, fomn .the
' {ime that 'thle-ri mmbirs'"of the:'.diet!.:became indepen4antl,ates,

the rigih of fiuffrage t'as antnexed' to the territory; or dignity,
not t the peioi.' The members, if' theylcould not, or would
' not aten';i i ' h',;mign'ht. Ibd :,their :deputies,' j a. Princes

kindi

fend ambaifadors, and they were entitled to exercise all the
rights belonging to their conflituents.. Ibid. N". 42, 46, 49.
By degrees, and upon the fame principle ,of confidering
the diet as an aembly of independant states, in which each
confederate. had the right of suffrage, if any member polfefled
more than one of those flates' or characters which entitle to a
feat in.the diet, he was was allowed a 'proportional numberof
'uffrages. PfeffeL Abrege 6z. F'rom the fame cause tie
Imperial cities, as, soon as they became free, and. acquired fipreme
and independant jurifdidion within their own teri'toies, were
received as members ot the diet. Thle powers of the diet extend
to ever ithing relative to the.conjqmn 'conceii off the', ;eilmanick
body, or that .an interest or. asset it as a confederacy.' "Te
diet takes, no.,ognipgce of the interior dminiftratio' i the 'idif-
<.ferensrtat, , upess hat, happens to disturb or threaten tie ge-

· '

... . "

, ,, : ..... ['.!'
,:pealfafety. .

4.; Wi'. 'refpe&. to ,the Imperial chamber, the jurifdislon
of which has been the great tpurce of order and' tranquilliy/in

....... S . In' ..
,prmany,. it is, ece'ary to observe, hat this court was ini-

, - ...,.: , ,"* :;'' :' :". i ' -

,

,;,

, '

- ';.'/T"-o

t..,uted in. order..to put; an ,ed.to .the, ,caamities occafinsed by
private wars .in '..Cermany. I haye , aready, traged .the rife and

' progress of this;.pratice, aand,poigtsed ,out its, perpicious effeets
:Ias'fuilyas. ;their extgnfiYe, inlus9pce duripg;the middle ages me-
:rifed .;;? Geomany .private, .war:; tm, to,,a ve .been ore ire-
queit and. prdutive, of worrfe conequenes than in, the oer
countries bs -Europe. :iThes. are obvi9ou reaqns.for tiis. the
i-6bilityof cOGeraby Wi re jfitreJely, nuero , n. 'th, causes
· Lt sos
I 384

of their diflbntioii multiplied in prqportion. The territorial
jurifdiion which tlhe German nobles acquircd, was more corn-
pleat than that Sprofefed by their order in other nations. Thcy
became, in reality, independrint powers, and they claimed all
the privileges of that charadter. The long ipterelgnuml accuf-
tomd 'Jtheil, to an uncontrouled licence; and led then to forget
tliat subordination ,hicl is neceflary in order to maintaizn pub-
lick tranquility. At the time when the other monarchs of
Eilope began to. acquire.fiich an increase of power and re-
venueg' as added new force to their government, the authority
.iid ,revehtes of the Emperors continued gradually to decline.
The diets of the Empire,.which alone had authority to judge
between such mighty barons, and power to enforce its deci-
sions;; inet' very seldom. Conring.' Acroamata, p. 234. The
diets when they. did affemble:.were okten composed of several
thousand members, Chronic. Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary aemblies, ill-qualified to decide
concerning any quefti6n of right; The feflion of the diets conti-
nued oHly'tro 'or three days , PfeffelAbrege, ij. s44, so that they
h'ad 'ho time to'! hear or discuss' any cause that was in the malleft
degree intricate. Thus Germany was left, in rome meafuire,
without any court of judicature, capable of reprefling the evils of
private war.

ALL tie expedients which were employed in other coun-

tries of Europe in order to restrain this praaice, and which
I have' described Note XXI. were tried nin ! Germany with
little effect.' The confederacies of the nobles and of the
cities, anid the division of Germany into various circles, which

VOL. . D d d 1 men-

38

I mentioned in that Note, were found likewise insufficient.
As a last remedy, the Germans had recourse to arbitets whom
they called .4luflrege. The barons and states in different parts
of Germany joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all controversies, that mnight arie 'between
them, to the determination of A4ufrege, and to submit to their
sentences as final. These arbiters are named sometimes in the
treaty of convention, an initance of which occurs in Lude-
wig Reliqu Manufcr. omnis aevi, vol. ii. z2t. sometimes they
were chosen by mdtual ebnfent; sometimes they were appointed
by neutral persons; and sometimes the choice was ltt to be
decided by lot. Datt. de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap, 27.
N° 60, &c. Speidelius Specultlm; &c. voc. Atflrag. p. 95.: Upon
the introduction of this p'ratice, the publick tribunals ofjltice
became, in a great ieatfure, -ufelefl, arid ere. almost! entirely
deerted.

IN order to re-establish the authority of government, Maxi-
milian instituted the Imperial chamber, ;at the prioa .whici I
have: mentioned. This. tribunal. confdied originally of a prefi-
dent, who was always a noblemap. of the firfi orde.r, and of
sixteen judges. The president wa appgirted by the Emperor,
and the judges, partly by him, and partly by the States, accord-
ing to forms which it is unneceflary to describe. A ftlm was'
iiiipofed, 'vith thieir o6wn consent, on the States of the nmpire,
for paying the faldries of the judges, and officers in this court..
The Imperial thambdr was eftablinled sirs at tFrancfort onr the
Maine. Duriig' the reign of. Charles; V; it was r.ovted, to
Sires, andl continued in thatcity above a cenltury and a half.

It
386

PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

It is now fixed ,at Wetzlar. This court takes cognizance of
all questions concerning civil riglt between the States (of
the Empire, and passes judgment in the las retort, and
without appeal. To it blongs, likewise, the privilege of
judging in criminal causes which may be confidered as con-
ne&ed with the ,preservation of. the publick peace. Pfeffel
Abrege, 06p. ,

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or jurifdition,

together with such as refpe& the territories, which hold
,ofthe Empire In Italy, belong properly to.the.jurifdi&tion of
thei Aulidk'iccotniil. This tribunal was formed upon the model
of ihe ancient court of the ipalace instituted by the Emperors of
Germany. It depended not upon .the States of the Empire, but
.upon. the Emperor he having the .right of appointing at plea-
Cure .nlli;the judges of yhom it is cOmposed. Maximilian,' in
Ordet, tiprocure Come compensation for the diminution of his
authority, by the. powers veRled in the Imperial chamber, pre-
yailed on.,the diet A. D. I512. to give its consent to the ella-
bli.(pent, of the. Aulick council. Since that time, it has been
a. great objea of,poli9y, iln .the court of Vienna to extend. the
juifdicIion, ,ad support the authority of the Aulick council,
and to; circumscribe and weaken those of the Imperial chamber.
The tedious forms and dilatory proceedings ,of the Imperial cham-
ber have;furnifhed the, Emperors with pretexts for doing To. Lites
Spire, accordipg. to the witticism of a Gernan lawyer,: spirant,
fed nunquam expirant. Such delays are unavoidable in a court
cpmpofed of members named by States, jealous of each other.
W9hreas the judges, of the Aulick council, depending on one
marter, and being reffonfible to him alone, are more vigo-

Ddd rous

rous and decisive. Puffendorf. de Statu Imper. German. cap. v.

20. Pfeffel Abreg6, p. 581.

NOTE XLII. S . CT. III. p. 189.

THIE description which I have given of the Turkish govern-

ment is conformable to the accounts of the most intelligent
travellers who have visited that Empire. The count de Mar-
figli, in his treatise concerning the military state of the Turkish
Empire, c. vi. and the Author of observations on the religion,
laws government and manners of the Trks, published at
Londoun 768, vol. i. p. 81. differ from other writers who have
described the political constitution of that powerful monarchy.
As they had opportunity, during their long refidenee in Turkey,
'.to observe the order and ,Justice conspicuous in feveal; depart-
;ments of admihiftration, they' eem unwilling to admit that it
should be denominated a despotism. But when the form of
government in any country is represented to be defpotick, this
*does not suppose that the powet of the monarch is' continually
. dbeited in ads of violence; iinjuftie nd cruelty. ;Uider govern-
''ments of every species, unless wihen' some frantic 'tyrant' hap-
pens to hold the scepter, ihe ordinary adminiitration mut be
conformnable to the principles of juflice, and if not acive in
promotir.g the welfare !of the pedple, cannot' certainly liave
their deftrution for its object. A state, in which the sovereign
possesses the absolute command of a vast military force, together
with the disposal of an extensive revenue; in which the people
have no privileges, and no part either iiiediate of remote in
iegillation; in which there is no body of, hereditary nobility,

jealous
388

jealous of, their own rights and diffinions, to fRand as an in-
termediate order between the Prince and the people, cannot be
distinguished by any name but that of a defpotifin. The re-
itraints, however, which I have mentioned, arising from the
Capiculy, and from religion, are powerful. But they are not
fuc! as change the nature or denomination of the government.
When a, defpotick Prince employs an armed force to support
his authority, he commits the supreme power to' their hands.
The Praetorian bands in Rome, dethroned, murdered, and
exalted Princes, in the fame wanton manner with the soldiery of
tile Porte at Constantinople. But notwithltanding this, the Ro-
man,, Emperors have been corfidered by all political writers as
poflefling defpotick power.

NOTE XLIII. SEC T. III. .p. 190.,

THE inflitution, the discipline, and privileges of the Jani-

zaries are described by all the authors who give any account of
the Turkiil government. The manner in ,vhich enthufiam
was employed in order to inspire them with courage is thus
related by Prince Cantemir, "When Amurath I. had formed
them into a body, he sent them to Haji Bektafh a Turkiil
Sainr,, famous for his .miracles and prophecies, desiring him to
give tliem a banner, to pray to God for their success, and to
give them a name. The faint, when they appeared in his pre-
fence, put the sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads, and
fays, Let them be called rTegicberi. Let their countenance be
ever bright, their hands victorious, their sword keen, let their

fpc;r.

spear always hang over the heads of their enemies, and where-
ever they go, may they return with a hining face. ;History
of the Ottoman Empire, p. 38. The number of Janizaries,
at the first in'iitution of he body, was not considerable. Under
Solyman, in. the year 521, they amounted to twelve thousand.
Since that time their' number has greatly ircreafed, Maffili,
Etat: &c. ch. 16. p. 68. Though Solyman pol'hd fuich abi-
lities and authority as to restrain this formidable-body 'iithin
the bounds of obedience, yet its tendency to limit the power of
the Sultans was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. ,'NTiolas Daulphinois, who acconmpanied'M. D'Aramon
ambaffidor from Henry . of France to ;Solyman, published
an account of his travels, in which he describes and celebrates
the discipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame time predicts
that they would, one day, become formidable to their masters,
and aa the -lane:part at Constantinople, as the Pretorian bands
had done at Rome. Colletion of Voyages from the Earl of Ox-
ford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 192.

So L Y M A N the Magiificent, to whom the Turkish historians

have given' the firname of Catuni, or instituter of rules, first
brought the finances and military establishment of the Turkish
Emnpire into a egular form. He divided the military force
into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Porte, which was pro-
perly the itanding army, and Serrataculy or soldiers appointed
to guard the frontiers. The chief strength of the latter confited
of those who held Timariots and Ziams, These were portions

of
390

,*

of land granted to certain persons for life, in much the fame
manner as the military fiefs among the nations of Europe, in
return for which military service was performed. Solyman, in
his Canmirn.Nane or book of regulations, fixed with great ac-
curacy the extent of there lands in each province of his Em-
pire, appointed the precise number of soldiers each person who
held a Timariot or a Ziam llould bring into the field, and
established the pay which they hould receive while engaged
in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have given
extracs from this book of regulations, and it appears that the
ordinary etablifiment of the Turkith army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When there are added to the
soldiery of the Porte, they formed a military power which
vastly exceeded what any Christian State could command.
Marfigli Etat Militaire, &c. p. 36. Rycaut's stato of the
Ottomhn Empire, book iii. ch. a. As Solyman, during his ative
reign, was engaged so constantly in war, that his troops were
always in the field, the Serrataculy became almot equal to. the
Janizaries them'selves in discipline and valour.

Ir is not firprizing, then, that the authors of the sixteenth
century 'hould represent the Turks as far superior to the Chri-
ftians, both in the 'knowledge and in the pracice of the art of
war. 'Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians learned the art
of fortifying towns from the Turks. Hiftor. lib. xv. p. 266.
Bulbequins, who was ambafador from Ferdinand to Solyman,
and' who had opportunity to observe the fRate both of ithe
Christian and Turkish armies, publirhed a discourse concerniiig
the best' manner of carry;ing on war against the, Turks, in

which.

39t

which he points out at great length the immense advantages
which the infidels poffefled with refpeC to discipline, and mi-
litary improvements of every kind. Butbequii opera edit.
Elzevir. p. 393, &c. The testimony of other authors might be
added, if the matter were, in any degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illustrations, I ought to
Explain the reason of two omiflions in them'; one of which it
is necefary to mention on my own account, the other to obviate
an objection to this part of the work.

In all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning the progres

of government, manners, literature and commerce during the
middle ages, as well as in my. delineations of the political con-
ftitution of the different States of Europe at the opening of the
sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned M. de Voltaire,
who, in his Essay fur 'hfloire generale, has reviewed the fame
period, and has treated of all these subje&s, This does not
proceed from inattention to the works of that extraordinary
man, whose genius, no less enterprizing than universal, has
attempted almost every different species of literary compoition.
In many of there he excels.. In all, if he had left religion un-
touched, he is inftrutive and agreeable. But as he seldom
imitates the example of modern historians in citing the authors
from whom they derived their information, I could not, with
propriety, appeal to his authority in confirmation of any doubt-
ful or unknown fat. I have often, however, followed him as
my guide in there researches; and he has not only pointed out

the
392

,0 !

the fats with refped to which it was of importance to inquire,
but the conclusions which it was proper o draw from them. If he
had, at the fame time, mentioned the books whicl relate these
particulars, a great part of my labour would have been unnecefia-
ry, and many of his readers who now confider him only s an en.
tertaining and lively writer, would find that he is a learned and
,well-informed historian.

As to the other omiion, every intelligent reader must have

observed, that I have not entered, either in the historical part
of this volume, or in the Proofs and illuitrations, into the fame de-
tail with refpe& to the ancient laws and customs of the Britifl
kingdoms, as concerning those of the other European nations.
As the capital facts with regard to the progress of government
and manners in their own country are known to most of my
readers, such a detail appeared to me to be less essential. Such
fats and observations, however, as were neceflfry towards com-
pleting my design in this part of the work, I have mentioned un-
der the different articles which are the fubjeets of my difquifi-
tions. The ltate of government, in all the nations of Europe,
having been nearly the fame during several ages, nothing can
tend more to illustrate the progress of the English conflitution,
than a careful inquiry into the laws and customs of the kingdoms
on the continent. This source of information has been too much
neglected by the English antiquarians and lawyers. Filled with
admiration of that happy constitution now eftablilhed in Great Bri-
tain, they have been more attentive to its forms and principles,
than to the condition and ideas of remote times, which, in almost
every particular, differ from the present. While engaged in pe-

VOL. I. E e e rufing

393

rufing the laws, charters, and early historians of the continental
kingdoms, I have often been led to think that an attempt to il-
lustrate the progress of the English jurisprudence and policy, by
a comparison with those of other kingdoms in a similar situation,
would be of great utility, and might throw much light on some
points which are now obscure, and decide others, which have been
long controverted.

INDEX
394

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

D
T,O T HS

* 4 z
F I R

S T

A
n, FRIC , the ihocking devastations

m. made tiere by the Vandals, 199.

Alanu', his characer of the clergy in

his time? 33.
Alfred tle Great; his complaint of he igno-

ranceof the clergy, 233.
.libdil. poffieuon of land, explained, 214.

HIow.' frch'po0cflop became, subjet to mili-
tary service, ib. Diftinguiifed from bene-
ficinry tenures, 215. How converted into
feudal tenurcs, 222.

Allodititt, the ety!nqlogy of that word, 225.
Anmianus, his charaecr of the Huns, .?.or,

206.
AJmuratb, Sultan, tc body,of Janizaries formed

by him, 190.
Anathema, form of hat denounced againlf rob-

bers during the middle ages, 330.
/qrabia the antielt Girek philosophy cultivated

there, while loft in E.urope, 321, ote xxviii.
The PIrogrcfi of plilofophy from thlcnce to
: Europe, 322.
.4rfgon ric of the kingdom of, 146. Its

union wit Cilt il. 'lie cosnijution
,; .d form of its governiilent, I 50. T lie pri-
',vylgcs of !ts iortes, 15. fficc ai,'jutrif

V O L U M

E.

dition of the Jufliza, 152. The regal
'ower very confined, 53. Form of the al-
legiance wore to the Kings of, it. The
power of the nobility to controul the regal
power, 344. Their privilege of union ta-
ken away by Peter IV. 1b. The eflablifh-
ment of the Inquifitlon opposed there, 347.
lAmile, hfanding, the rife of, traced, '92. By

what means they became more general in
Europe, 112.
Arnm, the profefion of, the mo'fl1onourable, in

uncivilized nations, 07. ''
As/, an account of the antient Romish feast of,

237, Notexii.

/AQ'mhlies, legislative, how formed, 36.
Ajrmlblies, general, of France, their ower un-

der the firfi race of Kings, 65. Under the
feco'nl and third, 66. At what perit& they
lot their legislative authority, 1 67. '
Altiil, King of the Hluti, accnunt of his reccp-

tion of theRoman ambaflidors, 197, Nole iii.
Some account of his conqufisl 262.
Avila, an aembly of Cafilian nobles there,

solemnly try, and depose Henry IV. their
King. 149.
Au/lria, the house of, hy vhlorn fdeiiled,

177.
I

N

E

X

Baillis,
E C C 2

B
Bailli, in the old French law, their office ex-

plained, 308.
Balance of power, the first rife of, in Europe,

iIi. The progress of, 112.
Baltic, the first source of wealth, to the towns

situated on that sea, 335.
Barcelona, its tiade, riches, ad privileges at

the close of the fifteenth century, 351.
Barons, their independence, and mutual hofli-

lities, under the feudal yftem, 16. How
affeaed by the infranchifement of cities, 34.
Acquire a participation in legflative govern-
ment, 36. Their private wars for redress of
personal injuries, 44. Methods employed
to abolish these contentions. 46. Origin
cf their supreme and indepcndant jurifdic-
lion, 57. The bad effects resulting from
these privileges, 58. The nfps taken by
Princes to reduce their courts, 60. How
obliged to relinquish their judicial preroga-
tives, 68. Of Italy, fubjeaed to municipal
laws, 247, Note xv. Their right of terri-
torial jurifdiaion explained, 303. Their
emoluments from causes decided in their
courts, 304.
Bnef ce;, under the feudal system, a history of,

17.. When they became hereditary, 220.
Bopk., an inquiry into the materials of the an-

tient ones, 233., The loss of old manuscripts
. accounted for, 234. The great prices they

fold for in antient times, 235.
Eorougbs, reprele.iiatives of, how introduced

into national counils, 37.
Britons antient, their distress, and dejecion

when deserted by'the'Romans, and harraffed
by the Pilts and Caledorias, 195, Note i.
Brotberbood of. God, an accunt cf that affocia-

tion for extinguishing private wars, 282.
Bruges, how it became the chief mart for Ita-

lian commodities during the middle ages,
334. Burgundy, Mary heiress of, the importance with

which her choice in a husband was confi-
dered by all Europe, 104. The treachelous
vipws of Lewis XI. of France toward her,
o:; lo6i 1 sarried to the Archduke Maxirni-
lian, 17. The influence of this match on
the tate of Europe, i.

C
Cefar, his account of the antient Germans,

compared with that of Tacitus, 206.

Cambray, treaty of, its objet, 11 7. 'lhe ccn-

federacy dififl\ed, 119.
Canon Law, an inquiry into, 62. Progress of

ecclesiastical usurpations, 63. The maxims
of, more equitable than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 64.
CaJlile, rile of the kingdom of, 146. Its union

with Aragon, ib. Its King Henry IV. so-
lemny tried and' deposed in an assembly of
the nobles, 149. The constitution and go-
vernment of that kingdom, 154. A hiflory
of the Cortes of, and its privileges, ib. The
kingdom originally elec6ive, 348, Note xxxii.
Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the people

there in defence of their rights, againit their
King John II. of Aragon, 149.
Cecifuales, t species of the Oblati, or voluntary

aves, the obligations'they entered into de-
fcribed, 272.
Centenarii, or inferior judges in the middle

ages, the extraordinary oath required from
them, 329.
Cbamps de Mars, and de Mai, account of those

assemblics of the antient Gauls, 357.
Cbarlemagne, his law to prevent private wars

for redress of ptrfonal injuries, 46; 278.
State of Germany under his descendants,
173.
Cbarle IV. Frmperor, difllpates the Imperial

domains, 378.
Cbarles V. Emperer, an emulator of the heroic

condu& of his rival, Francis I. 72. His fu-
ture grandeur founded on the marriage of the
Archduke Maximilian with the heiress of
Burgundy, 107.
Charles VII. of France, the first whi' introduced

flanding armies in Europe, 93. His successful
extension of the regal prerogative, 96.
Charles VIII. of France, his charactcr, 108.

How induced to invade Italy, ib. His re-
sources and preparations for this enterprize,
109. IHis rapid fuicefs, Ino. A combina-
tion of the Italian fates formed against him,

I. Is forced to return back to France, ib.

The distressed ate of his revenues by this
expedition, 6.
Cbarlevcix, his account of the North American

Indians, made use of in a comparison between
them and the antient Germans, 209.
Charters of mmutnity or franchise, an inquiry

into the nature of those granted by the ba-
rons of France to the towns under their ju-
rifdiCtions, 25, ANote xvi. Of cmmuni-

tif,

ties, granted by the Kings of France, how
they tended to eflablil regular government,
33, 252.
Chivalry, the origin of, 69. Its beneficial es-

fees on human manners, 70. The enthu-
fiafinof, diftinguithed from its falutarycon.
sequences, 71.
Cbrilianity, corrupted when first brought into

Europe, 73. Its influence in freeing nan-
kind from the bordage of the feudal policy,
268, Note xx.
Circles of Germany, the occasion of their being

formed, 179.
Citiesi the antient slate of, under the feudal po-

licy, 31. The freedom of, where firfi efta-
blifhed, 32. Charters of community, why
granted in France by Louis le ross, 33.
..Obtain the likeall over Europe, 34. 'Ac-
quire political consideration, 36.
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, 63.

Their plan of jurisprudence more perse&
than that of the civil courts in the midale
ages, 64. The great ignorance of, in the
early feudal times of Europe; 233.
,Cl¢riza, slave to Willa, Widow ofduke Hugo,

.extrac from the charter of manumiflion,
granted to her, 270.
Clermont, council of, resolves on the Holy war,

24. See Peter the bermit, and Crusade,.
Clotaire I. inflance of the finall authority he

had over his army, 356 ..,
Clotbariu II. his account of the popularaffem-

blies among the antient Gauls, 357,
Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy,

unable to retain a fcred vase taken by his
army, from being distributed by lot among
the reft of the: plunder, 217, Note viil
Colleges, the first eftablinhment of, in Europe,

323. ' .

. rI , ,
Combat, judical, the prohibition of, an im-

prbvementin' the adminiflration of juflice,
47. The foundation and universality of
this mode of trial, .2,. The pernicious es-
secs of, 54. Various expedients for abo-
lifhing this pra&ice, 55. ' The antient Swe-
dish law of, for words of eproach, 291.
Positive evidence, or points of proof, ren-
dered inefetual byit, 295. This mode of
trial authorised , by the ecclefiqflics, 297.
The lafi inflances of; in the. histories of
France and England, 298.

Commerce, the pirit of crusading how far fa-

vourable to, at that early period, 29. The
firfl establishment of free corporations, 32.
Charters of community why granted by
Louis le Gross, 33. The like practice ob-
tains all over Europe, 34. The salutary
effets of these institutions, ib. The low
slate of, during the middle ages, 77. Causes
contributing to its revival, ib. Promoted by
the Hanseatic league, 79. Is cultivated in
the Netherlands, 80. Is introduced into
England by Edward III. 81. The benefi-
cial consequences resulting from the revival
of, 8!. The early cultivation of, in Italy,
330.1 1 .
Common Law, the firfi compilation of, made in

England by. Lord Chief Justice lanville,
317. Communitie ; fee Cbarterr, Citiet, Commerce,

and Corporations.
Comnena, Anne, her character of the Crusaders,

'45 . .

t
Compfi, mariner's, when invented,. ari its

influence on theextenfion of. commri' F, 78.
Composition, for personal injuries, the moti(ye for

eflablilhing, 278. The cuflomof, deduced
from the pracice of the antient Germians,
299. Compurgator , introduced as evidence in the

jurisprudence of the middle ages,, 49.

Condottri in the Italian policy, what, 133.
Conrad, count of Franconia, how heobtained

ele&ion to the Empire, 173.
Conradin, the last rightful heir to the crown of

Naples of the house of Swabia, his unhappy
fate, 138.
Confiance, treaty of, between the Emperor Fre-

deric Barbarossa, and the free cities ofItaly,
250. Conflantinople, its flourilhing slate at the time

of the Crusades, 26. When first taken by
the Turks, 187. The Crusaders how looked
: upoP there, 244. The account given of

this cty,by the Latin Writers, 245.

Conflitutions, popular, how formed, 36.
Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secure3 the crown of

Naples t' Ferdinund of Aragon, 140.
Corporationst and bodies politic, the eflablill-

ments of, how far favourable to the improve-
ment of manners, 30..' The privileges of,
where first claimed 32. Charters of com.

munity,
I;

munity, why granted by Louis le Gross in
France, '33. ' The inltitution of, obtains
all over Europe, 34. Their effe'ts, ib.
Cor'tet of Aragon, its conflitution and privi-

leges, 151, 345.
Cortea of Castile, a hiflory of, and an account

of its confiitution and privileges, 154. The
vigilanectwtth ' hich it guarded its privi-
leges againk the ehcrbachments of the regal
.pOver, ' 155 .

Cru'dst the
I firt motiVes of undertaking, 22.

The'enthufiaftic zeal with which they were
udidettdkein, 23. 'Sift promoted by Peter
the hermit,24. The success of them, 25.
.The consequences resulting from them, ib.
Theireffects on itladers, d'6. .On po-
"'petty, '27::tow adtagitaeous to the en-
largement of the regal power of the Eu-
·'tpeah Prlnces; 28. The'commercial 'effets
of 29, .78. The niverfal frenzy'for en-
-gagitg in these· expediti6ns accounted for,
238, Note xiii. The privileges gridted to
l, ififet'hoengagRd in them,, 240. StUplien

' Hof'CHarters'nd':Blois, :his' acoulnt of
': tie'mt42. : 'The 'eipces 'of' c6ndtlng;

'' Hlmni:,'how rtifed, ib. Charaser; given of
: "'he'trfiders by;the GOeek Writers, 244.
Debt,"the sirs lilnt of' attathinglniovelbles for

ithe'irevery of, derived ! from 'the &' on

'*- '1 a wtt .

' t ! i

; t ,
Debtors, how confidered in the' rde and simple

'"at'e of society, 25 4.'

[Ditei;of Germany, some account of, 383.
Doflors, in the different.faculties, 'dispUte pre-

ted'etce with knights, '3~3. '.
' 'lceicaf/ir tjurifprudence, !nhoJa perse&, in its

' . ln than the ivil tcurts of the', iiddle ages,

6 4.
l ciddflicr, when, and by what 'degrees they

la'(ifed' exelption' frbtbm civIl ~jtfiifiEtion;
'2;l 'Mtilitary talents dtiltiTated 'ad exer-
*dlfed by. those of the htiddle 'ages, 319.
Edubd 'II. of England, hisi endeavours to in-

'trddue commerce'into his kingdom; 81.
' 'Elelrs of Germany, the rife of their privileges,

183.
' Eloy, St; his definition br description of'a good

tChrifiian, 236, Note xi.

Emperors of Germany, an inquiry into their

power, jurifdiation, and revenue, 376,
Note xli. The anticnt mode of eletirg
them, 38b.
England, a summary view of the contefis be-

tween, and France, 88. The confequcnces
of its losing i s continental pffcilouns, 9.
The power of the crown how t'xtended,
102. ee Henry V\I. Why so many marks
of Saxon usages and language, in compari-
son with those of the Normans, to be found
in, 197, NoteIV. 'When corporations bc-
gan tobeeftabliflied in, 264. rInltancesof
the long continuance of- personal servitude
there, 273. Inquiryinto the Saxon laws
for putling anend to' private ward;, 285.
The eaufes ot a speedy declino of private
wars there, proposed to the',refeardies of
Antiquarians,. 286. The afit .inftanccs
of judiial: combat tecorded 'in the' history f,
298. The territorial jurifdi&ion of the ha.
ronsanow abolidled, 310.. Caufoofithd flow
progress of commerce there, 36., TIhe first
comnerical treaty entered;iinto by,: 338.
* Evdedncr the imperfea ;rnature of ihat.admitted

in, law.proceedings'(luring .the middle ages,
48. Rendered ineffe&ual ' by the jhdicial
combat, 295.
Europe, the alteritions in, by.: the conquest of

,the'Rlbmans,. a.' The improvements the
nations of, received in exchange.for their li-
berties, :ib.! Its disadvantages under . this
change of circumstances, ib. Inquiry into
the lu'ppfed populofiefs of .the. antient
northern nations, 4. The savage :dcfola-
tionsicxerclfCd by the Goths, Vandals, and
Huns, 9. 'Theutniverfal, change :occasioned
·by iheitirruptions arid conquefis, io. The
first rudiments of the present policy of, to
:be deduced from' this period, . 'Origin
of the fettdl system, 13. See Fudal Syfiem,
* The general barbarism introduced with this
policy, 8. At- what time government and
manners began to improve, 21. The causes
and events which contributed to this im-
provement, 22. See Cri/fades, Corporationr,
.People. The miferiesoccafioned by private
wars 1n 45. Meth6ds"taken to suppress
them, 46. Judicial combats prohibited, 47.
* The'defets of judicial proceedings 'in the
middle ages,'48 The influence of-fuper-
flition in there proceedings, 50. The origin

of
%

of the independent territorial jurifdiions
of the barons, 57. The bad consequences
of their judicial power, 58. The steps ta-
ken by Princes to abolifl their courts, 60.
An inquiry into the canon law, 62. Re-
vival of the Roman law, 66. Effecs of
the spirit of chivalry, 69. How improved
by the progress of fcicnce and cultivation of
literature, 72. Christianity corrupted when
first received in, 73. Scholafic theology
the first obje& of learning in, 74. 1,ow
state of commerce in, during the middle
ages, 77. Commerce revives in Italy, 78.
Is promoted by the Hanfeat'c league, 79. Is
cultivated in the Netherlands, 80. 'he
effects of the progress of commerce, on the
poliffing of manners, 8. The effeas of
the marriage of the heiress of Burgundy
with the archduke Maximilian, on the fate
of, 107. By what means flanding forces
became general in, 112. Consequences of
the league of Cambray to, I 1 7. A view of
the political conflitution of the several States
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 122. Italy, 124. The papacy, ib.
Venice, 132. Florence, 135. Naples, 136.
Milan, 140. Spain, 144. France, 165.
Germany, 172. Turkey, 187. Inflances
of the fnall intcrcourfe among nations in
the middle ages, 325.

F

Feodum, the etymology of that word, 226.
Fiefi, under the feudal fyflem, a hiflory of, 217.

When they became hereditary, 20o.
Ferdinand, King of Aragon,' unites the Spanish

monatchy, by; his miarriage with Isabella of
Ca'file, 'i46. 'His schemes to 'exalt the
regal power, '160. Rcfiimes formergtants
of land from .his 'barmn, 16r . ;Unites to
the crown the gand masterships of the
three military orders, ib. Why he pthtro-
nized te lootonalldhe

aooiioncalled oly.bitber-

bood, 'againt thd bibAons 1 64.
1Feudal lyltem, the' origih 6f, 'deduced, 13.

The primary bbjef' f 'this policy, 14, Its
deficiencies for itcrior government, 15.
Tenures of land, how efthbluhed under,'ib.
The rife of inlcftilic difeords Among the ba-
sons under, 16. The-'rVil fitie ofllhe
people, 'b. ThP wdalkautliority f theKing,
;ib. Its influence on the external operations
I

of war, 17. The general extination of all
arts and sciences efIcCted by, 18. Its ope-
ration on ruligion, 19. Its influence on the
charater of the human mind, 20. At what
time government and manners began to be
improved, ar. The caules and events which
contributed to this improvement, 22. See
(.rulatsle. The antient ate of cities under,
31. Tlhe frnmq ;ps national councils under
this policy,,36. MHow altered by the progress
of civil liberty, 37. An inquiry into the
adminiitration of julice under, 4. Private
war, 43. udicia combat, 47. The inde-
pendant jurildittoins of the barols, 57. The
dittinaion between free men and val(ils:un-
der, 26. ow firangers were cqnfidered
and treated under, 37.
Ii'tzlJepbenrs, obfervalions on his account ofithe

slate of London, at the time qs :Henry II.
264.

Slanders. See Nthelrlandt.
Florence, a view of the constitution of,. at, the

commencement of the fiCx!esqth, entory,
135. The influence acquiied by Cofrpp di
Medici in, 136.
France, by what means the towns in, sirs ob-

tained chartersiof community,33. .Ordi-
nances of :Louis X. and :his Brother ,Philip
in :favour of civil liberty, 4q. M ethods
employed to suppress privatc wae, 46. St.
Louis attempts to ,difrountennce judicial
combat, 55. A view of th otells be-
tween, and lEngland, 88. The confcqucn-
ces of its recovering its provinces from Eng-
,land, 91. TIhe nonarchy ofll hw 1rcngth-
cned'by this event, 9'. T4lerife 9f tand-
ing forces in, 93. Tbe rqga) ptrogative
fliengthenctd by :khiis ..ncalieuie, 95. The
extension of. the regal prergga;jve vygoroifly
pursued by Louis XI, .97. :See Lis XI.
The effeets of the invasion of Italy by
CharlesVI . io8. Sc. Cl,/wlet,'1. Na-
tionnlinfantry establishtd in, z . League
of Cambrny formed gailt thbe Vfpetians,
· i r8. !Battlc of Ghianrfaiddda, ib. ,A'n, in-

quiry intolils antient govorment t ,and Jaws,
165. ' The i,,wer of tbhegenfral a)ie mblies
under the firfi race of .jinKs, /b. Undler
the second and third,: i66.;'l,'htg regl power
confined to the King!i;o.vnidmaijns,, 167.
When the general afllembly PIr 1ts gpeeral,
loftilheirlcglflatiye 8athority, ib. When the

Kingsr

Kings began to aflert their legislative power,
168. When tile government of, became
purely monarchical, 169. The regal power
nevertheless refrained by the privileges of the
nobility, 17o. An inquiry into the jurif-
dition of Its parliaments, particularly that
of Paris, 171. How the allodial property
of land there was altered into feudal, 223.
The progress of liberty in that kingdom
traced, 265. Note xix. The attempts to
eflablifh liberty there unsuccessful, 267.
The last instance of judicial combat recorded
in the hiflory of, 298. The present go-
vernment of, compared with that of ancient
Gaul, 355. Note xxxvii. The States-
general, when sirs assembled, 369.
Francis I. of France,'his characer influenced

by the spirit of chivalry, 71. Is emulated by
the Emperor Charles V. 72.
Frederick Braraoffa, Emperor, the free cities

of Italy unite againt him,25o. Treaty of
Constance with them, ib. Was the first
who granted privileges to the cities in Ger-
many, 26.1
Fredum, in the antient German usages explain-

ed, 300.
Freemen, how difinguifhed from valfals, un-

der the feudal policy, 216, 230. Why often
induced to surrender their freedom and be-
come laves, 231.
Fuleberius Carnotenfis, his charaaer of the

city of Constantinople, 245.

G
Gaul, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal, there, 223. The go-
vernment of, compared with that of modern
France, 355. Note xxxvii. The mall au-
thority the Kings of, enjoyed over their
armies illufirated in an anecdote of Clo-
taire 1. 356. Account of the popular as-
femblies of, 357. The salic laws how en-
raed, 358. Were not subjec& to taxation,.
359. See France.
Geoffrey de FillebaIdouin, his account of the

magnificence of Conflantinople at the time
when taken by the Crusaders, 246.
Germans, antient, an account of their usages.

and wayof life, 206. Their method of
engagingin war, 207. A comparison be-
tween them and the North American In-
dians, 209. Why they had no cities, 260.

Note xvii. The practice of compound;ng
for personal injuries by fines, deduced fron
their usages, 299.
Germany, little interefled in foreign concerns

at the beginning of the fifteenth century, 89.
National infantry eflablilhed in, 114. State
of under Charlemagne ard his defcerdants,
173. Conrad, count of Franconia choftn
Emperor, ib. His successors in the Impe-
rial dignity, ib. How the nobility of, ac-
quired independent sovereign authority, 174.
The fatal effecs of aggrandizing the clergy
in, 175. The contest between the Empe-
ror Henry IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 176.
Rife of the factions of Guelfs and Ghibe-
lines, 177. Decline of the Imperial autho-
rity, ib. The House of Aufiria, by whom
founded, ib. A total change in the politi-
calconltitution of the Empire, 178. The
fhate of anarchy in which it continued to the
time of Maximilian the immediate prcde-
cefforof Charles V. 179. Divided iilto
circles, ib. The Imperial chamber 'ifli-
tuted, 180. The Aulic council reformed,
ib. A view of its political conflitlulion at
the commencement of the ensuing hiflory,
ib. Itsdefets pointed out, i8. The Im-
perial dignity and power compared, 182.
Elecion of the Emperors, 183. The re-
pugnant forms of civil policy in the several
States of, 184. The opposition between
the secular and ecclefialtical members of, 85.
The united body hence incapable of aing
with vigour, 186. When cities first began
to be built in, 260. Note xvii. When the
cities of, firflacquired municipal privileges,
261. The artizansof, when infranchifed,
262. Immediate cities in the German jurif-
prudence, what, 263. The great calami-
ties occasioned there by private wars, 288.
Origin of the league of the Rhine, ib. When
private wars were finally abolished there,
a89. Inquiry into the power, jurisdiction
and revenue of its Emperors, 376. Note.xli.
The antient mode of ele&ing the Emperors,
380. Account of the diets, 383.

Gbibel;ne, See Guelfi.
Gbiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the. Ve-

netians, 8.
Glanville, Lord Chief Justice,, the first who

compiled a body of common law? in all Eu-
rope, 317.

Gotbs

Ootbs, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the Roman

empire, and precipitate itsdownfal, 3. The
slate of the countries from whence they
issued, 4. The motives of their first excur-
sions, 5. ow they came to fettle in the
countries they conquered, 6. A comparison
drawn between them and the Romans, at
the period of their irruptions, 8. Compared
with the native Americans, 9. The defo-
lations they occasioned in Europe, ib. The
universal change made by them in the fate
of Europe, o1. The principals on which
they made their settlements, 12. Origin of
the feudal fyfiem, 13. See Feudal Syflemn.
An Inquiry into the adminidration of jultice
among, 42. Their private wars, 43. De-
ftroy'the monuments of the Roman arts, 72.
Their contempt of the Romans, and hatred
of their arts, 196. Note ii. Their aversion
to literature, ib. No authentic account of
their origin, or antient hiflory exifling, ib.
Government, how limited by the feudal policy,

t6. The effects of the Crusades on, 28.
How affeced by the infranchifement of
cities, 35. Legislative afemblies how
formed, 36. Private wars deltruaive to the
authority of, 46. Methods employed to
abolilh this hostile mode of redrefling in-
juries, ib. How affe&ed by the fupream
independent jurifdiaions of the barons, 58.
The Rleps towards abolishing them, 6o,
The origin and growth of royal courts of
juflice, 60. How influenced by the revival
of science and literature, 76. A view of,
at the beginning of the fifteenth century, 84.
The power of Monarchs then very limited,
85. Their revenues finall, ib. Their ar-
mies unfit for conquel, ib. The Princes
hence incapable of extensive plans of opera-
tion, 87. The kingdoms very little con-
nected with each other, 88. How the es-
forts of, from this period became more
powerful and extensive, 9o. The confe-
quencesof England losing its provinces in
France, 91. Thefchemes of Louis XI; of
France to extend the regalipower, 97. See
Lotsir XI. The power of the English crown
tnlarged, 2oa. See Henry VII. As also that
of Spain, ro3. How the use of fianding
armies became general, 112.. A view of
the political confitution of the several ates
of Europe, at the commencement of the

VOL. ,

fixtecnth century, r 24. In what refp:eas
the clarters of communities granted by the
Kings of France, tended to introduce a re-
gular form of, 253.
Greece, the breeding of silk worms, when in-

troduced there, 331.
Greek Emperors, their magnificence at Con-

flantinople, 244.
Gregory of Tours, remarks on the slate of Eu-

rope during the period of which he wrote
the hiflory, 21.
Gregory the Great, Pope, his reason for grant-

ing liberty to his saves, 269.
Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation of his con-

tells with Henry IV. Emperor of Germany,
1 76. The mean fubmiflion he extorted from
Henry, 177. His own account of this as-
fair, 375.
Guelfi, and Ohibelines, rife of those feaeions

in Germany, 177.
Guicciardini, the hiflorian, inflances of his si-

perflitious reverence for Pope Clement VII
132. Note.
Guntberu, a Monk, his characer of Con-

flantinople, at the time when taken.by the
Crusaders, 245.

H
Hanseatic league, when formed, and' its in-

fluence on the extension of commerce, 79..
336.
Henry IV. of Caflile, solemnly tried and de-

posed by an assembly of Cafltlian nobles,,
149.
Henry IV. Emperor of Germany, the humili-

ating slate to which he was reduced by Pope
Gregory VII. 176, 375. Note xl.
Henry VI. of England, his situation at his

accefllon to the crown, 102. Enables his
barons to break their entails and fell their
eltates, ib. Prohibits his barons keeping re-
tainers, ib. Encourages agriculture and;
commerce, ib.
Herebannum, the nature of this fine under the

feudal policy, explained, 216.
Hermandad, Santa, account of that inflitution,,

354.
Hiflory, the moll calamitous period of, point-

edout, 59.
Holy Brotherhood, an association in Spain un-

der that name, on what occasion formed,,
163. r

Ir tr.wr .

0ioJy
r t!t

s

Holy Land, the original inducements of the

Christians to rescue it from the hands of the
Infidels, a2. See Crufadet, and Peter the
Hermit.
HIonour, points of, theantient Swedish law for

determining, 291.
Hospitality, enforced by ltatures during the

middle ages, 326.
rluns, instance of their enthusiastic passion for

war, 197. Note iii. Some account of their
policy, and manners, 201, 2o6. See Gotbr.

I
yanizaries, origin, and formidable nature of

those troops, 189.
Imperial chamber of Germany, inflituted, 180.

The occasion of its inflitution, 384.
Indians, North Americana comparison drawn

between them and the antient Germans, 209.
Indujlry, the spirit of, how excited by the in-

franchifement of cities, 35.
Infantry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry,

taught to the refl of Europe by the Swiss,
11 4. National bodies of, established in Ger-
mnany, i. In France and Spain, 1 5.
Inheritance, and right of representation, be-

tween orphan grandsons and their uncles,
how decided in the tenth century, 293.
Interefl of money, the neceflity of admitting,

in a commerical view, 332. Preposterously
condemned by the churchmen of the.middle
ages, 333. The cause hence, of the exor-
bitant exacions of the Lombard bankers,
ib.
Italy, when the cities of them began to form

themselves into bodies politic, 32. Com-
merce firftimproved there, and the reasons
of it, 78. The revolutions in Europe oc-
cafioned by the invasion of, by Charles VIII.
of France, 107. The fate of, at the time
of this invasion, og9. The rapid success of
Charles, lio. A combination of the States
of, drives Charles out of, and gives birth to
the balance of power in Europe, i l. The
political situation of, at the commencement
of the sixteenth century, 124. The papacy,
ib. Venice, 132. Florence, 135. Naples,
136. Milan, 140. Evidence of the dero-
lation made there by the northern invaders
of the Roman Empire, 203. How the cities
of, obtained their municipal privileges, 247.

Note xv. State of, under Frederick I. 248.
Treaty of Constance between the free cities
of, and the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
250.
udgment of God, modes of acquittal by, in
the law proceedings during the middle ages,
50. 289. Notexxii.

Judiccum Cruis, method of trial by, 290.
Julius II. Pope, forms a confederacy, againfl

the Venetians at Cambray, i 8. Seizes
part of the Venetian territories, ib. The
confederacy dissolved, I 19. Turns his
schemes against France, and England, ib.
Jurisprudence, ecclesiastical, more perse in

its plan, than the civil courts of the middle
ages, 46. See Law.
JuJlice, an inquiry into the adminiltration of,

under the feudal policy, 42. The steps to-
ward the improvement of, as civil liberty
advanced, 43. Redress chiefly pursued by
private wars, 44. Methods taken to sup-
press private wars, 46. Judicial combats
prohibited, 47. The defects of judicial pro-
ceedings in the middle ages, 48. Compur-
gators, the nature of that kind of evidence,
49. Methods of trial by ordeal, or acquittal
by Judgment of God, 5o. Origin of the
supreme independant jurifdicion of the feu-
dalbarons, 57. The extent and bad effects
of their privileges, 58. The steps taken by
monarchsto reduce the barons courts, 60.
The growth of royal courts of justice, 6.
Inquiry into the canon law, 62. How im-
proved by the revival of the Roman law, 66.
When the adminifiration of, became a di-
tina profeflion, 68.
7uJliza, or supreme judge of Aragon, hisof-

fice and privileges, 152. An inquiry by
whom this officer was ele&ed, 339. Who
was eligible tothis office, 340. Nature of
the tribunal appointed to controul his ad-
ministration, 341. Instance of his extensive
power, 342.

K
King, hispower how circumscribed by the

barons, under the feudal system, 16. By
what means the Crusades tended to enlarge
the regal authority, 28.
Ioran, its influence in checking the Sultans

of the Ottoman empire, 189.

Land,

L
Land, how held at the etablithment of the

feudal fyflem, 5. SeeFeudal fyflevl.
Land, the property of, how confideredby the

antient barbarous nations, 213. Note viii.
Allodial poflefion of, explained, 214. The
proprietors how subjea to military ser-
vice, 215. Allodial and beneficiary posses-
sion diftinguilhed, ib. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 222.
Law, when the fludy of it, became a diftin&

employment, 68.
Law, Canon, an inquiry into, 62. The

maxims of, more eqitable than the civil
courtsof the middle ages, 64. When first
compiled, 315.
Law, Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 65.

Circimftances which favoured the revival of
it, 66. Its effeas in improving the admi-
nitrationof justice, ib. Its rapid spread
over Europe, 316. Note xxv.
Lawburrougbs, in the Scottish law, explained,

254.
Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of, traced,

2. How favoured by the ordinances of
Louis X. of France, and his brother Philip,
40. The spirit of, how excited in France,
265. Note xix. The particulars included in
the charters of, granted to husbandmen, 268.
Note xx. The influence of the Chriflian re-
ligion in extending, ib. The several op-
portunities of obtaining, 280.
Limoges, council of, its endeavours to extin-

guifi private wars, 279.
Literature, the cultivation of, greatly inflru-

mental in civilizing the nations of Europe,
72. Why the fitrt efforts of, ill dire&ted,
73. The good effeCts nevertheless of the
spirit of inquiry exerted; 75. How check-
ed in its progress, ib. Its influence on man-
ners and' government, 76.
Liturgy the preference between the Mufarabic,

and Romish, how afccrtained in Spain,
294.
Lombardsr the first bankers in Europe, 332.

The motive of their exacting exorbitant
interest, 333.
London, its flourishing slate at the time of

Henry II. 264.
Louile Gross of Fance, his inducement to

grant privileges to towns within his own do-
mains, 33. See Charters.

Louis, St. the great attention he paid to the

adminiliration of juflice, in appeals which
came before him, 308.
Louis X. of France, his ordinances in favour

of civil liberty, 40.
Louis XI. of France, his character, 97. is

schemes for deprefling the nobility, ib. Sows
divisions among them, 99. Increases the
sanding forces, ib. Enlarges the revenues
of the crown, ib. His address in overruling
the assembly of itates, loo. Extends the
bounds of the French monarchy, 1ot. The
activity of his external operations, ib. His
treacherous bafcnefs towards the heiress of
Burgundy, xo5. Tho effects of his con-
duEt, 107.
Louis XII. his hesitation in carrying on war

against the Pope, 132. Note. Asserts his
right to the dutchy of Milan, and retains
Ludovico Sforza in prison, 143.

M
Manfred, his flruggles for the crown of Naples,

138.
Mankind, the molt calamitous period in the

hifloryof, pointed out, o.
Manners, the' barbarity of, under the feudal'

establishments, after the overthrow of the
Roman empire, 8. When they began to
improve, 21. Effets of the Crusades on,.
25. How improved by the infranchifement
of cities, 36. How improved by the erec-
tion of Royal courts ofjuiice, in opposition
to the barons courts, 6. Effects of the
revival of the Roman law on, 65. The
beneficial tendencyof the spirit of chivalry
on, 69. How influenced by the progress of
science, 72. 76. How polished by the re-
vival of commerce, 8.
Manumiffon, particulars included in the char-

ters of, granted to husbandmen or slaves,,
268. Note xx. The form of; 269.
Maximilian, archduke of Auflria, married' to

Mary heiress of Burgundy, 107. The in-
fluence of this match on the slate of Europe,,
ib.
Maximilian, Emperor, inflitutes the Imperial'

chamber,. 18o, Reforms the Aulic council;-
ib.
Mediri, Cosmo di, the first of the name, the

influence he acquired in Florence, 136,
Milan, the ate of the duchy of, at the com-

F f f mencement

mencement of the sixteenth century, 140.
Rife and progress of the disputes concern-
Ming the fucceflion to, 141.

ind, the human, a view of, under the firlt
establishment of the feudal policy in Europe,
2o. The aera of its ultimate depreflion,
and commencement of its improvement, 21.
The progress of its operations, before the
full exertion of it, 73.
Miniierialer, a class of the Oblati, or volun-

tary slaves the pious motives of the obliga-
tions they entered into, 172.
Afoors, make a conquelt of Spain, 144. By

what means weakened during their ela-
blifihment there, 145. Remarks on their
condua in Spain, 147.
Municipal privileges, how obtained by the

cities of Italy, 247. Note xv. Secured to
them by the treaty of Conflance, 250. The
favourite slate of, under the Roman govern-
ment, 259.

N
Naples, a view of the conflitution of that

kingdom, at the commencement of the
sixteenth century, 136. The turbulent un-
fettled state of that kingdom, 137. State
of the disputes concerning the fuccellion to
the crown of, 138. The pretensions of the
French and Spanilh monarchs to the crown
of, 139.
Narbonne, community of, preamble to the writ

of summons of Philip the Long, to, 265.
Note xix.
Navigation, proof of the imperfea itate of,

during the middle ages, 334.
Netherlands, vigorous prosecution of the manu-

faaures of hemp and flax there, on the re-
vival of commerce in Europe, 80.
Normans, why so few traces of their usages

and language, to be fcind in England, in
comparison with those of the Saxons, 167.
Note iv.

0
Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the claes of, fpe-

cified, 271.
Qrdeal, methods of trial by, during the middle

ages, 5o. The influence of fuperllition in
diating these means, 5 1.
Otto Frifingenfis, his account of the ltate of

Italy under Frederic I. 248.

Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic nature

of, 187. Becomes formidable to the Chri.
tian powers, 192.

P

Papacy. See Popedom.
Paper, when first made of the present mate-

rials, 235.
Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurif-

diaion of its parliament over the other par-
liaments of France, 171. Its origin traced,
370. Note xxxix. The royal edi&s re-
giflered by, before admitted to be laws,
373.
Parliaments, or legislative assemblics, how

formed under the feudal policy, 36. How
altered by the progress of civil liberty, 37.
People, their wretched servile state under the'

feudal fyflem, 16. 39. Released from their
slavish state by the infranchifement of cities,
34. How they obtained a representation in
national councils, 36. Those who lived in
the country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the feudal
policy, 227. Note ix.

Peria, murder, how punished there, 302.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European Princes

to undertake the Holy War, 24.
Peter IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders

of the Aragonefe union, and destroys the
privilege of there afrociations, 344.
Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of Cum-

mons to the community of Narbonne, 265,
Note xix.
Pbilofophy, cultivated by the Arabians, when

loft in Europe, 321. Note xxviii. Its pro-
grefs from them into Europe, 322.
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, when firfl un-

dertaken, 22. See Crusades, and Peter the
Hermit.
Placentia, council of, the Holy war resolved

on by, 4. See Peter the Hermit, and Cri-
fades.
Plunder, how divided among the antient nor-

thern nations, 13. Illuflrated in an anecdote
of Clovis, 212. Note vii.
Popedom, the highest dignity in Europe at the

commencement of the sixteenth century,
124. Origin and progress of the papal
power, 125. The territories of the Popes
unequal to the support of their spiritual
jurifdition, ib. Their authority in their

own

own territories extremely limited, 126. The
check they received from the Roman barons,
ib. Nicolas Rienzo attempts to eablifh a
democratical government in Rome, and to
destroy the papal jurifdi&tion, 128. The
papal authority considerably fRrengthened by
the Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 129.
See fuliut II. The permanent nature of
ecclesiastical dominion, ib. 'The civil ad-
miniflration of, not uniform or confiflent,
I30. Rome the school of political intrigue
during the sixteenth century, ib. The ad-
vantages derived from the union of spiritual
and temporal authority, 131. A view of
the conteits between the Popes and the Em-
peror6 of Germany, 176.
Populeoflne/i of the antient northern nations,

an inquiry into, 4.
Pri/cus, etrac from his account of the Ro-

man cmbafly to Attila King of the Huns,
197. Note iii.
Profopit, his account of the cruel devafa-

tions made by the irruption of the northern
nations, 198. Note v. 201, 202.
Property, the poleflion of, how secured by the

French charters of communities, 254.
Proveditori, in the Venetian policy, their

office, 134.

R
Religion, how corrupted by the northern na-

tions eflablilhed in Europe under the feudal
policy, 19. Its influence in freeing mankind
from the feudal servitude, 268.
Repldging, the right of, in the law of Scot-

land, explained, 305.
Reprob, words of,'the antient Swedish law

of fatisfation for,.a9I.
Revenue:, royal, very small under the feudal

policy, 85. By what means increascd,
115.
R bine, origin and intention of the league of,

288.
Rienzo, Nicolas, endeavours to rescue Rome

from the papal authority, and eablifh a
democratical form of government there,
128.
Robbers, the anathema, pronounced against

them during the middle ages, 329.
Rodulpb of Hapfburgh, how he attained elec-

tion to the Empire of Germany, 177.
Ronan, an inquiry into those advantages

which enabled them to conquer the ref of
Europe, a. The improvements they com-
municated in return for their conquest, ib.
The disadvantages the provinces laboured
under, from their dominion, ib. Their
Empire overturned by the irruption of the
barbarous nations, 3. The concurrent cau-
fesof their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn
between them and the northern nations, 8.
All the civil arts eftabliflled by them obli-
terated, 18. The monuments of their arts
indullrioufly destroyed by their barbarous
invaders, 72.

Rome, papal. See Popedom.
Royal truce, an account of, 282.

S
Salic laws, the manner in which they were en.

cted, 358.
Saxon, why so many traces of their laws, lan-

guage and cultoms to be found in England,
197. Note iv. Inquiry into their laws for
putting an end to private wars, 285.
Science, the revival and progress of, how far

instrumental in civilizing the nations of
Europe, 72. A summary. view of the re-
vival and progrels of, in Europe, 321. Note
xxviii.
Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his preten.

sions, to the dutchy of Milan, 142. Is mur-
dered by his uncle Ludovico, ib.
--7--Ludovico, his private views in engag-

ing Charles VIII. of France to invade Italy,
o18. See Cbarles VIII. Murders his nc-
phew Francis, and seizes Milan, 142. s
fripped of his dominions by Louis XII. of
France, and dies in prison, 143.
Shipwreckt, the right, lords of manors claim to,

whence derived, 328.
Silk, the rarity of, and the high price it bore

in antient Rome, remarked, 331. The
breeding of silk worms, when introduced
into Greece, ib.
Slaner, letters of, in the law of Scotland, what,

301.
Slaves under the feudal policy, their wretched

state 226. Oblati, or voluntary aves, the
several classes of, 271.
Socirty, civil, the rude f(ate of, under the feu-

dal cflablifhmnts after the downfal of the
Roman Empire, 18. The influence of the
Crusades on, 25. How improved y the

eflablifllent

eltablifhment of municipal communities,
30. The effe&s the infranchifments of
the people had on, 41. Private wars how
deftrutive to, 45. These intelline hollili-
ties, how suppressed, 46. The adminiflra-
tion of jutfice improved by the prohibition
of judicial combats, 47. The growth of
royal courts of justice, in opposition to the
barons courts, 60. How advanced by the
revival of the Roman law, 65. The effets
of the spirit of chivalry in improving, 69.
The revival of commerce and its influences,
78.

Solyman, Sultan, his charater, 191.
Spain, a summary view of its situation, at the

commencement of the fifteenth century,
89. The power of the crown of, how
extended by Ferdinand, 103. National in-
fantry eflablifhed in, 115. Is conquered by
the Vandals, 144. and after by the Moors,
ib. The empire of the Moors in, how
weakened, 145. Rife of the kingdoms of
Castile and Aragon, 146. Their union
into the Spanish monarchy, ib. The an-
tient customs fill retained amidlt all its
revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its confti-
tution and laws ramarked, 148. See Ara-
gon and CaJfile. Various causes which con-
tributed to limit the regal power in, 156.
Thecities of, how they attained their con-
fideration and power, 157. The schemes
of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt the re-
gal power, 60. The grand maller(hips of
the three orders, annexed to the crown,
161. The afbciation of the Holy Brotber-
bood, on what occasion formed, 163. The
tendency of this association to abridge the
territorial jurifdiaions of the barons, 164.
The cruel devaflations made by the Vandals,
in the invasion of that province, 199. When
the cities of, acquired municipal privileges,
§63. Note xviii. The long continuance
of the pracice of private wars there,
287. The total annual revenue of the no-
bility, in the time of Charles V. 35o. An
inquiry into the orgin of communities or
free cities in, 351.
8t. ago, the military order of; when and

on what occasion infituted, 352. Note
xxxv.

Standing armiec. ee Armier.
8tate general of France, caufds which ren-

dered their authority imperfe&, 167. When
they loft their legifl.ttive authoritv, ib.
When first assembled, 369. The form of
proceeding in them, ib.
Stophen earl o Chartres and Blois, his account

of the progress of the Crusaders, 242.
Stiernhbok, his account of the antient Swedish

law of fatisfation or words of reproach,
291.
Strangers, in what light confidered, and how

treated during the middle ages, and under the
feudal policy, 327.
Sugar canes, when first brought from Asia

into Europe, and thence carried to Ame-
rica, 331.
Sultans, Turkifi, their despotic power, 188.

How nevertheless limited, 189.
SuperJlition, its influence in the legal proceed-

ings during the middle ages, 51.
Swifi, the superior discipline of their troops,

in the fifteenth century, I r3. Teach other
nations the advantages of infantry over ca-
valry, 114.

T
Tacitus, his account of the antient Germans

compared.with that of Cefar, 206.
Tenures, feudal, the origin of, 15. See Feudal

Syflem, and Land.
Tbeology, fcholaflic, the firRt literary pursuits

at the revival of learning in Europe, 74.

Truce of God, an account of, 280.
Turkey, origin of, its government, 1 87. The

despotic genius of this government, ib. No
hereditary nobility in, 188. The authority
of the Sultans, how checked, 189. Origin
of the Janizaries, ib. Becomes formidable
to the Christian Princes, 192.

V
Vandals, their cruel devallations in the invasion

of Spain, 199. The havoc made by them
in Africa, 200. See Gotbs.
Va/sals under the feudal system, view of their

slavish condition, 16. 39. How they ob-
tained infranchifement, 40. How antient-
lydiltinguifled from freemen, 216. Their
wretched state under their feudal masters,
226. Note ix.
Venice, the long duration of its civil confti-

tution, and its flourishing slate at the time
of the league of Cambray, 117. Its pof.

sessions

fefions dismembercd by the confederates,

8. Dissolves the confederacy, 19. Its

rife and progress, 132. Defeas in its con-
ltiution, 133. The excellency of its
naval inflitution, 134. Its extenfivecom-
merce, 13 1.
Fifconti, rife of the family of, in Milan,

141.
Union of the Aragonefe nobles to controul the

undue exercise of regal power, explained,
343. This privilege abrogated by Peter IV.
344. UniverfiJie$, the first eflablilhment of, in Eu-

rope, 323.

W
War, a comparison between the manner of

carrying on, by barbarous and by civilized
nations, 9. How rendered feeble in its
operations by the feudal policy, 7. The
profeflion of arms, the most honourable, in
uncivilized nations, 67. The rife of (land-
ing armies traced, 92. By what means
flanding forces became general, i 12. The
superiority of infantry in, how taught,

e r g
Wars, private, forthe redressing perfonalin-

juries, under the feudal policy, an inquiry
into, 43. Methods taken to abolilh this
hoile pratice, 46. Judicial combat pro-
hibited, 47. Inquiry into the sources of
these culomns, 274, Note xxi. Who in-
titled to the privileges of exercising, ib.
On what occasions undertaken, 275. Who
included, or bound to engage in those dif-
putes, 276. Who excluded from under-
taking, ib. The cruel manner of prose-
cuting them, 277. A chronological ac-
count of the expedients made use of,. to
suppress them, 278. Truce of God, an ac-
count of, ib. Brotherbood of God, an ac-
count of, 282. Royal truce, what, ib.
Saxon laws of England, for putting an end
to them, 285. The obRinate attachment
of the Spaniards to this practice, 287.
The calamities occasioned in Germany by,
288.
fWel/, antient, firangers killed with impunity

by them, 328.
Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extrat from her

charter ofmanumillion, granted to Cleriza,
one of her slaves, 270.
Willermu; archbiflop of Tyre, his account

of Conlfantinople, 245.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
.
