A D D I T I 0 N S

AND f)

/'
CORRECTIONS

T
THE FORMER EDITIONS

O F

Dr. R O B E R T S O N's
HISTORY OF AMERICA.

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

MDCCLXXVIII.
[ Price One Shilling. ]

# ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO THE FORMER EDITIONS OF Dr. ROBERTSON'S HISTORY of AMERICA.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS

TO
THE FORMER EDITIONS

OF
Dr. ROBERTSON'S HISTORY of AMERICA.

[ T2hbefe Additions refer to the QUARTO EDITION printed in i778.]

VOL. I. Page xvii. line 4, at the End of the Preface, add,
SINCE this edition was put into the press, a History of

Mexico, in two volumes in quarto, translated from the Italian

of the Abbe D. Francesco Saverio Clavigero, has been publilhed.
From a person, who is a native of New Spain, who has resided
forty years in that country, and who is acquainted with the
Mexican language, it was natural to expe& much new informa-
tion. Upon perusing his work, however, I find that it contains
hardly any addition to the ancient History of the Mexican empire,
as related by Acofta and Herrera, but what is derived from the
improbable narratives and fanciful conjecures of Torquemada and
Boturini. Having copied their splendid descriptions of the high
state of civilization in the Mexican empire, he, in the abundance
of his zeal for the honour of his native country, charges me with

B having

having mistaken some points, and with having misrepresented
others, in the History of it. When an Author is conscious of
having exerted industry in research and impartiality in decision,
he may, without presumption, claim what praise is due to there
qualities; and he cannot be insensible to any accusation that tends
to weaken the force of his claim. A feeling of this kind has
induced me to examine such triCtures of M. Clavigero on my
History of America as merited any attention, epecially as these
are made by one who seemed to possess the means of obtaining
accurate information; and to hew that the greater part of them is
destitute of any just foundation. This I have done in notes upon
the passages in my History, which gave rife to his criticisms.
COLLEGE Of EDINBURGH,

MARCH 1l, 1788.
VOL. I. Page 242, line 4, at the Word America, add the follow-

ing ote :

CLAVIGERO cenfurcs me for having represented the
Spaniards who failed with Cordova and Grijalva, as fancy-

ing, in the warmth of their imagination, that they saw cities on
the coast of Yucutan adorned with towers and cupolas. I know
not what translation of my History he has consulted (for his quo-
tation from it is not taken from the original), but I never imagi-
ned that any building ercted by Americans could suggest the idea
of a cupola or dome, a rtdture which their utnolt {kill in archi-
teaure was incapable of rearing. My words are, that they fan-
cied the villages which they saw from their ships " to be cities
" adorned with towers and pinacles." Bypinacls I meant some
elevation above the rft of the building; and the panlage is tranf-

lated

lated almost literally from Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. . In al-
most all the accounts of new countries given by the Spanifi dif-
coverers in that age, this warmth of admiration is conspicuous;
and led them to describe those new objecs in the most splendid
terms. When Cordova and his companions first beheld an Indian
village of greater magnitude than any they had beheld in the
islands, they dignified it with the name of Grand Cairo. B. Diaz,
c. 2. From the fame cause Grijalva and his aflociates thought the
country along the coast of which they held their course, entitled
to the name of New Spain.
VOL. I. APge 276, line 3, delete the paragraph beginning the

flands of this New Archipelago, &c. and if'ert in its room,
TH' OUGH the illands of this New Archipelago have been

frequented filce that time by the Ruffian hunters, the court

of St. Peterfburgh, during a period of more than forty years, seems
to have relinquiflied every thought of prosecuting discoveries in
that quarter. But in the year one thousand seven hundred and
fixty-cight, it was unexpecedly refilmed. The Sovereign, who
had been lately feated on the throne of Peter the Great, pof-
fesTed the genius and talents of her illustrious predecessor. During
the operations of the most arduous and extensive war in which
the Ruffian empire was ever engaged, lie formed schemes and
executed undertakings, to wich more limited abilities would have
been incapable of attending but amidst the leisure of pacific
times. A new voyage of discovery from the eastern extremity of
AGia was planned, and Captain Krenitzin and Lieutenant Le-
vaflcff were appointed to command the two veflels fitted out for
that purpose. In thcir voyage outward they held nearly the fame

B 2 course

course with the former navigators, they touched at the fame islands,,
observed their ituation and producions more carefully, and dif-
covered several new islands, with which Behring and Tfchirikow
had not fallen in. Though they did not proceed so far to the east
as to revisit the country which Behring and. Tfchirikow supposed
to be part of the American continent, yet, by returning in a course
considerably to the north of theirs, they corredted ome capital
mistakes into which their predecessors had fallen, and have con-
tributed to facilitate the progress of future navigators in those seas.
VOL. I. Page 278, lis/e 3, delee from thbe u'ord vanish, lo the end

of the paragraph, and ifirt ars ollows :
XVHAT could be offered only as a conjecture when this History

vas first published, is now known to be certain. The near

approach of the two continents to each other, has been discovered
and traced in a voyage undertaken upon principles so pure and
so liberal, and conducted with so much professional skill, as reflect
luflre upon the reign of the Sovereign by whom it was planned,
and do honour to the officers entrulted with the execution
of it.

OUR knowledge of the vicinity of the two continents of Asia

and America, which was very imperfeCt when I published the
History of America in the year 777, is now complete. Mr.
Coxe's Account of the Ruffian Discoveries between Asia and
America, printed in the year 1780, contains many curious and
important fads with respeCt to the various attempts of the Ruffians
to open a communication with the New World. The history of
the great Voyage ofdifcovery, begun by Captain Cook in 1776,

9 and

and completed by Captains Clerke and Gore, publilhed in the year
1780, communicates all the information that the curiosity of man-
kind could desire with regard to this subjet.

AT my request, my friend Mr. Playfair, Professor of Mathe-

matics in the University of Edinburgh, has compared the narra-
tive and charts of those illustrious navigators, with the more im-
perfed relations and maps of the Ruffians. The result of this
comparison I communicate in his own words, with much greater
confidence in his scientific accuracy, than 1 could have ventured
to place in any obfcrvations which I myself might have made upon
the subjet.

" Tr discoveries of Captain Cook in his last voyage have

confirmed the conclusions which Dr. Robertfbn had drawn, and
have connected together the fads from which they were deduced.
They have now rendered it certain that Behring and Tfchirikow
touched on the coast of America in 1741. The former disco-
vered land in lat. 58° 28' and about 236° east from Ferro. He
has given such a description of the bay in which he anchored,
and the high mountain to the westward of it, which he calls St.
Elias, that though the account of his voyage is much abridged in
the English tranllation, Captain Cook recognized the place as lie
failcd along the wetcrn coast of America in the year 1778. The
isle of St. Hermogenes, near the mouth of Cook's river, Schu-
magins Isles on the coaf of Alaflika,. and Foggy Isle, retain in
Captain Cook's chart the names which they had received from the
Ruffian navigator. Cook's Voy. vol. ii. p. 347.

" TSCIIRIKOW came upon the fame coast about 2 30' farther

south than Behring, near the Mount Edgecumbe of Captain
Cook.

" WITH

" WITH regard to Krenitzin, we learn from Coxe's Account

of the Ruffian Discoveries, that he failed from the mouth of
the Kamtfchatka river with two ships in the year 176S. With
his own ship he reached the island Oonolaflika, in which there
had been a Ruffian settlement since the year 762, where he
wintered, probably in the fame harbour or bay where Captain
Cook afterwards anchored. The other snip wintered at Alafhka,
which was uppofed to be an ifand, though it be in fa a
part of the American continent. Krenitzin, accordingly, re-
turned, without knowing that either of his hips had been on the
coaf of America ; and this is the more surprising, becaule Captain
Cook has informed us, that Alaihka is undcrflood to be a great
continent both by the Ruffians and the natives at Oonolaflika.

" ACCORDINC to Krcnitzinl, the flip which had wintered at

Alafilka had hardly failed ,2' to the ealtward of the harbour of
St. Peter and St. Paul in Kailtfchatka; but, according to the
more accurate charts of Captain Cook, it had lailed no less than
37' 17' to the caftward of that harbour. There is nearly the
fame mistake of 5° in the longitude which Krenitzin aigns to
Oonolaflka. It is remarkable enough, that in the chart of those
seas, put into the hands of Captain Cook by the Ruffians on that
island, there was an error of the fame kind, and very nearly of
the fame extent.

" BUT what is of moRt consequence to be remarked on this

subjec is, that the dilcoveries of Captain Cook have fully verified
Dr. Robertlon's conjecture, " that it is probable that future navi-
gators in tlhofe eas, by fleering farther to the north than Behring and
Tfchirikow or Krenitzin had done, may find that the continent of
America approaches ill nearer to that of Asia." Vol. i.p. 277.
It has accordingly been found that these two continents, which in
the parallel of 55°, or that of the louthern extremity of Alalhka,

are

are about four hundred leagues asunder, approach continually to'
one another as they stretch together toward the north, until,
within less than a degree from the polar circle, they are termi-
nated by two Capes, only thirteen leagues distant. The east cape
of Asia is in latitude 66° 6', and in longitude 190° 22' east from
Greenwich; the western extremity of America, or Prince of Wales
Cape, is in latitude 65°46', and in longitude 191° 45'. Nearly in the
middle of the narrow trait (Behring's Strait) which separates these
capes, are the two ilands of St. Diomede, fiom which both conti-
nents may be seen. Captain King informs us, that as he was failing
through this strait July 5, 1779, the fog having cleared away, he
enjoyed the pleasure of feeing from the ship the continents of Asia
and America at the fame moment, together with the islands of St.
Diomede lying between them. Cook's Voy. vol. iii. p. 244.

" BEYOND this point tho trait opens towards the Ard-ic Sea,

and the coasts of Asia and America diverge so fast from one
another, that in the parallel of 69° they are more than one
hundred leagues asunder. Id. p. 277; To the south of the strait
there are a number of islands, Clerk's, King's, Anderson's, &c.
which, as well as those of St. Diomede, may have facilitated the
migrations of the natives from the one continent to the other.
Captain Cook, however, on the authority of the Ruffians at
Oonolalllka, and for other good reasons, has diminiflied the
number of islands which had been infcrted in former charts of the
northern Archipelago. He has also placed Alafhka, or the pro-
montory which firetches from the continent of America S. V.
towards Kamtfchatka, at the distance of five degrees of longitude
farther from the coast of Asia than it was reckoned by the Rufflian
navigators.

" TE geography of the Old and the New World is there-
fore equally indebted to the discoveries made in this memorable

voyage;

voyage; and as many errors have been corrected, and many de-
ficiencies supplied, by means of these discoveries, so the accuracy
of some former observations has been etablilhed. The basis of
the map of the Ruffian empire, as far as regarded Kamtfchatka,
and the country of the Tfchutzki, was the position of four
places, Yakutfh, Ochotz, Bolchereft, and Petropawlofki, which
had been determined by the aitronomer Kraffilnicow in the
year 744. Nov. Comment. Petrop. vol. iii p. p46, &c. But
the accuracy of his observations was contelted by M. Engel,
and M. Robert de Vaugondy; Coxe Append. I. No. 2. p. 267,
272 ; and the former of these geographers ventured to take away
no ls than S2 degrees from the longitude, which, on the faith
of Kraffilnicow's observations, was assigned to the eastern bound-
ary of the Ruffian empire. With how little reason this was
done, will appear from confidering that our Britill navigators,
having determined the position of Petropawlofki by a great
number of very accurate obfcrvations, found the longitude of
that port 1i8- 43' E. from Greenwich, and its latitude 53° ';
agreeing, the irft to leis than seven minutes, and the second to
less than half a minute, with the calculations of the Ruffian atro-
nomer: a coincidence which, in the situation of so remote a
place, does not leave an uncertainty of more than four English
miles, and which, for the credit of science, deserves to be par-
ticularly remarked. The chief error in the Ruffian maps has
been in not extending the boundaries of that empire sufficiently
towards the cafl. For as there was nothing to connect the land
of the Tl'huitzki and the north-east point of Asia with those
places whereof the position had been carefully acertained, except
the imperfe& accounts of Behring's and Synd's voyages, confider-
able errors could not fail to be introduced, and that point was
laid down as not more than z3" ' eat of the meridian of Pe-

tropawlofki.

tropawlofki. Coxe App. i. No. 2. By the observations of
Captain King, the difference of longitude between Petropawloiki
and the East Cape is 31° 9'; that is 8° 7' greater than it was
supposed to be by the Ruffian geographers.-It is probable that
this interesting portion of geographical knowledge will, in the
course of a few years, receive farther improvement. Soon after
the publication ps Captain Cook's last voyage, the great and en-
lightened Sovereign 'of Russia, attentive to every thing that may
contribute- .,;'tend the bounds of science, or to render it more
accurate, i e plan of a new voyage of discovery, in order
to explore :p rts of the ocean lying between Asia and Ame-
rica, whic'Siin Cook did not visit; to examine more accu-
rately the islands which stretch from' one continent almost to the
other; to survey the north-east coast of the Ruffian empire, from
the mouth of the Kovyma, or Kolyma, to the North Cape; and
to fettle, by astronomical observations, the position of each place
worth notice. The conduct of this intportant enterprise is com-
mitted to Captain Billings, an Englifl officer in the Ruffian ser-
vice, of whose abilities for that station it will be deemed the best
evidence, that he accompanied Captain Cook in his last voyage.
To render the expedition more extensively useful, an eminent
naturalist is appointed to attend Captain Billings. Six years will
be requisite for accomplihing the purposes of the voyage. Coxe's
'Supplcmcnt to Ruffian Discoveries, p. 27, &c."

VOL. I. Page 402, line ult. after th e wori agailnl them, adl,
IN consequence of this, he feels the knowledge which lie pof-

fesses, and the efforts which lie makes, and citlcr in delibera-
tion or action refits on himself alone.

C

VOL. I. Page 423, line 9, after Senegal, p. 176, add,
T HE Periplus of Hanno has been translated, and every point

with refpec to it has been illuifrated, with much learning

and ingenuity, in a work published by Don Pedr. Rodrig. Cam-
pomanes, entitled, Auligiie dad Maritima de Cartago, con el
Periplo de fu General Hannon traducido iluftrado. Mad.
1756. 4to.
VoL.. I. Page 448, line 5, after feet, add, no less than seven

thousand one hundred and two feet above the highest mountain
in the antient continent.

VOL. 1. Page 466, line 6, after Introd. p. 26, add,
t/V DOBRIZHOFFER, a Jesuit, who resided eighteen years

in Paraguay, and who had seen great numbers of the va-

rious tribes which inhabit the countries situated upon the Straits
of Magellan, confirms, in every point, the teltimony of his bro-
ther missionary Falkncr. Dobrizhoffer enters into some detail with
respect to the opinions of several authors concerning the t(ate of
the Patagonians. Having mentioned the reports of some early
travellers with regard to the extraordinary size of some bones
found on that coaf,, which were supposed to be human; and
having endeavoured to hew that these bones belonged to some
large marine or land animal, he concludes, " de hifce offibus crede
quicquid libuerit, dummodo, me fuafore, Patagones pro gigantibus
defmas haberc." Hiftoria de Abiffonibus, vol. ii. p. i9, &c.

VOL. I. Page 471, line o, delete thefentence beginning I have ob-

lerved, &c. and ending in their make, line 2.; and ifert in
its room,
DOBRIZHOFFER, the last traveller, I know, who has resided

among any tribe of the ruder Americans, has explained so

fully the various reasons which have induced their women to
suckle their children long, and never to undertake such as were
feeble or distorted, and even to destroy a considerable number of
their offspring; as to throw great light on the observations I have
made, p. 298. Hist. de Abiflonibus, vol. ii. p. 107. 221.
VOL. I. Page 32, line 3, delete from With this view, &c. to

the words, royal authority, linc 17, and ifert in its room,
T/VITH this view he persuaded the magistrates of the colony

at Vera Cruz to address a letter to the king, the chief ob-

jec of which was to justify their own conduct in eftablifling a
colony independent on the jurisdiction of Velasquez. In order
to accomplih this, they cndeavoured to detrac from his merit, in
fitting out the two former armaments under Cordova and Grijalva,
affirming that these had been equipped by the adventurers who
engaged in the expeditions, and not by the governor. They
contend that the soli object of Velasquez was to trade or barter
with the natives, not to attempt the conqucft of New Spain, or to
fctle a colony there. They aftert that Cortes and the officers iwho
lerved under him had defrayed the greater part of the expenee
in fitting out the armament. On this accont, they humbly rc-
quelled their sovereign to ratify what they had done in his name,

C 2 and

and to confirm Cortes in the supreme command by his royal
commiflion. That Charles might be induced to grant more readily
what they demanded, they gave him a pompous description of
the country which they had discovered; of its riches, the num-
ber of its inhabitants, their civilization and arts; they relate.
the progress which they had already made in annexing some
parts of the country situated on the sea-coast to the crown
of Cafile; and mention the schemes which they had formed,
as well as the hopes which they entertained, of reducing the
whole to fubjetion.

Ix this letter it is asserted, that though a considerable number

of Spaniards had been wounded in their various encounters with
the people of Tabasco, not one of them died, and all had reco-
vered in a very hort time. This seems to confirm what I ob-
serve in p. 263, concerning the imperfection of the offensive wea-
pons used by the Americans. In this letter, the human sacrifices
offered by the Mexicans to their deities are described minutely,
and with great horror; some of the Spaniards, it is said, had been
eye-witnesses of those barbarous rites. To the letter is subjoined
a catalogue and description of the presents sent to the emperor.
That published by Gomara, Chron. c. 29. seems to have been
copied from it. Pet. Martyr describes many of the articles in his
treatise De infulis nuper inventis, p. 354, &c.
VOL. II. Page 54, line 18, for Tezeuco, read Tepeaca, and add

the following note:
I AM indebted to M. Clavigero for correcing an error of im-

portance in my description of Mexico. From the east, where
Tezeuco was situated, there was no causeway, as I have observed;

9 and

and yet by ome inattention on my part, or on that of the printer,
in all the former editions one of the causeways was said to lead to
Tezeuco. M. Clavigero's measurement of the length of these
causeways, differs omewhat from that which I have adopted
from F. Torribio. Clavig. ii. p. 72.
VOL. II. Page 92, line 6, at the word country, add the follow-

ing note:
M o CLAVIGERO has censured me with asperity for re-

lating this gallant aion of the two Mexicans, and for

supposing that there were battlements round the temple of
Mexico. I related the attempt to destroy Cortes, on the au-
thority of Her. dec. 2. lib. x. c. 9. and of Torquemada, lib. iv
c. 69. I followed them likewise in supposing the uppermot plat-
form of the temple to be encompassed by a battlement or rail.
VOL. II. Page 114, line 4, for Tezeuco on the east fide of the

lake, read Tepeaca on the north fide of the lake..
VOL. II. Page 128, line 6, delete from But for some reason, &c.

to the words, two years, line 25, and insert asfollows :
B UT as his general would not grant his suit, and he expcted

greater juticc from his sovereign, whom he knew to be a

good judge and a generous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
abruptly, and returned to Lisbon. In order to induce Emanuel
to liften more favourably to his claim, he not only stated his pafl
services, but offered to add to them by conducting his country-

men.

men to the Molucca or Spice Islands, by holding a westerly course;
which he contended would be both shorter and less hazardous
than that which the Portuguese now followed by the Cape of
Good Hope, through the immense extent of the Eastern Ocean.
This was the original and favourite projet of Columbus, and
Magellan founded his hopes of success on the ideas of that great
navigator, confirmed by many observations, the result of his own
naval experience, as well as that of his countrymen in their inter-
course with the East. But though the Portuguese monarchs had
the merit of having first awakened and encouraged the spirit of
discovery in that age, it was their destiny, in the course of a few
years, to rejet two grand schemes for this purpose, the execution
of which would have been attended with a great acceflion of glory
to their reigns, and of power to their kingdom. In confequencc
of some ill-founded prejudice against Magellan, or of some
dark intrigue which contemporary hilorians have not explained,
Emanucl would neither bflow the recompence which lie de-
manded, nor approve of the scheme which lie proposed; and
difinifted him with a disdainful coldness, intolerable to a man
conscious of what he deserved, and animated with the sanguine
hopes of success peculiar to those who are capable of forming
or of conducing new and great undertakings. In a transport
of refentmenr, Magellan formally renounced his allegiance to an
ungrateful maltcr, and fled to the court of CafRile, where he
.expcted that his tlcnts would be more jifily climated. He en-
deavourcd to recommend himlnifif by ofiring to cxecute, under
the patronage of Spain, that fchcmc, wlich he lad lid before
the court of Portugal, the accomllliflimct of \ihcl, lie knew,
would wound the monarch againl wl:om lie was cxalpcrated in
the most tender part. In order to cil.;blilli tll jutllclj of is

tliCOIy,

theory, he produced the fame arguments which he had employed
at Liibon; acknowledging, at the fame time, that the undertak-
ing was both arduous and expensive, as it could not be attempted
but with a squadron of considerable force, and victualled for at
least two years.
VOL. II. Page 27ir line 23, at the words Spanilh writers, add

the followuing ole:
IN the first edition, I observcd that in consequence of the de-

ftruaion of the ancient Mexican paintings, occaioned by the

zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might have con-
veyed was entirely loft. Every candid reader muff have perceived
that the expression was inaccurate; as in a few lines afterwards I
mention rome ancient paintings to be flill extant. M. Clavigero,
not satisfied with laying hold of this inaccuracy, which I cor-
rected in the subsequent editions, labours to render it more glaring,
by the manner in which he quotes the remaining part of the fen-
tence. He reprehends with great asperity the account which I
give of the scanty materials for writing the ancient history of
Mexico. Vol. I. Account of Writers, p. xxvi. V. II. 380. My
words, however, are almost the fame with those of Torquemada,
who seems to have been better acquainted with the ancient mo-
numents of the Mexicans than any Spanish author whose works I
have fecn. Lib. xiv. c. 6. M. Clavigero himself gives a delcrip-
tion of the deltrudtion of ancient paintings in almost the fame
terms I have used; and mentions, as an additional reafbn of their
being o finall a number of ancient paintings known to the Spa-
niards, that the natives have become so solicitous to preserve and
conceal them, that it is " difficult, if not impossible, to make them

part

part with one of them." Vol. I. 407. II. 94. No point can
be more ascertained than that few of the Mexican historical paint-
ings have been preferred. Though several Spaniards have carried
on enquiries into the antiquities of the Mexican empire, no en-
gravings from Mexican paintings have been communicated to the
public, except those by Purchas, Gemelli Carreri, and Lorenzana.
It affords me some fatisfaaion, that in the course of my researches
I have discovered two colletions of Mexican paintings which were
unknown to former inquirers. The cut which I published is an
exaE copy of the original, and gives no high idea of the progress
which the Mexicans had made in the art of painting. I cannot
conjcture what could induce M. Clavigero to express some diffatif-
fadion with me for having published it without the fame colours
it has in the original painting, p. xxix. He might have recol-
lcaed, that neither Purchas, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor Lorenzana,
thought it neccsary to colour the prints which they have publilsed,
and they have never been censured on that account. He may reft
na'ured, that though the colours in the paintings in the Imperial
Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on without art, and
without " any of that regard to light and shade, or the rules of
perfpeive," which M. Clavigero requires, Vol. II. 378. If the
public express any desire to have the seven paintings flill in my
pofficnfon engraved, I am ready to communicate them. The print
published by Gemclli Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans
when they travelled towards the lake on which they built the capi-
tal of their empire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 481, is the molt
finihed monument of art brought from the New World, and
yet a very flight infpaciion of it will satisfy cvery one, that
the annals of a nation conveyed in this manner must be very
meagre and impcrfct.

VOL. II. Page 286, line 6, at the word aukward, add the fol-

lowing note:
A S a specimen of the spirit and flyle in which M. Clavigero

makes his ftriltures upon my History of America, I ihall

publish his remarks upon this paflage: " Thus far Robertlon;
" to whom we answer, firfi, That there is ho reason to believe
" that those rude works were really Mexican.-Secondly, That
"neither do we know whether those persons in whose judgment
" he confides, may be persons fit to merit our faith, because we
" have observed that Robertson trults frequently to the tefti-

mony of Gage, Correal, Ibagnez, and other such authors,

" who are entirely undeferving of credit.-Thirdly, It is more
"probable, that the arms of copper, believed by these intel-
" ligent judges to be certainly Oriental, are really Mexican."
Vol. II. 39i.-When an author, not entirely destitute of inte-
grity or discernment, and who has some solicitude about his
own charaaer, aflerts that he received his information con-
cerning any particular point from persons " on whose judgment
" and taste he can rely ;" a very lender degree of candour,
one flould think, might induce the reader to believe that he
does not endeavour to impose upon the public by an appeal
to testimony altogether unworthy of credit. My information
concerning the Mexican works of art deposited in the King
of Spain's cabinet, was received from the late Lord Grantham,
ambassador extraordinary from the court of London to that of
Madrid, and from Mr. Archdeacon Waddilove, chaplain to the
cmbaffy; and it was upon their authority that I pronounced
the coat of armour, mentioned in the note, to be of Oriental

D fabrick.

fabrick. As they were both at Madrid in their public cha-
raaer, when the first edition of the History of America was
published, I thought it improper at that time to mention their
names. Did their decision concerning a matter of taste, or their
testimony concerning a point of sac, stand in need of con-
firmation, I might produce the evidence of an intelligent tra-
veller, who, in dccribing the royal cabinet of Madrid, takcs
notice that it contains " pecimens of Mexican and Peruvian
"utensils, vafcs, &c. in earthen-ware, wretched both in tafle
"and execution." Dillon's Travels through Spain, p. 77. As
Gage composed his Survey of New Spain with all the zeal and
acrimony of a new convert, I have paid little regard to his
testimony with refpea to points relating to religion. But as
he resided in several provinces in New Spain, which travellers
seldom visit, and as he seems to have cbfcrved their manners
and laws with an intelligent eye, I have availed myself of his
information with respect to matters where religious opinion could
have little influence. Correal I have fcldom quoted, and never
refted upon his evidence alone. The station in which Ibagnez
was employed in America, as well as the credit given to his
veracity by printing his Regno Jefuitico among the large col-
lection of documents published (as I believe by authority) at
Madrid, A. D. 1767, jutifies me for appealing to his authority.
VOL. II. Page 319, line , after the word commodious, add as

follows :
IT was a capital object of Roman policy to open a commu-

nication with all the provinces of their extensive empire,
by means of those roads which are justly confidered as one of

the

the noblelt monuments both of their wisdom and their power.
But during the long reign of barbarism, the Roman roads were
negleced or deflroyed; and at the time when the Spaniards
entered Peru, no kingdom in Europe could boast of any work
of public utility that could be compared with the great roads
formed by the Incas.
VOL. II. Page 429, line 17, delete te fntence beginning But

notwithstanding this general corruption, &c. and ending Ame-
rican dominions, line 24, and ifert in its room,

U T notwithtanding this general corruption in the colonies
of Spain, and the diminution of the income belonging to

the public, occasioned by the illicit importations made by so-
reigners, as well as by the various frauds of which the colonists
themselves are guilty in their commerce with the parent state,
the Spaniih monarchs receive a very considerable revenue from
their American dominions.
VOL. II. Page 432, line 28, delete from The salaries, &c. to the

end of the paragraph, and ifert what follows :
T H E salarics fixed by law are indeed extremely moderate;

that of the viceroy of Peru is only thirty thousand ducats;

and that of the viceroy of Mexico, twenty thousand ducats. Of
late they have been raised to forty thousand.

D 2

VOL. II. Page 476, line 3, delete from But his catalogue, &c-

to the words ignorant captors, page 383, line 5, and insert i.
its room,
B UT his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings, tribute-rolls, ca-

lendars, &c. is much larger than one could have expeCted. Un-

fortunately a hip, in which he had sent a considerable part of them
to Europe, was taken by an English privateer during the war
between Great Britain and Spain which commenced in the year
1739; and it is probable that they perished by falling into the
hands of ignorant captors.

VOL. II. Page 479, lile (6, after c. 19, add as follows:
EVEN M. Clavigero acknowledges that all the Mexican tem-

ples were solid trucures, or eaithen mounts, and of con-

sequence cannot be confidered as any evidence of their having
made any considerable progress in the art of building. Clavig. II.
207.

VOL. T1. Page 482, line , after landed there, add as follows:
T H I S reasoning is just. If the number of victims in all the

provinces of New Spain had been so great, not only mutl

population have been prevented from increasing, but the human
race mut have been exterminated in a short time. For besides
the waste of the species by such numerous sacrifices, it is ob-

6 icrvablc,

fervable, that wherever the fate of captives taken in war, is either
certain death or perpetual slavery, as men can gain nothing by
submitting speedily to an enemy, they always resist to the utter-
most, and war becomes bloody and deftruaive to the last degree.
VOL. IL. Page 492, line ult. after the word people, add as

follows :
IT is remarkable that Torquemada, who wrote his Monarqu;a

Indiana about the year 1612, reckons the inhabitants of Mexico

at that time to be only 7000 Spaniards and 8000 Indians. Lib. iii;.
c. 26.
V'OL. II. Page 502, line 24, after the words penes me, add a.

folows :
M/, CLAVrGERO has contradiced what r have related

concerning the ccclefiaftical state of the Indians, particularly

their exclusion from the sacrament of the Eucharist, and from
holy orders, either as Seculars or Regulars, in such a manner as
cannot fail to make a deep imprefion. He, from his own
knowledge, aflerts, " that in New Spain not only are Indians
permitted to partake of the sacrament of the altar, but that
Indian priess arc so numerous that they may be counted by
hundreds ; and among thece have been many hundreds of rectors,
canons, and dlotors, and, as report goes, even a very learned
bishop. At present, there are many priests, and not a few
retors, among whom there have been three or four our own
pupils." Vol. If. 348, &c. I owe it therefore as a duty to the

public,

public, as well as to myself, to confider each of there points with
care, and to explain the rcafons whilh induced me to adopt the
opinion which I have published.

I KNEw that in the Christian church there is no diftincion of

persons, but that men of every nation wvlho embrace the religion
of Jesus, are equally cnti:lcd to every Chriflian privilege which
they'are qualified to receive. I knew, likewise, that an opinion
prevailed not only among most of the Spaniflh laity fettled in
America, but among " many eccleliaftics (I use the words of
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 15.), that the Indians were not perfect
or rational men, and were not pofefled of such capacity as
qualified them to partake of the sacrament of the altar, or of any
other benefit of our religion." It was against this opinion that
Las Casas contended with the laudable zeal which I have dc-
icribed in Books III. and VI. But as the Biffop of Darien,
Doctor Sepulvida, and other refpctable ecclesiastics, vigorously
filpported the common opinion concerning the incapacity of the
Indians, it became necessary, in order to determine the point,
that the authority of the Holy See should be interposed; and
accordingly Paul III. iued a bull A. D. I537, in which, after
condemning the opinion of those who held that the Indians, as
being on a level with brute beasts, flould be reduced to servitude,
he declares that they were really men, and as such were capable
of embracing the Chriflian religion, and participating of all its
blessings. My account of this bull, notwithflanding the cavils of
M. Clavigero, must appear jufft to every person who takes the
trouble of perusing it; and my account is the fame with that
adopted by Torquemada, lib. xvi. c. 2. and by Garcia, Orig.
p. 31 1. But even after this decision, so low did the Spaniards
rcfiding in America rate the capacity of the natives, that the
first council of Lima (I call it by that name on the authority

of

of the best Spanilh authors) difcountenanced the admiflion of
Indians to the holy communion. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20.
In .New Spain, the exclusion of Indians from the sacrament
was fill more explicit. Ibid. After two centuries have elapsed,
and notwithstanding all the improvement that the Indians may
be supposed to have derived from their intercourse with the
Spaniards during that period, we are informed by D. Ant. Ulloa,
that in Peru, where, as will appear in the sequel of this note,
they are supposed to be better inftruded than in New Spain, their
ignorance is so prodigious, that.very few are permitted to com-
municate, as being altogether destitute of the requisite capacity.
Voy. I. 341, &c. Solorz. Polit. Ind. I. 203.

WITH refpea to the exclusion of Indians from the priesthood,

either as Seculars or Regulars, we may observe, that while it
continued to be the common opinion, that the natives of America,
on account of their incapacity, ihould not be permitted to partake
of the holy sacrament, we cannot suppose that they would be
clothed with that sacred character which entitled to consecrate and
to dispense it. When Torquemada composed his Monarquia
Indiana it was almost a century after the conquest of New Spain;
and yet in his time, it was Rfill the general pracqice to exclude
Indians from holy orders. Of this we have the mol satisfying
evidence. Torquemada having celebrated the virtues and graces
of the Indians at great length, and. with all the complacency of
a mifionary, he flarts as an objection to what he had aftlrted,

If the Indians really poffcfs all the excellent qualities which

you have decribed, why are they not permitted to affumc the
religious habit ? Why are they not ordained priests and bishops,
as the Jcwifh and, Gentile converts were in the primitive church,
elpccially as they might be employed with such fupcrior advantage
to other persons in the inftrulion of their countrymen ?" Lib. xvii.
c. 13.

Ix

IN anfwver to this objection, which eftablihes, in the molt un-

equivocal manner, what was the general practice at that period,
Torquemada obfervcs, that although by their natural dispositions
the Indians are well fitted for a subordinate situation, they are de-
ftitute of all the qualities requisite in any station of dignity and
authority; and that they are in general o addicted to drunk-
ennefs, that, upon the slightest temptation, one cannot promise on
their behaving with the decency suitable to the clerical charaaer.
The propriety of excluding them from it, on these accounts, was,
he observed, so well justified by experience, that when a foreigner
of great erudition, who came from Spain, condemned the pracice
of the Mexican church, he was convinced of his mistake in a
public disputation with the learned and most religious Father
D. Juan de Gaona, and his retracation is still extant. Torque-
mada, indeed, acknowledges, as M. Clavigero observes, with. a
degree of exultation, that, in his time, some Indians had been
admitted into monasteries; but, with the art of a disputant, he
forgets to mention that Torquemada specifies only two examples
of this, and takes notice that in both inflances those Indians had
been admitted by mistake. Relying upon the authority of Tor-
quemada with regard to New Spain, and of Ulloa with regard
to Peru, and confidering the humiliating deprefion of the Indians
in all the Spanish settlements, I concluded that they were not ad-
mitted into the ecclcfiaflical order, which is held in the highest
veneration all over the New World.

BUT when M. Clavigero, upon his own knowledge, asserted

facds so repugnant to the concluion I had formed, I began to
distrust it, and to wish for farther information. In order to obtain
this, I applied to a Spanish nobleman, high in office, and eminent
for his abilities, who, on different occalions, has permitted me
to have the honour and benefit of corresponding with him; and
I requefed my rcfpeaablc friend Mr. Liflon, the Britifli Minitfer

at

at the court of Madrid, to make what inquiries he judged proper with
refpeal to this point. From the former, I have been favoured with the
following answer. " What you have written concerning the ad-
mission of Indians into holy orders, or into monasteries, in BookVIII.,
especially as it is explained and limited in Note LXXXVIIL, of
the quarto edition, is in general accurate, and conformable to the
authorities which you quote. And although the congregation of
the council resolved and declared, Feb. 13, A. D. 1682, that the
circumstance of being an Indian, a mulatto, or mestizo, did not
disqualify any person from being admitted into holy orders, if he
was possesed of what is required by the canons to entitle him to
that privilege; this only proves such ordinations to be legal and
valid (of which Solorzano, and the Spauiih lawyers and historians
quoted by him, Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 29. were persuaded), but it
neither proves the propriety of admitting Indians into holy orders,
nor what was then the common pratice with refped to this; but,
on the contrary, it ihews that there was ome doubt concerning
the ordaining of Indians, and some repugnance to it.

" SINCE that time, there have been some examples of admitting

Indians into holy orders. We have now at Madrid an aged priest,
a native of Tlafcala. His name is D. Juan Cerilo de Castilla
Aquihual Catehutle, descended of a Cazique converted to Chrifti-
anity soon after the conquest. He studied the ecclesiastical sciences
in a seminary of Puebla de los Angeles. He was a candidate, ne-
verthelefs, for ten years, and it required much interefl before Bishop
Abren would consent to ordain him. This ccclefiaflic is a man of
unexceptionable character, modest, felf-dcnicd, and with a compe-
tent knowledge of what relates to his clerical functions. He came
to Madrid above thirty-four years ago, with the sole view of so-
liciting admifflon for the Indians into the colleges and Seminaries in
New Spain, that if, after being well inllru'lcd and tried, they
flould find an inclination to enter into the ecclefiafilcal state, they

E might

-!.'i:lt embrace it, and perform its funclions with the greatcft be-
nci.t to their countrymen, whom they could address in native
tongue. IIc has obtained various regulations favourable to his
lilemc, particularly that the firlt college which became vacant in
cniifcqiince of the exclusion of the Jcfuits fhouild be set apart for
thi; purpole. But neither thee regulations, nor many similar ones
inlerted in the laws of the Indies, has produced any effed, on ac-
count of objeions and rprrefntations from the greater part of
persons of chief consideration employed in New Spain. 'Whether
Icir oppolition be well founded or not, is a problem difficult to
rc''el:'c, and towards thle solution of v.hich, several diftincions and
mndilications are rqulifitc.

' ACCORDING to the accounts of this ccclefiaftic, and the in-

formation of other perlons who have resided in the Spanish do-
mniions in America, you may rclt asSured that in the kingdom of
Ticrra Firni no such thing is known as either an Indian secular
pric:l or monk; and that in New Spain there are very few eccle-
fialsics of Indian race. In Peru, perhaps, the number may be
greater, as in that country there are more Indians who poflefs the
means of acquiring uch a learned education as is neceffry for
persons who alire to the clerical characer."

FROM Mr l. Iillon, owing to some incidents which it is unnecessary

to specify, I have not yet received an anfwcr to my queries. If the
intelligence, -which from my experience of his obliging attention
I certainly cxpedI, flall differ materially from that which I have
already received, I will not fail to communicate it to the public,
and will, without hesitation or reluctance, make whatever altera-
tions may be necessary in my narrative. Meanwhile, in Vol. II.
p. 386. 1. 28. inItcad of no Indian is ither ot-dainid a priti, it will
be more proper to read, -vcrrft. InlIians are ordaincdprii5s.

T I E END.
